FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10252
13 January 1982

West Europe Report .

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M‘I'E

JPRS publications contain irformt ion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
(POUO 2/8 2)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL

AUSTRIA

Kreisky on Middle East Problems
(Bruno Kreisky Interview; STERN, 23 Dec 81) ...............

FRANCE

Ambassador Martinet on NA’IO, Foreign Policy, Pacifism
(Giles Hertinet Interview; HONDOPKRAIO, Nov 81) ...........

MILITARY
ITALY
Commentary on European Security, NATO, TNF, EEC
(Stefano Silvestri; MONDOPERAIO, Sep-Oct 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SPAIN

Secret Coupist Organization Within Military Described
(cm1016, 7mc 81) OI..0.00UOIOCOOOCOOOCOOOOOOO0.0.0....

-a- [III-WE-ISOP'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AUSTRIA

KREISKY 0N MIDDLE EAST PROBLEMS
DH2309S7 Hamburg STERN in German 23 Dec 81 pp 48-52

[Interview with Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky by editors Bernd Doerler, Georg
Kath and Henri Nanner in Vienna, date of interview not given]

[Text] STERN: Mr Chancellor, you have just returned from a tour of the Persian
Gulf states. Austria is not a world power, but the head of the Austrian Government
obviously deems himself a world politician. How does that jibe?

Kreisky: The Austrian head of government does not operate as a world politician
but is an old man who, of the 70 years of his life, spent at least 55 awarely

as a politically thinking person. And during these 55 years he did see quite a
lot of people, political configurations, crisis and wars. And this Austrian
chancellor does advocate the presumptioua view that whenever he sees a solution
in a difficult world configuration of which he believes that it is practicable,
he should say so, too. After all, it has turned out that people occasionally
wish to know this.

STERN: People have often said that your stand for the Arabs and against the state
of Israel is quite remarkable, for a Jew. Do you propose to overcompensate
something there?

Kreisky: Well, you know, this is old hat as far as I am concerned; I am familiar
with it, and you can forget it. As far as I am concerned the Middle East has been
the politically most important part of the world since World War II. And I will
tell you why. A new state has emerged here due to the Buropeana' fault. Without
Hitler Israel never would have gained this virulence. But it was not Hitler alone.
Other European politicians did not behave particularly magnanimously in the face
of the Jewish persecution in Germany. Then they created this state by UN decision
and stuck to the principle: "Right or wrong—-we are greatly culpable, we are
unable to prevent the misfortune which swooped down on the European Jews, and
therefore we must protect them no matter what the cost might be.“ But you cannot
make amends for one injustice by means of another. So, this new state existed in
hostility with its neighbors, the expelled Palestinians, and it has always been
clear to me that a catastrophe will occur unless a melting process takes place.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STERN: Did the UN declaration of March 1948 not envisage two states in Palestine,
an Arab state and a Jewish state?

Kreisky: Yes, of course, all this is exactly written down on paper. but history
has ignored it. Just the same. I am convinced that Israel in the long run will
be able to live only if it comes to terms with its neighbors. It is possible to
negotiate on anything, and one must try to do that, anyway. I realized quite
early that the Palestinian problem is the crucial problem of the Israeli-Arab
conflict. Hence, Israel must negotiate with the Palestinians. You just cannot
pick the one whom the other side selects as its representative. Hence. if it is
‘Arafat, then they must negotiate with 'Arafat.

STERN: Prime Minister Begin says, as did Foreign Minister Yitzhak Shamir in

STERN just rczently, that they would not sit down at the same table with a terrorist
who has made Israel's destrucnion his maxim.

Kreisky: Israeli Foreign MinisLer Shamir, after all, was one of those who at the
time participated in the assassination of Graf Polke Bernadotte. And probably
there was nobody who was as meritorious for the Jews as was this Swedish count.
Near the end of the war Graf Folke Bernadotte achieved through negotiations the
option of liberating the Scandinavians but also tens of thousands of Jews. Because
of these extraordinary merits he was sent to Israel as UN commissioner to implenent
there the UN resolution on the two states.

STERN: But Israel's Prime Minister Begin also refused to negotiate with 'Arafat
whose people committed bomb attempts on school buses.

Kreisky: You know, terrorism is a strange matter. There is a terrorism as a
means to its own end--that involves the crazy people who really do not have any
particular cbjective, such as the Red Army faction in Germany and the Red Brigades
in Italy. They simply want to destroy the democratic order. Then there is the
other terrorism which I will neither condone nor approve, yet this terrorism
often marks the beginning of revolutions and political movements. De Valera. the
Irish president of long years, first was a terrorist-and later a recognized,
respected statesman. And there was hardly any more terrible and brutal terror
movement in Africa than the Han-Man revolt led by Yomo Kenyatta. But later
Kenyatta became a statesman and a hope for stability in Africa.

And let us not forget that Begin at the time blew up the "King David Hotel" in
Jerusalem with his people. The victims at the time were British soldiers-—but I
do not differentiate. To me women and children as victims are just as pitable

as is the humble English soldier or Graf Bernadotte. I do not accept this double
morale. I do not approve of the terrorism of the Palestinians, but neither do I
share the hypocritical outrage displayed if and when this happens to oneself.
There has always been that kind of terrorism which ceases immediately once the
goals can be attained with different means.

STERN: Can the Israelis sit down with the Arabs at one table as long as the Arab
states do not accept the existence of Israel?

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kreisky: Why should the recognition stand at the beginning? One starts negotia-
tions always with maximum demands. They should try it first. If nothing came of
it, one would at least have done everything. But as things are today, the Israelis
do not want to negotiate at all. They want to dominate the region, and whether
they want to do it out of a need for security or because they consider themselves
the masters of the Middle East does not matter in the end. You see, when I made
my first trips to the Arab countries, I was not received in a friendly way at all.
They have naturally told the socialist Kreisky: You come as a representative of
the socialist international, the political grouping which failed in the case of
France in Algeria, which marched to the Suez Canal with the socialist Premier Guy
Mullet, the British and the Israelis. Well, I was suspicious to them as a
socialist. Not only as a Jew; that did not interest the people. You forget that
the Arabs are not anti-Semites.

It was not much different with regard to the "eat. when I first met al-Nasir in
1965 and 'Arafat in 1974, the European politicians asked what Kreisky want to
achieve there, adding that he should not bore us over and over again with these
things. They considered the Palestinian problem only as a refugee problem, and
they believed Golda Meir who had said: "There is no Palestinian people, all that
is nonsense." When the oil crisis came, one has suddenly thought differently,
saying that Kreisky obviously has the best relations with the Arabs and that
Kreisky should handle the matter.

STERN: The idealist Kreisky suddenly became a useful man for the pragmaticists?

Krelsky: You see, I have not spoken of idealism. I said that I may have realized
somewhat earlier than others that the Middle East will become a hotbed of crisis
if the Palestinian problem will not be solved, and that a new war is more likely
to come from there than from the big powers who know what will happen to them if
they start a war. But the big powers can become involved in it.

And as regards oil, I have my own experience, too. I have been dealing with energy
problems much earlier than others. Austria would still be a Russian oil colony

if we had not excluded this in long negotiations with the Russians from the 1955
state treaty. Austria has a few oil fields, and according to the state treaty

pact of the victorious powers, the Russians were to have the right of sitting up

to 30 years on the oil fields opened up by them. So they would still be sitting
there today. After fierce disputes we have eliminated this from the state treaty
through negotiations.

I realized it pretty soon that the energv basis of Western Europe does not lie in
Europe and that it will lie for a long time far away, namely in the Middle East.
The Americans have their own energy resources, the Russians have theirs, the Poles
have their coal, only western Europe was living at that time from the oil of the
Arabs. Naturally we have found some oil in the meantime, but of the 600 million
tons of oil consumed annually by Western Europe, some 400 million come from the
Arab states. In such a situation Europe cannot afford not to cooperate with Arab
countries, even more so since it turned out that alternative energies are not
available-for political reasons. The only ones who managed to use nuclear energy
on a large scale are the French. Otherwise nuclear energy supply of Europe has
practically failed. So Arab oil remains for us the most important energy basis.

1
son ornait us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The western statesmen suddenly realized that the socialist dreamer is a quite

' pragmatic man, and from there on one had much understanding for my policy. It
is obvious now for the European community that we must do everything to live under
acceptable conditions with the Arabs.

STERN: But the Arabs said they would drive the Israelis into the sea. Are nego-
tiarions between Israelis and Arabs at all possible under these circumstances?

Kreisky: That is an old hat. I think it is extraordinary that the Arabs, respon-
sible Arabs, say today: "We realize that the state of Israel exists, that is a
reality. Help us now to found a Palestinian state so that these two states can
exist side by side as envisaged by the UN resolution." And in this situation

Israel says "no."
STERN: Jordan is a state mostly populated by Palestinians.

Kreisky: At the time being some 1.2 million Palestinians still live on the West
Bank and on the Gaza Strip. And that is occupied country like Czechoslovakia
when it was occupied by Hitler and treated as a protectorate. We cannot ignore
that. No moral right exists to withhold a state from the Palestinians. Moreover,
Israel would never be able to handle such a large Arab populace. That would be

a built-in explosive with which an Israeli state could not exist in the long run.
The plan presented by Saudi Crown Price Fahd is clearly based on the existence

of the Israeli state. Point 7 says: "Conformation of the states of the region to
exist in peace." Israel belongs to this. And what do they do? They annex the
Golan Heights, and Israeli Prime Minister Begin has the cynicism to state in the
Israeli Parliavent that the timing was caused by the Polish crisis. The attention
of the world is focused on Warsaw so that Israel does not make the headlines.

The annexation of the Golan Heights is an obvious violation of international law.
I can only support the statement of the German-Israeli working circle for peace

in the Hiidle East, when this really not anti-Israeli circle stated through its
chairman, evangelical Professor of theology Rendtorff: "Israel's radical terri-
torialism plays opnely into the hands of radical Arab forces." No wonder that
there are people among the Arabs who consider even ’Arafat a traitor if he is
prepared to negotiate with Israel.

STERN: The conference of Fe: has shown that the Arabs do hold different views
about the Fahd plan. And perhaps Israel thinks this Fahd plan is just some bluff.

Kreisky: This can be found out only if a test is made. What I told Israeli
Interior Minister Burg just recently was this: "Why don't you sit down and find
out whether it is bluffing." It is, after all, a big chance if as important a
country as Saudi Arabia has the courage to advance such a proposal. After all,
such a proposal does not mean "root, hog, or die." Nobody says that Israel must
adopt the plan as it is. Yet, it is necessary to sit down and negotiate-~provided

one really wants peace.

STERN: Do you believe that the PLO would be satisfied with the West Bank and the
Gaza Strips? Is Israel's apprehension so wholly unjustified in that continuously
new attacks might be launched against Israel from this Palestinian state?

I

L}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0\'L\'

Kreisky: Israel would not be any weaker if a Palestinian state would exist on

this territory whose form and armament might be subject to negotiations. After

all, nobody asks the Israelis to disarm. It is quite definite that they will
continue to be the strongest military power of the region. The present situation

is what constitutes for Israel the real source of all tensions and security problems.
Just as the Balkan dodged our control at the time the Middle East, too, will be
beyond any control unless pacification is achieved there.

STERN: How can the Middle East calm down if the United States concludes a military
pact with Israel and the Soviet Union an assistance treaty with the Syrians?

Kreisky: The Americans do not even understand the whole problem. In the United
States the presidents obviously begin to think about the Palestinian problem only
when their term is over. Besides, the two superpowers in reality are trembling
with fear of being dragged into war by the Syrians or by the Israelis. And the
vast majority of the Arabs, too, does not want the Russians. They want to be left
alone by both great powers as much as possible. After all, it is the fault of

the policy of the Israelis that the Soviet Union is now sitting in this region.

STERN: Do you consider it possible that you would fly to Israel to point out
' your standpoint to Begin?

Kreisky: That is senseless. The aversions between us are too great. A mediator
can be only somebody who is trusted by both sides. I have done what I could to
outline the problem.

STERN: And you believe that the Israelis have no reason to mistrust you?

Kreisky: No, they have no reason, by God. If they need something from me, they
come to me. For instance when it comes to letting 250,000 Russian Jews emigrate
through Aistria to Israel. No other country in the world wanted to handle this
task. We are doing it for 15 years.

STERN: But if reconciliation between Jews and Arabs is the work of your life,
so to speak. should not you overcome yourself to make a step toward Begin?

Kreisky: To make that clear: The work of my life lies in Austria. This is where
I have to fulfill my political mission. My relations with the Middle East were

a task I have set myself next to other things, but it gained more and more signi-
ficance. Tod-y all West European governments realize, be it in Bonn, London,
Brussels or Oslo, that the solution of the Palestinian problem is the key to
solving the Middle East problem. A simple person cannot achieve more.

STERN: But the problem will still occupy you.

Krcisky: i will tell you an anecdote: Around 1912 or 1913 the whole glorious
Austrian Army was parading on Vienna's Ringstrasse. The lancers in their neat
uniforms and the dragoons in their attire. A spectator says to another: "Say,
are they not too nice for waging war?" I think of that anecdote which is not
pathetic when I see the young Israelis working somewhere in a kubbuz, or when I
see the young Arabs. Then I say to myself that they are really too good for

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0\'L\'

waging war. But it seems that the Israeli politicians are far from this insight.
Read the bible. There are unbelievably many examples showing that Israel has
always fought at the wrong time, at the wrong place stainst the wrong people and
that it has always lost. Heroism alone does not help any. politics is a matter
of reason. But I fear that Mr Begin and Mr Shamir are about to prepare a new
biblical fate for the Israeli people.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 C0.

C50: 3103/ 168

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AMBASSADOR MARI‘INBT GI NATO, FOREIGN POLICY, PACIFISM
Rome MCNDOPERAIO in Italian Nov 81 [P 18-20

[Interview with Giles Martinet, French Ambassador to Italy, by Mario Baccianini, cor-
respondent for MONDOPERAIO; date and place not specified]

lText] [Question] Last July 50,000 peace marchers descended on Paris from northern
Europe. They were received with indifference. A march organized by the PC? at the
end of October was equally diswpointing. The mn-Ccmmnist French Left seems willing
to exert itself mainly for causes like Afghanistan and Poland, but it is luke—warm
about incipient neutralism in West Germany, Holland (where this peace movement
originated) and England. Is this just because the Reagan administration's military
choices are of no concern to France now that France is out of NATO? Or are there

more complex reasons?

[Answer] There are more canplex reasons. We want Europe to be independent both poli-
tically--especially where the Third World is concerned--and economically. especially
as regards American and Japanese canpetition. we would like Europe to be independent
militarily as well, but we know that that isn't possible. Europe as a whole has not
been wi) .ing to make the effort that would have enabled it to have military power
canparable to those of the USSR and the USA. Our population is larger than that of
the Soviet Union and our industry is stronger, but we allocate only about 3.5 percent
of our national revenue to military expenditures culpared to the 12-14 percent spent
by the USSR. From the moment when, for very praiseworthy reasons--you can call them
development or social progress--we bet on peaceful coexistence, we have relied on our
alliance with the United States for our defense. You can't get away from that. We
don't have the right to say we want to be defended free a potential Soviet threat and
at the same time reject the consequences of our alliance with the United States.

[Question] But that alliance can also have undesirable political costs.

[Answer] Our position on this point is common knowledge, as reflected in the press all
over the world after the Mitterrand-Reagan meeting. We don't want our military alliance
to affect our foreign policy or our econanic policies. But in the realm of the
military, since we don't intend to make the effort to maintain the balance of power

in the world by ourselves our dependence m the United States is inevitable. We don't
understand why sane people who accept the Atlantic Alliance-as the French and

Italian Communists do—-want to deprive the United States of the means to ensure this
defense.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'LU. INF. ()Klj

[Question] isn't it slightly paradoxical that the Italian and even the French Con-
munists--albeit with mental reservations--recognize the need for the Atlantic
Alliance, whereas traditionally pro-NATO groups like the British Labor Party, certain
sectors of the SPD (German Socialist Party) , and even sane members of the British
and German liberal parties are questioning this need?

[Answer] I should say that French public opinion, including the Socialists, is very
independent. But independent thinking takes two forms in Europe, me pacifist and

the other "military." In France we don't have the problem of the installation of
American missiles on our territory, it's true, since De Gaulle rid our soil of the
American presence completely. Instead we have our nuclear force de frappe [strike
force], and it is this force on which some of France's independents base their position.
A lot of people say: If there were to be a war in £urope--and we don't think there
will be, despite everything--then it will be a war of coalitions, and that is what

we are used to. But if the Americans or the Soviets were to start such a war under
circumstances which we found unacceptable, we have the means to protect our neutrality:
the force de frappe. You can disagree with this reasoning. But you have to bear in
mind the fact that because it has nuclear weapons France is not in the sane position
as the other European countries.

[Question] You mean it has a sort of potential armed "neutrality?"

[Answer] Yes, but with this difference: if we were faced with a war unleashed by
Soviet aggression we would undoubtedly go to war. If, however, events were to take
place somewhere in the world that induced the Americans to intervene and force their
European allies to join them in their venture, we would be able to make our own
choice.

[Question] On Saturday 17 October [.3 Home reported Hitterrmd's trip to America:
”Washington considers the French president able but hard to understand." What is it
about Hitterrand that the American administration finds enigmatic?

[Answer] The Americans were surprised by our firmness about Bast-West relations.
They expected strong disagreement with their policies, partly because we have Can-
munist ministers in our government. The fact that of all the countries of Europe we
were the firmeSt vis—a-vis the USSR was a big surprise to them. But then we criticized
the Americans for their attitude toward Latin America. especially Central America.
We made a joint statement with the Mexican government about civil rights in El
Salvador. The Third World's problem is to free itself frat poverty. The Americans
find this reasoning hard to understand. For then everything is black or white.
There is the problem of relations with the USSR, they say. an attitude is firm on
the proolems of Afghanistan, Cambodia and Poland? Then we must also support everyone
who is fighting Communism in the world, including Latin American dictators. We
don't accept this concept, and the Americans, just as they consider us realists where
East-West relations are concerned, consider us starry-eyed idealists where North-
South relations are concerned.

[Question] Hernu does not exclude the possibility of producmg the N bomb. It seems
to me that the French position resembles Carter‘s: continue research, perhaps be
able to produce it, but then make a political decisicm as to whether to actually
produce it. These statements don't bother the French. Is that because there is a
widespread conviction in France that the Russians took advantage of the detente years
to alter the balance of military power--conventional or nuclear--in their favor?

8
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
[Answer] There are various opinions in the French socialist movement. One group is
hostile to the neutron bomb and even had trouble accepting the idea of our maintaining
a strike force. Another group is basically pacifist, but is in the minority.

[Question] In public opinion as a whole, too?

[Answer] Yes. But surveys have shown that the majority of the population accepts the
strike force. There are two schools of thought among those who accept the strike
force, however. The first adheres to the doctrine of deterrence. It is really a

sort of neutralism: we say that deterrence can only be a national issue. not European.
In the present circumstances this means simply letting it be known that the French
sanctuary is inviolable. This theory has been expounded by various circles, including
some generals. It was General De Gaulle's official theory.

[Question] But it's hard to reconcile it with membership in the Atlantic Alliance and
with policies based on a European Conmunity...

[Answer] That's true, because it is based on the following reasoning: if someone
attacks French territory we will use our atomic bombs. This is the principle of
deterrence. But if we look at the map we see that we don‘t have any borders in column
with the USSR and if we were ever in a position where we were not threatened by a war
that Started in West Germany. for example. either we would go to war because we
thought there had been aggression, and then we would have to join our allies, or we
would withdraw from the alliance and take refuge in our sanctuary. Those who hold
this latter opinion are against the neutron bomb, not because it is more terrible than
other bombs--it is less terrible than the atomic banb we have--but because if we
produce the neutron bomb we are accepting the idea of fighting in Germany and
rejecting the idea of a French sanctuary. But if we are already involved in a war

in Germany fought with tactical weapons it will be hard for us to brandish this
threat. The theory of deterrence is one of all or nothing: either the Apocalypse or
leave us alone.

[Question] But this makes sense only in a context of political neutrality.

[Answer] In fact, sane people think that we should retain the possibility of France's
deciding to avoid the conflict, and that we should therefore keep this apocalyptic
threat. Others think that if there is a war in Europe it will be a war between
coalitions and we will be drawn into it because we can't accept a Soviet presence on
the Rhine, for example. 80 then we ask ourselves why we shouldn't have the same
weapons our allies have in a war between coalitions.

[Question] 50 we have three trends in France: me pacifist, one neutralist (the
"French sanctuary“), and one based on a solid alliance among Western countries,
especially European ones.

[Answer] This third trend is represented now by the present government and by the
President of the Republic, feeling that France's policy should not be purely selfish
and that the force dc frappe is an important political factor for Europe. Our having
it changes the given part of the problem of relations with the United States.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA

Take for example Reagan's last speech, alluding to the possibility of a nuclear war
limited to Europe. The reaction to this was indignant. In fact. the Americans have
always contemplated this possibility. The concept of flexible defense imlies
escalation up to the Apocalypse or a limited nuclear war. This last hypothesis

implies the use of American tactical atanic weapons against East Germany, Czecoslovakia,
and Poland, but they would not reach Soviet territory becaua if they did American
territory would be bombed in retaliation. But if there is saneone in Europe who can
say: "If our territory is bombed we can bomb the USSR,“ than the Americans are obliged
to discuss matters with us.

[Question] But there is obviously a psychological and moral crisis in northern Europe
because of the end of detente, and not surprisingly it is above all West Germany
which reacts the most sensitively to pacifist movements. Dm't you think the Reagan
administration has committed some errors in proposing its present policy, at least for
the initial phase? Above and beyond the merits of the issue, est modus in rebus.

[Answer] Here we must distinguish between Germany and other countries. Pacifist
feelings have always run strong in countries like Denmark and Holland. In my opinion
the change in Germany is due to two fundamental reasons. Thanks to the Pershing
affair the people discovered that they were living not on a keg of gun powder but on a
formidible array of atomic missiles. The quantity of these weapons somehow transformed
their quality. The feeling of fear came when it was proposed that sanething be added
to what already existed and had been accepted and which people didn't want to think
about. The Pershings had a shattering psychological effect. We already have thousands
of warheads on our territory—-the Germans said to themselves-~and now they tell us the
battle will start in our country. The German people suddenly woke up to their problem.
They have rediscovered it not because of any change in the nature of the American
presence but because this quantitative change suddenly revealed a reality they wanted
to ignore.

The second reason is the economic crisis. which plays an extremely important part in
this issue. Germany does need to maintain and develop its economic relations with
the East, above all with East Germany. We knovv perfectly well that a lot of products
exported by west Germany are partly made in East Germany,which fulfills the same
function for West Germany as Taiwan or Korea for Japan. Then we have the problem of
gas and the problem of German exports to the East. All this gives rise to resentment
toward the Americans when the United States-~which is supplying the Soviet Union with
grain--says: You mustn't supply the East with sophisticated technology, or buy gas,
etc.... A reaction is understandable.

[Question] The big peace demonstrationsa-I'm thinking of the German far left--seem
to be a repetition of the big youth demonstrations of the 605 against Vietnam. Ter-
rorism has even re-emerged as anti-American. There is none of this in France. All
the former protesters, from Pierre Victor to the new philosophers to newspapers like
LIBERATION and ACTUEL, have been deeply critical of socialist realism, and also of
terrorism. France has been almost untouched by terrorism of the Left. Why?

[Answer] There has been a very interesting phenomenon in France. Hay 1968 could have
given birth to terrorist movements, with the enormous disillusionment there was among
young people. But this didn't happen, for various reasons. The main one is that most
of the intelligentsia that belonged to the far Left or supported it was struck above

all by totalitarianism. The discovery of the Gulag made the intelligentsia--exaggerating

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
at timesuset their sights on totalitarianism (in eastern Europe, Latin America and
Africa). There was a sort of fascinatim, even an dosessim, with totalitarianism,
that is in contrast with what the Red Brigades or the German terrorists were saying.
What they said didn't get through to France.. Young people can be against our present
society, they may criticize reformist socialism as they have experienced it, but the
idea of resorting to violence and not respecting democracy is inadmissible for them.
So the reaction in France was a little different from in West Germany. But it is

also true that in France we have never had the kind of primitive anticommunist: that
was bound to arise in Germany.

[Question] The basic difference, therefore, is still that the French far Left is
unwilling to give the USSR and socialist realism any credit, whereas the German and

Italian far Left is. For example in the case of the peace movements this willingness
to see good in the USSR takes the form of a certain reluctance to recognize the
reality of Soviet expansionism and of the aggressive intentions of the USSR.

In France we have a problem with the attitude of the Conuuunist Party. The PCE‘
denounces the Pershings without contemplating the problem posed by the 85-20 at the
same time. We are not in favor of the installation of the Pershings. We would like
an agreement to be reached with the Soviets for the withdrawal of the 55-20. But the
PC? is waging a unilateral campaign against the Pershings. This is a pro-Soviet
position. But when they demonstrate they find themselves alone. In France pacifists
dislike being mistaken for pro-Soviets.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Hondoperaio Edizioni Avanti

9855
C50: 3104/60

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WWARY 0N MEAN SECURITY, NAN, 110‘. EC
Rome PUNIOPBRAIO in Italian Sep-Oct 81 pp 8-17

[Article by Stefano Silvestri: ”Pblitical Ties"; passages enclosed in slantlines
printed in boldface]

[Text] If one would like--as is only proper-relations among the neabers of the
Atlantic Alliance to be on a sore equal footing, the problem to be resolved is to
be found not so such in America as in Europe. The American policy say or my not
be to one's liking, but it cannot be replaced or seriously altered unless Europe
itself is in a position to resume effectively at least sole of the roles that are
today played by the USA. Desiring to gain sore automay at slall cost would be too
risky a proposition for everyone concerned.

In the case of Italy we have, to be sure. an opportunity to leave the "small time"
and set sail in the sue difficult waters of intermtional policy: but this also
requires that our country assule a greater measure of responsibility in respect to
security. Moreover. it requires a more active Italian presence in the EC in
order to develop a common policy for the Mediterranean. Africa and the Riddle East.

Let us begin by establishing the fact that the world is changing. and rapidly.

The old alliances no longer safeguard us at all. The new dangers are called energy.
inflation, teapo of development. The old dangers (war. subversion, ungovernability,
totalitarianism) have not disappeared: on the contrary, they have in sons cases
intensified. The world as a whole-~seen fro. Europe-4s at one and the ease time
very secure and very terrifying. No one really thinks that it would be advantageous
to unleash a war in Europe or in behalf of Europe. Binope does not know. however,
how it can survive the change in equilibrium and the threats agaimt its prosper.r
ity. its stability, its security and its freedom. Things are not so bad at present,
but the outlook is glooay.

It is therefore not easy to design a foreign policy for Italy (and for Italy as part
of Europe): it is a question of not losing the security enjoyed today, and of
improving the prospects for the future. The difficulty is that asny foraules for
Improving the future have until now been lilited to taking action that would worsen
the present. and are therefore unacceptable. "Better an egg today than the chicken
tomorrow"--especially if the chicken can be realizable only in the very distant
future and serious doubts exist as to the freshness ani fertility of the egg. This
will be our point of departure. however: namely. changes in respect to security.
Not a very exciting topic, you say? Yes, wars are what is exciting-mt first.

anyway .

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New (hallenges

Michael Racht recently summarized the "factors for change" (in DAEDALUS, January-
March 1981). The first factor is the relative reduction of U.S. power vis-a-vis
the USSR. The latter has developed at least as many-~11~ not aore--intercontinental
nuclear weapons, an ocean-going fleet, a capability for global intervention. and
has intensified its conventional and nuclear threat to Europe. Calm and Japan. It
has therefore become difficult to replicate experiences such as the Korean car. the
crisis of the Chinese islands, the Cuban crisis of the 1960's. the siege of Rho
Sanh during the Vietnam war, the blockade of Soviet intervention during the 1973
Arab-Israeli war. and so forth. In each of these cases (and in others as well, as
for example the various Berlin crises) the USA threatened the USSR with its nuclear
arsenal and the USSR avoided direct intervention. Today such a threat is more
risky and less credible: in short. much more difficult.

Moreover, the American government today has less freedom of action than previously
vis-a-vis the Congress and public opinion. However such Reagan can count on his
great popularity and his majority, it is clear that everything would change in the
event of defeat or humiliation. Prudence therefore reigns suprene.

Even the American economy is less strong than it was. In the 1950's the USA -
duced more than 50 percent of the world's manufactures: today it produces less than
25 percent. In terms of per capita GNP it is today surpassed by Norway, Sweden.
Switzerland and Kuwait and is more or less on a par with Mada. Federal Germany and
Delmar-k.

Besides the USSR, the other center of power that has developed enornously in today's
world is OPEC: that is to say. the petroleun exportirg countries taken as a whole.
Although OPEC is not a unitary center of power, it is a source of econolic threats
and threats with respect to energy, as well as the activating factor for an inense
concentration of conventional military power (and of dangerous develop-ants with
respect to nuclear proliferation) in parts of the world that are anything but peace-
ful.

In addition to these traditional conflicts, the end of colonialism has also
bequeathed to the world the so-ealled North-South conflict. that is to say the
diversity of interests. perceptions and strategies as between the developed world
and the developing world. 'lhese diversities are in general the underlying cause of
much strife and absorb a great part of the attention of our diplomts and our

military.

Lastly, what we have is the reality of a world that is increasingly interconnected
(communications. culture and so forth) and increasingly interdependent-m world in
which negative phenomena are being manifested which are both universal and trans-
national in character. such as terrorism the growth of separatist, nationalist and
religious irrationaliss: and. in general. the conflicts between traditioml values
and modernization. The nation-states have survived but are beooning more inter-
dependent (and therefore less independent ) and are uniergoing a process of political
and military fragmentation that nilitates against their survival.

These changes are threatening the traditioml arrangeeent with respect to Bumpean
security and are changing the relationship between Europe and “cries.

13
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
In essence, it is a question of coping with four principal problems to which all

the other problems are subordinate: a) Hhat kind of relations should be maintained
with the USSR? b) Hhat kind of relations should be maintained with OPEC?

c) How should the problem of economic development be dealt with? d) How can a
credible framework of European military security be maintained (or. in other words.
what kind of relations should be maintained with the United States)?

Europe and the United States

‘ihe /optimal/ response to these four questions implies a qualitative change in the
European nolitical pir ture. Any change involves. in its own way, a reexamination
of the relationship between Europe and the USA-4 relationship /which has until now
ensured that there will be acceptable responses/ to all four of these questions.

In fact, these questions are raised precisely because an examination of the current
trends in the development of the international system has raised doubts as to the
ability of the USA to ensure that these same responses will continue in the future.
Naturally. howeVer. any new response cannot exclude the United States. Even if the
United States is not (and can never again be, in the future) the same super-super-
power it has been in the past, it nevertheless is still a superpower. Not only,
therefore, can the USA not be disregarded (just as the USSR cannot be disregarded)
but it is /entirely advantageous/ to Europe that the United States remain its ally,
because the American interests are assuredly closer to Europe's interests than are
the Soviet interests. and because only the American superpower is in a position to
oppose the Soviet superpower.

If indeed this is the way things are. then the dilemma of the relationship between
Europe and America can be stated simply: Is it a more "equal" relationship that is
desired. or more rapid and efficacious decisions? The two propositions are not at
all compatible, at least for the short tom. Rapid and efficacious decisions imply
a kind of division of labor that is centered on the partner who is more powerful
and flexible. namely the USA. Better consultation can mitigate the inevitable
discord. but it cannot change the substance of an American "bossism" in the inter
national context. Because we are in the pluralistic and democratic West instead of
in the monolithic and autocratic East. this "bossism" (which some erroneously
define as "imperialism" because they love cheap semationalism) obviously leaves
some rcam for dissent. Hitterand may continue to criticize the USA over £1 Salva-
dor or Namibia: Schmidt may be angry with Reagan's economic policies: Brandt may
nraise detente, inventing--for the use ani consumption of young German social
democrats-1 "golden age" that never existed: and even Berlinguer may conjure up a
NAN that has nothing to do with the military equilibrium vis-a-vis the USSR. At
the appropriate moment. however, the Europeam must "go along with" the American
decisions and content themselves with a few corrective changes in respect to form.

A relationship based on greater equality. however. entails greater European respon-
sibilities. The justification for demanding this greater equality is to be found
both in the fact that European interests do not always coincide with ‘American
interests, and in the fact that Europe is far richer and potentially much more
powerful today than it was 20 or 30 years ago. If these two premises are accepted
the Europeans can certainly be more autonomous , on condition-~of course~-that they
acquire the means to guarantee for themselves a greater measure of independence
coupled with at least an equal measure of security, and if they assume the risks
and responsibilities inherent in such a choice.

“I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To want to be sore autonomous at small cost (a scenario which the Americam have
defined as "Finlandization" and others define as a pacifist--or scantily armed--
neutralism) would not only be dangerous but would have profoundly divisive effects
both as among the various European countries and inside those countries. It is
indeed obvious that those countries which :‘eel themselves lost threatemduand
those political forces which place the least confidence in the goodwill of the
USSR-~wou1d have no other choice than to appeal to the Americans and to their
"bossism." as the lesser of two evils. In other words, it would amount to a return

to the 19119 split between pro-Russians and pro-Americans, with a resultant crisis
in respect to the outlook for Europe.

reason than because Washington would have to be reeducated in order to accept that
greater measure of equality. It could be worth the while, however. The “bassist"
hypothesis could in fact--over the long term-prove to be weak and counterproduc-

' ve. eliciting domestic neutralist opposition as well as ‘Tnird Force" (or nation-
alist) opposition within various European countries. If the ”bossist" hypothesis
should then also prove to be incapable of dealing with a serious crisis with opti-
mal results. we could abruptly find ourselves facing a sudden public rejection of
the alliance with the USA without having prepared any alternative. Iugine, for
example. a serious crisis in the Persian Gulf and an American inability to guaran-
tee Europe's energy supply: would RATO survive?

Let us not deceive Ourselves, however. The problem to be solved is not so much in
America as in Ehirope. The American policy may or may not please, may satisfy or
nay leave one perplexed. but in no case can it be replaced-wot significantly
amendeduif Lin-ope itself is not in a position to resume at least sons of the roles
that are today being played by the Americans.

In the absence of such a development, the only course remaining will be to opt for
"bossisn" and try to handle it as well as possible while hoping for the best.

There are many possible instruments to effect an awakening-or qualitative leap
forwarduin re set to European policy. we shall discuss several hypotheses at

the conclusion of this article. These hypotheses must, however, be prefaced by
some general political considerations. for the quality and quantity of the instru-
ments in question depend in great part on what one wishes to do. He shall therefore
return to our four original questions. What would be the best course to take?

that Does the USSR Want?

Any policy regarding the USSR involves an evaluation of what the USSR wants from us.
Such an evaluation is not easy to make, because there are so new different inter
pretatiors: at least as many as there are Sovietologists. If a Sovietologist
wishes to be a realist. however. a measure of simplicity is called for. Basically,
it is not so much a question of knowing whether Brezhnev is being more honest when
he invades Afghanistan or when he proposes a new era of peace in Europe as it is a

policies that are adapted to. and change with, changes in circumstances and in
interlocutors. These considerations should disabuse anyone 01' either opti-is- or

pessimism. Pierre Hassner (at the most recent annual conference of the Interm-
tional Institute of Strategic Studies in London) brilliantly summed up the

15
FOR omen/u. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

weaknesses of both camps, urging the reader to "avoid both the illusions of the
progressives-who tend to minimize the Soviet threat and the role of military force
and to exaggerate the hopes engendered by detente--and the illusions of the conser-
vatives, who tend to exaggerate the former and minimize the latter." We should
accordingly avoid the mistake mde by those "who tend to minimize the impatance of
new weapons systems, and military interventions, when they are the work of the USSR
but find them highly destabilizing and dangerous when they are the work of the USA."
These individuals tend to mistake fiction for fact. He should also, howwer, avoid
the conservative conviction that there exists a "conception of spheres ofinfluence
of the 'cujus regio ejus religio' type. and a dogmatic belief in the impossibility
either of evolution, or of revolution, within the communist regimes."

Hassner goes on to observe (also quite correctly) that the strangest thing of all is
the fact that those who ask the USA to imitate the USSR by assignirg absolute
priority to a policy of strength are the same people who affirm most strongly that
the relatiomhip between the Western system and the communist system is character-
ized by diversity and indeed by incompatibility: in short, precisely those conser-
vatives who in the last analysis are advising Reagan to imitate Brezhnev. In so
doing they are "assuming that an open and pluralistic democratic society or alliance
can adopt the same strategy as a totalitarian society without itself being tram-
formed in turn into such a society." To tell the truth, it is not a very convin-
cirg assumption.

Equally strange and unconvincing, moreover, are those anti-Soviet observers who--
less strorgly anti-Soviet--put their faith in a depoliticized vision of economic
relations and of disarmament, thereby eliminating from these relations any pressure
on Soviet behavior and hoping to "teach the USSR by example" to do likewise. These
observers are committing the error (exactly the opposite of that committed by the
conservatives) of tending to "underestimate the differences existing between the
United States and the Soviet Union, and on the other hand to emphasize the common
interest in disarmament and economic interdependence, but then advising the United

States (and the other Hestern countries) to behave differently than the USSR is
behaving.”

Both positions, in short. seem neither very logical nor very farsighted. The fact
is orobahly that both positions are partly correct and that the relatiomhip between
the West and the USSR cannot be interpreted in as simplistic a fashion as one fac-
tion or the other would like. A thropean policy vis-a-vis the USSR must inevitably
Include. a little of both positions.

After all, Moscow's policy toward Europe is itself full of ambiguity. At the aili-
tary level there is no doubt of this: the sale period during which Hashimton and
Moscow were talking about detente is the very same period during which the great
arms buildup and Moscow's cffensives in the Third World took place. The emphasis
changed with the changes in circumstances. At times the effort was directed toward
obtain {31" urndml political control of Central Bin-ope. and Germany in particular,
both by direct and by indirect methods: at times Hoscow has concentrated on revolu-
tions- iv: the Third world: at times it has favored detente (as in 1981): and at times
it has exalted the growing might of the Red Army and the Soviet capacity for being
the principal axis of international policy (as in 1976). Underlying this diversity
of tactics are differing evaluations of the forces in the field, political opportu-
nities and internal problems of the communist camp: but overall we can single out

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

elements of convergence-~33 well as elements of competition~~with the west. The
problem is: how t< enhance the convergence without in fact diminishing the chances
of defeating the competition?

A Nonsuicidal Response

The response is to be found in the elaboration of an overall strategy that will
combine both of these elements. But beware: a certain pacifist rhetoric existirz
in Dirope is tending to divide the problem geographically. To put it in silple
terms, many Europeans appear convinced that the USA should concern itself with the
"competition“ and Europe the "convergence." Such a formula is suicidal. for
several reasons:

a. Because the Americans by themselves (as we have already said) could find them-
selves in trouble and abandon the competition in regime or areas that are of vital
concern to us Europeans.

b. Because this division impels the USSR to strive for a deepening of the gulf
between Europe and America. rather than for a modification of the policies of both.

c. Because this method has already been attempted, first by De Gaulle and then by
Schmidt and Giscand, and has already failed on several occasions. 'lhc USSR has not
accepted the European nations as interlocutors on a basis of equality (it has
contented itself with attempting to play them off against the Americans), while on
the other hand the hopes (especially on the part of the Germam) for the creation
of a "community of interests" (a kind of "lingua francs" of detente) between western
Europeans and Eastern tharopeans, simultaneously imposing conditions both on the USA
and on the USSR, have been dashed against the fragility-and the subordination to
Moscow-of the governments of Eastern Europe (the fall of Gierek. the Polish
"friend“ of Schmidt and Giscard : the anti-Bonn betrayal of Honecker: and so forth).

d. Because such a course will encourage the already strong European inclimtion
toward irresponsibility and noninvolvement, and induces the European governments to
underestimate the elements of competition and low-term strategy that are present
in Moscow.

e. Because such a policy contradicts the basic European need (as we have noted)
for maintenance of a close alliance with the USA.

The operative conclusions flow rather easily from these premises. 0n the military
plane (we shall speak of it in greater detail later) it is a question of maintain-
ing and strengthening the existing equilibrium in Mrope and in those regiom of
strategic interest. Negotiations are a viable course to follow only within the
perspective of this greater security, as a conplementary and confirmatory factor.
It is not a question of attempting to roll the USSR back to a regional role, or to
regain total military supremacy over the USSR (an objective which. among other
things. is in practice unrealistic), but rather of convincing--once and for alle-
both the USSR and the Third World of the impossibility of successfully employing
force. or the threat of force. to oppose our fundamental interests.

0n the economic plane, it is a question of taking account of the political vision
that the USSR has of economic relations (a vision that is shared also with our

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
partners of the Third world, with OPEC in the vanguard). It is not possible to
hope (as some spokesmen of the Reagan administration seem simplistically on
occasion to be saying) that the cost of the military competition will force the
USSR into a dorsstic economic crisis of such seriousness as to compel it to come to
terms or to change its policies. ibis was already the hope of George Kennan when
he developed the first American theory of "containment" and was the basic idea
behind Foster Dulles' hope for a ”rollback" (i.e., forced withdrawal) of the USSR
ﬁ-om Em‘o'oe. Such theories have shown themselves incapable of foreseeing the
Soviet capacity for resistance and the long-range character of Moscow's policy.

Economic cooperation can therefore become a permanent factor in East-Vest rela-
tions, on condition however that it not be Murdered with excessive hopes that are
at least as unjustified as the hope that was placed in the development of reformist
forces in the USSR (in the eyes of many mix-opeaz-Asnﬂeaven only knows why--Kosygi
had' remained a “refer-list" long after even the abandonment of every reformist

policy)-

It is not easy to find a eiddle way between economic cooperation without precondi-
tions and the short-term political me of the economic weapon. Because both of
these Options have already proved disappointing to us, howwer, it is at least
advisable that we cease to repropoae them uncritically and turn instead to a sore
realistic and analytical vision of the overall situation.

One course of action. however. has not yet been undertaken decisively. and an effort
in this direction could be worthwhile: we have always spoken in terns of economic
relatiom with the USSR, but /why not make a distinction between the USSR and the
Eastern European countries?/ For even though Eastern Europe has shown itself to be
politically weak and economically in a situation of crisis. it is certainly more
interestednfmm a structural starripointnin its relations with the West than in
its relatiom with the USSR. 'lhe Soviet Union itself--in Poland, and in a differ-
ent form in Hungary and Rumania has appreciated the importance of relations with
the west, provided that these relations do not seriously jeopardize the solidity of
its ‘oloc. The greater the political and economic tensions within the can, the more
opportunity there is for a Western economic initiative that would be politically
relevant and that in any event could influence Moscow's behavior toward its satel-
lites. The same thing could happen in countries of the Third World that are linked
to Moscow militarily but that are very desirous of increased economic relations
with the West. In short, it is a question of reniering the Soviet empire maximally
permeable to the Heat. A strategy of this type can be attempted. although there is
one difficulty: in some cases it can prove to be a costly strategy. However.
unless we believe that the communist bloc is monolithic-and provided we believe
that after all, even this bloc is capable of evolving-~it is an option full of
promise.

Petroleum, Development and World Equilibrium

It is now time to discuss international economic policy. Not being a specialist
(or. in any event. an observer with expertise) in this field. I gladly leave to
others (in this sale issue of MONIDPERAIO) the task of examining the intricacies
of this subject. In the present article I should like to emphasize certain politi-
cal aspects of relations with OPEC, on the one hand. and with the lihird World in
general.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (MIA

countries that identify themselves as members of the group of the ”7 " in the
United Nations). Ewen Western Shirope, moreover, owes its current international
role to its econosic dimension and to the power of attraction delorstrated by the
European Economic Community. 'Ihe necessity for taking political action based on
the economic dimension is therefore obvious, in order to respond to the denands and
pressures of some and to do justice to the cards we hold.

In this case, too, the primry requirement is security~-the stability of our basic
position. He cannot be credible rm-tners if we remain vulnerable to every change
in the wind. The very fact that our interlocutcrs are especially able to take
action in the economic sphere should put us on our , for vulnerability or
excessive dependency (in the absence of reciprocity on our part would inevitably
motivate them to attempt to force our hand, that is to say, to employ the means at
their command in a competitive rather than a cooperative Ianner. Suffioe it to

period of maximum European dependence and vulnerability in the energy field was
also the period of the largest increase in energy prices and of the gravest threats
to employ this weapon politically in order to influence Uestern behavior in the
Middle East. A marginal change in the situation of Hester-n dependence was suffi-
cient to create a growing opportunity for the moderate forces within the Arab world
to achieve relatively stable petroleul prices.

This experience should not be forgotten. me less our partners are convinced of
our vulnerability, the longer will cooperation and interdependence be able to
survive. This obviously has important comequences for the domestic economy,
including rapid development of all alternative sources of energy.

If, however, we accept the hypothesis that Europe and its partners in the industri-
alized world will succeed in maintainixg a sufficient margin of flexibility in
respect to energy and economic autonomy, we are then faced with the problem of how
to play a positive role in the Third World.

We are already aware of many of the theoretical responses. They have been developed
at international conferences and in the attempts (excessively Iodest so far) to
effect a triangular recycling sililar to that proposed. in his day, by Guido (hr-1i.
These responses, however, come into conflict with a difficult political reality.

yses are concerned. The first problel is that of the /swwth, in world political
stature, of the individual developing countries./ This growth results in contradic-
dory tensions as between cooperation am conflict with the wealthier (or more devel-
oped) countries, encourages domestic instability, and underlies various regioml
conflicts anon; Third world countries. Although economic developsent requires a
frenework of cooperation and interdependence, the political presises for it give
rise to conflicts that are endogenous to the 'lhird World itself.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fast-west Competition in the Third 'Jorld

not convincing. The drawback of this formula is that it gratuitously hands over
to the USSR a profitable position which the latter can exploit at its pleasure,

and the for-ula has a subsequent disadvantage in that the Rest is thereby motivated
to support uncritically every reactionary force, eli-imting all flexibility and
squander-int: political opportunities. This kind of decision is divisive within the
Hester-n world itself and therefore threatens to weaken our internal consensus. In
short, such a decision does not allow us to exploit in depth the potential of our
neater economic capacity and inpels us to disregard the requests that flow inde-
nendently from the Third world countries, needlessly making them our enemies.

On the other hand. the theory of those who believe that the West should not concern
itself with the East~west dilension of the problem of the Third world is not convin-
cing either. This theory has had various applications, as for example during the
initial years of the Garter administration (in the conviction, later revealed to be
mistaken, that the USSR would be unable to "rule" for very long in the countries
where it had established itself)--applications in the form of certain sultilateral
initiatives by the United Nations and the EEC. To disregard the struggle for power
under way in the Third 'dorld is to cut oneself off from the dimension which is of
the greatest interest and concern to the very “same developing countries which are
our partners. One cannot understand how it is possible at one and the sane time to
hope for greater interdependence and cooperation and then attespt to disregard the
very bases of any policy of interdependence and c00psratiom that is to say, the
continuity of the interlocutors; their capacity for respecting the agreements signed:

A "middle way" should therefore avoid all dangerous theoretical or ideological
generalizations. Specifically. it is also a question of sorting out an overall
policy composed of various correlated initiatives. It is essential to establish

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Southwest Asia." as it is currently fashionable to say. so as to emphasize the
Persian Gulf and Pakistan): Southeast Asia; an! the region between the Pacific and
the Indian Ocean require for themselves a strategic equilibrium in which the 'u'est
should play a fundamental role. wraps can participate in a decisive way in some
of these equilibriums, and Japan in others. The United States is basically present
in each area. Maintenance of an equilibrium also involves the possibility of the
use--or threat of the use--of force in a credible manner. Force should be employed
primrily to keep the USSR under control. but it is also a necessary element for
ensuring the overall credibility of the west vis-a-vis its allies. It is true that
many states of the Third World actually contend that the military presence of the
superpowers is ”destabilizing," but there are no other alternatives. If anything.
it is a question of apportioning the forces in a political manner so as to avoid
having them ultimately prove to be counterproductive.

Such a. policy should obviously also have an economic dimemion, either as a deter-
rent or as an incentive for regional stability and development. This economic
dimension must at times go as far as "linkage": in other words, it is possible to
try to increase the price that the USSR must pay for every intervention it makes
in the Third world. thereby forcing the Soviets to take into account the proba-
bility that there will be reprisals--in different areas and in different modes--
in those regions where its operations are taking place. Above all. however, it is
essential to develop a policy of incentives that will speak directly to the devel-
oping countries.

It is also necessary to remember our mmise, namely that there are, in the world,
revolutionary situations and situations of conflict that are not a function of
Soviet intervention. In coping with a situation of this nature. the use of force
or of the economic weapon should be apportioned in various ways: the West should
show itself to be at least as amemble to change as the Soviet Union. The two
aspects are not mutually contradictory, however. It is very difficult to accept
change if one is in a situation of strategic inferiority, and if one is afraid of
losing the last positions of strength that one possesses. In this way. for exam-
ple, it was very difficult for the Americans to accept the hypothesis of a change
of regime in Iran, because in that period the LEA appeared to be short of allies
and was in a situation of strategic inferiority in the Middle East, ard because
Fun-ope was in a period of great vulnerability with respect to energy. 0n the
other hand. it was possible to achieve a positive compromise and a change of
regime in Zimbabwe (formerly Rhodesia) because the French-American-Horoccan inter-
vention in Zaire had preserved the stability of that country and because the
strength of South Africa was a sufficient guarantee of the maintenance of a mili-
tary equilibrium in the region. This lesson, too. should not be forgotten or
undervalued.

The Military Problem and NATO

He now come to our final problem in the area of foreign policy: the maintenance
of a credible framework of military security. I do not propose to dwell on the
strategic problems of the East-West conflict. 0n the other hand, it is interest-
ing to emphasize some problems relative to the relationship between the western
Europeans and the Americans.

President Reagan has decided on a strong program of reamment--both conventional
and nuclear-Justified on the basis of the slow but continuing numerical decline in

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(which is quantitatively inferior to the rearnament that took place in the USA on
other occasions such as the Korean war, the "nissile gap" of the Kennedy era, and
the Vietnam war should make it possible for the USA to face several crises siaul-
taneously in several parts of the world. This theory is not conpletely in accord
with reality. however.

In terms of conventional forces, the equilibriun of the forces in Central Europe is
not one of the best. After a couple of weeks of mobilization the Harsaw Pact

could. in this category, achieve a ratio of superiority to NATO of 2 to 1 in person-
nel, 2.5 to 1 in tanks. 2.“ to 1 in artillery and tactical missiles and 2.h to 1 in
armored equipment, whereas NATO has a 2 to 1 advantage in antitank missiles and

1.8 to 1 in helicopters. The fact is that the Alerioans probably have neither
sufficient tactical aircraft nor sufficient personnel. for example. to confront

the USSR in Europe and in the Persian Gulf simultaneously.

According to calculations made for the 1138 by Tom Wheelock, the Soviets can put
approximately 600 tactical aircraft over Iran. plus an unspecified number of
medium-range bombers; two airborne divisions ready for action plus another six
available on short notice: 21 mechanized divisions (ready afte: a brief period of
mobilization) and one armored division, in addition to a flotilla of eight war-
ships. Almost all of these forces are stationed in the southern districts of the

Chinese border.

0n the other side, the Americans have a group of two aircraft carriers. 16 warships
and 110 fighter-boabers; the AUMS stationed in Saudi Arabia; a. tactical air group
of 70 aircraft noraally stationed in Europe: the use of the B-jZ’s nor-ally sta-

tioned in Spain or Guam (in the Pacific); four tactical air groups stationed in the

marines available within 21:» hours (one airborne battalion fro- Italy and the other
an umibious battalion now in the Indian Ocean): one brigade of m rines available
within 7 days from the USA and from Diego Garcia; one airborne brigade available
within ? days. and the entire division within 1“ days (forces destined for NATO
and based in the USA): one brigade of marines fron the heific. available within

problems) as well as the ”prestocking" in Europe, designed to speed up the tempo
of reinforcement of the European front, the fact remains that the USA does not
have--and probably will not bur-sufficient forces ready for action in order to
cope with more than one crisis at a tine. It would need at least 2 months to
mobilize all the forces necessary.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nuclear Forces and conventional Forces

Other developuents--in the sphere of nuclear forces--have been announced that may
complicate the situation. The strategy of ”compensation" provides for the limited
use of nuclear forces in response to a victorious conventioml attack by the
Soviets. This is also the standard doctrine of mm. It is a doctrine, however,
that requires a greater degree of invulnerability on the part of the Anerican
strategic forces (some people are in fact talking about "dusting off" the anti-
missile missiles that were restricted by the SALT-1 treaty). for a greater inv-ul-
nerability of this sort would render the use of tactical nuclear weapons more
credible but clearly run the risk of increasing the /distance/ between the tactical
theaters (Asia, Europe) and the Aaerican rational theater. This my create tension
between the USA and its allies, who may feel themselves threatened by the hypothesis
of a nuclear war limited to their own territory.

Moreover (as Jan Lodal emphasizes, also for the IISS). the tactical and "Bin-ostrat-
egic" use of nuclear weapom gives rise to ,Ioperative/ doubts, inasmuch as the
problems of command. control and com-unications appear not to have been solved. as
well as the problems relating to recognition and acquisition of tactical objectives
(especially if they are moving objectives) by these forces. These weapons can, to
be sure, destroy preselected fixed objectives, but it is unlikely that they could
keep up with a strategic situation which is in motion. According to certain Jour-
nalistic lndiscretions. the nuclear /reaction times/thesaelves could prove to be too
great to cope with close-in strategic situations. Lastly (to quote Jan nodal),

"the growim possibility of rendering credible antipersonnel capabilities operative.
combined with the current NATO strategy of threatening to be the first to use
nuclear weapons to strengthen a conventional defense that is failing, adds a strong
argument in favor of the development of antipersonnel nuclear capability in the USA
(such as the “N" bomb or other tactical categories--editor's note). The technical
impossibilit , however, of carrying out an antipersonnel attack that would be
/conplete1y crowned with success reloves much of the validity of the decision to
continue the development of antipersonnel weapons." In short, we have in this case
as well two contrasting truths both in respect to nuclear forces and in respect to
conventional forces.

In the conventional sphere, it is by now increasirgly obvious that the USA mt
increase the mobility and strategic flexibility of its forces, but this will reduce
the concrete possibilities forrreinforcelent and in some scenarios its very pres-
ence in Europe.

In the nuclear sphere. the existing disequilibrium constitutes an incentive for
development of tactical nuclear fo 3, but these forces will subsequently resolve
neither the economic problem (a " I" enter-coalind, control and communication
plus "intelligence"--that is truly effective costs as much as. and sore than, new
conventional armed forces), nor the human problel (for in reality the requirements
for troops appear to increase rather than decrease). nor the silitary problem
(because of the aforementioned technical problels and because the advantage to be
gained by being the first to use these forces would very likely prove to be fleet~
ing, except in certain cases involving the "closing off" of lines of comunication
or a surprise attack, either of which would, however, be difficult in view of the
rum systems of <91.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

The development of "Eurostrategic" forces could actually enhance the credibility of
the use of tactical nuclear forces in Europe. Such forces could in fact--by posing
a strong, direct threat to the Soviet national territory-~dissuade the USSR free any

Whereas the NATO tactical nuclear weapons would indeed strike Soviet forces but not
the territory of the U'SSR, the Soviet tactical nuclear weapons employed by attacking

destruction of civilian objectives and would be little--if at all-~different in its
effects from a massive nuclear attack against the European populations. To this.
NATO could therefore-with good mason--respond by carrying out the massive destruc-
tion of civilian and military objectives in the USSR. This could induce the USSR
to engage in a much more limited use of its theater nuclear forces in Europe. and

could therefore enhance the credibility of the military use of tactical nuclear
forces by NATO.

This development, too ( iust as every other aspect of nuclear strategy at every

and secondly. because wherever this line of reasoning does "hold up" it would inany
event lake the limited use of nuclear arms in Europe more feasible. with consequences
that would certainly not be at all positive and would be politically divisive.

weapons.

If we proceed on the latter basis, the conclusions to be drawn are very obvious (at
least the extent to which they will be difficult to put into practice): it is a
question of relying less and less on the American conventional forces, and in sone
cases (as in the case of the air and naval forces) of integrating the- better. If

the USA must defend Euronean interests in Asia, Europe must make a more substantial
contribution toward equilibrium on its continent.

and different degrees of vulnerability-~as between the USA and Europe. It is inevi-
table. however. that the relative relationship between the two components will

change and that the European role will grow in importance. This is true~-unless
one wishes to stake everything on nuclear weapons.

Defense. unfortunately. is expensive. Germany has reduced its proposed expenditures.
To finance its presence in Germany and its strategic nuclear forces. Great Britain

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has reduced its naval presence in the weste. '- and southern Atlantic. leaving the
Americans virtually air ‘I.'- there. France has announced a reinforcement of all areas.
but it is likely that '2 development of new nuclear forces will consume a dispro-
portionate share of the budget to the detriment of the conventional forces. Italy
is gradually increasing its budget, but not sufficiently to enable it to carry out
a "two-front" strategy, that is to say, to enable it to operate with full efficiency
both in the northeast and in the Mediterranean (and it is therefore sacrificing
both sectors somewhat, but especially the latter).

To compensate for the American charges therefore requires a financial effort, but
above all requires (and this is the most difficult part) the coordination and inte-
gration of the various national efforts. A greater /specialization of the roles/
of the European forces is inevitable. as are also a greater mobility /among the
various fronts/ and the effective /standardization/ of the arment. Unless these
three developments take place, Europe's defense will experience a multiplication of
instances of duplication and waste of resources, accompanied by the impossibility
of integrating the forces in the field effectively: as a result, the use of nuclear
forces would become more necessary and more urgent. Such a failure would in fact
have the effect of deterring the very defense of Europe and thereby discourage all
resistance.

In the nuclear sphere the problem is not so much one of freeing oneself from
nuclear weapons (which are henceforth an integral part of the European equilibrium)
as it is one of keeping them under control both from the military standpoint and
from the political standpoint as it relates to negotiations.

There are those who-~as an alternative to the present situation--are inclined toward
the development of an autonomous nuclear deterrent (either a national one or, less
likely. a European one). The development of such a deterrent would in reality not
solve our problems, which are as follows:

a. The r.oblem of credibility--because national deterrents do not add to the over-
all deterrent effect vis-a-vis the USSR. 0n the contrary (at least in the case of
Germany) they are probably less credible than the American tactical detemnts and
Eurostrategic deterrents of NATO.

h. The problem of cost--and therefore of the relationship between conventional
and nuclear deterrents. On the contrary: the British and French experience (and
or. a iarne'r scale, the American experience) demonstrates that the development of
the nuclear deterrent impacts the availability of funds for the conventional deter-
rent. thereby intensifying the overall defense problems.

c. The problem of C3I--with the aggravating factor that in the event a national
nuclear dates-rent is developed it would probably be necessary to renegotiate the
use of the C systems and--above all--the "intelligence" systens of the Americans.
This would therefore create new, additional costs of no small consequence.

d. The problem of negotiationsnbecause the USSR would inevitably tend to view
such forces as additional forces and therefore as Justification for increased
reamutent on its own part.

e. Political problem-whether domestic in mture or (especially) those involving
relations with the USA.

25
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1‘. T‘roblems of regional equilibrium-40‘: example, in the hediterrahean. Nuclear
rearnament of Italy would accelerate the nuclear rearmament of other states such
as libYa . mm and so forth.

l‘xmscquentiy, a more appropriate hypothesis would appear (at least for the medium
term} to he the exercise of better European control over this problem without
making any basic change in the current arrangement. To this end there already
exist numerous iEA'I‘G committees (such as the Nuclear Planning Group. the High-Level
Group and the Special Group), althOugh France has excluded itself from them.

These committees, moreover. operate strictly from the "NATO perspective," which on
the one hand is perhaps based too much on a military--and Central European-dogic
and on the other hand excludes problems such as those relating to the extension of
force to areas outside Europe and to regional equilibrium other than the princi-
pal equilibrium with the USSR.

Instead. it would be advisable for the Europeans to begin to think autonomously
concerning the problems with respect to negotiations, strategic logic. ard "contin-
gency planning," without reference to the fact that the nuclear forces belong to
the USA. This latter reality has impelled the Europeans to adopt a "passive"
stance characteristic of recipients who find themselves being urged with the
greatest insistence to express their criticism and propose modifications to the
strategy chosen by the Americans. iihat is lacking is the autonomous elaboration
of European doctrines/. even though the ability to do so is not lacking. Further-
more, in the absence of any elaboration of such doctrines, even the control exer-
cised over the nuclear weapons of iiATO and over the progress of negotiations
cannot help but be limited. The European interests are singled out and defemied

in a fragmentary manner, while the overall picture passes unnoticed.

instead of promoting the development of other national nuclear deterrents (which
among other things would intensify the fragmentation of the European response),
this kind of situation calls for the creation of a. sort of "European Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency" on the model of the American counterpart, including however
a / Function of "contingency planning" and analysis/ of the overall. and regional,
stmteric situation (of the type which in America is carried out by the Department
of Defense). Such an "agency" (which should inevitably maintain a dual headquar-
ters, in Europe and in Hashington. in order to have the necessary quick reaction
time and completeness of information) has already been singled out as a “neces-
city" by many analyst (including. among others, Alistair Buchan as early as
1"“) but was never created because to do so was politically difficult.

The European Problem and Italy

Now we come urecisely to the real European political problem. the problem which
underlies all the proposals put forward in the present article: namely. the lack
of a genuine process of European political integration. without a European "intel-
lect" (one obliged to think. and act. in continental and integrated terms). these
aolicies either cannot be implemented or can be implemented only in a very partial
and inadequate manner.

The European governments have proposed many palliatives (rangim from development
of cooneration in the sphere of foreign policy among the 10 EC countries to a more
extensive use of summitry and to the creation of special groups of countries--in

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the nature of "maragers"--that would be assigned to serve as "task forces" to

deal with individual problems, specific strategic areas, and so forth. I shall

not digress into a detailed discussion of these proposals (I discuss them in
detail in my article entitled "A Policy for Europe: Foreign Policy and Security
Problems," published this year in SPEI'I‘ATORE IN’I‘BRNAZIONAIE, to which I refer any-
one who is interested). I should like only to quote the conclusion I drew: "The
central m-oblem is that this kind of /communications network/ is devoid of any
incentive or institutional stimulus to arrive at effective ani operative decisions.
ﬁery ministry of foreign affairs or national defense is, quite logically, struc-
tured with a view to making decisions at the national level. Once this objective
is achieved, the mandate of these ministries has been fully satisfied. 'lhe network
of European contacts is therefore viewed basically as a means for improving commu-
nications, speeding up the flow of informtion, avoiding mistakes and misunder-
staniings, and-«if possible-developing a common position. It is not a decision-
makimz process in the strict sense of the term, for it lacks any internal institu-
tioml logic that would impel it to make decisions, or any necessity to face up to
the major Eleonean problems in a timely and efficacious fashion."

The princiml political cnnclus n to be drawn from this entire analysis may there-
fore appear to be selr~evident and commonplace, but it is nonetheless necessary:
Italy must strive to develop European institutional systems that possess this
internal necessity-~and impulsento make decisions.

This Conclusion is likewise incomplete. however, if one does not add that in order
to accomplish this goal Italy /must in the meantime change its ways/, change

tcmno and quality of its foreign policy and policy on security. In this way the
medium- and long-term problem becomes in actuality also a short-term problem.

Such a change will require first and foremost a new awareness of Italy's potential
and opportunities-«if the real possibilities that exist to emerge from the. current
"small-time" phase and set out into the more difficult waters of international

nolicy.

Such a choice will require a /greater degree of responsibility/ on Italy's part,
even with respect to security. The course undertaken with the conclusion of the
armament mnamntecinr: the neutrality of Malta and the installation of the Euro-
missiles must be neri‘ected and substantiated. In this way, for example, it is no
low-er possible. to adopt the hypothesis of a. greater initiative in the Middle East
if this is not accommnied by the assumption of a greater meastire of direct respon-
sibilities, such as oarticimtion in the international force that is to guarantee
Um Cane David accord: in the Sinai and a series of political-military and techni-
cal. assists ncr- agreements with Middle East countries-agreements that are congruent
with the policies that one wishes to carry out (above all, therefore, with Egypt,
Tunisia and perhaps Algeria). This kind of Mediterranean projection is already
included in Ttaly's diplomatic rilsms (continuing attention to the Greek-Turkish
dis-mute. a arming interest in the Cyprus problem, a treaty with Yugoslavia, and so
Forth). However, it also involves an analysis and an orientation of our defense
policy designed to make our presence in the Mediterranean credible, and a study of
the economic competibilities and prospects that underlie a better common European
policy toward the Mediterranean, Africa and the Middle East. In this connection,
the two aspects of defense and international economic policy (including energy
\security) are closely linked.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This also will near. seeking a different, and lore active. Italian presence in the

Hun

..-.-.-., which must however undergo a change in quality and in strategy- Cur hmpean
action is in acneml centered on the search for /political axes/, or Indeed privi-
leged alliances with one nation or another. '-..’e may call attention, for example.
to the Stone-London axis, and more recently the Rome-Bonn axis. This type of
/POIicy by alignments/ has not proved to be very productive. Not only has the
Italian position appeared generally speaking to be "in tow." adapted in reality

to the interests and plans of the other [ax-trier, but these very same use have
nroved to be rather unproductive because they have been partial and incomplete.
Thus. for example. there is today a clear-cut Italian-German and Italian-British
convergence on certain problems of foreign policy (with the Germans as regards
detente, with the British as regards certain decisions concerning the Middle
East), but in neither of the two cases has there been a convergence on the problem
of reforming the EC institutions and budget.

It is therefore advisable to abandon for the time being this typically Italian
obsession (which can also be found in our domestic policy) concerning alignments
and alliances, in the illusion that these alignments and alliances can in and of
themselves define a. policy, and to pass on decisively to a planning phase, a

phase of proposals, and therefore a phase of a search for alliances, for collab-
oration and connitments based on effective operative plans developed uith a full
measure of analysis (imtrunental amlyses. cost analyses and analyses of results).

In short. in respect to our foreign policy as well. it is time to /establish our
priorities/.

Naturally. a change of this sort cannot take place in an institutioml vacuum.
Giulio Alato (in this same issue of nonvomxo) analyzes the negative political
and operative inplications of the current institutioml chaos in which our foreign
nolicy functions. Greater effectiveness in our foreign policy entails greater
consistency in governmental action, an emphasis on planning, and a closer linkage
with domestic policy.

mFYRIGi-ﬂ‘x 1991 Honiooeraio F‘dizioni Avantil

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SECRET COUPIST ORGANIZAIION HITHIN MILITARY DESCRIBED
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 7 Dec 81 pp 56-61

[Text] An underground, coupist and antimonarchical military organization, detected
but not infiltrated by the state secret services, is attempting increasingly to
make its presence felt. It is a question of the Spanish Military Union (UME).

In 1975, after the arrest of a senior officer and eight junior officers belonging

to the then unknown Democratic Military Union (UMD), when the minister of the ArIy,
Francisco Coloma Gallegos. received a lieutenant colonel, already retired, a for-er
comrade-in-arms, the latter tried to intercede in behalf of the arrested officers.
"that they want," he stated. "will be the country's future before 5 years have
passed."

The minister said that perhaps this might be true. but that he could not pardon
them for having established an underground organization within the Armed Forces.

Then the lieutenant colonel could not avoid a gesture of skepticism and, addressing
his superior and friend, he reminded him that 1.0 years earlier they had organized
the Spanish Military Union, the UME. The reply by Lieutenant General Colona Galle-
gos was categorical: "that is different!" -

At that some time, the military governor of La Coruna visited three UMD prisoners
held in the El Ferrel military prison. During the interview with the UMD members,
reference was made to how dangerous the establislnent of underground organizations
within the Army was to it.

When the topic of the Spanish Military Union was discussed. the military governor
of La Coruna changed his mind: the UMB that they had established before the Civil
Her was made up of decent, rightist persons.

a

These two anecdotes, unpublished up to now, reflect a constant in the Spanish Army
in recent years: an excessively beneveloent treatment of military persons con-
nected with the extrele right and strictness, harshness and persecution for mili-
tary persons defending liberal or democratic political positions.

This constant enabled the coupist sectors in Army to have a' free hand, once the

political reform had been carried out, to conspire against democracy. The facts
are evident: in Holy Week 1977, while the UM!) was persecuted harshly, a group of

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FﬂR OFFICIAL IZSE ONLY

generals tonnecied with ilu‘ react iunary right met In Jaw-.3 and promoted an attempt
to have the legalization of the Communist Party of Spain reversed.

One year later. shortly before Christmas 1978, another military officer advocating
reversal of that legalization--LtCol Antonio Tejero Molina, of the Civil Guard--
was the protagonist in a second attempted coup d'etat.

UHB Comes Into Being

Up to that time. coupist military plots had shown signs of not being organized.
Several groups of military officers with far right leanings had established organi-
zations like the Military Patriotic Union (1PM (sic; should read UPHI), the “111—
tary Patriotic Movement (MPH). the Patriotic Associations or the Spanish Union

for the Defense of Spain (UEDE), which did not go beyond being mere attempts to
form an association of military persons thinking along conservative. coupist lines.

They died a few days after their establishment. Like autumn flowers. And the
only evidence that there is of the existence of those secret organizations in the
barracks are photographs in the files of military secret services of some isolated
item signed with the acronyms UPH or MPH.

The situation was to change as a result of the reduced sentence imposed on Antonio
Tejero Molina, a Civil Guard lieutenant colonel, and on Ricardo Saenz. a major
in the National Police. for the attempted military coup kncwn as "Operation Galaxy."

Starting at that time, military officers of the extreme right who went under the
acronyms of Military Patriotic Union. Patriotic Associations and Military Patriotic
Movement entered into contact with each other and established the Spanish Military
Union. rcsuscitating the old underground organization that enabled Gen Francisco
Franco to set off the coup d'etat on [8 July 1936.

Nevertheless, the new UHE was not a strictly military organization , as it was

in l936, but also behind the extreme right military persons there is a complex
conspiracy of civilian coupists connected with the New Force Party and the intelli-
gence services of the single party of Franco's Movement and of the vertical labor
unions. including the only civilian arrestedduring the 23 F £?3 February? coup:
Juan Garcia Carres.

The civilian conspirators were precisely the ones who gave the UME cohesion and
structure and the ones who designed the new strategy to be followed, in order to
demolish the structures of the democratic state.

A member of the state's intelligence services who agrees with CAHBIO 16's analysis
stated to this periodical that, starting in 1979. a very subtle operation of in-
filtration in the areas of military intelligence and in the immediate intervention
units was detected in extreme rightist circles of the Army.

“the cxtrenc right military persons," he stated to CAHBIO 16. ”who up to that time
seemed to be little interested in the art of warfare. suddenly began to aim at

General Stuff courses and to request assignments in the best equipped military
units regarded by the high command to be for 'immediate intervention'-"
The same source remarked that "it was clear that their intention was to take hold
of the three basic means for the operation of any army: intelligence, staffs of
the units in which action plans are prepared and guns."

Bound by Oath

In the first months of 1979. the UHE--according to data from this periodical--

was only a group of military persons with extreme right thinking, very closely
knit and bound to each other by oath. in order to prevent infiltration and in order
to act in the most absolute secrecy against the democratic institutions and against
the Crown.

That structure is tic one that they still maintain at the present time. although
among its plans is a plan to come to the surface some day. in order to be able

to increase its number and to create a reliable structure that will enable them
to carry out military action against the king and the will of the people. what
concerns them most is not the number of members that the UH! can have. but rather
the contacts and the number of persons with whom they associate every day.

One of the UHE's instructions to its members is to associate constantly with other
military personnel or their same class, to study what their political thinking

is and to try to ascertain how many persons in each Army unit would be inclined

to participate in a seditious coup, under the assumption that a favorable situation
would occur in Spain that would enable them to destroy the regime of freedoms.

intact

These instructions. which are not written in any manual. but which are transmitted
verbally. have enabled the UHE to have a rather complete file in which the number
of military persons who would be in agreement with a military solution and the
number who would remain passive and would not obstruct tanks from going out into
the street is recorded.

The UMH, which. according to all the information that CAHBIO 16 has. took part

in the preparations for the 23 February military coup, disassociated itself from

it as an organization when. months before Lieutenant Colonel Tejero Molina seized
the Congress of Deputies. Gen Alfonso Armada. with the support of foreign secret

services, entered into the coupist plot, in order to try to soften the rebellion

and to attempt to prevent bloodshed as much as possible.

On the other hand, it does seem that there were members of the Spanish Military
Union who joined the 23 February coupist conspiracy in an individual capacity.
The Almendros collective. which. according to the French newspaper LB HDNDE, con-
sisted of Colonel San Martin and Colonel Harchante. Lieutenant Colonel Villalba
and Lieutenant Colonel Fuentes Gomez de Salazar and Major Pardo Zancada, was an
idea of the UHE to warm up the atmosphere and prepare the way for the coup from
ﬂu:pages of the daily newspaper EL ALCAZAR.

or the five persons mentioned by the French newspaper. two of them--Pardo and San
Hartln--are under arrest for military rebellion and Lieutenant Colonel Fuentes
y Gomez dc Salazar. who was the one who convinced Tejero to surrender, has been

under strict watch by the anticoup brigade. which has been unable to find the
slightest shadow of suspicion in his behcvior.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore. the internal structure of the UHE is intact and running smoothly. The
proof of this is that away of its members have been the main promoters of the
strategy of disinformation and negotiation concerning the ones tried for the 23
February coup. while another sector of the organization has worked on organizing
collections for the coupiats. "And it must not be forgotten," according to a mem-
ber of the secret service, "that Franco's UHE came into existence, in 1934, to
organize "Blue Aid" for the military personnel against whom reprisals were taken

because of the [miscarried] Sanjurjo (coup]."

They made only one mistake in this work, although it occurred quite a bit before
the 23—F coup. A lieutenant colonel in Seville, associat ‘ with sectors close

to the Spanish Military Union, was dismissed in the middle of 1980, after someone
in his office stole some code tapes with which the military coupist conspirators
were attempting to control the military intelligence communication networks and
to decipher their messages.

The incident was only an obstacle on the way, but it did not make the UME change
its course or its objectives. And thus, on 31 [sic] April 198), over a month after
the miscarried coup d'etat, the UHE brought out a 70-page report in which it ana-
lyzed the mistakes made in the coupist attempt and stated that "the first obstacle
to saving Spain is the king" and that, when they go into action. they are not going
to ask anyone for permission.

Not cvun their seniors. Because, according to CAHBIO 16 data, the present UMB

is made up basically of junior and senior officers of the Armed Porces--the men

who command the regiments, battalions and companiea--and they have an Olympic scorn
for the generals whom they regard as a disturbance to their plans, because they
regard them as a class very much tied to the political command.

"The men who won the war of liberation," they say in one of their reports. "were
not the generals. The generals, the majority of whom remained loyal to the Repub»
iic, lost it. Only the captains, majors and colonela in command of the units and
who are in direct contact with the troops are, therefore, the ones who can again
"enable us to rise up Victoriously."

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Informacion y Revistas. S.A.

[0,042
C80: 3|l0/55 END