FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10258
15 January 1982

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(POUO 1/82)

CONTENTS

ROWIC POLICY, ORGANIZATION AND W"?

Development of Economics in Light of 26th CPSU Congress
(N. P. Fedorenko; VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK $883, No 9, 1981)..

Definition of National Economic rotontial Proposed
(E. Gorbunov; VOPROSY ROWIKI. Sep 81)...................

Theory's Tasks in Advanced Socialisn Outlined
(V. Medvedev: WPROSY EKMIKI. Nov 81)...................

Aganbegyan Book on Management Reviewed
(G. Popov, Ye. Kocherin: VOPROSY BKONOHIKI, Sep 81) ........

REGION“. DEVBIDPHBNT

Success. Problems in Introducing New System
(N. Santeladze; VOPROSX' EKONOHIKI. Sep 31) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Management of Large Production-Economic Complexes
(A. Kochetkov. et a1.) VOPROSY EKONOMIKI, Oct 81) ..... .....

- a - [III - USSR

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEVELOPMENT OF ECONOMICS IN LIGHT 0F 26TH CPSU CONGRESS
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 9, l981 pp 29-37

ixrtlcle hy Academician N. P. Pedorenko: "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of
Economic Scienceﬂ/

ilexg/ In March at the general meeting of the Economics Department the Main Direc—
tions of the "ark of the Department on the Development of Economic Science in Light
of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress were approved. This document, it seems
to us, provides the institutions of the department with reliable guidelines in
their activity, since it is directly connected with the final program materials of
the congress and with the main principles and instructions, which are contained in
the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee, which was heard at the
congress. "The tasks which life advances," Comrade L. I. Brezhnev emphasized in
this report, "require the development of theory, economic science, its approxima-
tion of the needs of economic practice. The mobilization of the creative potential
of our entire society is needed. The understanding of the arising problems should
increase and the available means should be identified and used better in the center
and locally, in all the links, in all the units of the national economy."

Important, responsible matters await Soviet economics scholars, as well as all the
Soviet people. Along with all the people they will take part in the fulfillment of
the plan of the 11th Five-Year Plan. The party and the government have the right
to count on the effective assistance on the part of economic science in the solu-
tion of many difficult social and national economic problems.

As is known, the congress resolved to begin the preparation of a new edition of the
CPSU P1 gram--an edition in which the most importnat changes in the life of Soviet
society and in world social development and the most important tasks of the building
of communism should receive thorough scientific reflection. This circumstance is
increasing more and more the importance of research on the economics of mature so-
cialism, the laws of its development into socialism and especially the demands on
the quality of political economic research. Many problems, which await solution,
have accumulated in the political economy of socialism, the question of the social
consequences of the scientific and technical revolution requires much attention.

Comprehensive programs of basic research, the implementation of which began during
the past 5-year plan, remain the main form of the organization and coordination of
the work along the entire front of economic science. In all there are six of them.
I will mention how these programs are formulated and who is directing the work on
their fulfillment.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The hronumiv Problems of Mature Socialism and the Laws of Its Development Into Com-
munism”--Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences Ye. I. Kapustin, di-
rector. "The Elaboration of the Theory and Methods of the Planning and Management
of the Socialist Economy"--Academ1cian N. P. Fedorenko, director. "The Program of
Research on Problems of Demography"--Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of
Sciences T. V. Ryabushkin, director. "Regional Economics and the Distribution of
the Productive Forces of the USSR"-Academician N. N. Nekrasov, director. "The Laws
of the Development of the World Socialist Economy, the Problems of Socialist Econom-
lc Integration and the Development of Long-Term Economic Relations of the USSR Nith
the Socialist Countries"--Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences 0. T.
Bogomolov. director. "The Laws and Trends of the Development of the Economic Sys-
tem of the Capitalist and Developing Countries and the World Capitalist Economy;
Problems of the Foreign Economic Relations of the Soviet Union With These Coun-
tries"--Academician N. N. Inozemtsev, director. In light of the decisions of the
26th CPSU Congress it is planned to organize the elaboration of the new program
"Theoretical Problems of the Efficiency and Intensification of P:oduction."

As was indicated, political economic research, the increase of its scientific level
and the extension of th. analysis of the real processes of socioeconomic development
are now regarded as of paramount importance. In this connection, in particular,_the
studies_of the methodological problems of [the political economy of socialism] Lin
italics] have to be expanded. Scholars of the institutes of the Economics Depart-
ment, and first of all of the Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sci-
eneea. will continue the Study of the state and prospects of the economic system of
mature socialism and of the development of the scientific principles of the economic
strategy of the CPSU and the economic policy of the socialist state at the present
stage and the elaboration of the economic theory of mature socialism, the general
laws and peculiarities of building it in various countries.

The studies of the means and possibilities of the improvement of the material and
technical base of mature socialism and its development into the material and tech-
nical base of communism, the acceleration of the rate of the scientific and techni-
cal revolution and the use of its achievements under the conditions of the social-
ist economic system will also be continued and expanded. During this work the task
is being imiscd to study better the methods of solving similar problems in other so-
cialist countries for the sharing of experience and the mastering of everything ef-
ficient that has been developed by the collective intellect of the fraternal par-
ties and peoples. Along with the elaboration of purely theoretical questions, the
preparation of scientific recommendations on the further development of national
property and the convergence of kolkhoz-cooperative property with national property,
the overcoming of the substantial differences between mental and physical labor, the
city and the countryside and the leveling of the social differences on the terri-
torial level should he the immediate goal of research.

It I» very important at the present stage to improve the distributive relations in
society. This is dictated, in particular, by their importance as a factor of the
intensification and the increase of the efficiency of social production. Therefore
the problems of the strengthening of the material and moral stimuli to work, the
change of the content of labor, the increase of the well-being of the workers and
the development of the socialist way of life and so on must be studied in greater
detail.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A large collective of researchers headed by scholars of the Institute of Economics
of the USSR Academy of Sciences will complete the work on the three-volume work
"Ekonomicheskiy stroy sotsializma" [The Economic System of Socialism], the dummy
copy of which has already been preparaed and in the immediate future will be of-
fered to the scientific community for discussion. All the basic results of the
study of the economic categories and laws of socialism in conformity with the logic
and structure of socialist production relations should be generalized in .his work.
He expect of the authors the thorough substantiation of their scientific positions,
which should contribute to the further pooling of the efforts of Soviet economists
and the extensive use of the conclusions of economic science as the basis of the
management of the economy of our society. ‘-

The second major set of problems concerns /the planned management of the national
economy and the increase of its efficiency/lin italicsT. The search for means of
the further intensification of social production for the acceleration of the in—
crease of the well-being of the Soviet people and the solution of other socio-
economic problems, including the assurance of the future economic development of
the country and the strengthening of its defensive capability, should be continued.
Economics scholars should prepare suggestions on the improvement of the system of
planning and especially on the unification of the various types of plans into a
single system, on the assurance of the balance of the economy, the strengthening of
the relationship of the planning of physical production with the problems of scien-
tific and technical progress, with the financial means, as well as credit, and on
the improvement of the system of statistical indicators and the methods of statisti-
cal analysis in connection with the needs of optimum planning and forecasting.

The studies of the problems of the theory and methods of the optimum planning and
functioning of the socialist national economy will undergo further development.
This direction of the work has as its goal as if to translate into the language of
precise qualitative characterization and quantitative definiteness our notions
about the economic laws of socialism, such as the law of planned development, the
law of distribution according to labor, as well as about a number of other politi-
cal economic categories. At the same time it should promote the elaboration of a
precise program, the directions and principles of the improvement of the economic
mechanism of the country on the basis of a uniform national economic approach to
the optimization of the use of all production resources. the optimum combination of
the economic interests of the workers, labor collectives and society as a whole, as
well as the efficient use in economics of mathematical methods, systems analysis
and other achievements of modern science.

0n the basis of the studies of expanded reproduction under the conditions of mature
socialism, with allowance made for the achievements of science in the area of the
development of mathematical economics methods and models, it is necessary to pre-
pare recommendations on the optimum choice for the future of such structural corre-
lations as the growth rates of the first and second subdivisions, the rate of ac-
cumulation in the national income, the proportions of production and nonproductive
accumulation and so on, having directed special attention to the increase of the
effect of the intensive factors of the growth of production.

it is well known that by the decisions of the party and the government on the im-
provement of the economic mechanism the Comprehensive Program of Scientific and
Technical Progress has been introduced directly into the system of the planning of
USSR economic and social development. Now, on the basis of the generalization of

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR13FFK]AL.USE10NLY

the gained experience, a set of methods of long-term and intermediate-term forecast-
ing of scientific and technical progress, including the creation of a system of
models of regional and interregional forecasting with the use of econometric methods.
should be elaborated.

We have to complete the elaboration of the procedural materials of the second sec-
tion of the automatic system of plan calculations (ASPR), to prepare for practical
use by planning organs a system of models of optimum long-range planning with a

breakdown by sectors and territories and to continue the elaboration of the meth-

odological substantiation and procedural materials on goal program planning and
management.

however, economics scholars not only are preparing reliable procedural materials,
but are also directly participating in the elaboration of specific programs. The
responsibility of the scholars. who are participating in the development of the
food, the long-range energy and ether most important statewide comprehensive pro-
grams: thc Sibir' and Ural programs, the program of the development of the Noncher-
nozem Zone, the program of the economic development of the zone cf the Baykal-Amur
Railway Line and others, is great. Stating the idea a bit more roughly, it is pos-
sible to speak about to two means of solving the above—described research problems--
on the theoretical methodological level and on the real economic level. Of course,
these aspects are inseparable, in practice and in organizational work we should

take them into account and differentiate them. Here it is proper always to remember
Lenin's words that "whoever sets to work on special problems without the preliminary
solution of the general problems inevitably will at every step unconsciously 'run
into' these general problems. But to run into them blindly in each specific case
means to doom one's policy to the worst vacillations and the lack of principles."1

The Main Directions of the Development of Economic Science envisage the performance
in the shortest possible time of research aimed at the finding of the most effec-
tive means and methods of overcoming the factors which complicate the economic de-
velopment of the country during the 1980's. Among these factors are the decline of
the growth of manpower resources, the increasing remoteness of the fuel and raw
material bases, the increase of the need for environmental protection and others.

It is proposed in this connection to prepare recommendations on the area of the
optimization of the fuel and power balance, the increase of the efficiency of the
extractive industry and the identification of the most efficient economic and organ~
izational forms of the cooperation of the fraternal socialist countries in the aolu~
tiun of energy problems. The Central Institute of Economic Mathematics of the USSR
Academy of Sciences (TsEMI) will complete the publication of the series of mono-
graphs "The Fundamentals of the System of the Optimum Planning and Management of the

Socialist Economy.”

Among the other problems in this area let us note another, in our opinion, extreme-
ly important one. In July [979 the party and the government adopted decrees on the
Improvement of the economic mechanism and the strengthening of its influence on in-
creasing efficiency and work quality. During the llth Five-Year Plan these deci-
sions should be implemented. The institutes of the department on the basis of the
study of this process will have to prepare suggestions on further work in thissdi-
rcctlon, having in mind first of all the strengthening of the orientation of the

 

I. V. l. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." lzomplete Horké7, Vol 15, p 368.

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
entire economic mechanism toward the end results, the increase of the independence
of associations and enterprises and of the rights and responsibility of economic
managers. The studies on the elaboration of a long-term concept of the assurance

of the balance of the physical and the monetary and financial flows in the national
economy must also be intensified.

The third set of problems is /the problems of the world economic system/ 13h italicéf.

Based on the fact that "the decisive front of the competition with capitalism passes
through economics, economic policy" (L. I. Brezhnev), the economic institutes of
international specialization are concentrating attention on the study of the urgent
problems of the socioeconomic and political development of the socialist countries,
on the generalization of their experience in the intensification of economic

growth, the improvement of the international mechanism of socialist integration,
especially commodity-money and institutional instruments, as well as the domestic
system of the management of the integration process. The scientific substantiation
of the stand of the socialist countries on questions of economic relations with non-
socialist states is of great importance.

The Institute of Economics of the World Socialist System of the USSR Academy of
Sciences will enlarge the studies of the interaction of economics, politics and
ideology in the socialist countries at the present stage. What is meant is the
study of the improvement of the political organization of socialist society under
the new conditions, the means of unifying scientific and technical progress with

the socialist forms of economic and political life, the solution of urgent social
problems in the CEMA countries (the increase of the standard of living, the consoli-
dation of the socialist way of life and others). The same collective will prepare
the two-volume monograph "Mirovoye sotsialisticheskoye khozyaystvo (voprosy politi-
cheskoy ekonomikl)" [The World Socialist Economy (Problems of Political Economxll.

In the area of the studies of the developing countries and modern capitalism the
main efforts will be focused on the study of the problems of state monopoly capital-
ism, its new forms and the peculiarities of their manifestation in different coun-
tries, the development of inflationary processes, the intensification of the capi—
talist economy under the conditions of the scientific and technical revolution, as
well as on the comprehensive study of the problems of the liberated countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America, the laws and prerequisities of their changeover to

a noncapitalist path of development.

At the same time the study of global problems: the energy, food, raw material, demo-
graphic and ecological problems, the problem of overcoming the backwardness of the
developing countries, the problem of establishing a new international economic order
and others, will be intensified.

The problems of the class struggle at the present stage of the revolutionary proc-
038 In the states of developed capitalism and the developing countries and the ques—
lions of the development of the international communist and working class movement,
its international contacts and solidarity with other currents of the revolutionary
process remain at the center of attention of the institutes of the department.

The thorough comprehensive studies of the main country of modern capitalism-the
United States of America--in all aspects: foreign policy, economic, ideological,
military and social, in the aspect of Soviet-American relations, should also be

5

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rontinued during the coming 5-year period. One of the important directions of this
work is the study of the problems of the scientific and technical revolution in the
United States, the European countries and Japan, the means of the intensification of
the economy and the peculiarities of the development of the agro-industrial and food
complexes in these countries. (I vauld like to note the great importance of the
elaboration on this basis of practical recommendations which can be used in our na-
tional economy.) The institutes of the department plan to prepare the series of
monographs "Global'nyye problemy sovremengosti i mirovoye razvitiye" iglobal Prob-
lems of the Present and World Development], "Sovremenngya vneshnyaya politika SShA"
Lpontemporary U.S._foreign Policy], "Ekonomikg SShA" llhe U.S. EconomiY. "Noveyshaya
istoriya Kitaya" ljhe Modern History of China], "Sotsialisticheskaya oriyentatsiya

i revolyutsionnyy rotsess v Afrike" lfhe Socialist Orientation and Revolugionary
Process_in Africa , the encyclopedic reference book "Latinskaya Amerika" listin

Americg/ and other major collective works.

Reality urgently requires the increase of the effectiveness of economic science, its
influence on economic life and on the increase of the efficiency of social produc-
tion. This requircnwnt is dictated by the present economic situation in the coun-
try and stems directly from the decisions of the 26th party congress. It seems that
even unto attention than before to the problems of economic and social development
is needed, that is, the substantiation of social needs in the future, the determina-
tion of the socioeconomic goals of long-range development, the creation of a concept
of the socialist way of life in all its manifestations (the material well-being and
spiritual development, the relations of distribution, the conditions of the increase
of labor productivity, the demographic situation), the substantiation of the means
of changing over our economy to the intensive path of development and a number of
other problems.

Among them are the problems of improving distributive relations in society. As we
have already noted, their elaboration is becoming, without exaggeration, problem
number one. First, it is necessary to extend the theoretical analysis of the law
of distribution according to labor under socialism, the system of values of social-
ist society and the general problem of the optimization of socioeconomic develop-
ment. (It seems that our political economists should analyze specifically the very
concept of distribution according to labor with allowance made for the historical
experience of building socialism in our country and other countries.) Second, on
the basis of the theory of distributive relations, an entire set of practical meas-
ures which are connected with the intensification of the influence of distributive
relations on the efficiency of social production should be elaborated even more ac-
tively than before. (It is a question of the system of wages and income of the
population, of the payments and benefits from public consumption funds, of the re-
distribution of monetary assets among different categories of the population and so
on.) And third, the theoretical and practical elaboration of the question of the
strengthening of the sense of social satisfaction of the workers and of the improve-
ment oi the socialist social system as a system of genuine social justice should be
started. But this Involves to a considerable extent the optimum differentiation of
income, consumption and personal accumulations.

The essence of the economic strategy of the party, its highest goal is the increase
of the material and cultural standard of living of the people and the creation of
the best conditions for the all-round development of the individual. The means of
achieving this goal consist in the increase of the efficiency of all social produc-
tion, the growth of labor productivity and the increase of the social and labor

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
activeness of the Soviet people. The contribution of economics seholurs to the ac-

complishment of this goal, it seems to us, will be Judged first of all by the extent
to which they promote the strengthening of these means.

In the Accountability Report at the party congress Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, having
noted the existing bottlenecks and disproportions in the national economy, indicated
that their most important cause consists in the fact that the forces of inertia,

the traditions and habits, which were formed during the period when not so much the
qualitative as the quantitative aspect of the matter came to the forefront, have not
yet been completely overcome. Soviet economists also need to make a decisive turn
toward the qualitative aspect of the matter--a turn which reflects the new objective
factors and conditions of the growth of the national economy. During the ilth Five-
Year Plan the increase of the end and national economic results should lead the in-
crease of the labor and material expenditures, including the capital investments;
therefore our basic and applied research should be aimed at the finding and use of
resource-saving factors of economic and technical development. Here a comprehen-
sive, integrated approach is especially important. I will recall that in the past,
for example. the separate study of the questions of demographic policy, capital in-
vestment policy, technical policy and the economic mechanism of the stimulation of
labor did not make it possible to ensure a uniform approach to the problems of'in-
tensification; as a result a definite contradiction was noted between the labor-
saving direction of technical progress and the capital investment policy, which in
essence was aimed at an increase of the number of workplaces in industry.

i would like to note the inclusion in the Main Directions of the Development of
Economic Science for the 5-year plan of such a fundamentally new applied science
task as the elaboration of the Method of Measuring the Efficiency of Economic Meas-
ures. It is proposed to create a unified methodological and procedural basis for
the evaluation of capital investments, new equipment, organizational, economic and
other management decisions. It is a question, in essence, of the improvement, the
adjustment of the tools which are used both for the solution of scientific problems
and for the making of practical economic decisions. The need for such improvement
is indisputable. Let us cite just one example. At the Central Institute of Eco-
nomic Mathematics a number of experimental calculations of the economic effective-
ness of scientific and technical innovations were made by different, let us empha-
size, prevailing national economic methods. And so the effectiveness of the use of
one new, more perfect and durable pump than former pumps was estimated in the fol-
lowing manner.

According to the method of determining the economic efficiency of the use in the na~
tional economy of new equipment, inventions and rationalization proposals--an eco-
nomic impact of 2.3 million rubles. According to the standard method of determining
the effectiveness of capital investments-~a loss of 22,300 rubles. According to

the method of determining the economic efficiency of automated control systems——an
import of ll2,000 rubles. According to the method of determining the wholesale
privvs for new products for production engineering purposes-~an economic impact of
Mo 7,000 rubles.

Huw does one choose under such conditions the optimum versions of technical prog-
ress?

Vast opportunities exist in the country for the saving of material resources and
living labor. The combating of losses is being brought to the forefront in economic

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policy. Meanwhile the measures on the reduction of losses require additional capi-
tal investments and current expenditures (if we do not consider the elimination of
elementary mismanagement, for which other methods exist). The opportunities of the
state to identify the corresponding resources, of course, are limited. Therefore a
strict quantitative economic evaluation and a comparison, according to the level of
effectiveness of the expenditures, of the measures aimed at saving and at the mobil-
ization of real resources are necessary.

In principle the same resources are consumed for the decrease of waste products and
losses as on new construction and the expansion of production. Therefore the meth-
od of calculating the expenditures and their effectiveness should be uniform for all
the types of their outlay. Such is another conclusion in favor of the uniform meth-
od being developed for the measurement of the effectiveness of economic decisions.

The drive against losses of resources and for the increase of the impact from their
use should be conducted in two main directions: the improvement of planning and its
standard base and the improvement of the mechanism of the stimulation of production,
including the establishment of payment for all types of resources and complete cost
accounting responsibility for their consumption. Here precisely the organization

of work and the creation of an interest in using resources most efficiently are the
real task of economists. The identification of reserves is important, but this is
not an end in itself; we are required to give scientifically sound recommendations
on how to truly put these reserves to use.

When implementing in planning and economic practice the decisions of the party and
government on improving the economic mechanism and increasing its influence on ef-
ficiency and work quality, economics scholars should bear in mind the following
priority tasks. The development of a reliable system of economic measurers and
plan indicators, which orient producers toward the maximization of the end national
economic impact, and therefore the accomplishment of a gradual changeover to opti-
mization principles of the management of the economy. The adoption of advanced
forms and methods of the organization of production and wages, including the bri-
gade and other collective forms, in which payment is made according to the final
product, the end results of the work. The stimulation of the economic initiative
of enterprises and associations hiseeking means of the best satisfaction of social
needs with the increase of contractual discipline and responsibility to consumers.
The development of a modern technical information base which ensures the complete-
ness, timeliness and accessibility of the information necessary for making effec-
tive economic planning decisions.

We should admit that so far it has not been possible to fulfill the previously
adopted decisions on the creation of the statewide automated system for the collec-
tion of information (OCAS). The urgency of this problem was again confirmed by the
26th party vunqroun. The country is being saturated with computer hardware, but the
lack of a unified state system of computer centers is leading to its poor use, in-
efficient operation and, what is the main thing, the inadequacy of the information
for the efficient management of the national economy. Apparently, we must under-
take definite efforts to expedite this work in cooperation with other concerned
organizations.

The scientific forces of the department are now being focused on comprehensive
basic research. The practice of joint operations of the institutes of the Economics
Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the economic institutes of the

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
academies of sciences of the union republics with the institutes of ministries and
departments and with higher educational institutions is being extended. The coor-
dination of the work is being improved, and the role of the Bureau of the Eco-
nomics Department, which proposes to examine at its sessions the activity of periph-
eral scientific research organizations and to use in practice field sessions of the
bureau in the union republics and large regions of the RSFSR for the atrenghtening
of contacts with local scientific forces and for their enlistment in the solution
of general problems of economic science, is increasing in this matter.

He consider it necessary to enhance the role of the scientific councils of the Eco-
nomics Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences and of economic journals in the
discussion of urgent problems of theory and in the preparation of recommendations
on the accomplishment of the tasks of building the economy; the journals should
enlist peripheral authors more actively in contributing.

As to the training of personnel, it is especially important to ensure the extension
of the training of specialists in political economy and to reinforce the staffs of
economic scholars in Siberia, the Far East and the European north, as well as in a
number of union republics. The demands on the theoretical level and practical sig-
nificance of dissertations and on the ability of dissertation writers to use modern,
especially mathematical economics, methods of research should be increased.

Cooperation with Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", other central, republic and local publishing
houses on the publication of scientific and popular science literature, on the se-
lection of foreign economic literature for translation into the languages of the
peoples of the USSRI as well as on the selection of Soviet literature for publica-
tion in foreign languages has to be increased during the llth Five-Year Plan. In
all this the element of chance is still strong. At times the fate of a book is de-
cided not by its quality and significance for science, but by the "go-getting"
capabilities of the author and other attendant circumstances. Sometimes publishing
houses are afraid of new, fresh ideas, preferring to travel the well-beaten path,
but precisely what is new is more important for science! We will hope that by our
Joint efforts we and the workers of publishing houses will be able to put things in
this matter in the proper order.

it is necessary to broaden the cooperation of the institutes of the economics de-
partments of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the academics of sciences of the union
republics with the scientific institutions of the fraternal socialist countries in
the elaboration of fundamental problems and in the preparation of collective works,
to increase the activcness of Soviet economists at international theoretical con-
ferences and symposia and to strengdum the contacts with progressive scholars of

the capitalist and developing countries.

The task of studying the experience gained in the fraternal socialist countries of
the organization of production and management and the solution of national economic
problems was set at the 26th CPSU Congress. It is well known, for example, how
skillfully the work has been organized at agricultural cooperatives and enterprises
of Hungary, what valuable experience of the rationalization of production and the
uconomy of raw materials and materials exists in the GDR; there is much of inter-
est and value in the social security system in Czechosolvakia, while new effective
forms of agro-industrial cooperation have been found in Bulgaria and a number of
European socialist countries. It seems that the Economics Department must special-
ly elaborate the question of a system of the study of the concrete experience of

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.Y

ucuuomlc work in the socialist countries for the preparation of reconnendation on
its possible use in our economic practice.

In conclusion let us emphasize the importance of the systemic, comprehensive solu-
tion of all the above-enumerated problems and the need for creative cooperation be-
tween economists and representatives of other social, natural and technical sciences
for the fulfillment of the plans of the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

7807
C50: 1820/63

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEFINITION OF NATIONAL EEONOHIC POTENTIAL PROPOSED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 97-106

[Article by E. Gorbunov: "The Economic Potential of Advanced Socialist Soci-
ctyn]

[Text] Socialist society's entry into the phase of advanced socialism is re-
lated first of all to attainment of a high level of economic development. In
the context of mature socialism the level of economic development is not charac-
terized solely by a certain scale and volume of production; this represents a
new qualitative state of the productive forces, a state that has to do with ap-
propriate changes in the system of society's production relations and in eco-
nomic policy. The country has entered a new decade. L. I. Brezhnev noted at the
26th CPSU Congress. "in possession of a mighty economic and scientific-technical
potential and an army of trained personnel devoted to their work numbering in
the many millions."

Creation of a mighty economic potential makes it possible to enlarge the scale
of accumulation for production and nonproduction purposes. to achieve a substan-
tial rise in the workers' standard of living. to put on the agenda the perfor-
mance of social, intersector and regional programs which are huge in their
scale. and to broaden positions in the world economy. Economic theory is con-
fronted in this connection with the need to solve a number of important prob-
lems. Among them are methodological problems in determining indicators of the
level of development of the country's productive forces and problems of their
economic content.

The level of economic development is a historical concept. Each stage in the
development of the economy makes specific adjustments in its indicators.1 As
the degree of the social division of labor increases and the production struc-
ture becomes more complex, indicators of the level of a country's economic de-
velopment. reflecting the growth and greater complexity of factors in the dy-
namic behavior of the productive forces, tend to rise. In the present period,
when millions of different products and services are being created in social
production. there is an especial need to develop measures of the level of eco-
nomic development and to set up a system of summary synthetic indicators re-
flecting both the quantitative and also the qualitative aspects of the develop-
ment of society's productive forces. A distinction has to be made here between
indicators of the country's economic might (economic potential) and indicators
of the level of its economic development.

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I UNIX

Certain economists have thought in the recent past that the level of economic
development could be expressed by some one indicator synthesizing all aspects of
social production as a whole. Some of then have proposed as such an indicator
the productivity of labor. others the indicator of the standard of living, still
others the per capita national income produced. and yet others the output of
heavy industry. But contemporary production is so diverse in its character and
distinguished by such a multiplicity of intersector and intrasector relations
that it does not seem possible to express all this in a single indicator. For
instance. the level of labor productivity is one of the most important economic
indicators. But it does not directly express the level of a country's economic
development, since it does not reflect. for example, the absolute volume of out-
put or the per capita output. and the economic might of a particular country
cannot be judged without taking them into account.

In precisely the same way a judgment cannot be made on the level of economic de-
velopment from the per capita amount of national income produced, though there
is no question that this indicator is one of the most important for comparing
levels of economic development of individual countries. But its shortcoming is
that it does not reveal the structure of social production and the division of
labor. which, as K. Marx put it, characterize most graphically the level of de-
velopment of a nation's productive forces.2 Nor is it possible to evaluate the
level of a country's economic development from the volume of production of par-
ticular products: for example. from the per capita production of steel, pig
iron, petroleum, paper. cardboard, paper pulp. and so on.

A country may possess a sizable economic potential. but be characterized by a
moderate level of economic development, and, conversely. it may be highly devel-
oped with respect to the level of its productive forces, but characterized by a
relatively small economic potential. The ideal here will be to combine the high
level of economic development and a eighty economic potential.

The first indices of the level of development of society's productive forces
from the quantitative and qualitative standpoint were worked out as a system of
indicators by A. Notkin. lle distinguishes between indicators of a country's
economic might (or economic potential), reflecting the level of development of
the productive forces from the quantitative standpoint, and indicators of the
level of economic development. which determine the qualitative factors of the
economy. Here the following are looked to as the principal indicators of eco-
nomic potential: the volume of the productive forces; the volume of the social
product and national income of the given country; the volume of industrial out-
put. especially heavy industry; and the absolute increments in growth of the so-
cial product. the national income and industrial and agricultural output.3 In
our opinion. these fundamental indicators should be supplaented by taking into
account certain important factors in development of the productive forces.

I-‘lrst. these indicators must include not only the volume of resources for pro-
duction and consumption reproduced (the gross social product, national income),
but also resources for production and consumption accumulated. which are embod-
ied in the indicators of the national wealth. At the same time, there is hardly
any need to distinguish sectoral indices (industry. construction, transportation
and agriculture) within the indicators of the economic potential, since by its

12

FOR 0Fl"l(‘lAL USE ONLY
purpose the economic potential of society is characterized above all by syn-
thetic and summary indices. Second, the economic potential must also include
nonrenewable natural resources-~minera1 reserves, and timber. water and land re-
sources. "Development of a country's economic potential is determined in large
part by the state of resources of minerals and raw materials," it was remarked
at the 26th CPSU Congress.

Natural resources, consideration being given to their rapid regeneration on the
basis of the scientific-technical revolution, largely determine the very direc-
tion of development of the principal branches of a country's national economic
complex and its specialization and structure. The economic importance of in-
cluding natural resources as a component in the production potential is also de-
termined by the fact that expenditures for environmental protection are now
reaching very substantial proportions and are growing every year. For instance,
in just 4 years of the 10th Five-Year Plan about 8 billion rubles were spent for
these purposes. The value of fixed capital for ecological purposes in the in-
dustrial sector has reached 3.1 percent of the sum total of that capital.“ Un-
fortunately. no assessment of any accuracy has yet been made of either the indi-
vidual elements of natural resources (minerals, timber, water resources and
land) or of their total value. For that reason it is not possible today to de-
termine their share in the composition of the economic potential.

Such an exceedingly important element of the productive forces as human and 1a—
bor resources must also be taken into account in the indicators of the economic
potential. It is well known that the size of the population largely determines
a country's economic might, its ability to produce specific volumes of physical
goods. That is why the size of the population. along with the able-bodied popu—
lation and size of the labor force. should in our opinion be included among the
indicators characterizing a country's economic potential.

It is also indispensable to include in the country's economic potential the
level of nonmaterial wealth: the scientific knowledge accumulated, production
know-how. the level of skills, the level of education and state of health of the
population. that is, indicators characterizing from the qualitative standpoint
the creative capabilities of the population and of the labor force. "Along with
the production potential." T. Khachaturov rightly notes, "an ever greater role
in economic and social development is being played by the nonproduction poten-
tial, which determines the living and cultural conditions of the workers and has
a feedback effect on economic growth. The nonproductlon potential consists of
personnel in the nonproduction sphere and its plant and equipment--housing. mu—
nicipal services and utilities, enterprises and organizations rendering consumer
services and in trade and supply, educational institutions, institutions for
health care. athletics, art and science. as well as the intellectual riches
built up over the centuries--knowledge, experience and culture. All of these
are important factors in socia1--and at the same time economic--development."s
There is other evidence of this in the nonproduction sphere's economic role in
developing the sectors of social production and in creating the gross, net and
final product.6

In the absence of a sufficiently sound methodological base for statistical meas-
urement of the nonmaterial portion of national resources. it is not possible at

13

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the present time to fix its real magnitude. But society's runmaterial wealth
and its volume and structure are reflected in the final indicators of resources
for production, for reproduction and for consumption.

When what has been said above is taken into account. economic potential (the na-
tional economic might) of society can be expressed by the following indicators:
the count:y's total number of gainfully employed (samodeyatel'noye) persons and
the number of employees (rabotayushcheye naseleniye), the volume of its accumu-
lated national wealth. the annual volume of the gross social product and na-
tional income.’ nonmaterial wealth (accumulation). and an assessment of economic
resources. At the same time there is also a need for a system of indicators de-
rived from the functional characteristics of the various components of the en-
tire national economy. The system of indicators reflecting the functional pat-
tern of the country's national economic potential might be the following: human
potential (the country's total population and within that gainfully employed
population); labor potential (employed persons); the potential of natural re-
sources; the production potential (the volume of production of the gross social
product); the reproductive or investment potential (sum total of accumulated
fixed productive and nonproductive capital and working capital); the potential
for personal consumption (the volume of output of the consumer sphere of the
economy as the sum total of consumer goods and services).

The most complicated problem in setting up a system of indicators of a society's
(country's) national economic potential is measuring its size as a single whole.
The size of the potential is characterized by three components which are not
commensurable with one another: the human potential and labor potential are de-
termined by the size of the population. and the production potential, the repro-
ductive potential and also the potential for consumption are determined in value
terms. We need to note the imperfection of the value expression of the compo-
nents of the economic potential indicated above, since prices of the means of
production, working capital and consumer goods and paid services are structured
along different lines. Public consumption funds are estimated from the size of
material expenditures. All of this makes it difficult to work out a methodolog-
ical base for determining the national economic potential, not to mention find-
ing any sort of specific measure of magnitude..

The national economic potential has fundamental importance as a category in
studying expanded reproduction. especially in analyzing long-term tendencies
over a period of, say. 20 years. As we know. the decree of the CPSU Central
Committee and USSR Council of Ministers entitled "0n Improving Planning and
Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism on Increasing Production
Efficiency and work Quality" calls for work to be done in that time frame as a
kind of load-bearing structure for the multiannual national economic plan. It
provided that the USSR Academy of Sciences. the State Committee for Science and
Technology and USSR Cosstroy would draft a detailed program no later than 2
years in advance of the next 5-year period. c. Sorokin made a relevant state-
ment in this connection when he said that "at the present time it is already in-
possible to limit ourselves to '5-year cycles of reproduction'...we also need to
study long-range periods.... He need totals summing up work over many years."9

14

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
The national economic potential of the USSR. conceived as the result of the
country's economic development over a lengthy period. is indeed such a synthetic
and summary indicator. As T. Khachaturov has noted, a country's economic poten-
tial is a material condition for raising the efficiency of social production.1°
It reflects the accumulated amounts of the gross social product. the national
income and fixed capital, and the volume of personal consumption of material
goods and services thus figuring as a summary indicator of the country's eco-
nomic might. The makeup of the national economic potential includes both the
results of current periods of production and conSumption and also elements of
the social (national. people's) wealth over the entire previous period of the
country's development: that is, indicators of both "income" and also "wealth"
are brought together within this category. whereas for determining the national
income, for example. indicators of "income" are mainly used. The study of the
process of growth of the national economic potential over a particular period is
based on an analysis of all the basic patterns of expanded reproduction, which
substantially supplements the theoretical and concrete socioeconomic descrip-
tions of this process, which are arrived at through these ordinary indicators
(the gross. net and final aggregate social product).

economy of an advanced socialist society lies in the fact that they make it pos-
sible to give expression to the effectiveness of interrelationships in the econ-
omy and to its functional structure. The economic interrelationships of the
various constituent parts of the potential as a single whole can be described
statistically by specific magnitudes of society's current efficiency, reproduc-
tive potential and rates of nonproductive consumption. Use of such specific
magnitudes increases the group of indicators of expanded reproduction. These
indicators have especially great practical importance for multiannual planning.
In our opinion. the following need to be included among these indicators.

1. Per capita volumes of the national economic potential:

Productive resources.

Reproductive (investment) resources.

Resources for personal consumption.

The production and consumption parts of the economic potential as a whole.

2. indicators of the efficiency of the national economic potential:

Production and consumption parts of the potential per employee in social produc-
tion.

Current level of the productivity of labor (gross social product per employee).

The reproductive level of efficiency of the potential (production and consump-
tion portions per unit of the reproductive resources of the potential).

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The potential's supply of capital;
Reproductive and productive resources.
Reproductive resources as a whole.

Fixed capital of the national economy (including the productive and nonproduc-
tive fixed capital, given separately).

Raw materials and supplies (materials intensiveness of the economic potential).
Capital investments f-ariLJi intensiveness of the economic potential).
4. Indicators of the efficiency of personal consumption:

Current production costs per unit of resources for personal consumption as a
whole.

Current inputs per unit increase of the consumption fund of the national income.

Relative share and growth rate of the individual parts of resources for personal
consumption.

The figures in Table 1 show that over the period from 1971 to 1979 substantial
changes took place in the size of the USSR's economic potential. While human
and labor resources increased 8.6 and 17.0 percent, respectively, the volume of
material resources for production and consumption increased 90.3 percent, and
within that resources for personal consumption increased 83.1 percent. The per
capita growth of all types of material resources was 75.3 percent. including an
82.5-percent growth of resources for production and reproduction and a 68.6-per-
cent growth of resources for personal consumption (without taking into account
the addition to nonmaterial assets).

Table 1. National Economic Potential of the USSR Over the Period 1970-1979

Resources Included in Potential 1970 1979 1979/1970 2

._________L__
1. Human resources (millions of persons) 241.7 262.4 108.6
11. Labor resources (millions of persons)* 118.8 138.4 117.0
111. Material resources for production and
reproduction (billions of rubles) 694.4 1,375.8 198.1
1. Volume of accumulated fixed productive
capital 531.0 1,076.0 202.6
2. Working capital in the form of inven-
tories 163.4 299.8 183.5
1V. Resources for personal consumption (bil-
lions of rubles) 743.3 1,360.7 183.1
1. Current resources for consumption** 201.3 323.7 160.8
2. Size of accumulated nonproductive cap-
ital for public purposes 329.0 562.0 170.8
16 '1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1 (continued)

Resources Included in Potential 1970 1979 1979/1970. 1
3. Volume of accumulated household
goods*** 213.0 675.0 223.0
V. Total material resources intended for
production and consumption 1,437.7 2,736.5 190.3

* Working in the national economy.
** Consumption fund of the national income.
*** Calculated (see the comments on the table in the body of the article).

The principal factor in augmenting the country’s economic night is the growth of
its production potential: fixed productive capital. capital investments, and
the amounts of raw materials and supplies produced. In the 1971-1979 period the
growth of resources for material production exceeded the growth of all physical
goods by more than 8 points (a growth of 98.1 percent as compared to 90.3 per-
cent). Hithin the category of productive resources fixed capital increased
fastest (growth of 102.6 percent). and the growth of working capital was 83.5
percent. By the end of the seventies the volume of fixed productive capital in
the USSR national economy exceeded 1 trillion rubles and in 1979 comprised 39.3
percent of all the country's material resources and 78.2 percent of all its pro-
ductive resources. One of the main achievements of the USSR economy has been
the building of the mighty physical production base of advanced socialism.

Along with the growth of the potential of capital goods sectors in the seven-
ties. the Soviet people's standard of living rose as a result of fulfillment of
the social program drafted at the 24th and 25th CPSU Congresses. The growth of
the consumption fund of the national income was almost 61 percent over the 1971-
1979 period (average annual rate 5.4 percent), nonproductive capital increased
70.8 percent, personal property 2.2 percent. and all resources for consumption
83.] percent.

Let us examine the method of computing accumulated household property. As we
know. this indicator is not given a separate line in the statistical yearbook
“Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR" [USSR National Economy] as a component of the na-
tional wealth or resources. Accumulated personal household property was deter-
mined for the first time as an indicator by V. N. Kirichenko for 1970. when it
amounted to 213 billion rubles, on the basis of a population survey covering
different social and age groups.11 According to the author's calculations, the
average annual growth rate of this indicator was 8.5 percent over the 1961-1970
period (227 percent [index number-~translator's note] over the 10—year period).

On the assumption that this rate of increase of household property persisted in
the subsequent years as well. its volume at the and of the seventies would have
to be 645 billion rubles. But since this figure was calculated in current
prices. in determining it we must take into account price changes over the pe-
riod under review. Adjusting for this. according to our calculations the volume
of accumulated household property at the end of the seventies was 475 billion

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SI-I ONM

rubles, which corresponds to almost 86.5 percent oi the volume of fixed nonpro-
ductivc capital for public purposes and 65-66 percent of the total amount of all
nonproductive capital. This figure is in line with the calculated index of the
USSR Central Statistical Administration."

Indicators of the per capita amounts of resources for production and consumption
accumulated over a particular period of time play an important role in a descrip-
tion of the national economic potential. The dynamic behavior of these indica-
tors over the 1971-1979 period is evident from the table which follows (see Ta-
ble 2).

Table 2. Per Capita Components of the National Economic Potential of the USSR
Over the 1971-1979 Period (in rubles)*

Resource Components of the Potential 1970 1979 1979/1970, 2

1. Material resources for production and

reproduction 2,872.9 5,263.1 182.5

1. Volume of accumulated fixed produc-
tive capital 2,196.9 6,100.6 186.6

2. Working capital comprising invento-
ries 676.0 1,162.5 169.0
11. Resources for personal consumption 3,075.3 5,185.6 168.6
1. Current resources for consumption 832.8 1,233.6 168.1

2. Volume of accumulated fi:ed nonpro-
ductive capital for public purposes 1,361.2 2,161.8 157.3

3. Volume of accumulated household per-
sonal property 881.3 1,810.2 205.6

111. Total material resources intended for
production and consumption 5,968.3 10,628.7 175.3

* Computed from the data in Table 1.

The computations given in the table reflect sizable changes occurring in the
seventies in the per capita amounts of consumption of productive and nonproduc-
tive resources. For instance, the corresponding level of the per capita supply
of capital increased over this period nearly 1.9-fold on the basis of fixed pro—
ductive capital, 1.6-fold on the basis of fixed nonproductive capital, and 1.7-
fold on the basis of working capital. If labor resources are taken instead of
the entire population, the gross supply of capital [per worker] increased from
5,865 rubles in 1970 to 9,961 rubles in 1979, that is, by 70.1 percent, and on
the basis of fixed productive capital it rose from 6,669.7 to 7,776.5 rubles, or
73.9 percent. In spite of the problematical weather conditions, the level of
per capita consumption rose 68.6 percent in those years, and the absolute level
of personal consumption reached nearly 5,200 rubles in 1979.

Given the high level of productive resources which has been attained, the prob-
lem of the efficiency of the national economic potential is taking on particular

importance (see Table 3). At the present time the dynamic behavior of that ef-
ficiency is characterized by the fact that on the one hand the level of labor
productivity is rising at rather high annual rates (above 5.9 percent), while on

18

FOR OFI-‘K ‘IAI. USP. ONLY
the other hand the high growth rates of the supply of capital (average annual
rate ab0vc 6 percent) are not accompanied by such sizable growth rates of the
utilization of physical resources. As a result of the rise of materials inten-
siveness and the drop in the output-capital ratio, then. unit expenditures in
production per unit of resources for consumption have risen almost 9.0 percent.

Table 3. Dynamic Behavior of the Principal Indicators Characterizing the Effi-
ciency of the USSR's National Economic Potential Over the Period 1970-
1979 (in rubles)*

Indicators 1970 1979 1979/1970, 2
1. Productivity of labor resources** 12,101.80 19,772.30 163.4
2. Supply of capital*** 4,469.70 7,774.50 173.9
3. Output-capital ratio**** 2.71 2.54 93.7
4. Materials intensiveness***** 8.80 9.13 103.8
5. Inputs of production resources per
unit of resources for consumption****** 0.93 1.01 108.6
6. Inputs of production resources per
unit of the economic potential******* 0.48 0.50 104.2
* Calculated from the figures in Table 1.
** Physical resources intended for production and consumption per unit of
labor resources.
*** Accumulated fixed productive capital per unit of labor resources.
**** Physical resources intended for production and consumption per unit of

accumulated fixed productive capital.

***** Physical resources intended for production and consumption per unit of
working capital.

****** Resources for production and reproduction per unit of resources for
consumption.

******* Resources for production and reproduction per unit of physical re-
sources intended for production and consumption.

As L. l. Brezhnev noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, the task has been set in the
11th Five-Year Plan of "stewardly utilization of the huge potential built by the
Soviet people at its full output." The congress outlined :hc principal direc-
tions of the interrelated system of measures to ensure by virtue of conversion
to the intensive strategy of economic development efficient utilization of natu-
ral. physical and labor resources as the decisive and most effective method of
augmenting the country's national wealth and of rapidly increasing accumulation
and resources for consumption.

The real strength of the economic potential increases with a growth of the share
of the final product among its components. The measures of structural policy
have great importance among the measures to improve utilization of the economic
potential; they provide for accelerated development of the sectors producing
finished products and guarantee thereby that the largest final results from the
standpoint of the national economy are achieved. The output of those branches
and sectors in the 5-year period will increase at faster rates than production
of the overall output of industry. For instance. the entire output of industry

19

FOR OFFICIAL IESF. ONLY
FOR ()I-‘FIFIAI. [Isl-Z ()NI.\'

ls increasing 26-28 percent. but the growth of the output of machinebuilding is
an percent. that of the chemical and petrochemical industry 30-33 percent, and
that of branches in Group B as a whole 27-29 percent. Increasing the share of
branches mainly producing finished products is helping to improve satisfaction
of society's needs and is expanding the areas of the economy which are balanced.

The volume of the productive resources in the USSR's economic potential. which
had attained a very sizable magnitude even by the end of the 10th Five-Year
Plan. will increase in the period 1981-1985. Particular importance is being at-
tributed in the llth Five—Year Plan to the heavy branches of industry-fuel and
power, metallurgy, machinebuilding. the chemical industry. as well as transpor-
tation and construction. The growth of the volume of production in them will be
accompanied by retooling, by introduction of new technology. and also by improve-
ment of the composition of the implements of labor produced and by intensifica-
tion of production specialization. Particular attention is being paid to those
branches which are vehicles of scientific-technical progress, the consumption of
whose products yields a maximum economic benefit.

One of the most important factors in augmenting the resources of the economic
potential is to draft and carry out in the branches of social production a na-
tional economic target program for elimination of losses. According to avail-
able data, the internal potential for increasing production capacities by im-
proved utilization of resources are very sizable. For instance. a l-percent re-
duction of material costs in the national economy provides a growth of 6 billion
rubles in the national economy and raises labor productivity 1.3 percent. Re-
duction of worktime losses in the industrial sector could increase output by 3
billion rubles a year, and [in the construction sector] it could increase the
volume of construction and installation work by 700 million rubles. A reduction
of construction time of production facilities by only 1 month would make it pos-
sible to increase the national income by 2 billion rubles. Raising the produc-
tivity of labor at all industrial enterprises to the level of those enterprises
which are fulfilling the state plan (which is altogether possible) would make it
possible to obtain an additional 5 billion rubles of output.13 As is evident
from the figures given. carrying out a national economic target program to slim-
inate losses would substantially increase the size of the USSR's economic poten-
tial without any sort of sizable outlays of capital investments.

Another important factor in improving the utilization of resources for produc-
tion and consumption under present conditions is creating a mighty and compre-
hensively developed infrastructural complex within the branches of social pro-
duction. Shaping such a complex is necessary first of all in agriculture by
virtue of development of the production operations involved in procurement.
storage. shipment and processing of agricultural products, which preserve them
and bring them to the consumer in a more marketable form. In a number of cases
(potatoes. vegetables, fruit. etc., in particular) it would be possible to un-
dertake a certain restriction of capital investments for augmenting the produc-
tion of products and substantially increasing investments in the infrastructural
complex until its construction is completed. This is all the more important be-
cause infrastructure facilities are as a rule less capital-intensive than pro-
duction proper. and building them does not take long periods of time.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A large potential for consumption has been built under the conditions of ad-
vanced socialism. In order to strengthen its impact on the rise of efficiency

of social production. it is advisable to make a gradual transition from carrying
out separate measures of social welfare policy to setting up completed consumer
complexes which have a direct tendency to raise production efficiency and achieve
high final results. to improve the system of material incentives. to augment per-
sonal consumption and raise the educational and cultural level, and to improve
the Soviet people's living and working conditions, medical service and rest and
recreation.

Improvement of the economic mechanism is playing a large role in improving uti-
lization of the economic potential; it ensures higher efficiency in the use of
physical. labor and financial resources and intensification of the entire pro-
cess of economic development. The measures being carried out in the period of
the llth Five-Year Plan to solve the problem of ensuring intensive development
are at the same time conducive to improved utilisation of the country's economic
potential and to its further enlargement.

FOOTNOTES

1. "For a very long time." A. L. Vaynshteyn has written. "scientific thought
has searched for ways of expressing in the most compressed form. even in a
single numerical indicator. the state of a country's economy. its economic
might. and the level of its development and prosperity. which are indispens-
able in making comparisons with the past or with other countries. Since
the level of prosperity and economic strength of a separate economic entity
or individual was usually characterized either by its income. or by the
proportion of that income. or. finally. by the amount of property accumu-
lated and possessed. it is natural that scientific thought should also have
striven to compute the analogous values for the country as a whole"

(Al'b. L. Vaynshteyn. "Narodnyye dokhod Rossii i SSSR. Istoriya. metodo-
logiya ischisleniya. dinanika" [National Income of Russia and the USSR.
History. Computational Methodology and Dynamic Behavior], Izdatel'stvo
"Nauka." 1969. p 7).

2. K. Marx and F. Engels. "Sochineniya" [Works]. Vol 3. p 20.

3. A. I. Notkin. “Tempy i proportsii sotsialisticheskogo vosproizvodstva"
[Rates and Proportions of Socialist Reproduction]. Ekonomizdat. 1961.
pp 37-38.

4. T. Khachnturov. V. Varnnkin and A. Bystrov, “In the Interests of Natural
Conservation." EKONOHICHESKAYA GAZETA. No 38. 1980. p 15; also the method
"Efficiency of Expenditures for Environmental Protection," developed by the
Scientific Council of the USSR Academy of Sciences for the Economic Effi-
ciency of Fixed Capital. Capital Investments and New Technology and by the
Economics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences (EKONOHICHESKAYA GA-
ZETA. No 33. 1980. pp 13-14).

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

II.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL 135E ONLY

T. Khachaturov, "Efficiency of Socialist Social Production," VOPROSY 3K0-
NOHIKI. No 7, 1980, p 4.

In a study devoted to the dynamic patterns of total capital in the United
States, the well-known American economist J. Kendrick showed that rapid
growth of "nonmaterial" capital (outlays for education. a portion of out-
lays for health care, movement of manpower and science) was typical of the
1929-1969 period. This led to a reassessment of previous conceptions in
the United States about the rising return on capital (reduction of the cap-
ital coefficient). It turns out that the capital coefficient. which is
computed as the ratio of the gross national product to gross outlays of ma-
terial and nonmaterial capital. does not drop, as Kendrick himself had as-
serted a certain time before, but for all practical purposes maintains a
stable level (J. Kendrick, "Sovokupnyy kapita1_SShA i yego formirovaniye"
[The Formation of Aqqrnqate Capital in the USQ/, lzdatcl'stvo ‘Ptogress' 1973:
p 147).

Taking into account the value of the output of the nonproductive sphere.

There have been attempts to express the magnitude of the USSR's national
wealth by means of expenditures of labor of annual workers (see, for exam-
ple. IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SERIYA EKONOMICHESKAYA. No 5, 1979. PP 5-18). But
this method of computation is very provisional, if for no other reason be-
cause it does not take into account reductions of labor, not to mention
that the productivity of the "annual worker" in the branches of material
production (for example, of a metallurgical worker, chemical worker, and so
on) cannot be compared to its analog in the branches of the nonproductive
sphere.

G. Sorokin. "Reproduction in the Context of Advanced Socialism," PLANOVOYE
KHOZYAYSTVO. No 7, 1973. p 61.

T. Khachaturov, "Efficiency of Socialist Social Production,” VOPROSY EXO—
NOHIKI, No 7. I980. p 3.

There have been studies of sources of the fund for the personal consumption
of the population over the period from 1950 to 1970 with respect to 200
items in the classification of that consumption in which 55 commodity
groups were identified. The calculations were revised on the basis of data
from a survey of the VNIIKS [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Consumer Demand and Market Conditions], which covered 90,000 families liv-
ing in different regions of the country, and 170,000 rural households

(V. N. Kirichcnko. "Problems in Studying Social Health." IZVBSTIYA AN SSSR.
SERIYA EKONOHICHESKAXA. No 2, [975. pp 14-15.

EKONOHICHESKAYA GAZETA, No 50. I980, p 2.

PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO, No I, 1980. p 43.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

7045
C80:

l820/63
22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
THEDRY'S TASKS IN ADVANCE! SOCIALISM OUTLINED
Moscow VOPROSY dKONOHIKI in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 119-129

[Article by V. Hedvedev: "Certain Problems in Economic Theory in the Light of
the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress"]

[Text] The 26th CPSU Congress paid a great deal of attention to the science of

economies. In the report address of the CPSU Central Committee to the congress

L. I. Brezhnev twice took up this matter. In connection with examination of the
problem of improving methods of guiding the economy he noted that "the problems

which reality is posing call for the development of theory. of economic science

and require that it come closer to the needs of economic practice." In evaluat-
ing the state of affairs in the field of the social sciences L. I. Brezhnev em-

phasized that "quite a few problems waiting to be solved have accumulated in the
political economy of socialism."

The assessments given above complement one another, and taken together they de-
termine the principal content and character of present-day tasks in the field of
the economic theory of socialism. Those tasks have arisen from the qualita-
tively new stage of development of the socialist economy. from its fuller subor-
dination to satisfying the needs of the workers and from the turn toward produc-
tion efficiency. The new conditions and tasks need more thorough conceptualiza-
tion in the terms of political economy. and that in turn is expected to facili-
tate the restructuring of the system for management of the socialist economy
that is now being carried out.

Economic science has performed quite a few basic and applied research projects
in recent years which have served as the basis for practical decisions made in
the course of improving the economic mechanism. One can include among them re-
search in the field of the efficiency of capital investments. planning indica-
tors, remuneration and incentive procedures. etc. At the same time economic
science owes it to economic practice both to work on particular problems and
also to furnish an interpretation of present-day changes in economic development
in the terms of political economy.

An elaborate description of the tasks of economic science arising out of the de-
cisions of the 26th CPSU Congress has been furnished in the statement made by

H. V. Zimyanin, secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, on the occasion of pre-
senting the Order of Labor Red Banner to the staff of the Economics Institute of

23

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FUR ()I-‘FK'IAI. lZSE "NIX

the USSR Academy of Sciences and in the "Basic Directions for the Effort of the
Economics Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Developing the Science
of Economics in the Light of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress." adopted
by the General Assembly of the Economics Department.2

This article principally examines problems in further development of the theory
of the socialist economy as a system of directly social production. After all.
the main direction in development of socialism's economic system and in the re-
structuring of the economic mechanism is to utilize more fully socialism's fun-
damental advantages as a system of directly social production and to improve
management and its basic link--planning--in a very close relationship with the
use of conmndity-money instruments and incentives. We need to bear in mind in
this connection that expanding the independence of economic entities and devel-
oping commodity-money relations will be able to effectively contribute to im-
provcmenl. of socialist conduct of economic activity only in relation to and on
the basis of centralized planned management of the economy.

From this standpoint it is very relevant and urgent to the political economy of
socialism to do more work on the system of categories of directly social produc-
tion and on problems related to its supreme and imediate goal, to efficiency,
to planned regulation of the economy, and to the use of commodity-money rela-
tions.

On the Goal of Socialist Production

In the discussion of the draft of the first party program. and later in his re-
mark about N. I. Bukharin's book "Bkonomika perekhodnogo periods" [The Economic
System of the Transitional Period]. V. I. Lenin noted the inadequacy of the ex-
planation that socialist production would serve to meet the requirements of so-
ciety. He emphasized that it was characteristic of socialism to organize the
production of products "not only to meet the needs of the members of society,
but also to guarantee the full well—being and free comprehensive development of
all members of society."3

In those years comprehensive development of the personality was a phrase that
expressed a general progrannatic requirement characterizing the deepest essence
of the new comunist society, but it did not figure as an upcoming practical
task. In the context of advanced socialism, in which production is subordinated
more fully to meeting the needs of the workers, the situation is changing. As
noted in the "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the
USSR Over the Period of l98l-l985 and up to the Year 1990." creation of better
conditions for comprehensive development of the personality is becoming an or-
ganic component of the party's economic strategy and a goal of its practical ac-
tivity.

Transforming the requirements of the workers into the main point of departure
for planning greatly complicates the entire process of planned managanent of the
economy by comparison with the periods of industrialization or economic recov-
ery. when it was above all a question of achieving specific targets in the pro-
duction of the principal product, in building or developing new sectors, and so
on. The goal of production stated in the form of meeting needs is a concrete-
historical goal, one that moves. Every step forward in the development of

24

FOR OFFICIAL lISl-Z ONLY
production and other spheres of social life alters man and has an impact on the
scope and makeup of his needs.

Under those conditions devising scientifically sound conceptions of needs actu-
ally taking shape and of future patterns of change is assuming the greatest the-
oretical and practical importance. Planned economic development aimed at man's
comprehensive development is impossible without it. First, of course, the prob-
lem must be solved of complete satisfaction of needs for first necessities, food
above all. The comprehensive food program drafted by instruction of the 26th
CPSU Congress is aimed at that. As the demand for first necessities is met, the
problem of studying the ways in which needs developed and of society's planned
influence on that process arises with ever greater urgency.

There is some experience in the study of demand. Working out optimum standard
rates of consumption of foodstuffs and industrial goods and studying shifts in

the pattern of the public's effective demand are of particular practical importance.
The study of the economic and other aspects of the socialist way of life opens the
way to more profound and general problems. But in our view this is not enough
under present conditions. There is a full-fledged need for an interdisciplinary
study of the entire range of people's material. nonmaterial and social needs by
the united efforts of sociologists, economists, psychologists, physiologists and
other specialists. This could result in preparation of forecasts and recommen-
dations both for planning production and also for the entire effort of shaping the
new man. But probably this would require setting up an appropriate large
scientific center.

The methodological foundation for such a study might be V. I. Lenin's substanti-
ation of the general sociological law of rising needs, which is manifested in a
change in the volume and makeup of needs and a change in methods of satisfying
those needs under the impact of the gradual development of society's productive
forces and science and culture. In the context of socialism. and especially in
its advanced state, this law operates with the greatest consistency and com—
pleteness. The entire system of social relations. people's work activity, the
social environment, ideology, spiritual culture. and the moral and psychological
atmosphere are conducive to man's development and enrich and elevate his needs.

They are also influenced by concrete-historical and geographic factors and eth-
nic customs.

For all its complexity and the large number of factors involved. the process
whereby needs change needs to be consciously managed. Haphazard development in
this area could lead rather to the reproduction of standards. models and rates
of consumption already known than to movement in the direction of the fundamen-
tally new forms and patterns of consumption of the future communist society.
That is why the CPSU’s social program presupposes a purposive influence on the
volume and pattern of needs. Its point of departure is that the growth of con-
sumption is not a goal in itself for socialist society, but a means of shaping
the new man. of comprehensive development of the personality, and of improving
the socialist way of life.

The llth Five-Year Plan presupposes a sizable advance in all the directions that
determine the qualitative aspect of people's life. One of the leading places in

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tl-t program for raising the standard of living of the workers is occupied by im-
provement of the socioeconomic and production conditions of labor. by intensifi-
cation of its creative character. and by a full-fledged reduction of manual.
low-skill and heavy physical labor.

Scientifically sound parameters need to be developed for all the components of
well—being--components such as the meaning of work. working conditions. the du-
ration and content of worktime and leisure time, education, culture. housing.
opportunities for rest and recreation, organized sports. protection of the name-
diate environment, the level of nonmaterial needs. people's civic activity.
their participation in management. and so on. The problems of the relationship
between people's material and nonmaterial needs, between group forms and indi-
vidual forms of meeting needs. between public and personal ownership of certain
goods. between types of housing. and so on. are very relevant ones. We should
take into account that the various needs are closely interrelated and in a num-
ber of cases are capable of substituting for one another either completely or
partially. while the limited nature of resources at any particular moment makes
it necessary each time to resolve the question of the degree of urgency and of
the order of priority in satisfying them. Society possesses a large degree of
freedom in selecting among alternatives for increasing well-being within the
limits of the resources at its disposition. It is this freedom which makes it
possible to shape the pattern of consumption in a planned way so that it comes
closer step by step to the communist ideal of the harmoniously developed person-
ality.

The objective function of the development of socialist society as it grows to-
ward communist society can be represented in the form of a series of values of
well-being (with definite qualitative and quantitative characteristics). each of
which corresponds to successive levels of formation of the comprehensively de-
veloped personality and of the rise to communism.

Intensification of the study of the needs. well-being. and patterns of compre-
hensive development of the personality raises yet another question-identifica-
tion of the supreme goal of socialism as a system and of the immediate goal of
socialist production as its subsystem. After all. needs are not only and not so
much an economic category as a broader social category.

It is equally true that well-being is not a purely economic concept either.
Aside from its economic basis in the form of real income, it includes a range of
social factors. including the amount of free time and conditions for its use.
the level of satisfaction of intellectual and social needs. people's participa-
tion in civic life and above all in management of material production and soci-
ety . etc.

Harmonious development of the personality cannot be the result of the production
of material goods alone. It figures as the product of social progress as a
whole and of all the spheres of socially useful activity--both productive and
nonproductive. the latter including science, education, culture. the service
sphere. physical fitness and athletics. work with children. and so on. More-
over, the role and relative share of the sectors of the nonproductive sphere in
meeting people's needs increased noticeably in advanced socialist society and

will he growing in the future.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-C ()Vl.\'

The production of material goods is the basis of the society of mature social-
ism, its principal subsystem. The supreme goal of material production is the
same as for socialism as a whole. but within that framework production has its
own specific function which only it performs and which cannot be performed by
any other sphere of human activity. This is creation of the social product,
which is intended for meeting needs and ultimately represents the material basis
of the comprehensive development of society and of the personality.

In his theoretical statements of the problem of socialism and in his practical
effort to set up socialist society V. I. Lenin always emphasized the decisive
importance of the production of material goods. "Once the proletariat has taken
over the power of the state," he wrote, "its most important and fundamental in-
tereat is to increase the amount of products."“ At that time it was a quescion
of meeting the most urgent needs of the workers and of the economy. But even
under the conditions of advanced socialism. when a mighty economic potential is
in existence and when tremendous success has been achieved in developing and
satisfying the material and nonmaterial needs of the members of society. the
task of expanding the production of material goods and of improving their qual-
ity remains in the foreground. As pointed out at the 26th CPSU Congress, "we
can carry out the large and diverse program of raising the prosperity of the
people only by developing material production and by raising its efficiency."

0n the Place of Use Value in the Economy of Advanced Socialism

Subordination of social production to the task of obtaining the maximum social
product to meet people's needs is radically changing the socioeconomic function
of use value. K. Marx and F. Engels foresaw enhancement of the role of use
value in the economy of the future society and its actual incorporation into the
socialist economic mechanism. As early as "The Poverty of Philosophy" K. Marx
noted that "in the future society...the amount of time which will be devoted to
production of a particular article will be determined by the degree of that ar-
ticle's social usefulness."s In "Anti-Duhring" F. Engels emphasized that the
production plan "will ultimately be determined by weighing and comparing the
useful benefits of various consumer goods with one another and with the amOunt
of labor necessary to produce them. People then do all this very simply. with-
out resorting to the services of a glorified 'value.'"‘

This is no mean problem. Yet we cannot say that it is insoluble. The problem
of a social valuation of use value and of finding ways of measuring and compar-
ing them is one of the urgent problems of economic theory. This applies both to
the means of production whose purpose consists of saving social labor and of
raising its productivity, and also consumer goods. That accounts for the tre-
mendous importance of use valuations with which commensuration and comparison
both of consumer goods and also of means of production are possible.

The most complicated problem is commensuration of consumer goods. It is thought
by some that the qualitative differences in consumer goods preclude the possi-
bility of their comparison and quantitative expression. In our view this opin-

ion is without substantiation. Qualitative homogeneity is always relative;
thcrc is never any absolute identity of quality. For things to be commensura—
blc. it is necessary and sufficient that they be alike in some respect. The

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

comparative evaluations of things pertain, of course, only to the characteris-
tics which they have in common. That is why a conclusion should first be made
concerning the commensurability of interchangeable products intended to satisfy
a given need. This commensurability is mediated through the extent to which the
need is satisfied. It is obvious that those interchangeable products which sat-
isfy a larger need at given expenditures of labor are preferable for society.

K. Marx felt that "a product as use value is measured by the need for it."7

Elsewhere he wrote: "... More and more when men apply to certain products of
the external world...the stamp 'good,‘ they are comparing these 'goods' with one
another and placing them in a certain order according to the hierarchy of their
needs. i.e.. or, if you like, 'measuring' them.... This does not involve at all
what we mean by 'meaauring value.'"°

Socialist society is also constantly solving the problem of comparing products

which meet different needs. or. more precisely, of the level of urgency and the
order of priority of satisfying different needs. That is. making a comparative
evaluation of the usefulness of different goods. In accordance with those as-

sessments products are arranged in an order reflecting the level of urgency of

the respective needs. They are also relative in the sense that they depend on

concrete conditions. But without them there can be no scientifically sound so-
lution of the problem of finding the national economic optimum.

The very concept of maximum product cannot be boiled down to volumetric and
quantitative characteristics, but presupposes a certain composition of the prod-
uct with respect to quality that corresponds to a particular pattern and a par-
ticular level of needs. Haximization of the product does not merely signify en-
larging it. but changing its composition and improving quality in accordance
with changing needs. The selection of a particular mix that represents the max-
imum product consists in fact of comparing the level of urgency of various needs
and the social necessity of producing the particular consumer goods.

Comparability of means of production is more obvious. The means and subjects of
labor constitute the material basis of labor productivity. That means that
their use valuation may be derived from their ability to guarantee a particular
productivity of labor. They should express the labor saved by using the given
means of production in obtaining a specified volume of the final product. In
other words, they show how much additional labor society would have to expend to
manufacture the same volume of output if the given means of production is not
used. The aggregate valuation of all means of production expresses the total
labor saving afforded by their use.

The labor saving is a different expression for the growth of its productivity.
that is. for the increase in the mass of the product. and in the final analysis.
for the volume and level of the need satisfied at given costs. The valuation of
the production factors in terms of labor can be interpreted like physical val-
ues, expressing their contribution to attainment of the national economy's goal.
The dimensionality of the valuation. moreover. has formal significance. The
valuation may vary (in hours. rubles. and so on) depending on the given dimen-
sionality of the objective function.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Economic theory has shown a greater interest in working on the problems of so-
cial use value in recent years. In our opinion this is one of the promising and
fruitful lines of development for the development of economic theory and at the
same time for improvement of planning practice. The time calls for attention to
be paid to the problems of use value and to methods of estimating it and measur-
ing it in connection with the national economy's turn toward fuller satisfaction
of needs. Unless these problems are solved. it is impossible to fully reorient
planning toward attainment of high final results. Work on the problems of use
value affords better conditions for solving such urgent problems as setting up a
system of measures of output which take into account product effectiveness in
consumption. as improving balance in the national economy, and as linking physi-
cal and value proportions.

What we have said does not, of course, signify any belittlement of the role of
measuring the costs of manufacturing means of production and consumer goods.
Use and cost valuations of output should be examined inseparably from one an-
other. It is completely obvious that this arises out of the statements of Marx
and Engels quoted above. In this stage costs are measured in value form. The
methods and procedures for this measurement. though worked out by theory and
practice long ago. are also in need of development and improvement. Yet the
problem of economic commensuration of use values is still awaiting its solution.
Its importance is determined by the growing significance of improving the tech-
nical performance and service characteristics of products in raising production
efficiency.

0n the Efficiency of Socialist Production

The turn toward efficiency is one of the main points in the party's economic
policy in the period of advanced socialism. Much attention was paid at the 26th
CPSU Congress to problems related to completing this change of direction, to the
national economy's transition to predominantly intensive development. A
straightforward definition of the content of the economic efficiency of produc-
tion was given in the documents of the congress. "Intensification of the econ-
omy, raising its efficiency, if this formula is to be translated into the lan-
guage of practical affairs," L. I. Brezhnev said at the congress, "consists
above all of a growth of the results of production which is faster than the
growth of production cost so that more can be obtained by committing compara-
tively less resources to production."

It is urgent to provide an interpretation of production efficiency in the terms
of political economy because this lies on the main line of the connection be-
tween the scientific-technical revolution and socialist production relations.
The content of this category must fully reflect the economic result of changes
in the productive forces of the present time, which are conditioned by the sci-
entific-technical revolution. The vigorous impact of socialist production rela-
tions in the direction of speeding up scientific-technical progress and an all-
out economy in the use of social labor should be manifested through the planning
and stimulation of production efficiency.

Yet the problem of production efficiency has not yet been given appropriate ex-
pression in the political economy of socialism. Until recently this category

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm OFF“ 1:“. USP ONLY

was equated with the productivity of labor or was examined in its application

to specific concrete problems, above all the efficiency of capital invescments.
Assertions to the effect that a summary indicator of production efficiency is
impossible are in essence equivalent to a denial of the independent existence of
production efficiency as an economic category of socialism. Moreover, they in
fact disarm economic practice in rather widespread situations when the compo-
nents of efficiency are changing in opposite directions.

At the present time these shortcomings are gradually being eliminated. but an—
other problem is arising in connection with analysis of efficiency so as to take
into account the entire set of social consequences-human development. complete-
ness of satisfaction of human needs. the character of labor, use of free time.
and so on. All of this is included in the concept of the social or socioeco-
nomic efficiency of production. It is justified to pose the question in these
terms. but it must not overshadow or absorb the problem of production efficiency
proper as the relationship between the results of production and its costs and
must not divert attention from it. Nor are such fears without basis.

The trouble is that the relative magnitude of the social product is not uncom-
monly reg~rded as a technical-and-economic category which supposedly pertains
only to the sphere of the productive forces and does not express socialist pro-
duction relations. From this standpoint it is set in opposition to social or
socioeconomic efficiency as a kind of general economic category deprived of any
definite social orientation. Its importance is thereby diminished, like it or
not. It is in essence excluded from the system of socialist socioeconomic cate-
gories.

In our view there is no basis whatsoever for treating the relationship between
the product and the resources expended as technical-and-economic efficiency if
the results of production and the costs are taken not in abstract form. but in
the specific form inherent in socialism, which includes a definite social orien-
tation. The directly social character of the product signifies its inclusion in
the supreme goal of socialism and an evaluation made on the basis of comparison
against the requirements of comprehensive development of society and the per-
sonality. It is not every expansion of the volume of production that signifies
enlargement of the directly social product. but only that expansion which cor-
responds to the needs of society. Thus there can be no question of the directly
social product being indifferent to production relations or of the absence of a
social orientation. The same thing pertains to the social form of costs. It is
another matter that the social form of the results and the costs under socialism
does not differ from their general economic and "natural" purpose. as it is un-
der capitalism, and that it corresponds to it. The absence of an antagonistic
contradiction between the social form of production and its "natural" content
should not be taken for a disappearance of this form.9

As for human development, which we are called upon to regard as the socioeco-
nomic efficiency of production. it should be borne in mind that it sums up the
efficiency not only of production, but also of the other spheres of social life
and activity. We can imagine a hypothetical situation in which the growth of
production efficiency is accompanied by a corresponding progress in human devel-
opment and by a harmonious combination of man's needs and social and personal

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
interests. High production efficiency by no means automatically results in suc-
cess in shaping the new man. This is a large and independent problem that falls
outside the confines of production and has to do with the relationship between
material production and the nonproductive sphere. between individual and collec-
tive forms of satisfying needs, the development of the spiritual and ideological
complex of socialist society, and so on. This is also indicative of the need to
identify within the confines of the general goal of socialism. which consists of
raising the level of well-being and of comprehensive human development. the spe-
cific function of socialist production--which is to obtain the maximum of the
directly social product.

0n the Planned Nature of the Socialist Economy and Conundity-Money Relations

Relying on the expressions of K. Marx and V. I. Lenin. the political economy of
socialism regards conformity to plan as one of the objective and organically in-
herent characteristics of socialism. This is the general form of regulating
economic (and not only economic) processes under socialism. it is an objective
characteristic of a socialist economy. one which is realized in practice through
its planning. It represents one of the principal advantages of socialism, which
are manifested most fully in the stage of advanced socialism.

Books and articles on the problems of conformity to plan (planomernost') have an
unfortunate tendency to confine their theoretical calculations to the most gen-
eral and abstract arguments. Yet conformity to plan is expressed in the entire
system of economic categories of directly social production, which have a most
important role to play in the mechanism for regulating it. From this standpoint
more attention should be paid by political economy to such a category as the
norm or standard. The norm is an instrument for planned development of social-
ist production which is in extremely wide use; it is the principle by which
worker and collective performance is evaluated and material incentives awarded.
V. I. Lenin's words to the effect that the plan "is a scale. a criterion, a
lighthouse, a landmark" can be applied with full justification to the norm.1°
Devising a set of norms that encompasses the principal aspects of production.
exchange and distribution of products is one of the most important tasks in im-
proving management and planning. The new content of the category of socially
necessary expenditures of labor in the socialist economy is also related to
this.

Averaged socially necessary expenditures, which make up the cost, is only one of
the historic forms of socially necessary expenditures. one which is inherent in
the system of commodity product-on. K. Marx noted: "... No form of society can
prevent the worktime which is at the disposition of society from regulating pro-
duction in one way or another."n

Average expenditures of labor retain an important informational and stimulative
role even in a socialist society. But socialist production cannot be regulated
through the mechanism of average expenditures and nothing more. Establishing a
standard value of expenditures on the basis of the average expenditures of the
sector or branch is incapable of identifying the line that separates the neces-
sary expenditures from those which are not necessary. To give up establishment
of that line on the basis of centralized planning would signify a return to

31

FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

market regulation of production. Management of production in conformity to plan
presupposes social recognition of expenditures of labor incurred in manufactur-
ing the product, beginning with the maximally permissible expenditures under the
worst conditions, which are incorporated in the national economic plan. and end-
ing with minimum expenditures under the best conditions of production. Of
course. attention must be paid not to just any expenditures which have actually
been incurred, but to expenditures which are optimal. and which are socially
conditioned by the level of the physical factors of production. They may be ex-
pressed in differentiated standard levels of expenditure of live and enbodied
labor.

The treatment of socially necessary expenditures of labor as a series of differ-
entiated values have brought an objection from many authors on the grounds that
their use could detract from incentives for technical transformation of produc-
tion. This fear would seen to be groundless. 0n the contrary. evaluation of
the performance of each unit of the economy based on progressive standards which
take into account the objective conditions of production. standards which remain
stable for a certain period of time, is generating motivation to improve produc-
tion in every unit of the economy.

The criterion based on the average for the sector or branch offers no advantages
whatsoever with respect to this motivation and generates its own problems. This
has to do with the fact that it is shaped not only on the basis of the objective
conditions. but also under the impact of actual expenditures, including those
which are inefficient. It creates "hothouse" conditions for the best enter-
prises and sections of production and can as a consequence detract from incen-
tives for improvement of production. As for the worst conditions. here the use
of the criterion based on the average of the sector or branch does actually ex-
pose the need for a radical transformation of the given unit. But the decision
on that transformation lies outside the competency of that enterprise. It must
be taken at a higher level on the basis of the optimum from the standpoint of
the national economy and must be oriented not toward the standard based on the
average for the sector or branch, but toward the best indicators achieved in
world practice.

The principle of a series of differentiated socially necessary expenditures has
not been generally recognized in political economy. But it is making its way in
practice. This is manifested in the fact that excess profit. which is not the
result of the collective's performance. is taken away from enterprises which are
operating under the best conditions. And a planned subsidy must be paid to en-
terprises operating under the worst conditions. In essence the solution of this
problem does make provision for establishing differentiated rates for formation
of incentive funds. But these are far from perfect forms of the solution.

There is something forced about them because the criterion based on the average
of the sector or branch is used.

Certain essential revisions and supplements have begun to be made in the treat-
ment of the average socially necessary expenditures of the sector in recent
years. A number of authors write that in addition to the socially necessary ex-
penditures. there also exists in a socialist economy the socially permissible
expenditures under the worst conditions of production. This is an important

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
step toward recognition of the entire series of differentiated expenditures as
socially necessary expenditures.

This recognition could help to bring the entire conception of conformity to plan
to the point of developing a specific mechanism for regulating socialist produc-
tion and to a clear view of ways of improving a system appropriate to socialism
for evaluation and material stimulation of the performance of collectives. It
would seem that recognition of a differentiated series of expenditures (but in
dynamic form. not congealed form) as socially necessary could serve as the theo-
retical basis for devising a system of standards for evaluating enterprise per-
formance that would remain in effect for lengthy periods. We need to add that
the differentiated series of socially necessary expenditures is closely bound up
with valuations of the use value of the factors of socialist production and of
its result within the confines of the general system of categories of directly
social production.

In an advanced socialist society it is still necessary to use conmxxiity-money
relations and the law of value. The task of political economy in this connec-
tion is to furnish, relying on the classical legacy of Marx. Engels and Lenin
and the historical experience of socialism and taking the conditions and needs
of the present stage as points of departure. a thorough substantiation of the
role of commodity-money relations and the law of value in the economic system of
advanced socialism and to substantiate ways and methods of making better use of
them to increase the efficiency of socialist production.

Commodity-money relations exist in real life neither separately nor parallel.
but in dialectical interaction with the basic content of socialist relations. to
which they import complicated and multilevel economic form in which the influ-
ence of the various aspects of socialist relations is crisscrossed. For in-
stance. in the categories genetically related to directly social relations, for
example. in assigned standards, the influence of commodity-money relations may
be manifested with greater or lesser force. To be specific, this applies to the
rates regulating the formation of material incentive funds, the wage fund and
distribution of profit. rates which remain in effect for long periods of time.
The complicated "tangle" of economic relations is embodied in the wage.

At the same time. directly social relations may also be manifested in categories
which owe their origin to connndity production. This applies above all to the
price. production cost and profit. The planned price under socialism remains
the money expression of value. But in elucidating its essence it would be in-
sufficient, and that means incorrect. not to go beyond that definition. It also
performs the role of a planned standard applied to costs. This role is ex-
pressed with particular vividness in the price for producers of the socialist
product. and it is this function of the wholesale price that must be taken into
account first of all in the process of improving pricing. Much the same argu-
ments are legitimate with respect to profit and the production cost. not to men-
tion credit. finance and other instruments traditionally referred to as value
instruments.

Historic experience indicates the need for fuller use of commodity-money rela-
tions in the stage of advanced socialism as well. This effort offers a sizable

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

potential and opportunity for speeding up the growth of socialist production and
fur rnlslny, production efficiency.

The socialization of production. which is taking place at a fast pace under the
conditions of advanced socialism, is having a contradictory impact on commodity-
money relations. As the primary economic entity becomes larger thanks to the
formation of production associations and agroindustrial integration. commodity-
money relations are. it seems. being pushed to a newer and higher "story" of the
economic organism--into the sphere of interrelations among associations and com-
plexes. Here the role of commodity-money relations is growing. The large asso-
ciations are distinguished by considerably greater economic independence and
greater opportunities for exerting an influence on the level of production and
distribution costs.

In the course of the restructuring of the economic mechanism that is now being
carried out provision has been made for associations and large enterprises to
establish stable rates of transfers from profit left to their disposition. As-
sociations and enterprises have been given broader rights to use depreciation
and also Gosbank credits, and the wage fund is now to be planned on the basis of
long-term standards per ruble of output. But within associations and enter-
prises cost accounting (khozraschet) is in a sense being restructured after the
intraplant model. At this level commodity-money relations are secondary and de-
rivative in nature.

Finding the optimum combination of centralized planned guidance of the economy
with economic independence of associations and enterprises. with the leading
role played by the former. is one of the most important problems of the present
stage of improving the economic mechanism. and theory is called upon to help in
solving it.

FOOTNOTES

l. VOPRDSY EKONOHIKI, No 7. 1981.

2. VOPROSY EKONOMIKI. No 4. 1981.

3. V. I. Lenin. “Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete Works], Vol 6, p 232.
6. V. I. Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 64, p 345.

5. K. Marx and P. Engels, “Sochineniya” [works]. Vol 4, p 97.

6. K. Marx and F. Engels, op. cit.. Vol 20, p 321.

7. K. Marx and F. Engels, op. cit., Vol 46. Part l. p 381.

8. K. Marx and F. Engels, op. cit., Vol 19. p 382.

9. We should note that the epithet "technical" is not suitable to phenomena
pertaining to the productive forces. It is well known that V. I. Lenin

34

FOR OFFIUAI. USE ONLY
opposed description of the productive forces as a technical category. See:

V. I. Lenin's remarks about N. I. Bukhartn's book "Ekononika perekhodnogo
perioda." LENINSKIY SBORNIK, November 1929, p 371.

10. V. I. Lenin. op. c1t., Vol 43, p 382.
11. K. Marx and F. Engels. op. c1t.. Vol 32, p 9.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda", "Voproay ekonomiki", 1981.

7045
CSO: 1820/63

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFNJAL.USE(NVLY

ECONOMIC POLICY, ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

AGANBEGYAN BOOK ON MANAGEMENT REVIEWED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMiKl in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 140—142

[Review by c. Popov and Ye. Kocherin of the book "Upravleniye Sotsialisticheskimi
Prcdpriyatiyami" l"The Management of Socialist Enterprises") by A.G. Aganbegyan,
Moscow. "Ekonomika." 1979. 448 pp]

[Text] The book is unique in its conception. it is at the same time a textbook and
a scholarly work. in our opinion, this is the most correct approach to preparing
instructional aids for enterprise directors who assimilate purely instructional
material better and more fully if it is set forth in connection with problems that
concern practical economic workers. For this reason let us emphasize immediately
that on the whole the author has succeeded in preparing an interesting work.

At the same time, in order to strengthen this kind of orientation toward its read-
ers--economic executives—-it would have been useful to have activated their atten-
tion even more. Control questions connected with the topic could have been placed
at the end of each chapter. and the chapters could have been supplemented with a
description of several concrete situatioas. This would have made it possible to
clearly show that the improvement of production management is a continuous process
and that the reader personally can and should make a contribution to this work.
This kind of variant of the organization of the book's chapters would have been
all the more easy to realize, since the faculty for the advanced training of ex-
ecutive cadres at Novosibirsk State University which is directed by A. Aganbegyan
has accumulated experience in the use of active methods of teaching.

The book opens not with the traditional characterization of the enterprise. but
with a description of the camenpomry problems of the develOpment of the economy
(Chapters 1-3). There is an examination here of such questions as the essense and
tasks of the economic management of the development of social production and its
social thrust, and the orientation toward increasing efficiency and improving work
quality and toward accelerating scientific and technological progress. This makes
it passible for enterprise directors to have a clear awareness of the general line
or economic development and to guide themselves by it in making concrete decisions.
This kind of structure for the monograph is without question successful. Indeed,
with the centralized planned management of the economy the "rules of the game"

and general strategy are formed not at the enterprise itself, although it partici-
pates actively in this. An analysis of the problems of the economy involves the
disclosure of common goals and of development paths for any enterprise.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In developing this idea it would probably have been useful here to investigate
problems which concern not only management as a whole, but also the system of
branch management. it is equally important for an enterprise to "fit in" to both
branch and regional economic systems. For this reason, besides a description of
the branch aspect, it was necessary to also reveal the territorial aspect of econ-
omic life, which would have been useful for the enterprise director.

The book is distinguished advantageously from many text books by the wide range
of the enterprises which are analyzed and by its profound study of the advanced
experience of their economic management. Concrete examples, numerical data, and
experiments--ail this satunnes many of the work's chapters. Apart from the task
of elucidating or confirming one or another proposition, this material is of im-
portant independent significance, indicating to the reader the addresses of ad-
vanced experience and motivating the author's recommendations.

hole should also be taken of one nwre characteristic of the book. The experi-

ence and problems of the development of Siberia's enterprises and associations are
presented for the first time in the text book literature. in the light of the well-
known instructions of the party and the government on speeding up the development

of Siberia. the analysis of this experience plays a large role.

The appllentlon of what the author has called the methodological principles of
nunagement (Section ll, Chapters 4-9) has taken up a substantial place in the mono—
graph. This concerns the orientation of enterprises toward the final results of
their work, toward a future-looking approach and toward the use of systems analy-
sis and of the study of operations, of special-purpose programmed methods. and of
a socio-psychological approach. This is the first time that these questions are
described so fully and systematically in our instructional literature. The first
section "Methodological Principles of Management" is undoubtedly one of the best
in the book, although its name is not entirely successful, since political economy
and scientific communism are above all the methodological principles of management.
in this work what is discussed is not the methodological principles of management,
but the present-day characteristics of its improvement and the equipment for such
an improvement.

Among the chapters of this section,one wishes to take special note of the chapter
on the future—looking approach. In the light of the instructions of the 26th CPSU
Congress regarding the necessity for cultivating inleaders an "ability to see the
future prospects," the conclusion that strategic leadership is the chief duty of the
economic executive sounds especially up-to-date. The importance of the future—
nrlented approach in the work of the leader is demauwrnted on the basis of the ex-
perience of advanced industrial and construction leaders. Precisely in its ability
to see and realize the future is one of the chief advantages of socialist planning
as a whole which, in connection with this, makes definite demands upon the quality
of economic leadership.

Hhilc we place a high value upon the entire first section, we would like to wish
that the author in his further work on the book provide a special chapter on the

interbranch relations of enterprises and on interbranch integration. Various kinds
of agro-lndustrial associations, the appearance in connection with production assoc-

37

FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

e accomplishment of this
of the system of manage-

ook (Chapters 10-16) is devoted to the various sectors
of improving the system of the management of sociali
instructional

st production. Combining an
are treated with their

sic aspects of the- development
n management. planning, the organization of
production and management, and in the

an L1!" structure of managem

l..l. lirezhnev at the 26th Party Congress regarding the net
work In this field. The 81

Limml structur
mutt-rial strc
since during
against the

paragraph on the planning of organize—
es for management deserves a
ngthens the gene

come up
eveloping management structures

At the wme time. in the chapter on management structures more attention should
have been devoted to the experience of V“ /Volga Not

[in]. Research show that direc

and advanced practice

preparation of a

s also in need of control.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agement also seems to us to be debatable. 01' course, there is an important as-
pect in the work of the party organization which is connected with involving
workers in management. But the chief functions of party organizations are control
met the work of administration, the selection and placement of cadres, educational
and ideological work, and the immediate organizational work connected with solving
crucial economic and social problems. The creation of associations has brought
much that is new into the work of party organizations. it would have been useful
to have examined all of this in a special chapter.

The concluding fourth section of the book (Chapters 17-21) examines cadre policy,
the organization of labor, the making of managerial decisions, the analysis of the
economic activities of enterprises, and ASU {automated COOUOI &=)'Stel‘|§/'- Tht‘
best chapter in this section, in our opinion, is the chapter on ASU. Especially
useful is the description of advanced experience in the field of the creation of
automated management systems on the basis of computers: in particular, this con—
cerns the "Barnaul" ASU. It is known that a large amount of work is now being
carried out in the country on the development of ASU. but it is by no means being
conducted as effectively as is necessary. The development of an ASU for the
Barnaul Radio Plant is of especial interest. An integral approach was adopted for
the preparation of the information system for the "Barnaul" ASU. Here, the central
part of the ASU which is connected with the planning and management of production
is a single one and is not broken up into individual subsystems. The experience
which was gained in the creation of the "Barnaul" ASU made it possible to love on
to the development of the "Sigma" A5U--this is an ASU of a new generation which

is based on computers of a single series and which possesses adaptive properties
which make it possible to adapt it easily to diverse production and econocic con-
ditions, above all, to the enterprises of the machine building branches of in-
dustry. Dozens of enterprises in the country have now embarked upon the introduc-
tion of the "Sigma" ASU.

The chapters on the managerial decision, the organization of the labor of the dir-
ector, and on the analysis of economic activity are well written. True, the chap-
ter on the selection, placement, and education of cadres is a descriptive character.
In general, there is a lot of material in this section which would have been just-
il'ied if this were a traditional textbook oriented toward the mandatory treatment
of all of the points in the curriculum. But this kind of material is not aandatory
with the conception which the author chose. Many problems (for example, evaluating
the efficiency of management) merit a broader examination.

The structure of the book's sections and the distribution and the logic of the
placement of its chapters give rise to a number of criticisms. The lack of cor-
respondence between the name of the first section and its content has already been
noted. The third section is called "The Problems of improving the System of Man--
aging Socialist Production," but it does not contain the problems of the select ion
.nnl placement of cadres and certain other isSues which are described in other
sections of the book. but are mt these chapters about the improvement of manage-
ment? Therefore, the third section would more correctly have been called "The
Organization and Methods of management."

Some criticisms have to do with the distribution of the chapters by sections. It
is clear that the chapter on ASU gravitates more toward the first section of the

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘(IR OFFICIAL USl-Z ONLY

hunk. In the same way, the division of the problems of decision making among mat-
erials in chapters 8 and 19 is not entirely justified. It turns out that the meth-
ods of making optimal decisions are given long before the general scheme of decision
making. it would have been better to have placed the chapter of analysis of econ-
omic activity in the second section where the problems of planning and cost accoun-
ting are examined.

The logic of the placement of chapters is sometimes violated in the book. “by is
the chapter on planning separated from the chapter on the economic levers of man-

agement by the chapters on production organization?

But all of these complaints, possibly, are given rise to by the evaluation of A.
Aganbegyun's book as a textbook. if one considers that the author himself in the
preface defines the genre of his work somewhat differently, then it is clear that
it vauld be wrong to take too "textbook" an approach to the structure and logic

or the chapters. 0n the whole, the monograph under review represents an import-
ant step forward both in the scientific literature on the management of enterprises
and in the textbook litcruturc on these questions.

COPYRIGHT: izdutel'stvo "Pravda," "Voprosy ekonomiki," 1981

2959
C50: 1820/46

40

FORIDFFKJAI.USE(NHLY
SUCCESS, PROBLEMS IN INTRODUCING NW SYSTEM
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 25-36

[Article by N. Santeladze, Tbilisi: "GSSR Experience in Perfecting the Economic
Mechanism"]

[Text] L. I. Brezhnev's speech at the ceremonies dedicated to the 60th anniver-
sary of GSSR and the Georgian CP contained a thorough and comprehensive analysis
of the most important economic and social processes and set forth the crucial
problems in Georgia's future socioeconomic advancement. One of the principal
problems posed by L. I. Brezhnev is that in the years immediately to come Geor-
gia must catch up with respect to certain indicators of economic development.
Comprehensive performance of measures to restructure the economic mechanism and
improve leadership at all levels of management of the economy are being called
upon to play an important role in performing this task.

A purposeful organizational and political campaign is being conducted in GSSR to
carry out the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers
on improvement of the economic mechanism (July 1979). An intensive process of
step-by-step performance of the measures outlined in connection with that decree
began in the second half of 1979.

The Bureau of the Georgian CP Central Committee has been regularly hearing re-
ports of party committees of regions. of the heads of ministries and departments
and of directors of enterprises and organizations on progress in improving the
economic mechanism and has been guiding them toward performance of the measures
outlined by the party and government in this area. In 1980 reports were dis-
cussed on the organizational and mass-political effort to carry out the decree
of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers on further improve-
ment of the economic mechanism from the Leninskiy Rayon Committee of the Geor-
gian CP (Tbilisi). from key officials of the Kutaisi Motor Vehicle Plant imeni
S. 0rdzhonikidze. the Rustavi Metallurgical Plant. 6858 Gosplan, the Abkhazskaya
ASSR Council of Ministers. etc. Plans of specific organizational. technical-
and-economic, housekeeping and propaganda measures related to the transition to
the new system of planning and management have been drafted and approved. The
task has been set of linking closer together the efforts to prepare for the
transition to the new system of economic activity with further improvement of
the quality of management and planning of production, economic analysis. book-
keeping snd reporting. and the setting of work norms and allowances pertaining

41

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to material resources in order to regularize the entire set of norms and stand-
ards drawn upon in planning.

Many directors of enterprises. production associations in the industrial sector.
construction organizations and other organizations have been constantly improv-
ing their knowledge of the problems in management of the economy. At the same
time certain managers still have a poor knowledge of economics. and at times
they show incompetence in management. which results in expenditure of working
capital for other than the stated purpose and diversion of physical and finan-
cial rescurces for projects not envisaged by the plan. The result of this is
that a number of enterprises and organizations turn out to be in a difficult fi-
nancial-economic situation.

In accordance with the requirements of the decree of the CPSU Central Committee
and USSR Council of Ministers indicated above. in early 1980 directors of all
industrial enterprises. managers of construction and assembly trusts, and also
chairmen of kolkhozes and sovkhozes went through certification procedure. The
purpose of the certification was to determine how suited the managers are to the
positions they hold. The certification was preceded by on-the-job workshops for
directors of enterprises and organizations aimed at improving their knowledge of
economics in the context of the peculiarities of economic-financial activity of
the relevant sectors and production groupings. The syllabus made it possible to
develop in the managers an ability to find the correct solutions in concrete and
complicated situations. The certification commission in union-republic and re-
public ministries and departments were granted the right to make recommendations
to party organs and economic bodies concerning the dismissal or reappointment of
managers who had gone through the certification procedure and did not have suf-
ficient knowledge in the field of management and economics. A special interde-
partmental certification commission was set up in the GSSR Council of Ministers
to conduct the certification procedure for managers of enterprises and organiza-
tions under union subordination located within the republic.

In 1980 the Georgian CP Central Committee and the republic's Council of Minis-
ters conducted a review to see how ready industrial enterprises, construction
and installation organizations. scientific research organizations. and project
planning and design organizations were for the comprehensive approach to the new
conditions of planning and economic incentives in order to invigorate further
the preparatory efforts and initiatives of work collectives in increasing eco-
nomic efficiency. The review was conducted in two stages. In the first stage
tasks were set of achieving participation of every work collective in mutual
cross-checks of the readiness of enterprises and organizations for the transi-
tion to the new conditions of economic activity.

A basic condition of the review was strict observance of the decree indicated
and the managers' ability. along with the existing reporting system, to record
and analyze the economic and social activity of production enterprises and orga-
nizations with respect to the new planning indicators and evaluaticu criteria.
Principal attention was paid in the second stage of the review to practical ap-
plication of measures to improve the economic mechanism. The readiness of en-
terprises and organizations to make the transition to the new conditions of eco-
nondc activity was taken into account in totaling up the semiannual and annual

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
results of the republic socialist competition among regions. ministries and de-
partments of GSSR.

The review made it possible to stage efforts everywhere to improve planning and
incentives. to disseminate progressive experience along these lines. to enhance
the responsibility of managerial personnel for implementing decisions taken. and
to substantially improve economic performance. which played quite an important
role in the republic's success in the 10th Five-Year Plan. With respect to
growth rates of national income. output and labor productivity in the industrial
sector. and the relative share of products bearing the State Quality Emblem 6583
advanced to a leading position in the country with respect to the results for
the 10th Five-Year Plan. The 1980 plan of industrial production on the basis of
normative net output of enterprises converted to the new methods of planning was
fulfilled at a level of 105.4 percent. and the growth rate over 1979 was 9.7
percent. The productivity of labor rose 9.2 percent on the basis of normative
net output and 7.5 percent on the basis of gross output.

Indicators higher than the average for the republic's industrial sector were
achieved by the entire group of enterprises operating under the new conditions
with respect to the level of planned fulfillment and the growth rate of labor
productivity. That situation was observed at the enterprises of the republic's
Ministries of Light Industry. Food Industry. Heat and Dairy Industry and Local
Industry.

Implementation of the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of
Ministers on improvement of the economic mechanism also had a constructive im-
pact on other aspects of production and economic activity of enterprises. For
instance. according to the data of a 1-day observation conducted by the CSSR
Central Statistical Administration. use of production equipment at the repub-
1ic's machinebuilding enterprises improved during the 10th Five—Year Plan. The
shift coefficient of untalworking equipment as a whole rose from 1.1 in 1975 to
1.23 in 1980. including an increase from 1.18 to 1.30. respectively. in the
principal production operation. from 1.17 to 1.32. respectively. for metal-
cutting machine tools. from 1.16 to 1.25. respectively. for forging and pressing
machines. and so on. But on the whole these indicators lag substantially behind
the respective union averages.

In recent years there has been an increase in the relative share of industrial
enterprises regularly increasing their output exclusively by intensifying pro-
duction. specifically by raising labor productivity. The share of such enter-
prises is now about 60 percent, whereas in previous years it did not exceed
28-30 percent. In certain ministries this figure is considerably higher: about
60 percent [or the Ministry of Light Industry. about 50 percent for the Ministry
of Food Industry. and so on.

The initiative of work collectives during introduction of improved planning has
also been manifested in the intensified mobilization of internal potential for
increasing industrial output and for improving product quality. In 5 months of
1980 output exceeded the plan by 75 million rubles. which is more than 80 per-
cent of the annual surplus envisaged by the republic's socialist obligations.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘FK'IM. llSl-f (WIN

The comprehensive improvement of economic performance has made it possible for
the Tbilisi Electric Locomotive-Building Plant to improve noticeably the quality
of its product--the VL-ll electric road locomotive, which has been awarded the
State Quality Emblem. This made it possible to increase the plant's economic
incentive funds by more than 300,000 rubles in the current year alone, and
217.000 of this amount were assigned for material incentives paid to workers and
engineering and technical personnel. The Quality Emblem has also been awarded
to the truck tractor manufactured by the Kutaisi Motor Vehicle Plant, etc.

These examples indicate the trend toward improvement of the quality of indus—
trial products that has been generated during improvement of the economic mecha-
nism in the republic. we should note that up until 1979 the greater share of
products bearing the Quality Emblem were mainly products of the food industry.
and the relative share of the products of branches of heavy industry, including
machinebuilding. was quite low. The new requirements for improvement of the
economic mechanism have made it possible for enterprises to activate internal
potential for improvement of quality in a different way and to be persistent in
searching for that potential in all branches.

Reorganization of the economic mechanism has been accompanied by expansion of
the movement dedicated to the motto "Every Enterprise Among the Best in the Re-
public. in the Sector, in the Country," which is directly related to overcoming
the republic's lag behind the average union level with respect to a number of
the most important indicators of general-economic and industrial development;
this can be illustrated by the Tbilisi Aircraft Plant imeni Dimitrov. Perfor-
mance of more strenuous socialist obligations and counterplans of industrial en-
terprises to increase the volume of output and to improve the qualitative indi-
catorsof’performance helps in the practical performance of this task. The
drafting of measures along those lines made it possible for the aircraft plant.
with the help of the union ministry. to revise the figures of the plan for the
llth Five—Year Plan and to double the growth rate of the volume of output over
the target previously intended. to raise the labor productivity target 1.5-fold.
and to increase the growth of industrial production up to 84 percent.

0n the initiative of the workers of Hakharndzsvskiy Rayon a "vertical" socialist
competition referred to as "plantation--transport--tea factory" was organized in
the republic. The competing collectives of the region's agroindustrial complex
assumed an obligation to increase the output of tea in an improved assortment
and with high quality, while at the same time minimizing losses in the picking.
shipment and processing of the tea leaf. This made it possible for work collec-
tives to work out and perform Joint vertical obligations ensuring an increase in
the final results from the standpoint of the national economy. This is what
makes the new form of socialist competition that arose during the restructuring
of the economic mechanisa valuable and topical; it altogether conforms to the
party's requirements concerning the targetsprogram management of the agroindus-
trial food complex as a system. concerning balanced and proportional development
of its component branches, and concerning achievement of their smooth interac—
tion and improvement of economic relations among them.

At the present time the republic has 117 base standard enterprises using the new
cost-accounting (khozraschet) indicators and evaluation criteria on an experi-
mental basis and introducing effective forms and methods for the organization

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and work and remuneration. As of 1 May 1981 [17 production associations and en-
terprises in the industrial sector. more than 13 percent of their total number.
were converted in the republic to planning and recordkeeping based on normative
net output. The normative net output indicator is being used by all enterprises
of the GSSR Ministry of Gas Industry, about 93 percent of the total number of
enterprises of the Ministry of Fruit and Vegetable Industry. 25 percent of those
of the Ministry of Meat and Dairy Industry. 16 percent of those of the Ministry
of Food Industry. 10 percent of those of the Ministry of Light Industry, 31.3
percent of those of the Ministry of Timber. Pulp and Paper Industry. 4 enter-
prises of the USSR Ministry of Machinebuilding for Light and Food Industry and
Household Appliances. 2 enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Instrumentmaking.
Automation Equipment and Control Systems. etc. These enterprises account for
about 2] percent of the total volume of the republic's industrial production.

Particular attention is being paid to the base enterprises converted to the new
conditions of economic activity. The ministries and departments of the various
sectors and branches have drafted and are carrying out according to plan meas-
ures on the concentration of production. elimination of disadvantageous duplica-
tion of the manufacturing of products. raising the relative share of the total
comprising products which conform to the enterpriae's specific consideration,
and the formation of production associations. At the present time the share of
the latter in the rcpublic's industry is 44 percent on the basis of output and
4| percent on the basis of labor force.

The base enterprises were assigned individual targets for the indicators of net
output and the wage fund per ruble of output. Parallel planning. recordkeeping
and analysis of output and labor productivity is being done according to the in-
dicators now in effect and according to normative net output. The republic's
Central Statistical Administration and the Statistical Administration of Tbilisi
prepare monthly reports on these associations and enterprises. Their perfor-
mance is regularly analyzed. and unused potential is sought for a further rise
in production efficiency. All of this is helping to transform the base enter-
prises into pilot production operations which can be used for demonstration pur-
poses.

A number of measures have been carried out in the republic to further improve
economic planning and to intensify followup on plan fulfillment at all levels of
management of the economy. Performance of the decisions taken by the Georgian
CP Central Committee and GSSR Government on the drafting and implementation of
comprehensive target programs occupies a special place.

The republic's Council of Ministers has passed 16 target programs covering the
period 1981-1985. Among them an important place is taken by production-economic
programs aimed at solving major intersector problems in the area of raising pro-
duction efficiency: a food program; comprehensive programs for development of
the production of consumer goods. for raising efficiency of utilization of fuel
and energy resources. for development of the GSSR transportation complex over
the period up to the year 2000. etc.; the target program of the Georgian RASU
[republic computerized management system]. which makes provision for further im-
provement of the organization of management of the economy.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pcrtormancc of the target programs which call for drafting scientific-technical
bases for increasing the efficiency of mining and combined processing of manga-
nese ores of the Chiaturi deposit, mechanization of manual labor in the GSSR
economy, thorough processing of production waste and its use as a secondary raw
material. development of an effective and comprehensive system for protecting
citrus, grape and fruit plantations against freezing and hail, creation and in-
troduction of special suspended cableways and related automation systeam, etc..
will help to speed up the pace of scientific-technical progress and intensifica-
tion of production.

The comprehensive target program for reduction of manual labor in the republic's
economy in the period 1981-1985 has been drafted and put into effect. The pro—
gram contains specific long-range assignments for the republic's ministries and
departments and for associations and enterprises under union jurisdiction. At
the same time it is a regional program, since it encompasses practically all
branches of material production and the nonproductive sphere in all the repub-
lic's regions.

The work of shaping summary regional plans for mechanization of manual labor is
now nearing completion. The drafting of this target program was headed by 24
regional commissions and the republic coordinating council under the general
methods supervision of CSSR Gosplan. The program outlines more than 400 meas-
ures; about 150 project planning and design institutes and scientific research
institutes in the republic and the country at large took part in drafting them.
It calls for carrying out in the 11th Five-Year Plan more than 1.300 nmjor orga-
nizational and technical measures to mechanize manual labor. The organizations
which are to carry out the measures have been designated, deadlines have been
fixed. and the sources of financing have been assigned: state capital invest-
ments, credits of Gosbank and Stroybank. and resources of production development
funds.

Performance of this program will make it possible to reduce the number of work-
ers employed at manual labor by 160,000 and to increase by 30 percent the number
of workers performing their jobs on automatic machines and automated units and
apparatus as well as with power tools and machinery. Performance of measures to
mechanize and automate production processes and to introduce progressive tech-
nology in the period 1981-1985 will make it possible to raise labor productivity
10-12 percent in the industrial sector alone. The total economic benefit re-
sulting from performance of the program will amount to more than 133 udllion ru-
bles, and the proposed expenditures will be paid back in 6.5 years.

The transition or scientific research, ﬂcchiu;i“ engineering and process engi-
neering organizations. institutions and industrial ministries to the cost-
'nccounting system of organizing projects on the basis of job orders for creat-
ing. putting into production and applying new equipment and processes.

More intensive work is also being done in the republic to shape up the food pro-
gram. Its drafting is being coordinated by a republic commission headed by

E. Shevardnadze, first secretary of the Georgian CP Central Committee. The pro-
gram’s principal goal is to establish the optimum scale of production of the
principal foodstuffs necessary to meet the needs not only of the republic's

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
population. but also of tourists and vacationers. as well as to further increase
the republic's contribution to the production of the union as a whole.

The food program will become an organic and integral part of the plan for eco-
nomic and social development of 688R, the autonomous republics. the oblasts. and
the cities and rayons for the period 1981-1985 and the period up to the year
1990. Provision will be made for the figures of the food program in the devel-
opment plans of kolkhozes and sovkhozes and those of procurement. processing and
other enterprises. This will make it possible to improve the management. coor-

A great deal of work is being done in the republic to improve regional planning.
Comprehensive plans of economic and social development are to become an effec-
tive instrument in effective management of the economy. In a number of leading
regions in 1980 the post of chairman of the planning commission was replaced by
the post of deputy chairman of the Executive Committee of the Council of Peo-
ple's Deputies. who supervises all planning, financial-economic and statistical
work in the regions. Opportunities are being explored for enlarging the staffs
of local planning agencies in other cities and rayons as well.

At the outset of the 10th Five-Year Plan GSSR was one of the first republics in
the country to undertake to compile comprehensive regional plans for all the re-
gions within the republic. They are now drafted for an elaborate system of in-
dicators projecting the planning of practically all aspects of economic and so-
cial development of the regions. Experience in the drafting of comprehensive
regional plans shows that many problems can be solved more soundly with their
help. In addition. they contribute to purposive coordination of the work of
ministries and departments. enterprises and organizations in solving problems
which have become urgent in the socioeconomic development of the regions.

Agricultural production associations--the main unit for guidance of the region's
agroindustrial complex-have been formed in certain rayons of the republic for
the same purpose. Steps are also being taken to set up a unified center (unit)
for management of the agroinduatrial complex of the republic as a whole, includ-
ing the food complex. One of its main tasks is to be the planning and mutually
adjusted and systemic solution of the problems of pricing. incentives. credit
financing and budget financing of all the interrelated branches of the agroin-
dustrial complex.

In most of the republic's regions long-range programs for economic and social

development over the period 1981-1985 and up to the year 1990 have been drafted
(and approved in plenums of local party committees); they also defined specific

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

steps toward their fulfillment. Special decrees of the party's Central Commit-
tee and the republic's Council of Ministers on measures to speed up socioeco-
nomic development have been adopted concerning more than 30 regions. These de-
crees constitute comprehensive economic programs defining the strategy for the
future economic and social growth of the regions and a system of measures for
implementing that strategy whose resources. performance responsibilities and
completion dates are interlinked.

The existence of the sound comprehensive programs makes it possible for each of
the regions to see more clearly the possibilities and prospects of their growth.
the final results of solving the problems which have become urgent, and the
strategies and means of realizing the tasks which have been set within the
framework of the economic complex of the entire republic. so that on that basis
they can structure their own planning and economic effort more effectively. For
example. the program of measures for accelerated economic and social development
of the republie's Akhaltsikhskiy Rayon, which has a labor surplus, calls for un-
used land occupied by deserts and brush to be made fertile in 5-6 years. Some
of these tracts would become pastures and meadows or would be afforeated. By
the end of the 11th Five-Year Plan there should no longer be any land used inef—
ficiently in the rayon. A transformation in the proportional pattern of farm-
land has been determined on that basis. and that in turn would serve for achiev-
ing a growth of grains. vegetables. fruit and the products of animal husbandry
and for augmenting agricultural production.

To the end of better utilization of labor resources provision has been made to
expand handicrafts (including work done at home), development of local industry.
etc. By the end of the llth Five-Year Plan the level of employment of the able-
bodied population in the socialized economy is to increase from 77 to 90 per-
cent.

Performance of the comprehensive program for the economic and social development
of Akhalkalakskiy Rayon is a special problem. This is now one of the republic's
backward rayoas. The rates and level of development of its economy have not in
past periods corresponded to the opportunities that exist. and its natural and
labor resources have been slow to enter into economic circulation. More than 30

percent of all labor resources in that rayon are employed in personal subsidiary
farming and the household. Akhalkalakskiy Rayon lags substantially behind ray-

ons in similar natural and climatic conditions with respect to a number of indi-
cators of the development and efficiency of agriculture.

The comprehensive program which has been worked out for this region's further
economic and cultural advancement calls for large-scale measures to be carried
out to speed up the growth of industrial and agricultural production, to affor-
est the eroded lands of kolkhozes and sovkhozas, to build and repair roads. to
build and manage housing on a private basis, to develop trade and consumer ser-
vices. and so on.

Calculations show that performance of these measures will make it possible by

the end of the 11th Five-Year Plan to bring into the rayon's socialized economy
an additional 6,000 or so persons. to reduce from 30 to 16 percent the number of
persons employed in personal subsidiary farming in the household, to increase

48

FOR OFI-‘K'IM. USE ONLY
industrial output 2.5-fold over the 1979 level. and to add 10,500 hectares to
the area of irrigated land and 1,000 hectares to the area of drained land.
Plans call for increasing the production and procurement of the principal farm
crops.

Indicators of scientific-technical progress and of the efficiency of social pro-
duction are now reflected more fully in the plans for economic and social devel-
opment of GSSR. The functions of the republic's Gosplan have been expanded in
the area of planning the development of science and technology. and its respon-
sibility for application of scientific-technical advances has been enhanced.
This has made it possible to interlink plans for application of new technology
with other sections of the plan and to take into account more fully the socio-
economic consequences of scientific-technical progress in the economy.

Much attention is being paid in the republic to improving sectoral and regional
plans. In 1979 the Georgian CP Central Committee adopted a specific decree on

measures to further improve the planning of the social development of work col-
lectives. Under that decree special commissions (councils) for social planning
are to be set up at enterprises and in economic organizations of the republic.

Ministries and departments are organizing in associations and large enterprises
services for factory-plant sociology to draft the scientific and organizational
bases of plans for social development of work collectives. A standing republic
conmussion headed by the republic's Gosplan has been created to coordinate sci-
entific research and practical application of advanced know-how in the field of

planning social development.

The planned effort is continuing to carry out the measures outlined to improve

the system for supply of materials and equipment. The volume of product deliv-
eries on the basis of direct business relations has increased almost 1.4-fold

over the Ninth Five-Year Plan.

Another progressive form of supplying physical resources to enterprises and or-
ganizationa--guaranteed aggregate supply on the basis of contracts concluded
with agencies of the republic's Gosplan--has also experienced extensive develop-
ment. The number of enterprises covered by this form of supply increased in the
years of the 10th Five-Year Plan more than eightfold. and the volume of products
delivered to them-S.3-fold. In the 11th Five-Year Plan more than 100 of the
republic's enterprises are to be converted to guaranteed aggregate supply.
whereas at the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan there were only 9 of them.
At the same time. a number of the republic's production associations and enter-
prises (the Rustavi chemical Combine. the Kutaisi Electric Drive Plant. the Ba-
tumi Hachinebuilding Plant. etc.). Just like the ministries of their sectors and
branches, are taking a passive position and are not promoting widespread dissem-
ination of the progressive form of supply.

By the end of the llth Five-Year Plan the volume of services rendered the repub-
lic's consumers through the Gossnab system is supposed to increase 5.6-fold.
Plans accordingly call for construction of two specialized shops for preparation
of rolled products of ferrous metals for industrial consumption and for repack-
ing liquid chemicals in small containers. The capacity of sections for cutting
paper products and wire and cable will be doubled, and so on.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I‘SI-I UNI.‘

Centralized delivery of products to consumers has great importance to organiza-
tion of regular supply of consumers. more efficient utilization of transporta-
tion equipment and stepping up the rate of turnover of stocks of physical re-
sources. The share of such deliveries is now 75 percent for the republic's Gos-
snab as a whole. which is below the union average. But the share of centralized
delivery is considerably higher for a number of articles. For example. for
metal products and products of the timber and paper industry it is about 90 per-
cent. In I981 this figure will reach 90 percent for the republic's Gossnab as a

The effort being made in the republic to make the conversion to the new condi~
tions of economic activity also has shortcomings. One of them is that the prep-
aration of a number of ministries and departments. enterprises and organizations
for it was not properly linked to the search for internal potential for raising
efficiency nor to the development of creative initiative on the part of economic
organizations in improving the quality of performance and in perfecting the en-
tire system of the planning and management of production. Consequently. the re-
public still has a high share of enterprises and organizations which are not
fulfilling plans for the rise of labor productivity and the growth of profit.

0n the basis of the results for 1980 there are many such production operations
in the Yugo-Osetinskaya Autonomous Oblast, where about 39 percent of the total
number of industrial enterprises did not fulfill assignments for labor produc-
tivity: in Curdzhaanskiy (21.4 percent) and Khashurskiy (25 percent) Rayons, in
Rustavi (3é.6 percent). etc. Assignments for labor productivity have not been
fulfilled by more than one-third of the industrial enterprises of the republic'a
Ministry of Construction. Ministry of Rural Construction and Ministry of Build-
ing Materials. For a number of enterprises under union jurisdiction the short-
fall in fulfillment of the 1980 plan for profit was 35 million rubles. or 10.6
percent of the plan.

Nor have satisfactory final results of economic activity been achieved at all
the base enterprises. though. as we noted above. they are expected to be model
production operations. So far enterprise passports have not become an effective
means toward a higher standard in the drafting of annual and 5-year assignments.
counterplans and socialist obligations. nor for competent assessment of utiliza-
tion of equipment. production space. raw-material and fuel-and-power resources.
and manpower.

Nor have all party committees and Soviet organs at the local level seen to the
drafting and approval of regional schedules for conversion of enterprises and
organizations to the new conditions of operation. which would be cleared with
the respective ministries and departments. The vigorous activity of republic
agencies to expedite the preparatory work is not always being met with approval
and support on the part of sectorwide union ministries and departments. Some of
them are postponing deadlines for conversion of enterprises to the new methods
of planning. Such a position is adhered to. for example. by the USSR Ministries
of Fishing Industry. Chemical Industry. Construction. Road and Municipal Ma-
chinebuilding, Machine Tool and Tool Building Industry. etc.

Certain enterprise directors have still not fully mastered the new methods of
economic activity. nor do their qualifications meet the present requirements for

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI-‘K'Hl. l SK ()\'l.\

management and planning of production. Some enterprise directors in the system
of the Ministry of Heat and Dairy Industry and the Ministry of the Building Ha-
terials Industry, who during the certification procedure showed incompetence in
the matters of improving planning and economic incentives, have been held back

to go through the certification procedure.once again.

work-team methods of organizing work and of work incentives have not yet been
developed as they should have been at industrial enterprises and construction
organizations in the republic; and the relative share of work teams working un-
der a single contract is low (25 percent). This work procedure has reached only
11.2 percent of industrial production personnel proper. There have been delays
in the drafting and implementation of master charts for management of the vari-
ous sectors and branches of the republic's economy and industrial sector and in
conversion to the new system for the planning. financing and economic stimula-
tion of the projects for creating. putting into production and applying new
technology.

There are shortcomings also in the drafting and implementation of comprehensive
plans for increasing production efficiency and target programs for mechanizing
manual labor and for saving on metal and fuel and power resources. A number of
enterprises are continuing to manufacture products which violate the require-
ments of state standards and technical specifications. Advanced methods of or-
ganization of work are slow to spread in the republic's industrial sector. The
share of workers attending more than one machine tool (more than one unit) is
low. as is the share of workers who are combining occupations. In many branches
and sectors the figures on coverage of workers by measures for scientific man-
agement is considerably lower than the average union level. There are also
shortcomings in improvement of the economic mechanism in capital construction.
The volume of unfinished construction has been growing year after year. The
plan for activation of activation of fixed capital in 1980 was fulfilled at a
level of 80 percent.

In accordance with the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the 16th Congress
of the Georgian CP. the program for conversion of sectors of the economy and
branches of the industrial sector to the new methods of economic activity is now
being revised in the republic. To that end schedules are being worked out with
deadlines for conversion of the respective enterprises and organizations to op-
eration in the new way. A strict system has been set up for monitoring the or-
ganization of preparatory work.

Ministries and departments are completing the work of revising the passports of
associations and enterprises. Summary and sectorwide passports will be compiled
from them. It has been proposed that they be widely introduced into the prac-
tice of sectorwide planning and analysis of economic performance. Work is being
stepped up to introduce the work team in organizing work and incentives, with
remuneration made under a single contract for the final results of the job.
Targets to this effect for 1981 and the multiannual period have been assigned to
associations and enterprises so that the work team becomes the principal form
for the organization of work in the llth Five-Year Plan.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

vigorous steps are being taken to further improve the style and methods of work
and to strengthen the organizational role of the republic's Gosplan. Ministry of
Finance. State Committee for Labor and Social Problems, State Price Committee.
Central Statistical Administration. Gossnab. Gosbank and Stroybank. Gosstroy.
and the State Coumittee for Standards, as well as their local subdivisions.
along with economic planning services of sectorwide ministries and departments
in introducing the new methods of economic activity. The training of supervi-
sory personnel, engineering and technical personnel, and workers and employees
in the methods of improving the economic mechanism. linked to the principal
tasks of the 11th Five-Year Plan, is continuing at the same time.

Comprehensive implementation of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and July
decree of the CPSU Central Comittee and USSR Council of Ministers on improve-
ment of the economic mechanism will be a most important factor in raising the
rates of the republic's economic and social development and in boosting produc-
tion efficiency and the prosperity of the people in the llth Five-Year Plan.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

7045
C50: 1820/62

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MANAGED"? 0? LARGE PRODUCTIm-BCWMIC C(MPLEXBS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 10. Oct 81 pp 64—72
[Article by A. Kochetkov. D. Levchuk and B. Hil'ner]

[Text] Creation of large industrial complexes is one of the most progressive of
the development and location of the branches of the industrial sector. Large
industrial-economic coaplexes-VAZ [Volga Motor Vehicle Plant]. KanAZ [Kama Ho-
tor Vehicle Plant], Atommash [manufacturer of nuclear power plant equipment]--
have been built in recent years in many branches of the industrial sector. the
Minusinsk Electrical Equipment Complex is under construction, and so on. The
shaping of mining, fuel-and-power. timber-lumber and other complexes has a large
role in development of the economic regions of Siberia and the Far East.

The socialist economic system makes it possible to apply capital investments
purposively to the comprehensive formation and development of production sys-
tems. In future large complexes will be characterized by the large scale of
production of industrial products (often commensurable with the scale of the en-
tire branch). and sizable amounts of capital investments are being used to cre-
ate them.

In his report on the Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of
the USSR Over the Period of 1981-1985 and up to the Year 1990 N. A. Tikhonov
noted: "In the new 5-year period and over the longer range there will be a con-
tinuing effort to improve the location of the productive forces both in existing
regions and new ones. There are plans to strengthen their comprehensive devel-
opment and specialization and to take steps to optimalize economic interrela—
tionships.... Such TPK's [regional industrial complex] as the West Siberian.
Sayan. Angara—-Yeniaey, the Timan--Pechora, the South Yakutia. the Pavlodar--
Ekibastuz. the Southern Tajik. and others will also undergo development. Their
formation is entering a new stage typified by the emergence and development of
an entire complex of branches as well as support-service production operations.

An analysis of the peculiarities of the large complexes. which are at the same
time comparatively localized in geographic terms. as subjects of management
makes it possible to identify three basic types among them. The first group are
national economic complexes being built over the territory of entire regions.
The Nest Siberian TPK, the BAH [Baykal-Amur Main Rail Line] and the KHA [Kursk
Magnetic Anomaly] might be included here. The second are intersector TPK's

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

located in a limited area: for example. the Angara--Yenisey system of TPK's.
The third are local TPK's or industrial parks (promyshlennyye uzly) after the
pattern of VAZ. KamAZ, and the Hinusinsk Electrical Equipment Complex.

The benefit of the complex is manifested first of all in the saving on capital
investments and other resources and results from the following factors: cen-
tralization of supporting and auxiliary production operations and economic enti-
ties, scientific-technical and training facilities, and the economic and social
infrastructure; unification of natural conservation components, and so on; effi-
cacious subcontracting, a saving on shipping costs; and also improved organiza-
tion of construction and exploitation of additional opportunities for achieving
a high level of concentration of construction work.

From the standpoint of both the concentration of production and economic re-
sources and also production-technical and business collaboration the process of
shaping a large complex is a qualitatively new and complicated form of the so-
cial organization of production as compared to traditional forms of the invest-
ment cycle followed for separate industrial and civil engineering projects. One
of the determining factors in creating large complexes as unified economic sys-
tems is the high level of synchronization and proportionality of all aspects of
its activity. This is characteristic of the highest forms of the social organi-
zation of production. which presuppose not only the technological separateness
of the economic units in its structure, but also their relative organizational
and economic separateness.

A most important peculiarity of creation of a large complex as a subject of man-
agement is the direct interrelationship among the processes of its formation and
its operation. Industrial projects are activated phase by phase. and the pro-
cess of activation and attainment of rated capacity may extend over many years.
The development of the complex is built up. as it were, of successively created
production and social subsystems which at the point of their completion should
comprise a unified system rather than a dissociated conglomerate of elements.
This step-by-step aspect of forming the complex should take into account all the
cooperative relationships and proportions of the various production operations
which have been laid down in the project planning solutions. These circumstances
have an impact on the organizational forms of management of large complexes,
since program-based methods should be directly intertwined with existing sec-
toral forms of organization of production and management.

in the process of shaping the complexes difficulties arise in connection with
certain shortcomings in capital construction, slow attainment of rated capacity,
and the lagging of materials and the technical capability for housing and public
works construction and for the facilities of the economic infrastructure shared
in common. Disproportions in shaping the individual functional subsystems of
complexes become aggravated by negligence in meeting deadlines for supply of
manufacturing equipment by ministries figuring as suppliers, and so on.

The adversities noted above result from causes of an organizational and economic
nature: the low level of multiannual. current and operational planning (includ-
ing the planning of capital investments); the scattering of resources and dis-
persal of responsibility for the final results among the numerous plant depart-
ments. the existence of parallel general contractors which are organizations

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
belonging Lo different ministries. the lack of an efficient organization of all
the relations arising among scientific and project planning support, construc-
tion. activation and the attainment of rated capacity; difficulties in interde-
partmental and interorganizational agreement on the features of project designs
and plans; and slack supervision over execution of intersector decisions.

one both in the taking of decisions on project designs and plans and also in
carrying them out. Decisions of an intersector nature or for the complex as a

union mlnistries--Hinenergo [Ministry of Power and Electrification] . Minneftekhim-
prom [Ministry of Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical Industry], and so on--
were directly involved in construction of the shared-in-common economic and so-
cial infrastructure of the Rest Siberian Complex. Aside from the principal min-
istry acting as contractor in building the industrial plants--Hinne£tegazstroy
[Ministry of Construction of Petroleum and Gas Industry Enterprises]. a whole
series of other ministries took part in the construction: Hinpromstroy [Minis-
try of Industrial Construction]. Hintransstroy [Ministry of Transport Construc-
tion]. Hinenergo. Hinmontazhspetsstroy [Ministry'of installation and Special Con-
struction Work]. Minstroy [Ministry of Construction], and Mintyazhstroy [Minis-
try of Construction of Heavy Industry Enterprises], all USSR ministries. Per-
formance of the program involved more than 10 ministries which saw to the build-
ing of manufacturing and industrial equipment. as well as a number of related-
sector ministries. Five all-union ministries are involved in building the KATEK
[Kansk--Achinsk Fuel and Power Complex]; among them Minpromugol' [Ministry of
Coal Industry] and Minenergo are the principal customers and at the same time
contractors for construction of industrial and public works projects. Neverthe-

KATEK difficulties arose concerning the punctual and quality construction of the
facilities of the social infrastructure. Even in cases when the industrial parks
have a single principal customer (for example. the Minusinsk, the Tomsk. etc.).
there are a number of related client ministries for construction of the facili-
ties belonging to the economic infrastructure shared in common as well as sev-
eral ministries acting as general contractors. All of this considerably compli-
cates the planning and organization of the construction and investment cycle for
the complex as a whole.

An analysis of the peculiar features of production technology and the socioeco-
nomic peculiarities of building large complexes makes it possible to define the
principal requirements for the organizational structure of management of a TPK:
the systems approach to the organization of management and to management meth-

ods, which guarantees that the integral character of the complex is taken into

account. including establishment of its internal and external relations; subor-
dination of the production and managerial activity of all units of the complex

which belong to different departments to the final results from the standpoint

of the national economy; definition of rights and responsibilities for each

55

FOR OFFICIAL lZSl-I ONLY
FOR ()l-‘l-‘K'l-U. l SI". ()\'l.\'

component; organizational and economic-statistical support of the creation of
large complexes, whose purpose is to improve the degree of internal consistency
in the project designs and plans and to reduce the length and increase the com-
prehensiveness of the investment-construction cycle; adoption of interdepartmen-
tal and regional-sectoral operational decisions in efficient performance of all
the management functions, including planning. financing, and the supply of mate-
rials and equipment; preservation of sectoral and regional management of produc-
tion-economic organization; assurance of central distribution and redistribution
of resources in solving long-range and operational problems; and continuity of
management of large complexes in the stages of scientific and project planning
work, the investment-construction cycle and the activity of production and oper-
ation.

Depending on the specific nature of the complexes, their scale. and their struc-
ture, different solutions might be applied both in organizing the planning and
also in selecting the organizational forms of management as a whole. An analy-
sis of the possible solutions shows that they must pertain to all the levels of
planning and management. This is indicated by experience in organizing the man-
agement of large industrial complexes and industrial parks: for example. VAZ.
KamAZ, Atommash, etc.

The purposes of the program governing the creation of complexes can be formu-
lated as follows: creation of all the principal production operations and ele-
ments of the infrastructure in the given proportions both with respect to scale
and timing. as well as the conduct of social and natural-conservation measures
necessary to the complex's development; achievement of a high technical level of
the basic and auxiliary production operations being built in the complex; assur-
ance of the economic and social effectiveness of shaping the complex on the ba-
sis of the internal consistency and quality of the system of planning decisions
and project plan features being developed and of the corresponding organizational
and economic mechanism of management.

The goals enumerated call for coordination of performance of the tasks of scien-
tific and project planning support. the working out of comprehensive solutions
to be included in the program. and centralization of economic guidance not only
at the lower levels. but also at the sectoral and intersectoral levels. The
most acceptable organizational forms of management in these cases might be the
following: centralization of administration of the program for creation of the
TPK within the confines of the individual sector; creation of a special sector-
wide ministry or industrial association to carry out the program; and selection
of the coordinational type of organization with partial decentralization of eco-
nomic supervision over the performance of intersector tasks under the program.

The experience which has been gained allows us to conclude that it is possible

to apply the different variants of the organizational forms of management de-
pending on the type of complex. In the case of one-of-a-kind complexes. the
system of management should include bodies endowed with sufficient powers for
planned and economic supervision at the intersector level (within the USSR Coun-
cil of Ministers itself) and at the level of the complex. In the creation of
intersector complexes which are not so large, it is advisable to organize an in-
terdepartmental commission under the supervision of the authorized representative

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the USSR Council of Ministers. as well as organs for economic supervision at
the level of the complex. The management scheme based on the head department
seems most suitable for single-sector complexes or complexes in which one of the
sectors is predominant.

Two forms of management--strategic and operational--are indispensable in shaping
a balanced and integral organizational and economic system to administer the
program. By the first form we mean the working out of the basic long-range and
planning decisions. and by the second the current economic supervision of per-
formance of the given program. Experience shows that it is not possible to sep-
arate these forms at different levels of economic management. Moreover. the
lower level of management plays a substantial role in information support and
development of current and long-range planning and project design solutions.

A balanced cembination of organizational (administrative) and economic methods,
ensuring completeness and responsiveness of the managerial impact on the subject
of management. is required to achieve the overall (interorganizational. inter-
sector and national economic) goals.

One of the tasks in organizing program-based management is to establish those
who are responsible for attainment of the overall goals stated in the program.
to take the burden off the higher tier of management. and to improve the quality
and punctuality of long-range and current decisions. As the subject of manage-
ment the program unifies the activity of organizations subordinate to different
branches and departments. Pull centralization of administration of the program.
including allocation of all resources to a single organ. is possible if a matrix
structure of management is adopted. But highly complex matters arise when this
is done: a sizable portion of the resources used to solve the most important
scientific-technical problems is distributed through the traditional sectoral
channels; in addition. it is difficult to regulate research and project planning
activity. this being an area in which sectoral and departmental supervision re—
mains decisive.

As they make the transition to cost-accounting (l. zraschet) methods of opera-
tion. scientific and project planning organizations are those best able to adopt
matrix management forms. Matters are more complicated in applying the matrix
scheme in the system for management of production-economic organizations. The
present system of economic management is structured along the sectoral and re-
gional principles within the confines of the line structure of management.
Should special program-based bodies be created. this could result in a substan-

tial additional complexity of the system for planning the supply of materials
and equipment. for reconciliation and mutual adjustment of planning decisions.
for monitoring the use of resources and funds subject to limits. and so on.

The basic task of improving management of the process of creating the large com-
plex necessitates integration of management right at the level of the organiza-
tions which are responsible for carrying out the entire scope of operations un-
der the program. Opportunities for this are limited by their production-eco-
nomic functions and by their departmental subordination.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USI’. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in our view the following types of organizations involved in carrying out the
program should be distinguished: those performing the role of customers and
contractors in capital construction; those supporting the activity of the former
with scientific and project planning work, with equipment. with physical and
technical resources, and so on. But in practice it is not uncomn for the di-
vision within each of these functions (of customer, of contractor, and so on) to
be excessive. This complicates cooperation among the economic links and results
in a squandering of resources and diffusion of responsibility of personnel for
the final results of activity. Centralization of management and the coordinabil-
ity of all the units should encompass first of all the Emotions of the customer,
the contractor and the supplier. In complexes which have a sectoral configura-
tion. where there is a single customer, his functions need to be broadened and
resources should accordingly be allocated for the entire extent of construction
of the shared economic infrastructure. housing and public works construction.
personnel training, and so on.

Generalization of management of capital construction is also indispensable in
the case of large intersector complexes. Here it is advisable to set up a uni-
fied directorate of the complex under construction on the basis of the indepen-
dent sectoral directorates; as production capacities are activated and brought
up to rated outpuL, it would grow to become an industrial association with a
multisector configuration. In such complexes as KATEK the directorate could
figure simultaneously as the middle-level management body because there are
within it separate lines of operation--industria1. public works and power fa-
cility construction. facilities of the con-non economic and social infrastruc-
ture, and so on. It is best for certain project planning and research organiza-
tions engaged in technical-and—economic elaboration of the overall problems and
with coordination and preparation of planning and design decisions to be made
subordinate to the body which represents centralized program-based management.
Other economic organizations, including construction organizations. might also
be made subordinate to the unified directorate (industrial association).

It is high time for centralization of the functions of those organizations fig-
uring as general contractors. especially those with a small capability. In
cases when the functions of the customer cannot be altogether centralized, the
organizational and economic conditions can be created for unified responsibility
of personnel for the results of the entire complex by centralizing the functions

of the general contractor.

Experience in building complexes (VAZ. KamAZ. etc.) has confirmed the effective-
ness of using large-scale organizations as general contractors. When there is a
large-scale general contractor, it becomes possible to introduce the most pro-
gressive methods of managing construction. he has broader opportunities. the
level of organization of operations and the level of responsibility for the fi-
nal results are raised. the process of interaction with the customer is simpli—
fied, and additional opportunities are created for centralizing the construction
capability and for improving the entire system for supply of materials and

equipment .

Along with the lower and middle tiers, the structure of the entities for admin-
is: ration of the program should also include a higher level of economic manage-
ment, as well as appropriate branches or bodies at the intersectoral level

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(within USSR Gosplan. in the State Committee for Science and Technology. in USSR
Gossnab. etc.). They might be reduced to three organizational forms: a head
ministry with centralization of the functions of administering the program;
designation of a specific body for program-based administration subordinate to

It is best to base the management of large sectoral industrial complexes on cre-
ation of program—based management entities organized on the principle of the
head ministry. This principle can also be extended to complexes with a multi-
sector structure in which one sector is predominant. Here the enterprises and
economic entities of other sectors are set up as auxiliary entities supporting
the sector or with close relations with the centralized scientific—technical fa-
cility or the common economic and social infrastructure.

In the process of shaping such complexes the functions of the customer. that is,
of the sector responsible for building them. are centralized to a considerable
degree. It is advisable in this connection to order the head ministry to draft
the program for shaping the complex and to work out the complexwide predesign
solutions and to appropriate to it the principal resources for project planning
and surveying work and capital construction. It is also indispensable that the
individual specialized ministries retain their functions as customers, while the
head ministry is given coordinating powers. Aside from the right to monitor and
redistribute resources, a number of types of activity related to scientific and
project planning support, technical supervision, deliveries of equipment, and so
on. remain within the competence of the ancillary ministries, which bear direct
responsibility for performance of those functions within the confines of their
own sector, and they finance those functions as well. Sectoral plans of the re-
spective types of operations. coordinated with the program, may. then. be the
most effective means of coordination. In this connection the functions of sum-
mary program-based planning in the appropriate sectoral division of USSR Gosplan
should be expanded.

A number of unsolved problems also exist within the head ministries, which have
not been introducing sufficiently the forms of program-based planning and eco-
nomic management over the creation of large complexes. There is a need to form
special staff units to plan the program within the ministry, to centralize eco-
nomic management at the level of the lower economic tiers. and to assign them to
the bodies for management of the complexes. Within the sector the entire com-
plex of organizational and economic measures to administer the program is best
provided for by adopting normative decisions, including appointment of the su-
pervisor of the program and the creation of special units in the management ap-
paratus. Such a syxtem of measures is necessary in all cases when program-based
management is introduced. Implementation of a comprehensive program within a
sector necessitates straightforward interaction not only of the subdivisions of
the ministry's apparatus. but also of the individual industrial associations
which are to provide the technical supervision over preparation of the project
planning solutions and over technical policy, which are to provide the scien-
tific and project planning work. and so on.

59

FOR OFHC‘IAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Management of large complexes like KATEK may follow one of two basic schemes:
centralized management of the program by forming an all-union industrial associ-
ation. which is subordinated to the head ministry; and centralized coordinating
supervision based on "cooperative" or the forms of joint management of the pro—
gram. Management of the programs of such complexes must'be centralized at all
levels of management.

The unified directorate of enterprises under construction could become the orga-
nization providing direct supervision over construction of the complex. In view
of the step-by-step nature of construction. at KATEK, for example. it is advis-
able to create an all-union industrial association on the basis of the coal and
power enterprises or production associations; it would perform the functions of
the customer concerning construction of the industrial and other facilities of
the TPK and would also provide supervision over the current activity of indus-
trial enterprises (taking into account the existence of a straightforward "tech-
nologicai chain" in the KATEK: coal mining--coal processing-~generation of
electric power).

The association or unified directorate needs to be subordinated to the intersec-
tor management entity or committee of authorized representatives (KPP), which
might be formed on the principles of shared participation as the entity for co-
ordinating the activity of client ministries and which w0uld have not only coor-
dinating functions, but also would have economic management functions. The mem—
bership of the KPP might include representatives of the leading ministries (dep-
uty ministers) and of regional bodies. A small specialized administrative staff
should be organized to conduct the affairs and maintain operational relations of
the members of the KPP. The KPP is a collective body which should perform the
general integral functions of economic management and as it were perform the
role of a collective manager on behalf of the participating ministries. This
scheme has its advantages, but also certain drawbacks. It results in the forma-
tion of an additional tier in the management structure and complicates the pro-
cess of achieving consensus on and adoption of intersector decisions.

In our opinion the scale of the subject of management and its level do not re-
quire creation of a special independent body for program-based management at the
sectoral or supersectoral level. That is why the attempt to subordinate the
economic organization to two ministries is promising and could find similar ap-
plication in other projects with an intersector configuration.*

For such a large complex as KATEK it is possible to envisage the variant of an
economic mechanism with dual subordination of the entity for administration of
the program. an alternative that is quite realistic under the conditions that
have come about: the unified directorate or industrial association submit pro-
grams and comprehensive plans to the KPP. and the latter defends them on behalf
of the client ministries in USSR Gosplan and other entities representing inter-
sector management; USSR Cosplan in turn plans and allocates resources directly
to the unified entity for administration of the program.

* Failure to solve this problem has. in particular, resulted in the inadequate
development of the economic mechanism that has taken shape and the management
structure of intersector production operations. the low efficiency of construc-
tion of intersector industrial parks. and so on.

60

FOR OFFICIAL “SI". ONLY
The principle of dual or multiple subordination of economic organizations in the
context of "vertical" development of cost accounting should become increasingly
widespread. There is a need for scientists and project planners to do specific
work on the entire mechanism for planned distribution. including the planning of
the principal production indicators. their adjustment. evaluation of the perfor-
mance of that organization and the recording of its results in the activity of
superior economic organizations. and the incentive system. Particular attention
should go to solving the problems of the supply of materials and equipment. to
the transfer of funds. and to the planning of capital investments.

The scheme of program-based management with a specific body at the regional
level which would be subordinate to the USSR Council of Ministers is a promising
scheme for management of the creation and development of one-of-a-kind national
economic complexes. This could be a body of economic management responsible for
effectiveness in the development and execution of all the complexwide and inter-
sector decisions. This body for program-based management should supplement the
existing sectoral and regional management system. and it should also have a num-
ber of economic and managerial functions. which need to be centralized in order
to exclude duplication in sectoral entities.

General management of the target program for development of one-of-a-kind com-
plexes should be made the responsibility of special commissions of the USSR
Council of Ministers (as was done in the Heat Siberian Complex); it would be ad-
visable for their members to include the ministers of the principal sectors in-
volved in developing the complex and also representatives (deputy chairmen) of
USSR state counittees. the RSPSR Council of Ministers. the vice president of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. and oblast representatives.

Jointly with USSR Gosplan these comissions would draft and carry out the target
program and monitor fulfillment of planning assignments by ministries and de-
partments; would examine and coordinate decisions concerning interaction of sec-
tors and enterprises within the complex; would reconcile and coordinate the
principal indicators of sectoral plans and designs for new construction in the
given region; would monitor progress in capital construction. and so on.

Main administrations for complexes. which would be created under the USSR Coun-
cil of Ministers. could supervise the organization of fulfillment of the target
programs. and there would be interdepartmental operational coordination of the
activity of production associations (enterprises). Regional councils of direc—
tors of large enterprises (associations) and organizations to be included in the
complex could be created at the regional level under the main administrations,
and representatives of local administrative agencies could participate in their
proceedings.

The principal tasks of the main administrations should be the following: cur-
rent supervision of the performance of the target program by performing coordi-
nating. planning and monitoring functions with respect to interdepartmental
linkage of the production and economic activity of enterprises and organiza-
tions operating within the complex or closely related to it; Joint preparation
with sectoral organizations of proposals for multiannual plans for development
of all the components of the complex. including drafts of plans of capital con-
struction and contract construction work.

61

FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Special subdivisions should be created within the planning commissions of the
executive committees of local soviets of people's deputies to plan and monitor
fulfillment of planning assignments by enterprises and organizations subordinate
to local soviets in order to improve combination of sectoral and regional man-
agement .

The organization of performance of the programs for creation of large complexes
should guarantee straightforward division and coordination of functions of the
entities which are responsible for developing that organization. Compilation of
comprehensive large-scale programs is a complicated organizational problem that
necessitates that scientific-technical personnel be concentrated at the inter-
sector. sectoral and regional levels and that there be clear coordination of all
participants in this process on the basis of head and competent scientific and
project planning centers.

The economic efficiency of target-program management of large complexes is mani-
fested in improvement of the quality and internal consistency of the project de-
sign and planning decisions thanks to use of the program approach; in reduction
of the length of the investment-construction cycle and reduction of its resource
intensiveness; in assurance of synchronization and proportionality in schedules
and scales of development of the various components of the complex; in central-
ization of infrastructural units (because of their intersector subordination);
and in combined utilization of regional resources.

Shaping the organizational structure for maxagement of large complexes does not
require more capital investments or more matagerial personnel. The restructur-
ing of the organizational and economic mechanism can be done with the existing
potential in the present management system. that is. by redistribution of mana-
gerial functions. Efficiency can be achieved mainly through a saving of capital
investments because of elimination of departmental parallelism in construction
of projects of the same kind, reduction of losses at organizational and techno-
logical junctions. and greater comprehensiveness and responsiveness in the tak-
ing of interdepartmental decisions.

The systems approach to program-based management of the creation of large com-
plexes necessitates interrelated organizational. economic and legal measures.
The time has now come to publish specific normative documents on the economic
mechanism for program—based management in which the most general principles con-
cerning this form of management would be set forth.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki". 1981

7045
050: 1820/62 END

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY