FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

JPRS L/10232
31 December 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 60/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
tLansmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lO
31 Decemb

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOI’ICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(P000 60/81)

Cou'rems

ASIA
HONG KONG

Police Smash Two Drug Syndicatee, Seize Opium, Heroin
(SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 2h, 28 Nov 81) ................

Briefs
Opium Traffickers Charged

INDIA

Briefs
Opium Arrest. Reported

PAKISTAN

Legislation To Combat Drug Addiction Planned
(mm, 7 mo 81) 00.0.0.0...OOOIQOIO0.00COOOIOOOIIOOOOO...

Campaign To Reduce Poppy Cultdvation Viewed
(mm, 7 mo 81) .IIOOOOCCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.IODOODOIOOOOOOOOO

Heroin Seized From Europe-Bound Ship
(“WIN “m, 11 mo 81) CC...'0..OOOOOOIOOIOOIOCOOOUCIOO
Marihuana Plantation Destroyed
Heroin Smugglers Seized

Drug Smugglers Nabbed
Convicted Honk Arrested

Three Lao Arrested

LATIS AMERICA
BARBADOS

Briefs
Anti-Drug Squad

BOLIVIA

Chapare Coca Crop Affected by Disease
(ms TIM, 17 NOV 81) .00...IO...COOOOOOOOO-OICOOIOIOVI

WINICA

Briefs
Arrest of Rastafarians

MEXICO

Confiscated Drugs Being Removed From Court Premises
(BL MARIO DE ”Ems mm, 3 NOV 81) IIIOOIIOOIOOOQOAI.

Sentences Imposed for Harihuana Trafficking, Prisoner Release
(EL DIARIomNUBVO mm, 25 “0v 81) OOOIOOOOIOOOO.DIOOO

PANAMA

Briefs
Cocaine Trafficker

Briefs
Cocaine at Lima Airport
Illegal Coca Plantations
Dutch Drug Trafficker
Erug Seizures Estimates

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Briefs
Harihuana in Hailbags

FOR OFI1C1AI.USEAMNLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEAR EAST AND "(8TH AFRICA

mm
Opium Drug Bust Ends in Arrest of Italian snuggler, Diplomat
(“Dam Ghanim; mm, 8 Sep 81) eooaeeeeee-eoeeoooeeeeee
Hashish Operation Leads To Arrest of Narcotics King
("unir 81-34881“; mm 8"“, 23 sep 81) eoeeeeeoeeeeeoesoo
IRAN

Briefs

Opium Seizure in Mashhad

Opium Seizure in Shiraz

Mast-had Opium Seizure

Poppy Cultivation Banned

Khorasan Drug Discoveries

Mg: Confiscated in Shiraz
International n'ug Traffickers Arrested
M33 Seized in Shiraz

Shiraz Drug Seizure

“EST BUMPB
INTMATIONAL AFFAIRS

Council of Europe Adopts Program Against Narcotics
(wmumm MT, 23 Nov 81) 00.0.0.0...OOIOOOCIOOUICOCO‘OO

CYPRUS

Briefs
Cyprus Battles Narcotics

SUEDE"
Briefs

Dogs' Enforcement Contribution Explained
Indian Gang Snuggled Cannabis

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLICE SMASH W0 DRUG MICATES, SEIZE OPIUH, BEGIN

Largest. Haul in 1981

Hong Kong SOUTH CRINA WRNING POST in English 26 Nov 81 p 12

[Text]

A Chiu Chow syndiuto
involvod in the local distri
”9“” W M'
out w
by omen or the Nuoot!
ion Bun“.

pendumhcrotm
o ICIBWMIIIM
.a-mmmm.
3y: taint: of )3 LI: d
to mud on
MmthntvolbolNo
3 Iotoio would to he
mum“)! million
oothomoilumut.

. Yatoqh o haul no tho
by N3 to for this
you.

A tonic: bun“ omen
aid lost night Ibo dolydmod
own no of "ﬂntoclut‘
mm)! cod could hove boon

Hod in night by ro-coot-
io; and mum,
“saw-“war“

o n on a.
sold to «3%; who on
molly thou ct. tho oldct
mum-m. _

Tho opium saint: will hit
the opium who! vow had.
no. ‘ will toot from
ultra. omen and.

c said thot it In tuba
mum (or o syndicate m to
involved in both opium and
W °

Naomoonm nib
Wham-t

“W to tiny-db

C

uuhﬁurumr
m“ I!
load tb m
(«Jauuﬁutm

W TdShShokKipMd
mMMw
to more! nth tho dug

%

lath-onus. '
mm
taco-dogma“
a... all!!!
hound-duo
rowan!) .
W- L.‘-“,...~.....“ ......

§§

E
3??

3%?
:25

8 E;
2:
ii

i;
E?

i
E

§
3
i
9
‘3

3
E?

5%
3E

ii=“§£ g;
‘3 g!“ i‘.
Lsﬁ‘iﬁ
W 55%
SE 23 E
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020001-3

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

Heroin Refinery Pound

Hong Kong SOU’I'R CHINA mRNINC POST in English 28 Nov 81 p 1

Mm:

i‘l‘ext ]

mmmmmz

W

mm E

my?

W» PM“ «mm

:man

“mm”

mm
mm

wmm

5320/9106

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020001-3
BRIEVS

OPIUH TRAFFICKERS CHARGED--A nan and two women appeared before Hr D. C. Lee at
South Kowloon Court yesterday on charges of possessing about 7 1/2 kilos of
opium for unlawful trafficking. The court was told that the drugs were worth
about $330,000. No plea was taken from Kwan Leung (51), Au Siu-chun (b6) and
Au Lin (62) and they were remanded in jail custody until next Tuesday. They
are jointly charged with possessing 3.6 kilos of prepared opium and about

2.8 kilos of prepared opium, which had been dehydrated, in a sixth floor flat
at Al Ha Heung Road, Kowloon. on Saturday. Kwan and Au Siu-chun are additionally
charged with possessing about one kilo of prepared opium and about 250 grams of
prepared opium. which had been dehydrated. at the ground floor entrance of

Kwan Kan Building, 2-8 Telple Street. Yaumati on the same day. Au Sin-shun is
further charged with possessing about 35 grams of prepared opium in the same

building on the same day. [Text] [Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English
1 Dec 81 p 22]
BRIEFS

cum AW m-A aereilly resident hopeful of concluding e berm: exchenqe
of opium in return (or a hood of cettle found hiuel: minus both in police custody
when sultanpuri police erreeted hi- on Thursday etter recovering two kiloe of opi-
u from his possession. According to police the erreetod person an Galen had
procured the opium tron aereilly tor enother person in the Sultenwri to had of-
fercd hill cattle in exclunqe. [New Delhi Puma: in Dalian 21 Nov Bl p 10]

C80: 5300/7013
moisture): we wear DRUG mzc‘non m
Karachi mm in uglish 7 Dec Bl p lo

(Text! Islamabad, Dec 6-‘rhe President's Adviser on health, Dr. Basharat Jasbi.
yesterday said that a cosprehensiye legislation to nest the probl- of drug addic-
tion was on the anvil and will be enforced in the near future.

Addressing the opening session of the four-day sysposiun on drug demand reduction,
organised by the Pakistan Narcotics Control Board here yesterday, Dr. Jasbi asked
the participants to formulate a national plan of action and forward it to hie for
Govermaent action.

The symposium is being attended by Pakistani doctors, drug specialists and experts
and representatives of a nwer of united nations and international organisations.
including the UNPDAC, mo and mo.

Earlier, welooning the Advisor to the sywosiua, the Chaim, of the Pakistan
Narcotics Control Board. Hr. uairej Mesain, told the synposiun that M's efforts
have been successful in bringing down the production of opiu in Pakistan fron
8,000 netric tons in 1978-79 to 85 tons in 1980-81. But, he said. even this vastly
reduced production of epic: posed grave danger to the cmxntry and the Board was
ternined to continue its efforts to reduce production. '

The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Social welfare. In. A. Sani Qureshi, also ad-
dressed the symposium end said that even though precise statistics about the addic-
tion to drugs in Pakistan were not available the basic parqsters were there and
the problsn had been quite clearly identified. he said, if necessary drug oontrol
laws would be reviewed and reinforced by the (avert-ant.

The us Ambassador, Mr. Ronald I Spiera who attended the evening session said that

Nesrica also had a drug problen which was causing anxiety and as such there was a

deep understanding of Pakistan endeavours towards achievsnsnt are drug free soci-

ety. he said Pakistan and Ansrica was tackling essentially identical probl-a. We
were working hands in hand to deal with it.

‘rhe sywosiun concludes on Dec 8.

C80: 5300/4574
CAHPAIGN TO REDUCE POPPY CULTIVATION VIEWED

Drug Abuse Control, the money to be used in one of the country's najor poppy grow-
ing areas, Buner, in Swat, for crop substitution purposes. Because large nubers
of families are depmdant on poppy growing, and becauu the economies of entire
regions may sometimes be centred on opiu, it is inadvisable to begin with very
drastic action to curtail cultivation of poppy. In pakistan, another coeplioation
is that almost all the poppy is grown in areas which are considered sensitive by
the Govermeent, and where the courses of action available to it are restricted.
Crop substitution is, of course, the best possible way of ending poppy cultivation,
and it has been used with considerable success in parts of the notorious Golden

What we lust assess accurately--and soon--is whether crop substitution can be pro-
moted without resort to extreme coercion. And in making such an assessnemt it is
obvious that the financial resources which can be spared for this purpose, and the
realities of narcotics control. must be taken into account. Production of spin
and its derivatives has reached a stage which is terrifying. and along with it drug
addiction has gone up also: and opiun is very different from the such more benign
cannabis, for it is a cruel drug which rapidly reduces an to vegetable. It is es-
sential, therefore, that elloout war he declared on it and the efficacy of the in-
staments which are in use or are to be used be assessed accurately.

Sous idea of the success or failure of crop substitution efforts can be had from
the sunsr area. where such atteepts had been ends in the past and are probably
still on. Facts and figures illustrating the results of these attempts should be
collated and published. If it is found that even after several years there has not
been any significant decline in poppy cultivation and switch-over to other crops,
then eethods should be re-exanined: sufficient incentives nay not have been pro-
vided to the fareer to go over to other crops. or perhaps farmers are just not
willing to settle for less intone even though it nay be sufficient for their needs.
In this case different means should be uployed and attewte node to nest any
reasonable demand made by tuners. The point is that the Government should satisfy

itselt that stepo taken to encounge growing of 'norul' crops have a positive
chance of success, and that better irrigation facilities, for instance, are not
used merely to grow better poppy. There should also be a limit to the policy at
sppeasenent and to encourage drop subetitution, it say be necessary perhaps to in-
troduce some degree of coercion, along with the provision of incentives.

(:80: 5300/4574
HEROIN SEIZBD FROM EUROPE-BOUND SHIP

Karachi IDRNING NEWS in English 11 Dec 81 p 9

[Text] The Custom Drug Enforce-ant Cell Isde the biggest ever seizure of heroin,
worth about Rs. 8.5 crore in foreign currency, after a bid to snuggle it was foiled
at the East Wharf yesterday.

The Customs Drug mforcenent Cell, the reports said, had a hot lead minutes before
the contraband cargo being shipped nor a western Europe desintation. '

Mr Robin Aimed lumen, in coordination with the Deputy Collector of customs. Kr ijad
Raehid. laid a trap and conducted a successful raid resulting in the seizure of
half kilogram of heroin.

Pour crew members, tbhamd Ari: Khan. backer, Babib-ur Rehnan. Leskar, Ahmad Ali
and Sher Ali, firemen, alleged to be involved in the racket. were picked up for
interrogation.

The contraband cargo was recovered from the tunnel of the deep froezer cospartnent
of the ship.

ibwever, the Customs Drug atonement cell were managing through the other parts
of the ship, till last night, in a search for more of the contraband cargo. The
ship was detained at the wharf.
Custom Drug Enforcement Cell yesterday seized heroin worth Rs. 8.5 crora

from a cargo ship. Photo shows Mr Mohammad Akbar, Collector, Customs. Hr

Mind ﬂashid, Deputy Collector, Hr Mali): Rubin Ahmed, Superintendent, Drug
Cell and Mr sibtain, Inspector seen inspecting the heroin.

. 5300/4575
BRIEFS

OPIUH ERADICATION PROGRAM POSTPONm—Prine Minister Pren Tinsulanon has postponed
the prograa to wipe out opim cultivation by hilltribe faraers in 10 villages of
Chiang Mai Province. The prime ninister has cited the reason for the postponement
that he wishes to know more details about the progran. The poppy substitution
plan is under the Thai tin-sponsored crop substitution project. The poppy destroy-
ing team, comprised of provincial [word indistinct] and border patrol police, had
earlier planned to start their work in the 10 villages last week. The Office of
the Narcotics Control Board this year has planned for the first tine to take action
against hilltribe farners who grow opium in an accent to reduce opiun cultuvation
in the Thai side of the Golden Triangle. Officials say that cash crops intro-
duced to these farners during the past 10 years have yielded good results and en-
abled then to earn nore incoae than growing opiun. [Text] [3x140363 Bangkok Do-
nestic Service in English 0000 GMT 14'; Dec 81)

AUSTRALIAN ANTIDRUG AID—Australia on 12 Nova-her granted Thailand 350,000 baht

worth of equipment including a niniconputer to strengthen the Thai antinarcotics
forces. The equip-ent was delivered to Deputy Prise Minister Gen Prachuap Sunthsrang-
kun by the Australian snbassador to Thailand during their acting at Government

House. Deputy Prime Minister Gen Prachuap Suntharangkun said the Australian con-
tribution included 15 walkie-talkie sets, 7 sets of radio transmission equipment

and the niniconpnter. [30.703109 Bangkok Voice of Free Asia in uglish 1100 GHT

13 Nov 81]

HAT YAI DRUGS SEIwRES-Hatyai-Three persons. including a woman, were arrested by
narcotics police here yesterday in two separate incidents where police confiscated
710 kilograms of cooked opium, 1.3 kilograms of "No 999” heroin and 300 grams
of No 6 heroin, worth a total of 2.1 nillion baht, police said. In the first inci-
dent, two suspects each driving a car were arrested when cooked opiua worth 1.6 nil-
lion baht was found in one car. Mada-o Phinvsng, 43, iron Padang Besai, and Ian
Suphatthanachaiphichet. 42. were both stopped at 7.20 a.n. at a police road block.
Police, who had been tipped off that the suspects nay be carrying drugs, said they
found two large parcels which contained 76 kilogram-es of cooked opiun in Ian's car.
In the second incident, police at noon arrested Mrs Non Buttaphen, 38, fret Village
Group Five, Tanbon Kuan-Luang. here when she was allegedly found carrying heroin
concealed in a big laundry detergent box at Hat Yai airport, police said. Police
said they found 1.3 kilogram-es of No 999 heroin and 300 grams of No 6 heroin
worth about 500,000 baht inside the box. [Text] [Bangkok mm in English ’0 Dec

81 p 3 BK]

10
NARCOTICS BONPIRE—Nearly 600 kgs of seized narcotics were put to the torch in a
big bonfire at the head office of the disaster relief centre on Hiphawadi Eangsit
road yesterday. The event, which involved 10 nillion baht worth of narcotics, was
chaired by Deputy Premier Prachuap Suntharangkun and witnessed by senior government
officials, the press and the general public. About 270 kgs of the destroyed nar-
cotics was heroin and the rest were morphine. narihuana, kraton leaves and some
tablets. This was the fourth time in the past four consecutive years that huge
amounts of seized drugs were destroyed by fire. The first three events were in
August 1977 (1,291.66 kgs), January 1979 (8.162.552 kgs) and August 1980 (1.179.959
kgs). [BK180301 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 7 Dec 81 p l]

PORN-IR BPP CORPORAL HELD—Police arrested a forner border patrol police [BPP] corporal
as he was allegedly about to deliver 3.5 kilogram-es of heroin yesterday—the second
time he had been held on heroin charges. police said. Pol Cpl Sanguan Pancbakhan
was arrested when he arrived at Buai waang market at about 3 pm. yesterday. Police
said a waiting crine suppression team, tipped off there would be a heroin delivery,
found the double lions brand heroin when they searched Sanguan's pickup truck.

Police clained Sanguan adnitted smuggling the heroin from Hae Sai District of

Chiang Rai for clients in Bangkok. He was detained at the crime suppression di-
vision on an initial charge of possessing the drugs with intent to sell. Former
Corporal Sanguan, a native of Mae Sai District, was previously arrested on January 9,
1978 when he and two others were allegedly waiting to deliver about 3.5 kg of heroin
snuggled from Mae Sai. However, Pol Cpl Sanguan was acquitted by the three courts
for lack of evidence. while the other two were sentenced. [Text][Bangkok POST in
English 8 Dec 81 p 5 BR]

OPIUH IN UNREGISTBRED CAR—A joint custom and police teen early yesterday morning
arrested a man in the Thon Buri area carrying 16 kilograms of raw opiun hidden

in an unregistered car. The man's brand-new blue Toyota Corolla saloon was believed
to have been snuggled into Thailand across the southern border. It carried a fake
Samut Sakhon licence plate. The arrest cane after customs officials were tipped

off that an amount of contraband would be brough to Bangkok from the south. They
set up a checkpoint on Ekkachai road yesterday morning. At about 10 a.n. the
Toyota. driven by Nasan Sihaphon. approached the check point but turned and sped away
when the driver saw the uniformed officers. After a brief chase, Wasan was forced
to stop in front of Sci Charoenrat. Searching the car. the officials found 16 kilo-
grannes of raw opiun in the boot. Nasan declined to give a statenent to the police.
[Text] [Bangkok POST in English 5 Dec 81 p 3 BR]

MARIHUANA PLANTATION DESTROYBD—Sakon Nakhon—Police last Saturday [12 Dace-her]
raided two villages in Khok Sisuphan sub—district and destroyed a large plantation
of narihuana. Acting on a tip-off that the urihuana plants were ready for cutting,
about 100 policeuen led by Pol Lt-Col ILR. Prasansawat Suksawat. the deputy super-
intendent, went into Ban Klang and Ban Huang Khai of Tanbon Dan moans-Khan to
investigate. The police team found the 100-rai plantation on the edge of a forest
about 1 kilometre from the villages. Arned with sickles and knives, the policemen
chopped down the plants and then burned then. A police official said the police
action had infuriated villagers who put up no resistance, merely watching the bonfire
helplessly. The official said villagers there earned their living by planting sari-
huana and selling it to drug braffickers who also financed the cultivation. [Bangkok

Post in English 1!. Dec 81 p 2 at]

11
HERO!“ SHDGCLERS SBIZED-leo Thai men were arrested late Sunday night while alleg-
edly attempting to smuggle over four kilograms of No 3 "brown sugar" heroin to
West Germany. The two men, Pramot Kaeoprasoet. 32 and Thoedsak Tosaks, 25, refused
to make a statement to customs and-.police officials upon arrest. The officials
reported that they found the narcotic drug, neatly packed in 16 plastic bags, hid-
den in speciallydmade secret compartments of the suitcases. The drugs weighed . a
total of b.190 grammes. [Bangkok POST in English 26 Nov 81 p 5]

DRUG SMUCCLmS “ADDED-4 taxi driver and a beautician were arrested yesterday while
allegedly attempting to smuggle 3 kilograms of heroin base out of the country to
Tokyo. Aphichat Loet-Usaha. 24, and Miss Somphon Koro, 21, were shout to board

a Cathay Pacific flight to Tokyo when a Metropolitan Narcotics Unit new) police
team reportedly intercepted them and found the drugs neatly hidden in specially-
made compartments in the two suitcases which they allegedly were carrying. The

two suspects reportedly were with a tour group organised by Bungsap Tour. Aphichet
reportedly told police he was hired by a Japanese drugs dealer who paid for Miss
Somphon and his airfare plus 21,000 baht pocket money each. Hiss Somphon denied
any knowledge of the drugs, saying that she accompanied him only because she had
been contacted to work in a Tokyo bar. [Bangkok POST in English 13 Dec 81 p 2 BR]

CONVICTED mNK ARRESTED—A convicted drugs trafficker, who became a monk three years
ago in an attempt to avoid serving a life sentence, was arrested on Friday by a
Bangkok north police team at a temple in Si 8amrong District OESukhothai Province.
Deputy cos-lander of the Bangkok North Investigation Bureau. Pol Lt-Col Kittichok
Seangnil said that Ong-at Peng Sae Tae or Phikkhu Sompong, had gone to the temple

to perform a religious rite. He was disrobed from the monkhood after his arrest, he
added. In October 1978 Ong-at was sentenced to life imprisonment in abstentia after
escaping arrest in a police raid in Samut Prakan. During the raid 92.7 kilograms
of heroin, $8.6 kilograms of morphine and 81.2 kilograms of processed opium were
seized. [Bangkok POST in English 22 Nov 81 p 3]

THREE LAO ARRESTED--l.oei--Three Lao were arrested in Chiang Klan District Friday
night after they crossed the border into Thailand with a bag containing 12 kilo-
greases of opium and 650 grammes of no lo heroin, according to Mr Kasem Chaisith,
the district officer. The men were arrested by a police team which had been pet-
rolling the border road and Mekong River bank after being informed of the smuggling
attempt. At about 7.30 p.m., the three men, one of them pushing a bicycle, were
seen coming down the road. They were stopped by the police and a search of a should-
er bag carried by one of them turned out to contain the heroin and opitmz. The
three men said they were Leo and had come from Vientiane with the drugs which they
were to deliver to an unidentified Thai merchant in Chiang Khan District. Police
have charged the three Lao with possessing narcotic drugs with intent to sell and
illegally entering the country. [Bangkok POST in English 29 Nov 81 p 2 BR]

cso: 5300/4578

12
BRIEFS

ANTI-DRUG SQUAD--Barbados now has the machinery to combat large scale drug
trafficking. It is the Undercover Drug Squad [0081. Acting Commissioner of
Police, Orville Durant, yesterday announced the establishment of the U05 and
intimated that the squad was necessary because of the highly suspected "large
scale drug trafficking" in the island. The police deputy told TEE NAIION that
the undercover cops were all trained by renown American crimebusters, Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and since its inception at the beginning of
Rovember, had produced'Veryinteresting results." One such crackdown by the
undercover police led to the arrest of an American, on Saturday, who was charged
with the illegal possession of drugs. Now awaiting an analyst report, police
also suspect that the drug contents may consist of hashish. Durant also stated
that the special squad duties include the monitoring of schools. Drugs in Bar—
bados, more commonly marijuana. is now into a multi-million dollar business

and in recent times, more and more people have been brought before the courts
for use and trafficking offences. Increased scrutiny at both sea and airports
has resulted in the seizing of hundreds of pounds of marijuana and other drugs
worth millions of dollars. At the recently completed October Asaizes, a St James
man was sent to jail for five years after he was found guilty of importing some
$750,000 of marijuana. Several raids carried out by joint police/Defence Force
squads have uncovered hundreds of neatly cultivated plots of marijuana in the
remote parts of the country side. [Text] [Bridgetown THE NAIION in English

17 Nov 81 p l]

cso: 5300/7516

13
CﬂAPARB COCA CROP AFFECTED BY DISEASE
Cochambanba L05 TIEHPOS in Spanish 17 Nov 18 p 7

[Text] The peasants of Chapare have becoae concerned about the appearance of a
disease affecting coca plants called "estalla," which hinders their growth and
causes the leaves to crack.

According to reports fro. Ministry of Agriculture technicians, the disease has
appeared in a number of regions, where the crops have had to be abandoned and in
some cases destroyed to prevent the spread of the virus.

It was learned that the situation is forcing producers of coca to use chemical
fertilizers, weed killers and fungicides and other high agricultural technology
chemical products.

According to the peasants in the region, the name of the disease derives from the
verb "estallar” (to break out) because of the reaenblance to an explosion of some
kind leading to the destruction of an object.

Dozens of peasants in the Hejillones sons and the coastal and other regions have
abandoned the cultivation of coca because of the existence of the disease.

Moreover, technicians from the Ministry of Agriculture, the PBODBS and other

bodies working in the Chapare zone have reported that "estalla" may affect a large
percentage of the coca crop in Chapare and may force the peasants to turn to the
cultivation of other crops such as papaya, citrus fruits, bananas, yucca, rice, etc.

However they said that total replacement of the coca crop would be difficult for
the peasants, because "they have become accustomed to earning the money."

The technicians say that there is a possibility that the peasants could eliminate
the disease by their own efforts or by turning to private agronomical technicians.
because it is in their interest to improve and "purify" the growing of coca plants.

It was learned unofficially that at the market center in Zinahota last Sunday, coca
leaves were being sold at up to 10,000 Bolivian pesos per packet to private persons
or merchants engaged in drug traffic, while a very limited quantity of the leaf was
being sold at 4,000 Bolivian pesos at the Office for the Supervision and Control of
the Marketing of Coca.

5157
CSO: 5400/2oa9 1h
BRIEFS

ARREST 0F RASTAPARIANs--Roseau, Dominica. Friday (CANA)-—Dominica police yester-
day confirmed they were holding three mesbers of the local Rastafarian community
following a raid on their commune just outside the capital. Roseau, on charges
of having marijuana in their possession. They said that Desmond Trotter, proba-
bly the best known Rastafarisn here, and a woman were among the detainees.
Trotter became known internationally after he was sentenced to death for murder-
ing an American tourist here in the early 70's. He repeatedly said he was inno-
cent of the crime and following international protests and petitions on his behalf,
the death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment until 1979 when it was
squashed and he was released. The police said a number of marijuana plants were
found inside the hut occupied by the three persons and others were being culti-
vated nearby. They are due to appear in a Magistrate's Court today to answer the
charges. Meanwhile, a 25-year-old Rastafarian was found dead in the hills sur-
rounding the village of Delices earlier this week, after reports fromthevillsge
said that the man, Avondale Alexander. had gone on a hunger strike. The police
said the youth's body was found by a Forest Ranger. In other police news, a
28-year-old St Lucian held in custody by the police here and wanted in his home-
land on a number of charges including drug trafficking, escaped from prison last
night along with three other Dominicans. Police said that Jean-Marie Benjamin
who was fined BCSSOO by a City Magistrate yesterday for possession of a quantity
of marijuana, was to be deported for illegal entry into the island. They added
that Benjamin, whom they described as 5 feet 10 inches tall, with a scar on the
left side of his face and a member of the Rastafarian movement, had managed to
escape lawful custody during the early hours of this morning. The police said
that the description of the other escaped men would be announced later. [Text]
[Bridgetown ADVOCATE-NEWS in English 14 Nov 81 p 3]

C80: 5300/7516
CONFISCATED DRUGS BEING REMOVED PhD“ COURT PREMISES
Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDEAS NEGBAS in Spanish 3 Nov 81 Sec 3 p 1

[Text] Yesterday, Fernando Venture, first secretary of the Second District Federal
Court, reported on the removal that is continuing in that entity of all the drugs
which have been turned over in the various cases that are being heard in proceedings
both with and without arrests.

He noted that some of then were burned several days ago, and that this work is being
continued in order to put an end to the entire remains and supplies of drugs, begin-
ning with the cases which have already been tried and are settled.

Envelopes and packages containing msrihuana were evident in his office, because the
cases associated with cocaine. heroin and opium have been concluded, and the evidence
incinerated.

He said that only samples are being stored along with the records, remarking that
this is something which must be done so as to end the problem of keeping those
amounts of narihuana and other drugs too long in the custody of the court.

He claimed that it was impossible to keep those samples in the court any longer.
because problems might arise. which would occur because the proceedings wherein
these drugs are involved have been settled.

He said that. this year, action has been initiated in 85 different cases for crimes-
against health and contraband, and in 118 for the smuggling of laborers abroad;
noting that most of these crimes were against health, while those relating to the
illegal importing of weapons have declined by a large percentage.

He said that this phenomenon had been noticed the year before last, when there was
a large number of cases involving persons attempting to bring weapons and ammuni-
tion of various calibers into the interior of the country. Most of them were held
by the Customs Guard, because they were detected when the individuals arrived from
the United States at the checkpoint on the International Bridge.

.2909
680: 5330/58

16
SENTENCES IMPOSBD FOR HARIHUANA TRAFFICKING, PRISONER RELEASE
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 25 Nov 81 fee C p 6

[Text] Yesterday, the third district judge, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal, imposed
a prison sentence of 7 years and 6 months and a fine of 10,000 pesos upon an indi-
vidual who was arrested last year by Federal Judicial Police agents with a shipment
of narihuana in his possession.

In July of last year, Miguel Angel Rodriguez Torres was captured by Federal Judicial
Police forces at a checkpoint that had been set up on the National Highway.

At the beginning of the questioning, this subject told the federal agents that he

had purchased the drugs in the town of Hatehuala, San Luis Potosi, with the intention
of selling then in this town to other persons who were not arrested by the Federal
Police because they had managed to escape to the United States.

Miguel Angel Rodriguez Torres was convicted by the federal court for a crine against
health in the degrees of narihuana possession and trafficking. and yesterday the
pertinent sentence for the connission of the aforementioned crimes was handed down
against his.

Moreover, it was announced in the third district court that Manuel Hernandez Garza
had also been sentenced, for the connision of the crime of prisoner escape.

The sentence passed against this individual was 5 years and 5 months in prison,
which he will serve at the La Lona Prison, where he has been held since 1979, when
he allowed the escape of a federal convict from the Reynosa jail.

According to the statements made by Manuel Hernandez to the Federal Public Ministry
and the third district court, in August he received an.alleged telephone call from
the prison director, Jose Taile Laredo, notifying hin that he was to allow the
release of Juan Antonio Guerra fro- the jail.

This story was later proven to be false, and it was learned that Manuel Hernandez

had received a large one of soney for allowing the innate Juan Antonio Guerra to
escape iron the jail.

2909
C50: 5330/58

17
BRIEFS

COCAINE MICKER—Guatavo Adolfo Mesa, a 20-year-old Coloﬁian student. was ar-
rested with approximately 1.5 kilos of cocaine by agents of the Panmnian Finance
and Treasury Ministry Narcotics Division, at his arrival at General Onar Torrijoe
Berrern international airport, aboard flight 112 of SA)! airline, iron Medellin,
Colo-hie. [Panau City HAIUTINO in Spanish 28 Oct 81 p Z-A PA]

CSO: 5300/2102

18
811388

MAINE AT LIMA AIRPORT—Antidrug dogs at the Jorge Chavez international airport
in Line detected yesterday 60 kg of pepper-camouflaged cocaine base in two suit-
cases carried by Cololtiane Fernando Hicolte Salinas, 30, and Hillia- Alfredo
Gutierrez Gaitan, 28. [Lin EL COHEICIO in Spanish 15 Nov 81 p A-l PY]

ILLEGAL COCA PLANTATIONS—‘l'he Civil Quard's intelligence Service have traced nore
than 55.000 hectares of illegal coca plantations with a production surpassing
60,000 metric tons per year. Drug traffickers operating in the country pay nix tines
nore than the value fixed by the NCO-Peru [National Coca Enterprise]. Illegal
plantatione were found in the following deparnents: Ayscucho (8,669 hectares, with
a production of 6,976,000 kg): Buanuco (17,000 hectares, with a production of
16,985,000 kg); San Martin (12,153 hectaree, with a production of 10,535,000 ks).
[Lina BL OOMBCIO in Spanish 16 Nov 81 p A-16 FY]

MCI! DRUG “BROKER-dine, 21 Nov (IMF-Peruvian police have arreeted Dutch
citizen Ply Antonie Harinue for carrying 500 gran: of wrecocaine hydrochloride.
0n the local mrket this would be about 20 nilIion soles although abroad its value
can increaee about 10 tinesr [Buenos Airee TEAM in Spanieh 2137 an 21 Nov 81 P1]

08.00 821201138 ESTIMATES—Since 1 January 1981, Civil Guard Intelligence Service

(nmmcc) has seized drugs worth 71 billion solee. It has disrupted 50 drug traf-

fickers' organizations and captured 500 traffickers. [Lina Bl. comm in Spanish
14 Nov 81 p A44 PY]

080: 5300/ 2098

19
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA IN HAILBAGs-~Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, Friday (CANA)—Three mailbags
containing $750000 worth of narijuana were discovered at Piarco International
Airport this week by Customs Officers. a spokesman said today. The cured mari-
Juana was found in mailbags destined for Guyana. The bags arrived on a BWIA
flight from Kingston. Jamaica, around 11.30 p.m. (0300 hours an) on Wednesday.
Raving discovered a similar find a month go, the Customs officers called in post
office agents to check the bags. It was found that there was no local registra-
tion of the "mail" and as a result the bags were opened. according to the spokes-
men. Recent Customs Officers stepped up surveillance at all ports of entry in a
bid to curb smuggling, especially of narcotics and arms and anunition. into the
country. Also on Rednesday night, ina joint exercise with the Coast Guard,
Customs Officers intercepted an inter-island schooner. the "Cathy-Ann," and
seized a firearm and 100 rounds of anunition. The captain of the vessel has
been charged with failing to declare the firearm and ammunition. [Text]
[Bridgetown ADVOCATE-ms in English 14 Nov 81 p 3]

C80: 5300/ 7516

20
OP'UH DRUG BUST ENDS IN ARREST 0P ITALIAN SMUGGLBR, DIPLG‘IAT
Cairo AL—AHRAH in Arabic 8 Sep 81 p 10

[Article by ﬂusayn Ghanim: "A Foreign Diplomat and an Italian Run a Narcotics-
Smuggling Ring: A Large Shipment of Opium, Worth 1.5 Million Egyptian Pounds.
Seized in Cairo Airport"i

[Text] The Public Narcotics [Control] Bureau arrested a foreign diplomat and the
owner of a boutique in al-Zamalik, of Italian nationality, who were running a
large network which smuggled narcotics into Egypt from abroad. The arrest was
made after the two men had taken out of the Cairo Airport customs area-four Sam-
sonite suitcases which were filled with approximately 1.5 million Egyptian
pounds worth of unprocessed opium meant for delivery to narcotics dealers in
al-Batiniyah. The Public Prosecutor'n Office ordered that the Italian be jailed
and that his vehicle be confiscated. Initial infatuation had indicated the
activity of some narcotics mgglers and dealers and the fact that they had made
contacts with some of their assistants for the purpose of reaching an agreement
concerning the bringing in of large shipments from abroad. Furthermore, the
Department of Investigations noted the fact that the owner of a boutique in al-
Zamalik, which dealt in imported clothes, had been making frequent trips to
al-Batiniyah. Careful surveillance revealed that the man was Antonio (Rishli),
1.2 years of age, of Italian nationality, and the owner of the Honda boutique on
al-Barazil St. It turned out that he spent his money lavishly during his even-
ing parties with some local narcotics smugglers and dealers in various cabarets
and that he owned three cars.

An investigation showed that his lifestyle did not correspond to the income which
he earned from the boutique. It was also noted that he traveled abroad once every
week and that he made trips to some of the countries which produce narcotics.
when he returned he did not carry with him any suitcases, and this aroused sus-
picion and served to confirm the evidence concerning him. It was also noted
that he went back to the Cairo Airport, got in touch with a number of foreign
diplomats, and accompanied them while they cleared sane of their suitcases
through customs. After Haj Gen Sami As'ad, head of the Public Narcotics Control
Bureau, had received ample information concerning this matter, he presented it to
Muhammad Nsb'awi Isma'il, the deputy prime minister and minister of the interior.
Hr Isma'il then ordered that all of the diplomats seen in the company of this
Italian be put under careful surveillance and that the real role which the
Italian was undertaking be discovered.

21
Maj Gen Hamduh Salim Zaki, the bureau's deputy director, Col Muhamad 'Abbas,
director of operations, and Col Sayyid Ghayth, chief of the Foreign [Narco-
tics] Operations Department, made a study of all of the possibilities and re-
corded all of these meetings which took place. It was confirmed that the
Italian was very active. together with some foreign diplomats who provided a
cover for his activities, in bringing in narcotics from abroad via Greece.

Surveillance of the Italian's activities recorded the fact that he left the
country on the third of this month, and by means of contacts with some secret
sources it was possible to learn that he was returning to Egypt yesterday after
learning the description of the four suitcases filled with opium.

The stake—out and arrest plan was set up in cooperation with the General Bureau
of the Cairo Airport Police after it was provided with radio connunications
equipment. [The operation was under] the command of Col Ahmad Nida, head of

the Airport Narcotics Division, and [others participating in the operation were]
Lt Cols Hagdi Husayn, 'Imad Rashid, Shafiq al-‘Ashari, Muhammad al-Imam, Mahmud
'Abd al-Rashid, Ahmad Samak, Huhamad 'Abd al-Wahhah, and 'Atif Bakr. The
Italian was seen leaving the plane and carrying a small suitcase, and he had

left the four Samsonite suitcases containing the opium among the various suit-
cases of the passengers. The suitcases were then put in the baggage storage
room belonging to the airline. After that the Italian met one of the foreign
diplomats who was waiting for him outside of the airport. They went together to
the airline office where the diplomat asked for the four suitcases, saying that
they were his suitcases and that they had arrived late. After the diplomat
received the suitcases and left the customs area, where he made use of his status
of diplomatic immunity, he and the Italian then got in a car outside the airport,
the license plate of which indicated that it belonged to a private car owner from
Gizah and the number of which was 48465. There the two of them were arrested,
the four suitcases were seized, and when the car was searched the police dis-
covered papers relating to the shipment from Greece of the suitcases which had
been seized and they also found other papers concerning the foreign diplomat.

It turned out that the suitcases contained 150 packages of unprocessed opium
worth 1.5 million Egyptian pounds.

The investigation of the case was taken over by Salah Hilal, counselor in the
Narcotics Division, under the supervision of Public Justice and Attorney Huhamad
Mohamed Yahya, chief of the Narcotics Division. It was decided to jail the
Italian and confiscate the vehicle.
HASHISH OPERATION LEADS TO ARREST 0P NARCOTICS KING
Cairo AlGiIR SA'AH in Arabic 23 Sep 81 pp 52-53

[Article by Hunir al-Masiri: "Finally the Downfall of the Narcotics Kings!:
The Secret of the 'sl-Ha'diyah' and 'al-llamwn‘ Operation, and the Snuggle:
Called the 'hairdresser'"]

[Text] The narcotics kings of Alexandria have met their downfall. The Narco-
tics Control Police have managed to discover the most modern methods of narcotics
smuggling which the smugglers have been utilizing.

It was not an easy operation tobring about the downfall of these narcotics kings.
In fact it was like the adventure stories you see in the movies. The world of
narcotics is a world which is surrounded by obscurity and enveloped in secrecy.
The great narcotics kings administer their "operation" from afar so that they do
not fall under suspicion. But how did these narcotics kings get caught?

mun SA'AH is bringng you this exclusive story concerning the downfall of the
biggest dealers in poison in Alexandria, and the story is being presented to you
both in words and in pictures. Suddenly--that is, since the beginning of the
sunset and up till last week-v-the northern coastline from Rashid all the way to
al-Sslum had been witnessing large-scale activity on the part of big-time narco-
tics snugglers to swamp the market with narcotics in various locations along the
coast. From these locations they made several attempts to bring narcotics into
some of the summer resort beaches in al-‘Ajami in order to avoid the surveillance
of the Frontier Corps forces. During these attempts some of the alleged smug-
glers were captured and 20 tons of narcotics, worth 30 million Egyptian pounds,
were seized. Last week the smugglers resorted to a new method of smuggling.
They undertook to bring in 50 tons of hashish in four different locations at the
same time in order to keep the forces of the Frontier Corps busy in some places.
These places were the coastline at Abu Qir and al-Salum, where they attempted to
bring in 1 ton of narcotics. They attelpted to do this in order to bring in 25
tons of narcotics, all at once, both at al-Hammam, near the province of Hatruh,
and in the al-Ha'diyah area. near Raehid, while the police were busy seizing nar-
cotics in the other areas. This was the new method resorted to by the smugglers
in order to avoid being surprised by the naval forces since it is difficult to
smuggle narcotics into the country via the sea and right before the Greater
Bairam Feast. Information was collected by Brig Gen Wshbi Babib, chief of the
Frontier Corps Intelligence Division, and he passed it on to Maj Gen 'Ali Paruq
[illegible], nether of the General Staff and cot-sander of the [Frontier Corps]

23
forces. A careful plan was then begun to shut the doors of Egypt's coastline
to these smugglers. Maj Gen Samih al-Tihami undertook the preparation of the
plan in cooperation with the Headquarters Command of the [Frontier Corps]
forces. The objective of the plan was to close off the desert roads and pre-
pare ambushes along them in order to make it possible to capture the smugglers
if they turned out to be successful in any of their attempts and managed to
penetrate, with their narcotics, from the coastline to the desert roads. Then
large reserve forces were sent out to keep a watch on all the desert roads.

At the same time Brig Ben Taha Muhammad 'Awad and Col 'Abd al-Hamid Sanjar, the
chief of the Frontier Corps Intelligencc Division in Alexandria, began to inten-
sify surveillance along the coastline and to utilize a large number of sea
launches for 26-hour patrols in order to keep track of any activities engaged in
by the smugglers along the coastline.

A Huge Quantity of Narcotics

When the smugglers, in their small motorboats from Turkey, began to arrive in

the Abu Qir coastal area, the Frontier Corps was not fooled and the other Fron—
tier Corps forces and ambushes remained in their locations all along the coast-
line. The second attempt was made a few hours later on the coastline at al-Salum,
near the Egyptian-Libyan border. The [Frontier Corps] forces hastened to thwart
these attempts and capture the narcotics which the smugglers had dumped overboard
before fleeing.

The surveillance continued, and the plan which had been set up was successful.

A few hours later the smugglers began to bring in a very large quantity of nar-
cotics--amounting to 25 tons-on [each of] two smuggling boats in the al-Ha'diyah
area, near Rashid, and in the al-Hamnam area, near Hatruh. Then there occurred
a battle in both of these areas between the coastal [patrol] launches and the
turkish smugglers which lasted 4 hours and in which machineguns were used.

After the battle the smugglers were forced to dump their load of narcotics over-
board and flee.

Inside the Smugglers' World
The world of the narcotics trade is an empire which exists in its own right!

The job of the smuggler kings is to bring narcotics in from abroad, to keep it
concealed--that is, in secret hideouts and storage places near desert roads--
and to control this illicit trade throughout all of the country's provinces.

The strange thing is that in the course of all of this they are quite far removed
from all of these operations. They engage in the operatioas only through their
men and their agents. They are careful never to be where the narcotics is be-
cause they know very well that this is the only thing which would prove their
guilt in a court of law! Also, the Narcotics Control Police are not in a posi-
tion to reach them. The efforts of the police have always been concentrated on
seizing the narcotics during attempts to smuggle it into the country or to
arrest the middlemen who are subordinate to the great narcotics kings in this
world of evil. The big-time smugglers are always linked to the coastline! A
smuggler has to own some land along the coastline in order to be able to receive
the narcotics when it is being brought in to shore! Furthermore, they have
unlimited amounts of money. In fact they have millions [of Egyptian pounds]!
A single narcotics deal, of the type which usually takes place more than once
each month, enables them to earn more than 1.5 million Egyptian pounds!!

An Agent Sent to the Hashish Producers

The smuggling operations always begin with the agent whom the big man or smug-
gler sends to the areas where the narcotics is grown, especially Lebanon. The
agent is the one who negotiates with the hashish growers and producers! As for
the smuggler, he never shows his face during all of these operations. Then the
deal, which they call the ”affair" [sl-maslahah], is concluded and agreement is
reached concerning all of the details of the operation and the places where the
narcotics will be smuggled in along the coastline. The agent then pays a large
part of the price of the deal. If the smuggling operation is successful he will
pay the remainder of the price. But if the operation fails then each party con-
tents itself with the loss which it has suffered. This is the custom in this
illicit trade.

The first preparation concerning the narcotics which will be smuggled is the pro-
curement of sets of rubber automobile innertubes. The bags of hashish are put
inside the rubber tubes in accordance with their weight. Either each bag weighs
1 kilogram or each pair of bags together weighs this same amount. This happens
after each bag is wrapped up in cloth and nylon bags in order to make them water-
proof. After "stuffing" the inside of the tire, they firﬂly fasten the tire
around the hashish packages. Then they get a very long rope. They make "knots"
in this rope at particular intervals which include more than one tire. Then
they rent a small motorboat or launch or other types of small boats from Turkey
where the Turkish crews of these motorboats are specialists in smuggling opera-
tions. These crews do not receive their wages unless the operation succeeds.

The journey with the shipment of narcotics starts out franLebanon and the motor-
boat crew usually is accompanied by the Egyptian smuggler's agent so that he can
guide them to the particular place along the northern coastline of Egypt where
the smuggler's men are waiting for them in order to receive the shipment.

The smuggling boat quietly penetrates Egypt's territorial waters and continues
until it reaches a place opposite the shoreline. At a given location, and dur-
ing the quiet of the night, light signals are sent out from the boat and these
signals are answered by the same light signals from shore. Then there is rapid
communication by radio between the men on shore and those in the boat. This
means that the way is clear. Then the members of the boat crew throw overboard
the rope with its tires, which they call "parcels" [turud], in clockwise fashion.
One of the crew members then takes hold of one of the ends of the rope, jumps in
the water, and swine to shore in order to give the end of the rope to the smug-
glers who are on shore. This is the end of the job of the boat crew. The
smuggler's agent then goes on shore while the boat withdraws and goes back where
it came from.

Storage Places in the Desert!

Usually the big-time smuggler follows these operations from afar, and does not
come close at all! his men bring the narcotics out of the sea for him while he

25
sits in another place which is safe. "Pulling the rope" in order to bring in

the narcotics parcels from the sea requires the efforts of between 20 and 35

men! Then the narcotics parcels are loaded on trucks which go to a particular
point where they stop. Usually this point is near sl-‘Adami or not very far
from it. A privately-Owned car which carries several people waits for the
shipment. These people then take over the driving of the truck along with its
shipment after the truck's driver gets out and is sent back. Or else the truck
goes directly to the desert roads if the narcotics was smuggled into the northern
coastline between Alexandria and Natruh or al-Salum. In both cases the truck
goes to the desert roads where the narcotics is put in storage and hiding places.
The desert storage places usually are not specially-constructed hiding places.
Usually they amount to a large hole in the sand in which the narcotics is buried,
and their location isindicated by natural markings such as a stone or a few
bushes growing in the desert. This makes it impossible for anyone but the per-
son who knows about them to find them!

At this time the agent sent by the smuggler is on his way back to see him in
order to inform him of the success of the operation and the safe arrival of the
"affair!"

Then the smugglers, through their men, begin to conclude deals with the large-
scale wholesale dealers throughout Egypt. "hat they then do is to put small
quantities of narcotics in the marketplace, rather than glutting the market all
at once, in order to keep the price high!

During the last 3 months. and for the first time, six of the largest narcotics
smugglers have met their downfall! One of these smuggler kings was Sa'd Ahmad
Muhammad, 45 years of age. But his name as such did not mean anything in this
strange world of narcotics smuggling. He is known to all of the narcotics pro-
ducers and growers in Lebanon and in other countries from which narcotics is
smuggled. He began life as a carpenter. and then he opened up a women's beauty
shop in the al-Nuntazah area. It was at this time that he began to deal in the
narcotics trade, and with time his activities expanded. Within 15 years he be-
came one of the largest narcotics smugglers in Egypt. In other words he became
one of the narcotics kings!

The smuggler who was formerly a hairdresser was careful to avoid being detected
by the Narcotics Control Police from either the Public Bureau or the Narcotics
Bureau in Alexandria. He always switched his privately-owned cars so that no-
body would be able to track him down. When he came to the summer resort, he
had already sold his own car and bought a Mercedes in its place. He then out—
fitted it with the most modern of radio communications equipment which operated
at a distance of 70 miles!! Then he settled into a villa which he owned at Ard
Blis in al-'Ajami.

However. the eyes of the men from the Narcotics Control Bureau in Alexandria

had been following him without his knowing it! The police officers and author-
ities had already had information to the effect that a large shipment of narcotics
was about to be smuggled in at al-‘Ajamil [They also knew] that he used a modern
piece of radio equipment to guide the smuggling boats, operating for his benefit,

26
before they entered Egypt's territorial waters! He was on the point of conclud—
ing a large deal. he especially felt this way because the agent whom he had

sent tothe narcotics growers and producers in Lebanon had returned and shown him
samples of the highest grades of narcotics there in order to obtain his agreement
to buy the sorts of narcotics which he was choosing. This was one of the few
times when it was possible for narcotics to be in the presence of one of these
narcotics kings. The quantity of narcotics, as such, is very small and amounts
to no more than one bag! however, this quantity constitutes samples of the types
of narcotics which he contracts to buy. Then there took place the ambush operation
in which the Public Narcotics Bureau branch participated along with the Narcotics
Bureau of the police of the province of Alexandria, and the time was set to make
a raid on the hairdresser. This was when the narcotics king met his downfall.

he had no choice but simply to confess. Bis radio car was discovered in front

of his villa, and they also found some strips of (HatoreX) narcotic tablets which
he was also in the process of contracting to buy.

The downfall of narcotics kings does not mean that their empire is destroyed.
When one of then falls, their place is taken by another person who becomes a
narcotics king or emperor as long as there are always people who are drug addicts
and are always begging and searching for narcotics!

 

[Photo caption] Ahmad Muhammad the Hairdresser. a narcotics king

9468
C50: 5300/5000

27
BRIEFS

OPIUM SEIZURE IN MASHRAD-During the past 26 hours Mashhad police have seized

36 grams of heroin and 68 grams of opium froa a number of people. Similarly, the
Mashhad Islamic Revolution Guards Corps have seized 1.200 kg of opium from two
persons. [GP061905 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 6 Dec 81]

OPIUM SEIZURE IN SHIRAZ--The Shiraz antidrug squad has seized 2.150 kg of opium
from two persons. [GP061905 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 6 Dec 81]

MASHMAD MEROIN SEIZURE--The Mashhad Islamic Revolution Guard Corps has seized
3.4 kg of heroin and 7 kg of opium from a number of persons. [GF08l752 Mashhad
Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 8 Dec 81]

MASHMAD OPIUM SEIZURB--The Mashhad antidrug squad has seized 100 grams of heroin
and 21.5 kg of opium from a number of persons. [GF100652 Mashhad Domestic Service
in Persian 1430 GMT 9 Dec 81]

POPPY CULTIVATION DAMNED—-The Firuzebed Islamic Revolution Court has banned the
cultivation of poppies and has announced that those attempting to cultivate poppy
will face trial and their land will be confiscated. [GPlSl710 Shiraz Domestic
Service in Persian 1500 GMT 15 Dec 81]

KHORASAN DRUG DISCOVBRIES--The Abkuh Revolution Guards have seized 7 kg of opium
from three residents of Torbat Heydariyeh. They have also confiscated 300 grams
of opium and 557,000 rials from a woman. The same guards have also discovered a
total of 200 grams of heroin in the possession of two individuals. A group of
Torbat Pam Revolution Guards have discovered 310 grams of heroin and 75 grams of
opium in the possession of a number of individuals. [GP210719 Mashhad Domestic
Service in Persian 1630 GMT 20 Dec 81]

DRUGS CONPISCATED IN SHIRAZ--Shiraz police personnel in the past week have arrested
a number of thieves. discovered stolen goods and destroyed six narcotics hands
distributing drugs in Pars Province. One of the gangs has repeatedly imported
large quantities of heroin from Baluchestan to Shiraz. One and 1/2 kg of heroin
powder have been confiscated. [GP210719 Shiraz Domestic Service in Persian

1500 GMT 20 Dec 81]

28
INTERNATIONAL DRUG TRAPPICKERS ARRESTED-~Tehran, 20 Dec (PARS News Agency)-Hembera
of an international drug trafficking gang have been arrested by the anti-narcotics
squad of Shiraz, Pars Province, it was reported on Saturday. One and a half kilo

of heroin, some opium and other types of narcotics, and about 10,000 ".8. dollars
each which had been cleverly false bottomed in their Paykan car have been discovered
with them. The same report indicated that the gang was led by a person named

Rahmatollah (Naruie), fluent in five languages. [Text] [GF210719 Tehran PARS
in English 1450 GMT 20 Dec 81]

DRUGS SEIZED IN SHIRAZ--The Shiraz Isle-1c Revolution Guards have seized 2 kg of opiuln
hashish and heroin and have arrested 16 persons in this connection. [03161627 Shiraz
Domestic Service in Persian 1500 GMT 16 Dec 81]

OPIUH SEIZED IN HASHMAD--The Mashhad sntidrug squad has seized 700 grams of opium
and 295 grams of heroin from two persons. [Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian
1430 GMT 16 Dec 81 GP]

SHIRAZ DRUG SEIZURB--A drug distributor has been recognized and arrested. Some

2.015 kg of rolled opiun was seized tron his house. [Text] [GP211926 Shiraz Domestic
Service in Persian 1500 GMT 21 Dec 81]

C50: 5300/5336

29
COUNCIL OF EUROPE mom's moms AGAIIIST HAROOTICS
Luxeaburg LUXDIBURGE HURT in French 23 ltov 81 p 3
[Article: ”The Council of Europe Strengthens Fights Against mugs’ﬂ

[Text] At the end of a. ninisterial conference on the problems of drugs. the sinis-
ters of the 12 nenber states of the Council of amps connitted tmselves. as we
have already announced. to support increased cooperation in the fight against the
abuse of and illegal traffic in narcotics and to pronote the treatnent and social
reintegration of drug addicts.

The conference. which was held in Strasburg on 12 and 13 loveaber 1981. was chaired
by Mrs Nicole Questiaux. Punch sinister of national solidarity. and by It: Joseph
Franceschi. secretary of state to the minister of national solidarity.

Four issues were mm at the nesting. specifically: the evolution of drug
abuse in hmpe, international cooperation in the repression of illegal trafficking.

the taking charge of serious drug addicts. and the abuse of aind altering nedioa-
tions.

The ninisters expressed their anxiety in the face of growing drug sums. specifi-
cally of heroin and cocaine. They noted that anphetaaines and solvents represent
a growing problea in certain countries. the solvents presenting a real danger for
thousands of increasingly younger high school students. 'Ihe conference also stree-
sed its concern in the face of a broadening of the use of narcotics to new layers
of the population. as the proportion of ferale drug addicts. for example, has sub-
stantially increased. In this context. the sinisters stressed the very inportant
role of prevention.

As far as marijuana is concerned. following a tread discussion the ninisters reaf-
firmed their opposition to all atenpts to legalise marijuana other than for thera-
peutic or research purposes. However. the ministers decided to establish an ex-

change of infomtion on their practice with regard to the repression of the use of
marijuana. When all is said and done. this attitude indicates a new and sore subtle

approach to a question which remains at the center of the concerns of the various
states.

In order to fight the illegal traffic in narcotics. the ministers want to streng-
then international cooperation through existing agreeaents.

30
As to the taking charge of the heavy drug addicts. the ministers stressed the need
for a particularly motivated personnel. with appropriate training and able to re-
ceive assistance tron professionals in the various services having experience in
this field.

According to the ninisters. particular attention should be given to specific cos-
psrison and evaluation of existing treatnent programs.

As far as the mind altering medications are concerned. the ministers have noted
the increasing concern of certain somber states with regard to the abuse and the
unappropriate use of these nedications. Action to control the supply and desand

should involve close cooperation between the public authorities and doctors. phar-
nacists and the plurnaceutical industries.

Finally. the ministers adopted an action progran for i982 and 1983 directed toward
the following points:

- intensified European cooperation with regard to the fight against illegal traf-
ticking:

- probless related to the suppression of drug use;

- problem related to the detention of drug addicts;

- taking charge of serious drug addicts and problens related to those involved in
treatment as well as to the social rehabilitation services;

- balance between supply and denand of legal opiatesn

- exchange of information on research in Mops!

- control of substances leading to the use of drugs;

- developnent of national administrative control systens to evaluate the social
and public health problems in the area of drug abuse.

The text of the final declaration (Reference PPCH(81)22) is available in beach and

in Blglish upon request from the press services of the Council of wraps. Post Of-
fice Box l5-31 R6. 67006 Stras'wrg-Cedex. ﬁance.

8463
cso: 5300/2085

31
BRIEFS

CYPIUS BATTLES humus-4m. use of cyprua aa a centre or international snuggling
gangs for narcotics and other illegal trafficking in causing concern to the Qprue
police. This is stated in the annual Police Report by Police one! Mr Same An-
toniou who eaye: "The data and information available to the police do not justify
concern about widespread uee of narcotics in mm. Ceaee involving mainly young
people and aliene cone to light from tine to tine but the neaenree being taken by
the police are a strong mtrictin factor. “Concern, however, in canned by the
chanelling of narcotice to European countriee fro- the Middle Beat and Turkey,
through 01pm. and the uee o! the inland an a centre of international wiggling
gangs (narcotics and other illegal trafficking) . In cooperation with 1mm and
other national police forces, the Cyprus police are etriving to locate and neutra-
liee such genge, eaye the report which adds that police eucceee in thie field ie
eignificant and is internationally acknowledged. [Nicosia CYPRUS mm. in mglieh
2 Dec Bl p 1]

C80: 5300/5330

32
BRIEFS

DOGS' ENFORCEMENT CONTRIBUTION EWIWCustOI-s' narcotics dogs sniff narcotics
that are worth much nors than the price of the dogs. During only one week in
August this result was obtained. states an article in the ALKOHOL OCR NAROOTIKA
nagazine that is published by the Central Federation for Alcohol and Narcotics
Information. This is the week of 24 to 30 August. The largest confiscation was
made that week in a boat in the Norrkoping harbor where Oustons officers found
narcotics worth 5 sillion kroner. Each dog costs the Custoas Office 55,000
kroner. The dogs can be used effectively for about 7 years. The author of the
article. Nils Gardegard, who recorded the activities of the 22 dogs during this
week in August, thinks that his compilation denonstrates that increased coverage
at the borders would make drug trafficking sore difficult. he further points out
that despite the dogs' proven effectiveness, the Gustons Office gets one new dog
a year at the most. The police are deliberating whether the nunber of dogs can
be reduced. [Text] [Stockholm DAGBNS mm in Swedish 5 Nov 81 p 16] 9583

INDIAN GANG SMIGGLED CANNABIS-~The leader of the Indian dope ring that was caught
in groups at Arlanda in September, whereby the so-called smuggling of people via
Sweden to west Europe also was disclosed, was captured on a street in Dppsala on
Wednesday. The nan who had been sought during his absence and is considered the

organizer of the snuggling-~25 kilos of cannabis were confiscated-wis now being
interrogated by personnel from the National Criminal Police. The snuggling of
people and narcotics from India aroused great attention after it was disclosed
that a systematic snuggling of Indians was taking place via Polish flights to
Arlanda. Many of those arrested said that they had paid large sum of sunny to
agents who were collaborating with the tour guides of the flights. One of those
guides has been sentenced to one south in jail while the others have been sent
back home. During the tightened control at Arlanda, a nusber of Indian couriers
with prepared suitcases were discovered. Nearly 25 kilos of cannabis were found
in the suitcases. During the interrogations it was disclosed that an Indian
living in Uppsala was to be the organizer and receiver of the ship-ents. The
nan, who has lived in Sweden for a long time, married a Swedish wonan in June.
Three days after the wedding he returned to his homeland. The National Crininal
Police inquired about the nan via Interpol, and one week ago it was known that

he was on his way to Sweden. He was arrested while on his way to see his wife.

He claimed surprise at the arrest. Eleven sewers of the dope ring are under
arrest on suspicion of having col-titted a serious narcotics offense and an attempt
of serious smuggling of merchandise. [Text]. [Stockholm DAGENS mm in Swedish
5 Nov 81 p 16] 9583

080: 5300/2076 DID

33