FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10202
22 December 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 754

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those 3'". English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the -riginal phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIﬁATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARM AFRICA REPORT
rouo No. 754

Count: rs

CAMEROON

Budget Outlined for 1981-1982
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS, 23 Oct 51) . . . . . . . . . . 0

Agreement With GD‘R on Bilateral Trade, Projects
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITEZRANEENS, 30 Oct 61) ...........

Briefs
Fifth Plan
Kribi Iron Deposit DevelopVent
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Opposition Leader Discusses Attitude Toward New Regime
(Ginettc Cot; AFRIQUE-Asn, 9-22 Nov 81) 000000.. on - .0 o o 0-0.

CHAD

Inter-African Force Not a 'Miracle Solution'
(Antonia 8118; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 9‘22 NOV 81) o o o o o o o on o o o a o o o -

COMORO [SLAMS

JI‘I‘icial Report on 1980 Economy szlished
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITWBENS, 13 NOV 81) ...........

HADAC-AS- 2AR

Lational Bank of Commerce Reports on 1980 Budget
(HARCHES 'I‘ROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS, 6 NW 31) ...........

NIGERIA

{Cain Trading Partners for 1980 Ranked
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBMTRRANEENS, 30 OCT. 8".) ...........

-a- [III-NEEA-IZOI

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIH(JAL USIICMVLY

Development of Economic, Industrial Relations Hith France Expected
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 30 Oct 81) ............

New Temporary Drop in Oil Prices Noted
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 30 Oct 81) ............

Briefs
Austerity Budget
Oil Production
Insecurity in Lagos
Relations Hﬁth South Africa
Agreement on Tin
Hotel Construction in Abuja
Cholera Victims in Ibadan
Roll On-Roll Off Ship
AGIP Investment Program
New Companies in 1980

ZAIHE

Regulations Issued for Use of Import Allocations
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANKENS, 30 Oct 81) ...........

Report on GBCAMINBS Copper Production for Fiscal Year 1980
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET “BMW-IS, 6 NOV 81) ............

Briefs
Niobium Ore
Aid to Ugandan Refugees
Cobalt Production
Fuel Prices
Tin Mining
Trade Hith Belgium
Billion-Franc Telephone Bill
Diamond Monopoly
Trade Hith Ivory Coast
Cooperation With GER

ZAMBIA

Need for Solution of Zairian, Malawian Border Disputes Noted
(Hasautso Hasautso; AFRIQUB-ASIB, 9-22 NOV 81) I o a o a o o o o o C v o

- b -

FOR‘OF11CLALVUSEGDNLY
FINICMﬂﬂCJA1.lﬂﬂE(MNLY

CAMEROON

BUDGET OUTLINED FOR 1981-1982
Paris MARCHES TRO“ICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 pp 2699-2670

[Text] In our 24 Julv issue (page 1945), we presented the main lines of the United
Republic of Cameroon's budget for the 1981-1982 fiscal year (1 July-30 June). This
budget was the subject of the 81/01 finance law 01 29 June 1981. The following
article gives a detailed analysis of it.

1 -- 1980-1981 Fiscal Year

Receipts for the past fiscal year amounted to 249 billion CPA francs and expendi-

tures to 246 billion, compared with the planned 186 billion, an overrun of 60 bil-
lion for expenditures (up 32.2 percent).

The increase in receipts stems, first of all, from the fact that certain headings
had a better yield. For example, taxes and related duties yielded an additional

23 billion (67.7 billion compared with the anticipated 44.7 billion). Likewise,
indirect duties and receipts from services produced more, with a total of nearly

10 billion. 0n the other hand, customs dutie~ yielded slightly less: 91.9 billion
compared with the estimated 95.4 billion.

The other source of the increase in receipts is the carryover of commitments:
34.9 billion, including 14 billion in credits carried over for equipment. In other
words, the authorities did not manage to follow the ambitious programs they drew

up for the equipment budgets. In fact, various important projects are delayed or
halted. which worsens bottlenecks.

For spending in 1980-1981, some expenditures are lower than expected, for example,
for the office of President, the departments of the prime minister, but social
affairs as well. Others are higher, particularly the increase of 3 billion for
national education, 434 million for the armed forces, 700 million for health, and
especially, 18.5 billion in regular expenditures for government agencies instead
of the planned 15.4 billion. It should be noted that less than expected was spent
for equipment: 42 billion instead of the announced $7.2 billion.

2 -- Provisions Relating to Resources for the 1981-1982 Budget
In these provisions, one notes the following main aspects:

a) a strengthening of the powers of the president of the republic. He may inter-
vene by order in order to modify and adapt the domestic tax system so as to meet

ma omcin. use own
FfllilFFICJAI.IISEZ(ﬂ¥LY

exceptional circumstances. Furthermore, he is authorised by deduct by decree all
or part of the credit results of state enterprise so as to allocate them for the
completion of priority development operations. Actually, it would not appear that
many of them have credit results, given the present state of affairs.

b) an increase in taxes, penalties and nontaxable minimums. First of all, the

minimum due is payable by companies on 31 July instead of 15 September. Second,
the minimum, nontaxable income goes from 5,000 to 15,000 CPA francs per month for
domestics.

Likewise. the levels of the brackets for the progressive surtax are inc-eased.

For example, the nontaxable bracket goes from 0 to 300,000 CPA francs instead of
from 0 tn 200,000. The rate is 25 percent for brackets from 1.1 to 1.5 million,
instead uf 750,000 to 1 million, but while the progressive surtax stopped at 45 per-
cent for brackets over 3 million, it nuw rises to 50 percent between 6 and 5 mil-
lion, then 55 percent between S and 6 million, and 60 percent over 6 million.

The tax minimum now goes from 2,400 to 3,000 CFA francs, plus the communal centimes.
Other duties are increased or specified:

Taxes on benefits in kind granted by enterprises to personnel (housing, domestics,
water, electricity, food) are raised. For example, the scale goes to 10 percent for
housing instead of 5 percent. '

Taxes on real estate transfers subject to certain liabilities or free are figured,
when paid late, on the basis of the last transfer plus 10 percent per year.

Penalties are increased or made heavier if the proper statements are not filed or
if the taxes are not paid on time.

Transfers and assignments of shares in certain companies (for example, for the
construction and management of buildings) or transfers and assignments of share

as a result of a gift or death are no longer exempt from stamp and registration
duties.

Various taxes (example: registration of orders of the Supreme Court, inclusion
in the Commercial Record, registration of a judgment, a will, and so on) are doubled.

A special tax label has now been created for the two drive wheels (2,000 CPA francs,

a uniforn rate that does not take power into account). 0n the other hand, it is
2,000 CFA francs per horsepower for other vehicles, with a SO-percent reduction for
vehicles over a years old.

Export duties on certain coton fabrics made in Cameroon and on fresh bananas remain
suspended (except that the specific tax for bananas goes from 750 to 1,000 CPA
francs a ton).

Finally, duties and taxes on hunting permits, forestry permits and on the making
of gold objects are increased.

0n hunting permits, the increases mainly involve residents and nonresidents and, L0
a lesser degree, nationals (except slaughtering taxes, which also gn up, but less

a

ma omcfat use ONLY
FOR OFIIC1AL.US£'0NLY

than the others). Hunting duties increase between 25 and over 100 percent. For
example, the big game permit goes from 20,000 to 40,000 CPA francs for residents
and from 40,000 to 60,000 for nonresidents. Capture taxes are created or in-
creased for most animals, for example, 50,000 CPA francs instead of 10,000 for
an ostrich. Finally, slaughtering taxes: It will henceforth cost 60,000 CPA

francs instead of 20,000 for a resident to kill an elephant and 100,000 instead of
30,000 for a lion.

Duties and taxes on forestry permits go up: The reforestation tax moves from

15 to 20 CFA francs per hectare per year. Transfer duties go from 30 to 50 CPA
francs per hectare and the guarantee from 20 to 40 CFA francs per hectare. Duties
on exported rough timber goes from 10 to 15 percent of market value.

0n the crafting of objects from gold: The authorization is now 375,000 CPA francs
instead of 50,000. Annual renewal costs 120,000 CFA francs instead of 25,000.
This measure is particularly aimed at Senegalese :raftsmen, but also at nationals
and other foreigners.

3 -- 196l-1982 Budget: Receipts and Expenditures

Receipts in the 1981-1982 budget are as follows (in billions of CFA francs):

 

Source Among
Direct and related taxes 146.772
(batons duties and taxes 122.451
Registration, stamp and guardianship duties 9.622
Revenue from state lands 1.012
Receipts from services 22.113
Various receipts, misc. deductions 8.021
Total 310.00

Spending is on the same level (see table).

As indicated by Basile Emah, general reporter of the finance committee (CAMEROON
TRlBUSE, 28-29 June i981), this budget is 26 percent higher than the previous bud-
get, while during the year coming to a close, Camcroon's gross national product
increased only 19.1 percent, compared with 21.1 percent for 1979-1980. This

slackening is mainly due to slower growth in the primary sector and especially in
the building and public works branch. For the new 1981-1982 budget, more sustained
growth is expected, along with resources from the new provisions.

Operating expenditures go from 163.2 to 199 billion (up 22 percent), while equip-
ment expenditures go fron 82.4 to 111 billion (up 36.7 percent).

Among the operating expenditures, the most spectacular growth involves scientific
research (up 48.3 percent). followed by services attached to the office of Presi-

dent (up 37.9 percent). which thus becomes the third-ranking “ministry" in size
afte: National Education and the Armed Forces, which now pass up the ministries

of Equipment and Health. This was not the case in preceding budgets. Other major
and reassuring growth is in Social Affairs (up 30 percent) and Labor and Social

son omcfat use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Welfare (up 29.5 percent). Other operating expenditures have increased more slowly
than the national average of 22 percent, except for National Education (up 22.9

percent). in other words, this growth is not exceptional.

For equipment expenditures and especially for equipment projects and contributions
and subsidies (total 82 billion), one may fear lest the previous difficulties con-
tinue -- that is, that delays will pile up, requiring carryovers.

Finally, the following provisions should be noted:

The Cameroonian Land Bank will henceforth enjoy the Treasury privilege to recover

its debts. In other words, the contribution of wage earners to the Land Bank is
deducted from basic pay. like other taxes, using the DIPE (employed personnel

information document).

In addition, the government is "authorized to negotiate and eventually arrange...
loans whose amount is set at 75 billion CPA francs," including 15 billion between

1 and 10 years and 60 billion over 10 years.

Finally, the government is authorized to grant, during this fiscal year, state
backing in the amount of 100 billion for loans to public establishments, joint

ventures or public collectives.

Cameroon's 1981-1982 Budget (in billions of CPA francs)

Billions of CPA Francs Increase Over
Operating Budget CFA Francs 1980-1981 (2)
A.
1. Office of the President 6.89 18.6
2. Services attached to Presidency 10.9 37.9
3. Sational Assembly 1.7 11.9
4. Departments of the Prime Minister .65 12.1
5. Economic and Social Council .23 6.8
6. Foreign Affairs 2.8 21.7
7. Territorial Administration 6.2 10.7
8. Justice 2.5 14.2
13. Armed Forces 22.8 18.7
15. National Education 28.9 22.9
16. Youth and Sports 2.6 22.2
17. Information and Culture 1.7 16.2
20. Finance 7.5 15.3
22. Economy and Planning 2.2 22.2
23. Tourism .5 12.3
24. Scientific Research .5 68.3
30. Agriculture 5.5 13.7
31. Livestock raising, fishing and
animal industries 1.7 17.1
32. Mining and Energy .7 15.3
36. Equipment 10.6 13.
37. City planning and housing 6.2 2.7
40. Public Health 10.2 13.3

ms omcfat use ONLY
41. Labor and Social Welfare .9
59. Social Affairs .9
45. Post Office and Telecommunications 5.1
46. Transport 1.1
50. Civil Service 1.4
Total A 143.5

B. Transfer Expenditures

*5. Domestic operating debt 5.6
60. State intervention 27.1
65. Regular expenditures 22.6
Total 8 55.4
Total A + B 199
Public Investments
90. Equipment projects 69.1
91. Participation in corporate stock 2.79
92. Endowment to buy back concessions PM [expansion unknown]
93. Contributions. subsidies, aid
funds 13
56. Public debt linked to
investment 26
Total Public Investments 111

Total Operating Budget and Investments 310

[original numbering]

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie Paris 1981.
INJRIOFFWCIAL.USEZ(HNLY

CAMEROON

AGREEMENT WITH GDR 0N BILATERAL TRADE, PROJECTS
Paris MuRCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 8] p 2767

[Text] The first session of the grand commission of Cameroon and the German Demo-
cratic Republic (CDR) was held in Yaounde from 13 to 16 October. The Cameroonian
delegation was headed by Pierre—Desire Engo, deputy minister of economy and planning,

and the East German group was led by Clausnitzer Pridmar, deputy minister of foreign
trade.

In order to develop bilateral trade, Cameroon will send a collective exposition to

the Leipzig (GDR) Spring Fair in 1982 and will promote direct contact between its
exporters and the proper foreign trade enterprises in the CDR.

Concerning cooperation. projects studied by the two nations within the framework
of Cameroon's Fifth 5-Year Development Plan concern training, health, school and
road infrastructures, industry, agriculture, livestock raising and fishing.

There are plans for the construction of three brick works using the clay deposits
in the regions of Bamenda, Yaounde and the Northern Province, in order to carry out
Cameroon's vast housing program.

For livestock raising, the two sides agreed to carry out three pasture irrigation
projects in different regions of the country (north, east and northwest). The

studies needed for Northern Province are available. Cameroonian experts will visit
the GDR and will personally visit cattle fattening ranches. Following their visit,

Cameroon will inform the GDR of its concrete needs for such ranches.

In addition, there are plans to equip the seven provincial branches of the National
Center for Studies and Experimentation in Agricultural Hechaniration (CENEEHA) with
mobile units and agricultural machinery (tractors, equipment to work the ground,
reapers and harvesters, mobile repair shops).

In order to maintain rural trails, Cameroon will receive East German equipment to
equip some 55 subdivisions. Negotiations will be undertaken to provide electrifi—
cation and rural telephones.

Cameroon will buy the equipment needed for its educational establishments from the
CDR and will be able to improve the level of specialized training (cold—storage
techniques, wood processing, machine construction, electrical techniques, automo-
bile mcchanics, civil engineering, sanitary plumbing), as well as training of

ma OFFICIAL use omx
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

narnmedicnl personnel and doctors. Finallv, both sides manifested their interest
in cooperating on :ne conscruction of a cement works, a caustic soda production
Jnit, a chocolate factory and an industrial slaughterhouse.

Jp until 18 December 1980, the date of the signing of the econonic, industrial,
scientific and technical Cooperation agreement concluded between the two countries,
the United Republic of Cameroon and the German Democratic Republic had been linked
3y a commercial agzeenent since 1978. It was in Leeping with this agreement that
the Cameroon-60R joint commission was set up. Its second session will be held

in November 1982 in East Berlin.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

ll,é64
C50: 47191236

roe omcf'AL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMEROON

BRIEFS

FIFTH PLAN—-Thv Economic and Social Council of Cameroon mvt a 12 October, summoned
by Preszount Ahidjo. This was the first regular session of the 1981-1982 fiscal
year and was to last 2 weeks. The task of the Council during the meeting was to
examine she Fifth Plan, which will be 60-percent financed by the public sector and
40 percent by the private sector, Cameroonian Minister of Economy and Planning
Youssoufa Daouda said. The first session was the occasion of the election of the
Council's new officers, who are, in addition to the president, Felix Sabal Lecco,
who was named by decree, the two vice presidents: T. Bella and Tum Tafou Isiah.
Finally, four study sections were set up: General economic, planning and finance
section: president, Prof Handji Roland; reporter, Ngosso Ebenezer. Production,
trade and tourism section: president, Dr 301 Alina Gibering; reporter, Otabela
Hubert. General affairs section: president, Dr Yotnda Pierre; reporter, Dakole
Daissala. Social and cultural affairs section: president, Dr Abdoulaye Souaibou;
reporter, Mrs Ekotto Alvine. [Text] [?aris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS
in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2700] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981]
11 464

KRIBI IRON DEPOSIT DEVELOPMENT—-A partnership agreement concerning development of
the Kribi iron deposit was signed in Paris on 20 October 1981 between the govern-
ment of the United Republic of Cameroon, represented by the minister of mines and
energy, the BRGH [Geological and Mineral Prespecting Office] (France, Krupp (PRC),
and GFH {expansion unknown] Partners Limited (United States). The purpose of the
agreement just signed is the establishment of the Iron Study Company of Cameroon
(SEFERCAM), in charge of carrying out prefeasibility studies for 18 months, effec-
tive with the signing of the agreement. The studies should make it possible to
define the technical, financial, economic and commercial condi'ions for completion
of an overall iron and steel project in Cameroon. The cost of the studies and
work to be undertaken during the period considered, estimated at 410 million CPA
francs, is distributed among the different partners prorated on the percentage of
interest which each holds in SEFERCAH: Cameroonian Government (35 percent), the
BRCH (31 percent); CFH (24 percent) and Krupp (10 percent). During the same cere-
mony, a technical assistance contract was also signed by SEPERCAH and the BRGH,
which agreed tc provide technical supervision of the execution of programs and
work planned. [Text] [Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1877
30 Oct 81 p 2768] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,466

250: 4719/236

FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE OSLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

OPPOLl'l‘Il N LEADER DISCUSSES ATTITUDE TOWARD NEW REGIME
Paris AFRIQL'E-ASIE in French No 252. 9-22 Nove 81 pp 15. 16-18
[Article by Cincttc Cot: "Abel Goumba: 'Only Democracy....""|

[Text] The current phase of military rulers can only be temporary.
The impact of our movement can only be judged in the context of
the elecroral farce organized by Dacko. Host political leaders
pay their mi: Rants—which we do not do. We are feared because
our honesty cannot be questioned. Poverty and dictatorship

have corrupted the people. Central Africa has bred mediocre

and contemptible regimes. Socialist France should only agree

to help under certain conditions.

Restore the country's economy, which is in such disastrous disrepair. and create
conditions in which real democracy can flourish: such is the mission which General
of the Army Andre Kolingba, president of the Military Committee for National
Recover; (CMRﬂ) that came to power in Bangui 1 September. declares he has been
given. According to the new Central African head of state. who says the army has
no intention either of "contiscating power" or of maintaining a "military dictator—
ship." tie CMRX (which has 23 members) will not have fulfilled its mission until

it has pt t into operation "the machinery of a sound economy that will make possible
a decent standard of living."

None of this can be accomplished without sizable external contributions. Ami the
Central African trea5ury has an irmediate need of an estimated Fr CPA 60 to 70
billion to put the Country on the road to recovery and "feed the people." Cen
Kolinga. who also launched an appeal for African "brotherliness." says that Bangui
is ready to receive any form of assistance. whatever its source. But. as we know,
the new regime says it wants to maintain special relations with Paris and even

would like to see the beginning of increased economic cooperation between the two
- countries.

0n the French side. while noting that a prompt restoration of democratic processes
in the country is still being, awaited, the word is thct we will continue to assist
the Central African Republic in meeting its most urgent obligations. in accordance
with the conditions defined in June 1981 during the visit of the prime minister of
the previous government. Trere was never any question of brtaking off relations.

according :0 Acting Cooperation and Development Minister Jean-Pierre Cot, who con-
firmed that a French mission would be sent to Bangui as scheduled this October to

ron omciu. use ONLY
FDR OFFICIAL USE 05L"

examine ":he preconditions for the country's economic and financial recovery, in
order to assist the country in recovering its politicalunityand to re-establish
more or less normal conditions of administrative and economic life."

"we have taken cognizance of Gen Kolingba's statements that he intends to restore
democratic processes in the shortest time possible," stressed the French minister.
according to whom "the current regime can only he temporary. for a military regime
is inherently a failure.“

According to Gen Koliugba, the army did no: seize power out of "personal or egoist
ambition" but out or “duty to the nation." and the number one concern. it seems.
is to put an end to the endemic poverty and arrest the process of economic
regreSsion.

'Ve have gone throurh a difficult experience. and the Cenlral African people are
not ready re begin again. For the moment. we must relax people. He must be given
the time to feed the people before thinking of democracy." said the new head of
state, when asked about a possible return to civilian government. "Everything will
depend on the economic situation."

Doubtful Conjuncture

While the idea of organizing free elections may not be out of the question on
principle. Gen Kolingba nevertheless aaintains the he could not here and now pre-
dict when such might happen: “In 6 months. in a year perhaps. I do not know." he
said. "But, in any case. it will not be right away."

For the time being, it Can be observed that the new regime seems prepared to go
into battle to "clean up ethics" and reduce the government's extravagancea-which
appear arrogant when one knows that the budgetary deficit this year amounts to more
than Fr CFA 10.5 billion. and that some external assistance has been diverted from
its intended destination.

Thus, after the arrest of several directors of the Central African National
Development Bank (BSCD) accused of diversion of public funds. Gen Kolingba announced
on 23 September in a radio speech that "any failures that turn up in the administra-
tion of public business" will be the subject of "extremely rigorous" sanctions.
'Everyone in the government who has any authority whatsoever." he said. "must apply
himself to more orthodox administration of the public funds. which are the common
patrimony of all Central Africans."

0n the other hand. out of a twofold concern to make the bureaucracy "more effective
and more dynamic" and to reduce governmental expenses. two-thirds of which were
devoted to paying the salaries of an excessive number of employees. more than 500

cadres will be removcd from the civil service rollsbetweennowandJanuaryl98L Those
removed will be officials who have 27 years of active service or who have reached

the age of 55. as well as "dubious, incompetent. dishonest. drunken and undesir-
able" employees. By contrast. some 350 teachers will be added to the rolls of
governmental agencies. "0n the one hand," said the minister for the civil service.
labor and state insurance. Brig Gen Xavier Sylvestre Yangongo. "there is a plethora
of unproductive employees and. on the other. new cadres need to be assimilated. It
is thus of fundamental importance to move ahead with a purge and forced early
retirement."

FOR (kl-NH: {SF 0V!)-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other reductions in force are also anticipated. to affect students abroad. and
officials in diplomatic posts overseas or working in international organizations.
The military rolls may also be decreased by 1.000 people between now and the end of
the year...

If these early measures reveal a real detersination to reform things. it can be

predicted that they will not fail to cause grumbling and gnashing of teeth in some
circles. also. one of the questions being asked is how and on what basis the new

government expects to get the support it would need to go very far along that road.

It is at this still very doubtful conjuncture--in which there are still many
questions unanswered. before the intentions and outlines of the CHRN's recovery
programs have emerged—~thatIJrAbel Gounba. president of the Ubangi Patriotic
Front-Labor Party (FPO-PT). an organization created in 1976 to oppose the Bokassa
dictatorship and one which as everyone knows played a decisive role in fomenting
the student revolt of January 1979 in Bangui, delivers here his thoughts about
developments in the Central African Republic and the future of his country.

The president of the FPO-PT. who is preparing to return once and for all to Bangui.
where he will teach at the university. and whose presence abroad in recent days
has aroused comments that. at the most charitable. would have to be described as
glib and hasty. also uses the interview to dispel any doubts that may still exist
as to his plans and ideas about the struggle to be carried out to help his people
achieve free will and become the sovereign rulers of their own destiny.

For Dr Abel Goumba, there is no doubt that the departure of Bokassa's successor
from the Central African political scene is a good thing in its own right. "David
Dacko's Continuance as head of the country was in fact a factor engendering civil
war. In the first place because. when he understood the reset ations the French
Government had about using the French troops on hand in Central Africa and its
reservations about providing financial and economic assistance. the former head of
state became frightened. So he turned toward the United States. as evidenced by
his plan to contact Egypt or the Sudan to obtain troops from those countries. We
know that he was even contemplating turning to South Africa. Now it is quite
obvious that patriotic forces would not sit with hands folded before such maneuvers.

Vicious Circle

"In the second place. David Dacko was at the end of his rope. He had nothing more

to offer anybody. He was still anxiously waiting for France to send him the money
to pay the salaries of government workers. And everything was suspended. Economic

movement had Stopped. In a word. Bokassa's successor could not count on the army.
or on the people. or on anything else.

"That is to say, his departure is a positive development. But the coming to power
of the soldiers also forces us to note our reserVations about the principle in-
volved. For we have not forgotten that sad period that followed the coup of
Saint-Sylvestre in 1966. and the indifference with which the people greeted the

1 September change tends to show that the traumas of the Bokassa era have not yet
begun to disappear. We are all the more afraid of a dictatorship now that the

the constitution and all political activities have been suspended.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fol! UI‘NLIAL USE UNI.“

'1his is why we want to believe that the military phase will only be temporary. For
problems are not solved by replacing one lane solution with another. 0n the con-
trary, we think that the reason we are locked into a veritable vicious circle is
because the country has been deprived of any democratic freedom for 20 years. And
today, once again. by totally suppressing these democratic freedoms which, in our
view, are indispensable for any real national recovery. one can only succeed in
further compromising the political. social. economic and cultural future of our
country.

"I think that the soliders are aware of the elements of the problem and that they
will rapidly create the conditions for a return to democratic life. even if it is
“guided" democracy because of fears of possible disorders. but a democratic life
which is based on participation of the people in all the recovery efforts. For
the country will not experience an era of development if the people are kept out

of the recovery process.

"There is also another thing that disturbs us. This is the fact that seven of our
militants are still in detention in a military camp, following the terrorist attack
of 14 July.* Now we know that this attack has been claimed by the Idii Lala group
and that our party has since been "rehabilitated," which certainly confirms the
fact. if there were any need of it. the the FPO was not in any way involved in that
affair. Now these militants are the subject of trifling accusations such as "being
in possession of arms“ or "nondisclosure" of fact... None of those are very
serious.

"Finally. nothing really justifies the assertion that 1 September marked a real
break with the past. At the most it amounted to a transfer of power."

[Question] On the eve of Dacko's departure. people seemed to be expecting some
spectacular initiative on the part of certain sectors of the Central African
opposition. There was even talk of the imminent establishment in the north of a

government in which you yourself were supposed to participate. One might speculate
that these preparations might not have beentotallyunrelated to the army's decision

to take over...

[Answer] "1 have never been consulted about establishment of such a government.
And I have never been involved in such a scheme. For to establish a parallel gov-
ernment in the north would have amounted to creating conditions for the partition
of the country and resulting government intervention and civil war.

"As for ourselves. we are not struggling to get power for power's sake. regardless
of the means. what is important for us is the interests of the country. As an
opposition leader. I have always worked openly, democratically. and in the national
interest.

* They are Nditifei Boysembe Marc. Gouandjia Maurice. Saulet Hubert. Gouandjia
Michel~Ange. Moakit Guy. Bilingbi Pierre and 7angato Etienne. who may be handed

over to a special tribunal. At least that was the decision made by the David Dacko
government. And up to now the FPO has been unable to ascertain the new government's
intentions. A Paris lawyer. Frederic Heyl. is to defend the FFO militants.

a

-/

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FIICiAL L-Si: ONLY

opposition leader, I have always worked openly, democratically. and in the national
interest.

"what has been considered. along with the other numbers of the provisional political

committee, was creating a national political council. In that context. we had
called for aatudy on the possibilit) of establishing a government of national
unity in which all the ipolitical] forces in the country would have participated.
including the military and even the people in David Dacko's UDC (Central African
Democratic Unition). But this project never got off the ground.

"In our opinion. doing something spectacular is not the purpose of being in the
opposititn. And I think that since the overthrow of Bokassa. the precipitous
actions taken by certain Central African politicals has greatly contributed to
complication the situation..."

Rumors

[Question] Your stay abroad. which began in July. has generated unpleasant
speculation here and thrre. And the French press has a tendency to present you
as an holest leader who would have the sympathy of the PS! [French Socialist
Party] but who would be "a man with no troops." On that score. people point to
the poor showing (1.4 percent) made by the FPO during the presidential elections
last March. And this is compared with the popularity which certain other politi-
cians like Patasse have gained. despite their long history of collaboration with
Bokassa. What do you think of all tha'?

[Answer] "1 think that the people still do not understand the situation very well.
As everybody knows. I did not come to France for political reasons. As I have al-
ready had occasion to say several times, I resigned from the world health Organization
(WHO) and my family continues to live in Cotonou, where I was posted. 50 I left
Bangui in a very ordinary way. last July. in order to resolve some personal
problems. still pending, which concern the repatriation of my family and some "30
administrative matters.

"The news of the bomb attack of 14 July came as a surprise to me while I was
outside the country. and consequently i had to devote all my time to clarifying
tne situation. to contacts with the press and with other representatives of the
Central African opposition. It was at this time that the question of establ-
lishin: a nution.l political council arose. But it is quite obvious that none of
that could he done precipitously and that, in Bangui, power was not to be taken in
the streets. 1: has been said that I was in France because I was afraid or for
Sum: other reason. I don't know what. It has even been rumored that I was pre-
paring to be parachuted into Bangui by the French socialists. This is to misread
me completely. if we ourselves condemned "Operation Barracuda." it was not so we
ourselves could parachute into a French military truck like Dacko. Allwe are
asking is the chants to carry on the struggle. on a democratic basis. on the
ground. to advanCe the interests of our country. For. as far as we are concerned.
we have done norhin. to merit criticism. We are not afraid to show ourselves to
the people. for we have never made compromises with the previous regimes. It is
our enemies. particularly the businessmen in the Bangui chamber of commerce, who
circulate the most ridiculous rumors. for example. the rumor that I have three or
{our nursing homes in France. in reality. beside the other opposition leaders. we
practica ly look like pariahs.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

"As for the results of the March 1981 elections, it goes without saying that we
attach no importance to them. Everyone knows that through that electoral farce
Ciscard d'Estaing tried to justify before the world his "Operation Barracuda" by
giving it at least a hare veneer of democracy, which fooled no one. At the same
time, he tried to humuiliate us by arranging for the FPO to score as poorly as
possible. Besides. arcording to information gleaned here and there, if Dacha did
not go through with dismissing his prime minister. Bozanga. as he intended to do--
consultations on a successor had already begun-~it was because the latter had
threatened that if he were driven from office he would reveal all the electoral
fraud committed in the March 1981 election.

"In other words, none of that disturbs me very much; the strength of the FPO
cannot be seriously judged on the basis of the tally in that electoral parody.

"What is certain, and widely known. on the other hand, is that an effort is being
made to eliminate us by any means possible, because we are the most vociferous
and highly organized opposition movement. Dacko himself this and said
so. This is why we are not in the least intimidated. We are feared because our
honesty cannot be challenged, and neither can our credentials in fighting against
the former fascist regime of Bokassa. And this is what our enemies are afraid of.

"Finally, 1 would like to empsusize that there is a certain kind of popularity
which does not impress us and which we are not seeking. This is popularity based
on tribalism or on exploiting the misery of the population. For it is necessary
to understand that most political leaders pay their militants. The FPO and the
young people, on the other hand, are offering to mount guard for us out of
conviction.

"To understand what is happening in Central Africa, it is necessary to understand
that poverty and dictatorship have made our people "corruptible." Thus, when we
were involved in our electoral campaign. the people asked us: "What are you
bringing to us? What are you giving us?"

"Under these conditions, one van understand howtnscrupulonspeople, with the help
of enterprises they built up under the Bokassa empire, would be able to buy clien-
tele. As far as we are concerned, these methods are totally alien. And it is
precisely because of the very conditions that prevail in Our country that we
believe that the creation of conditions for the flourishing of normal democratic
is an urgent necessity. He must be able to contribute to the education of the
people. raising the level of political consciousness. Our citizens must be con-
vinced that they themselves can act in their own interests...

"In order to understand what has happened in our country since independence, and
what has happened to our people, one must put the problems into a wider context.
In fact. everything is just as if imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism were
at work more feverishly in the central part of this continent than anywhere else.
Perhaps because of the mineral wealth in its soil. The result, in any case. it
that central Africa has engendered some of the mOst mediocre and contemptible of
regimes. And it has endured and continues to endure tragic situations the Like of
which have apparently never been seen in the countries of the geopolitical era of
the former French Nest Africa.

FOR OFFICIAL [Si-Z 0V!)
EUR ()Ft'h :Al Lh‘t ONLY

"How have the forces of reaction proceeded? First of all \y the physical elimination
of those whose activities to mobilize the masses would hav: jeopardized the neo-
colonial status quo and the policy of pillaging the wealth of the region. Thus
Lumumba and Hulele were assassinated in Zaire, Boganda in Central Africa. Dr Bonno

in Chad. etc.. to take only a few examples. And we know that in Gabon the disappear-
ance of leaders without a word said count for nothing. when they have not been
liquidated, nationalist or insubordinate leaders have been given three options: rot

in prison, take exile (those are the two I have been through) or agree to be co-
opted. in other words. corrupted.

"At the same time. no effort has been spared to put straw men in place: Dacko.
then Bokassa. then Dacko again in Central Africa, Mobutu in Zaire. Bongo in Gabon...
Here. most of the elite have sold out or become totally disengaged. This only
makes the struggle harder and more complex. And one can predict that this part of
Africa will be subject to every sort of pressure for years to come.

“As for our own country. we must not forget that it has substantial potential
wealth. The famous Bangui 'phenomenon' would outstrip the wealth of the former

Katanga province. In addition to uranium, copper and cobalt, the Americans say
there are oil deposits greater than those in Chad..."

[Question] What does the FPO propose to do to get the Central African Republic
out of the current impasse?

[Answerl "First of nl!--even though this is a special problem. which is part of

a bigger whole--we are asking For the release of our militants. who are unjustly
detained. Finally, and above all, we believe we must rapidly create the democratic
conditions for scheduling of free elections with the shortest possible delay
(perhaps in one year) and give our country normal, popularly supported institutions.

"The problems which our country faces are too serious for the military to even
imagine they can solve them by themselves. Discipline alone is not enough, far
from it, to inspire the people with enthusiasm and determination. We think that
the movements and political parties should be allowed to speak their peace, too..."

Two Points

[Question] Do you think that the French Government can influence the evolving
situation in the Central African Republic?

{Answer} "1 think that France can play an effective role in the restoration of
democracy in Central Africa. and particularly since the new government wants to
maintain special relations with Paris. I think that a socialist France will put
conditions on its cooperation.

"in that regard, there are two points 1 would like to make. First of 411, there

is the question of the final destination of the financial aid. Up to now. the
subsidies were used for the benefit of the "elite" or to expunge debts the of the
former Boknssn regime. it is neceSnary now for the Central African people to
benefit from this aid. In the second place. and this point is tied to the first, we
need to have a real program of national recovery drawn up, for we cannot go on

'u
.1

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

doling out money only to respond to crises, i.e., using aid to pay the salaries
of officials...

"In our opinion. France can thus use its influence in this direction and insure
that certain conditions are net.

"But what we also fear is that if there are problems with Paris Bangui will turn

to other partners. In that regard, all those trips to the United States which have
been made in recent months continue to worry us."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Af rique-As ie

9516
C50: 0719/213

FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
FUR OPTION. {,5}: ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN FORCE NOT A 'MIRACLE SOLUTION'
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 252. 9-22 Nov 81 pp 15-16
[Article by Antonia Blis: "The Determination of Goukowni Oueddei"]

[Text] Now that he has announced he will henceforth be without the
presence of his Libyan allies. the president of tr: CONT [Transi-
tional National Unity Government] should receive formal guarantees
respectinuliiscountry's territorial integrity. security and
stability. so Chad will not become yet another neocolonial morass.

ln Chad everything happens as if people were always trying to add yet new complica-
tions to a situation that is already complex and tragic enough without widening it
further or distorting the real problems. French journalists. or at least most of

them, as far as one can tell. have never been overly concerned with striving for

a minimum of objectivity or a better understanding of the Chadian imbroglio, its
“players" and the stakes involved. And one will recall the unlikely chorus of
approval which greeted the December 1980 victory of the GUNT forces rallied around
Goukouni Oueddei and supported by Libya over Hissein Habre's troops-the latter
being supported by the Ciscard government--and a short time later. in January 1981.
greeted the Chad—Libya joint communique published in Tripoli.

The Voice of the Chadians

Several reasons seemed at the time to explain the tendentious and impassioned
attitude of the commentators: 0n the one hand the refusal to recognize the right
of Libya--an African country, turned into a bugbear in the service of an unworthy
causc--to intervene in Chad. which was still considered a special preserve of its
former colonial master, or the right of the Chadian leaders to appeal for help to
the ally of their choice. or in any case to the only one likely to respond to their
plea; and for doing so thOSc leaders were denied any legitimacy. At the same time,
there was and still is a refusal to concede the fact that Tripoli's help was use-
ful: at an early stage it tacilitated bringing to an end what seemed to be 1n
interminable war. On the other hand, finally, and this goes back to the observa-
tions made initially. there was never a willingness to pay real attention to the
voice of the Chadians themselves. the overwhelming majority of whom consistently
maintained. heginninguiththe GUNT president. that they had not fought for years
on end only to fall back into a new state of vassalage. and time after tire
appealed to the international community for help in rebuilding the country.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)“ UN“. IAL USI‘. ONLY

It was basically because of these same reasons that most of the dailies and other
media in France fell into a double trap on 29 and 30 October: on 29 October by
recklessly exploitinz-—without the least confirmation--a report born of "alarmist
rumors." at least one of them going so far as to announce on page one that there
has been a ”Libyan armed coup" in Chad. President Goukouni Oueddei. according to
that press organ. had "disappeared" or was "fleeing." and had been replaced by his
minister of foreign affairs. Acyl Amat. reputedly the most “pro-Libyan" of the
Chadian leaders. On 30 October, when at last confronted with the fact that the
realities were different. the commentators launched into new speculations. announc-
ing it as a near-certainty that. following Major Jalloud's 3-day trip to Ndjamena
and the latrer's "saber-rattling" on behalf of the Triopli government. the "frail"
GUNI president. or as the pundits desc-ibed him, "the cunning cat of the Toubou
desert," could not fail to “knuckle under" and discard his last pretenses to being
independent of his big brother next door.

He know how these speculations were stunningly discredited almost as soon as they
were printed. He learned the very same day. in fact, following a meeting of the
council of ministers that lasted 5 hours, that President Goukouni Oueddci. with the
approval of all but one participant in the meeting, had during the night of 29-30
October demanded the immediate and total withdrawal of Libyan troops from the
capital and the prefecture of Chari-Baguirmi. south of Ndjamena, as well as the
departure of all of the military forces Tripoli has stationed in Chad before 31
December 1981.

Beyond the dramatic escalation of events and the eagerness with which certain

Parisian commentators rushed off on the wrong track. it appears obvious that
differences between Ndjamena and Chad have surfaced as to the direction events in

Chad will take in the future. and as to the appropriate response to be made to

the initiative taken in Paris--and expressed 22 October in Cancun by President
Francois Hetterrand--to speed up the process of creating the inter-African peace
force. and to the French government's decision to contribute to getting the project
on its feet, "with material. financial and logistical assistance. but without any
military participation."

Naturally, Goukouni Oueddei himself vigorously denied the rumors that his minister
of foreign affairs had engineered a coup with the support of the Libyan troops. And
a Chadian government communique protested the "lies aimed at sowing discord in our
midst." But sources close to the Chadian president also said that the demand for
the Libyan troops to withdraw was made without any previous agreement on the part of
Tripoli, and was made because "the conditions for the maintenance of peace in Chad
seem now assured." especially in light of France's "decisive offer" of "logistical
support."

Now we know that Major Jalloud, the number two man in the Libyan regime. had just
spent 3 days in Ndjamenawhere--whilecontinuing to maintain what Tripoli has
consistently said: namely that the Libyan troops would be withdrawn whenever the
Chadian Goverment desired it--he also described Paris's decision to "impose" an
inter-African peacekeeping force in Chas as "interference in Chadian internal
affairs."

While waiting for Tripoli's reaction to these latest developments, we should note
that Ndjamcna's decision comes at a time of new change, characterizcd on the one

I-OR (ll-Fir! \l. r .v'. Z'A‘l)
FUR “Pint-AL 1 Bl. {l\t.‘u

:nnd by the growing authority ?resident Goukouni Oueudei has acquired in recent
months as a national consensus seems to be growing around him. and on the other hand
py the consolidation of the GUXT's dzplomatic position, especially since the fall

rt the Cisca lian regime in France. The OAU summit resolution in Nairobi last
'une, which 1. addition to calling for specific action to create an inter-African
neace force. called tor the African and international community to help the GUKT
:reate an integrated national arny and rebuild the country. had expressed an
.nproved understanding of the situation in Chad, if not a spectacular shift from
:he positions which up to then had been maintained with the support of the previous
lccupant of the Elysee. And today, hardly anyone but the head of state of Togo
:hallenges the legitimacy of the GUN? by harping on the fallacious and worn-out
lrgumonts of the pasr.

'innlly. President Coukouni Oueddei's official visit to Paris 17 and 18 September
mrked-—despite France's reIHCtance to commit itsel: to taking a forward position
)“ cooperation with Ndjamene so long as the Libyan troops had not first been
ai:hdrawn--a decisive turning point in relations between the two countries. and a
:otnl break with the previous policy of the former colonial power toward Chad.
‘Franee is ready to assist in the reconstruction of a united and totally indepen-
ient Chad." said the french foreign minister at the end of the talks, while for
118 part President Mitterrnnd asserted: "We have made much progress in under-
;tandlng and. i hope. in joint cooperation."

\ Helping Hand

Jhile it muy not have been a Question of "repeating the mistakes of the past."
several hurdles were cleared: the resumption of economic cooperation with Chad,
’aris's contribution to the reconstruction of Ndjnmena. France's agreement to send
in ambassador to the Chadian capital in the near future. The import of the visit
lid not. in any case. escape the GUNT's enemies. All the evidence indicates. in
fact. that it was precisely to scuttle the new relationship into which Paris and
Gdjamcna were beginning to enter that the partisans ox Hissein Habre, concentrated
in the Koulbons and Jeneina regions in the Sudan and supplied with equipment both
from Khartoum and Cairo, launched in September their major operations in the lriba
and Adre regions in the eastern part of the country. These attacks. which led

to fierce firhting and had teen stopped with the he.p of Libyan troops. also led
Soukonnl Oueddel to state. whvu he was in Paris: “50 long as our country remains
threatened by Sudan and hﬂgot. so long as vast resources are being poured ilto

the effort to destroy Chad's unity. so long as we do not have an integrated national
army in operation, it wcnld be difficult for us to spurn tne helping hand of a
Friendly. neighboring country."

lowever, at the Sumv lihu new tension seemed to be growing within the GUNI forces
:hemseivos. And in nny case it was fear of seeing new troubles arise that seems
:0 have rotivated Francois Mitterrand's sudden move to approach the acting presi—
lent of the GAR. Ara: Moi. the head of state of Kenya. on the rapid mobilization
if the inter-African force. as well as the unexpected decision by Paris a short
:imu later to send light arms and munitions to President Coukouni's forces.

Lt is clear that the French president's initiative was all the more oorl received
P y

in Tripoli because it was immediately endorsed by Lhe United States, Egypt and the
iudan. whose bellicose attitudes toward Libya are well known. and because those

FOR OFFICIAL IESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three countries tried to take over Paris's initiative to more effectively short-
circuit the Libyan adversary. It must also be noted that the attitude of the new
French government toward Tripoli. which was the first Arab capital to express its
pleasure and its hope in the wake of the 10 Hay elections, and to extend the hand
of friendship to the successors to Giscard d'Estaing's team, is if not unkind. at
least clumsy and seems to be tainted with the same prejudices as the preceding
regime.

However. there is no doubt. either in Ndjamena or in Paris. that a Libyan withdrawal
would have positive effects, boch within the country and on its borders. One might
think. in fact, that Libya's military disengagement from Chad would deprive Hissein
Habre and the two countries (Sudan and Egypt) that hold him at arm's length of any
further pretext for ontinuing his destabilization operations. Habre. in fact. has
been abandoned by several of his closest lieutenants. and has already totally lost
face. One might also speculate that Libya. unburdened of the Chad “affair," would
be in a better position to cope with its enemies and unmask their real designs. and
also to alleviate the supposed fears of those in sub-Saharan Africa who would like
to Suspect Tripoli of nourixhing not only revolutionary designs but also some kind
of expansionist plans. However. those are only possibilities. and until we see

the outcome of events we should not view the creation of the inter-African force. on
which Paris seems to be relying for the restoration of peace and independence of
Chad, as a panacea. For does it not amount to replacing one "occupation" with
another which. even if it is multi-national. nevertheless presents its own dangers?
Indeed it does. unless Ndjamena's recent decision arouses and gives concrete expres-
sion to a new patriotic spirit in the country. a spirit which among other things
would hasten the process of political unification of the different factions claiming
allegiance to FROLINAT [Chadian National Liberation Front] and the creation of an
integrated national army-in other words a powerful solidarity movement equal to
the innense needs of this country where everything must be rebuilt on new foundations.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

9516
C80: 4719/213

FOR OFFKML :JSF. ONE."
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

COHORO ISLANDS

OFFICIAL REPORT ON 1980 ECOIDH‘! PUBLISH-
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANKENS in French No 1879, 13 Nov 81.1) 7.899

[Text] The 1980 annual report of the Comoro Issuance Institute makes a detailed
survey of the general development of and prospects for the economy of the Federal
Islamic Republic of Comoro.

Agricultural production, which was satisfactory in 1979, led in 1980 to an
accumulation of reserves of several slow-moving products: copra, ylang-ylang
oil, and vanilla, Only cloves enjoyed both an abundant harvest and solid nrket
prices.

In 1980, exports of processed vanilla amounted to only 13 tons (compared to 170
tons in 1979) with a net worth of 192 million Comorian francs (compared to 2.3

billion). During the first 3 months of 1981, 95 tons were shipped out, and this
was an improvement.

The Comoro Islands are the world's largest producer of ylang-ylang oil, supplying
80 percent of the market. In 1980 33 tons were exported, at a net worth of 393
million Comorian francs (compared to 61 tons and 662 million [Comorian francs) in
1979). France is the largest customer (78 percent), followed by the United
States and Switzerland.

Only 680 tons of copra were sold in 1980 (compared to 2,470 tons in 1979). the
biggest buyer being Madagascar (80 percent).

Clover production is subject to a 4-year plant cycle, and the 1980 harvest was
very large at 1,200 tons.

Other export crops. such as coffee, cacao and pepper, yielded only insignificant
tonnages.

Industry is advancing very slowly because of financial problems. Infrastructure
in various sectors is a cause for concern: inadequate storage capacity for

oil products and electricity production, deterioration of the telephone system,
and the accumulated operating deficits of the national air and shipping lines.

21
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I703 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreign trade, between 1977 and 1980. is summed up in the following chart
(figures are in millions of Comorian francs):

1977 1978 1979 1980
Imports (Cost, freight and insurance) 4,053 ﬁ,329 6,135 6,147
Exports (FOB) 2,203 2.099 3,729 2,364
Deficit -1,850 -2,230 -2.h06 -3,783

The principal suppliers are France and the Common Market countries for industrial
products. Kenya for oil products, Madagascar for salt and sugar. China and
Pakistan for rice and Hozanbique for cement. Among the buyers, France purchases
76 percent of Comorian exports; then come Rest Germany (9 percent), Madagascar

(5 percent) and the United States (4 percent).

Despite 2.4 billion Comorian francs in cash grants and foreign assistance. the
1980 balance of payments shows a deficit of 1.9 billion Comorian francs. The
external assets of the Issuance Institute showed a decline of 0.7 billion Comorian
francs in 1980. The deficit in external payments is financed by external grants,
borrowing abroad and commercial loans.

The federal government's 1980 operating budget was certified to be 1.6 billion
Comorian francs in revenue and 2.7 billion in expenditures, the 1.3 billion deficit
having to be covered by external resources. The 1981 fiscal year operating budget
has been fixed at 5.2 billion. 52 percent of it to be covered by tax revenue

and foreign aid supplying the other 48 percent.

The 1980 c1pital expenditures budget. entirely financed by grants and external
bcrrowing. amounted to 1.6 billion Connrian francs. That budget for the 1981
fivcal year is down to 1 billion, and will be financed in the same way.

The gOVernorates came up with a 0.5 billion Comorian franc deficit in their
budgetary operations for the year ending 31 December 1980.

On 31 December l980. there were 2 billion Comorian francs in bills and coin in
circulation (up 12 percent over the end of 1979); sight deposits in the two
banking institutions (Comoros Commercial Bank and the Loan Society for Comorian
Development) totaled another 2 billion (up 16 percent over 1979). Credits to the
economy. on the other hand. amounted to 3.7 billioa Comorian francs (up 64 percent)
while Comorian treasury indebtedness was up to 0.7 billion (up 290 percent over the
end of 1979).

Public sector financing (government and atatal enterprises) absorbed 3.5 billion
Connrian francs in 1980. 92.6 percent of the total going into road, port and
airport infrascructure. This financing was obtained from Saudi Arabia. Kuwait.
Abu Dhabi, China and :he Central Fund for Economic Cooperation [CCCE] (2.2 billion
in all), from international organizations (world Bank, European investment Bank,
African Development Bank) which supplied 1.3 billion. and from supplier credit.

The year 1931 should show a decline in production of cash crops (vanilla, clove),

a fallback in exports and a major increase in imports (tso 10,000-ton deliveries
of rice were made in the initial months).

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ON'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (.NLY

The Comoros suffer from inadequate sources of financing. The problems of the
Comoros Commercial Bank and the absence of a private sector. However, agricul-
tural development activities. particularly corn cultivation and poultry raising,
should begin to produce reSults and contribute to achieving the objective of food
self-sufficiency.

COPYRIGHT: Rent. Noreux et Cie Paris 1981.

9516
080: 4719/269

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

NATIONAL BANK OF COMMERCE REPORTS ON 1980 BUDGET
Dari: MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEEbS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2838

iText] The report for the 1980 fiscal year of the Banky Fampan drosoana ny Varotra
(BFV, or National Bank for Commerce) notc- that the balance sheet on 31 December
[980 was balanced at 63.5L billion Malagasy francs compared with 54.79 billion for
the previous fiscal year. an increase of nearly 16 percent. The increase mainly

results from an increase in customer dep sits and, to a lesser extent, from the
accumulation of oVerdue transfers vis-a-xis foreign customers as a result of the

failure to execute orders for currency purchases by the Central Bank of Madagascar.

With respect to commitments, immediate figures for the balance sheets on 31 December
1979 and 1980 are substantially the same. Actually, there was an average increase
in commitments by withdrawals on the order of 12 percent. A more detailed analysis
of these variations reveals an average increase of: 21.7 percent in liabilities in
local commercial paper; 18 percent in liabilities in documentary discount; 5.6 per-
cent iu advances on merchandise; 13.2 percent in advances on products; 19.3 percent
in overdrafts and facilities for payment in current accounts; 6.5 percent in medium-
term credit liabilities. Decreasing commitments concern in principle only the
mobilization of administrative debts equivalent to a drop on the order of 23 per-
cent.

interventions on foreign credits also rose, corresponding on 31 December 1980 to an
overall liability of 4.16 billion Malagasy francs distributed as follows: long-term

financial credit, 387.7 million; medium-term foreign credit, 1,é03,900,000; backing
for foreign credits, 1,451,250,000.

Overall and despite the difficult economic situation encountered during the fiscal
year, the BFV continued to effectively finance the different sectors of the Mala-
gasy economy. This would not have been possible if the bank's resources, essen-
tially made up of customer deposits, had not grown. On an average, deposit ac-
counts rose 20.2 percent, while corporate current accounts increased by 24 percent.
Fixed deposits and cash certificates rose an average of 6 and 11.3 percent respec-
tively.

while in I979 resources on call represented 67.8 percent of all bank deposits, in
1980 :hat percentage dropped to 63.4 percent. With respect to immediate deposits
figuring in the 31 December 1979 and 1980 balance sheets, corporate accounts rose
by 2.5 percent, private accounts by 12.8 percent and fixed deposits and cash certi-
ficates by 29.7 percent. This points up a reduction in corporate funds, meaning
greater use of bank loans, followed by increased private ssavings. This situation
enabled the bank to meet loan requests.

21.
roe omcut use ONLY
FOR 0531C1AL.US£10NLN

Finally, there was a 45-percent increase in locked-up capital, which went from
705.9 million in 1979 to 1,023,800,000. This increase is essentially due to the
"data processing equipment" column, corresponding to the purchase of a more power-
ful computer, accompanied by other data processing equipment to meet the needs of
the new system of handling operations.

The mass of the "special balance sheet“ dropped by some 32 percent, going from
27.5 billion Malagasy francs in 1979 to 18.7 billion in 1980. This drop is attri-
butable to the country's foreign payment difficulties encountered during the last
quarter of the fiscal year. Consequently, the liability for the opening of docu-
mentary credits dropped considerably on 31 December 1980: 3,156,200,000 compared
with 15,096,300,000 on 31 December 1979. Nevertheless, the total amount of docu-
mentary credits opened for imports followed a less noticeable drop. With respect
to the utilization of these same credits from 1979 to 1980, the values remained
substantzally the same: 21.2 billion compared with 22.8 billion. Likewise, docu-

mentary remittances dropped by 42.4 percent. Free remittances grew, on the other
hand, by 34.2 percent. However, for their part, commercial transfers went down

26.5 percent.

0n the whole, international payments of a commercial nature remained stagnant,
amounting to 26 billion Malagasy francs in 1979 and 26.35 billion in 1980. At the
same time, currency receipts corresponding to export collections amounted to

36.25 billion, a cover of 137.6 percent compared with import payments.

Finally, considering bank proceeds, bank expenses, amortization accounts, and so
on, the operating profit of the BPV for 1980 amounts to 1,115,800,000 Malagasy
francs, compared with 1,234.200,000 in 1979, a drop of 9.6 percent. After the
allocation of 506.6 million for the corporate profits tax (138), the net profit
totals 679.8 million in 1980, down 5.8 percent compared with the previous year.

Difficult Economic Situation

In the light of the situation at the close of this fourth quarter, the BFV report
states that the economic situation will remain difficult throughout 1981. Naturally
the financial recovery program approved by the government with the International
Monetary Fund should bring about a better balance of the Malagasy economy in gen-
eral. However, it is a well-known fact that some of the measures within such a
program do not help banking operations. In particular, the policy of rehabilitat-
ing public finances will imply a transfer of deposits of public agencies with banks
to state coffers, at the same time .nat the conditions fur the remuneration of in-
vestments in the treasury will be at a more attractive level than what is possible
with the banking system.

On the other hand, the institution of more draconian credit measures than those
in the previous system is not for the purpose of developing bank proceeds, while
the growth in management charges is inevitable.

At any rate, the management committee report concludes, one must recognize that
the interest of the national economy outweighs that of the financial institutions,

even if they do belong to the state. One must concentrate and adapt management
efforts so as to continue to ensure the expansion of the bank as well as its role

in financing economic activities.

FOR OFFICIM. {ESE OELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The BFV management committee is headed (as is that of the 3111 [National Bank for
Rural Develoment], whose repcrt we analyzed in our 30 October issue) by Rakotovao-
Razakaboana, minister of finance and planning attached to the presidency. The

general manager of the BF? is Richard Randriamholy.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
C50: 4719/20?

-1

.0

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

MAIN TRADING PARTNERS FOR 1980 RANKBD
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2766

[Text] In 1980, France was Nigeria's third-ranking trading partner after the
United States and the Federal Republic of Germany and before the Netherlands and
the United Kingdom. The latter was only in fifth place, but with a commercial
balance heavily in its favor, which was not the case of the four other partners
and of the United States in particular, all of whose balances showed a deficit.

we have regularly followed the evolution of French-Nigerian trade based on French
statistics (for 1980, in our issue of 3 April, p 967, and for the first six months
of 1981, in our issue of 2 October, p 2505). He noted that this trade is increas-
ing, with a tendency toward a restoration of the balance.

He thought it would be interesting to give the comparative figures for the federa-
tion's trade in 1980 with its main western partners, based on statistics from the
International Monetary FUnd (IMF). Nigeria's official figures for the year con—
sidered are not to be published, in fact, before the end of 1982. The following
figures are given in millions of dollars. United States: import, 10,287; export,
1,265; the Federal Republic of Germany: import, 2,756; export, 2,010; France:
import, 2,728; export, 1,483; the Netherlands: import, 2,639; export, 1,025; the
United Kingdom: import, 320; export, 3,079; Japan: import, 110; export, 1,651;
Italy: import, 859; export, 752; and Belgium: import, 394; export, 660. For all
the other countries, the value of trade was well under $1 billion. Two countries:
New Zealand and Australia, bought nothing from Nigeria, although they sold products
worth $12 million and $5 million respectively.

The share of industrialized countries (outside of East Europe) is 85 percent of all
Nigerian trade and totaled nearly $35 billion in 1980. .One can therefore conclude
that Nigeria's total trade for the year in question amounted to some $37.5 billion,
including 516 billion for imports and $21.5 billion for exports (essentially oil).
The surplus in the Nigerian trade balance is therefore $5.5 billion.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
CSO: 4719/235

FOR OiiﬂCJAl.lﬂnE(NULY
um muslin. val. oNLI

NIGERIA

DEVELOPMENT 01’ BCONMIC, INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS WITH FRANCE EXPECTED
Paris HARCBBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBBRS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2766

[Text] The president of the French national oil company, ELF-Aquitaine [Gasoline
and Lubricants Company of France], Albin Chalandon, visited Nigeria front 16 to
16 October. He was received by Chief of State Alhaj Shebu Shagari, and met with
the country's top officials for energy and economic affairs.

Chalandon first of all joined with his hosts in a discussion of the evolution of
the oil market and prospects for the development of ELF-Nigeria's production in
terms of conditions granted to the company and thanks to the great increase in its
hydrocarbon reserves. This increase, due to new discoveries and a rise in the
productive potential of deposits already being worked, is the fruit of a very sub-
stantial exploration effort now representing 20 percent of the overall annual ex-
ploration investment in Nigeria, for a production capacity that is still only

5 percent of the total.

At the same time, the president of ELF-Aquitaine indicated that both because of the
increase in production and the French policy of diversifying oil supply sources,
his firm hopes to no: :52: Eigerian oil to the 6"}! extent compatible v‘th the
economic and technical conditions of the 011 market and more particularly, the
African crude oil market.

Concerning natural gas, inasmuch as the chief of state mhasized Nigeria's desire
to see the proposed liquefaction plant become a reality at the earliest possible
date (the Bonny liquefied natural gas plant), Chalandon confirmed that ELF-Aquitaine
was ready to increase its financial and technical participation in the project in-
sofar as its viability and profitability are ensured.

Finally, the president of ELF-Aquitaine told his interlocutors that his firm is now
studying the expansion of its activities in Nigeria in sectors other than hydro-

carbon exploration and production and more specifically, in areas where it has very
solid experience such as the local distribution of refined oil products or their

maritime transport, pharmacy, and so on.

All of the discussions showed that Nigeria hopes for isportant development of eco-
nonic and industrial relations with France and that the ELF-Aquitaine firm is

making an essential contribution.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,461. ,5
cso: 6719/235 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEioNLY

NIGERIA

NEH TEMPORARY DROP IN 01L PRICES NOTFD
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 30 Oct 81 p 2766

[Text] At a time when the Organization of Oil-Producing Countries (OPEC) was an-

nouncing its intention of holding a special meeting on 29 October in Geneva, Nigeria
decided on 21 October to put into effect another $1.50-per-barrel reduction

in the price of its crude, retroactive to 1 October. This is reportedly a provi-
sional measure only applicable in the case of the payment of invoices within
30 days. To date, Nigeria's customers have had a period of 120 days.

Consequently, the new reduction, which joins that of $é.00 decided upon on 26 Au-
gust following the failure of the last OPEC conference (HARCNES TROPICAUX ET MEDI-
TERRANEBNS, a September, p 2280), brings the actual price of Nigerian crude down
to $3¢.SO a barrel, far higher than the price of Saudi crude ($32 a barrel), but
lower than that of crude oil from the North Sea ($35 a barrel) and even crude.oil

from Libya (which has just reduced it from $40 to $38).

In oil circles, it was :nought that the Nigerian decision made on the eve of the
Geneva conference bore witness. either to a desire to speed up payment of invoices

in order to meet a pressing need for foreign exchange, or a determination to bring
pressure on certain members of OPEC still hesitating to adopt a positive attitude
toward price unification.

It was also noted that the previous drop did not motivate Nigeria's buyers suffi-

ciently. Consequently, the rise in production registered in September: 1,066,000
barrels a day (HARCNES TROPICIUX, 23 October. p 2697) would not have resulted in a
corresponding increase in sales, which have reportedly remained stagnant recently

at around 600,000 barrels a day. Furthenmore, production for the month of October
has allegedly dropped back down below a million barrels a day (900,000).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,46a
cso: 4719/235

29

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NNUY
INJI40FFICIA1.lEIE(H'LY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

AUSTERITY BUDGET-Nigeria's federal budget for the 1982 fiscal year (1 January to
31 December) should be announced during the first week of November. It is expected
that it will be marked by austerity because of the current foreign exchange reserve
drain resulting from the heavy cost of imports (MARCHES TROPICAUX, 16 October,

p 2628). Furthermore, Prof Emmanuel C. Edozien, special adviser to President

Shagari for econamic affairs. confirmed only recently that the government did in-
tend to take the measures needed to reduce monthly imports so that they will no

longer exceed 1 billion naira. He added that these measures will result in the
restoration of control over articles previously released from it: mainly raw
materials and spare parts. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAIBENS
in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2697] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981]

11,466

01L PhODUCTlON-Nigeria's oil production, which fell to 708,000 barrels in August
(MARCHES TROPICAUX, 18 September, p 2384), experienced a very clear recovery in
September, when it amounted to a reported 1,064,000 barrels a day. The increase,
after a decline lasting months, must not prevent the government from drawing up its
austerity budget for the 1982 fiscal year (see above), especially since the level is
still far from the maximum reached in March 1979 (2.4 million barrels a day) and
even from that attained in January (2.1 million). [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX

ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2697] [COPYRIGRT: Rene Hoteux
et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

INSECURITY IN LAGOS--The assassination, on 11 October in Lagos, of a secretary

of the British High Commission. Mrs Maude Eagleton, who was on her way to a Sunday
luncheon with her husband and friends of Indian origin in their Mercedes, has
aroused strong emotions among the expatriate cummunity, especially since Mr Eagleton,
a SCOA [West African Trading Company] employee who had lived in the federal capital
for some 15 years, was so seriously wounded that he had to be taken home immediately
on a special flight. Moved by the acts of aggression aimed at a number of foreign-
born persons since the beginning of the year and by protest notes from various
embassies. including those of France and the Netherlands, federal authorities have
taken a series of preventive and repressive measures. mainly strengthening security
forces and increasing patrols. However, while a certain rise in crime has affected
residential districts. insecurity also remains and is frequently borne by the
Nigerian citizens themselves. The attackers often act in groups, blocking streets
and mercilessly holding up passers-by. Large automobiles, particularly Mercedes,
are special targets because of the prestige surrounding them and the high resale
value. That of the Indian High Commission was stolen in December from the very

3C
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY

courtyard of the Connission and the Pakistani ambassador had his vehicle taken
twice in 3 years. [Text] EParis MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French
No 1876, 23 Oct Bl p 2697] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,466

RELATIONS HITH SOUTH AFRICA—-1n mid October, Alhaji Bello Haitama Yusuf, Nigerian
minister of commerce, announced that his ministry was in the process of counting

all the local companies having relations with South Africa. The survey concerns
loo-percent Nigerian companies as well as those with foreign participation. Accord-
inx to the NEWS AGENCY OF NIGERIA (NAN), South African products are reportedly being
marketed in Nigeria, such as radios, canned food, cigarettes and edible oils. These
products are said to come from Great Britain or are smuggled in from Benin. [Text]
[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2697]

11,464

AGREEMENT ON TIN--A1haji Ibrahim Hassan, Nigerian minister of mines and energy,

who has just participated in the third ministerial meeting of tin-producing coun-
tries in Koala-Lament, has stated that his country would ratify the Sixth Interna-
tional Tin Agreement as soon as possible. Along with Zaire, which began to produce
3 years ago, Nigeria is the only tin producer in Africa. The fifth-ranking world
producer, it puts out some 3,500 tons a day. Malaysia was the first country to
ratify the agreement and Indonesia is also said to be on the brink of doing so.

The conference, held i3 October, was attended by Malaysia, Indonesia, Bolivia,
Nigeria, Australia and Zaire, which supply 85 percent of all production in the
world. It was to be followed by the 26th session of the International Tin Council.
work concentrated on prices, which, according to Prof Dr Soebroto, Indonesian nin-
ister of mines and energy, remain at "unrealistic" levels. Participants emphasize
the need for an increase in prices so as to face higher costs and inflation. The
next ministerial meeting will be held in Nigeria in 1982. [Text] {Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITEKRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2698] (COPYRIGHT:

Rene Horeux et Cic ?nris 1981] ll,46&

HOTEL CONSTRUCTIUN iN ABLJa—-The future federal capital of Nigeria, Abuja, is now
the scene of hotel construction. in addition to the largest one, the Nicon Noga
hilton, which will have 1,000 rooms and whose financing was provided by a bank
consortium headed by the Bank of Indochina and the Suez (INDOSUEZ) (MARCHES TROPI-
CAUX, 16 nctoher, p 2639), two more establishments are to be built: one by

Nigerian Hotels, Ltd, with 500 rooms (according to the president of that hotel chain,
Livinus Ogbonnn, the 2-hcvrnre site has already been purchased and work should

hegin immediately) and one with 521 rooms, 25 business suites, 20 deluxe suites

and 5 presidential suites. without counting a 1,000-sest conference room. This
hotel, to cost an estimated 109 million naira, will be built by Abuja International
Hotels, Ltd, and will be 25-percent owned by the Federal Capital Development Author-
ity, FCDA, and the rest by the National Insurance Corporation of Nigeria, NICON.

the Nigerian Development Bank, the Nigerian Bank of Commerce and Industry, the New
Nigeria Development Company, the Benue Investment Company, the Kano State Invest-
ment and Property Company, the Pabol Finance and the Investment Company, Ltd. It
will be known as the Abuja Sheraton Company. Its promoters are: Towny Coker
Association (TCA) of Lagos, Neue Heimat Stadtebau (NHS) of Hamburg, Breder Interna-
tional Bu, of Utrecht, Breder Nigeria, Ltd, of Lagos, and the FCDA. Concerning

the Nicon Nona Hilton, the main contract was granted to a Swiss firm: Real Estnte
Promotion and Financing Agency (APROFIM), but because of the large French financial

.
)l

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USIZONLY

credit, most of the work was subcontracted to the Dredging and Public works Com-
pany. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct
81 p 2698] [COPYRlCHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

CHOLERA VICTIMS IN IBADAN-A dozen persons have reported died of cholera in Ibsdsn
recently. According to an official from the Ministry of Health of the state of

Oyo, of which Ibadan is the capital, the epidemic is the second to occur in a
month. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876,

23 Oct 81 p 2698] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

ROLL ON—ROLL OFF SHIP--1n September. the United Kingdom Rest Africa Lines (UKHAL)
put a second "ro-ro" ship into service serving Apapa, Nigeria, monthly. The

vessel, "he "Anzere." joins the first. the "Treno," which went into service in 1976.
The new unit, with a dead weight of 5,482 tons, was built in 1978 and flies the
Swiss flug. It can haul loads of 133 tons at a speed of 19 knots. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES ' ROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2698] [WPYRIGH'h
Rene Horrux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

A61? INVISTMBNT PROGRAM--The Nigerian AGIP [Italian Petroleum Enterprise] 011 Com-
pany (NAOC), a Nigerian subsidiary of the Italian firm, expects to invest some
$350 miliion in Nigeria next year in exploration and the development of current
extraction activities. The “ompsny, which reduced production substantially in
July compared with June (MAnoHES TROPICAUX, 18 September, p 2384), even suspended
any shipping of crude out of the federation in August, at a time when the world
market was saturated. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in
French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2766] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981]
11,464

NEH COMPANIES IN 1980--The number of limited liability companies set up in Nigeria
in 1980 is reportedly 5,455. Among them are 2,080 commercial firms (38 percent).

while the others are mainly in the sectors of engineering and construction (1,095

companies). [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877,
30 Oct 81 p 2766] 11,464

C30: 4719/235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

REGULATIONS ISSUED FOR USE OF IMPORT ALLOCATIONS
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2770

[Text] BELGOLAISE [Belgian-Zairian Bank] has just disseminated the directives
recently sent by the Bank of Zaire to the Zairian Banking Association concerning
regulations for the use, by Zairian importers, of the second installment of the
$20-million allocation (1981) from the Executive Council (in shortened form
ACE/81/II).

Destination

1 -- Food sector and trading articles: Importers named in this category may import
only goods expressly specified for each. '

2 —- Sector of manufacturing and other industries: Banks can accept only "1" forms
subscribed for goods imports to be used in industrial operations or in equipping
enterprises, with the exception of any product to be resold.

Beneficiaries of allocations must transmit to the Ministry of National Economy

and Industry a detailed summary of equipment, spare parts and products to be im-
ported, along with their impact on production.

3 -- Registration/validation of "IACE/8l/II" forms: Enterprises receiving foreign

exchange allocations must give to the approved banks "1" form import declarations
in the amounts allocated to them, which represent the CIF value of the goods,

labeled in American dollars. Importers may contract with their suppliers and sub-
scribe "1" forms in other currencies, whose exchange rates are published by the

Bank of Zaire. In this case, the conversion of the amounts allocated in the con-
tract currency must be executed on the basis of the exchange rates published on

I September 1981.

For these operations, banks are authorized to register directly, without the pre-
vious approval of the Bank of Zaire, the "I" form import declarations to which
the documents stipulated by exchange regulations must be attached.

Importation by air is subject to previous authorization from the Bank of Zaire.
The mention "Allocation of the Executive Council 1981/11" (ACE/Bl/Il) must be

included in a visible manner on "I” forms mentioned by these provisions. The
"I“ forms must be subscribed and registered or validated by the banks before

Tl

FOIIOIIWCJAI.USEibNLV
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(ENLY

31 December 1981. After that date, no presentation of "I" forms within the frame-
work of these provisions will be accepted by banks without express authorization
from the Bank of Zaire.

Official Exchange Rates Valid in the Republic of Zaire for 1 September 1981

 

 

Currency Zaires Currency Zaires

100 DH 230.7670 100 Sterling pounds 1,032.7766
100 lire 0.5610 100 Kenyan shillings 62.5538
100 Swiss francs 264.2527 100 F1 PB 207.2597
100 CD 73.6717 100 Portuguese escudos 8.6051
100 CN 92.6502 100 Pesetas 5.7455
100 CS 107.6502 C.S. $100 560.5333
100 Auﬁtridn 8Ch1111085 32.8566 CAN $100 666.2565
100 French francs 96.2292 100 yen 2.4585
1,000 CPA francs 19.2658 100 Belgian francs 14.1068

4 - Means of payment: Banks are authorized to make payment either by documentary
credit or by a documentary remittance or even by a direct transfer. Expenses and

possible commissions linked to the confirmation of documentary credits required by
suppliers must be charged to them.

In order to enable approved banks to obtain the confirmation of documentary credits
that they will have to open within the framework of this operation, the Bank of
Zaire will make the necessary currency available to them.

Payment for goods can be made upon shipment in exchange for a remittance of
6 percent of the P03 price (required by regulations for this method of payment).

If this type of payment is not accepted by the two parties, goods are payable at
the earliest within 90 days of the shipping date, with no financing interest.

5 - Constitution of funds: Funds in zaires which the importers involved must put
together must be in the amount of: a minimum 20 percent of the CIP value of the
import at the time of the opening of the documentary credit or, if this method is
not provided for, at the time of the introduction of the request for the provision
of the currency; or the percentage needed to attain a minimum of 50 percent, at the
latest within 60 days of the supplying of the currency; or the balance at the time
of the arrival of the merchandise and before the approved bank to the order of which
the transport document is drawn has allowed the goods to be forwarded.

For imports payable upon shipment, all 100 percent must be constituted by the

shipping date at the latest. If that date is more than 60 days after the day on
which the currency is supplied, then the constitution of funds as provided in the

second point remains required.

Banks called upon to finance the constitution of funds can do so provided that
they have the financing under their credit ceiling. Nevertheless, this financing
cannot exceed: 50 percent of the funds to be constituted if the importer is from
the commercial sector and 75 percent of the funds to be constituted if the benefi-
ciary is from the industrial sector.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6 -- Supervised before shipping: In keeping with general regulations, imports
brought in in keeping with this order are subject to supervision before shipping by
representatives of the Zairian Control Office (OZAC). Supply contracts lust
contain this clause. No waiver is provided.

7 -- Extension of licenses: Approved banks are authorized to extend the "I" forms
they have validated or registered provided that the request is presented before
the expiration of the term of validity for importation, with proof of shipping
documented. As there are no exceptions, "1" forms without such proof (a shipping
document or a certification of the beginning of execution of the order) will
simply be nullified.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
cso: «719/237
POI OFT1C1AI.lEﬂE(NVLY

ZAIIE

REPORT ON GECAHINES COPPER PRODUCTION FOR FISCAL YEAR 1980
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2833

[Text] The GECAHINES (General Quarries and Mines Company) report just published
emphasizes that the past year was marked by a substantial recovery in copper produc-
tion, which totaled 425,700 tons compared with 369,800 tons in 1979. and moderate
growth in cobalt production, with 14,482 tons compared with 16,029 tons.

The report notes that the result is the fruit of a sustained effort to regain the
production capacity that existed before the Kolwezi events, by means of the reorgan-
ization and restaffing of personnel, reconstitution of stock and supplies, renewal
of equipment and the completion of various investment projects.

In addition, the company produced £3,858 tons of zinc in ingots and 168 tons of
cadmium bars in 1980. Copper refining abroad made it possible, in addition, to re-
cover 78,756 kilograms of silver and 115 kilograms of gold. For its own needs,
GECAHINES also produced a large tonnage of coal, metallurgical processors and
building materials. In 1980, these types of production amounted to 124,385 tons of
coal, 142,687 tons of acid, 113,635 tons of lime and 15,506 tons of metallurgical
cement.

However, the development of the world economic situation and its impact on the metal
market, particularly the cobalt market, limited the financial resources made avail-
able to GECAMINES during the second half of 1980. Consequently, action successfully
undertaken for a year had to be slowed down and even halted instead of continued

and strengthened.

Nevertheless, this measure allows one to consider, with mitigated optimism, that the
level of production reached in 1980 will be able to be maintained in 1981. On the
other hand, this situation is translated in fact by the postponement of the imple-
mentation, not only of the expansion plan, aimed at increasing the copper production
capacity to 570,006 tons a year, but also of the rehabilitation plan, aimed at
regaining the production level corresponding to the nominal capacity of the facili-
ties: 470,000 tons of copper.

Mining: In 1980, nearly 16.7 million tons of ore were mined in all the company's
mines, a substantially higher tonnage than the average (13.8 million tons) taken out
over the past 5 years. this improvement stems from strip mining, in which the

tonnage of ore mined -- 8.6 million -- is 1.2 million tons greater than that of
1979. The essential reason is partial modernization of means of hauling ore in the

western strip mines by the use of 16 ISO-ton trucks.

/

,9

FOR OFFKJAL.US£‘0NLY
lso improved their results over those of recent years. The
cation of operat ing methods, in keeping with future condi-
iosits continued, along with work aimed at adapting mining

ieepuning oi the operation through the installation of new
round.

ant of the ore extracted rose from 4.4 percent in 1979 to

ich was partially attributable to the deepening of operations
allty of the selection of ore mined, in keeping with the

ig of personnel.

:e concentration plants processed 16 million tons of ore in
r i979). Total production of concentrates was 1,743,000
are, containing 505,000 tons of copper, and 123,000 tons of
ﬁning, 67,000 tons of zinc.

concentrates is up by 104,000 tons, or 26 percent, cmpared
:2mn 6: percent above that of the past 5 years. Despite a
.~:‘.t of the ores treated, this situation results from the

two sections :‘or the processing of mixed and oxidized ores
atrator during the second half of 1980, but also from a

in operating conditions, leading to metal recovery yields
itor.

2 plants: The metallurgical extraction plants produced
an copper, 65,400 tons more than in 1979, including 288,100
(electrolysis) and 159,700 tons by pyrometallurgy (ioundrv).

:iE 16,000 tons of contained cobalt, 600 tons more than in

aetallurgy. Finally, zinc production of the Koluezi hydro-
Sl,-’.00 tons, slightly more than in 1979.

:: results from the better condition, transport and storage

.i twarll not-calization of supplies of spare parts and con-
. uradual restafflng of personnel.

blunts: The artinlng at Shituru of part of the production of
it possible to produce 144,200 tons of electrolytic copper
iiu modes to be used in hydrometallurgical circuits. This
ans. or nearly 40 percent, compared with 1979, is still

I]. production capacity of 250,000 tons of electro copper.

is year by the shortage of imported carbon.

:odi“ cobalt obtained at Shituru made it possible to produce
mules, a tonnage very close to that obtained the two pre-

.- works: Production of the rolling mills and cable works,
.als: produced by CECAMINES, amounted in 1980 to 1,751 tons
irlous manufactured products (1,009 tons for the rolling
:he cable works). This figure is not only higher than that
:hc average production of the last 5 years (1,704 tons).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX

GECAMINES [980

1980 1979
Metal production (tons)
Copper 425,700 369,800
Cobalt 14,482 14,029
Zinc in ingots 43,848 43,700
Cadmium bars 168 212
Silver 78.8 91.7
Gold (in kilograms) 115 104
Metal sales (tons)
Copper 439,000 334,900
Cobalt 14,500 14,000
Zinc 43,800 43,700
Turnover (millions of zaires)
Copper sales 2,472.8 958.7
Cobalt sales 1,206 1,312.6
Zinc and Misc. sales 158.7 165.4
Other receipts 275.7 146.9
Total 4,113.2 2,583.6
Financial results (millions of zaires
Gross cash flow 1,836.5 1,652.4
Taxes and duties 694.6 1,245.2
Net cash flow 1,141.9 407.2
Net result 691.5 211.7
Fiscal year investments ‘ 432.5 193.8
Personnel (number) .
workers . 35,149 32,946
Management personnel 3,259 2,872
(lnvluding university graduates) 1,165 (985)
TotJE 38,408 35,818

Auxiliary facilities: Total acid production amounted to 142,700 tons, including
77,600 from calcinated blende and 65,100 from imported sulfur. The reduction in

acid production registered in recent years persists. It is essentially due to the
old age of the facilities, for which a rehabilitation plan is in the works.

The Kakontwe plants produced 113,600 tons of lime and 15,500 tons of metallurgical
cement, productions to be compared with those of 1979, which were 115,300 and
10,800 tons respectively. A new coal crushing facility, which was to make it
possible to substitute the local coal from Luena for imported coal, and a new

lime oven with a capacity of 200 tons a day were put into service during the first
quarter of 1980.

The Luena coal fields produced 124,400 tons of select or washed coal, with an
average content of 24.5 percent Cinders, or 25,200 tons more than in 1979.

Export traffic: The total volume of exports was 481,400 tons, including 433,500
tons of copper, compared with 410,700 and 365,700 tons respectively in 1979.

The distribution of these tonnngcs by shipping route was: 200,800 tons, or 41.7
percent on the Hatadi line; 38,000 tons, or 7.9 percent, on the Dar-es-Salaam line;

FOR OFFICIAL LSIL ONLY
232,600 tons, or 48.} percent, on the southern line. Air transport was used for
only 10,000 tons of cobalt, 2.1 percent of the total tonnage.

At the end of 1980, the average shipping time for products between the plant and

the port was 48 days on the Matadi line, 55 days on the Dar-es-Salaam line and 28
days on the southern line.

Major projects: As a result of financial difficulties encountered during 1980,
the investment program, set at the beginning of the year in terms of short- and
medium-term production programs, had to be greatly reduced.

industrial projects were initially classified into three categories: those needed
to maintain the current production capacity. estimated at 420,000 tons of copper

(work mainly concerning underground mines); those that should make it possible to
regain a nominal capacitv of 470,000 tons of copper or rehabilitate the production

apparatus; and finallv. those aimed at increasing the production capacity to a level
of 570,000 tons of copper.

During the first half of 1980, the completion of certain units planned within the
frametork of the second expansion plan made it possible to minimize production
losses resulting from too obsolescence of existing facilities. On the other hand,
during the second half if l960, only a few study contracts could be maintained,
particularly :he one for the filtration module to be installed at Shituru, while
activities relating to rehabilitation of the Shituru and Lullu plants were greatly
reduced.

As for the rest of the projects aimed at increasing the production capacity to
370,000 tons of cuppvr -- that is, in essential order, the plant for pyrometallur-
eical eXtraction by flash smelting and its peripheral facilities, along with the
electrorefining plant with a capacity of 100,000 tons of copper a year -- they were

suspended for the rest of the year, with the exception of some preparatory work
and maintenance.

Related activities: Among its related activities, CECAMINES has flour mills and a

hotel.

Corn meal production of the mills was 162,000 tons, close to the record level of
163,800 tons registered in 1979. Production of wheat flour totaled 8,600 tons
(7,200 tons in 1979) and that of fodder amounted to 11,100 tons (10,500 tons).

The Karavia Hotel in inhumbashi. opened in 1976, is managed by the French hotel
chain called the Tourist and Hotel Union (UTH). it has 210 rooms and all the

usual facilities (restaurants, bars, swimming pool, and so on). In 1980, the aver-
age rate of occupancy dropped to 55 percent, compared with 64 percent in 1979, but
it Tvndlnud Earnely higher than the 41 percent figure of 1978 and the 28 percent

of 1977. Total turnover [or 1980 was 12,373,000 zaires.

ﬁtCAﬂlNES Structures

Tho Honerui Quarries and Mines Company (GECAMINES) is a Zairian state enterprise
of an industrial and commercial nature.

'50

4

FINICNWWCIAI.[EHE(MVLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 31 December 1980, its board of directors was made up of the following: chainan
of the board, L'mbu Kyanitala; administrative director to the chaimn of the board,

Robert Crem; administrative director, Norbert Rocher; board members: Buhendua 3w:
Mushaba, Ekila Liyonda Ngongo Pembamoto, Jean-Claude Nicault. Sambve Dianda and
Boboy Mokpala.

General secretary: Lucien Kort

Directors: of operations, Henri Sorel; technical, Jean Louveaux; administative,
Kasongo lzwanba Ha Lenge; financial, Norbert Rocher.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,664
cso: 4719/243

.'.'J

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

BRIEFS

NIOBIUH 0R£-SOHINKl (Mining and Industrial Company of Kivu) has announced that the
2airian Government has given its approval to the establishment of a new mining com-
pany in the Kivu region. The setting up of the new firm, the proposed agreement
for which was approved by the Zairian Government and drafted by SOHINKI, will re-
quire an investmen: of $50 million. within the new company. called the Kivu Mining
Company (SOMIKIVU). the American firm Metallurg, one of the main processers and
users of niobium in the world, will hold 70 percent of the initial capital, esti-
mated at around 6.5 million zaires ($1.17 million). SOMIKIVU will essentially

work pyroehlore, the ore containing niobium. Sources close to SOHINKI report that
for a single deposit, proven pyrochlore reserves guarantee at least 50 years of
mining. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1874,

9 Oct 81 p 2578] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,664

AID T0 UCANDAN REFUGEES-—Emergency food worth $2.93 million will be sent by the
world Food Program (NF?) to Ugandan refugees living in Zaire. According to the
“PP, the number of these refugees went from 80,000 in March to some 108,000 today.
Aid will be granted in the form of shipments of grain, leguminous vegetables and
edible oils. This brings the total food aid granted by the HP? to the refugees
since March to $5.7 million. The "PP estimates that a large number of these refu-
gees will settle permanently in Zaire. A program is now being worked out to facil~
itate their accommodation. Food aid will continue until other sources of supplies

exist, tue HF? says. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPiCAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French
No 1876, 23 Oct 81 p 2703] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

COBALT PhODCCTION-—Zalre, like Zambia. has been forced to reduce its cobalt produc-
tion because of the market slump. According to the METAL BULLETIN, GECAMINES [Gen-
eral Quavries and Mines Company], a Zairian state firm, has decided to reduce its
production by about 40 percent in order to get rid of its stock, now on the order
of 16.000 to 15,000 tons (over an entire year of production). including that stored
in Belgium. [Text] [Paris NARCHES TROPICABX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1876.
23 Oct Bl p 2703] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,564

FUEL PRICES-~Thc Zairinn Executive Council has decided to freeze fuel prices until
31 January 1982. The decision was made known to heads of the main oil companies
operating in Zaire during the meeting which they held on 22 October with the deputy
first state commissioner and state commissioner for the administration of the terri-
tory, Vunduawe Tc Pemako. it is specified that the Executive Council's decision was
motivated by the consequences that higher fuel prices would have had on the coun-

try's economy, especially the key sectors of agriculture and transport. For about

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! 0F11C1AL USEIDNLY

two weeks, a tangible drop has been noted at the level of the distribution of oil
products. It is thought in official circles that this situation was deliberately
created by oil companies in order to force the Executive Council to back a new
increase in the prices of oil products. The latest fuel price increase came on

20 July. Rillowing that hike, the price of gas (super and regular) went from

4 zaires to 5.50 zaires (l zaire = about 1 French franc). [Text] [Paris MARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2770] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

TIN HIM NG--Zaire has embarked upon a program to develop its tin mining projects

in order to encourage the declining mining sector. This announcement was made on
21 October by Ngongo Sulubika, Zaire's permanent representative to the International
Tin Council in Kuala-Lumpur. Ngongo Sulubika added that the program is also aimed
at intensifying tin prospecting and determining the most suitable methods of ex-
traction. The Zairian representative, who presented the situation of "tin in
Zaire and its future prospects" to the Council, indicated that Zairian tin produc-
tion has sceadily declined since 1973. It actually went iron 6,400 tons in 1973

to 4,300 tons in 1979 and the decline has continued since that time. A feasibility
study is underway at the Hanono Mine (eastern region of the country), which con-
tains a minimum of some 22,600 tons of reserves. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX
ET HIDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2770] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux

TRADE Ullﬂ BELGIUM-In 1980, Belgian imports from Zaire amounted to 36,156,000,000
Belgian francs, or 1.72 percent of all Belgium's purchases from other countries.
These figures show an increase of 28.8 percent compared with 1979 (28,074,000,000
Belgian francs, 1.57 percent of the total). Zaire thus remains Belgium's tenth-
ranking supplier, a position it has maintained for 3 years. Zairian exports to
Belgium in 1980 included 47 percent nonferrous metals, essentially copper. As

for Be1gian exports to Zaire, they totaled 7,673,000,000 Belgian francs, or .40 per-
cent of all Belgian sales abroad. This amount marks a 32.2-percent increase com-
pared with the previous fiscal year (5,778,000,000 Be1gian francs, or .35 percent
of total exports). Over half of the Belgian sales to Zaire stem from the metal
manufacturing sector (54 percent). The rest of the Zairian purchases mainly in-
volve chemical products (14 percent), textiles (7.4 percent), iron and steel

(4.7 percent), agriculture (4.4 percent) and food (4.2 percent). By order of
importance, Zaire is Belgium's Z7th-raiking customer and the fourth in Africa,
coming after Nigeria, Algeria and Libya. The balance of Belgian-Zairian trade
therefore shows a difference of 28.483.000.000 Be1gian francs in favor of Zaire
(compared with 22,296,000,000 for 1979). Only Saudi Arabia, the United States, the
Netherlands and Japan occupy a more aduantageous position in this field via-a-vis
Belgium. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877,

30 Oct 81 p 2771] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

BILLION-FRANC TELEPHONE BILL-~1n October, the last meeting of the retiring Be1gian

Cabinet took up a rather special question: the telephone bill of the Zairian Em-
bassy in Brussels. If one is to believe a recent article by the TIMES correspondent
in the Belgian capital, that bill has practically never been paid to the Belgian
Telephone Office since the Belgian Congo achieved independence in 1980. Since it

was difficult to cut off the embassy's telephone service, the different governments
in Brussels have tolerated the situation and, since the telephone and telex operate

n‘

F02 OFFK‘MI L'SI" ONL‘.’
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

now totaling a little over a billion Belgian francs. Consequently, the retiring
government has decided to make a final request to Kinshasa. Freddy Hillockx,
minister of telecommunications, has preposed to Zaire a plan to pay the bill in
4 years, with annual payments of 288 million Belgian francs, the first due on

31 October 1981. This time, the minister used the threat of a halt in service.
[Text] (Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81
p 2771] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1981] 11,664

for the Marketing of Ores]. The counters set up by SOZAGOH will be managed by
mixed teams made up of Zairian diamond experts and expatriates chosen by SOZACOH,

on the one hand, and of diamond experts chosen by approved buyers and working
under the exclusive direction of SOZACOM. These counters will be set up in areas

declared as cottage industry zones of operation by the state commissioner for
mines, particularly Tshikapa, Luebo, Demba and Lusambo. [Text] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2771] (COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1961] 11,466

TRADE WITH [VORY COAST--0n 15 October, contact was made on 15 October in Kinshasa
between an Ivorian commercial delegation, headed by David Amuah, director of stock
of the Ivorian Foreign Trade Center (C102), and the officials of the National Asso-
ciation of Zairian Enterprises (ANEZA), as well as those of the International Trade
Center of Zaire (CCIZ). Meetings dealt with the way to promote economic and com-
mercial trade between the run countries. [Text] (Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1877, 30 Oct 81 p 2771] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et
Cie Paris 1981] 11,h64

COOPERATION WITH GDR--The first session of the GDR/Zaire joint commission was held
in Kinshasa from 20 to 24 October. The only perceptible result at the close of the
work is the satisfaction expressed by both sides at having held the meeting and

having outlined a number of directions in which concrete cooperation could go. The

joint commission will next meet in East Berlin next year. but the date has not been
determined. [Text] [Paris MARCHES THOPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878,
b Nov 81 p 2833] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux ct Cic Paris 1981] 31,464

C30: h7l9/263

c3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

NEED FOR SOLUTION 0F ZAIRIAN. HALAHIAN BORDER DISPUTES NOTED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 252. 9-22 Nov 81 pp 16. 15
[Article by Masautso Hasautso--passages enclosed in slantlines printed in italics]

[Text] Zaire and Malawi are trying to present Zambia with a fait
uccompli in certain provinces known for their wealth of strategic
mineral deposits.

Border disputes between Zambia and two of its neighbors have come out into the
open in recent weeks, after simmering quietly for some tine.

Zambia's prime minister. Nalunino Mundia. said recently that the government would
take the problem of its borders with its northern neighbor. Zaire. before the OAU
[Organization of African Unity] and the International Court of Justice. unless a
friendly solution was rapidly found. And a short while ago. in Parliament. a
state minister on the prime minister's staff announced that Zambia was publicly
acknowledging its border conflict with its eastern neighbor. Malawi.

Up to now. Zaire has physically occupied the Zambian territory of Kaputa, in
Northern Province. and has established customs and immigration posts there. thus

reinforcing its claims to those areas. border posts have been establishedixlxaputa,
at Mutamhala. 20 km inside Zambia. and in western Kapula. at Musaca. 19 km outside
the country.

The regirn in dispute is known for its wealth in strategic ores: platinum.tungsten.
and also large quantities of cobalt and copper.

The mineral deposits go all the way into Zairian territory. where large quantities
are already being extracted by the Union Miniere (a Belgian company) and an inter-

national consortium. the Tenke-Fungurume Mining Company. headed by Anglo-American
Charter Consolidated.

0n the east. Malawi claims. as an integral part of its territory. the portion of
land where the customs and immigration post is located and is demanding the
departure of Zambian officials from the region. The Halawians have refused to

recognize the colonial boundary. which places the custom post in Zambian territory.
and demand that the line be redrawn so that region will revert to then.

M;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is the second time Malawi has demanded a part of Zambian territory. About 13
years ago. Malawi's then-president. Kamuzu Bands. asserted that three districts in
Zambia's Eastern Province were actually inside Malawi's borders.

Eastern Province is one of the most productive regions of the country. The two
countrie: had only been independent for a years and had not yet established

diplomatic relations.

Vegotiations on the two problems—-including summit-level talks--have not up to now
brought a solution.

Scars of Hiscory

The Zambian borders present one of the most classic examples of the scars ofhistory.
Circumscribing a country of 752,615 square kilometers. they were drawn by the

colonial powers. which attached little importance to such things as tribal distribu-
Lion. economic activity or customs. and communication links.

Surrounded by eight countries. Zambis's longest borderline is shared with Zaire-
1,800 km. The line runs by the following provinces: Northern, Luapula. Copperbelt
and Northwestern. 0n the Zairian side the same boundary marks the southernmost
limit of the province of Shaba (formerly Katanga).

The border with Angola. on the west. is second longest: 1,200 km. Zambia also

shares borders with Zimbabwe. Malawi and Mozambique (respectively 750. 600 and 400
km in length).

The current Zambia—Zaire border problems might be considered as a legacy from the
colonial era. British officials responsible for administering the distant border
regions adjacent to non-English speaking territories tended to have special prob-
lems due primarily to the poor connmnications between them and their counterparts
on the other side of the border.

In some cases that anomaly provoked one of the earliest forms of resistance to
coercive colonial policies such as the taxation of the natives. Zambian villagers
easily escaped the colonial authorities simply by crossing the border. knowing
quite well they would not be pursued.

Later. they returned to their villages when calm had returned.

The language barrier was no problem for these rebels. because the villages on the
other side of the border belonged to their own ethnic group. The people on both
sides in the border regions generally had the same chiefs and even the same
relatives.

After 1964. when it became independent. Zambia did not feel itself threatened on
the Zairisn border. since that country too was independent. unlike Rhodesia. Angola
and Mozambique. which were still governed by hostial. racist regimes.

The border problem with Malawi appeared when there were skirmishes between Malawi

authorities and members of the Watchtower religious sect (now banned in that coun-
try). producing repercussions in Zambia in the form of a wave of refugees arriving

FOR OFFICIAL '. SE 0M]
r'Ok OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

in Eastern Province. But these refugees. for the most part. tended to pose more of
an administrative problem than a border problem. i.e. a political problem. for the
two countries.

A aore important border dispute flared up in 1968. when Kamuzu Bands declared that
all of Zambia‘s Eastern Province historically belonged to Malawi. That assertion
did not seem to be based on the undeniable fact that initially northeastern Zambia
had been put under the British colonial control of Nyassaland--the name which

Malawi bore before independence. 0n the contrary. President Bands seemed to insist
on the fact that the natural frontiers of the former kingdom of Malawi. for which he
named the count:y at independence. extended over what is now Zambia's Eastern
Province.

That claim has very broad implications. In the first place. it raises the issue of
national territorial expansion, and secondly it advocates the notion of regrouping
the ethnic communities of independent Africa. Carried to an extreme. such a
situation would tend to create irredentist policies.

it is necessary to iind peaceful solutions to these border problems now, because
we have seen how the issue of boundary alterations has been the cause of some of
Africa's most explosive conflicts.

The situation which recently developed on the road linking Luapula and Zambia'a
Northern Province with the Copperbelt could lead to a more serious confrontation
between the Zambian and Z;_rian people. Zambians traversing the Zairian corridor
are harrnssed by that country's customs and immigration officials. Among other

things. the Zairians have ccnfiscated merchandise and demanded the payment of
transit fees. They have even begun enforcing the international vaccination

requirements. whereas previously those formalities had never been taken very
seriously.

On Paper

Zambia conSiders the construction, now under way. of a road linking the three
provinces within its borders to be the long-term solution to the problem of com-
munications. Zambiu's desire to peacefully coexist with Zaire and Malawi has been
shown by its nonhelligerent reaction to the actions of its neighbors.

It is obvious that neither the GAO nor the International Court of Justice can do
much more to put a definitive end to the border disputes. since those borders are
not marked and. in addition, are poorly defined.

Escalation of the conflict on Zambia's northern and eastern borders must be

avoided by bilateral talks. which would thus eliminate the need to resort to formal
arbitration. The OAU and the International Court of Justice could certainly find
solutions on paper. but not on the ground. It only remains for the peoples and
governments of the three countries to realize that it is in the interest of all

of them to resolve these disputes quickly and amiable. And this is not easy when

one's partners are Hobutu and Bands.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9516

C50: 4719/213 5&5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY