FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10186
14 December 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 65/81)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. .Haterials fron'foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hbrds or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FRANCE

Gallois Interviewed. Voiceo View: on 'Zero Option'
(Pierre Gellois Interview; LA STAHPA. 1 Dec 81) ..

Briefs
Riosile's Range Political

ITALY

Briefs
Reagan's Disarmament Propooel

ECONOMIC

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Metalworkers' Union Strategy To Combat Unemployment
(Reiko Tornow; STERN, 5 Nov 81) ..................

ITALY
Svimez Report cites North-South Economic Gap
(Nando Hezzei; IL SOLE-25 ORB, 25 Oct 81) ........
POLITICAL

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Point. of Dissension Between rohl, Geiooler Noted
(Ludolf “errata“: CAPITAL. NOV 81) ooeaooeoouooooo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

PS-Deputy. Governuent Ralationa; Economic. Foreign Policy
(Lionel Joapin Interview; n: max. onsmvn'rm, 17 Oct 81)

ITALY

Alleged Socialiat Plan To Split OGIL Union
(Ime, 90c: 81) I0......OI.COOCOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOCO0-0....

Drop in Union kmrahip. by Renzo Rooati
Anti-Inflationary Pact. by Loren“ Schcui

GENERAL

FRANCE

Ariane Launch Delay

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GALLOIS INTERVIMD, VOICES VIEWS 0“ mm OHION'
PH031519 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 1 Dec 81 p 5

[Interview with General Pierre Gallois by Paolo Patruno: "Zero Option Leads
Only to U.S. Disengagenent in Europe" in Paris; date not given]

[Text] Paris--"In Geneva the Americans are negotiating with the objective of
the 'zero option.‘ To prevent the deploy-eat of the Euronissiles, the Soviets
are offering a reduction in their nuclear weapons and perhaps a partial
withdrawal of their SS-20's. But if the negotiations end with an agreement.
Europe will have little reason to be pleased or to applaud. Because in any
case it is taking a big gamble." General Pierre Gallois, internationally
famous strategist. author of a dozen studies of military strategy and inter-
national relations and one of the creators of the French strike force under

De Gaulle, expressed in an interview granted to LA STAMPA all his reservations,
as a specialist, about the Geneva negotiations and above all about European

policy.
[Question] Why is Europe in danger?

[Answer] The problen is very simple: what specifically does the U.S. zero

option offer mean? It means that the United States will relinquish deploying

its Pershing II and cruise missiles in NATO countries served by U.S. personnel.

In other words. Reagan is backtracking fron Carter's proposal, correcting the
"imprudent" levity of his predecessor at the White House and in practice
facilitating a disengagement from the European theater. It is absolutely senseless
and idiotic that European politicians hnaediately supported and applauded

Reagan's zero option proposal.

[Question] But in exchange for the nondeploynent of the Buronisailes the
United States wants to secure a similar zero option from the Soviets.

[Answer] what, in fact. will the Anericana be able to obtain, after many efforts?
Perhaps that the USSR will reduce its nunber of nissiles targeted on Europe a
little, perhaps by a few hundred? But it is certainly the older weapons that

will be put into storage. What about the SS-ZO'a? The Russians night. as a
denonstration of good will, agree to halt their deployment, reduce their nunbers
or pull them back a few hundred kilometers. Even deployed in the Urals the

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet SS-ZO's could still hit the majority of main nerve centers in central
West Europe. 80 what will we have achieved? Europe would remain the 0583's
hostage, with the additional drawback of the U.s. disengagement.

[Question] Why have European politicians supported the 0.8. zero option
proposal: why did they not insist instead on the deploy-eat of the Buromissiles?

[Answer] The European leaders, starting with Chancellor Schmidt. have displayed
great ignorance of the problem of their countries' security. They are chasing
public support and do not want to be accused of bellicosity. But they would

do better to explain the real situation to people. They have been wrong from
the outset. They should have reached an agreement with the Anericans to fern

a fleet of 20—30 submarines deployed in the various seas and constantly on the
move. Secrecy would have been safeguarded and the Euromissiles would have
retained the advantage of nobility.

[Question] 80 what is the choice now. General Gallois?

[Answer] In my opinion the zero option is inconsistent and suicidal for us
Europeans, who would be its victims. By accepting it, the European leaders
are making their countries' future dependent on Russian good will.

[Question] In conclusion, is the dloice between unconditional surrender and
disaster?

[Answer] A disaster was a nightnare until 10 years ago. Now strategic changes
and weapons miniaturization have made this terrifying hypothesis less realistic.
There is still a possibility of a limited war, which could even be restricted
to a mere disarming action to neutralize military objectives without hitting
the civilian populations.

[Question] So what can we expect from Geneva?

[Answer] As far as I an concerned, it will be worse than the withdrawal of
the Thur and Jupiter missiles from Europe under Kennedy.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editr. LA STAHPA S.p.A.

CSO: 3104/53

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCE mm:

BRIEFS

HISSILB'S RANGE POLITICAL--‘lhe col-unique from the [President's office in the]
Elysee on 16 Nave-bet, announcing the choice of the Hades tactical nuclear niuile

for the yeara to come, included a figure underlined for the benefit of the Germans,
'Ihe exiating Pluton niuile eyatea

namely, the niaeile'e range of 250 kilo-etert.
has a range of only 100 kilometera. Stetioned in Rance, it could hit only FRG
lhe Hades Iiuile, however,

territory and the West Gemna are quite aware of it.
[Text] [Patio VALBURS Acmuzs in French

can reach the 60!! from the Rhine.
23 Nov 81 p 19] (COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Veleure actuellea"]

C50: 3100/ 152

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

REAGAN'S DISARHAMM PROPOSAL--Rome--ln an article in today's L'UNITA,

[secretary of the PCI Foreign Policy Studies Center] Romano Ledda recognizes

the major importance of the 0.5. proposal. whose "philosophy reverses the
previous one: whereas before, rearmament use the precondition for any future
negotiations. now it is asserted that there is a desire to negotiate a compre-
hensive reduction of all weapons." Nevertheless. the PCI representative identifies
"a fundamental contradiction" in the 0.5. President's speech. According to
Ledda, Reagan is placing himself in "a negotiating position that is neither
strong nor reasonable" because it goes beyond even the Italian socialists'
stance--anong the most radical-won the zero option. Indeed, it aims not only

at the dismantling of missiles deployed since 1977, but also challenges the
previous situation which, Ledda maintains. was "by consent" recognized as
balanced. [Excerpt] [PMZSlSSl Milan CORRIERE DELLA sum in Italian 22 Nov 81 p 5]

C30: 3104/52

(9
FOR OFl-‘IGAL USE ONLY
NBTALHORKERS' UNION STRATEGY TO COMBAT UNEMPLOYMENT
Hamburg STERN in German 5 Nov 81 p 262

[Article by Heiko Tornow: ”’No Icing on the Cake'--Nhy the Hetelworkers' Union
Plans to Fargo Nigh Pay kaises"]

[Text] Nolfgan Engelnann, deputy representative of the Hetalworkers' Union in
Hamburg. had just explained his union's strategy for the impending contract
negotiations to the staff of the Kolben Schaidt fire in Hamburg--scanty percentage
raises but in return pensions st 60. The reaction surprised him. "For that

we'll strike. even on Christmas Eve!" 1b their union leader the metalworkers
announced willingness to strike.

"Pay pension" is the term that the Hetalworkers' union seems to have used
successfully not only in Hamburg to mobilize its membership in spite of dire
economic prognosis. In View of the alarmingly high unemployment--feared to
reach 2 million in the next winter--the metalworkera are urged to forgo parts of
their salary increase.

In return Nana Janssen, in charge of pay programs for the world's largest single
union, would like to wrest the following model from the industrialists of
Gassmtmetall: Hetalworkers will "go on pension" at 60 instead of the current 63
years. The industry is to pay them 90 percent of their salaries. The employers
are also to pay social security contributions for them until the "paid
pensioners" qualify for their state retirement. At the same time the jobs
abandoned voluntarily by the older colleagues are to be filled by unemployed
younger workers.

Holfgang Bngelmann thinks that 70,000 younger metalworkers could take the place
of colleagues who retire early. But the hamburg resident was given wrong figures
by the headquarters in Frankfurt--in an internal document of the Hetelworkers'
union leadership a figure of barely 30,000 newly opened jobs is mentioned.

For Franz Steinkuehler. leader of the Stuttgart local of the Metalworkers' Union.
this figure is too low. He is agitating among union leadership and members for
a more comprehensive plan: In the future the workers reaching age 57 will work
only three-quarter time. at 58 only half tine and should retire at age 59. The
union man has node calculations as to the benefit of this comprehensive

S
FINICMHW(JAI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

suggestion for the labor narket--67.622 jobs in the netal industry and 8395 among
steelworkers .

Steinkoehler also pleads that the pay pension should not be negotiated at the

sane tine as contract terns but later. The reason? The retire-ant policy is so
conplicated that the contract negotiations planned for February 1982 w0uld
unnecessarily be prolonged by it. and "we could be pressured for agree-eat."

That could lean that the union would be forced to sake great concessions in both
the salary increases as well as the paid retirenent areas. However, Steinkuehler
wants to evoke just as few illusions about salary increases as union leader Janssen.
A shortening of the working life neana that the firm would have to expend mney
that will then not be available for higher salaries. Says Steinkuehler: "Of
course we can't have that. That would be icing on the cake."

Opinions still differ about the asount that netalworkers would have to give up
in their salaries in favor of early retirement. The Hetelworkera' Union clains.
"Not even one percent of salary." The esployers' union Guest-stall is talking
of 2 percent.

Behind the scenes uniOn leaders are already talking about figures in a possible
contract: "we can be happy if we get to sign at 3.5 percent plus contract rates."
This would not even neet the inflation rate of 7 percent.

The employers still do not know how to react to the union proposal. Peter Stihl,
spokesman for the employers in Baden-Hurttesberg, last weekend flatly rejected
the paid retiresent. It would be so costly that pay increases for 1982 would
have to be ”so unpleasantly low” that the union could not defend the contract

to its neshership. Besides. pensions are a utter for the state and should rennin
so.

On the other hand. the supreme federation Gesastnetall praised the noderate tone
of the Metalworkers' Union. After all. enployer representatives have already
calculated the benefits of a paid retirement for the firns. A younger staff is
more efficient. Besides. the esployers could dessnd that the Hetelworksrs'
Union abandon its proposal for a 35 hour week in return for concessions in the
field of paid retirenent.

The idea of paid retirement will he of concern for other branches of the industry
as well. Even before napping his own union's strategy Eugen Loderer, chief of
the lletalworkers. obtained the approval of alsost all nenhers of D63. Only the
Printing and Paperworkera' Union did not agree.

The other unions want to copy the paid retiresent agreenent if the Hetalworkers'
Union's initiative is successful.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner 0 Jshr AG 8 Co.

9240
C80: 31 03/99

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SVIHKZ REPORT CITES norm-scum aoouomc GAP
Milan ll. SOLE-26 ORE in Italian 25 Oct 81 pp 1, 2
[Article by Rondo Nanci]

[Text] Rona-~Industrialisation and urban renewal are the two nain problems
involved in the issue of the South in this phase, and these are the issues which
special intervention will have to concentrate on nore in order to reduce the
persistent gap between North and South. The Svine: (Association for the Indus-
trial Development of the South) 1981 report concentrates on these two aspects
of the situation in particular depth. pointing out that all the regions in
southern Italy are well below the national average in per capita production,
and only Abruuo, and to acne extent biolise and Sardegna, show that they have
reached higher levels, above the average of southern regions, thanks to a type
of diversified industrialization with plants that have the lowest index of
sectorial concentration. In these regions, according to the report, a trend is
developing which has already been encountered in the North and in the central
South in other decades, namely that of "an extension towards the South of the
territorial propagation of develop-ant." Farther south, in fact. one finds
areas in which intense urban and demographic concentration are a handicap to
develop-eat, or regions like Galabria havim the lowest index of industrialization
and production per capita or, finally, phenonena of regression like in Taranto
and Brindisi. in Puglia, and Syracuse in Sicily. In this last case, the diffi-
culties are due to a vast spectral of factors, among which the difficulties of
large plants and the urban problem stand out, as well as dmgraphic expansion.
These are becoming, more and are clearly. real obstacles to econonic progress
and to the location in these areas of new industries.

It is with these obvious internal gaps within the area and with related problems
that the policy for the South or” the 1980's will have to cons to grips. inter-
vening not only at a national level but also at a regional level. The report
esphasises the ilportance of industrialization to anss revenue, and insists on
rejecting as inadequate the suggestions of those who propose concentrating on
developing the tertiary sector and on deindustrialiaation as an alternative to
develop-ant. Only industry can guarantee the absorption of the excess labor
supply in the South (816,000 people. or 10 percent of the labor force, as opposed
to 882,000 in the Center and North, or 5.3 percent of the labor force). This

_ excess of labor will tend to continue in the South because of the continuing

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expansion of the population of this area, despite the slower growth rate regis-
tered in recent years. Of course this stimlus to be given to industrialisation,
especially sophisticated sectors, mat not neglect the development of a tertiary
elite; but the report warns against the possibility of. developing this type of
tertiary sector in netropolitan areas like those in the South, because overpopu-
lation, scarcity of civic services and housing, their "operational failure,
mmploynent, and urban deterioration are phenomena which are strictly inter-
dependent and must be attacked jointly." Here physical reneual is not enough,
the report warns, in this connection. There mat be a social-urbanistic renetnl
which lakes it possible to find adequate solutions to the problem of elploynent
and unelploy-ent through long-ten intervention at a broad territorial level.
But to do thisnin other words to do what policies for the South have not done in
the last decade-we met resort to ways of planning that lid: the political will
of the central authorities to that of local authorities.

As for the overall picture in the South this past year, the most significant data
in the report decry an increase in population, going fro- 3’0.9 percent of the
nation's population in 1973 to 35.6 percent in 1980, and, for the sane period,
an increase in the proportion of the population eqloyed in agriculture of fro-
lol.3 percent to 106.7 percent and of those occupied in industry fro- 52.6 to 54.3
percent. For the sane period, the added value of agriculture increased by only
0.1 while that for industry increased 0.7. Between 1973 and 1980, bed: deposits
increased from 16.6 percent of the national total to 17.6 percent, but jobs
diminished iron 15.3 to 13.9 percent. In this past year there has been a relative
contraction in private consuqtion, and a recovery in investlsent in absolute
values which does not correspond to the rate of accululation, however, which
fell in the South to 25.9 percent of the national average as cowared to 29.5
percent in 1974. There was also a reduction in pay-ants nde by the state and

a 30 percent reduction in contributions nde by the mesa del Heszogiolo (ms
for Southern Italy) to productive sectors.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editrice ll Sole-24 Ore s.r.1.

9855
(30: 3104/37

8
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
mu (DH-'H‘IM. USE ONLY

PONTIGAL man. REPUBLIC 0? 0mm

POINTS or DISSBSIOB BM 1081., 681881.33 mm
Henburg CAPITAL in Gernen Nov 81 pp 14. 15
[L’rticle by Wolf Hornenn: "left my

5.157 The SP» leederehip trio 1- et odde within iteelf; but
the cm ie not much better off. Helnut Kohl met defend hin-

eelf egeinet the attache of hie own eeoretery-generel.

Oppoeition leeder Eel-at Kohl eeye he would tether not face the problem confront-
ing Belmt Sohnidt. For thet utter, he doee not need then booeuee he hee problem
of hie own. he chancellor my be oonfmnted with rebellion in the renke but in
Kohl'e oeee it ie dieeeneiom at the top. whenever he triee to lay down oppoeition
etreteg, hienrohingordere ere thwertedby theverynnwhoehouldninteine
reletiondaip of epeeiel truet to the perty oheirnm— the eeontnry-genenl. ht
Heiner Geieeler, 51, doee not let e eingle opportunity so by without undeninin;
the enthority of hie pereonel friend, Belmt Kohl. um. the party oheinen ie
etriving for her-ow, Geieeler publicly oelle for 'reedineee to debate" end In
“opening for new idea.“ ‘l'o ehow motly whet he neene by thet. he offere proof
ofhienon-edherenoetothepertylinegivenoutbylohlineeohendeverynediu
thet pd'ovidee hill with e tom.

At the very eonent thnt the coo/(so donineted Lend government“ were pampering to
introduoe dreft legieletion in the Dundeeret that would ourteil redioel ebuee of
the freedoe of eeeenbly, Geieeler edvieed the petty not to oreete the inpueeeion
thet it wee out to defend the etetue que with the help of rubber bullete end re-
etriotione on the right to denonetrete. At the very nonent thet young votere.
dieeppointed by the ooelition'e neohinetiene end the weekneee of the goveruent.
were elowly turning to ﬂae CEO/080, the “eatery-genera one out with the etete-
nent thet the trend mint them/OBI! enoncyoungvoterehednotyet ebeted.
Atthenxyeountthetthepeeoemtweeemoeneingthesmtoheveuoond
thought” Geieeler, the individualiet Swnbinn, we trying to eehe the peeoenike
in hie own oenp look better, celliw for: "nore peeoe. nore freedoe froe force,
fewer weepone.’ Be eleo edopted nveriok poeitione on oonthovereiel ieeuee which
had not been counted anon; thoee in which he hnd ow expertiee before. Vithout
nah edo, he oene out egninnt me ehipnente to Sandi-Anne whoee moment he
refemd to ee "oneteble" end 'leee then eerioue.‘ He revised thie poeition leter
but hed by then provided the government, which hed been undecided on the ieeue.
with e mob-needed reepite.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Home nouth.theminent ammuormmmmm1m
thethevuvillingtcnpeet 'wmdmeppleeer‘e'ietryin‘temm
theIoniapolioyorientetionethieperty.lehlmldlibtoeeethem
neat gobetoretbewbliobyiteelttouphinthembl-eﬁedetentepo-
lioyhumoomtered.hepertyleederehipmdlthemm
Mopiece byOeieeler eppeeredintheputy'e mamas-m
edditmtbecw/GU'esedtomintceoutiniMMetideu
intention viththeSoviet leader-hints mu. hewvu. Milli-nee
mmn unexpected. Geieeler m an eeverel tile. m an an cw/
ehcnldprovidefer'noreetenopeuinctothelet.‘

RE;

8?:

mmmmmmmtmemmmmmm-
Mbemeppemtmmmthemtioutnthemm”
greuineulyﬁovuber.ceieelermtedtotmit intoeywthuenbhbut
Iohlmtedtceeeﬂnlergopelitioslimedebeted.lehldidvineutinthe'
endbuttomforympeopledidtebphoeulellinmiohtheperwne
subjected to mblio emtiw.

Geieeler didnot reetriot himltto eubetteqrte ton-b the petty dam

ever intontigmbeedvhonenly enouteeﬂaepolioiee othie macaw-ml.
He went beyond that, looking {or opportunitieeto teethi- M the
otBelmthhl.k1-lythieyeu.theputydninnhedint m
mrmiinkthetheexpeotedhiltcm the you.

Geieeler countered by inning e public deolm confidence 'e
mtmdthomtmthtﬂnkvmldetvmthejobtorul ea:
Geieeler'e confidence. In not, the labor In doee etipnlete ne‘er
mldmlyhdiniuedbytheumtewmyhxtitm them
mttheyoudattobe,thueumquetimuteuhoeevilheeveﬂdbe

tedbythepertyhim.

Whonnnkdid etepdwn—endvoeemttonerlinuemtortor ecommto
resolve the ieeue—Kohl naked that the perty m'e poeition be eboliehed for
econouw roe-om. mt Geieeler enoe uni: lode use of his prerogative nd ”poin-
ted Peter Rednnehi, bend of the public mun divieion at m hem-rm.
umpu'tymer.1nthie cue, eooumieevureeohedvithmkihold-
ing down both Jobs eimlteneouly.

E

EE
is?

E
?

$5

9.8
iii

* E
3 a

In September, Geiuler celled e preee contennoe Kohl hed exp-only nbd utbe
held to enneunee draft guideline- ter the My emu. By Ming he an,
the secretary-general eon-ed dittioultiee to: the m when nbeeqoent cheapo
toque-tedbytheputypreeidinteokentheeirotepdeoemolotieneadm
'1.e author- ot the original dnft.

without a. doubt, the rehtiomhip between Eel-1t Kohl end hie anew
ie in shambles. It in plum to see tint the tvc toner triendehcalhinelnd—
Paletinnte heme dittomt politioel enteoedente. Geieeler, uhoee tether worked
for the old Center Putty, has remind e letting center Pu'ty politician st
hen-t. Kohl, on the other head, belong- te the enlightened ecueemtive eup—
e. political orientetion the peatvu: cm developed ea ite very on oonttibntien
to Gem political life.

10
??
§

oﬂnqwﬂimmmturcmmtupm-tomm
t

m mottotdtobw no ”notary-gourd. amtnumm
wasmap“otmmuplmuomthtmtouyhold.uthomtorot
his madman policies In could oomtnbly than. ovation conﬂicting
viththu.3ut1nnohoouo,homldmtnbollwutthuhutotformn-

station.
comm: 19816nm +Juhr A6 a: 00.

9478
0803 3103/13}

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PS-DEPUTY. GOVERNMENT RELATIONS; ECOROMIC, FOREIGK POLICY
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in FrenCh 17 Oct 81 pp 68-50

[Interview with Lionel Jospin by Albert du Roy and Kathleen Evin; date and
place not given.)

[Text] Today, the great debates for the Socialists are more
in the Parliament and in the antechaabers of power than in
the sonewhat deserted "old house." It is therefore on the
results of these 5 months of government action that Lionel
Jospin, first secretary of the Socialist Party. answered our
questions.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: What do you think of Bdmond Haire's statements?

Lionel Jospin: No words: it is Bdnond Haire'a habit. before each Socialist
Party congress. to assist us with his public advice. This time too, it must

be that. On the basic issues, I would like to recall that at this time the
nationalization battle against the Right and big business is beginning. Each of
us is freely choosing the place he will take in it.

LB NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: As first secretary of the Socialist Party. how do you
assess the new administration's actions 5 months after its installation? "hat is
going well? What is not going so well?

Lionel Joapin: I may lack objectivity: this government is my government. I

an not a meaber of it. But I an at its side, an actor and not a spectator or a
judge. The most important point is this one: the change in France really began
after 10 May. History has shown us so nany parties who proclain themselves
leftist when they are the opposition only to abandon all or part of their program
once in power. As for the Socialists, they are doing what they said they would
do on all the large issues. I well know that there are changes on some points,
such as on the energy problem. But they are moderate, and the reasons have been
given. In the end, I find that as far as the aajor social and economic problems
are concerned. based on which the Right was predicting our apocalypse, the govern-
ment is in control of the situation. We are still confronted with unemployment
and inflation. But neither of the two evils can be attributed to us. And at
least we deny their inevitability. It can even be stated that the progress of

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unemployment is checked, and there is no side-slipping on inflation and prices.
Finally, brnid structural reforms have begun--must we list then?--which will bear
their fruit in time.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Would you say, then. that the Socialists are not doing
any worse than their predecessors?

Lionel Jospin: They are certainly doing differently. Furthermore. they are
doing soaet-ing which does not show up in the indexes. They are recreating the
bases for true social cooperation in the face cf the problems posed by the crisis,
with the development of solidarity. of continuous dialogue between labor and
management. of decentralization of responsibilities and, in general, development
of social responsibility. But, let us be realistic, the situation is such that
we can hardly set victorious economic goals for ourselves in the short term.

We will be judged on the medium term.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: No dark areas in this assess-ant?

Lionel Jt‘pln: I believe that there is a problem with the flow of information.
Primarily between the administration. the ministers. their co-workers and the
parliamentary group. The work load and the work pace are such that the elected
officials sometimes feel they lack the time to participate in the drafting of
texts. They perceive them, if I may say so. at the "finished product” level.
we would like to be informed at the "semi-finished product" level. I am dis-
covering that the parliamentary apparatus takes time. however, for our first
reforms we needed to go quickly. Things will go better in the future. I imagine.
There is also the problem of explaining our policy. The opposition speaks more
and does less. Today we tend to believe that our actions speak for themselves.
He should do a little more educating. And, concurrently, prevent some of our
officials from announcing projects which are not yet decided upon, too early,
too quickly.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Must the Socialist Party. as happened in the debate on
immigrants. settle the possible disputes between its elected officials and the
administration?

Lionel Jospin: The party's executive board does not set itself up as arbitrator
between the parliamentary group and the adainistration. A matter is only referred
to it, by the president of the group, when there is a problem among the members

of Parliament. Then it is the executive board who decides. The Socialist

Party is not a cog in the state wheel, it belongs to society. It must inform the
Socialist ministers of the state of opinion. of the views of its militants and

its officials. But it cannot constantly take the place of the executive.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: What is the government's margin of freedom with regard
to the Socialist Party program?

Lionel Jospin: The government is not just socialist. It is a government of
union of the Left and even of a broader assemblage. This simple fact creates

a certain distance with regard to the Socialist Party. Furthermore, the govern-
sent is faced with the need to make decisions which weigh directly on the life
of the French and to measure their consequences accurately.

13
LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Does this distance represent the margin between what is
desirable and what is possible?

Lionel Jospin: The government nust realize as such of the desirable as possible.
For the aonent it is applying the program approved by the people during the
presidentitl election. To go beyond that will only be possible after a demo-
cratic vote. Of course. the farther one goes, the nore new problens can arise
for which this progral provides no answer. The Socialist Party will have to
express its opinion more often.

LE NOINEL OBSERVATEUR: Is it possible to foresee s split between the future
choices of the Socialist Party and those of the administration?

Lionel Jospin: Possible, yes. Probable, no.

LE NOUVKL OBSERVATBUR: what is the status of your relationship with the Con-
nunist Party?

Lionel Jospin: The Co-mnist Party respects governnent solidarity as the
essential. Having said this, it is obvious that it cannot renounce its own
existence, or autonomous expression. But it seems to me that its tone is
adapted to the new period. As we are, it is retaining its right to legitimate
criticism. Basically, our relationship is good enough. which is a pleasant
change from the previous period. But is it the sign of an in-depth change?
Only time will tell. For my part. I an not naive: I have forgotten nothing.
And I an following what is occurring in the Col-mist Party with attention.

For example. the reasons for its decline, at least electorslly. I did not know
that the causes were so distant.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Are you going to review the structure of the leftist
union municipalities between now and 1983?

Lionel Jospin: The power ratio between the leftist parties has obviously
changed. Drawing up the lists for the 1983 municipal elections is not yet on

the agenda. When the time comes. we will, as usual, take the realities into
consideration.

LE NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: Contrary to the history of the Socialist Party since
Epinay. it seems that the next congress in Valence, at least in appearance,

must mark the disappearance of "political factions." Does this seem possible
and desirable to you?

Lionel Jospin: The answer to this question must not be institutional, but
political. If the elimination of the factions is an actuality, it is good.
If it is a fiction, it is bad.

LB NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: Recently, at Conflans-Sainte-llonorine, Michel Rocard

violently contested the new distribution of influence within the Socialist
Party?

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Lionel Jospin: The problem will be brought up and settled in form and in sub-
stance within the party. The former "A" faction presented a text on political
orientation which I signed with other comrades. He heard from all sides: "He
are in agreement! We want to sign!" He made only one condition: to have a
majority within the directing bodies of the party (steering committee, execu-
tive board, secretary's office). In our discussions, no one, to my knowledge,
has contested the fact that in a vote among the militants we would undoubtedly
have obtained clearly more than 51 percent of the vote. If this had been con-
tested. it would have sufficed for each faction to agree to "count its own,"
which I supported. Throughout the party, the leaders discussed and the mili-

tants voted on the results of these negotiations. Tnis is the reality. There-
fore. no grandiloquent 'catement!

LE ROUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Has admission of the former minorities to the Socialist
Party's national secretariat been achieved?

Lionel Jospin: For some of them, it has. For others it is completely possible.
This will depend on the congress.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Let us go back to the evaluation. 00 you feel that
the government has completed the nationalizations that were necessary, or that
it should go further?

Lionel Jospin: Before going further, it must first succeed with the nationaliza-
tions. This success will be achieved if the rate of investment grows, leading

to an acceleration of technical progress, to gains in productivity, to the
modernization of these companies. This effort should cause a stabilization

and even an increase in the number of jobs. It will contribute to our balance
of trade through a better response to the requirements of international competi-
tion within the framework of financial stability. There is no doubt of success
as far as the nationalized conpanies themselves are concerned. Just look at

the results of the existing public enterprises.

The aim of the nationalizations is not to stand in the way of the development of
individual initiative and small and medium-size companies, but to support and
encourage them. Public management should also enable the growth of democracy

in work, and it will be necessary to pay particular attention to organizing
worker participation in the manage-ant of these companies.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Is there a risk that certain deputies will profit from
the parliamentary debate to go further?

Lionel Jospin: I don't think so. Since to have completed already the national-
izations which we are completing is a big event. In relation to the economic
policy and the ideological taboos which still dominate in the western world,

it is a "split."

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Regarding national solidarity. many were shocked to
see the Socialist Party oppose the participation of officials in the effort

against unemployment .

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lionel Jospin: First of all, let us note that under the solution decided upon,
the officials are on exactly the sane level as the others: if their incomes
reach a certain level they will pay the uneqloyment tax.

1.! NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: But when. as a tradeoff for their job security, it
was a question of having then contribute to the UNBDIC [National Union for

bloynent in Industry and Comerce], thus aligning then with the other wage
earners, the Socialist Party was opposed.

Lionel Jospin: It is true. we must avoid having two workers' classes: one
threatened by unemployment. and the other protected. But the Socialist's
traditional slogan is "the right to work" and not "work is a privilege." And
the tradition that I perceived in the union's action was respect for the
advantages acquired. The disadvantaged are progressively being brought to the
level of the advantaged and not the reverse. Our goal is to reduce the nuﬂaer
of meamloyed, not to punish those who are employed. I an adding a political
explanation to our position: was it the role of a Socialist government to do
what no rightwing governaent has dared to do in 23 years? Particularly when
opposed by a category of French people who, in the large majority, voted for
the Left? In politics. I don't recon-lend aasochisn.

LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR: Are you satisfied with the tax reform?

Lionel Jospin: There has been no tax reform. We have not had the tins and
therefore we are still depending on an unjust and failing tax systen to finance
mat of the budget. In this situation, the government has been coapeiled to
draw fron certain categories which it would have been desirable not to touch
again. But all the new fiscal measures are going in the right direction. Is
it necessary to mention the tax on wealth, the leveling off of tax relief

for dependents, the fight against tax fraud? And then we would have to discuss
expenditures. They nean: economic recovery, creation of jobs, research ef-
forts, social jmtice. There, the Ilium is silent. In-depth tax reform is
urgent in order to finance this policy nore equitably. It must be conducted
seriously.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVA‘I‘EUR: Do the President's statements on the Bast/"est balance--
or rather iabalanceuconforn to the basic beliefs of the Socialist Party?

Lionel Jospin: Yes, they are in agreeaent as long as it is well noted that
since the notion by the Met: Congress. the situation has changed: the invasion
of Afghanistan, the change in the American administration. the Iranian crisis.
It is the facts which have changed, not our principles.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Doesn't this policy offen a pacifist sympathy within
the Socialist Party?

Lionel Jospin: I will say, as does Francois Mitterrand himself, that within
the Socialist Party what interests us is peace and not pacifisn in itself.
Munich was. it seems, a victory for peace! All Socialists know that the danger
exists in the West, with a disorganized reamment, as well as in the East,

with excessive nilitary deployment. In Europe there is an iﬁslance which
favors the Soviets. Balance nust be reestablished towards the lower end of the
scale. if not it will establish itself at the upper end. which will be dangerous

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for peace. Our policy must be considered in all its aspects. A step such as
the French/Hexican declaration on Salvador is a good denonstration that it is
not a matter of being Atlantic or anti-Atlantic, but of affirming principles
while proposing concrete solutions.

LE NOWEL OBSERVATEUR: In taking sides on the political problens of the con-
tinent of South America. France is directly opposed to the United States. Can
this new attitude go beyond the symbolic level?

Lionel Jospin: The political. historical and cultural links between Europe
and Latin Aaerica are as obvious and of earlier existence than the econolic
and strategic links for-ed between the United States and South Anerica. And
over the past 10 years, the Socialist Party has established privileged relations
with the denocrstic soveaents on this continent which are struggling against
dictators. Despite the different levels of develop-eat. these chntries are
very close to us. To accept the reality of dictatorship in their countries
is to accustoa ourselves to the idea here. If deaocracy is reborn there, it
will be strengthened here. The United States wrongly places Latin America's
problems within the East/West context. For us and for the Socialist Interna-
tional, whose leaders are not suspected of pro-Soviet tendencies. it is above
all a matter of autonoaous econoaic and social develop-eat and of respect for
hunan rights. It is tragic to make a whole part of this continent, so rich
in potential. mproductive through violence and terror. Europe lust act.

LE NOWEL OBSERVAT‘IUR: "hat lesson do you draw tron Sadat's assasination?

Lionel Jospin: What struck ae at the funeral service was that the Egyptian
people had to be held back. This is systolic: to conduct a foreign policy
as original as his, President Sadat would have had to have had a doasstic

consensus.

For his economic and social policy no doubt would not enable attainment of this
goal. what also strikes me is that all the western countries were represented,
but alnost no Arab countries. His friends were there, but not his family.

The former considered Sadat a man of peace (this is also Ily opinion) the latter.
a traitor. Such a gap is concerning. But how can an area of understanding

be reestablished between a part of the Third “arid and ourselves? If Hestern
rationalism aeans nassive menployaent. shantytowns. Ialnutrition. flagrant
inequalities. and outside interference, it will be rejected. And this has
already begun.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "be Nouvel Observateur"

9693
(ISO: 3100/101

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ALLEGED SOCIALIST PLAN To SPLIT CGIL UNION
Drop in Union Membership

Milan IL HONDO in Italian 9 Oct 81 pp 12-13
[Article by Renzo Rosati: "The Desire Count"]

[Text] The first warning signal arrived, once again, from union membership.

A decrease in membership of 20,000 among Piedmont metalworkers and just as
many among those in Lombardy. In the entire Lombardy industrial sector, 40,000
members are about to leave the union. From north to south the decline follows
the location of the traditional bastions: 30 percent of Paglia laborers will
not renew their membership and. in Bari alone, 5,700 out of 10,000 will quit.

At the end of November, when CCIL [Italian Confederation of Labor], CISL [Ital-
ian Confederation of Labor Unions] and UIL [Italian Union of Labor] will take
stock, one will find out. perhaps, that in spite of substantial gains among
retirees. 1981 has been even worse than 1980 which already was a bad year (the
CGIL alone lost 93,000 members among active workers, partially made up by
retirees).

However, on a general overview of union strength never as full of uncertainties
as at the present time, the decrease in membership is not the leading problem
worrying national and local officials; who, nevertheless, do not underestimate
its effects, including material ones: Angelo Airoldi, PIOH [Federation of Metal-
lurgy Industry Workers] secretary from Lombardy, explains: "Our revenue will
be 2 billion lire less. As far as the general picture is concerned, this is
like saying that, all of a sudden, Genoa FIOH would be closing down." “What is
happening," points out Agostino Marianetti, CGIL's number two man, "is not that
the union is being rejected. but that it is being increasingly criticized."
Ottaviano Del Turcu, FLH [Federation of Hetalworkers] secretary, remarks: "Lay-
offs, unemployment, wild economic crisis are the causes for the reduction in
union membership. If we want to regain credibility, in addition to membership
we must look elsewhere, forgetting about the figures."

look in what direction? Rank and file and top management agree in indicating
member representation as the key question. The factory council mechanism, through

which representation is exercised, seems, in fact, to be jammed. And, according
to some, to have gone wild.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The UIL, as it has been happening increasingly more frequently, has ignited the
powder. Massimo Mezzantini, Milan's UIL secretary, in a document on the rela-
tions between the factory and terrorism at Alfa Romeo, sternly accused the coun-
tile for failing to represent the members, for failing to monitor their mood.
for failing to observe the biennial expiration of the renewal of the mandates,
and for failing to exercise any control over the rank and file and on them-
selves. "A state of affairs," concluded Mazaantini. "that not only places the
representation in a crisis, but that opens new space to terrorists."

Immediate and violent was the rebuttal of the CGIL and CISL. "Does the OIL,
perhaps, wish to go back to the method of long lists, of internal conittees

like those of the 1950's?" asks Antonio Pizzinato, CGIL secretary for Lombardy.
"Factory councils are the labor union's backbone for unity," remarks Sandro
Antoniazzi. Milan's CISL secretary, "let's take any necessary initiative for
strengthening our relation with the rank and file, but let's be careful in avoid-
ing the councils' debacle.”

The matter also involves southern industries. 0n Hednesday, 23 September. the
general assembly of factory councils convened at Brindisi's petrochemical plant
to deal with the renewal of mandates: 105 out of 150 delegates deserted the meet-
ing. Three days earlier, at Taranto's ITALSIDER, a 2-hour strike called by F10“
failed. not only because the rank and file boycotted it, but a large number of
union delgates as well. Giovanni Cassato, Taranto's COIL secretary. admits

that: ”He have a very serious representation crisis. We have a 70—parcent

rate of unionization, but at this point it is a theoretical figure, in view

of the fact that only 20-30 percent of the workers participate in meetings and
strikes.

The contrasting reactions among the three confederations and the various cate-
gories toward the proposals on economic policies introduced by Giovanni Spade-
lini's government, must be added to the decline in membership, to the matter of
factory councils and to the representation crisis. And, probably, many aspects
of the same problem are involved: the union model, born out of the 1968 and
1969 struggles, finalized by unifying mechanisms, solid and cohesive in the last
decade, is probably undergoing a crisis.

It is too soon to say that the union's unity is in crisis: certainly, the union's
dream of the 1970's is in crisis. The leadership and the rank and file, all
realize the immediate danger of this situation: that the spirit of confedera-
tion, the return to parallelism toward the parties intended as home base, in
other words, the desire to count may prevail.

There are those who believe that the only remedy to this danger, which would
truly cause the end of the union's unity, would be to listen directly to the
voice of the workers. It is an old idea of Giorgio Benvenuto, which the UIL's
leader is now reintroducing with vigor; Benvenuto told IL HONDO: "To exorcise
the fear of counting, there is only onemethod; make the workers count. Ask,
therefore, their opinion on the whole range of problems to be discussed:
whether to act on the automatic wage indexation or directly on salaries;
whether to favor contract renewals or to accept a partial pause in exchange

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL\

[or guarantees on severance pay and nobility. But it is urgent that voting be
reintroduced in the factories and on concrete proposals. Because of this point
we don't know anymore what is the rank and file and who are the peripheral
members . "

Starting from these considerations, Benvenuto is about to launch an offensive
against the present factory council mechanism, "which now," he states, "is

just a caricature of what it should be." In support of the initiative, the UIL
cites the results of a survey conducted in 525 factories in the industrial tri-
angle and in Veneto. The resulting picture is alarming: each factory has its
own rules for the election of union delegates, the 2-year expiration term for
the renewal is seldom enforced, there is no record, either territorial or na-
tional, of factory councils. The same clause on union protection, prescribed
by the workers; bylaws, is applied at FIAT and Alfa Romeo under different terms.
Furthermore, the present composition of the councils no longer reflects the
structure of the labor force; according to the UIL's survey, 90 percent of union
delegates are laborers and, of these, only 70 percent are of the third level
(assembly line for metalworkers): "It is obvious," Benvenuto remarks, "that
there is a leveling at the lowest tanks, that, practically, workers have no
representation and that all this hinders any discussion on professionalism."

Hhat Benvenuto wants to accomplish on a large scale, someone has already accom-
plished here and there. For example, a survey by the Pietro Seveso foundation
on FILH’s [presumably PIOH] and CISL's metalworkers shows that 50.6 percent of
the members seek better pay and recognition of professionalism, that 68.8 per-
cent would accept mobility. even if negotiated. that only 15.3 percent believe
that the union should not get involved with productivity. In appearance, almost
the opposite of CISL's traditional line. Also party affiliations have been
changing: in 10 years, the Dc decreased from 80 to 6] percent, the PSI rose to
22.5 percent from 11 percent, the PCI to 18.5 percent from 5 percent.

It is in this multicolored picture that the desire to count and Benvenuto's
attempts of having the workers count are being injected. Until now, this last
proposal has been received by the other confederations with some diffidence:
Benvenuto is being accused of open gambling, namely without taking into account
the UIL's real dimension, of waving the referendum like a slogan without the
support of concrete contents and adequate structures for its realization. How-
ever. greater consensus is becoming apparent, especially as far as the COIL is
concerned. "Without doubt." Marianetti admits, "we are at fault in our rela-
tions with the rank and file. In general, union culture is at a standstill,

we have to start it in motion."

Anti-Inflationary Pact
Milan IL HONDO in Italian 9 Oct 81 pp 13-15

[Article by Lorenzo Schcggi: "Anti-Inflationary Pact--Hho Will Be the First
To Break It"]

[Text] "If it is broken because of the government which breaks down, the union
does not break down. otherwise it breaks down." The interpretation of this

20
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

politically union-oriented riddle, authored by Ottaviano Del Turco. PIOH—CGIL
adjunct secretary general, is not difficult. In a few words, it means that
what is still left of the union's unity is in the hands of Beniamino Andreatta.
treasury minister, and in those of Giovanni Harcora, his industry colleague.

It means, even more clearly, that at this point the union, after months and
months of polemics on the anti-inflationary pact, automatic wage indexation,

the dynamic of salaries. can manage to stay united only as far as rejection of
the government's measures is concerned. "but if instead of saying no, we should
say yes," many of the leading confederation officers told IL HONDO, "we would
arrive at ruptures that this time could be truly irreparable.”

The truth is, in fact, that among the many issues at stake in this maxinegotia-
tion among government, unions and business, there is also the future of the rela-
tions among the CCIL. CISL and UIL, which seems now destined to follow predeter-
mined tracks on the basis of what the developments of the anti-inflationary pact
will be. The viable solutions are, substantially. two. Both, however, are sub-
ordinated to a premise: the anti-inflationary pact. conceived originally as a
social pact. is by now mere fantasy. The communists. afraid of signing a blank
debit note on behalf of a government and a majority to which they do not belong,
do not want it. Nor do many Christian democrats, for fear that layman Giovanni
Spadolini may make it where all their colleagues who succeeded one another at
Palazzo Chigi failed. But what are these two scenarios? ﬂow will the unions
react in one case or the other?

There Is Neither a Pact Nor Traumatic Breaks

Giorgio Benvenuto. for example. sustains that "partial agreements may be reached,"
as an alternative. Several small agreements. Del Turco sustains. "so that nobody
can claim complete success or complete failure." CGIL socialists sustain that
“on the basis of several partial agreements it may be possible to obtain at least
some results which are not completely negative so that the union may consequently
honor the commitment of handling the dynamic of salaries, maintaining them
within the agreed ceiling of inflation, for the forthcoming renewal of con-
tracts." Anyhow, one thing is certain: in this scenario we don't talk about
automatic wage indexation. Not only will there not be any agreement for its
substantial modification (a possibility that, on the other hand. has not been
suggested yet by any union), but not even the proposal of economist, Brio Taran-
telli. supported by the CISL, will get through.

In this event, namely of partial agreements, the union front will see the CGIL
and UIL on one side and the CISL on the other. The first two. united in particu-
lar by the preoccupation of not creating too many problems for Spadolini.

is a common goal of all the political forces present in the two confederations,
including the communists in their own way.

This solution is not acceptable to Pierre Carniti's CISL on the eve of a congress
where instead there will be strongly reintroduced the necessity for an anti-
inflationary pact rigorously limiting investments, prices and tariffs and which
the union may be inclined to approve, agreeing to limit wage indexation in-
creases for a while. It is. therefore, against partial solutions, against the

21
FOI:0FFKJA1.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

alternative of many limited agreements that Carniti spoke up during all the
trade congresses he attended this last week. "We will not sign phony pacts,"
he said in Termoli, at the home builders congress. "The truth is," one hears
from the other two confederations, "that Carniti is ill-disposed because Spado-
lini did not include Tarantelli's formula in the economic program, with the re-
sult that he now finds himself isolated, since he lacks the political support
which would have pushed forward a proposal that now, instead, is dead."

One thing is certain: Carniti will not give up. Because he must show his or-
ganization that he is not the secretary general of defeats (the reduction in
the workschedule has not been approVed for the time being, nor the 0.50 percent
fund). And, in particular. because he must show CISL's pro-Christian democrats,
and there are many, that he has no intention of giving Spadolini what he did not
give Porlani or Cossiga. Therefore, if the anti-inflationary pact does not go
through. Tarantelli's formula included, it is almost certain that during the
next few months we will see a CISL hypercritical of any government measure,
ready to fight the CGIL and UIL.

Breakdown Among Government, Unions and Business
This second scenario has two variables, depending on who causes the breakdown.

--The first: The breakdown occurs because the government. divided in its own
front, does not give in at all to union requests on prices, tariffs, taxes and
investments. It is the hypothesis already taken under consideration by Del
Turco: "If it is broken because of the government which breaks down. the union
does not break down." In this case there will not be any particular consequences.
'1wuever,“they say at CISL in particular, "we will have lost a great opportunity
and we will find ourselves facing again the same old problems with the added
drawback of hurling at each other accusations for the responsibility of this
failure."

--But there is also a second hypothesis: That the breakdown occurs because of
the union. "hat would happen in this case? According to IL HONDO, this was
explicitly discussed in mid-September by Agostino Harianetti and Giorgio Benve-
nuto. during a meeting with Bettino Craxi, PSI secretary, at the Socialist Party
headquarters. In the end. this was the decision taken: The socialists do not
want a crisis of the Spadolini government. Therefore, the socialist ministers
as well as the socialist union representatives, each at their own end, must work
so that breakdowns do not occur. They must continuously submit mediation propo-
sals. seek alternative solutions which would not entirely jeopardize the negotia-
tions. However, the breakdown could occur just the same, in which case if the
major reservations originate from the CISL, CCIL socialists will continue sup-
porting Luciano Lama and the UIL will move the axis of its alliances from the
CISL toward the COIL.

Instead, if the COIL communists cause the breakdown with the government, Agostino
Harinnetti's socialists will not hesitate to declare war, perhaps calling a CGIL
congress on opposite theses. In this case, then, the alignment would see CGIL
socialists united, plus the entire UIL and CISL. And this would mean, in effect,
also the end of the remaining union unity. And the unified federation itself
would be probably swept away. The communists, however. decided against causing
the breakdown, at least for the time being.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL L'Sli ONLY

"0", what is going to be the winning scenario? It is too soon to say. It is
certain, however. that if the hypothesis. even the least trmtic for the union,
should occur. the fragments of union unity will be even further destroyed. And
then? Giorgio Benvenuto tells it straight to 1111. national officers: “The 0611.,
CISL and U11. must establish a new unity pact: if we do not succeed, the union
runs the risk of being literally crushed."

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1981

9758
CSO: 3106/28

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

ARIANE muncu DELAY-4 10-day strike that has slowed down work at the Toulouse
Space Center there the European Harecs A satellite is being readied hss resulted

in a (0-day postponement of the launching of the Ariaue not. on which the threes A
is to be the principal payload.

Originally planned for 14 Dace-her, the launching
is now to take place on the 18th.

[Text] [Paris VALEURS ACNELLBS in French
23 Nov 81 p 19] [COPYRIG-IT: 1981 "Valeurs actuelles"l

C80: 3100/ 152 END

24

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY