FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10492

5 May 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 27/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST lNFORMATiON SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MT!

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. moccasing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govermaent.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 01"
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(70110 27/82)
CONTENTS

ECONOMIC

Trade Friction with l'nited Staten Analyzed
(NIHON xocvo summm, various dates)....................

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Technology Cooperation with 0.5. To Be Strengthened
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN, 30 Mar 82).

MIT! Approves 11.3. Participation in 5th Generation Comters
(NIKKEI swcvo sanmm, 6 Apr 82)

Tariff Rate on Computers Lowered to (0.9 Percent
(NIHON KEIZAI SNIHBUN, 9 Apr 82) .......................

Friction with USSR Over Couunications Satellite Noted
(YOHIURI SHIMBUN, 9 Apr 82)

Translation System To Be Established. 'Dictionary' Promoted
(NIHON KOGYO SHMUN, 31 Mar 82) ...... ..... ............

Comnication Comittee To Cope With Ultra-Modern Technology
(NIHON 1(0ch sumnun, 13 Apr 82)

Revision, Abolishment of 355 Laws Approved
(NIKON KEIZAI SHIMBUN, 19 Mar 82)..

HITI, Postal Service Head for 'Second Round' Over Communications
(MINICHI SHIPBUN, 20 Mar 82) ..........................

Industry Starts Preparations for Data Cormnications Role
(NIHON KEIZAI salmon. 20 Mar 82)

Further Discussions on Date Comnications Urged
(YOHIURI SHIMBUN, 26 Mar 82) ...........................
TRADE FRICTION WITH UNITED STATES ANALYZKD
Tokyo union KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9, 10, 12, 17, 18,. 19 tab 82
[9 Feb 92 p 1)

[Text] Rebuilding U.S.-Japan Relations: Effort To Promote Imports; Criticism
of Status Quo in Japan

A s Japan-U.S. trade friction escalatec: goverment officials and trading
companies are afraid that a Reagan shook may strike Japan. The Reagan
administration is chafing under an $18-billion trade deficit with Japan and

a growing domestic unemployment problem. They believe that he may unilaterally
enact stiff sanctions against Japan such as import restrictions or import
surcharges. The 11.5. Congress has repeatedly proposed reciprocity bills,
which may be taken as a forewarning of some such action, and a movuaent to
seal off Japan in emerging. Also, the effects of the expanded military budget
aiming at a strong America cannot be overlooked. The so (Buropean Couaunity)
also began studying anti-Japanese measures on the 10th of the month. Depending
on how the situation develops, Japan may drop out of cm (General Agreement
(m Tariff and Trade) temporarily because of a boycott on Japan. Furthermore,
the recent demands on Japan related to trade friction are for opening up to
services as well as conventional goods, and they are spreading to domestic
economic policies and defense issues. ‘Ihe Japanese response has become cor-
respondingly difficult. The difficult must be overcome one way or another

in order to maintain national security and the smooth working of the free
economy of the Rest.

Naomi Becki, chairman of the LDP International Economic Measures Special
Study Cousnittee, will visit the United States on the 21st to talk with
President Reagan, explain the policies for opening the Japanese anrket,

and seek understanding. Chairman asaki is actually the chief person res-
ponsible for enacting reassures for improving 647 non—tariff barriers (NIB)
previously determined by the government. Since this visit will occur during
the rush for a reciprocity bill. he is likely to meet with rather harsh
criticism. however, Chairman Braki is taking the stance: "In order to build
a new Japan-U.S. relationship, I will state clearly what needs to be said."
He will advance directly on the White House and attempt to make this visit
to the United States a starting point for a substantial Japanese liberalisation
policy.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PCB (EPICIAL USE ONLY

[Interview with Chairman Hasmi Bzaki of the LDP International Economic
Measures Special Study Coumittee; questions by reported litatsu Purudate]

Tariff Levels the Lowest in the World

[Question] First what is your own view, Mr Chairman, on the m improvement
measures?

Esaki: The study comittee spent about 80 hours examining this problem in ‘
parallel with last year's budget formulation. As a result, while consulting
with Chairman Yamanaka of the Tax System Study Comittee and obtaining full
cooperation, we decided to move up the multilateral trade negotiations
decided on during the Tokyo Round of trade talks by 2 years. In other words,
we decided to take early action on all 1,653 items. Not only would this have
an effect of reducing the deficit by 40 to 45 billion yen, but it would make
Japan's average tariff rate 6.9 percent, the lowest in the world. This was
decided on as the first step.

Also, with respect to improvement of import inspection procedures, there are
51 items which have been under study by our comittee since its inception.
Ultimately, this was expanded to 99 items. 11:1: shows in reverse how overly
troublesome the import inspection procedures have been. This process has
exposed some haphazard aspects in the procedures of goverment offices. I
believe we have achieved substantial results.

Sweeping Away Foreign Criticism With 01‘0

[Question] However, a continual inundation of demands for improvement can
be expected from the United States and Europe.

Ezeki: Certainly, just as the 51 demands grew to 99, we can expect the mother
of specific demands to easily reach 120 or 130. Therefore, we decided to create
an Office of Trade Ombudsman (010) with a complaint processing role, directly
under the prime minister's office, as an organ for comprehensive government
response to the opening of the market. By this means we can make a quick,
comprehensive response to problems that involve more than one ministry or to
new problems and avoid the repetition of criticism by foreign countries that

we always say that we will "take positive measures" but never actually respond.
This is especially important in our approach to foreign countries.

[Question] There are some who claim that this will be "making an image of
Buddha withOut putting in the spirit."

Ezaki: In a vertically organised government administration, it is necessary
to have a followup study to see if a certain thing has actually been done.

The study coumittee is prepared to make such a study and do everything it can
to follow up. If this approach really works, I believe it can because an inter-
national matter, as pointed out by the U.D. Minister in Japan, Berreclough.
This is a very important aspect of avoiding friction.

2
pos MICIAL USE ONLY
Reciprocity a Principle of "Equality“

[Question] However, it is questionable whether the trade imbalance with the
United States and Europe will be eliminated or whether trade friction can
be avoided through these measures alone.

Ezaki: Certainly, I do not think this alone will make the problem go away.
However, we have simplified our import procedures so that they are similar
to those of the United States. If there is a further demand to make the
procedures similar to those of the EC, we are prepared to discuss it and do
something about it. And, as you mentioned, we have created a policy of
beginning construction on 1.3 billion units of housing and are making repeated
efforts to promote product imports to expand domestic demand. Therefore, we
hope that the United States and Europe and the developing countries will make
a greater effort to export to Japan. We would like the business leaders of the
United States and Europe to make a renewed effort to promote this within their
countries.

a
[Question] However, whatever the situation is in Europe, the United States
is facing offyear elections. Even if there is a theoretical understanding,
there is a rising mood of protectionism and some danger of retaliatory measures
against Japan in the name of reciprocity. In other words, there could be a
"Reagan shock" worse than the "Nixon shock."

Braid: There is a lot of discussion of "reciprocity." We understand reciproci-
ty to be a principle of equality, the carrying on of trade according to the
same rules. To espouse volume restrictions and protectionism under the name

of reciprocity would throw the world economy into confusion and would lead

to trouble even in the limited case of the United States and Japan. Japan is
purchasing a large volume of agricultural products such as wheat from the
United States and exporting almost no agricultural products to that country.
The important thing is for the country which has a certain product to export

it to the country that does not, to the place with the greatest need.

Ilowaver, Japan cannot prosper unless the United States prospers. This is a
fundamental principle. Furthermore, the number of unemployed in the United
States has reached almost 10 million, the greatest number since the great
depression of the 1930's. We must take this very seriously. The same goes
for the BC. ‘lhis is not a simple situation.

[Question] What measures can Japan take for this?

Bzaki: It is necessary for us to cooperate wherever possible. In particular,
our industrial sector, indeed each company, must think of this as a "second
opening of the country" and work actively to place its facilities in the
United States and other countries and promote technological assistance. Also,
we must sincerely proceed to simplify the complicated domestic distribution
system which has been criticized by the U.S. auto industry, promote the
application of data from 0.8. testing organs, and make a positive study of the
27 items which still come under import restrictions.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘FK‘IAL USE ONLY

Invite American Opinion Leaders

[Question] Then what will you appeal for in your upcoming visit to the
United States?

Bzaki: It would be impudent to offer the secrets of Japanese success or ask
the United States to learn from us in the area of productivity. However, one
of the motive forces of Japanese progress is the quality of its managers. Any-
one can become president of a company regardless of his background. I would
like to have them understand these differences in Japanese culture and society.
Also, I would like to extend a sincere invitation to America's opinion leaders
to come to Japan to see and hear these things.

Anorher big problem between the United States and Japan is that we are not
unified by a network of roads as is the EC. That is not all. It is said that
there is a lack of reciprocity in our treatment of U.S. financial and service
organizations. The Japanese have traditionally had a strong attachment to
stocks and not been inclined to let them out. This has given rise to the mis-
understanding that we are closed and isolationist. Also, there are some

items that are restricted when there is danger of a substantial adverse
effect on the Japanese economy. I would like to explain these special
problems, including our Achilles heel--oil. If something happened one day

in the Middle East, the prosperity of the Japanese economy could crmble.

[QuestiOn] Finally, I believe there is a good possibility that during your
visit on the trade friction problem the United States will make demands which
include a sharing of the defense burden.

Bzaki: I will treat defense and trade as two separate problems. To bring these
two problems together would make the solution of problems between the United
States and Japan much more complicated. However, I also understand something
about the defense problem, so I will listen carefully and explain in detail

how Japan is making an effort. I think new demands will be made for opening

the market, and I intend to explain clearly what we can and cannot do. The
promotion of diplomacy directed toward members of congress concerned with

these matters will also be necessary.

[10 Feb 82 p 1]
[Article by reported Norio Konuma]

[Text] Second Hove: Abolisl'ment of m: Cooperation in Advanced Technology
Before Paris Sun-nit

Painful Awareness of Weak Foundations of Japanese Economy

"Can't we have a third oil shock?" This remark has frequently been heard in
HITI recently, and it is hard to tell whether it is a joke or a serious wish.
If an oil shock came, there would be an immediate trade deficit. This would
get rid of the trade friction that is becoming such a headache for HITI.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Indeed, during the two previous oil shocks, the balance of international pay-
ments went into the red, and the U.S. and European criticism of Japan somehow
disappeared. If the same thing happened again, things would "work out well."
This approach is like "waiting for a divine wind."

Of course, there would be serious trouble if this longed-for oil shock came.

So the present situation is causing a great deal of irritation. What HITI

is really trying to say is: "The foundations of the Japanese economy are
weak." Japan is the only country that is continuing to grow successfully
while the U.S. and European economies remain in a slump, so it is the object of
envy and camplaints. However, MIT! is saying: “It is not really true." HITI
is afraid that witn a little pressure from the outside, "it could easily
crumble."

Minister of International Trade and Industry Abe presented a position of
"maintaining freedom of trade" and protested reciprocity at the tripartite
trade conference at Key Biscayne, Florida on 15 and 16 January and in a series
of talks with U.S. Government and business leaders. But he has also advocated
something else in a quiet way. That is: "The United States and Europe argue
strongly that their economies are in recession and unemployment has increased.
But no country has as great a financial burden as Japan. Japan is pressed by
the debt created by many years of deficit financing. The internal situation
is not as good as the United States and Europe may think." This statement
implies that the foundations of the Japanese economy are week, not at all
strong, and that future policies are restricted. If invisible unemployment

is considered, unemployment is growing in Japan, even if it is not yet as bad
as in Europe and the United States. If the free trade system breaks down, there
is a latent fear that a country like Japan which depends on trade will run
into trouble.

Certainly, some processed goods like automobiles, color television sets,
machine tools, and seudconduetors are strong enough to cause trade friction
with foreign countries. However, other basic industrial sectors such as
aluminum and petrochemicals are under attack from overseas. They are like
a candle flame in the wind, and there are many problems.

Avoiding Repercussions Over Semiconductors

with the present petroleum situation, there will not be another oil shock

soon. But if there is a shock brought on by the United States unilaterally
imposing sanctions on Japan such as import surcharges or restrictions, the
Japanese economy will soon come to a standstill. This awareness is driving
HITI to take active measures to open the market, even though it believes that
the reciprocity bill now being presented in the v.5. congress "will not pass"
(Makoto Kuroda, assistant director of HITI's International Trade Policy Bureau).
The policy is to "reduce the number of remaining items with import restrictions
and expand the boundaries“ (Minister of International Trade and Industry Abe).
Whatever form the policy takes, HITI wants to avoid a ”Reagan shock” one way
or another.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

50 what is to be done? MITI is aware that the previously formulated policy
to eliminate non-tariff barriers (NTB), mainly by simplifying and improving
import procedures, is not enough. Therefore, MI’l‘I believes it is necessary
to introduce a second m elimination proposal with the objective of reducing
the items still under import restrictions, such as agricultural products,

and Open up the market to financial and trust services before the Paris
sumit in June. The MIT! leadership thinks that "America is concentrating on
one thing, opening up the market." Therefore, if it does not make some sort
of response, there is the danger that America will rush to take protectionist
measures.

However, most of these proposals actually come under the jurisdiction of other
ministries and agencies. Therefore, MITI is detemined to set an exmnple

and push hard for opening of the market, working to "expand the boundaries

of imports" for items like leather goods which are more of a political than
an economic problem. '

Hith respect to separate categories which come under MITI's jurisdiction such
as automobiles and machine tools, HI'l'I is taking a strong surface stance for
the second year. Vice Minister Ichiro Fujiwara says: "Automobiles will be
handled according to the rules." According to Kaku Toshima, director of the
Machinery and Information Industries Bureau: "Fundamentally, the number of
vehicles will be 1.68 million plus alpha." Actually, However, MI'l'I intends
to be flexible in negotiations. "A reduction is impossible." "This will be
a means of softening U.S.-Japan negotiations."

However, what worries MITI is the possibility that, in the name of reciprocity,
high technology such as that seen in semiconductors may meet the same fate

as automobiles. Even if problematic items like comunications equipment were
added, says Kengo Ishii, assistant director of the Machinery and Information
Industries Bureau, it would not be a big problem because "the amount of money
involved is small compared to automobiles." However, it is a matter of concern.

Do Not Give an Excuse for Reciprocity

For this reason, M111 is working on the various sectors to open the market as
much as possible and not give the United States an excuse for implementing
reciprocity measures. This touches on MI'l'I's true feelings of irritation at
the prospect of having export restrictions put on items under its jurisdiction
such as automobiles, semiconductors, and communication equipment because of
proposals by the other ministries--the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishery, the Ministry of Health and Welfare, and the
Ministry of Transportation-which are criticized by the United States.

MITI believes it should actively promote positive policies and positions for
industrial cooperation in advanced technological fields, which are being
requested by the United States and Europe, as an aid to eliminating trade
friction. Shohei Jurihara, a trade official, says: "This is fundamentally
a matter for the private sector, but we will make every effort to cooperate

on the part of the goverment."

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()H-'l('l.-\I. [351: ()VI.\

"The United States says that it is in difficult circumstances. However,

Japan has been forced to look too much at the northern and eastern areas,
especially Detroit. There is also a strong part of America, in the West and
the South, producing agricultural products and electronics products." MITI
officials are feeling the pressure from America directly. "For some reason,

a cold wind has been blowing from America since the beginning of March. Even
though it is spring. it feels like we are goind back to winter." Hill Japan
prosper as a country built on the foundation of trade with a balanced expansion
according to xITI's plans? Or will the world take the path of protectionism
and contraction. This will be decided by Japan itself as it endeavors to open
its markets.

[12 Feb 82 p 2]
[Article by reporter Tsuyoski Kikuchi]

[Text] Technology and Services: General Trading Companies Move Away From
Emphasis on Tangible Goods; Promotion of Comprehensive Industrial Cooperation

Taking the "Vanguard" Role in Eliminating Friction

According to Seiki Tozaki, president of C. Itoh and Co, "we have entered an
era of compound political and economic crisis." Ever since the U.S.-Japan
fiber negotiations, trade friction has been continuously exacerbated by
politics.

Economic stagnation has brought about high unemployment. The stagnation

of regional industry has become more of a problem politically. As a result,
some leaders of large companies have begun to ask: "Why is Japan the only
country that has to move up the implementation of the Tokyo Round tariff
reductions? This does not agree with diplomatic commonsense."

0n the other hand. most observers believe that the American actions have been
very reasonable. "Japan is starting from zero, but America is starting from
100 percent" (Tomen consultant Yoshituni lshimaru). There is a big difference
between Aumrica implementing import restrictions with a background of 100
percent liberalization and anun making small concesssions after having no
achievements in this area. Therefore, same think that the main problem is how
much restriction exists in comparison to loo-percent liberalization rather than
how many items are restricted. This view holds that before America became
political, Japan was even more political. Japan's political "lack box,"

represented especially by farm products, has made the trade problem more
complicated.

As exemplified in Minister of Finance Natanabe's statement about "carousing,"
the trading companies are usually thought of as the "vanguard of trade." When
it comes to the trade friction problem, they are at the forefront of the effort
to open the market. Behind this is a reaction to the idea that the trading
companies are inherently evil. "The friction has been caused by auto and
electrical equipment makers. The trading companies are actually helping to
eliminate friction."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nine largest trading companies have a 56-percent share of Japan's total
imports, but only 48.7 percent of the exports (in 1980). For six trading
companies, imports exceeded exports. Mitsui USA is ranked fourth among
U.S. exporters (with $3.8 billion in 1980), coming'behind Boeing and GM.
Because its exports exceed imports by $2 billion, it claims: "Re are
contributing to improvement of the U.S. trade balance."

A New Viewpoint on Liberalization of Farm Products

Trading company business has slowed down as much as that of domestic basic
industries, so difficulties are increasing. Even if the v.5. demands are met,
imports from the United States will reach only $1 billion, just a drop in the
bucket for eliminating friction. The ripple effects of increased distribution
volume are great, and it would be better for business not to have these
accusations.

Yohei Mitsumura, president of Mitsubishi Corporation, says: "Why not lib-
eralize the import of beef and oranges? Compensation for the domestic
problems could be considered separately." Sachio Shibayama, president of
Sumitomo Shoji, says: "The remaining items under import restriction should
all be liberalized. An import tax could be established, and these funds could
be used to carry out domestic measures. Seiko Kojima, senior executive
managing director of Marubeni, says: "It is only natural that nontariff
barriers (NTB) should be modified, but this will not automatically restore
the trade imbalance."

Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Tazawa is keeing up a stiff defense
againt liberalization of farm products: "Any more is impossible." Increasing
self-sufficiency is a problan related to national security. However, ﬂiromune
Minakswa, executive managing director of Mitsubishi Corporation, is optimistic:
"It is a mistake to think that security is possible with self-sufficiency in
food. Things should be arranged so that the countries exporting farm products
to Japan will be in trouble if anything goes wrong in Japan." Kojims also
says: "There are some sectors such as livestock which have grown on the basis
of feed imports. There are limitations to increasing self-sufficiency." ﬁe
emphasises that close economic relations can aid in easing conflicts.

However, since exports to America are industrial products and imports are
primary products like wheat, feed, and coal, the U.S.-Japan trade structure
will always resolve itself into a pattern whereby Japan enjoys a favorable
balance of trade under ordinary rates of economic growth. Ultimately, the
United States will try to reach into service fields as well as conserical
product trade. But service fields grow out of each country's historical and
cultural backgrounds. Therefore, simple comparisons are difficult and the
Japanese response inevitably becomes more difficult.

Policies To Create a Strong Yen and Solve Fundamental Problems
Even though exports were slowing down with the yen exchange rate at last year's

high level, as a result of a drop in the yen rate, an export drive is getting
underway again. There is a fundamental problem with economic policies which

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
depend on exports. If measures are not taken to induce a high yen rate in
parallel with the liberalization of imports, the problem will not be solved.
Some of the large trading companies are saying that the series of reductions
in the interest rate have led to an increase of friction, and they are begin-
ning to call for the implementation of "operation twist." This is a policy
opposite to that used in ordinary times. It is a policy for creating low
long-term interest rates and high short-tens interest rates. The Kennedy
administration used it successfully in parallel with 1 tax reduction policy.

This will probably end up only in increased direct intervention in the exchange
market. 'lhe pound rate will remain high because of the North Sea oil fields.
This has the ironic result of weakening international competitiveness, and

the U.S. high interest policy leads to a strong dollar. However, Japanese

foreign exchange policy has an undeniably large effect on the present trade
friction.

Another problem in that Taiwan and Korea are catching up with Japan. There

is a boomerang effect, and the large trading companies are beginning to get
involved while at the same time trying not to offend Japanese steel makers.
The trading companies are also under pressure to use a diversified approach.
According to Shunji Ueda, president of Nichimen Co, Ltd: 'EJapan cannot survive
without buying things from foreign countries. However, it must not only deal
in products but must also carry out "comprehensive industrial cooperation"
involving technology and services as well in order to solve the trade friction
problem. This is where the trading companies must get into the act."

Previous imports of primary goods have been described as the wreckage resulting
from Japanese employment policies. The liberalization of farm product exports
is more of a domestic problem rooted in our country's political base then it

is a problem of U.S. political pressure.

[17 Feb 82 p 1]
[Article by reporter Katsuhiko Tomioka]

{'l‘ext] Clarification of Items of Preferential Treatment: Time Required for

Understanding of System: "Discrimination" Against Foreign Banks a Misunder-
standing

Dissatisfaction Over Bank Administration and the Financial System

As Japan-U.S. trade friction increases, the debate on the isolationism of
Japanese financial services has rapidly become a focus of concern. U.S.
Ambassador Mansfield clearly expressed dissatisfaction with reference to this

problem in January: "Japanese banks are buying American banks, but American
banks are not allowed to buy Japanese banks."

America is asking for reciprocity, and this inequality in the area of financial
services, or rather, this discrimination against American banks, is difficult
to bear. Correction of this situation is becoming a key point in improvement
of Japan-U.S. trade relations.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us analyze what the United States means by discrimination against foreign
barks. The dissatisfaction of the United States can be divided into complaints
against the bank administration of the Ministry of Finance and complaints against
the Japanese financial system itself. Items related to the formercatem are the
regulations governing establislnnent of banks, limitations on activities for
obtaining deposits. and income regulations on Japanese financial institutions.
Problems under the latter category are the prohibition of bank debenture issues
an- limitations on consumer credit business.

If the U.S. accusations are correct and these types of restrictions on foreign
banks exist, we must admit that this is indeed "discrimination."

What is the real situation? First, let us examine the rebuttal given to the
LDP International Economic Measures Special Comittee by the Ministry of
Finance under the orders of Finance Minister Hstanabe on 12 February.

'Tstnblishment and expansion of branches of foreign banks are allowed as long
as a necessary minimum of soundness is maintained. There is no discrimination
between this and the establishment of branches of Japanese banks. The
solicitation of deposits from individuals by foreign banks is completely free."

"The purchase of Japanese banks by foreign banks is possible in principle.
However, this requires agreement between the parties as a prior condition.
Also, if a financial institution holds more than 5 percent of the stock, the
approval of the Fair Trade Commission is necessary under the Antimonopoly Law.
However, this is not something that is only applied to foreign banks."

Japanese banks go along with the Ministry of Finance in saying that the com-
plaint about the prohibition of bank debenture issues and the limitation on
consumer credit activities is nonsense. The issuing of bank debentures is also
impossible for Japanese banks, with some exceptions such as the Bank of Tokyo,
and not just for foreign banks. "This is a difference in the system, not dis-
crimination," according to the International Division of Sumitomo Bank.

The same source says this about the limitations on consumer credit business:
"Japanese banks are actually placed under stiffer restrictions. Foreign
banks are free. Indeed, a number of consumer finance companies have emerged
under the name of banks. In a sense, you could say that domestic banks are
being discriminated against."

Actually No Advantage in Purchasing Banks?

I would like to narrow the discussion down to the "purchase of Japanese banks
by foreign banks" spoken of by Ambassador Mansfield and analyze this issue
carefully. It is a fact that Japanese city banks have purchased U.S. banks

in such places as California, and it is also true that there is no opposite
example of 11.8. banks buying Japanese banks. However, this is not because they
want to buy a Japanese bank and cannot. It appears that, in reality, they

have not bought any Japanese bank because there is no advantage in doirg so.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Japanese banks are forced to operate at a low rate of profit under the
euphemisim of 'socisl mission.‘ Could the hoped-for results be achieved by
buying such institutions?" These words of an influentical American bank
executive seem to back up this idea. Furthermore, there is no exanple in the
past of a foreign bank making an offer to buy a Japanese bank.

If we ask for the real opinion of foreign banks, the response varies. At

the same time they are generally sensitive about the discrimination problem.
Several influentual foreign banks have said: "No conment." One branch manager
made the following statement on the condition that the name of the bank not

be revealed, whether in deference to Ministry of Finance officials or to
'Hniddlemen." "I do not think there is discrimination. They think that

because they have not carefully studied the Yapanese situation. Mdat of the
responsibility is theirs."

However, the majority seem to believe that "there is still some unfairness."

"Whether there is unfairness or not depends on how it is interpreted. If the
problem is national treatment, there is no unfairness now. in spite of what the
past situation might have been. However, if we look at the issue of the system
itself, this is not necessaily true. Japanese banks receive preferential
treatment in the United States because they are foreign banks. For example,
because their head office is in a foreign country, they can establish a place
of business in any state. In Japan their are so such areas of preferential
treatment for foreign banks" (Bankers Trust).

Differences Between the United States and Japan in the Degree of Freedom in
Operations

"It is not discrimination, but I find a difference between Japan and the

United States in the degree of freedom in banking operations. Japan's

financial system is overly complicated and it obstructs free economic activities.
Especially with respect to fund procurement methods, the diversification used

by Japanese banks in the United States should be made possible here“ (Chase
Manhattan Bank).

From the views of these banks, we see that the differences between the
financial systems in Japan and the United States give rise to a "perception
of unfairness," and the most extreme peOple interpret this as "discrimination."

If this is the case, the "various forms ofdiscrimination" toward foreign banks
claimed by the United States cannot be denied out of hand. There are
qualititive differences, but if the position of both countries is clearly
coulnunicated, it is not a problem that is impossible to overcome.

The Ministry of Finance seems to have understood this belatedly. It says
that it will make clear the areas of preferential treatment toward foreign
banks which the United States did not know of or was not informed of, such
as the exemption from Bank of Japan "window guidance" or the exemption from
the obligation to accept national bond issues, in order to clear up 0.8.
misunderstanding.

' 11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because there are differences in fundamental awareness or philosophy with res-
pect to the system, the attempt to create understanding will take sometime.
llowever, such a dialogue ahould‘lead to definite results. Although it is

a rather comonplace conclusion, I believe that patient effort is the key to
improvement of this situation.

[18 Feb 82 p 1]
[Article by reporter Tetsunosuke Hirose]

[Text] Era of Compound Crisis: Isolationism Casts a Shadow; Getting Away
From Dependence on the United States; Economic Relations To Be Diversified

Progressing to Social and Cultural Friction

"Three Japanese businessmen purchased the management rights of the ﬂaworth
Country Club in Bergen County, New Jersey, and decided on a big hike in the
annual membership free from $300 to $5,500-$10,500. At first, this was met
with jokes like: "Are they planning to put a geisha in the locker room?"
However, the Japanese actually began to shut out Americans in practice, and
hatred of the Japanese grew among the members. It is terrible when Americans
are made into "second-class citizens."

This is just a small article from a recent NEH mm TIMES. However, the
paper gave it the title "Jepan-U.S. Golf Course Friction." The trade friction
which began with textiles, color televisiOn, and automobiles is now spreading
from general economic friction to social and cultural friction. Furthermore,
the economic friction was not brought about only be economic causes.

"Today, 40 years after Pearl Harbor. the United States has become a virtual
'economic colony of Japan.‘ Japan imports farm products and raw materials
from the United States and exports finished products such as cars and color
television sets to the United States. This is the classic form of a colonial
relationship. Why has such a thing happened? It is because Japan has been
spared large outlays for defense“ (WASHINGTGI POST).

Economic friction has roots in military and political problems and it gives
rise to further social and political problems. These various problems are
intricately entangled.

Ryuzo Seshima, a consultant to C. Itoh and Co, has frankly called this situa-
tion "an era of compound crisis." He says: "If the trade friction is under-
stood only on the econonic level, we will lose our view of the whole. An
understanding on the political level is absolutely necessary." He has recently
been making an active contribution to foreign economic policy and admin-
istrative reform as a part of the "general staff of the financial sector"

and as a member of the Second Ad Hoc Council on Administrative Reform. Because
of his experience as a part of the ’genbral staff," his political and military
analysis of the world situation has a solid reputation.

When Seshima speaks of a "military analysis," he is referring to "the close
connection between trade and defense. This "trade and defense linkage theory"
is not the exclusive property of Seshima. The relation between the two was
incisively analysed in the report "America's Choice," put out by the Hoover

' 12
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Institute of the United States. The bill demanding an increase in Japanese
defense spending, sponsored in the 0.3. Congress last fall by Congressman Neal,
arose from the same kind of thinking.

No Solution With Bilateral Reforms

Certainly there is a strong allergy to this linkage theory in Japan. If this
linkage becomes clear, there will be reactions such as "the business sector

is being sacrificed to defense“ and "the opposition parties will not stand

for being drawn into more involvement in defense because of economic friction."
And the government will not be able to move either way. However, as Seshima
points out, if we analyse trade friction only in economic terms, we will head
into a blind alley and not be able to find a way out.

"The government and the LDP are working to improve non-tariff barriers and

open the market, and this _probably has substantial psychological effectiveness.
However, in terms of its effect in reforming the trade imbalance, it will only
reduce the trade surplus by a small monetary amount" (Yoshihiro Inayama,
president of the Keidanren).

As long as the trade imbalance is not eliminated, friction will not disappear.
No matter how hard Japan works to open its market, there will be no end to the
demands from the United States and Europe. The restrictions on auto exports
to the United States implemented under a 2-year agreement have been extended
to a third year, and after autos, there is a strong campaign for new self-
imposed restrictions on electronics exports such as semiconductors. While it
is still uncertain whether improvement of non-tariff barriers will be achieved,
the United States has demanded liberalization of service trade. Furthermore,
there is the troublesome fact that "the trade imbalance cannot be corrstted
bilaterally" (Inayama).

“The Americans are threatening to pass a 'reciprocity bill.’ If they can do

it, let them try. Could it be passed in Congress? If such a situation occurs,
it will cause a big problem in the United States" (Sony Chairman Akio Morita).
This kind of "defiance" or "hardline" attitude is competitively cannon among
Japanese businessmen. This may be a kind of shock therapy for the United States,
but the problem is that even with this defiant attitude, it is necessary to

look carefully not only at economic aspects but also at the intentions of the
United States and the strategy of the Reagan administration.

We can speak of defense being entangled in the trade friction problem, but

the problem cannot be solved under the simple formula espoused up to now of
"either trade or defense."

Looking at Defense From the Viewpoint of Comprehensive Security

"On the basis of that dichotomy, if we expand defense spending to 1 percent of
the GN? as requested by the United States, the trade friction should be
eliminated" (Shun Ishihara, president of Nissan Motor).

The following scenario of the Reagan strategy has been discussed recently.

'13
FORIOFFHJA1.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Reagan is taking a hard line against the Soviet Union on the surface, but
behind the scenes, he is seeking to "shake hands" with the Soviets. A "new
Yalta system” has been constructed which gives tacit approve l to the situation
in Poland. In other words, the objective is detente and world domination by
the United States and the Soviet Union. If this could be done, the United
States would not need to maintain the alliance relationship with Japan and

the countries of the Heat. The western alliance is more of a burden than

not for the United States. The United States will return to the old Monroe
Doctrine (isolationism)."

This scenario is just the theory of one American expert in Tokyo. However,
there is plenty of corollary testimony to back it up. Seshima points out:
"The Poland problem is a product of the Yelta agreement." Ishihara says:
"The conflict between the United States and Europe and the uncomfortable re-
lationship with Japan will force the United States to turn to isolationism
for its own advantage." Also. according to the HASHINGTON POST: "Murmurs of
isolationism are heard throughout America. Critical glances are being cast
at our allies, west Germany and Japan. If West Germany and Japan do not do
what they are asked, all of their products should be shut out of the U.S.
market.“

The Reagan administration is rebuilding a new Yelta structure and moving toward
isolationism. According to the WALL STREET JOURNAL, the administration strategy
corresponds to the mood of the 0.8. Congress. "Japan's dependence on America
for defense and its dependence on the American market should be eliminated."

The isolationism of the United States is casting a shadow on the trade

friction problem. This will have the effect of increasing the pressure on
Japan to expand its defense capability.

Japan is entering a period where it must work to build diversified economic
relationships and escape from dependence on America. At the same time,
according to Inayama, it must seriously consider "defense capability from the
viewpoint of Japan's own overall security."

[19 Feb 82 01]

[Text] Substance of Problems With the United States and Japan's Choice:
Economic Sector Consensus Should be Reflected in Government

The focus of concern in Japan-0.5. relations has moved to politics as well as
economics. The results of a poll on "overall security" taken among influential
business executives by the NIPPON KOGYO SHIHBUN (on 1 January) demonstrated
that most executives think there is "a threat of invasion of Japan by another
country." They also emphasize that "it is necessary to maintain friendly
relations with the United States and raise defense spending to l or 2 percent
of the GNP." However, because of financial difficulties and attacks from the
opposition parties, it is hard to increase the defense capability, and the
approach to Japan-U.S. relations tends to be restricted to trade problems.
Irritation and anger at this Japanese attitude is spreading in the United
States. We asked Assistant Professor Yehiro ﬂakagawa of Tsukuba University
to comment on the situation in the United States and our country's future
policy. Here are his remarks:

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Central Problem 13 Defense

The present serious problems in Japan-U.S. relations can be said to constitute
a crisis of catastrophic proportions. And the central problem is not economic
friction. It is the 0.3. anger (dissatisfaction is not the appropriate word)
directed at Japan over the issue of defense.

Japan is trying to placate the United States by working only on the 0.5. trade
deficit with Japan, and it is attempting to alleviate that by only abolishing
some non-tariff barriers.

However, the $18-billion U.S. trade deficit with Japan is no: nearly as
serious as the defense problem. This was demonstrated by the contents of
President Reagan's budget message, which was announced early, on 6 February.
All Japanese newspapers as usual are fooling the people with a sense of
victimization, saying that a share of the defense burden will be pushed on us.
However, there is a danger, if Japan continues to refuse or fails to make an
appropriate response, that the anger of the United States will result in
"economic retaliation against Japan" and "military abandonment." Japan is
facing its greatest crisis since the war.

U.S. Anger Is Real

Let us look at the ideas of Professor Lutowakku [phonetic] published in the
HASHINGTON POST on 13 December 1981.

"The statement by Prime Minister Suzuki on keeping defense spending within
1 percent of the GNP (referring to a statement made in November 1981) was
a final insulting reply to the United States."

"In order to rationalize the refusal to increase the defense capability, Prune
Minister Suzuki is playing on the same team as the (anti-armament) opposition
parties and the mass media."

"The time has cone for the United States to deliver, politely, an ultimatum
to Japan."

"This ultimatum should clearly include the retaliatory measures to be taken
if it is not complied with."

Lutowakku [phonetic] is a scholar from Georgetown University who is well versed
in Japanese affairs, but he was also a member of the Reagan administration
transition team, and at present he is a consultant to the Department of Defense.
This seems to be a hardline statement, at first glance, with its use of
incredible words like "insulting," "aultimatum," and "retaliatory measures."
However, it would probably be better to view it as representing the present
thinking of the Department of Defense, which is "becoming the mainstream View
within the United States Government.

For some reason, the Japanese press is not reporting the reality of this
anger of the 0.8. Governmenttoward Japan.

'15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be Japanese journalists think that this kind of argment is just the babbling
of a few hardline scholars? Or do they think that if Japan makes concessions
in the area of economic friction, things will work out all right?

This anger is a true response which is found throughout the government and
among the people.

Caused by Prime Minister Suzuki

0n 8 May last year, Prime Minister Suzuki signed a joint communique between
Japan and the United States. It prasised the United States and announced
to the world that Japan would share a role in defense of the Northwestern
Pacific (from several to 1,000 nautical miles out from Japan) in order to
defend the peace of the free world against the threat of the Soviet Union.

In short, Japan made an agreement, in effect, to totally revise the Defense
Guidelines (determined in 1976) and break the barrier of 1 percent of the
GNP in defense spending.

This is because defense expenditures of at least 1.5-1.8 percent of the GNP
are necessary for defense of the sea and air around Japan. However, although
10 months have passed since then, Japan has not carried out this international
agreement. Rather, it has continued to hold firm to the "Defense Guidelines"
and to the limit of 1 percent of the GNP.

There cauld be no failure to carry out an agreement which shows more rudeness
toward the other party to the agreement. Is it not reasonable for the
U.S. Government to take this as an insulting response?

That is not all. The prime minister of this country did not even make public
this " joint comanique," an international agreement which he signed himself.
In practice, he denied it soon afterward. this action has injured the
international credibility of Japan and even placed the existence of our
reliance on peace in danger.

Understanding of 0.8. Problems

Since the shah of Iran was deposed in January 1979, the United States has
been making an all-out effort to undertake a new burden of maintaining a large-
scale military presence in the Middle East.

Also, in order to restore the balance of naval power and strategic nuclear
force which is fundamental to the overall military balance, the 0.5. per capita
expenditure is nine times the Japanese defense esrpenditure (from taxes).
Today's Japanese cannot even imagine what a great burden this is under an
unprecedented recession with 10 percent unanployment.

Host of Japan's raw materials are imported from the United States or from
the military allies of the United States. And Japanese products are being
exported to the United States and its military allies. Are the Japanese
aware of this at all?

’ 16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Also, the freedom and safety of the export and import ships that make this
trade possible are supported by Meriean naval power (American taxes), but
the Japanese do not seem to feel any obligation.

The actual economic livelihood of Japan could be maintained even if it broke
off relations with the cosnunist bloc, but it woald be impossible for even
1 day without the United States.

Responsibility to the Free World

Furthermore, the Soviet Union in the 1980's has the capability for military
deployment on three fronts, Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East, and
has clearly demonstrated its ambition for territorial expansion. In this
situation, the United States is exerting its strength to expand its military
force even though there is a huge deficit in the national finances.

The Far East or the Western Pacific must be made the responsibility of
Japan, or at least the joint responsibility of Japan and the United States.

From-the 1980's on, the peace and existence of the free world must be main-
tained by the. tripartite alliance of the United States, Western Europe, and
Japan. In brief, as a choice for Japan, there is no room to consider anything
other than this.

Therefore, if Japan denies this minimum military role for world peace, the
military balance of East and West will break down, and there is a very high
probability that a large-scale war will break out. And this will be the end
of "Japan, the major economic power."

Establishment of Autonomous System Primary Consideration

I previously mentioned that the anger of the United States toward Japan can only
have the chilling result of "military abandonment.” Because of the avoid~

ance of a direct battle between the United States and the Soviet Union, Japan
is negligent and fails to understand the seriousness of the situation. It
would be the end of Japan if the United States decided that it would be better
to throw Japan to the Soviet Union than to spend its strength in our defense.

"The world will not move in accordance with the domestic affairs of Japan."
Naturally, with a response that does not show an understanding of this fact,
we cannot avoid a crisis.

In order to restore relations of friendship and trust between the United States
and Japan, the first consideration is the military problem of Japan's inter-
national role. In other words we must take a clear position and carry out
policies of defending our country by ourselves.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

9651
080: 4105/65

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INWR OFTWC]AI.I£§E¢)NL¥

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

TECHNOLOGY COOPERATION HITB U.S. TO BE STRENGTHENED

Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 30 Mar 82 p 1
[Text]

There are prospects that the co-operative structure between Japan and
the US will be strengthened greatly in the field of development of high ultra-
modern technology. including 5th-generation computers and biotechnology.
In regard to high-levelultra-moderntechnology, which is one of the focal
points of the Japan-US trade friction, HITI on the 29th formulated concrete
measures for over-all technological exchange between Japan and the US and for
the opening of the market, with the following items as the contents:

(1) US enterprises' participation in Government-aided projects; (2) promotion
of investments and technological exchange between Japan and the US; and

(3) complementary development through the sharing of roles between Japan

and the US. The Ministry will soon propose to the US Government the
establishment of a working group to realize these measures, and Japan and
the US will jointly start checking into the details. High-level ultra-
modern technology is a field where rapid growth of the market is expected.
As the US is strengthening its criticism against Japan's closed research and
development structure. and as this may become a cause of trade friction

in the future, MITI wants to prevent friction in advance by strengthening
the co-operetion between the two nations.

Opening of high-level ultra-modern technology is a big pillar among
the "in items of interest" to the US Government. In this field, represented
vby computers, biotechnology, etc.. the as side has an advantage at present.
However, the US side fears that if the Japanese market is left closed, the
advantage of the US side will be lost due to further technological progress in
Japan, and that there will appear a field which will repeat the failure of
automobiles.

Therefore, at the Japan-US Trade Sub-Committee meeting held in early
"arch, the US side requested of the Japanese Government the following four
points: (1) Stopping Buy Japanese, including the Government's preferential
procurement of home-produced products; (2) treating foreign capital-affiliated
enterprises and domestic enterprises on equal terms in such fields as the
tax system; (3) having foreign capital-affiliated enterprises participate
in Government-aided projects; and (u) not hindering the results of
technological development by Japanese enterprises from being given to US
enterprises.

18
FOR‘OFIIClAl.l£ﬂE(M‘LY
The policy of MI?! is to respond to these requests by the US side in a
positive way. First of all, International Trade and Industry Councillor
suaiahah, who is to visit the US in the middle of April, will propose the
establishment of a working group to discuss high~leve1 ultra-modern technology
between Japan and the US. This group will grasp the present situation of
investments and technological exchange between Japan and the US and thereupon
check into concrete measures to create a co-operative structure for the
future. It is said that the US is advanced in development in the fields of
baSic technology and software. and that Japan exceeds the US in the fields
of production technology and quality control. HITI wants to aim at :reating
a Structure to complement these 55V°P°d fields between Japan and the US.

. . In regard to the development of Sth-generation computers, the
Ministry will propose to the us side the holding of a symposium to exchange
research results between Japan and the US. As to the payment of Government
subsidies to US enterprises, which payment the US side is seeking Strongly,
too, tse Ministry is planning to explain that "If US-affiliated enterprisesmake
applications, they will be treated in the same way as Japanese enterprises."

{urthermorm the Ministry will show the posture of checking into the
lowering of tariff rates to push the opening of the computer market.
hi?! intends-to seek that the US side also lower the tariff rate on computers
in co-ordination with Japan's lowering of the tariff rate. It judtes that
it Is necessary for both Japan and the US to tackle the opening of the
computer c=rk-t.

NITI has decided to announce the posture of Japan-US co-operation by
tackling the opening of the field of high-level ultra—modern technology in
a POSitive way. in response to the request of the US side, because it judged
that "To eliminate the Japan-US trade friction. it is indispensable to
open the markets tor the items in which the US side is interested." also.
the Ministry thinks that not only meeting the request of the US side but also
co-operating with the US side in a forward-looking way will be effective in
settling the Japan-US trade problem, which has become so serious that it
cannot be settled only by piling up individual items. HITI‘s having begun to
show the posture of responding to the elimination of the friction in a positive
way by such means as opening high-level ultra-modern technology will have
effects also on the Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries Ministry, which is negative
about the opening of agricultural products.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

CSO: 6106/98

19
FOR OFF-CIA]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HIT! APPROVES ".3. PAHICIPATION IN 511! cmm'uou COMPUTERS
Tokyo RIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 6 Apr 82 p 1

[Text]

In response to the Government's having decided on a general framework
for measures to open the market. HIT; firmed up the policy of approving
US enterprises' participation in the "plan for the development of
Sth-generation computers," and it has started studies on the creation of
a concrete setup to receive them. The Ministry will soon inaugurate a
"New-Generation Computer Technology Development Organization," a foundation,
as the mother-body to promote the developent plan. It intends to check
into the contents of the setup to receive US enterprises, centering on the
organization of that Organization. its sharing as to development, etc.
MITI. expecting that opening the doors for the development of ultra-modern
computer technology will be a conclusive factor fer the settlement of the
present trade friction with the US, tOgether with the liberalization of
agricultural products, etc., intends to have Councillor KURIHARA, who is to
visit the US within April. sound out the reaction of the US Government.

The Sth-generation computer development plan is a joint project by
the Government and private circles, designed to develop the newest
computer having the function of dealing with languages, letters, and
diagrams which cannot be dealt with by the existing computers, and put
it into practical use within the 1990's.

So far, the US Government has not concretely sought approval for
US enterprises' participation in this development plan. in its request
to Japan for opening the market for ultra-modern technology. However, the
US side criticized Japan's measures to foster ultraemodern technology
with the concerted efforts of the Government and private circles, which
measures Japan showed as to the research and development of VLSI's (very
large-scale integrated circuits), saying that they are subsidized by the
(bvernment. Also, it has strongly hinted at an intention to the effect that
having US enterprises join in the Government-private joint project for
Sth-generation computers. following the development of VLSI's, will become
a pillar for the opening of the market for ultra-modern technology. In
response to this, HIT! has started forward-looking studies as to in what
form US enterprises can be received in case of having them participate.

20
FOI:OFFEJA1.USE(NVLY
I.“ CDHCI‘BLE 7.3m. tne ELDLSIW HILL EXPLDX‘B an UPL‘IIWI uuvuivyw‘uu
structure in case of US enterprises' participation, with the following three
items as pillars: (1) Organization to steer the "New-Generation Computer
Technology Development Organization" (Fujitsu President Takatomi YAHAEOTO
informally designated as Chief Director); (2) the contents of actual sharing
of development; and (3) who is to have the right concerning the results of
development. Especially, MITI is planning to develop three functions ~-

(1) disposition of inference. (2) a knowledge base, and (3) an intellectual
interface -- as themes for research and development for the three years frcm
fiscal 1982. It will cautiously check into how to share the contents of
research and development with US enterprises.

Also, the possibility is strong that the above-mentioned Organization.
which is to be formed with domestic computer manufacturers as main constituents.
will be limited strictly to a body to steer the development plan, and that
actual research and development will be pushed by separately establishing
a "Joint Research Association." like in the case of the development of VLSI's.
What t do about the form of US enterprises' participation in this Association
is also one of the subject5¢ofstudy by the Hinistry.

In the background of HITI's having begun to move to open the doors for
the develo;:ent of Sth-generation computers. there is also the fact that
varicus domestic,com;uter companies have changed rather to a forward-looking
posture in "taking in" US IBM. IBM is changing to the strategy of waging
an offensive against Japan with products which are not interchangeable with
Japanese products. Among various domestic companies. there has arisen a
voice saying that it is wiser to push the development of new-generation
computers jointly with [55 and aim at obtaining IBM's knowhow.

However. there are not a few people who wonder if US IBH will think of
participating in the development of "Sth-generation computers" in real
earnest, even if HITI approves Us enterprises' participation. Also, there
remains a problem of how to co-ordinate the participation of three European
countries which are showing interest in the plan -- Britain, Rest Germany,
and France -- and the participation of US enterprises.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunaha 1981

C50: 4106/98

21

FOR 0FFNJAI.1EHE(N¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

TARIFF BATE ON COMPUTERS LOWER!!! TO 6.9 PERCENT

Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Apr 82 p 1

[Text]

 

MITI on the 8th firmed up the policy of loweringthetariff rate (7% at
present) on computers (proper) to the US level (u.9%) in fiscal 1983, to
avoid the trade friction with the US and the EC. Japan's tariff rate on
computers is scheduled to be gradually lowered to “.9 percent by 1987, through
the agreement at the Tokyo Round (multilateral trade negotiations). However.
it will be lowered ahead of schedule. at one shot. As to the tariff rate
on peripheral units (10.3% at present). too, the Ministry is checking into
lowering it to the level (5%) of agreement at the Tokyo Round, in fiscal
1983. On the Japanese computer market. foreign products hold a share of
about 50 percent. However. HITI wants to make the lowering of the tariff
rate on computers a star item of its comprehensive market-opening measures,
which will be formulated in early May.

. On the lowering of the tariff rate on computers. which are-one of the
items in which the.US side is greatly interested. MITI at first intended
to check into it.on the premise of the US side's lowering its rate. however,

it is strengthening the judgment that in order to eliminate the Japan-US
trade friction which is becoming serious, it is necessary to have drastic
market-opening measures run ahead. without waiting for 08 moves. when ITI
Minister ABE called on Prime Minister SUZUKI and discussed comprehensive
meaSures to open the market. they are said to have agreed to conduct studies
in the direction of lowering theatariff rate on computers. Thus, the
Ministry has firmed up a policy for Japan's lowering the tariff rate on
computers even independently.

The US and BC sides' requeststo~Japan for opening the market include
the liberalization of such agricultural products as beef and oranges, the
lowering of the tariff rates on cookies, chocolate, and whisky. and also
the opening of the service sector including financing and insurance. In

22

FOIIDFFHRAI.USB(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan, however, there is strong oppositioﬁ'to the liberalization of imports
of agricultural products and the lowering of the tariff rates on cookies,
whisky, etc. MI?! is taking the pOSture of strongly pressing the Ministries
and Agencies concerned, such as the Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries Minist. .
to liberalize the import of agricultural products and lower the tariff rates,

by carrying out the lowering of the tariff rate on computers, which are a star
item.

The tariff rate on computers proper was lowered from 9.1 to 7 percent,
and the rate on peripheral units -~ from lu.6 to 10.3 percent, effective from
April 1. This is because the Government dicided, at the end of November
last year, to carry out a gradual tariff reduction, based on the agreement at
the ?okyo Round, from April 1, 1982.twoyears ahead of schedule. Still, the
tariff rate is higher than that in the US (u.9% on computers proper), and
the US side is requesting that the tariff rate be lowered further.

Therefore. the Ministry will lower the tariff rate on computers proper to
the final level (u.9%; scheduled to be carried out on April 1, 1987), agreed
upon at the Tokyo Round, for the time being.

In regard appepiphepalunits, too, the Ministry will check into
lowering the tariff rate to the final level (scheduled to be carried out
on April 1, 1987; 6%; u.5% in the case of the US) which was agreed upon at
the Tokyo Round. Considering computers proper differently from peripheral
units is due to the fact that Japanese manufacturers“ competitive power is
weak as to peripheral units, compared with computers proper, and that the
US side's interest in such units is not so strong.

According the agreement at the Tokyo Round, the US side is supposed to
lower the tariff rate on computers proper to 3.9 percent, and on peripheral
units to .7 percent by 1987. NITI wants to have the US side, too, lower
the tariff rate on computers ahead of schedule, if possible, by taking the
measures this time.

On the Japanese computer market, especially on the large-size computer
market, IBM Japan, a subsidiary of IBM. is proud of its overwhelming share.
Therefore, the produCts of foreign capital-affiliated manufacturers includ-
ing this company. and the products imported by these companies, hold a
share of about 50 percent. Also, the trends of exports and imports of
computers in l981 (based on surveys by the Finance Ministry) show that
exports amounted to V198,500 million and imports to V213,200 million, showing
that tne imports exceeded the exports. Moreover, with the tariff reduction
from April 1 as an opportunity, foreign capitaluaffiliated computer enter-
prises other than IBM Japan. which have so far been obscure, are showing
moves to roll back on the Japanese market.

23

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore, it is expected that Japanese computer manufacturers including
Fujitsu will strongly repulse MITI's policy. However. partly because the
semi-conductors of Japanese computer manufacturers are sweeping the
US market, and because the US Department of Commerce is conducting
inveStigations as to whether or not to invoke the national security clause
in regard to Su-kilcbit RAM's. many people view that they will inevitably
have to accept MITI's policy, in the end.

COPYRIGHT: Nlhon Kauai Shlmbunsha 1982

C50: 1410 6/98

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FRICTION WITH USSR OVER COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE NOTED
Tokyo YOMIURI SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Apr 82 p 3

[Text]

The problem that Japan is conducting a heated controversy with the
Soviet Union over the stationary orbit for the "CS-2a," Japan's firs:
practical stationary communications satellite, which Japan is scheduled to
launch in February next year (already reported in the evening edition of
the YONIURI on the 3rd), was taken up at the LDP Space Development Special
Committee (Chairman: Taro NAKAYAMA) meeting, which was held on the 8th.

At the meeting that day, the following problem was brought forward:
"This is the first time I have heard that the Soviet Union has wedged itself
into the stationary orbit over the equator at 130 degrees east longitude.
What is the situation?" Government leaders of the Postal Services Ministry,
the Foreign Ministry, the Science and Technology Agency, etc., who were
present as observers, explained the circumstances where the Soviet Union
requested Japan to shift the position wherethe "CS-2a" is to be Stationed.
also. they explained that the problem is being oo~ordinated between Japan
and the Soviet Union on the basis of the procedures stipulated at the
International Tale-Communications Union (ITU).

Also, a Postal Services Ministry leader answered on the schedule for
launching the satellite as follows: "If February is missed, the satellite
will have to be launched in August. As there will arise various problems
insludin; the quality assurance of equipment, we want to push co-ordination
strictly along the line of launching it in February.“

As the problem is connected with Japan's space development plan as a
whole. the said Committee eventually decided to watch the co-ordination
negotiations between the Governments of the two countries with serious interest,
and seek that the Governnmnt report on the progress of the negotiations at
all times. -

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

TRANSLATION SYSTEM TO BE ESTABLISHED, 'DICTIONARY' PBOHDTED
Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 Mar 82 p 1

[Text]

In order to promote the "internationalization" of the Japanese
people who are weak in linguistics, the Science and Technology Agency
has decided to launch into the development of a simple-type translation‘
system which will be capable of handling about ten times as many words
as in the case of an already existing trial-produced machine. This will
be an English-Japanese and Japanese-English electronic computer system,
under which translation will be carried out mechanically to the
extent of 70% to 80% or so, while revision and complete translation will
be carried out as to the remaining percentage. unlike the case of a
full-translation machine which is desired in connection with large-scale
projects. As regards hardware, an already existing computer ("H-200"
produced by Fujitsu) will be used, and it will also merge with a
"terminology dictionary" containing 500,000 to 600,000 words. The work
of development will be entrusted to the Japan Information Center of Science and
Technology (JICST) and the Industrial Science and Technology Board and the
Electronic Technology Overall Research Institute. Moreover, the Agency
plans to disburse about ¥l.S billion out of its scientific and technologicial
promotion funds and to complete the proposed development within three
years. it also plans to promote the nation-wide use [of the new system]
through the utilization of on-line scientific and technological
information services (JOIS) by JICST.

It is said that internationalization is lagging behind, because
there are language barriers. These barriers are not only making ordinary
personnel exchange negative but are also weakening researchers'
capability for the international exchange of information.

Recently, there is also an increasing number of researchers who
write their research treatises in the English language. however,

only one-third or so of the domestic treatises, the annual average number
of which is said to be 300,000, are translated into English.

26

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
This fact is recently tending to be rather criticized by Europe
and the US. It is said that on the international arena, Japan should
make public the results of its research, and that Japan should
abandon its exclusionism and open its market also in regard to treatises.
Setting its eyes on this situation, [the Science and Technology
Agency], in connection with the Industrial Science and Technology Board's
large-scale "super-computer" development project. plans to make it have
the function of being capable of carrying out English-Japanese translation,
besides that of conducting scienti.ic and technological calculations.
Thus, moves for the development of translation machines are also becoming
more vigorous.

At present. however, all plans aim at "complete" translation
which will not at all require any human hands; therefore, development
sdif ficult. A long period of about ten years is needed.

As can be seen also in the fact that t. .e Science and Technology Agency
is aiming at realizing practical use within three years, i a purpose
is to develop a system which can be used right now. In regard to the
concrete contents. the Agency has decided to conduct final studies on them
through a "committee for promoting research on a spot report system
conCurning overseas scientific and technological documents" (to be
composed of ten some-odd persons) which will be set up in the near future.
Fundamentally, it has been decided that the Electronic Technology Overall
Research InStitute will develop various kinds of :oftuare, with the
ﬁ-‘OG-, which it has. as the CPU and have them merge with a scientific-
terminology dictionary which will be developed by JIC T, and which will
use magnetic disks.

As ﬂu - he t3rg-. ’ performance, [the Science and Technology Agency]
is consiiering [a system] which will be capable of mechanically
carr"ing out the Japanese- English or English- Japanese translation of
various kinds of scie..tific trea:ise abstracts on the level of 70% to
800.

It is said that the oresent average fee level as to the translation
of treatises into English is as much as ¥u,000 per case. [The Science
and Technology Agency] is aiming to enable users throughout the country
to use the proposed system at lower cost through the utilization of
JICST's JOIS. It is expected that the time of translation will also be
shortened to below one-tenth of the present level.

The research project is scheduled to be started even by around the
middle of May.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1982

C50: 4106/98

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORINﬂﬂCJAl.US£1DNLY

SCIENCE AND TWO‘LOGY

COMMUNICATION OOPHITTBB T0 COPE WITH ULTRA-MD” 18mm

Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SEIHBUN in Japanese 13 Apr 82 p 2

[Text]

In the US Congress, there are growing moves to introduce a mutuality
clause covering Japan, Europe, etc., to push the opening of the market in
the high-level ultra-modern technological field including semi-conductors,
communications machinery, and computers. According to what was revealed
by a source concerned on the 12th, MITI has recently directed important
organizations concerned including the Communications Machinery Industry
Association (Chairman: Hitachi President Katsushige MITA), the Electronic
Machinery Industry Association (Chairman: Mitsubishi Electric Machinery Board
Chairman Sadakatsu SHINDO). and the Electronic Industry Promotion
ASSOCiation (Chairman: Mitsubishi Electric Machinery President Nihachiro
KATAYAMA) to check into responses to these moves. On that occasion, MITI
directed them, aside from measures to open the market, to check also into
responses to be made in case the US seeks Japanese industry circles'
co-operation in the future in the development of ultra-modern technology.
Therefore, ways of Japan-US co-operation on high technology on an industry
circle basis will be takenup on a large scale in the future.

A meeting between the Communications Machinery Industry Association
and MI?! was held on the 7th. From the Industry Association, members on the
Engineering Department Manager level of four companies -- Hitachi, NEC,
Fujitsu. and 0ki Electric -- attended the meeting, in addition to the
Secretariat leaders. At this meeting, MITI reported on the recent moves
of the US Government, Congress, and industry circles over high-level ultra-
modern technology, and emphasizedthatin the 05, both the Government and
p-ivate circles are "sensitive" to the field of high-level ultra-modern
technology.

The US has for some time past been saying that various foreign countries
including Japan have barriers in terms of tariffs and NTB's (non-tariff
barriers) in the field of high-level ultra-modern technology. Thus. it is
requesting that they open their markets on the level of the US. It is
pointed out that such moves are linked to the introduction of the mutuality
clause in the Us Cangressintothefieldof high-level ultra-modern technology.

28

FOR}MNHCJA1.USB‘DNLY
In the case of Japan in particular, its high-level ultra-modern
technological field includes many items which are superior to those in the
US, and it is said that US industry circles strongly intend to carry out
technological exchange with Japan in this field. It is pointed out that this
is the background of the introduction of the mutuality clause.

It is viewed that for such reasons, MITI conveyed its intention to
the main organizations concerned and directed them to explore responses.
The Communications Machinery Industry Association will explore concrete
measures by establishing a "High-Level Ultra-Modern Technology Measures
Committee" (tentative name) within this month. Thus, various industry
:iroles have Started actions on an "Industry Association basis." In this
situation, various industry circles are scheduled to make general reviews of
measures to open the market. the present situation of technological develot-
neat. ct:., and then explore such matters as what Japan-US technological
co-nreration should be. t is expected that Japan-US co-operation in the
field of high-level ultra-modern technology will progress. with this as an
occasion. However. the US is expressing dissatisfaction with the fact that
the Government is pushing basic studies on Japan's high-level ultra-nudern
technoiozy under the Japan,lnc. formula by giving "subsidies. it is viewed
as unavoidable for Japan to be pressed for some response or other on such
points. too. It is expected that arguments will mount between Japan and
the US over what this field should be.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

C50: 4106/98

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

REVISION, ABOLISHMEN’I OF 355 ms APPROVED
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 19 Mar 82 pp 1, 3

[Text]

The Government, at a Cabinet meeting held on the 19th, decided on a
permission and approval one—package readjustment bill (administrative tasks
simplification and rationalization bill). The purpose of the bill is to
materialize the second recommendation formulated by the Second Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council (Chairman: Toshio DOKD). This
is the second package bill concerning the Research Council's recommendation,
after the Administrative ReformPCOnnected Special Exceptions Law. It
includes the permission and approval readjustment bill, drawn up
separately from the Research Council's recommendation, and also the
laws and ordinances readjustment bills shelved at the previous Diet session.

It calls for dealing with the revising or abolishing of a total of 355
laws on a one-package basis.

 

The second recommendation calls for the readjustment of an items
which require permission or approval. In order to carry it out, it is
necessary to revise l7 laws. The Road vehicle and Transporation Law
revision bill for the purpose of extending the period between regular
intervals for the inspection of automobiles and the Radio Waves Law
revision bill calling for abolition of the license [system] for the
esrablishment of citizens'bands(a kind of transceiver) have become single,
independent legislation, in view of the purports of the respective Laws
and because of the problem of legislative techniques. Therefore, the
package bill covers 15 laws, including a Passport Law revision [bill]
calling for expansion of the scope of applications by proxy for the
issuance of passports and a Public Tele-Communications Law revision bill
which will generally liberalize the use of data communications circuits.

In regard to the readjustment of permission and approval, the
l.lu7-case readjustment plan, on which the Administrative Management
Agency, from its own standpoint. has been carrying out co-ordination with
various other Ministries, has been formulated, besides another plan
based on the Research Council's recommendation. Eight laws, including a
honopoly Law revision [bill] calling for extending the period for the

30
FOIlOFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
designation of tobacco and salt retailers, have been added—to it.
Moreover, the laws and ordinances readjustment ﬁlls for the purpose of
abolishing laws, which exist in form only, and which have become
unnecessary, have been unified, too. In this connection, there are 332
laws excluding those which are overlapped. Therefore, the revising or
abolishing of a total of 355 laws will be handled on a one-package basis.

At the very beginning, the Administrative Management Agency had planned to
have [the package bill] decided by the Cabinet by the 12th. But co-ordination
between the Postal Services Ministry and HITI on the liberalizing of
data communications had hard sailing, and [the reaching of a decision]
slided into the 19th. The bill will be submitted to the Diet even on
the 22rd. Deliberations will be conducted at the Cabinet Committee,
because the Administrative Reform Special Committee has not been set up,
as in the case of the previous Diet session.

Gist of Permission and Approval Readjustment Bill

Fcllowing is the gist of the permission and approval one-package
readjustment bill decifnd at the Cabinet meeting on the 19th:

Fair Trade Commission; Paragraph 2, Article 6 of the Anti-honopoly
Law: In regard to the kinds cf agreements or contracts (such as contracts
for borrowing of money and loaning of money), which, it is thought,
will hardly raise any prrblems, from the standpoint of the Anti-Monopoly
Law, the submitting of reports shall be made unnecessary.

National Public Security Commission: Paragraph 3, Article 2 of the
Law Concerning Control over Business which hay Affect Public Morality:
The period of renewal as to the licenses for the operation of game centers,

such as pin-ball houses and mah-jong parlors, shall be extended from
the present six months to one year.

Administrative Management Agency: Paragraph 2, Article 10 of the
Statistics Law: with regard to statistics superintendents, a part

stationing or statistics superintendents in cities, towns, and villages) of the
established restrictions shall.be abolished.

Foreign Ministry: Article 3 of the Passport Law: In applying for
the issuance of a passport, when the application is submitted through
the spouse of the applicant or through a relative within the second
degree of consanguinity. the application shall be accepted in case
the submitting of an application is not regarded as being difficult,
for unavoidable reasons.

31
FIMICNﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(NﬁLY
FOITOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Finance Ministry: (1) Paragraph 1, Article 32 of the Tobacco
Monopoly Law: The period of designation as to retailers of manufactured
tobacco shall be extended from the present within three years to within
five years.

(2) Paragraph, Article 65 of the same Law: With regard to appliances
in the appliances and machinery for the production of manufactured
tobacco, there shall be no need to obtain approval, for example.
in the case of their being manufactured.

(3) Paragraph 1, Article 26 of the Salt Honopolvbaw: The period of
designation as to salt sellers shall be extended from the present within
three years to within five years.

(u) Article 17 of the Sugar Consumption Tax Law: As regards the clar-
ification of tax exemption as to the transfer of sugar. etc., without
paying taxes. it shall be clarified only when this is deemed particularly
necessary. from the standpoint of securing taxes.

(5) Paragraph 3, Article 8 of the Playing-Card Tax, Etc., Law:
In ccnncction with playing-cards, etc.. to be used as samples, [the system
for obtaining] the tax office superintendent's or the customs-house

superintendent's approval for exemption from the application of the Law
shall be abolished.

(6) Article in of the Petroleum Gas Tax Law: The tax-exemption
clarification system shall be abolished, in regard to the imposition of a
tax on petroleum gas concerning the tax-free transfer thereof.

(7) Article ion of the :ional Tax-Collection Law: In connection
with the public sales of real estate, etc., persons, who make the second
highest-priced bid, after the highest-priced bid, shall be designated
as "applicants for buying it at the second highest price," and when the
decision on sales to the highest-price bidder is withdrawn, sale to
the "applicant for buying it at the second highest price" can be decided,
instead of carrying out re-sales, and necessary procedures can continue
to be taken as they are, after that.

Education Ministry: (1) Paragraph 3, Article MS of the School
Education Law: In regard to the granting of permission by prefectural
boards of education for the establishment or abolition of Senior high
schools which have curricula based on a wide-area correspondence system.
the obtaining of the Education Minister's approval shall read the
submitting of reports.

(2) Article 9-2 of the Social Education Law: As regards assistant
superintendents concerning social education, the established restrictions
shall be abolished.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
welrare Ministry: (1) Article 20 of the Welfare Ministry
Establishment Law: Quarantine stations can be forced to carry out
inspection or guidance in regard to the imports of foodstuffs, additives,

appliances, containers and packing materials, etc., which are put on
sale, or which are used for business.

(2) Article 8 of the Public Health Center Law: The welfare Minister's
approval shall be abolished in the case of using such words as to mean

public health centers, in the name of facilities other than public
health centers.

(3) Paragraph 2, Article 1 of the "Trachoma" Prevention Law:
The system shall be abolished under which doctors will submit reports

to the public health center directors concerned when they conduct check-ups
on cases of trachoma.

(u) Article 5 of the same Law: The established restrictions shall

be abolished as to facilities concerning the prevention of trachoma
and medical treatment.

(5) Article u of the Helminthiasis Prevention Law: The established
restrictions shall be abolished with regard to facilities concerning the
prevention of and medical treatment for helminthiasis.

(6) Paragraphs 1 and 2, Article 16 of the Venereal Disease Prevention
Law: The established restrictions shall be abolished in regard to
hospitals or clinics for conducting checkups on venereal disease.

(7) Paragraph 5, Article 2 of the Law Concerning Masseurs.
Chiropractors, Acupuncturists, Moxa-cauterists, and Others: Examiners
for the license to become massager-chiropractors, acupuncturists, or
moxa—cauterists shall be unified with those for the license to become
judo adjusters .

(8) Article 3-3 of the same Law: In connection with massager-
chiropractors, acupuncturists, and moxa-cauterists, the system of
reporting on (changes) in their addresses shall be abolished.

(9) Paragraph 3. Article 6 of the Physicians Law: The annual report
system shall be reformed, and reports shall be submitted once every
two years.

(10) Article in of the Law Concerning Medical Radiation-Rays
Technicians and Medical X-Ray Technicians: In regard to medical X~ray

technicians, the system of reporting on changes in their addresses shall
be abolished.

(ll) Article 7 of the Judo Adjusters Law: with regard to judo

adjusters, the system of reporting on (changes) in their addresses
shall be abolished.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-.—_ _

(1?) Paragraph 1, Article ll of the same Law: Examiners for the
license to become judo adjusters shall be unified with those for the
license massager-chiropractors, acupuncturists, or moxa-cauterists.

(l3) Paragraph 3, Article 6 of the Dentists Law: The annual report
system shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted once every
two years

(in) Paragraph 3, Article 7 of the Dental Hygienists Law:
The annual report system shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted
once every two y’ears.

(lS) Paragraph 3, Article 7 of the Dental Technicians Law: The annual
report syStem shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted once
every two years .

(16) Article 33 of the Law Concerning health Nurses, Midwives, and

Nurses: The annual report system shall be changed, and reports shall
be submitted once every two years.

(l7) Article 9 of the Pharmaceutists Law: The annual report system
shall be changed, and reports should be submitted once every two years.

Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries Ministry: (1) Fertilizer Control
Law: The established restrictions shall be abolished as to fertilizer
inspectors. -

(2) Article 21 of the Veterinarians Law: The annual report system
shall be changed, and reports shall be submitted once every two years.

MITI: (l) Paragraph 1, Article in of the High-Pressure Gas Control
Law: In connection with changes in the manufacturing facilities of the
Group A manufacturers, approval shall be shifted to reporting, with regard
to small-scale changes which will raise no particular problem, from the standpoint
of safety.

(2) Paragraph 3, Article 1% of the same Law: In connection with
changes in the manufacturing facilities of the Group B manufacturers,
there shall be no need to submit reports, with regard to small-scale
changes which will pose no particular problem, from the standpoint of
safety.

(3) Article 181-8 of the Measuring Law: The validity term of
designation as to special-container manufacturers shall be eutended from
the present three years to five years.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(‘6) Article 6 of the ﬁlectric Repair work Personnel Law: The established
restrictions shall be abolished, with regard to examiners for the license
to become electric repair work personnel.

Transportation Ministry: Article 99 of the Road Transportation Law:
The scope of trucks for private use, to be reported to the Transportation
Minister in connection with the use thereof, shall be limited to trucks
the maximum loading capacity of which exceeds the tonnage prescribed by
the Transportation Ministry Ordinance.

Postal Services Ministry: Article 55 of the Public Tele-Communications
Law: The connection of computers to computers. which connection has

not been approved so far, shall be approved under certain fixed conditions,
and the establishment of diversified data communications shall be made

possible through the mutual connection of computers. The connection of
public communications circuits and specific communications circuits,

which connection will only be approved under an individual approval system,
shall be liberalized. The public—specific-public connection. which has

no: been approved up until now, shall also be made possible under an
individual approval system.

Construction Ministry: Regulations Attached to the Architects Law:

The selection system shall be abolished under which one can obtain an

architect‘s license even if one does not undergo examinations for becoming an
architect.

Autonomy Ministry: Article la-u of the Fire Defense Law: The established
restrictions shall be abolished, with regard to examiners for the license
to become personnel who handle dangerous objects.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shiubunsha 1982

CSO: 5500/2168

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HITI, POSTAL SERVICE HEAD FOR 'SECOND ROUND' OVER COMMICATIONS
Tokyo HAINICHI SHMUN in Japanese 20 Mar 82 p 9
[Text]

A Public hie-Communications Law revision bill for the purpose of
"liberalizing data communications." over which confusion had been
continuing between MIT! and the Postal Services Ministry since the
autumn of last year, was drawn up through the mediation of the LDP, and
it was decided at a Cabinet meeting held on the 19th. It is expected
to be submitted to the current Diet session.

Data communications mean networks for tele-comunications to be
established through the use of circuits of the Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation (m). At present, they are being used
for on-line systems, including banks' cash cards and the National
Railways' "Green (TR: First Class Ticket) windows." There are many
restrictions on the use of such connunications circuits; therefore,
industrial circles have from before been requesting the liberalization
thereof. Moreover, the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research
Council also called for the liberalization of data comunications.
That is why the Postal Services Ministry finally started to take action
and drew up its Public Tale-Communications Law Revision Bill, including
the liberalization of the processing of on-line information.

However, in regard to the proposed liberalization, how far the
communications circuits should be liberalized, is a major problem.
On that point, controversy has been continued between the Postal Services
Hinistry and HITI, during a long period of more than six months.

From the viewpoint of outsiders, the contents of the controversy
between the two Ministries are very difficult to understand, partly
because they contain technical terminology. In the final analysis, however,
the problem can be boiled down to the point of whether [the Government]
should approve the free use of circuits by private circles through the
liberalization thereof to the greatest possible extent, as called for
by HITI, in order to cope with the development of information-processing
services, or whether the contents should have a strong restrictive
coloring. with importance attached to the public-utility nature, as proposed
by the Postal Services Ministry.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In other words, the stand of HITI is as follows: "The Postal Services
Ministry's plan envisages too many restrictions and limitations, even
while calling for liberalization. It is very far removed also from the
Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's recommendation
calling for the adoption of a negative-list formula (under which liberalization
will be carried out as a general principle, while the scope of restrictions
will be clarified to the minimum necessary extent)."

The contents of the Sevision Bill, agreed upon between the two
MiniStries this time. use such expressions as "it shall be based on the
spirit of administrative reform.“ when viewed as a whole, the direction
of liberalization has been clarified. Also, in regard to use by others
(which means that for the sake of enterprises which cannot have their
own computers, information-processing enterprisers will lease circuits
from NTT and sub-lease them to such medium and small enterprises through
the establishment of an on-line system) who are medium and small
enterprisers, which use was regarded as a problem pending between the two
Ministries, it will be apprOVed under certain fixed conditions. Thus,
the direction of liheralizing communications circuits has been generally

'clarifiud. A HITI leader also emphasized the "general achievement,"
saying as follows: "This marks one step forward." "I mvself will rate
it at '10 point; or so."

However, when one carefully views the contents of the agreement,

one will find that they are "ambiguous." For example, in connection
:ith use by others, they call for the imposition of such restrictions as

it snall be limited to use by medium and small enterprisers who have
close business connections," or "under certain fixed conditions." The
contents of these restrictions are vague, and it will also become
pcssible to strengthen the restrictive coloring through the establishment
of a Ministry ordinance. Moreover, the expression "it shall be based
on the spirit of administrative reform" shows the direction of permitting
libnralization, but the degree will depend largely on the completely
subjective =udgment to be formed. As regards use by others,.the
agreement between the two hinistrics this time only takes the form of a
provisional stay, to the last.

37
FORIOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the agreement this time is likenedtoa meal. this can also be
adiJ to be a situation whereby the kinds and size of tableware have been
tiezided, but whereby it is still not clear what kind of food will be
served. Therefore. in regard to the revising of the Postal Services
Ministry Ordinance for the purpose of deciding on the detailed contents
of the agreement. a vigorous exchange of words is expected to be carried out
between the Postal Services Ministry, which wants to carry it out, from
its own basic standpoint, and HITI, which wants to promote the proposed
liberalization, as far as possible, even during the current Diet session.
Also, in regard to the final settlement of the problem of liberalizing
data communications, which settlement, it is said, will be secured

within the next one year, the second round of fierce offensive and defensive
battles will probably be continued between the Postal Services Ministry,
whicn thinks it necessary to enact a new law which will recognize the
State's right to grant approval and permission, and MIT! which regards

such a new law as unnecessary.

(By reporter Shigeki MORI)

COPYRIGH'I: Main‘ichi Shimbuneha 1982

C80: 5500/2168

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDUSTRY STAR‘IS PREPARATIONS FOR DATA CONNICATIONS ROLE
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 20 Mar 82 p 1

[Text]

The Government, at a Cabinet meeting held on the 19th, decided on a
"permission and approval one—package readjustment bill" which incorporates a
revision of the Public Tele-Communications Law for the purpose of
liberalizing data communications. The bill will be submitted to the current
Diet session. Big users and suppliers as to the data communications system
have already started to move simultaneously to provide for the proposed
liberalization. The "Mitsubishi CC Research Council," composed of
la major companies which are affiliated with the Mitsubishi group, has
inaugurated two experts committees concerning communications technology and
estimation of demand. Fujitsu PIP (with its Read Office in Tokyo (President:
Heiji KIDA; capital: ¥2uo million), a big information-processing services
company, has also inaugurated a “Data Communications Circuits Project Team"
within that company. Hoves for connecting the effective use of data
communications with a new business chance will probably be accelerated.

The "Technological Experts Committee" and "Demand Experts Cbumittae,"
set up by the Hitsuibishi group, for the first time, will he participated in
by Department Vice Chief- or Section Chief—level experts from the

information-processing and communications sectors of the various companies
concerned.

To begin with, "joint use," in which data communications circuits will be
leased and used jointly by a plural number of enterprises, is expected
to be shifted from the present "banned in principle“ to "liberalization
in principle." Therefore, the Technological Experts Committee is scheduled
to study what kinds of technology will become necessary when joint use
is carried out after the liberalization. It is also scheduled to
carry out also the work of establishing a circuits network which will
become a model. Furthermore, it will check into such problems as
whether a joint company will be necessary to exercise control over the
circuits to be thus leased, and in what form such a company should be
established if it is to be done.

39
FOR OFI1C1AL.US£1DNLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

Moreover, the Technological Experts Committee will conduct studies
on VAN (added-value communications), in parallel. from the stand that
in order to enhance the functions of the joint circuits networks, VAN
services will hold the important key.

0n the other hand, the Demand Experts Committee will conduct research
as to what new demand for data communications will arise among industrial
circles, with which various enterprises are affiliated, and among the
enterprises concerned, after the liberalization of circuits. In other
words, studies will be conducted as to what kinds of new communications
will become possible between the participating enterprises, including
enterprises which are not affiliated with the Hitsubishi group, and other
enterprises with which they have business transactions connections, and
what change this will cause in regard to the handling of business.

In the midst of the moves for securing the liberalization of circuits,
such enterprise groups as Mitsubishi. Mitsui, Sanwa. and Ito-Chu have
already started to hold study meetings on data communications. Among them,
the "Mitsubishi CC Research Council" is running out front.

Fujitsu F1? to Tie Up Also with European and US Enterprises

Fujitsu Ef Ai Pi (abbreviated to Fujitsu F1?) is carrying out the
work of establishing a new information-processing services set-up
on the premise of data communications, through its Project Team. It will
also carry out the following tasks with the co-operation of Fujitsu, its
parent company: (1) Research on the market and commodities on the basis of
the new data-communications system after revision of the Law, and (2)

development of a software operation system for on-line services which will
use the new data communications system. The said Company says that

it "wants to make efforts, so as to enable the start of new services,"

at the same time as the start of the new system.

The same Company also says that the following lines of business
are conceivable: "Business in which information will be transmitted to

many customers through the use of circuits to be leased from the Nippon

Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (NTT.)" "Acting as an intermediary
in case communications circuits are used jointly by a plural number

of enterprises." "Business of connecting enterprises with customers
through the establishment of a new system."

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For that purpose, the Company, centering on its Project Team, intends
to conduct surveys on the situation concerning the use of oomications
circuits in the Us and various European countries, with the co-operation
of Fujitsu. At the same time, if there are systems and software. which
may be able to be introduced into Japan, the Company intends to accumulate
know-how and software through the conclusion of tie-ups with the local
enterprises concerned. The Company further says that it wants to make
efforts, so that it may realize the "profits of the original enterpriser."

to the fullest extent. ahead of other information-processing services
companies. I

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

cso: 5500/2168

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FURTHER DISCUSSIONS ON DATA COMMUNICATIONS URGED
Tokyo YOHIURI SHIMBUN in Japanese 24 Mar 82 p 4

[Text]

The problem of liberalizing the use of data communications circuits
has been generally settled, with the Public Tele-Communications Law
revision bill incorporated in the administrative tasks simplification
and rationalization bill which was decided at a recent Cabinet meeting.

Data communications mean a system for connecting communications with
the processing of information through the use of computers, as in the
case of the National Railways' "Green (TN: First Class Ticket) windows
and the banks' on-line systems. The establishment of networks for the
processing and distributing of information is rapidly progressing
among enterprises.

Under the present system, however, the use of data communications
circuits is restricted strictly. In industrial circles, voices calling
for liberalization were strong.

The use of circuits for data-processing purposes. between enterprises
will be liberalized, due to the revision this time. Thus, the restrictions
will be eased to a considerable extent. However, this is still nothing but
the first step toward liberalizing data counmmications. Rather, it should
be said to be a stop-gap, previsional measure.

From the standpoint of improving the conditions for developing
data communications, there are still many problems.

#2

FOR‘0FFﬂJAl.USE(HVLY
For example, in regard to "message exchange" for transmitting
information, without changing the contents thereof, the recommendation,
submitted earlier by the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research
Council, points out as follows: "The use of circuits should be liberalized,
with the exception of [enterprisers] who carry out message exchange,
with an unspecified large number of persons as the objects." However,

as far as the revision this time is concerned. restrictions will be
left behind to a considerable extent.

The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (NT?) is
performing data communications services by itself, while offering
communications circuits. However, it holds the position of a privileged
organization, as a report on the results of its inspection, which report
was released by the Administrative Management Agency last year, points
out as follows: "[NTT] is carrying out message exchange, which is banned
toward private circles. It has also made up the deficit of as much as
xso million in its data-communications sector through the use of earnings
from its telephone services, etc."

Even if NTT is to extend data communications services, it should
establish a set-up for carrying out fair competition with private circles.

Data communications are a system which will form the foundation of an
informationized society in the future. In regard to the discussions
conducted up until now, MITI emphasized its views, from an industrial
standpoint. However, [data communications] will fulfill an important role,
not only in the industrial field but also in various other fields, including
education, medical service, administration, and science. Efforts should
be made to establish a desirable data-comunications system through
wide-range discussions.

At this time, therefore, it will probably be necessary to clarify
what were the substantially problematical points of the data-comunications
problem discussions conducted up until now.

The characteristic of the informationization of today is the point
of connection between communications and the processing of information
through the use of computers. Despite the fact that the field of
information-processing is growing in importance, the Postal Services Ministry
regards the long-established communications system as the premise, and
it is trying to take informstionization on an extension line thereof
and to impose restrictions on it. Is there no problem in regard to this
posture?

43

FORlOFFKJA1.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Apart from the data comunications, the realization of picture
communications, in which necessary pictures will appear on the televisian
through the use of communications circuits, is also close at hand.
Technology for satellite commieationa and optical communications, too, has
already been put to practical use. It is certain that informationization
in Japan will markedly progress within the next 10 or 20 years, thus

causing a revolutionary change in economic society.

It is important for Japan to promote such informationization smoothly.
A communications policy should be formulated, from the viewpoint of
what should a necessary comications system for that purpose be like.
that is, from the standpoint of the informationization policy.

At this time, we want to propose the establishment of a deliberation

organization under the direct control of the'Prime Minister, in order
to conduct comnunications-poiicy discussions comprehensively.

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuri Shinbunsha 1982

C50: 5500/2168 END

M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY