FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS .L/.1071o'

4 August 1982

USSR Report

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT
(FOUO 5/82}-

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omcuu. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

neadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3935 L/lo710
4 August 198:

USSR REPORT
ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 5/82.
CONTENTS
AERONAU'I ICAL AND SPACE
Gas Generators of Rocket Systans................................ l

NUCLEAR ENERGY
Current State and Outlook for HICR Research in USSR............. 3

Some Requirements for Nuclear-Chemical Facilities With
Bigh—‘l‘eaperature Reactors..................................... 12

Particulars of Layout and Construction of Experimental
Industrial High—Tupersture Gas-Cooled Reactor Model. . . . . . . . . . 18

Choosing Design Concept and Physical Features of EEG]! Core
for ﬁner” P.c111t1e..0000'0.0.0.0.0....DOOOOODOIOOOOIOODOOOOO 22

Molten-Salt Reactor with Natural Convection of Fuel Hixture
a” open Gas.mrb1ne A1: ”cleOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIDOODOOOOOOOOODOOO 28

Physical Features of III-ca With Circulating Fuel 36

Some Problens of Heat Exchange and Hydrodynamics in m Core
cmnenc. (survey)"00000OI.'00.0...OOODOOOCOOOOO'OOICOOOOOO' ‘3

Some Results of Experi-ental Research on m Equip-eat
cmonent‘OU'O'.ICOOCOOOOOOOO.OOIOOIOOOOCOOOOOOOOOCOC0.0.0.... so

Fabrication and Quality Control of Coated Fuel Particles,
Fuel Elements and Fuel Ass-bliss for mk's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 61

Transposing Fuel Assemblies To Equalixe Energy Distribution
and Ilprove Fuel Cycle in W Reactors....................... 8b

- a - [III - USSR - 2].? SET F000]
FOI.0F11CLAL.US£IDNLY

NON-NUCLEAR ENERGY

Energy-Storing Substances and Their Utilization.................

Reliability of Electrical Machinery for Power Generation........
NAVIGATION AND GUIDAMCB SYSTEMS

Navigation and Controlling Movement of Mechanical Systaas.......

Control System for Elastic Moving 0bjects.......................
HIGH-ENERGY DEVICES, OPTICS AND PHOTOGRAPHY

Optical Devices for Measuring Surface Roughness.................
FLUID MECHANICS

Hydrodynamic Theory of Lubrication and Analysis 0! Plain
Bearings Operating Under Stationary Conditions..... ..........

Increasing heat Exchange Efficiency in Power Equipaent..........
Applied Probleaa in Hydronechanica..............................
MECHANICS OP SOLIDS

Oscillations of Kinenatically-Driven Mechanical Systels
Considering Energy Disaipation................................

Two-Dimensional Vibration Impact Syste-s: Dynaaics and

StabilitynOoosaloOIO'OOsIOOOOOIOOOOOOOOaOOODOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

FOR 0$T1C1A1.US£GDNLY

92
9‘

102
107

114

116
120

129

136

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABRNAUTICAL AND SPACE

0130 68.7.0603
ms summons or Roam was

"0303: GAZOGEIIIATGY mmmnl SISTD! in Russian 1981 (signed to press 14 Aug 81)
pp 2

[Annotation and foreword from book "Gas Generators of Rocket Systems", by
Ai'bert Mckseyevich Shishkov and Boris Vasil'yevich Ruuyanssev. Izdstel'stvo
"Hashinostroyeniye". 1183 copies. 152 pages]

[Text] Annocat ion

This book gives a systentiaed description of the basic arrangessnts,characteris-
tics and special features of the operating processes in gas generators using
cheaical fuels (liquid. solid and nixed) for use as power sources and gas Jets
aboard aircraft and in ground systems of rocket equip-ant. Methods of experiamtal
finishing off of gas generators are briefly considered. '

This book is intended for engineers and designers in the area of rocket technology.

Foreword

Gas generators are widely used in rocket equip-ant. Their min units are very
similar to the min units of basic rocket engines: however, the operating processes
in gas generators have essential special features which list be taken into account
in designing and finishing then off.

Nunerous patents and mgasine articles have appeared in recent years in connec-
tion with rocket equip-ant. and the expanded use of gas gmerators, which resulted
in investigations of gas generator devices [2]. Brief inforaation on gas genera-
tors is available in annals on the bases for designing rocket engines [2. 3].
However. as a whole, published nterials on gas generators are disconnected. frag-
Ientary and asthodologically inhomogeneous.

in this book the authors attempted to systsmtise the description of the arrange-
aents and special features of the operating processes in gas generators using
different fuels. based on the basic principles of rocket engine theory.

The book contains five chapters. Gupter one describes the basic characteristics

of gas generators and the fuel compositions used. and considers separately the
aethods for laboratory and test stand tests.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter two describes the special features of gas flows in the gas generator.
the gas conduit and exhaust nozzles. as well as sethods for calculating the gas

dynamic characteristics of gas generators. Questions of filtering gas generation
products and of gas thermdynaaic processes in the devices are elucidated.

Chapter three reviews the special features of the devices on the basis of calcu-
lating one and two-conponent liquid gee generators. as well as gas generators
using fluidized (powdered) fuel.

Chapter four considers design arrengemts. sethods‘ for internal ballistic cal-
culations and various possible netth for regulating hard mel gas generators

(especially. by front cosbustion charges), including sultiplo connection gas
generators. The problea of transition processes during the change of decisive
pars-stars is solved.

The last chapter describes questions of developing various combination gas genera-
tors using solid (with separate coaponents), quasihybrid and hydrid fuels in steel-
gas generators and gas generators of direct-flow rocket and rocket-turbine engines;
engineering nethods are given for calculating the basic cknrecteristics of a nun-
ber of gas generators.

Chapters one. four and five were written together: chapter two -- by A. A. Shishkov
and chapter three -- by B. V. Runyantsev.

The authors express their deep gratitude to A. P. Tishin for his valuable recon-
sendations and for facilitating the isprovensnt of the unuscript in all its con-
ponents: to candidate of technical sciences H. Ye. Yevgsn'yev for useml advice
in solving problem in several sections. They will be grateful to readers who find
it possible to send their consents to Iadatel'stvo 'Ihshinostroyeniye' to address:
107076, Moscow, Stronynskiy per. 0.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'stvo "hahinostroyeniye". 1981

2291
C80: 1861/197

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR ENERGY

000 621.039

CURRENT STATE AND OUTLOOK FOR 810R RESEARCH IN USSR

Moscow um-voooaopmu men-m I moons in Russian No 2. I979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) PP 57-66

[Report TC-lO9I3 at meeting of Technical Committee on BTGR‘s. IABA. Vienna,
12-14 Dec 1977]

[Text] An examination is made of the major advantages of
high-temperature gas-cooled thermal and fast reactors. along
with the feasibility of using them for electric power pro-
duction and generation of high-potential thermal energy.

A survey is given of theoretical and experimental research
on such reactors in the USSR.

Initial Assumptions

Electric power production accounts for about 202 of the worldwide consumption
of energy resources, while 802 of energy resources (petroleum. gas and coal)
are expended for industrial and household heating purposes. transportation,
in the chemical. metallurgical and other areas of industry.

Among world reserves of fossil fuel, only coal is far from being exhausted
(according to estimates. only 2-31 of the reserves will be used up by the

end of the century). However. transportation problems and the high cost of
electric power plants that use coal considerably reduce the competitiveness

of coal as compared with petroleum and gas. which has led in recent decades

to preferential use of these valuable chemical products for energy purposes.
to their increased cost. and in future will lead to earlier depletion of their
reserves as conpared with coal. From this standpoint, nuclear power must
cover the needs of electric energy production. and at the same time be used
for producing process heat.

An important factor favoring development of nuclear power is the ecological
situation. Environmental pollution may become a serious limitation on the

road to further expenditure of fossil fuel. and especially coal. for power

production.

Naturally. nuclear power must undergo technical changes for successful intro-
duction in new fields. District heating and production of low-potential heat

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can be successfully handled by light-water reactors. 0n the other hand, natal-
lurgy. the chenical industry and hydrogen production require the developeent
of reactors with teaperature level of 800-1000'0 and higher. At the present
stage. high-temperature heliu-cooled reactors (m's) can be considered

the lost efficient sources for codained production of electrical and high-
potential therllal energy.

hith extensive development of nuclear power. scales nay be limited by nuclear
fuel resources. The world reserves of inexpensive urmiu conensurate in
respect to energy resources with petroleum reserves will have already been
exhausted by the beginning of the next century. The fuel problel can be solved
by breeder reactors that by expanded conversion can extend the capabilities

of uranim by dozens of tinea. putting into the cycle even the uranium dissolved
in sea water. Considering the actual characteristics of energy consumption

(1. e. the variable loading schedules. the necessity of producing high-potential
heat and so forth), it is necessary to set up an economically feasible two-
coaponent nuclear power structure including thermal reactors (light-water
reactors and high-teeperature plutoniua and thoriua reactors) and breeders

with a short deublingtine (6-6 years). Such a doubling tine is easier to
achieve by fast heliu reactors that have good physical and technological
characteristics. Helium breeders will be able to accunulate secondary plutoniu-
for their own developnent. as well as nuclear fuel for thermal reactors which
nay conprise up to 502 in the nuclear power ayaten. In this case. when involve-
aent of thorium is considered. an outlook is opened up for developnant of
nuclear power on a truly enormous scale (Fig. 1-3).

   
  

   
    
  

 

1.0

2°52 4'

755 u a:
a: 2::
a: 4’ 3t
5% 4' 5:}
g ‘ «at :3
“E 44 A%%;- ‘ 11g
:5 III/AdL/ﬂ/M/é/é g:
:5; ﬂaw-N E??-
(01’

   

W’l""',””/‘
,, - ww-
. 11. a ’:I.III7 _.III

4! SO-ZOOI: . s 7/, Power production
' ' nergyres. “’7',“
0 D m M ’0 ﬂ

Fig. 2. Doubling time of nuclear
power capabilities

Fig. l. Scales of development of

power production (zones of undeter-

nined use of energy resources are
shaded)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
  

  
    
   
       

II%%‘
I v Vii/’1!

.Ighall

IQI,Ii=I
'§§Srast III.

9‘ reactor -
I . I

  

Fraction or breeders

0 I“ 2‘ IN 4”

Specific uranium consumption
kg/head

Power production
kUyr/head

Pig. 3. Uranium consumption and necessary numbers of breeders

Peculiarities and Advantages of HTGR's

HTGR's have some distinguishing features and advantages that sake them the most
promising for the nuclear power industry. Principal among these are:

1) high temperature. better thermal efficiency. lower heat emissions to the
environment. lower consumption of cooling water;

2) high safety due to high negative reactivity, high heat capacity of the
graphite core. absence of phase transitions and chemical inertness of the
coolant. and the presence of a number of safety barriers (microsphere fuel
clements- element cladding-prestresaed concrete vease1-emergency enclosure
of the nuclear electric plant);

3) efficient fuel cycle (including Th and Pu) due to excellent neutron-physics
characteristics. high accumulation factor and breeding ratio of fuel;

6) reliability in operation. simplicity of servicing, lower specific activity
of the loop and leakage of radioactivity to the environment;

5) capability of high-power installations with lower capital investment. use
of a gas-turbine cycle. ”dry" cooling towers. simultaneous production of elec-
tric power and high-potential thermal energy. use of nuclear electric plant to
cover peak loads.

HTGR Research Areas

'. Experimental facility with VCR-50 reactor of 50 “He power.
Purpose: accumulation of experience in designing and building HTGR's. working
out helium technology. dynamics. safety. mass testing of fuel elerenta. test-
ing components of reactor control system. equipment components. etc.

The engineering plan for the project has been worked up.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Prototype facilities:

with vc-aoo thermal reactor of 1000 HHt power for process energy purposes;
with act-300 fast reactor of 300 HUe power.

Purpose: accumulation of experience in making installations with 3103's and
PGR's. developing equipment (gas blowers. steam generators. heat exchangers)
studying problems of making prestressed concrete vessels. industrial methods
of using high-potential thermal energy, confirmation of feasibility of attain-
ing the required conversion properties in breeders.

Design work has been done on the rough-draft and planning stage. Coordinated
work is being done by scientific research and planning design agencies.

3. industrial facilities with HTGR's and PGR's of more than three
million kHt power. Purpose: production of high-potential heat. regener-
ators. synthetic fuel. hydrogen for industry. transportation and household
use; for purposes of electric power production with the use of a direct cycle.
air cooling and utilization for covering peak loads.

Studies are being done on parameters and prospects for using large HTCR's
for the national economy.

State of Research on HTCR's

Theoretical and experimental research. 1. Studies are being done
on analyzing areas for most efficient use of HTGR's:

a) for electric power production (here other types of reactors may be com-
petitors). including with gas-turbine facilities and for covering peak loads;
b) to produce high-potential process heat (this field of application of HTGR's
is most promising. including in connection with the lack of competition at

the present time). Under consideration are the processes and sectors of in-
dustry that consume the most energy. and also utilization for transportation
and domestic purposes:

metallurgy. where the use of HTGR's will reduce demands for coke and natural
gas. and when the technology has been successfully developed will enable tran-
sition to the process of direct reduction of iron;

chemical industry (production of ammonia. methanol. etc.);

gnsification of coal;

lent supply to centralized consumers.

Particular attention is being given to hydrogen production by dissociating
water. since water is an unlﬂnited source of the most ideal energy carrier.

which can be used in the power industry. metallurgy. chemistry. households,
transport at ion. etc .

FOR OFFICIAL l‘SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Physicotechnical studies are being done on different HTGR designs (physics
and thenophysics of reactors. dynamics. fuel cycles. various kinds of fuel
eluents. safety. etc.).

3. Materials for man's are being studied. Research is in progress on dif-
ferent kinds of graphite for fuel elesents and reflector. construction materi-

als for equipment (tubing. ste- generators. heat exchangers. etc.). insulation
materials.

4. Work is under way on fuel element sanufacturing technology (spherical
and prissatic versions) and making sicrosphere fuel elements.

5. Research is being done on equipment couponents in facilities and nuclear
electric plants (prestressed concrete vessels. steam generators. heat exchan-
gers. etc.).

6. Research is in progress on helius coolant technology. yield of fission
products. monitoring instruments and helix. cleaning system.

7. Facilities are being developed and sade for studying patterns of nova-ent
of fuel elesents. rods of the control systel. materials and the like. critical
stands (Astra. Grog) (Fig. 4). experisental helim loops (PG-100) (Pig. 5).
Reactor alpule tests are being done on fuel elements and sicrospheres.

 
  
 

to san lin
systeg I

 
   

o evacuation

”1.

Fig. lo. Astra critical stand

8. Research is being done on helium-cooled fast reactors that have an advan-
tage over other types of fast breeders in higher breeding gain and shorter
doubling tine; experiments are being done on critical assesblies (Korba).

PInnning and design work. I. Developuent is in progress (engineering
design stage) on a two-loop experimental chemical process facility with II'I'GR
(Pig. 6).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOO OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Emergency
anks

    

Regenerator Inter-ediate

            
  
   

'~\.|

a regenerator

 

    

Fig. 5. Schelatic diegr- of PG-lOO
gss loop with channel for testing
spherical fuel elenenta

6 Work 111$ .3"
section

*expsnsion of am not given

IUUUUUUUUUUU

Fig. 6. Diagram of nuclear che-ical processing facility:
l--irradistor; 2--reactor; 3—stean generator; lo--turbo-

generator
’50 We Fuel element—sphere (0- 60 I.)
temperature--280/800°C lit-her of fuel elments:
'e--40 Its/cu in facility--260,000
.nensions—D/Il- 2.8/6 n in reactor-425.000
. rods: Fuel enrichenthlZ
'eflector and pylons-46 Burnup—IO0,000 HH-day/netric ton
nerged--lo-6 Cans power of radiation loop--300 k"

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uc- 300 m; cm- 300°c; T2-6.S(8.0) yr; c3"-000°c; zen-0.5 (1.0) yr

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4‘31 - znso'c
Fuel 00, + Plﬂz
200 k .180
[ﬁntnsérmf ﬁ.m,.f§{°"l- p -lG0 kg/cn}
- - - t 2620C
*0“: (m C 8.“?7.” yr
M; as m
.‘n._.—.3.8kg/c.
(sum—l In I‘m-.0

aim-0.7 a

G.4(7.7)yr l'_— "H'Fo's "

 

I

AH'g-o.7 I
Mar-I0 , ll 0-
r..l (7.4) yr

 

Ne- 110 m; 5xol'03 'l'z- 3.50.3) yr; “17,-0.7 In;

”mp-0.50.0) yr; Alt-0.6 3; 9-200 lug/cu”; tm- ”0'0

tout - 620°C; :‘z‘ix- 300°C; “:53- 25 w; cfuel- 2150’0;
Fuel U02+Pu02

Mg. 7. Influence of nan-300 para-atom on fuel doubling tine

Stean parameters-~90 acn, 535'6 Reactor shell-«reel
Nunber of cooling loops—lo Proposed completion deadline-4985
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 8. Fast breeder reactor with helium cooling (integrated

version): l--pnesnge for extracting and installing cassettes;

2-pssssge for reloading mechanism; 3--gate; lowprestresaed

concrete vessel; 5--reloading mechanism; 6--ste- generator;

7--breeding blanket; 8—core; 9-gas blwer; lO--control

system drive; ll--rotating device; 12--truck with telescopic .
hoisting crane

2. Develop-eat is in progress (rough-draft stage) on prototype fscilities
(different versions) for producing process heat (up to 950°C) with power of

500-1000 m: with ll'l‘GR using spherical and block fuel elensnts. including
the VG—loOO technological power unit:

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

Thermal power of reactor--lOOO-1100 NH
Helium tempersture--350/9SO'C

helium pressure--SO kg/cm’

Core dimensions—D/ll- 6.1o/lo/8 m
Control rods in reflector and core
Fuel element--sphere (9- 60 no)
number of fuel elements--800.000

Fuel enricnment-102

3.

Run--3-b yr
Huber of loops-do
Electric energy production-300-400 NH

Hydrogen production (thermochemistry.
methane conversion)--(20-25) 10’

nm’lhr per loop
Vesse1--prestressed concrete
Proposed deadline--l985cl990

Development is in progress (rough-draft stage) on a demonstration fast

helium reactor with power of 300 "He (Fig. 7. 8):

Thermal pouer--800 HH

Helium temperature at reactor outlet--
600-850'C

Helium pressure--160 kg/cmz

Energy release rate--500 kH/liter

Fue I --U02 -Pqu

lo.
introduction after 1990.

COPYRIGHT:

Atomizdat. [979
6610
C80: 8|hb/lOSZ-A

11

Breeding ratio--l.6-l.7

Doubling time--6-8 yr

Second loop parameters-ol70 atm, Sb0°c
Vessel-prestressed concrete

Nuclear electric plant efficiency--382
Deadline undetermined

Studies are being done on parameters of facilities proposed for industrial

Institut atomnoy energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. 1977

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039

SOME mumms FOR “LEAR-CHEMICAL FACILITIES HIT}! HIGH-WWW
RBAC‘IORS

Moscow AMO-VODORODNAIA ENERGBTIKA I TWOLOGIYA in Russian No 2. 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) pp 67-72

[Article by N. D. Zaichko. I. Ya. Yemel'yanov. A. If. Alekseyev. V. H.
Panchenkov. Yu. I. Koryskin. A. A. Orlov. B. K. Nazarov. V. A Chernysyev.
S. A. Hikhaylova. L. P. Dudakov and S. V. Radchenkb]

[Text] The authors consider conditions of forming pover-
process arrangements for producing hydrogen. ammonia and
other goods based on direct conversion of heat from high-
temperature nuclear reactors to a technological process.
Based on these conditions. major requirements are formulated
for high-temperature reactors to serve industrial technology:
service life. time between repairs. radiation safety. etc.

Ref. 1 reported on the feasibility and major areas of introducing high-tempers-
ture reactors for making hydrogen. ammonia and other products. It was shown
that the process nost ready for realization in respect to receiving thermal
energy from high-temperature reactors is steam catalytic conversion of hydro-
carbons. Therefore let us consider some requirenents for nuclear-technological
facilities that realize conversion processes.

As fossil fuel is displaced by nuclear fuel. there is a considerable reduction
of labor inputs. an increase in labor productivity. and a reduction in produc-
tion outlays and settling expenditures per unit of final product due to a
reduction of labor inputs on extracting and transporting fuel because of the
much higher "calorific value" of nuclear fuel over any kind of fossil fuel.
Nonetheless. along with the overall reduction in the level of labor expendi-
tures in the national economy. there may be some increase in the nitrogen
industry. Therefore careful analysis and detailed examination of this point
must be taken into consideration when studying the feasibility of introducing
nuclear reactors into industrial technology.

When high-tenperature heat is produced by burning natural gas. an strangenent
with better technical-economic efficiency is two-stage endothermic conversion

of methane. which is mainly the basis for ammonia production (Fig. l).

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Classical ammonia production scheme: l--nstural gas

turbocompressor; 2-air turbocompressor; 3--nitrogen-air mix-

ture turbocompressor; -—-¢—-—--- process gases; ---->-°°- --

air; -'->—-- - natural gas (fuel); -->—-— -- feed water;
-->-- -- water vapor

Engineering. design and economic workups of plans for the first nuclear-chemical
complexes are based on ammonia and methanol production aggregates with capacity
of 2500-3000 metric tons per day. The choice of this ammonia and methanol pro-
duction capacity has dictated a required power of the nuclear reactor instal-
lation of 550-600 HHt.

With respect to conditions of direct utilization of high-temperature heat
from nuclear reactors in ammonia production. an arrangement with two-stage
methane conversion is most preferable. although it is possible to realize

a scheme with single-stage conversion of methane and additional displacement
of fossil fuel even in the process channel. The advantages of the two-stage
arrangement are as follows: -

maxim-I capabilities for replacing fuel gas with nuclear fuel;

minimum level of working temperature of the stage of the technological process
in which heat from the high-temperature nuclear reactor is to be used-less
than 875°C;

the natural gas consumed in this arrangement is divided into two flows: fuel
(AS-502) burned to get high-temperature heat. and process gas. facilitating
conditions of replacing the fuel natural gas with nuclear fuel;

steam catalytic endothermic conversion of methane is accomplished in individual
tubular reactors with diameter of less than 150 mm with external supply of
high-temperature heat through a solid wall (rather than in an integrated work-
ing volume). which is more favorable for direct utilization of heat from high-
temperature nuclear reactors;

the tubular reactors used in present-day production have a guaranteed service
life of 100,000 hours. retain gas-tightness at a temperature of up to 950°C

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

   

 

m. m, ' s 900-1115!» 1300)? ’50.:
2 f ( ”a" ”0 onversi<ﬁ|\me or sol ~ conversion
' or so products ’ - olant) Prpducts
m " ' l ”'7"

. conversion c
products

,. a. 550?: Fig. 2. Versions of utilizing
nuclear re.-..tor in monia pro-
‘,"c duction: l—resctor; 2—-coolant
loop; 3--converter; lo—heater for
stem-gas mixture; S—sten super-
heater; 6—steam generator; 7-
water heater

 

Structure of heat utilization (Gcsl/hr) in energy scheme
of anonia production facility with capacity of 3000 metric tons per day

   
  
   
  
  

 

 
 

with use of
nuclear reactors

  

Without

 
 
   
  
      
   
 
  

   
  
  
 

using

nuclear for conversion and
Index reactors c3223; generating steam

(initial at pressure of 110 atm

version)

  
 
 

Version 3

@—

Conversion of steam-gas mixture

Heating steam-gas mixture

Steam generation

Steal superheating

Heating feed water

heating steam-air mixture

Heating gas mixture

Heating fuel gas

Total power from heat source

Thermal power of reactor not
counting internal needs. Wt

Note: Above the broken line the heat is supplied by the nuclear
reactor; below -- by burning natural gas

 

and pressure of 30-40 atm. and may serve as an engineering base for making new
tubular conversion reactors that take heat from the nuclear reactor coolant;

a considerable part of the produced hydrogen (theoretically up to 501) is
formed from water rather than from methane (cn.+ 2330- 002+ 6H2). which means

1!.

FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

that steam catalytic conversion of methane based on nuclear reactors can be
considered as a first step on the road to producing hydrogen from water.

The possible versions of using nuclear reactors. distribution of the thermal
power of the reactor with respect to conamers in mania production based
on two-stage catalytic conversion of methane. and the principal values of
technological parameters and working media are given in Fig. 2 and the table.

Version 1 (see Fig. 2a) assumes utilization of heat from nuclear reactors
only in the high-temperature part of production-~in the first stage of methane
conversion for heating reaction tubes.

Heating of the steam-gas mixture. the steam-air mixture. feed water. gas mix-
ture, superheating of steam and generation of saturated steam in an auxiliary
boiler are accomplished in this case by heating natural gas. All equipment
remains unchanged other than the heat-utilizing facility. which is slightly
modified. Starting conditions and transient processes are unaltered. The
advantages of this version are: relative simplicity of construction of the
reactor unit that heats only one flow -- the steam-gas aixture -- in the con-
version process. and most complete retention of the basic technological equip-
ment for ammonia production (excepting the tubular furnace). Its disadvantage
is the small fraction (about 202) of liberated natural gas from the total
production requirement. and low reactor power.

Version 2 (see Fig. 2b) almost totally obviates the use of natural gas as

a fuel. In this connection. the heat necessary for steam conversion of methane.
heating the steam-gas mixture. feed water. and also for generating and super-
heating steam with pressure up to 110 arm is provided by a high—temperature
reactor.

Version 3 (see Fig. 2c) is distinguished by the fact that the reactor facility
is used only for steam conversion of methane. heating the steam-gas mixture

and producing saturated steam at pressure up to 110 atm. In view of the com-
paratively small required total thermal power (500-600 H"). high-temperature
heat and energetic steam can be produced by a single reactor even for long-
range process arrangements. In practice. the area of a single chemical combine
acammndates several production facilities (ammonia. methanol. higher alco-
hols, etc.) with various technological chains in each one. and from arguments
of economy and standby capabilities it is advisable to arrange parallel con-
nections between the individual technological chains within each facility

and among facilities. This may make it possible to centralize production

of hydrogen-containing gas mixtures and energetic steam in separate specialized
reactor facilities.

The advantages of this arrangement are operating reliability of each technologi-
cal chain with lower expenditures on standby equipment and greater economy

and reliability of producing high-temperature heat and energetic steam on
specialized nuclear reactors.

Successful solution of the problem of hydrogenating large amounts of carbon
monoxide into methane with liberation of considerable amounts of heat may in

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

future enable rational solution of problems of distributing the high-temperature
nuclear reactors over the area of the chemical enterprise. Existing and newly
planned facilities in the nitrogen industry must meet the following require-
ments: . ‘

prolonged accident-free operation over the established work life (up to 30 .
years);

high level of utilization of installed power of process equipment (up to
8000 hr/yr);

high reliability of all machines and equipment incorporated in the techno-
logical chain;

ease of control. high degree of automation;

high level of labor productivity. maximum output from each worker;
minimum necessary consumption of raw materials and energy resources;
transportebility, producibility end repairability of all equipment;
high economy of operation of entire facility.

Direct utilization of the heat of high-temperature nuclear reactors in the
energy-consuming industrial processes of ammonia and methanol production
also involves solution of some technological problems. chief among which are:

developing and producing reliable accident-free reactors with coolant tem-
perature of 900-1600'0 at the core outlet and total working life of up to
30 years with yearly continuous-duty operation of up to 8000 hours;

development of reliable and efficient technical facilities for heat transfer
from the reactor core to the working volume of process equipment;

working out engineering measures to ensure protection of final goods and tech-
nical equipment from radioactive contamination;

solution of the problem of diffusion both from the core into the process chan-
nel and in the reverse direction.

Even new when operating facilities for ammonia production with a capacity

of 1360 metric tons per day, considerable difficulties arise in the matter
of training operating personnel with appropriate skills. The introduction

of nuclear-chemical complexes requires implementation of additional steps

in this direction. since the working conditions for service personnel in the
process part of the facility will evidently be on a par with those of nuclear
electric plants; requirements will change with respect to the makeup by
specialties and the training of service personnel.

16

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclus ions

1. The current state and engineering prediction of development of high-tempera-
ture reactor equipment and nuclear fuel technology. the start that has been
made on research and development, and analysis of the outlook for making a
nuclear-chemical facility for anonis and sethanol production based on methane
conversion allow us to count on organizing an experimental industrial plant

of this type in the next 10-15 years.

2. The major problems in making and using high-temperature nuclear reactors
in industrial processes of methane conversion are in the area of transferring
the high-temperature heat from the core to the working volume for carrying
out the technological process with appropriate observance of conditions of
protecting products. service personnel and the enviroment from radiation at
the required level of reliability and redundancy of the nuclear power source.

REFERENCE
1. Dollezhal'. N. A.. in: "vbprosy ctamnoy nauki i tekhniki. Seriya:
Atomno-vodorodnaya energetika" [Problems of Nuclear Science and Engi-
neering: Series on Atoaic Hydrogen Power]. Preprint No 2. I. V.
Kurchatov Nuclear Power Institute [IAE in. I. V. Kurchatova]. 1977. p S.

COPYRIGHT: lnstitut atomnoy energii in. l. V. Kurchatova. 1977
Atonizdst, 1979

6610
CSO: 8|lolo/I052-A

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIlOFFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY

UDC 621.039

PARTICULARS OF LAYOUT AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXPERIMENTAL INDUSTRIAL BIG"-
TBHPBRAIURB GAS-COOLED REACTOR MODEL

Moscow ATOHNObVODORODNAYA ENERGBTIKA I TIKHNOLOGIYA in Russian No 2. 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) pp 73-77

[Article by P. H. Hitenkov. Yu. N. Koshkin. 0. B. Samoylov and Ye. V. Komarov]

[Text] An examination is made of the layout and construc-
tion features of the reactor. and also the problems to be
solved on an experimental industrial facility. The proposed
plan allows development of the facility by stages with dif-
ferent temperature levels.

High-temperature helium-cooled reactors are a new field in nuclear power.
Their distinguishing feature is the feasibility in principle of getting heat
with a high temperature -- up to [000°C or more. Such a temperature potential
cannot be attained in other power reactors currently known.

Possible ways of utilizing high-potential heat have been extensively studied
in the USSR and elsewhere. Research shows that raising the temperature of
the heat generated in a reactor to 750-800’6 enables utilization of modern
turbines with high steam parameters (t,- S30-580'C). It is evidently inad-
visable to further increase the temperature for a steam-turbine cycle.

There is a much better outlook for using the BT63 in a gas-turbine cycle.

and also as a source of thermal energy for technological processes in various
sectors of the national economy in which 70-802 of all generated energy is
consumed as heat. particularly in the most energy-intensive processes of the
chemical and metallurgical industry. Analysis has shown that to replace fossil
fuel with nuclear fuel in these processes the coolant temperature must be
950'0 or more. Such a temperature is attainable in the BT03. opening up ex-
tensive possibilities for using the reactor in this field.

The use of high-temperature helium-cooled reactors in a high-energy process
facility for producing thernal energy is looked upon as the major area for
reactor utilization. Design developmentshave revealed that combined production
of electric power and high-potential heat is most advisable from the economic
standpoint. enabling effective utilization of generated heat with fairly high
efficiency.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of commercial reactor installations for combined production of
high-potential thermal energy and electric power necessitates a large volume

of scientific research and experimental design work. enabling resolution of

some engineering problems relating to the production. conveyance and utilization
of heat with very high temperature. assimilating helium technology, working

out new kinds of equipment and new materials.

Considering the complexity of the problem. it seems necessary to make an ex-
perimental industrial reactor installation. The purpose of such a facility

is to check and confirm all major engineering decisions. and to develop the

principal equipment and control systems under conditions of industrial oper-
ation. The development of an experimental industrial facility will open up

the way for producing commercial models of the facility and using them on

a wide scale. -

In order that experience in developing. making and using the model might sub-
sequently to the maximum extent become a basis for making commercial instal-
lations. it is necessary first of all to make a correct and sound choice of
the direction of planning and the initial technical parameters. 1. e. to work
out the optimum technical requirements for an experimental industrial model
of the high-temperature reactor with consideration of its ultimate purpose.

The technical requirements for an experimental industrial model stem from
the jobs it is to handle:

1) checking and working out the layout of the facility. including the process
1009;

2) checking designs of the principal kinds of equipment and systems. and re-
fining them from operational results. when such units are clearly to a great
extent unique (gas blower. steam generator. drives in the reactor control
system. heat exchanger. cleaning system. monitoring system. etc.);

3) operational check of structural components and technology of reinforced
concrete vessel;

A) checking new heat-resistant structural materials under conditions of pro-
longed operation. etc.

The necessity for preliminary solution of the enumerated problems precludes
the use of a low-power facility for this purpose. A reactor with thermal
power of 1000 H" can be recommended for the experimental industrial facility.
In this case the major components of the installation (core. steam generators.
nus blowers. heat exchangers) will have been prototyped on a sufficient scale
for future commercial facilities.

Hhen working up the design of an experimental industrial facility. considerable
attention must be given to optimizing the layout of the facility with consider-
ation of ensuring potential capabilities of getting information when developing
new cannercial energy-intensive technological complexes.

As an experimental industrial model we can consider a facility intended for
generating high-temperature heat that would be utilized for producing electric

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy in a nuclear power plant. Realization of such a project would enable
us to work out principal solutions of the plan layout. as well as the equipment
in the facility, including the reinforced concrete vessel. to incorporate

into operation the fundamentally new loop with helium coolant, and to elaborate
the working conditions of the facility. In this case it would be much easier
to solve the problem of choosing structural materials since steam parameters
(ts- 530-550’C) can be ensured at a temperature of 750°C in the first circuit.
However. this version would lack capabilities for checking the plan of the
technological complex using high-potential heat and developing equipment a:

a temperature necessary for the commercial technological complex.

The second way is to develop a direct prototype of the energy complex in full
scale, and hence with working temperature needed for supporting the given
process cycle (t- 950'C). This assumes development of new heat-resistant
materials. thereby pushing back the real deadline for making the experimental
industrial facility. Furthermore. it sh0uld be taken into consideration that
startup and alignment on this facility will undoubtedly take a long time.

and bringing the temperature up to working level will be gradual. Host of
the time on startup and alignment is taken up by the reactor installation
proper since it is the most complex and important part.

However, the disadvantages of the second version can in large measure be elimi-
nated if the design of the experimental industrial model allows development

of the prototype by stages. For this purpose. the facility diagrammed in

Fig. I can be suggested as an experimental industrial model of the installa-
tion. The heat produced in the energy unit can be used to generate electric
power in a turbogenerator, and also for producing hydrogen in a chemical
process co1plex.

ﬂnﬁwz- _ Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of experimental
industrial nuclear power-producing and pro-
cess facility (NPPP): l--reactor; 2--high-
temperature intermediate heat exchanger; 3~—
steam generator; 4-—main gas blower; S--chemi-
cal process circuit; 6--intermediate circuit;
7--gas blower for intermediate circuit; 8--
turbine; 9-—generator; lO--condenser; 11--
condensate pump; 12--low-pressure water heater;
l3—-deaerator; lb--feed pump; lS--high-pressure
water heater

 

Realization of the chemical technological process of hydrogen production re-
quires a first-loop coolant temperature of 900-950°C at the reactor outlet.
High-parameter steam is generated in the steam generator at temperature of
750°C at the inlet to the first loop. Such a facility can be manufactured
and developed in three stages.

On the first stage the facility can be worked out on a temperature level up
to 750°C with generation of electric energy in a steam-turbine cycle (Fig. 2)

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 2. Schematic diagram of N??? for
first and second stages of operation:
l--reactor; 2—high-temperature inter-
mediate heat exchanger loop; 3—steam
generator; lo—main gas blower; 5--bypsss;
6--turbine; 7—generator; 8-condenser;
9--condensate pump; lo—low-presaure
water heater; ll—deaerator; 12-feed
pump; l3--high-pressure water heater

 

without completing development and manufacture of the heat exchanger. devel-
oping high-temperature fuel or installing the equipment of the chemical complex.
by installing bypass pipes in place of the heat exchanger. Haximm reactor
power in this mode is 701 of Wm. The flowrate of coolant in the first loop.
and all parameters of the steam generator and gas blower will be nominal.

0n the second stage. with the same makeup of equipment as on the first. the
temperature at the outlet of the core can be raised to 950°C. the former tem-
perature level being maintained in the steam generators by diluting the hot
coolant coming from the core with cool gas fed from the pressure side of the
gas blower through bypass 5 (see Fig. 2).

On the third stage after making and installing the intermediate heat exchanger
and all chemical process equipment. as well as completing startup and alignment
work on the reactor facility, the entire facility shown in Fig. 1 can be de-
veloped and brought up to nominal power.

The plan for an installation with combined production of heat and electric
energy is the most optimal solution in choosing an experimental industrial
model of a facility with high-temperature helium reactor using thermal neutrons.
This model provides an excellent prototype for the most promising power-
producing and process facilities. and the design of the equipment and layout

of the instllation allow the necessary multistage manufacture and operation

of the model.

COPYRIGHT: Institut atomnoy energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. 1977
Atomizdat. 1979

66l0
050: 8llolo/1052-A

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039
CHOOSING DESIGN CONCEPT AND PHYSICAL FEATURES OF HTGR CORE FOR ENERGY FASILITIES

Moscow AIOHNO-VODORODNAYA ENERGETIKA I TBKHNOLOGIYA in Russian No 2, 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) pp 78-84

[Article by G. P. Goroshkin. A. s. Kaminskiy, V. D. Kolganov, Ye. M. Kuz'min.
M. D. Segal' and V. P. Smetannikov]

[Text] The authors consider the design of a high-temperature
channel reactor with spherical fuel elements with thermal
power of 540 H“ with helium temperature of 950°C at the
outlet of the core. Physical and hydraulic profiling of

the core reduces the maxunua temperature of the fuel elements.
The advantages of such a reactor over other designs are
indicated for use as part of a power-producing facility

with combined supply of energy to chemical. metallurgical

and other energy-intensive facilities.

Two directions of development of BTGR's are known in world practice: with
a stationary core and with moving fuel elements in the core.

The first direction is characterized by the use of large graphite blocks in

the form of hexagonal prisms in the core (reactors of the HTR type) with numer-
ous openings for accommodating the fuel and passage of the cooling gas. This
type of core is stationary. and recharging requires the use of loading machines
that operate relatively rarely when replacing individual depleted blocks of

the core or replacing the core in its entirety.

In the second direction, the core consists of a charge of spherical fuel ele-
ments that contain both fuel and moderator. In a reactor with such a core
(type AVR and THTR) fresh elements are loaded anddepleted elements are unloaded
continuously during operation at power for a prolonged period.

In our view. disadvantages of such directions in reactor construction are:

a) for the first type of reactor: shutdown of the reactor during reloading

of core blocks; variation of energy release distributions during reactor oper-
ation; comparatively long time for reloading core; high labor-intensiveness

and technological complexity of fabricating the graphite core blocks; consid-
erable thermal stresses that arise in graphite blocks under high heat loads;

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘

\

l

..
x
v
.

I

I

'l.

I
I
I
W
I
I

\
—.-_._n
‘-

317i.

i:

rest
We“

‘ __ r—r-I—
, am a -
h‘:b*n.1J—vnw\_‘ Isna’.‘ ‘

4'33

a"

ﬁ‘xﬁ‘ﬁﬁ

Va“
A

ﬁm‘t
i“
Ks,

“W

\

In!
‘. :I ;

an L“~..1-n . m 'V.

m:
~§\\\

 

Fig. l. Agat reactor facility: l--loading machine; 2--

intermediate heat exchanger; 3--actuating mechanism of reac-

tor control system; 4-—prestressed concrete reactor vessel;
5--conversion furnace; 6--core

b) for the second type of reactor: nonuniformity of spherical fuel element
movement in the core; no capability for precise profiling of energy release
with respect to core radius; necessity for accommodating the rods of the reac-
tor control system in the charge of spherical fuel elements in the core in
graphite pylons specially provided in the body of the core; possible fluctua-
tions of porosity in the charge of spherical fuel elements of the core over
the entire period of reactor operation; graphite moderator in the fuel ele-
ments. leading to additional expenditures when reprocessing depleted elements.

For industrial facilities (e. g. chemical, metallurgical and other sectors

of the national economy). uninterrupted operation of the reactor throughout

the technological production cycle is of decisive importance. This condition
is met to a greater extent by reactors with continuous fuel recharging during
operation at power. Reactors with spherical fuel elements can be put into

this category. The Agat reactor (Fig. I). designed to produce high-potential
heat for the needs of chemical production, represents the first attempt to
develop a facility that would not have the disadvantages of the above-mentioned
reactors while retaining their positive features. The following design features
have been incorporated into the facility: channel type core; regular geometry
of core channels and control rods; partial separation of moderator and fuel;
use of principle of one-time passage of fuel elements through the core; con-
tinuous reloading of spherical elements during reactor operation at power;
capability for rearranging physical channels.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK’IAL USE ONLY

The core of the Agat reactor is made up of graphite components with the excep-
tion of the upper spacing plate and the lower support plate. The fuel ele-
ments are nicrospheres in a graphite matrix enclosed in a graphite cladding

of spherical shape 60 mm in diameter. The moderator of the core is a set of
vertically arranged prisms in which the fuel
elements move (Pig. 2). The prisms are held

in the lower support plate by metal sleeves
that are hinged to the plate. Concomitant
movement of fuel elements and coolant is neces-
sary to maximize the coolant temperature at

the outlet from the reactor at the permissible
temperature in the center of the fuel element
with the highest heat release rate (for example
we can have a coolant temperature of lZOO'C

at the reactor outlet when the temperature
inside the fuel element is I300-1350'C).

 

The core is surrounded by a graphite reflector
made of hexagonal prisms. Above it is an
F18» 2- Core fragment upper heat shield made of graphite blocks.
The upper face of the core is conical; this
is necessary so that the depleted fuel elements can roll down past the boun-
daries of the core. The thickness of the side reflector in the radial direc-

tion averages 1200 mm. and that of the upper reflector in the axial direction
averages l000 mm.

The reactor control system consists of 61 rods; these move in the same channels
as the fuel elements and have a working section with absorber 5 m long. The
drive mechanisms are situated on the cover of the reactor vessel.

The equipment is configured in the following way.

The prestressed reactor vessel is a monolithic block with recessea'to accom-
modate the major equipment of the facility. emergency aftercoollng equipment.
and the channels of the reactor circuit (see Fig. 1). In the central part

of the vessel is a cylindrical space for accommodating the core. reflectors.
heat insulation of the vessel and lower support plate for the core. Above
the central cavity is a passage to accommodate the reactor cover. In the
lower part of the vessel under the core are seven vertical passages for in-
stalling the loading mechanisms for the spherical fuel elements. To accom-
modate the gas blowers of the reactor loop and the emergency aftercooling
system. horizontal passages are provided in the reactor vessel in which the
blowers are placed together with their drives. A hermetically sealed carbon
steel facing (liner) fills the inside of the reactor vessel. To ensure the
necessary temperature conditions for operation of the vessel. the liner is
protected by heat insulation with a gas layer -— a so-called gas wall -- and
tubes of a water-cooling system are buried in the concrete of the vessel at

a certain distance from the liner. The cylindrical cavity of the housing

is divided into two sections by the lower support plate. which has a passage
for the fuel elements under each channel of the core, and openings for passage
of the coolant that serves the moderator and reflector. A device for feeding
fresh fuel elements into the channel is placed in each channel opening of

the plate.

24

7K'Ml. l'Sl-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seven reloading mechanisms provide continuous reloading of fuel elements during
reactor operation. The spherical elenents are loaded into each channel, each
serving its own part of the core. when one of these mechanisms fails. the
reactor is capable of operation at somewhat reduced power (about 15! below
nominal) right up to shutdown for routine maintenance.

The design with lower placement of reloading mechanisms is chosen for the
following reasons: the supporting structures of the core are situated in

the zone of "cool" coolant; operation of the reloading mechanisms is facili-
tated by the absence of control rods under the core; the force from the pres-
sure differential in the core is directed opposite to the force of gravity

of the fuel elements and side reflector; coolant circulation in the reactor
circuit coincides with the direction of motion of the coolant with natural
circulation in the reactor in case the gas blowers stop; the principle of
one-time passage of fuel elements through the core requires concomitant move-
ment of fuel elements and coolant.

The proposed design has typical physical features of the RTCR, among which

we note the following; l) use of graphite. a neat absorber of neutrons, as
the moderator. which ensures neutron economy. improves the breeding proper-
ties of the core and reduces the charge of uranium compared with other types
of thermal reactors; 2) burnup is much higher than in other reactors: about
l0s HHvdays per metric ton; 3) the negative temperature coefficient of reac-
tivity and large heat capacity of the core ensure a high degree of safety.

At the same time. the proposed design successfully combines the advantages
and avoids the disadvantages of the spherical and prismatic forms of HTGR
fuel elements.

Regularity of the passage of fuel elements through the core in the proposed
channel reactor enables the use of a variety of effective methods of profiling
the field of energy release. The necessary profiling through the core body
can be achieved by: varying the fuel enrichment with 2’50 in profiling zones;
changing the rate of passage of the fuel elements in profiling zones; varying
the density of the graphite moderator.

Temperature fields in the core body can also be equalized by hydraulic pro-
filing.

 

0 50 7M 150 200 250 R,cu

Fig. 3. Channel power distribution with
respect to core radius

In the proposed reactor. three-zone profiling of the core is provided by using
two types of fuel elements differing with respect to 2”U enrichment and moving

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at different velocities. Enrichment of fuel elements in the central (1) and
peripheral (III) zones is 6.52. and in the intermediate zone (ll) -- 102.

This reduces the coefficient of nonuniformity of channel power along the radius
of the reactor to 1.05 (Fig. 3).

The proposed design extends capabilities for controlling the process of bring-
ing the core up to steady-state operation. This is done by providing ccntrol-
lable placement of absorbing elements specially introduced into the channels.
and corresponding configuration of the control rods.

The proposed channel reactor design facilitates physical monitoring of core
parameters at the necessary number of points to get reliable information.
enabling on-the-spot correction of the coefficient of nonuniformity of energy
release. raising the specific and thermal load on the fuel. and increasing

the average burnup. The configuration of the control rods in the channels
can also be optimized. which raises their effectiveness. In this way. the
design has advantages over the AVR. where the control rods are situated around
the periphery of the core in individual pylons.

 

 

m

    

 

72w 4’
0.7
ma 0,:
1100 0,5
infuse 4‘
relzJuf; ts 2.8... 0,3
0,95 m “2
0,:
m 4-
m . 0 200 400 mm mm t,'c
‘ a 45 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,515; 45 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 3,0 1?,

Fig. 4. Distribution of rela- Fig. 5. Distribution of rela-
tive heat release 0k. gas tem- tive heat release 0;, gas tem-
perature tg and temperature in perature t3. cladding temperature
the center of the fuel core tc tcl and temperature in the center
along reactor radius R of the fuel core tc over the height
of the core Z/Hk

Programmed motion of the fuel elements in each channel assumes stable dis-
trlbutlon of energy release heightwise of the core throughout a run. and con-
comitant motion of fuel elements and coolant maximizes the gas temperature

at the core outlet at the permissible fuel temperature. Thermohydraulic cal-
culations for steady-state operation have shown that the temperature distri-
bution can be kept fairly uniform through the core body (Fig. 4. 5).

Studies have shown that nonuniformity of the coefficient of heat transfer
over the surface of a sphere from maximum to minimum is 2.2-3.0. and as a
result. heightuise the maximum fuel temperature may be 10°C higher.

26

FOR OFFICIAL l'Sl-Z ONLI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The feasibilitv of hydraulic profiling was checked for the selected version

of physical profiling to determine the effectiveness of equalizing temperature
fields along the radius of the core. For a channel diameter of 7‘ mm in physi-
cal profiling zone II and 75 mm in the other zones. the gas temperature at

the outlet from the channel cores can be equalized and maxim- fuel temperature
can be reduced by ZO'C compared with the hydraulically unprofiled version.

"hen the channel dineter is 72 n in physical profiling zone II. a reduction
in maximum fuel temperature by SO'C is achieved. but nonuniformity of gas
temperature at the core outlet is increased to 130’C as compared with the

[10° C nonuniformity for the unprofiled version. Of course, hydraulic profiling
somewhat increases the hydraulic drag of the core: for the unprofiled version.
hydraulic drag is 0.39 kgf/caz; with channel diameter of 74 mm. drag is

0.41 kgf/cm’ . and for 72 mm - 0. b5 kgf/cm’.

Based on thermohydraulic calculation. we can conclude that physical profiling
enables attainment of the necessary equalization of temperature fields. while
hydraulic profiling in the given case is less effective and requires at least
two sizes of channels in the core.

As a result of design analysis. neutron-physicsaud thermohydraulic calcula-
tions of the reactor. the following characteristics are obtained:

Thermal power of reactor. NH 538
Dimensions of core. m:

diameter 6

height 5
Number of channels 3‘81
Fuel element diameter. mm 60
Charge of uranium. kg 6570
Enrichment. X:

in profiling zones 1 and III 6.5

in profiling zone II 10
Run. days:

for fuel elements of profiling zones I and III 860

for fuel elements of profiling zone II 800
Reactor coolant helium
Coolant flowrate in reactor circuit. kg/s 160
Coolant temperature. ’C:

at inlet to reactor 306

at outlet from reactor 950
Coolant pressure in reactor circuit. kgf/cm1 60

In summary. we can conclude that engineering and design calculations have dem-
onstrated the feasibility of developing a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor
combining the advantages of cores of channel and microsphere types. Such

a reactor can be used to produce high-potential heat in the chemical. metal-

lurgical and other energy-intensive sectors of the national economy.

COPYRIGHT: lnstitut atomnoy energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. I977
Atomizdat. I979

6610
C80: 8|06/1052-A

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.039

HDLTEN-SALT REACTOR WITH NATURAL CONVECTION 0F FUEL MIXTURE AND OPEN GAS-
TURBINE AIR CYCLE

Moscow AIOHNO-VODORODNAYA ENERGETIKA I TBKHNOLOGIYA in Russian No 2. 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) pp 85-93

[Article by V. A. Legasov. I. G. lelouaov. N. K. Yerokhin and A. s. Doronin]

(Text) The authors consider some problems of using a high-
tempereture molten-salt reactor with natural convection

of the fuel mixture in the primary circuit. Radiation pro-
vides the thermal coupling between the primary circuit and
the energy (or process) circuit. Reactor heat can be used
at a temperature near maximum. Combining a reactor of this
type with a gas-turbine facility operating on an open cycle
gives efficient conversion of heat to electricity.

Nuclear reactors with molten salt fuel mixture are in many respects an instruc-
tive phenomenon in nuclear power. interest in these reactors arose in the
[950's in the United States in connection with development of a nuclear air-
craft [Ref. 1]. An experimental reactor with power of 8 NH (H883) [Ref. 2]

was operated at Oak Ridge National Laboratory from 1966 to the spring of 1968.
During this period. 70.000 HHh of electricity was generated. and extensive
experimental material was accumulated on many aspects of scientific and design
developments of molten-salt reactors. which was the basis of project H838 -

a one-fluid breeder reactor with thermal power of 2250 NH [Ref. 3. 6].

Project HSBR was shelved. although the anticipated properties of a nuclear
power plant of this type opened up unique prospects both from the standpoint

of utilizing [Ref. 5] and reprocessing [Ref. 6. 7] nuclear fuel. and from

the standpoint of capital expenditures [Ref. 6]. There was no more really
serious work on the problem of the molten-salt reactor. and poorly advised
attempts to revive interest in the idea have led to considerable discreditation.

There are two reasons why it was quite natural to stop work on project "838.
First of all. the power industry was not yet feeling any scarcity of nuclear
fuel. anJ with the comparatively low fuel component in the cost of nuclear
electricity. extra efforts to develop technology for processing salt fuel
seem economically superfluous even in an ideal fuel cycle like that of the
HSBR. In the second place. the coolant temperature attained in the primary

28

FOR OFFICIAL L'Sl-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circuit (700’0) is lower than in the HTGR. and further upward movement on

the temperature scale is impeded by the particulars of interaction of salt
with structural materials based on metals. 0n the other hand. the low capital
component of the HSBR is obtained by calculation and cannot be taken as a
conclusive arguent.

The situation is considerably altered if metal-based structural materials

are eliminated from the molten-salt energy circuit. An isothermal high-
temperature molten-salt reactor design (VTRS) has been proposed in which the
only metallic structural materials in the salt circuit are in the pump group.
The purpose of our research is to examine the peculiarities of a VTRS in which
the only structural material in contact with the molten-salt fuel mixture

is isotropic pyrolytically precipitated graphite. The thermophysical layout

of a power plant with such a reactor is exceptionally simple. and the attainable
level of the coolant teapereture in the primary loop. and also the thermodynamic
quality [Ref. 8] of the reactor may be anomalously high. Beat from the core is
transferred to a radiant heat exchanger by natural convection of the fuel mix-
ture in graphite coaxial fuel elements. The resultant efficiency of a nuclear
power plant with VTRS may reach 50-601. and the thermodynamic quality of the
reactor may be 0.95-0.98. Thus the way is opened

up for considerable improvement of high-temperature
nuclear heat sources for future power and process
applications.

A temperature difference between the inner and outer
columns of liquid (Fig. l) is obtained by external
heat removal in a radiant heat exchanger from the
upper part of the fuel element. and volumetric nu-
clear heating of the lower part. Parameters of

flow of the molten salt in the circuit of the fuel
element are:

a. (ga’u:,.:)n_v.-ouo .:- d) ~ IO‘ + no";

Re I: may. ~ 540' + 5- IO‘; (1)
Nu :a (14;). ~ 50 +100;

SI - Nu/(Qe-Pt) ~ I0" 4» IO“.

where Gr. Re. Nu. Sr are the Graahof. Reynolds.
nusselt and Stanton numbers. Conventional symbols
are used to denote the paranetera. The law of cir-
culation is approximately described by the dime:-
sionleas equation [Ref. 9]

CI-2.5Re"|.; ( D-‘>3( D-§d>l.13+
«' a

0—4 (Ir—4' 2 new
I -o .
L-H «2 ) 0.316

 

 

 

Fig. I. Design of co-

axial fuel element with 4

natural convection of

salt fuel mixture (Li? We can see from equations (1) and (2) that a change

--0.75. ThP~--0.26. UF~ in temperature head At; by a factor of nearly 100
--0.01) is possible between the salt and the outer wall of

 

 

 

(2)

29

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the graphite channel in the vicinity of the radiative heat exchanger without
changing the turbulent flow state (Blesius interval). In other words. at

a fixed average te-perature of the salt fuel aixture the external load can
be reduced by two orders of nagnitude vhile naintaining stable circulation.

Pig. 2. Typical diagr- of

taperature distribution in

the salt circuit. the outer

jacket of a fuel elauent.

the heat exchanger tubes and
air heated therein

 

 

‘ a 10 20 so u, kcal/lnole

Fig. 3. Example of process consuption of heat fro- the
nuclear reactor (conversion of coal to carbon nonoxide)

  

a 70 20 so 40 so 60 N, c‘ IN“

Pig. 6. t-H diagran of heat consumption on the first stage
of a two-stage water thereolysis cycle

The nuclear reactor is made up of a series of fuel elelents. The teaperature
differential lengthwise of the fuel element cladding (Fig. 2) in the zone of

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heat removal is about 100-150’6. Consequently. all high-tenperature reactor
heat can be transferred to the heat exchanger at a te-perature little different
fron aaxinu. This explains the high therIodynnic quality of the VTRS as

a heat source. Fig. 3 and lo show exuples of possible process conau-ption

of nuclear heat of colparatively high quality. For examle. when coal is
converted to carbon nonoxide (Pig. 3) according to the Boudoir reaction

2co + mp - 2co, + «1,; l m
40, - — 9.55 + L9 17300 heal/mold
with subsequent exothernal generation of carbon dioxide
co. 1- c .2co-. .
ac. -. «.3- u2,umookca1/nolh m

It can be seen that carrying out reaction (3) at pressure of 10 at: involves
compensation of the reaction energy in the tenperature range of 750-1050'0.

Pig. lo shows the t-ﬂ diagran of heat consunption in the temperature range
of 820-!000'0 associated with the first stage of the two-stage cycle of water
thermolysis:

I: 9mm, up 4mg), M): II:;

Mi, 1.3.5— 22.l Tzinikcal/noulp.
ll “up, :. 26.0, — 2MnCO, - [205 |

A6, — 8.1 L 12.6 T/chal/nolei

(5)

(5)

Obviously high-efficiency thernolysis cycles can be realized only in the case
where an external heat source is capable of conpensating the reaction energy
in a narrow range of tenperatures close to naximn. An examle of a cycle
of water dissociation with low-quality heat from the source is the sulfuric
acid cycle:

I: ",50. .. SO, +"103
||= 50. -- $0. + 1/20.;

Ill: 2‘!,0 1- 50, 3-14.90. + q.

(7)

 

o 25 50 75 11,- kcal lnole

Pig. 5. t-H diagran of heat consmption on two stages of
sulfuric acid dissociation: I—SO;9SO;+3¢)2; II—H;SO.+
$03 + 320

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFEK1AI.USE(NNLV

The t—H diagram of the first two stages is shown on Fig. 5. The reaction
vncrgy is compensated in a temperature range of 370-900'0. and in this case

we cannot count on high energy efficiency of the cycle corresponding to the
maximum temperature of the heat source. It is known (Ref. 10] that the limit-
ing thermodynamic efficiency of a cycle of dissociation of a substance into
components does not depend on the use of either exceptionally high-temperature
heat or electricity obtained from the Carnot-cycle machine. The limiting
efficiency of the dissociation cycle is uniquely determined by the nature

of the substance being decomposed and the extremum temperatures of the heat
source and drain. In this sense the process utilisation of high-temperature
nuclear heat in the thermolysis cycle does not automatically give any advan-
tages over the traditional method of generating electric energy and subsequent
electrolysis (or plasma-chemical reaction [Ref. 11]). High-productivity elec-
trolyzers or plasma-chemical reactors combined with a good electric power
plant may be preferable to thermolyais process facilities. Therefore the
method described below for converting high-temperature and high-quality nu-
clear heat to electricity by using a gas-turbine installation with open air
cycle may be taken as a component in development of one of the important ele-
ments of process utilization of nuclear energy.

 
 

“0,7 as q: a, o
{I

Fig. 6. Simple thermodynamic cy:le (b) of gas turbine power
plant with open air cycle (rut-0.95; nc-O.9; c-0.8; t8-

[273 K; 6,- n m); dependence of efficiency on total hydrau-
f-l
lic losses in the air channel and air temperature at the
compressor inlet (a) and schematic diagram of realization
of this cycle based on VTRS heat (c): l-reactor; 2-heat
exchanger; 3--turbine; b--regenerator; S--compressor

A comparison of temperature curves for salt coolant and air in a radiative

heat exchanger (Fig. 2) shows the possibility of a further appreciable increase
in efficiency of utilizing high-temperature heat of the VTRS. However. some
open gas—turbine cycles even on the given stage of optimization enable us

to get quite high characteristics (Pig. 6). The air temperature at the inlet
to the turbine is taken as lOOO'C. The degree of regeneration of 0.8 is near
optimum; the total relative hydraulic losses through the channel l-6; are
equal to ~0.lé. The resultant efficiency of the power plant is 0.66 for air

32

FOR OFFICIAL I'Sl'? ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temperature of +20'C at the inlet to the compressor. and 0.53 for air tempera-
ture of -SO’C. He should also take note of the low maximum pressure in the
air circuit for temperatures of +20 and -SO°C: about 6 and 8 atm respectively.
This factor is quite significant for getting a reliable design of a high-
temperature radiant heat exchanger. It is proposed that grade KhNbSYu steel
be used as the construction material. The wall thickness of the hot tubes

of the heat exchanger is 3 us. At a temperature of “00°C and pressure dif-
ferential of 1 arm, the long-term (10,000 hr) strength reserve is 2.

o,

 

a b c

Fig. 7. Characteristics of open gas turbine cycle with
one intermediate heater (conditions and notation same as
on Fig. 6)

More complicated cycles enable us to improve the efficiency of the power
plant (Fig. 7). The schematic of the power plant is a little more complex.
but there is an appreciable gain in efficiency. For example at ambient air
temperatures of +20 and -50°C the efficiency of a gas-turbine unit with two-
stage heating is 0.48 and 0.56 respectively. The next step in improving the

 

0545 0,6 0,7 as 49 ‘2 4
a b c

Fig. 8. Characteristics of open gas turbine cycle with
intermediate cooling of air in the compressor (conditions
and symbols the sane as on Fig. 6; bn-intermediate cooler)

cycle involves adding an intermediate stage of air cooling in the compressor
(Fig. 8). The efficiency of the facility increases to 0.52 and 0.60 for air
temperature at the inlet to the gas turbine unit of +20 and -50°C respectively.
Optimua pressure in the air channel is 18.5 and 23 atm. Pig. 9 shows a clear
comparison of efficiency of complex gas-turbine cycles for different air tem—
peratures at the inlet to the compressor. As these data imply, it makes prac-
tical sense to develop complex cycles although pressure increase is a con-
straint.

33

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

as as «I as «was 0.6 47 no a“;

a b c

Fig. 9. Comparison of efficiency of complex gas-turbine
cycles at different air temperatures at the inlet to the '~-
compressor: a—nt-0.9S; nc-0.9; e-0.8; tug-50°C;
T8-1273 K; bunt-0.95; nc-0.9; e-0.8; t1n-20'C;
T's-1273 I

He must emphasize a number of factors that are organically related to direct
process utilization of VTRS's, or to their use in combination with a gas tur-
bine power plant.

1. The attainable level of working temperatures of structural components
based on graphite-salt opens up wide vistas for conquest of the high-tempera-
ture region.

2. The use of natural circulation of the fuel mixture in the primary circuit
obviates the need for developing a high-temperature pup group. end enables
transition to nuclear sources of high-temperature. high-quality heat.

3. The fuel cycle of nolten-salt reactor systems is among the most promising
both from the standpoint of complete utilization of fissionsble materials
(uraniu. thorium, plutonium) in accordance with the sequence
:Jsl'—
I

at: mm. -:--u -=-~u amp...

:Jsp“_'

and fro: the standpoint of reprocessing and disposal of fission products.

10. Absence of a water-cooling energy cycle makes nuclear power plants of

the proposed type independent of a source of cooling water and more ecological
compared with conventional plants.

5. The attainable efficiencies in the ms give access to new possibilities
in technology of converting heat to electricity.

6. The fact that industry is prepared to produce air gas-turbine plants of
the required class gives important economic advantages to development of

3!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high-temperature nuclear power in the direction of the V'l'RS. Research organi-
zations. design offices. metallurgiats and machine builders have accuulated
adequate experience for formlsting and solving the problem of making gas-
turbine power plants of the required class.

REFERENCES
1. Bettis. s. 5.. mm. scz. sums. Vol 2. No 6. 1957. pp 806-825.
2. ﬂaubenreich. r. 21.. Bagel. 1. 3., NUCL. am. 112cm. Vol 13, 1970. p 113.

3. Tosenthal. N. 11.. Kasten, P. R.. Briggs. R. 3.. NUCL. APPL. TECH!” Vol 8.
1970. p I70.

4. Bettie. B. 8.. Robertson. R. C.. NUCL. APPL. TECHN” Vol 8. 1970. p I”.

S. Bagel. l. 11.. Kerr. II. T.. Allen. B. 1.. TRANS. ”18.. No 22. 1975.
pp 705-706

6. Crimes. H. R.. NUCL. APPL. TBCHN.. Vol 8. No 2. 1970. pp 137-153.

7. Kashcheyev. I. N.. Zolotarev. A. 8.. ”Pirokhinicheskiye netody regeneratsii
uetallicheakogo i solevogo yadernogo topliva (obzor patentov i
nsuchno-tekhnicheakoy literatury 1956-1972 gg.)" [Pyrocheaical Methods
of Regenerating Metallic and Salt Nuclear Fuel (Survey of Patents and
Scientific-Technical Literature for 1956-1972)]. Hoacow, Gosudarstvennoye
ob"yedinennoye nauchno-tekhnicheakoye izdatel'stvo. 1973.

8. Belousov. I. 6.. in: "Voprosy atomoy nsuki i tekhniki. Seriya: Atonno-
vodorodnaya energetika" [Proble-s of Nuclear Science and anineering:
Series on Atoaic Hydrogen Power Engineering]. Preprint. I. V. Kurchatov
Institute of Nuclear Power [IAE ineni I. V. Kurchstova]. No 2. 1977. p 152.

9. Belousov. I. 6.. "Th. ml Physic. of Fuel Elements Hith Natural Circulation
of Molten-Salt Fuu‘ ' inure" in: "Voprooy atomoy nauki i tekhniki. Seriya:
Atonno-vodorodnaya em rgetika". Preprint. I. V. Kurchatov Institute of
Nuclear Power [IAE iaeni I. V. Kurchatova]. No 1(5). 1973. p 201.

10. Belousov. I. 6.. in: "Voproey ato-noy nauki i tekhniki. Seriys: Atmo-
vodorodnsya energetika". Preprint. I. V. Kurchatov Institute of Nuclear
Power [1A3 ileni I. V. Kurchstova]. No 1, 1976. p 65.

11. Belousov. I. 6... Legasov. V. A.. Russnov. V. 0.. in: “Voprosy atmoy
nauki i tekhniki. Seriya: Atomo-vodorodnaya energetika". Preprint.
I. V. Kurchstov Institute of Nuclear Power [1A3 ineni I. V. Kurchatova].
No 2. 1977. p 158.

COPYRIGHT: Institut atonnoy energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. 1977
Atonizdat. 1979

6610
090: 8166/1032-A

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UN 621.039
PHYSICAL FEATURES 0? ml! "11'“ CIRCULATINC FUEL

Hoscov amo-vomaonuma ENERGETIKA I MUQOGIYA in Russian No 2. 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) pp 94—100

[Article by N. N. Ponomarcv-Stepnoy. A. N. Protsenko. Ye. S. Glushkov. V. N.
Grebennik. V. Ye. Demin. V. S. Halhov, L. K. Halkova. 0. N. Smirnov. D. F.
Tsurikov and L. A. Bogatova]

[Text] An investigation is made of the characteristics of

a high-temperature gas-cooled thermal reactor with graphite
moderator for combined utilization of high-temperature heat
and gamma radiation of spherical fuel elements circulating
in the system made up of the reactor and irradiator. A
curve is given for the way that the power of gamma radiation
of the irradiator depends on the multiplicity of fuel circu-
lation in the system. An examination is made of the particu-
lars of fuel hurnup effects compensated by absorbing elements
that circulate concomitantly in the system made up of the
reactor and irradiator.

The main tendency in the development of nuclear power at the present time

is expansion of limits of application not only in electric power production,
but also for producing high-temperature heat. energy supply to the metallurgi-
cal industry and production of reducing agents for metallurgy. power and heat
supply to many sectors of the chemical industry. stimulation of chemical pro-
cesses. etc. [Ref. 1-3]. Research has shoun [Ref. 3] that these problems

can best be solved by using high-temperature reactors with helium coolant.

In particular there is a certain interest in the use of a nuclear reactor

as a source of radiation for radiation-chemical processes. In this connection.
use is made of gamma radiation of fissuion products in the radiation circuits
as fuel is circulated in the reactor-irradiator system [Ref. 5. 6].

A diagram of fuel circulation is shown on Fig. l. The reactor is the high-
temperature VCR-50 with graphite moderator, helium coolant and spherical graph-
ite fuel elements based on microspheres with multilayer coating [Ref. 4]. The
reactor permits combined use of high-temperature heat that is removed by the
helium coolant from the packed spherical fuel elements. and transportation

to the irradiator of gamma-emitting fission products in the makeup of the
irradiated fuel elements due to their circulation. It is desirable that the

36

FOR OFFICIAL L'Sli OM."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

—-

‘
J/g

   

Fig. 1. Diagram of fuel cir- Fig. 2. Diagram of nuclear

culation in facility with com- reactor: l—core (packing of

bined use of energy and sauna spherical fuel elements and

radiation: l--reactor; 2-- absorbers); 2--gap; 3—top end

irradiator reflector (graphite); (cu-control
rods; S—radial reflector (graphite);

time of delivery of the irradiated 6-bottom end reflector (graphite);
fuel and its stay in the irradiator 7--pylons (graphite projections)
be short (a few hours) so as to use for control rods

the radiation of short-lived isotopes
of fission products.

A physical diagram of the nuclear reactor is shown in Fig. 2. The radial
graphite reflector forms a cylindrical cavity that tapers into a cone in the
lower part. In the bottom end reflector is an opening for unloading the con-
tents of the core. The reactor is covered by the top end graphite reflector.
The inner cavity is filled with spherical fuel elements and absorbers. Pro-
visions are made for changing the number of absorbers in the circuit during
circulation to compensate for fuel hurnup during a run. the mount of ab-
sorbers not exceeding 152 of the amount of fuel elements. Between the top
end reflector and the spherical packing of the core is a gap that can be varied
over a wide range during reactor operation. The nominal size of the gap is
about 0.5 n. The main parameters of the reactor are'as follows:

Reactor power, nu 1100 Spherical fuel element
Coolant helim diameter. I 60
Beliun pressure. atm 100 Content of U in one

Helium temperature. fuel element, g 2-5
input/output. °C 270/000 Fuel enrichment. 1 10-30
Core dimensions. Power of gm radia-

D/ﬂ, cm 280/650 tion in irradiator, It" 400

To study the influence that multiplicity of fuel circulation has on the power
of gama radiation in the irradiator. an analysis was made of experimental
data on power and the spectral makeup of fission products [Ref. 7-10]. As
a result of the analysis. an approximation formula is reconended for the
time dependence of power of gama radiation of fission products after fission:

r(:)-1.5c"-’+ 3.461“ HeV/(s-fission) .

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where t>10’ a. The change in spectral makeup of guns radiation is illus-
trated by the data of Table 1 [Ref. 10]

mun

Spectral nakeup of game radiation of “’11 fission products
at different times after fission. relative units

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Time after — E e ran e Nev
fission. s 0.l—-0.l I o.s—I.o 1—2 2-3 3—. l 4—:
N0 0.|25 0.236 0.3" 0.|72 0.040 0.0!6
7.2- [0' 0.088 0.305 0.372 0.!!!) 0.0“ 0 .008
l.8~l0‘ 0.070 0.342 0.407 0.I00 0.014 0.001
3.0- l0‘ 0. l0.) 0.376 0.00 0.0% 0.008 0.007
8.0-l0‘ 0.l% 0.5I5 0.259 0.0]8 0.005 0.007
2.6-I0‘ 0.249 0.520 0.203 0.0I5 0.005 0.“)8

 

Theoretical studies have shown strong dependence of the power of ga-a radia-
tion of an irradiator on multiplicity of circulation in the system. Fig. 3
shows the way that the power of gal-a radia-
tion in the irradiator depends on the multi-
plicity of fuel circulation. It can be seen
that an increase in the multiplicity of fuel
circulation can raise the power of gonna
radiation by a factor of approximately 10

as compared with the case without fuel circu-
lation. A further increase in the power

of game radiation is limited by the hold

of the fuel following the irradiator that

is necessary for de-excitation of delayed
neutrons (tdel 3 10-20 min). The high core

I ,0 100 m N temperature leads to a strong temperature

  

effect of reactivity. The change in effective
Fig. 3. Dependence of power breeding ratio as temperature increases is
of gama radiation in the due to a umber of factors:
irradiator on multiplicity
of fuel circulation (PY-- Eggpler broadening of resonant levels of

power of gma radiation;
Ply-reactor power; N--mu1-
tiplicity of circulation (run a change in the spectra: of low-energy neu-
of l-2 years) trons. which leads to a reduction in the
yield of secondary neutrons per absorption
in the fuel. a change in the ratio of absorption of the neutrons in the fuel
and in other elements of the reactor. and an increase in the square of the
diffusion path of themal neutrons;

U as fuel temperature is increased;

the temperature change in the density of reactor materials and the dimensions
of its components, which primarily affects neutron leakage.

When studying reactor dynamics. it is important to break down the temperature
effect of the reactor into individual components. which we took as follows:

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

the temperature effect of the fuel; this is the fastest-acting effect and
is due mainly to Dapper broadening of resonant levels of 23.0;

temperature effect of the moderator associated with effects of thermalization
of slow neutrons. change in density of the moderator in the core and change
of dimensions;

temperature effect of the reflector associated with the change in the spectrum
of low-energy neutrons and the dimensions and density of the reflector.

 

Fig. 5. Influence that water in

the core has on reactivity (Cu2°

Fig. 4. Components of reactor is the amount of water per m’ of

temperature effect: l-reflec- the core with submerged (l) and

tor effect; 2--fuel effect; 3- extracted (2) compensating control
moderator effect rods)

 

The overall temperature effect is negative (Fig. 6). and the reduction in
the effective breeding ratio as temperature increases may reach ~102.

Fluctuation of the level of sphere stacking in the core influences reactivity
as a result of change in core height and the shooting effect in the cavity
between the top end reflector and the core. Dependence of reactivity on the
relative width of the gap between the top end reflector and the core stacking
(Fig. 5) near the nominal stacking level has a rather flat slope. which is
due to the large height of the core compared with its diameter.

As the reactor operates. certain changes in the density of spherical packing
can be observed. In this connection. an estimate was made of the effect that

a change in the porosity of spherical packing of the core has on the effective
breeding ratio; this effect is characterized by the quantity dk/del -0.33.

The high porosity of the core makes such a reactor quite sensitive to hydrogen-
containing substances in the core (water. water vapor. etc.). The following
factors may influence the breeding ratio:

an increase in the moderating power of the core. leading to an increase in

the probability of avoiding resonant absorption of neutrons by 23.0 (positive
effect);

a reduction in the length of migration of neutrons in the reactor. leading
to a reduction of neutron leakage from the reactor (positive effect);

Absorption of neutrons in hydrogen (negative effect).

A typical maximum can be observed on the curve for reactivity as a function
of the content of water (water vapor) in the core (Fig. 6).

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

~41;

 

Fig. 6. Reactivity as a function

of gap between top end reflector Pig. 7. Number of absorbers
and spherical stacking of the core in core to compensate burnup
(6--gap; Ho-—distance between top effects: l--units with burns-

and bottom end reflectors) ble absorber 1.3; 2--units with
unburnable absorber; H--nunber
To compensate for effects of burnup of absorbers located in the core
with rapid circulation of fuel in the stacking; t/Tx-ratio of elapsed
reactor. special absorbers of spherical time to run time

shape (like the fuel elements) are added

to the fuel charge of the core. As the reactor operates with circulating
fuel, provision is made for the capability of changing the amber of absorbers
in the spherical packing to maintain criticality.

Fig. 7 shows the change in the necessary number of absorbers during a reactor
run for two cases -~ for burnable absorber (based on 1'3) and for nonburnable
absorber.

The use of a "burnable" absorber. which does not necessitate a change in the
number of absorbers during a run increases the negative temperature effect
of the moderator due to blocking of the absorber as temperature is increased.
Fast circulation of fuel in the reactor determines the particulars of 1’5Xe
poisoning due to entrainment of the irradiated fuel from the reactor with a
large flux of thermal neutrons to the irradiator. where the thermal neutron
flux is near zero with multiple repetition of the process.

A peculiarity of I’SXe poisoning of the reactor during fuel circulation can
be discovered by solving the following system of equations:

dp'lﬁl 4 Mill/01 -| 19‘2”!" _ 1.9.;
01!,“er + Wok“: ‘ “NS/1"» -- l'p' -- 7.3.x.“ —- «1“an

where 01-01(t. z); pXQI-px¢(t. z) are the concentrations of 1351 and 1”Xe
at time t at point z of the circuit; it is convenient to take as coordinate
z the distance from the upper level of the core to the given point of the
circuit in the direction of fuel movement; 07(t, z) is thermal neutron flux
density. EjT(t. z) is the macroscopic thenmal-neutron fission cross section
of the core. AI'AXe are the constants of radioactive decay of 1351 and ‘SSXe;
H1. wxc are the yields of the corresponding products upon fission of 2’50;

60

FOR OFFICIAL lisl'l ONLY
F03¢NﬂﬂK1ALlﬂﬂi0NLV

 

fig. 8. Distribution of "’Xe con-
centration heightwise of reactor
with circulating fuel for differ-
ent circulation times:

 

where DXe- o; are concentrations. Pig. 9. Distribution of heat
Och. °¢s are the microscopic thsr- release heightwise of the core:
mal-enutron absorption cross sections 1a—-conaidering (Io-disregarding)
for 1”Xe and ’3‘U respectively nonuniformity of temperature dis-
tribution heightwise of the core
ox; is the macroscopic thermal-neutron in the presence of fuel circulation

absorption cross section of 1”Re; v is (ru- 6.6 hr); 2--using the principle
the velocity of fuel displacement during of one-time passage of fuel elements
circulation. through the core

At any time t. the solution of the system of equations should be periodic
with respect to z with period ZR equal to the length of the fuel circulation
loop. Let us note that instead of r we can introduce the variable

I
r n {elf/v.

I
wuennfﬁmthtmeuhnthfmlwcmmueweqdm

in the case where the tine of circulation is close to the period of decay
of 1”Xe. strong nonuniformity is observed in the distribution of xenon con-
centration heightwise of the core (Ref. 8): however. there is little change
in the average xenon concentration.

It is clear free the distribution of heat release heightwise of the core
(Fig. 9) that wten fuel is circulated the distribution of heat release is

not very nonuniform (curves is and 16). whereas with one-tine passage of fuel
through the core in the equilibrium state one observes strong distortion of
the distribution of heat release heightwise of the core toward an increase

at the beginning of the zone (curve 2). which is conducive to equalizing the
temperature of the core material.

REFERENCES
l. Aleksandrov. A. P.. AIOHNAYA ENERSIYA. Vol 25. No 5. I968. p 356.
2. Aleksandrov. A. P.. Ponomarev-Stepnoy. N. N.. "Nuclear Power and Technical

Progress" in: "Atonnaya energetika XX let." [Nuclear Power of the Mn-
tieth Century]. Hoscow. Atomizdat, I974.

61

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE10NLY
3 .

b.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

[0.
ll.

l2.

FOR OFFIHAL USE ONLY

Aleksandrov. A. P. et al.. "Bystryye i teplovyye geliyevyye reaktory dlya
proizvodstva elcktroenergii i vysokotemperaturnogo tepla" [Past and Thermal
Helium Reactors for Producing Electric Energy and High-Temperature Beat].
IAEA. Vienna. 1976. Vol 1.

"Sostoyaniye i perspektivy razvitiya rabot po VTCR v SSSR" [Current State
and Outlook for HTCR Research in USSR]. report TC-lO9/3 at meeting of
Technical Committee on HTCR's. IAEA. Vienna. 12-10 December. [977.

Ryabukhin. Yu. S.. Breger. A. Kh.. ATOHMAYA ENERGIYA. Vol 7. No 2, 1959.
p l29.

Breger. A. Rh. et al.. ”Oanovy radiataionno-khinicheskogo apparatoatroyeniya”
[Principles of Radiation-Cheaical Equip-eat Making]. Moscow, Atoaizdat. I967.

Hay. K.. Higner. 3.. PRYJ. REV.. Vol 73. 1948. p 1318.

Mayenshteyn. 7.. et al.. 'Ganna Rays Associated Hith Fission" in: "Trudy
Vtoroy mezhdunarodnoy konferentsii po nirnonu ispol'zovaniyu atounoy energii.
T. 2. Izbrannyye doklady inostrannykh uchenykh" [Proceedings of Second
International Conference on the Peaceful Use of Nuclear Power. Vol 2.
Selected Papers of Foreign Scientists]. Moscow. Gosatouizdat. 1959.

Sakharav. V. IL. Halofeyev. A. 1.. AWAYA ENERGIYA. Vol 3. No 10. 1957.
p 334.

Bunney. L. R.. San. D.. NUCL. SCI. BNGNG. Vol 39. 1970. p 81.
Dosts. L.. De Tourrecil. R.. J. NUCL. ENERGY. Vol 26. 1972. p 631.

James. M. F., J. NUCL. ENERGY. Vol 23. 3969. p 517.

COPYRIGHT: Institut atonnoy energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. 1977

Atonizdat. 1979

6610

C80:

81b4/IOSZ-A

1-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI". ONLY

UDC 621.039

son: mums or llEA‘i' sxcmcr m mnoonmucs m Irma cons cmonms
(SURVEY)

Moscow ATOHNO-VODORODNAYA ENERGETIKA I TBKHNOLOGIYA in Russian No 2. 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) PP le-lhs

[Article by Yu. 3. Kuznetsov and V. L. Lel'chuk]

[Text] The paper gives some results of theoretical and
experimental studies of heat exchange and hydrodynamics

in the annular channels. rod bundles. and in channels with
permeable walls as applied to helium-cooled high-temperature
reactors.

An examination is made of methods of calculating thermohy-
draulic processes in the primary circuit of HTGR's and GCFk's.

Mathematical Modeling of Processes of Convective Heat Exchange in and Bundles
and Annular Channels. One of the authors (Kuznetsov) has been doing theo-
retical research on convective heat exchange in HTGR cores with rod fuel ele-
ments. in which the peculiarities are associated with comparatively low heat
transfer coefficient. complicated geometry of the channel. variability of
thermophysical properties of the coolant and large volumetric flowrate.

A theoretical study has been done on patterns of convective heat exchange

in rod bundles and annular channels for arbitrary laws of change in the thermal
load lengthwise of the channel. Yu. N. Kuznetsov has developed a technique
that enables reconstruction of local values of heat exchange characteristics
in any channel cross sections and for any law of heat supply based on studying
tle stabilized heat exchange far from the inlet with some specially selected
law of heat supply. First for annual channels under conditions of constant
thermophysical properties of the coolant and constant change in the heat load
on both Surfaces lengthwise of the channel (with constant heat load on the
perimeter). the author examined the principles of stabilizing heat exchange
with increasing disatance from the channel inlet. introducing a criterion

that characterizes the influence of heat load variability. and is proportional
to the logarithmic derivative of the function describing the change in heat
load lengthwise of the channel.

As the heat load described by functions of exponential type changes with in-
creasing length. the temperature field of the coolant is stabilized. but

‘3

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
POI! (II-1"“ ‘IAI. USE ONLY

differs from the temperature field on the section of the heat exchanger sta-
bilized with respect to length for the case of a constant load. These differ-
ences increase with increasing relative rate of change in the load. and they
characterize the thermal inertia of the flow. This enables us to reconstruct
the influence function for the given heat exchange process. which also charac-
terizes the thermal inertia of the coolant flow. Mathematically. the process
of finding the influence function reduces to solving an ordinary differential
equation with unit boundary conditions in the complex plane. and to subsequent
determination of some integral of the real part of the solution.

The major difficulties arise in description of the velocity field and transport
coefficients of the turbulent flow of coolant. A model of turbulent coolant
flow in annular channels is proposed. Results of calculations of the charac-
teristics of turbulent flows and heat exchange by this model are compared

with experimental data of various authors.

Values and generalizing formulas for the influence function G, are obtained
for the temperature difference between wall and coolant over a wide range

of working parameters and geometric dimensions. It is shown that the problem
of local heat exchange characteristics in the case of longitudinal flow around
infinite bundles of rods that are not too close can be reduced to investigation
of heat exchange in the inner zone (between the rod surface and the line of
maximum velocity) of such an annular channel for which the line of maximum
velocity in some sense coincides with the line of maximum velocity of the
given rod bundle. This has enabled us to use the above described results

for studying annular channels, giving relations for the influence function
with heat exchange in rod bundles.

The resultant formulas can be used for fairly exact calculations of local
characteristics of heat exchange in any channel cross section with any law
of variation in heat load lengthwise over a wide range of geometric and flow
parameters: for annular channel 0< r1/r3< I; 10"<Re< 10‘; 0.7<Pr< 100;
for triangular or sqare bundle arrays l.S<p/d<2.2; 10‘<Re<10‘; Pr-OJ.
Reliability of results is confirmed by comparison with experimental data of
a number of authors.

It should be noted that experimental data on heat exchange in bundles. and
especially on local characteristics of heat exchange. are rather scarce and
often contradictory. 11mrefore experimental research has been done at the
All-Union Heat Engineering Institute on local coefficients of heat exchange

in bundles in the region of relative spacings of 1.2-1.7. which is of greatest
interest for gas-cooled reactors.

Some Results of Experimental Studies of Thermohydraulic Characteristics of
Turbulent Gas Flow Along Heated Surfaces. Some results for a turbulent air
flow washing over a bundle of seven tubes with relative spacing of 1.2 located
in a hexagonal unheated shell have been obtained by V. L. Lel'chuk et al. The
diameter of the tubes was l0 mm. and minimum spacing between the walls of

the peripheral tubes and the shell was the same as between the tubes, 1. e.

2 mm; the equivalent diameter of the bundle was the same as for a bundle with
an infinite number of tubes, deq- deqw' 5.86 mm; total length of the bundle

1014

FOR OFFICIAL l'SIi 0NI.\
FOR (WHUM. USE ONIN

between the end centering sleeves was l200 II; centering spacers were placed
at distances of 300. 600 and 900 Im fron the inlet. All tubes are heated

by electric current of the same power flowing through them in parallel.
Nineteen therlocouples are welded to each tube with different distances be-
tween thea; to check unifornity of wall temperature around the periphery,

the ten oddun-bered theraocouples are situated on a single generatrix facing
toward the inside of the bundle on the peripheral tubes. and the other nine
are placed in the spaces between the odd-numbered thernocouples. but on the
opposite generatrix. In one control section near the outlet, special probes
were used to neasure the dynamic and static pressures and temperature of the
flow in each peripheral and central cell of the flow. In addition. the tem-
perature and pressure of the flow were neasured in the stagnation chambers
preceding the inlet and following the outlet of the tube bundle. The heat
balance was computed from the difference between the total increment of entropy
of the air in the tube bundle and the supplied electric energy with consider-
ation of heat losses; the latter were determined from preliminary calibration;
they came to 1-22; divergence of the heat balance did not exceed 31.

It was found that the wall temperatures of the central tube on both generatricea
agree and are joined by a single smooth curve. with the exception of cross
sections where the spacers are installed. In these cross sections the wall
temperatures were systematically somewhat lowere than the overall curve. which
is evidence of a stepwise change in the coefficient of heat transfer at the
spacers. 0n the peripheral tubes. the temperature on the generatrices facing
the center of the bundle was close to the temperature of the central tube

(but higher than the temperature on the generstrices facing the unheated shell;
the difference was about 102 of the temperature head). This gave the authors
a basis for calculating the coefficient of heat transfer fron the central

tube to the air flowing along it in the region bounded fron within by the

wall of the central tube, and on the outside by the boundary passing over V5

of each peripheral tube and over the shortest distance between them.

ing eepirical relation for calculating local values of the Nusselt number
for the initial thermal section of the investigated tube bundle under condition
of constant thermophysicsl properties of the gas

(Nu/m...)-1-1.sz(x/d.q)‘°°"°. (I)

where Nata-0.018aRe°-°Pr°-' are the values of the Nusselt number at x/deq- 1.0.
In a first approximation it is assumed that heat exchange is stabilized at
x/de - (.0.

q

The authors are still gathering experimental data to explain the influence

of certain factors on heat exchange in tube bundles. and in particular the
variability of physical properties of the coolant. The authors are also doing
research on intensifying heat exchange in the fuel elements of the overheated
part of BHCR's and GCFR's. Optimum geometric parameters are being determined
for the artificial microroughness applied to the outer surface of rod fuel
elements. Experiments are being done with annular channels that have a rough
inside surface. and with rod bundles.

65

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experimental Study of Hydrodynamics of Cassettes With Hicrosphere Fuel Elements
for GCPR's. L. L. Kalishevskiy and others are doing research in hydrodynamics
of GCPR's on cylindrical and conical simulators of a microsphere fuel element
bed using various configurations of porous tubes. They are determining the
effect that a change in geometric characteristics has on the distribution

of local values of flowrate through the wall of a porous tube with respect

to length.

Analysis of experimental data has shown the following:

a) in cylindrical models. the distribution of local values of fluwrate through
the porous well over the length of the cassette depends weekly on the ratio

of cross sectional areas of the distributing and collecting channels PP/Pc.

ln models of cassettes with conical porous inserts. due to the taper and to
the corresponding change with respect to area of the distributing and collect-
ing channels. there is a better opportunity for action on redistribution of
the velocity of blow-in through the layer lengthwise of the cassette. 0n

the other hand, if in addition to changing the flow sections of the distribut-
ing and collecting channels we also increase wall thickness. the flowrate

of coolant through the porous wall reaches maximua values at x/L~0.S;

b) static pressure changes insignificantly in the distributing channel. but
in the collecting channel it falls off sharply toward the Outlet end. Thus
for constant drag and thickness of the porous layer. which determine the dis-
tribution of blow-in velocity lengthwise of the model, there is a change of
static pressure in the collecting channel;

c) total hydraulic losses in models of cassettes with a cylindrical porous
layer increase sharply with decreasing Fp/Fc. Minimum losses are observed

at Fp/FCI 0.8. Models of cassettes with conical porous layer also show an
increase in losses with decreasing area of the distributing channel as compared
with the output cross section. The total drag of the cassette depends on

the Reynolds number to a power of 0.6-0.63. and is practically the same for
different versions of cassette design. Such a power exponent corresponds

to relations typical of spherical packing and porous materials.

Thus the required law of distribution lengthwise of the channel for values

of flowrate of the coolant passing through a layer of microsphere fuel ele-
ments can be obtained by simultaneously varying the geometry of the channels
and the drag of the microsphere fuel element layer; the preferable hydrodynamic
arrangement of the cassette is one in which the distributing channel is lo-
cated inside the layer of microspheres. while the collecting channel is on

the outside.

Calculating Three-Dimensional Temperature Fields in Bundles of Fuel Elements

of Rod Type. Determination of the temperature field of the coolant in a bundle
of fuel elements of rod type for known values of the coefficient of heat
transfer and drag. and a known law of heat release is considered in Ref. 1.

The physical model that is used is one of a homogeneiaed two-phase flow with
stationary solid phase. The author considers hydrodynamically stabilized

flow of an ideal gas with volumetric source of energy release. assuming that
there is no transverse pressure gradient.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The initial system of equations takes the form

 

h do l 6 0a
”a; -— “Jr, a.["+°'""a.1+
I I) 0. nl’
+ I, “[NVH’J’M a, ]—t-g;. m
6T 1-: I ) 0T
W‘pE-FVI-—"+T':;’{I(l I “pod—07"?
I 0 0T
+7;[(l+wJ&)-*—: ‘3’
21': d,(l-l)
G v- If | [VIIJIIJ1; p-- pRT; 1". T !- - ¢.-~ (4'
'0 .' ‘7“

where c is the gas porosity of the bundle; d, is the hydraulic diameter; Pr..-

is the turbulent Prandtl masher; a is the heat transfer coefficient; D1- is

the turbulent transfer coefficient determined fron experiments on heat or

mass transfer and represented as 01-3 Kudn (I: is the dimensionless effective
transport coefficient); c, is the specific heat of the coolant. All thermo-
physical properties of the coolant are seemed to depend on tenperature. The
given system can be solved only by numerical methods. To solve it. a synthetic
method was developed that combines the method of natrix factorization with
iteration cycles ave. nonlinearties.

The mnerical analog of the systea was written in an implicit finite-difference
scheme having absolute stability. The equation of notion was split into

two equations. The author of Ref. 1 devised a conputational algoritlm by

using a vector-matrix for- for recording the nuerical analogs of the equations.
boundary conditions of periodicity of the sought functions with respect to azi-
muth and conditions of the second and third kind for the equation of notion

and energy. This algoriths was realized as a progru in FORTRAN written for
the BBQI-6 computer. The algoritln has fairly high speed. and enables solution
at 6000 points of a three-dimensional grid with dimensions of radius. asinuth
and height. The error of integration of the finite-difference analogs of

the initial equations does not exceed 0.5%. Convergence and stability of

the solution were verified by numerical experiment.

Unfortunately. nothing is said in Ref. 1 about what relations were used or
should be used for calculating the values entering into the algoritlll: trans-
port coefficients, Prandtl nrmuher Pr..- of the turbulent gas flow. heat transfer
coefficient and drag in the bundle. There are no exnples of calculations

and estimation of the reliability of theoretical results. There are doubts
about the form of recording the last tern in the right-hand nether of equation
of notion (2).

Program of Thernohydraulic Calculation of Axisylmetric Channel. Ref. 2 gives
a general description of a progrsa for engineering thermal and hydraulic cal-
culation of a nultiflow cylindrical heat exchange channel of complex configu-
ration. The given channel may consist of 1-5 lines separated by walls with

up to ten heat-insulating layers in each well. The direction of flow of cool-
anta in the individual lines nay be arbitrary. The central line contains the

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(1AI. USE ONLY

fuel elements. The geometry and material composition of the fuel elements
and heat insulation may vary with respect to height. Some of the lines may
be terminated with constricting flowmeter devices--a nozzle or diaphragm.

Solution of the problem can be based on a system of equations that define

axial distribution of mean-mass temperature. coolant pressure. flow in the
constricting devices. and also leakage of heat between lines through the thermal
insulation.

In the program the principal equations of coolant flow in the channels are
equations of heat balance. pressure differential and discharge from the nozzle.
The process of heat exchange between coolant and thermal insulation is de-
scribed by Newton-Riechmann law. and the process of heat transfer for cylin-
drical thermal insulation is described by a heat conduction equation.

In calculating heat leaks between lines. use is made of the condition that
ideal contact exists between layers of heat insulation. and that there are
uniformly distributed heat sources within each heat insulating layer. The
coefficients of heat conduction of each layer of heat insulation are taken
as constant and corresponding to the average temperature of the layer.

The problem is solved by an iteration method.

All thermophysical properties of heat insulating and construction materials
depend on temperature. while the corresponding properties of the coolants
depend on temperature and pressure.

There is a library of thermophysical constants for coolants, heat-insulating
and construction materials.

The basic initial data for calculation in the program are:

a) geometric characteristics (channel height. geometry of fuel elements. struc-
tural dimensions of heat insulation. diameters of critical cross sections
of nozzles or diaphragms);

h) parameters of coolants (flowrste in lines. temperature and pressure at
the inlet or at the outlet from the lines);

c) energy characteristics (distribution of energy release with respect to
channel height and in heat insulation);

d) characteristics of coolants and heat insulation (for each coolant. heat
insulating material and structural material a mnber is introduced that cor-
responds to its number in the library of constants).

Upon completion of the calculation by the program. values are printed out
for the pressure and temperature of the coolant heightwise of the channel.
and also for the temperature field in the heat insulation.

All printout entries are labeled. The program is written in FORTRAN for appli-
cation to the BESH-é computer with Dubna operating system.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unfortunately. this paper also lacks any specific application of the problem
to a particular object.

“RIMES

l. Segal'. H. 0.. Preprint, I. V. Kurchatov Institute of Nuclear Power [1A2
ineni I. V. Kurchatova], No 2865. Hoacov. 1977.

2. Pavshuk. V. A.. Smirnov, L. P.. Preprint. I. V. Kurchatov Institute of
Nuclear Power [1A3 iaeni I. V. Kurchatova]. No 2863. Hoscov. 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Institut ate-nay energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. 1977
Atonizdat. I979

6610
C80: 81 Mo/IOSZ-A

1.9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039

sons usuus or manna-m. essence on ma mum comments

Moscow Am-VODOROMAYA BERGEN I WIYA in Russian No 2. 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) PP 169-159

[Article by R. G. Bogoyavlenskiy. Yu. D. Nikiforov, A. B. Anapol'skiy.
L. H. Hinkin and 0. I. Kunakhovich]

[Text] The paper gives experimental data on wear of graphite
models of spherical fuel elements moving at different veloci-
ties based on various components of the helium circulation
loop at different temperatures. and also on the intensity of
wear in life service tests of a plain bearing coated with
molybdenum disulfide.

The main difference between the dual-purpose power-chemical facility and nu-
clear power plants with hTGR's is the presence of a process irradiator that
consists of rows of ball guides through which spherical graphite fuel
elements are moved by continuous-action mechanisms.

The entire circulation loop including the gamma irradiator is under a helium
pressure of 60 kgf/cm’. The helium temperature ranges from 300 to [000°C
along the line of fuel element circulation.

Each spherical graphite fuel element travels a distance of 150 km through
the circulation loop during a run. In doing so, it moves at different veloci-
ties and experiences different loads.

As a result of friction between the sphere and the surfaces of the steel ball
guides. and striking against the edges of joints and other components of the
circulation loop, the graphite shell of the fuel element becomes worn. There-
fore it is necessary to do experimental research on the wear of spherical
graphite elements in helium under different loads and at different temperatures.

Another problem that arises in making the power-producing chemical facility
is determination of materials for the bearings in mechanisms of the plant.

Mechanisms that transport fuel elements operate in helium at temperature of
300°C, pressure of 40 kgf/cm'. and under the action of gamma radiation. It is
not admissible to use liquid and plastic lubricants in the bearings of the

50

FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY ~
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bearings of mechanisms in the circulation loop. It is known that the coef-
ficient of friction of unlubricated materials rises sharply in a pure heliun
atmosphere. which may lead to seizing and failure of the bearing. Thus it

is necessary to select materials for bearings that would have a low coefficient
of friction and high durability with "dry" friction. and to do life service
tests on bearings under stand conditions.

The intensity of wear of spherical graphite fuel elements depends to a great
extent on the nature of contact of the interacting bodies. For example in

the case of elastic contact, which evidently occurs when a graphite ball moves
in a metal ball guide. the intensity of wear depends on geometric and micro-
geometric characteristics. mechanical properties. the coefficient of friction.
the fatigue characteristic of the material, contact pressure and other factors.
The modulus of elasticity of the material also has an appreciable influence

on intensity of wear. For example. the dependence of wear intensity on the
modulus of elasticity takes the following form [Ref. 1]:

JR~E"'"",

where JR is intensity of wear. E is the modulus of elasticit . t is the index
of the fatigue curve, which varies from 3 to IA. 8- (2v+-l)' . v is the constant
0! microgeometry of the surface.

The in‘luence of the specific contact stress on intensity of wear is expressed
by the power law

1,, ”Hal,

where q is specific contact stress, and the influence of the coefficient of
friction is expressed by the dependence

IR ~ 1',
where f is the coefficient of friction.

When simulating the process of wear of spherical fuel elements. the influence
of the modulus of elasticity. specific contact stress and microgeometry can

be eliminated by making the geometric, mechanical and velocity characteristics
of the model analogous to full-scale conditions in the facility; therefore

the influence of the atmosphere shows up largely through the coefficient of
friction. For this reason. we should know the change in the coefficient of
friction in helium atmosphere at different temperatures.

Graphite in air at elevated temperatures has good antifriction properties.
However. it has been observed that in vacuum and in some gas atmospheres its
coefficient of friction increases and the wear of graphite materials becomes
high. Fur example. the coefficient of friction of graphite after outgsssing
in vacuum becomes an order of nagnitude higher. and elevated "pulverized"
wonr begins. Such wear is observed in air under severe friction conditions.
The high antifriction properties of graphite in air can be attributed to its
complex structure and easy slip over the most densely packed planes. In deep

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FII'IHAI. USP. ONLY

vacuum and in a helium atmosphere. graphite does not show the oriented layers
on friction surfaces that are usual of friction in air and in an atmosphere
of gases that contain oxygen. water vapor and other substances. which is evi-
dently what explains the considerable increase in the coefficient of friction
of graphite materials.

As a result of numerous studies on the coefficient of friction.of graphite
in vacuum at room temperature. and the'way that it is affected by various
gases and vapors. the absorption theory of friction of graphite materials
has been formulated and widely accepted [Ref. 2]. In accordance with this
theory chemosorption or physical adsorption reduces the energy of atoms of
a crystal of the surface layer of graphite. which in turn leads to weakening
of the forces between surface planes. facilitating displacement between them.

Usually. in order to satisfy the requirement of reducing the coefficient of
friction and wear. graphite must have condensed moisture vapor; in some cases.
the presence of oxygen alone may be sufficient.

Ref. 3 gives the reSults of a study of the way that the coefficient of fric-
tion of graphite depends on the depth of vacuum and temperature. A study

of the influence of temperature from 20 to 800°C on the friction of graphite
material grade B (AG-1500) against grade lKhlaNIOT steel has shown that in
the case where the pressure of the ambient medium changes from atmospheric
to 5-10'” mm Hg. the friction coefficient increases by a factor of 1.5-2 at
all except room temperatures.

A study of the wear of spherical fuel elements made of grade MPG-6 graphite

was done at VNIIAH [expansion not given] on three experimental sections of

the lznos stand. Experimental section II was a straight lZKhlSNlOT stainless
steel pipe with cross section of 76x 10.5 an. 6500 mm long. The pipe was heated
by an electric coil. and the ends were covered with spherical graphite inserts.
When the pipe is inclined at an angle of 10°. the ball moves under the force

of gravity and strikes the insert.

Experimental section 92 is a pipe in the shape of a torus with radius of l m
that is made up of two halves joined by flanges. The pipe was vibrated by
an electromechanical drive. moving the ball under the action of the force

of gravity and centrifugal force.

Some results of the study of wear of graphite balls on these two sections
are given in Ref. lo.

Experimental section 03 was the same torus as section '2, but rotating in

the vertical plane. The section also consisted of two halves joined by flan-
ges. The pipe material was grade lZKhl8NlOT stainless steel. Inside the

pipe was a ball 65 mm in diameter or several balls that moved under the action
of gravity and forces of friction in the rotating torus. The electromechanical
drive permitted continuous variation of the speed of rotation of the torus

from 5 to 30 rpm. and of the veloeity of motion of the ball from 0.5 to 3 m/s.
The section was heated by an electric coil wound over the entire length of

the pipe.

52

H”! ()l‘l-"K'IAI. l'SF. ()VI.Y
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE I

Results of expedient: on wear of graphite balls

 

”Jul

use: «o 33:35

I F.
' I:
anmo

 

 

 

 

man a» m _
3.32. 22. 2
m ﬁnd-«noes no» ”mm. mm. «mm
mm nu mu
Iul HHCA no and: 212 2a. IMF
mm”. r... Mu.
I32 4... I ..
aux ya a” .
31mm um um
.l'.. .
ﬂﬁm. .u..u MN.
m _ m WW. n

 
     

         
 

    

uxl . .3
1.330., San

mmmm.

 

 

on the oxpcrnental muons

mmmm _mmmm

 

 

23‘
III

     

 

 

    

aouuuoo,
noun-ﬂauomxm

 

2
M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
   
   
     

m
K- F: "’ ‘3‘: ------
7 I / '
an // / ./ - IIIIII
h . , /.
ﬁz/i/ .W/ ﬂ 2” y
Mild!
\\“ \i‘mn/11/ f n _ . _ .
”’“m IIIIII
0 m m ammo MVMIJMIJV-I/a
Fig. 1. Mass intensity of Pig. 2. Mass intensity of
wear of graphite ball as a ball wear as a function of
function of temperature on velocity: 0 «experimental
experimental sections: section #2; *-experimental
ll: *-air; v‘v- LN n/s: section I3; atmosphere--
Vmax' 2.5 m/s; #2: O—helium; helium; t- 300'0

A—air; v- 1.8 ale; ‘3: 0--
helium; v-2.0-2.l n/s

Rear of an isolated graphite ball was studied for a helium atmosphere and

air at a temperature of 20. 300 and loOO’C. In each experiment. the ball trav-
elec 150 In: through the pipe, undergoing abOut 25.000 impacts against the
graphite insert in section ll. and about 50.000 impacts against the edges

of the flange connections in sections '2 and 03.

The results of none experiments are smarized in Table l. The graphs show
the way that wear intensity depends on the temperature of the medial (Pig. 1)
and linear velocity of motion of the hall (Pig. 2). The intensity of wear
of the ball was determined by the formula

K- AGILp

where AG is the loss of mass of the sphere in mg. and L is the length of travel
of the sphere through the pipe in km.

The influence of temperature on wear of a graphite ball in air was studied

in sections ll and I2. As temperature increases from 20 to 300%. wear inten-
sity increases (see Fig. I) from I. to 7 lag/kn in section ll. and from S to

9 mg/km in section 02. This is explained by the fact that as temperature
increases. there is a reduction in the amount of water in surface layers of

the graphite ball; in this connection. in accordance with the adsorption theory
of lubrication there is an increase in the energy of atoms of a crystal of

the surface layer. and displacement between surface planes is impeded.

The greater wear in section '2 than in section '1 can be attributed to the
fact that the ball was moving at a slower velocity in section '1.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI‘IUM. USE ONLY

The influence of tenpersture on wear of a graphite ball in helium was studied
in section 02 at a ball speed of v- 1.6 ale. and in section 93 at ball speed
of v- 2 m/s. As heliun temperature was changed in section l2 free 20 to 300°C
and in section '3 from 20 to aoo’c. ball wear intensity in each section re-
mined unchanged (see Fig. 1). Besides. wear intensity in section '2 with
testing in helium was somewhat higher (-10-20 lug/kn) than in air. This is
also satisfactorily explained by the absorption theory of lubrication since

in high-purity heliua the amount of water vapor and oxygen is nearly indepen-
dent of temperature. and is considerably lower than in air. The higher inten-
sity of ball wear in helium in section 03 (18-22 mg/km) than in I2 (9-12 mg/Irm)
is attributed to higher speed of the ball.

The intensities of ball wear in heliul in section 03 for speed of 1.6-2.1 m/s
are shown on Fig. 2 as a curve K-2.56v2°".

Hear with motion of a chain of five halls in heliun at a temperature of 20°C
and speeds from 0.35 to 0.85 m/s was studied on section #3. The results are
su-arized in Table 2 and Pig. 3.

The experimental curves show the mass inten-
sity of wear of the niddle ball of the chain
as a function of speed rav- 155v’~" and

the average intensity of wear of balls in
the chain (per ball) K-GOvz'l.

Pron the graphs (Fig. 2, 3) we can see that
the middle balls in the chain show greater
wear than those on the ends. and also are
worn more than an isolated ball. This can
be attributed to the fact that in experimen-
tal section #3 the chain of balls moves

over a concave surface. and the middle balls
are worn not only by friction against the
steel pipe and by impacts against projec-
tions. but also due to friction of sliding
Fig. 3. Mass intensity of wear against adjacent balls.

of a chain of balls in experi-

mental section '3: *--for the Analysis of the quantitative data shown

 

middle ball of the chain; 0- in Table 2 demonstrates that the sliding
average for balls in the chain; friction between adjacent balls in a chain
atmosphere—henna; t - 20’C has a very great influence on their wear

since the inside balls that have two points
of graphite-graphite contact are worn two-three times more than the end balls
that have a single point of contact. and five times more than an isolated ball.

The experimental data found for the wear of isolated halls and for a chain
of balls in different sections of the heliul stand enabled estimation of the
wear of a spherical fuel element in an irradiator tube.

As a result of work on studying the influence of helius temperature on friction
and wear of spherical graphite elements. the following conclusions were drawn:

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC1AI. IISF. ONLY

   

   

99¢.n

0—...—

   

:éw

   

  

nan aﬁnmv

 

un/SI 'tatsuaau:

un/Bu 'Jvan

;o [usuaaul

     

no...“
1—.onn

n.-.~
.0.unn
.u.~v«

     
     

.O-hn
counts

       
     

ﬂ.”

.. ..U.n«

.u. v. «an

«3. 50.7n8

—h. 00.nwu -..-.«

  

Ono...“

. .u.
Gouge“ — Quinn...

  
   

m
22“.“: 93.8. . .J c. .
93.2.... .23; 2 o a Z c
2...: . .

     

 

  

      

    

ﬂ.” °‘h.ﬂ-h OOH-Own u

.6. ”Ram ham“ u.

. Or . . _
3. =1»: 3...: 8n n. o n a. 2

2. 9.5.: 3...... .

   

  

   

      

      

      

 

        

      

    

    

 

             

     

0V 0. q I!- 1.
13A m ”8 3” 3m 3 n
O 8 n}. In m u d
1 8 30 T..- d 8 a
B n... a.) 83 3 J
88 0 30 1 .01 u. .l
9..- 1. no I. 3‘ “.2 m
0 a I 3 o a
T. 0. X0. 30 in I. u
so P .09 It: a... 3
9 I at r. 0.0
8 .l 11. O
1. o
. 31.

n. c0300. ”3:05:93 ac
.530... a." 3an 03.33» 023 no 52.0 a we .32; me 3153

N NASH

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHM'IAL USE ONLY

1) with a temperature change from 20 to b00°c the intensity of wear of graphite
balls in helium changes insignificantly; it can be assumed that wear is inde-
pendent of temperature in this range;

2) an increase is observed in the wear of the inside balls moving in a chain;
this shows the possibility of a considerable increase in wear when balls move
in a chain through the circulating system;

3) a power-law relation is confirmed for the way that wear of graphite balls
depends on speed up to 2 m/s when moving as isolated spheres. and also as
a group of spheres in a lZKhlaﬂlor steel pipe in helium.

The expected wear of fuel elements in irradiator tubes is calculated on the
basis of the resultant data: 0.5! of the mass of the fuel element over the
course of a run.

As we have already noted. the conditions of operation of bearings in mechanisms
of the circulation system are characterized by comparatively high temperature
(up to 300°C) and a highly pure helium atmosphere. which precludes the use

of liquid and plastic lubricants. and raises the problem of selecting self-
lubricating materials and coatings with consideration of the type of contacting
rubbing surfaces of components. friction conditions and permissible wear.

Analysis of published data (Ref. 5-9] has shown that friction and wear of
materials in a highly pure helium atmosphere at elevated temperature has been
practically unstudied. and specific recommendations can be made on the basis
of general ideas about the mechanism of friction and wear of solids. For
example. contacting of solids under these conditions is characterized by ab-
sence of oxidation processes that play an important and frequently positive
role with friction in air. Since helium is an inert gas and does not interact
with contacting surfaces. it can be simulated by a high vacuum with adequate
reliability as the external medium for friction under temperature conditions
up to 300°C. In this case, selection of the necessary materials becomes more
sound since friction of known solid lubricants and coatings in vacuum has
been extensively studied.

At the present time. especially with the development of space technology.
materials have been studied and used with physical and mechanical properties
that enable them to be utilized in friction couples under conditions of vacuum
or oxygen-free media. One of them is molybdenite or molybdenum disulfide

Hosz; its principal advantage is the capability of improving friction charac-
toristica with increasing temperature and decreasing amount of oxygen and
water impurities in the gas atmosphere. Holybdem- disulfide Nos; shows al-
most no vaporization in vacuum. Besides. this material is radiation resistant.

Molybdenum disulfide has a hexagonal structure; in its elementary cell. six
sulfur atoms are arranged around a molybdenum atom at the vertices of a regular
trigonal prism (A- 3.26 X. 0-12.30 K) [Ref. 5]. Thus, an elementary layer
with thickness of 6.25 K consists of molybdenum atoms with sulfur atoms on

both sides. Bonding between molybdenum and sulfur atoms is covalent. and

the sulfur-sulfur bond between elementary layers is by van der Heels forces.

57

FINI()FF1(1AI.I£SEZ(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore. these elementary layers can slide freely relative to each other
along cleavage planes. According to many researchers [Ref. 5. 6]. the mecha-
nism of lubricating action looks like this: with friction in a couple with
metal. a high-temperature film is transferred to the metal that is partly
oriented by basis plane (0001) in parallel with the slip plane. The bonding
forces between this film and the metal considerably exceed the bonding forces
of layers of H083. During motion. friction is produced by displacement within
the Hos; layer rather than by displacement relative to the metal.

Molybdenum disulfide as a solid lubricant for plain bearings is used in the
form of a ground of solid lubricant coating. or an isotropic composite whose
wearability and durability depend appreciably on composition and manufacturing
techniques.

Host promising for a helium atmosphere are Hos; coatings of diffusion type
formed on molybdenum components as a result of chemical heat treatment in

an atmosphere containing sulfur. They have considerable thickness (60-100 uh).
durability and temperature stability in vacuum and inert atmospheres (up to
800’0) with prolonged operation.

Laboratory appraisals have been done in a shaft-sleeve arrangement on solid
lubricant coatings and isotropic materials based on H05; in different combi-
nations with friction in a medium of highly pure helium at 300'C at different
speeds and loads. which have been the basis for selection of promising couples:
H-801-H-802-1 and H—801-H-802-2.

H—801 material is a combination of a heat-resistant molybdenum base with solid
lubricant molybdemn disulfide coating up to 60 um thick that is formed as
a result of chemical heat treatment of the component in a sulfur medium.

Materials H-OOl-l and H-BOl-Z are similar to H-801. but the H08; layer is
produced by chemical heat treatment of molybdenum in a Zns medium at different
temperatures.

Service life tests of the bearing unit of an injection-ejection mechanism
were done at VNIIAM [expansion not given] on the Rabotosposobnost' stand in
helium at normal pressure and temperature of 300'C.

The major equipment of the stand consists of a working section. loading devices.
an electric drive. an electromagnetic clutch. electric heater. evacuating

and charging system. monitoring and measurement instrumentation. The working
section is a hermetically sealed chamber of cylindrical shape made of grade
KhlSNlOT stainless steel in which a shaft is installed on roller bearings

along with the bearing unit to be tested. Torque is applied by a hermetically
sealed electromagnetic clutch.

A radial-thrust sliding bearing of the injection-ejection mechanism was made
for the purpose of the tests. "-801 material was used for the inner sleeve
of the bearing. and the outer sleeve was made of H-802-l material. The axial
load on the bearings was #0 kgf. radial load was [0 kgf. and speed of rotation
was 200 rpm.

58

FOR OFFICIAL IFS}: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Every so often. the working section was opened. the sleeves of the bearing
were weighed. and the intensity of wear was determined.

x.-3

%a---------
”lull-III.-
“III-III.

The results of plain bearing tests
(Pig. 6) showed that run-in of bearings
takes place in about the first 300-
(.00 hours. after which wear stabilizes

  
 
      

0:5 ‘ at about 0.1 mg/km. The bearing oper-
as n!------ sted more than 5000 hours without seiz-
kll-IIII ing. The working surface has a metallic

“III=‘E==gg

0 m m we m1. M
In addition to the plain bearing. tests

Fig. la. Mass intensity of wear of
, *_ were done on this same stand on roller
sliding bearings. outside sleeve sta 1 rd Its and with

bearings:
. A-- -
°2:31;".pmizgfﬁeﬁmeetmﬁfaggfé separators made of self-lubricating
i 0

materials. After 400 hours of opera-
tion. the roller bearing with brass separator showed appreciable separator
wear (-100 um) and adhesion transfer of brass to the ball bearings and to
the raceways. The ball diameter increased by 15-20 um.

shine without scoring.

A similar pattern was observed after 100 hours of operation of a bearing with
5-820 material; there was a considerable increase in separator wear (~150 um).
the diameter of the balls increased by ~10 as. 5-820 material is a porous steel
matrix impregnated with copper-lead alloy.

The bearing with separator of "801-1 material ran in after ~300 hours; transfer
of H08; to the balls was insignificant. but the coating of the separator nater-
ial was completely worn off.

Based on the studies that were done and analysis of Soviet and non-Soviet
experience with operation of bearing units in non-oxidative gas atmospheres
at high temperature. as well as laboratory and stand tests. it is recur-ended
that H-801 and "-802 materials be used for bearing units in mechanisms of

the circulation system of a power-producing chemical facility.

REFERENCES

l. Kragel'skiy. I. V.. "Treniye i iznos" [Friction and Hear]. Koscow.
"Ha shinost royeniye" . I968 .

2. Katsura. A. A.. Senenov. A. 9.. "liekhanism snizheniya treniya grafita
v vakuume. Tezisy dokladov Vsesoyuznoy nauchnoy konferentsii. 'l'eoriya
goreniya. iznosa i smazki. Chaat' Ill" [Mechanic of Graphite Friction
Reduction in Vacuum. Abstracts of Papers at the All-Union Scientific
Conference on the Theory of Combustion. Hear and Lubrication. Part III].
Tashkent. I975.

3. Gurvich. 0. 8.. "Tribonechanical Mechanism of Graphite Material Friction
Reduction in Vacum”. HASHINOSTROYENIYE. No 3. I974.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R. G. Bogoyavlenskiy et a1.. "Voprosy atonnoy nauki i tekhniki. Seriya:
Atomo-vodorodnsya energetika" [Problems of Nuclear Science and Engineer-
ing: Series on Atomic Hydrogen Power Engineering]. Preprint. I. V. Kurchatov
institute of Nuclear Power [1A3 imeni I. V. Kurchatova]. No 2. 1977. p 104.

Braithuaite. B. P... "Tverdyye snazochnyye usterialy i antifriktsionnyye
pokrytiya" [Solid Lubricants and Antifriction Coatings]. translated tron
English. Moscow. "mi-iya". 1967.

Hatveyevnkiy, R. IL. “Te-peraturnays stoykost' granichnykh snazochnykh
sloyev i tverdylth saszochnykh pokrytiy pri trenii metallov i splavov"
[Temperature Stability of Lubricant Boundary Layers and Solid Lubricant
Coatings in Friction of Hetals and Alloys]. Moscow. "Nauka". 1971.

Sentyurikhins. L. N.. Oparina. Ye. M” "Tverdyye diaul'fidnolibdenovyye
saazki" [Solid Holybdemn Disulfide Lubricants]. Moscow. "Khiaiya". I966.

Vsnshteyn. V. 3.. 'i‘royanovskaya. G. 1.. "Sukhiye snazki i
samsmazyvayushchiyesya naterialy [Dry Lubricants and Self-Lubricating
Materials]. Moscow. "Hashinostroyeniye". 1968.

Voronkov. B. 0.. "Podshipniki sukhogo treniya" [Dry-Friction Bearings].
Moscow. 'Mashinostroyeniye". 1968.

COPYRIGHT: Institut atonnoy energii in. I. V. Kurchatova. 1977

Atomizdat . 1979

6610

C50:

8|44/lOSZ-A

60

FOR OFFICIAL I‘SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039

FABRICATION AND QUALITY comm. 0! COATED FUEL PARTICLES, FURL M AND
FUEL ASSDGLIBS FOR M's

Moscow AWVODORODNAYA MGBTIIA I WHA in Russian No 2, 1979
(signed to press 8 Jun 79) pp 160-177

[Article by A. s. Chernikov. Yu. V. Koshelev. z. A. Shokina. V. I. Stolyarov
and c. N. Nikanorova]

[‘l‘ext] In the course of studying and analyzing various
methods. a process layout is proposed for fabrication and
operation-by-operation quality control of components of
monolithic prisnatic fuel assemblies and spherical fuel
elements for HTGR's. Process and control operations of
the arrange-sat are considered. beginning with spheroidiza-
tion of the fuel. and the interrelation between these oper-
ations is examined.

Int roduc tion

The design of high-temperature gas-cooled reactors (M's) as prospective
nuclear facilities intended for combined production of high-taperature process
heat and electric power has become possible thanks to advances in development
of uranium—graphite fuel elenents that hold fission products at a temperature
of [ZOO-IAOO’C and burnup of (l.0-l.5)~10"’ Mil-days per metric ton on a level
of R/B- lO"-10'5 (where R and B are the yield rate and formation rate of
fission products). In selecting the design of the fuel element we should

be guided by considerations of minimal fuel teaperature. technological feasi-
bility and minimum cost of fuel element fabrication. Operational requirements
of the energy-producing process m are most completely met by spherical

fuel elements. although in some instances they may face competition from other
types of fuel elements as well (e. g. prismatic for large m's. and block
type for men's with radiant heat exchange).

Typical of a fuel eleaent of any type is inbedding of coated fuel particles
in a graphite aatrix. since graphite has good nuclear and technological prop-
erties. and because of its inherent porosity cannot provide a reliable barrier
to fission fragnents. In this connection. when making HTGR fuel elements

the basis has been the condition that coated fuel particles should perform
the function of containment of fission products.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Extensive non-Soviet experience in developing “TOR fuel elements has shown that:

the most widely used fuel kernel is oxide fuel. and the most widely used coat-
ing is layers of pyrocerbon (PyC) of various densities and silicon carbide;

the buffer layer of the coating immediately adjacent to the nuclear fuel must
be porous and have a low Young modulus to relieve internal pressure on the
rest of the coating;

reactor tests of fuel particles in the free-piled state cause frequent occur-
rence of cracks in the coating. and it is difficult to judge the efficacy

of fuel particles as part of fuel elements because of the difference in the
nature of the stressed state (the graphite matrix has a favorable effect on
the behavior of fuel particles under irradiation [Ref. ll);

at a maximum temperature of fuel up to [250°C. BISO pyrocarbon coatings can
be used as evidenced by the construction of the spherical fuel element for
the THTR-3OO reactor (Heat Germany). Operating temperature can be increased
to [600°C for fuel particles with coating including silicon carbide (TRISO
coating) [Ref. 2. 3|;

irradiated fuel elements of the AVR reactor show practically no straight-
through fracture of the fuel particle coating [Ref. 5]. The yield of fission
products from AVR fuel elements on level R/B- lO'“-lO'5 can be attributed

to damage of fuel particles on the operation of fuel element fabrication.

and to technological uranium "contamination" of the fuel particle coating

and graphite matrix;

one of the possible methods of reducing RIB or increasing fuel particle oper-
ating temperature is to optimize the design and material composition of the

fuel particles. For example. the nuclear fuel could be based on uranium nitride
or carbonitride. It is advisable to dope the fuel material with trace amounts
of a getter that binds metallic fragments (for oxide fuel - 3-51 by mass

of oxides of zirconium. silicon and aluminum [Ref. 5]). In this case, the
coatings of the fuel particles contain in addition to pyrocarbon layers. car-
bide layers of more refractory compounds than Sic, e. g. ZrC [Ref. 6. 7].

Outside the Soviet Union. uranium-graphite fuel elements are being successfully
used in HTGR's. enabling maintenance of the helium temperature at the core
outlet at about 950°C [Ref. 4, 8]. In the near future, engineering and design
features may be realized relating mainly to fuel particles that will enable

a further increase in this temperature by ZOO-250°C without any appreciable
increase of radioactivity in the primary circuit.

Of interest from this standpoint is non-Soviet experience in developing tech-
nology for fabricating uranium-graphite fuel elements for HTGR's.

Questions of fabrication and quality control of fuel particles and fuel elements
and also the management of technological processes as applied to HTGR fuel
elements are covered in considerable detail in informative publications of

the United States. West Germany. the United Kingdom. France, Japan and other
nations [Ref. 9. I0].

62

FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

           

     

KEV!- K ~§§az¥

     

   

3
6-2! 338‘... 8.3!»! . 2,!

3- a8! wig-18%» :3 ~26..- 3.32.333
L: :38 as. I.“ 2.3.633 it: t‘
63:33. . (3.!ta-8vatun 6:53....

”3 - nut-.38.. gators}...

.3533... .uuﬁuyﬂtit i ".82.!!! e

n

t§~§3¢lﬁsﬁ :83! z 853- in}:

   

  

   

€5.32: ra§.AO—
a ”£313.:
£883.: £333: I on... g - oitto‘
‘ *3 45:. .
"g “.3. o8s~.2~ 33 :i‘: 323;»:
$35.5; 1.53.3... 9328:... 3 . .
f-z2.?~ .153 8739931.} . «e 23...-
ESS. 6? u .152?» 6.3:
~512~ou.~t2~3 {cut 6.2.2..
«5:35;..53223 $6.853! ” .3 .1; saw v
"5:35.‘.~!o=~:3.udo~3.!: .5 .3x 33.- o:
335...»; 153.23.. 98:8... 4.5 . a: T: 3
I3: 38‘! s stat-2. .83 £38

23.15.3333
.19-»: 3:...

3:2

 

3 - ... $2.35..

I

3.288
31533.

A:

               

  

           
          

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH-ﬂ'IAL USE ONLY

    

(I: 38.: unit:
“.53. a . §
. 9.9% . QN c a

3:123: “6355-! u 8!! 0.;

86... .883... 5.. 218.8:
.8!!!8§~§§. 83:13.: e

. k... .....|..§.:|I.:..|=..ER:IF5H_W

It » 2.3%: 9.3:-

...S. Q. . 3-3. at 2.. 2 .233
rsuﬁa? g
3.3.3. o

Lac-lat as...
.! Q 2.3:. 233...! 32.323 «:2 2:. 0v
.3ch 3.623638%.«13: 3333-:

 

38:3 :35: an

5.3!; 3.32.332. 2.5.3.324!
4:33-qu ink-patsolu: E
u...» a an; 3-! $91!
{Eris-u: 20: 3Q : .22“ q
"E sack-inane anus-33:“.
€25.33 .8: ans; :3: .
”a“. 39...: 88.30%
£351.? .83 3:33 3.82... n
”2:588: 2-3 3.3!!
£383.32! a: 5:855:
“35%.... 2.3 alt-E3. Baggiu
muslin—.2 a a: {acct-3A:
3.26:: an

 
 

. Cu 41‘
.nC-q3-u.§!!uls
3c: . its! .8253!

m 33...: 8.3.3..

A u 513?...” . a
..!§CK~ 32.255! 3
358.5. :5 3-826:

  

            

       
       

  

              

.32....312 c5

  

u. 8. . 8. . a
8.1.3....»

25!.st its: 52:23»!
A N a NH v ~93.

 
  

   

 

       

 

aqua 23 ‘ 3 " 33-22:..-
‘ mung-Eu: 2.18.2.3:

8.2 3.. 9.2 u is; .35.... .5

    
      

 

. . . . .332 83.. = u
o. n a. . a WNW“: 8 . ~22... our _
«m6. a . E! a .86 3.. 2:... w!

n H .33.. 123883503.
8.». . 3.. _ a... If laD=~ “5:223:

.1331... 2.2.5.328.- 2.12::

33

 
 
  

610

FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                      

3.8332... 2...:

    

    
     

   

         
       

:3 ~ .2 o
. :3 ~Euuu3ao-ct ‘3‘:
. _ .23... 3.
2.553.... .265 tilt... _ =2... 2

85.3.3... 52...... 1.5.... u .38.:- inxs _ E33 .3 _

1.2.! 252.328.! a. u 5:23. _ .3! a! _
”gnu-ouieau‘luuaﬁ 25:13: tin-g3: 9-33? 5...... ..tt
Swat... 252::qu W .. 82“! 333:. «u it... at}. _ g. is.
23:35.. An v 23.5.3: 18.3.5: Q 3.. 3i _ £133
331...: git-u: i!- » 23......

”gala A . n 393.... .638 3.... any
C 0v H 15...... a 58:3: _ .zsnina
«8.5.8 a

HENRI .53.... .525... ........
u . "3!..- ya:
. 823% a 333.8:

  
  

.8335 . 2.3.322.

    

{3332. 2282.33...‘ 2.5.3.2... .. ilgu
_ to... a...

 
  

 

 

 

   
 

 

 

 
  

      

  

‘35.:qu I 88... Iiacsa-Ealiota... 2.2.

325:... .5...qu 885.335.. 1.8.. .3 .5 2.2.8.3823!

3.an 352-: -63.. ”5:5 33:35 .32.. 31-3.! 2522...:

I... 2 .. in its? :33. 2.26 “5.3... .23. :83 9.2.»: 33233:...

I¢-~htn~t :3... ”Jet... mé . \ ”Anamhn-Hﬁ :iﬁlgivnn “Juana.“

zuawutsuuﬂduﬁ . 98 £03.83...“ _ 49.2.2“. . _ v 3:»: 33.! I...“

E... 3...“... afiﬁuﬁﬁ .mp2... :ﬁﬁ S ..........u......u.. .u

‘ tﬁ 0 . . . I

AmOV u. 3.. am. . 3.... 3382. 2.5.2: _ "*3 25...: ”gaugiit 23-3583
"5:2. 3-32.... _ .31 _.I.. 2.382. .2322. . #2.... 3-3... .9337. .~
3332. 23233 _ .26..on 3:13:32 :- _ 3:35.... 2.33:: .35.. 3132. 12.5. :3. tun-“MR7.“
.25 5.533.... $8.155... 8.2.3.6... _ 3:333:55... 82.6 32.3332. 8: 8 i _ o 3-38.“:

 

.3. 3:32.232... :6 .33! 3.8.3:... :2. 5.2.3.2.; 233’ El 8-»ZE-lisa~:! _

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

3:: 1:83:32:
6285;»: 1.332: cl
. 8-8 2.3.3 5 ”can:
.i 35%.: .3381...
.33» ‘35-‘38 5
I“ s 33.2.22
an: El: 253.55
. :53363 32.
. .31: use-:03- E
. aﬁguugeuuﬁl S.
“in:
$802.35.»: 3:33 6
. 3-! .13....
63.5. 232.332.
62.3! an: 23.. gm
{23‘ «33292.33;
.3333: ‘2‘2-3-5.
. 253‘s
3232-94.:- uts-ulu a.
. 38:23... 35.8.:
. 2525.32. _.

ammo-9...: _ —,A,hw_.v-.l =33...

   

  

. 1:5. ‘83:... .

a: 3 sh -.
intonunntt gar-3.3.3:

33

9.37.39... 35:33.3
. 259-382. gaining»;
832.33 nail—#3:.
image‘s.

molsE.‘ a .23" lo. 3
558......28. a.

:3qu C

8 av . REYES:

n1»..l.&

 

  
  

twaﬁit

   
        

  

  
       

23-...
”5:27:22: 4

. 1:33.533
62...»: 23:8. .r.
. hug-E3: ..
Ans {sue-t .

      

ANQV Hyatt-Ho

2:53:3qu

CC

 

         

«a _ .308!!-
u..». u u

A an

ll 8—. a
:53 pl: ~2— 3:33
853:: ~33-3 I:
. us 333:32.

u: .932. 2.3553.

 

     

                

 

1.2.8.. ~ .92. ; _
an my .018. 3:: .
3.2.23 u risotto .

   

.8: «3.3.3123...

at

 

‘19: 8:!» 253.3 x
:83 - «n.3- ouu‘ng 5.32: ...
232:0:

   

       

 

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

3:1. uI-Bqu-lﬁ
it:
. 3.3 a: ail-.21.!» 33‘ 8.
"its: 3‘85! 1:22. 3:28 5
{as in? slug 5
”as... is
§.§. P! as; it.
3:53....qu 89.3.3. uni-25053::
Haggis... 8
”aﬁuoxsiugol .333. R
23:9. :3... S
u 3::
.3573! .36.!» It at: a.
.3233: it; 3
. club-3 sag-=33:- atoeulu :.
. 38:32: .3389. a
. gnu-2. :

a~odv “.asssg

    

        

A_o~v

 

Havana usuaoHHOu no >0: 0:» one.

“genus-new...“
u3>om|=oc uo 31v .6an 3:03.30 ~03 nqowuoﬁo
van 033!»qu ~03 35:25. 033-3.:— uo
oucoaonaoo on» no «ouuuou huuuusc :ouuuuononzp
Icouuuuoao v..- coUIUuupIu «a :20th .u .9:

 
             

mun u~uuu~uk

 

    

  

      

dﬂh”ﬁ‘gatzst~t

232:3: 22:35: a nuns—.510. e
. Ill... 352.132. .3323! a
. .88: w
3.52.382. oat-9E0.» a.
“stray...
.35. 5 3:22. 3E¥3~ a 8.512.- c.
:6:- s... ‘32-! .w
.35»... a

an av 3325.2

  

   

 

67

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Fig. l:

l--Dopants in. Al. Si. rare earths. etc.)
2--Spheroidization of fuel particle:
l) mechanical methods (vibration treatment. rolling. isostatic pressing.
and so on); '
2) physicochemical methods (sol-gel process. use of ion exchange resins.
melting pobders or granules. spraying liquid or suspension-like mass.
and so on);
3--Sampling
6--Chemical analysis
5--Checking granulomstric compoeition
6--Determining bulk mass
7--Quality control and management of technological process
8--Hicrospheres
9--Sphericity treatment. determining degree of sphericity
lO--Unconditioned microspheres
ll--Reprocessing
12--Conditioned microspheres
l3--Hessurement of diameter. sorting by sizes
lé--Deposition of coating layers in fluidized bed facilities:
I-st layer PyC-Czllz: laoo-lsoo‘c. d-0.9-l.2 g/ca’. a-ao-ss um;
2-nd layer rye-cm: l600-l850'c. d- l.5-l.6 g/cu’. a-ls-Jo um;
3-rd layer PyC-Clie: laso-zloo'c. d- 1.3-2.0 g/cm’. A- 15-25 pm;
lo-th layer PyC-Czllz: lloSO'C. d-0.9-l.2 glcm . 6-0-5 um;
S-th layer SiC-CII:SiC13: lsoo°c. d- 3.2 g/cu‘. a- 30-60 um:
6-th layer PyC-Cylly: “60°C. d-0.9-l.2 g/cm'. A-O-lO um;
7-th layer pyc-cu.: l700-2060°c. a- 1.8-2.0 g/ea’, A- 15-35 um;
15--Future developments: layer of ZrC-ZrCled-CHe: 1300°C; d- 5.9-6.6 g/cm’;
layer of A1203
16--Control and management of technological process:
1) temperature; 2)gas flowrate; 3) micropsrticle pulsation frequency
(piezoelectric sensors)
l7--Sampling
l8--Checking:
l) apparent density;
2) porosity;
3) phase composition;
6) presence of impurities
I9--Acid rinsing
20--Drying
2|--Sphericity treatment. determining degree of aphericity
22-—Unconditioned fuel particles
23-—Reprocessing
24--Conditioned fuel particles
25--Measurcment of diameter. sorting by sizes
26--lnitial graphitized carbon materials
27-—Naturs1 graphite PP. Z
Craphitized petroleum coke KRB 0.06. I
Termax carbon black. 2
Binder (H118 phenolformaldehyde resin). 1
Grade of matrix composition

68

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

28--Hixing
30--I'lasticizing. rolling
3|--Drying. t- lOO'C (vacuus drying cabinet)
32--Grinding (h-ernill)
33-Screening
ISM-Fraction >1 II
35—Fraction <1 -
36—Saupling
37--Checking:
l) porosity of nuclear fuel and coating;
2) apparent density of coating layers;
3) crushing strength;
6) thickness of coating layers;
5) phase coepoaition of coating layers;
6) phase composition of nuclear fuel
7) lattice paraneter of coating layers;
8) coefficient of anisotropy of Pyc;
9) structure of coating layers;
10) Young modulus of Pyc and 816;
ll) gas-tightness of coating;
12) uraniun contamination of surface
38--Binder (30-501)
39—Applicstion of graphite natrix coating layer:

A- 150-200 un; volmetric

fuelaatrix ratio- l:0.9; rotating dun. centrifuge and other facilities
1.0--Control and management of technological process

lol--Puel particles with graphite layer
62--Polyeerization of binder. t- lOO-lOO'C
loll—Batching

lob-~Homgenizstion

loS--Charging into sold. eixing

bé—Prelininary selihydroetatic pressing (SI!) of spherical fuel ale-ent core

in elastic matrix:

t - 20-25‘0;

p- I) kgf/ce’

voluletric charge of fuel particles -- 12-161;
core diameter 50 III

(ob-Control and management of technological process
1.8--Final senihydrostatic pressing (SE) of spherical fuel element in elastic

matrix:

t - 20-25°C;

p- 3 metric tons per sq. cn;

fuel element diaeeter 60 In
69--Binder

50--Senihydrostatic pressing in elastic matrix (SH):

t - 20-25°c;
p- [-3 metric tons per sq. cu;
finished diameter 50-60 In;
density 1.8 g/cn3
Sl--Graphite blanks
52—-Grinding in hamernill
53--Screening

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sb--Fraction (0.3 II
55"} on fraction
56--Fraction 0.3- 3 —
57--Pressing in steel mold and formation of channels:
70'C;

p- l00 kgf/cm’
58-Cylindrical block: diameter 238 mm; height 380 In; 18 channels for fuel

elements 020 1-; 56 coolant channels 012.2 -
S9—Prismatic block: wrench size 3% II; height 800 n
60--Putting together the fuel assembly (inserting fuel elements into channels

of the block) or pouring in homogeneized mixture
6l--Forming tubular or rod fuel elements for prismatic fuel assemblies
62--llot pressing:

volumetric charge of fuel particles 26-65%;

binder content ~302;

t- loo-ISO'C;

p- 72.5-145 kgf/cmz;

length of fuel elements 75 an;

diameter 12. 7 am;

quantity of damaged fuel particles 2-5 10"

density of matrix (after heat treatment) 1.10-1.45 g/¢:m3
h3--Axial injection of matrix composition:

volunetric charge of fuel particles 622;

binder content 10-701;

t - ISO-190°C;

p- 72.5 kgf/cm’

time 0.3-2 minutes;

length of fuel elements 50.8 um;

diameter 12.7 In;

matrix density (after heat treatment) 0.73 g/cm’
610—-Radinl injection of matrix composition:

volumetric charge of fuel particles 62%;

binder content 53-65 utd;

t - ISO-190°C; '

p- 72.5 kgt/cm’;

length of fuel elements [52 In;

diameter 12. 7 mm;

matrix density (after heat treatment) 0.73 g/cn’
65--Extrusion of mixture:

volumetric charge of fuel particles 35-602;

t - 20-25'C;

v - 3 m/min;

length of fuel elements 750 m;

diameter [2. 7 m;

matrix density (after heat treatment) 1. 75 g/cm’
66--Control and management of technological process
67—Checking:

l) composition;

2) diameter;

3) length;

lo) integrity of matrix;

5) matrix density;

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

6) fuel charge;

7) fuel contamination of surface;

8) presence of impurities with large neutron absorption cross section
68--$ampling
69-Checking:

1) matrix integrity;

2) resistivity;

3) uniformity of fuel particle distribution
70-Tubular and rod fuel elements
7l--ﬂeat treatment:

t - 800’c.

atmosphere-nitrogen
72--neat treatment:

t- l9SO°C.

vacuum
73--Hechanical surface treatment
74--Checking:

1) fuel charge in channel and block;

2) height of fuel column
75--Pressing in steel mold:

c- 180'6; p- 400 kg/cmz
76—-Prismatic fuel assembly
77--Sampling
78-Checking:

1) density

2) resistivity;

3) chemical analysis
79--Cylindrical block
80--Mechanica1 treatment of side surfaces (wrench size 207 and 380 mm)
81--Heat treatment:

t - 850'C..

atmosphere--argon
82-Heat treatment:'

t- l950°c,

vacuum
83-Checking:

1) diameter;

2) mass;

3) sphericity;

4) apparent and true density;

5) fuel content;

6) surface state;

7) fuel contamination of surface
86--Sampling
85--Conditioned fuel elements
86-Unconditioned fuel elements
87--Checking:

l) porosity;

2) specific surface;

3) degree of anisotropy of graphite;

6) lattice parameters;

5) breaking force;

71

FOR‘OFFK]AL.USE(H‘LY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090007-0

FOR‘OITWC1Al.lEﬂE(HNLV

6) falling strength;

7) abrasive wear;

8) Young modulus;

9) resistivity;

10) thermal conductivity;

ll) coefficient of linear expansion;

12) corrosion rate at lOOO'C (1! ago in Ar);

13) ash content;

16) retention of fission products;

15) thermal-neutron capture cross section;

16) chemical analysis
88-.Harking
89-Reproceesing
90--Outgassing
9l--Csnning
92--PINISHED FUEL ELEMENTS
93--Checking:

1) height;

2) wrench size;

3) number and diameter of coolant channels;

6) surface state;

5) mass;

6) fuel contamination of surface;

7) apparent and true density
96--Unconditioned fuel assemblies
95-Reprocessing
96-Conditioned fuel assemblies
97--Harking
98--0utgassing
99--Canning
100--FINISHKD FUEL ASSEHELIES
lOl--Sanpling
lOZ--Checking:

l) porosity;

2) specific surface;

3) degree of anisotropy of graphite;

a) lattice parameters;

5) compression. tensile and bending strength;

6) Young modulus;

7) resistivity;

8) thermal conductivity;

9) coefficient of linear expansion;

[0) corrosion rate at 1000°C (11 820 in Ar);

ll) ash content;

12) retention of fission products;

13) thermal-neutron capture cross section;

[4) dimensional stability under irradiation;

IS) chemical analysis

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500090007-0
FOR OFI-‘lf'lal. USE ONLY

Fig. I shows a possible version of a flowchart for fabrication and operation-
by-opcration quality control of fuel microspheres. coating layers. graphite
matrix. and also spherical fuel elements and fuel assemblies. This flowchart
is derived from a study and analysis of published information.

The optional nature of some of the process operations considered and methods

of control is due to the particulars of national policy. The absence of infor-
mation of an economic nature on these sections of the chart makes it difficult
to evaluate the optimum version. Despite limitations of this kind. the given
diagram is logically complete. as it reflects the state of the art in non-
Soviet development. Let us consider the individual technological operations

of this arrangement.

with consideration of requirements to be met. the fuel for HTCR's must be

spherical fuel particles dispersed in a graphite matrix. Such fuel particles
consist of the nuclear fuel and several layers of protective coatings (Fig. 2).

1 2 J 2

    

Fig. 2. Fuel particles with coatings of type 3180 (a) and

sandwich-type TRISO (b) [Ref. 19]: l--porous pyrocarbon

layer; 2--high-density pyrocarbon layer; 3--silicon carbide
layer

There are many methods of fabricating spherical fuel particles from uranium
dioxide. carbide or nitride. thorium. plutonium. and also solid solutions
based on them. All methods can be arbitrarily divided into tvo groups: 1)
mechanical (vibration treatment. rolling. isostatic pressing. etc. [Ref.
I2-lal); 2) physicnchemical (sol-gel process. use of ion exchange resins.
melting povdcrsor granules. spraying liquid or suspension-like mass. etc.
chi. IS-l9l). Comparisnn of the possibilities of these methods shows that
physicochemical methods are most promising. in particular the sol-gel and
sorption processes for oxide and carbide fuel.

but us consider the capabilities of physicochemical methods of making fuel
microspheres in somewhat more detail.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ikmonding on the conditions of the sol-gel process. microspheres can be pro-
duced with diameters from 0.2 to 2 n with high uniformity of dimensions from
a variety of fuel materials with controllable density (80-991 of the theo-
retical value) [Ref. 15]. By using ion exchange resins with granules of known
sphericity (d.,x/d.1n) and size. it is also possible to produce a variety

of fuel microspheres of monofractional composition with satisfactory sphericity
and volumetric distribution of fuel [Ref. l6. l7].

Semi-industrial and laboratory facilities for producing microspheres of nuclear
fuel by physicochemical methods are currently in operation in the United States.
the United Kingdom. Heat Germany. Italy. the Netherlands and Switzerland.

These facilities have a capacity of 2-10 kg of uranium (thorium) per hour

[Ref. 15].

The next technological operation is deposition of protective coatings on the
microspheres. in view of the fact that the quality of the deposited layers
depends on the degree of sphericity of the nuclear fuel grain, subsequent
technological operations must be done on particles that have passed quality
control for sphericity (dmax/dmin‘ l.05).

Conventional methods of separating the spherical fuel grains from aspherical
ones are based on the way that the coefficient of friction depends on particle
shape. and assume the use of a rotating disk or inclined plane in reciprocating
motion lRef. 20-22]. Quantitative evaluation of the degree of spherlcity

is usually done by an automatic image analyzer of the Quantimet-720 type [Ref.
23. 24]. It is important to separate conglomerates of several particles from
the general mass. This operation is done by stereoscopic microscope [Ref. 23].

An optical analyzer lRef. II] is used for rapid and accurate measurements

of the diameter of grains (at a rate of up to [500 min"). The instrument
works on the principle of light blockage. i. e. as the particle intersects

a light beam. the current of a photocell decreases in proportion to the cross
sectional area of the particle. Measurement accuracy is ensured by a batcher
that synchronizes the feed of unit particles into the measurement space.

After mass quality control for sphericity and determination of diameter. sam-
pling takes place for quality control of the >llowing parameters: apparent
density. porosity. phase composition. presence of impurities.

The apparent density of fuel grains can be de ermined by dividing the mass
of a batch of particles by their volume. The method of mercury pycnometry
lRef. 29] is conventionally used for measuring volume.

The total porosity of the fuel grains is calculated on the basis of the values
of the apparent and theoretical density; open porosity is determined by im-
pregnating with liquids that wet the nuclear fuel in vacuum [Ref. 25].

Size distribution of pores can be found by methods of mercury porometry and
metallography lRef. 25]. in the latter technique. the number and volume of

tin pores are determined simultaneously. Monitoring is done automatically
by an image analyzer of the Quantimet-TZO type [Ref. 23. 24].

74

FOR OFFICIAL I SE 0‘th'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Phase composition and contamination with impurities are determined by physica-
chemical methods (Ref. ll. 23].

In measuring the enumerated parameters. considerable attention is given to
proper taking of the control sample. To do this. special multistage samples
have been designed that guarantee separation of 102 or less of the initial
batch on each checking stage. For example. a three-stage conical sampler
[Ref. [8} separates out down to 0.11 of a batch of microparticles. A con-
siderable advantage of this sampler is that it has no rotating parts.

After measurement of parameters. protective coatings are applied to the certi-
fied fuel grains. The main purpose of protective pyrocarbon layers is to
contain gaseouh and partly solid fission products. and also to ensure compati-
bility of the nuclear fuel material with the graphite matrix. Layers of cost-
ings of silicon carbide. zirconium carbide. niobium carbide and carbides of
other elements are used for reliable containment of highly radioactive solid
fission products.

According to computational data [Ref. 26]. fuel particles with oxide nuclear
fuel may have 5-7 layers of coatings (see Fig. 1). Usually the number of
coating layers does not exceed four. As a rule. the missing layers are the
transition layer (second from the nuclear fuel) of pyrocarbon with density
of I. 5 g/cm . and the two buffer layers of low-density pyrocarbon to either
side of the carbide coating with density of 0. 9-1. 2 g/cm .

The layers of pyrocarbon and carbide coatings are deposited in "fluidized

beds" by the reaction of hydrocarbon pyrolysis or by pyrolysis of halide com-
pounds of silicon. zirconium and so on (Ref. 27-30]. The source of carbon

is a hydrocarbon that when heated splits into radicals with release of free
carbon. Amorphous carbon black or crystalline pyrocarbon of various modifi-
cations may be produced. depending on the conditions of pyrolysis. 0f greatest
interest is the modification of isotropic pyrocarbon that has maximum stability
of properties under irradiation. Isotropic pyrocarbon with the necessary
characteristics is formed under strictly defined conditions of pyrolysis of
such hydrocarbons as methane and propylene (Pig. 3. 3data of Ref. 31). High-
density isotropic pyrocarbon (density of 1.8-2 glcm’ ) is produced in the process
of pyrolyaing methane at a temperature above l7SO'C. and with volumetric con-
centration of methane in the gas mixture of 5-601. This is so-called high-
tcmperature isotropic HTI pyrocarbon. In addition. Pyrocarbon with analogous
characteristics is precipitated in the process of pyrolyzing propylene at

a temperature of 1250-1280°C and volumetric concentration of propylene of
lO-lSZ--low-temperature isotropic LTI pyrocarbon. Intermediate layers of
pyrocarbon with density of 1.6-1.6 g/cm are formed when methane is pyrolyzed
with a lower temperature (1550-l700°c) than the high-density layers in the

same range of concentrations. Use of propylene precludes formation of single-
phase isotropic hydrocarbon with density of 1.4-1. 6 g/cm3 . since the deposited
material contains inclusions of soot. Loose buffer deposits of pyrocarbon
with density of 0. 9-1. 2 g/cn' are produced by pyrolyzing acetylene with temper-
ature of lbOO-lSOO'C IRef. 39].

Thus. in contrast to deposits of pyrocarbon with moderate and low density.
high-density isotropic pyrocarbon can be deposited from either methane or

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
   
 
  

anisotropy

Density of
Degree of

Volumetric CH.
content, 2

Degree of
anisotropy

Density of
PyC . g/cn

Volumetric content
of C3II5. 2

Fig. 3. Density. degree of anisotropy and structure (1--

laninar; II--isotropic; III-aciculer; IV--isotropic with

inclusions of soot; V--porous isotropic with soot inclu-

sions; Vl--grainy) of pyrocsrhon as functions of temperature

and concentration of methane (a) and propylene (b) in the
gas nixture [Ref. 26]

propylene. The advantage of the latter is the lower pyrolysis temperature,
which reduces interaction of Pyc with the fuel and "contamination“ of the
surface.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pyrolytic silicon carbide is precipitated from a mixture of methyl chlorosilane
(HTS) with a carrier gas [Ref. 281. The carrier gas is usually hydrogen.
which reduces the silicon halide and pyrolyua the CH; radical to free carbon.

Theoretical density

 

20

MN 15” 16W 1M "39m 1500 16m 1700

Deposition temperature. '0 Deposition temperature. 'C
a b

Fig. lo. Effect of volumetric concentration of methyl chloro-

silane in hydrogen and pyrolysis temperature on coefficient

of utilization of HTS (a) and density (b) of silicon carbide
[Ref. 23]

The inf luence that hydrogen additives have on silicon carbide density can

be judged from the data of Pig. lo. Optima conditions of the process of depo-
sition of the silicon carbide layer are: temperature lSOO-ISSO'C. voluaetric
concentration of methyl chlorosilane in hydrogen 6!.

Conditions of depositing zirconitn carbide on microfuel are described in Ref.

6. 29. 30. To produce it. a hydrocarbon is added to an initial mixture con-
sisting of a zirconium halide and hydrogen. By varying conditions. layers

of pure zirconium carbide and mixtures with pyrocarbon are produced with a
stepwise change in zirconium concentration. Coating with zirconium carbide

or its mixture with pyrocarbon is usually done at a temperature of llOO-l300'C.
Photographs of a ground section of a fuel particle with such a coating are shown
on Fig. S.

It shOuld be noted that during deposition of protective coatings. they acct-u-
late a certain amount of fuel. An acid rinsing operation is done to prevent
surface contamination of fuel particles (Ref. 33].

There is a relation between the outer shape of fuel particles and the proper-
ties of the coating lRef. 310]. Since fuel particles may acquire a polygonal
shape during the deposition of protective coatings. repeated mass quality
control for sphericity is required. as well as checking the diameter of the
fuel particles and sorting by sizes. using auxiliary methods of nicroradiog-
raphy and roentgenography [Ref. 35]. x-ray equipment can produce a radiograph
of a fuel particle with magnification of 100:: and automatic measurement of the

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONIN

 

Fig. 5. Photographs of a ground section of ZrC-Pyc composite
(Ref. 28]: l--dense Pyc; 2--C-ZrC composite: 3--2rC; 6--ZrC-C
composite

diameter and thickness of individual layers of the coating. Measurement re-
sults are printed out after computer processing.

After mass quality control for the given parameters. the fuel particles are
sampled to determine certain characteristics that reveal the extremum and
average values that limit operability of fuel elements. The range of control
methods that are used is rather broad since the layers of protective coatings
as well as the nuclear fuel particles differ in properties. Besides. when
coatings are deposited there may be changes in the fuel that are detrimental
to the properties of the fuel particle. host extensively used in sampling
control are optical, metallographic, radiographic and other physicochemical
methods of analysis. For example. to study the size distribution of pores

in a pyrocarbon layer. the following methods are used: metallography. mercury
porometry. and scattering of x-rays at small angles [Ref. 25. 36].

The apparent density of pyrocarhon and silicon carbide are usually determined
by a gradient column [Ref. 35]. This is a cylindrical graduate about 70 cm
high filled with a mixture of isobutyl alcohol and bromoform so that the den-
sity of the mixture increases linearly with height from 0.8 to 2.8 g/cm3 for
pyrocarbon. and from 0.88 to 3.3 g/cm‘ for silicon carbide. Part of the pyro-
carbon or carbide coating (without fuel) is placed in the gradient column

and balanced at a certain depth. The density of the coating material corre-
spunds to the density of the flotation material at this depth.

The mechanical characteristics of fuel particles (crushing strength, diametric
compression strength and also Young modulus) are determined by special methods

1‘8

FUR (Il-Fli'Ml. I fall OVIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

described in Ref. 25. 35. For example. crushing strength is determined from
smashing fuel particles between two flat surfaces. The breaking load is fixed
by dynamometers of various designs. The principal disadvantage of these tests
is the difficulty of establishing a relation between the breaking load and

the breaking stress in the coating [Ref. 35].

The breaking strength and Young modulus of individual layers of a coating

are calculated from the results of tests on diametric compression of a ring
or half-ring (Ref. 25].

An important characteristic of pyrocarbon is the degree of anisotropy of crys-
tal orientation. which can be measured by an x-ray (so-called Bacon anisotropy
factor -- BAP) or optical (optical anisotropy factor -- OP'MF or 0A1?) method
lRef. 37. 38]. Host widely used is an optical method in which a comparison

is made of the intensity of polarized light beams reflected from two mutually
perpendicular planes of pyrocarbon crystals.

To determine the structure of pyrocarbon, ground sections are etched with
ionized oxygen ("plasma" oxidation) or a solution of oxidant ("wet" oxidation)
chf. 25. 36]. The following are used in etching silicon carbide ground sec-
tions: thermal etching in argon atmosphere at a temperature of [550°C for

30 minutes; electric etching with a solution of potassium bichromate in phos-
phoric acid at current density of 10-5 A/cm2 for 1.5 minutes; chemical etching
with a mixture of equal volumes of saturated solutions of caustic soda and
potassium ferrocyanide.

Due to strict limitations on the yield of fission products from fuel particles,
the need arises for inspection and rejection of particles with a defective
coating. A simple method of determining the gas-tightness of the coating

is treating the fuel particles for 8 hours [Ref. 39] at a temperature of 95°C
with Thorex reagent that consists of a mixture of nitric and hydrofluoric
acids. Methods have also been developed for high-temperature oxidation of

the nuclear fuel grain with respect to defects in coatings [sic] [Ref. 40].

For microfuel elements with type 3150 coating, a method has been developed

to determine gas-tightness of pyrocarbon by high-temperature chlorine treatment
“let. 4”.

As already noted above. in the process of depositing protective coatings the
layers may be contaminated with uranium, which may lead to inadmissible release
of fission products into the coolant. Therefore it is necessary to monitor
volumetric and surface contamination oi microspheres with fuel before doing
the operations of fuel element fabrication. There are several methods of
checking the degree of contamination of fuel particles. the most promising
being measurement of the alpha-radioactivity of uranium. and also the use

of mica foils [Ref. (.2. 103].

it sh0uld be noted that agreement is good between the realized and required
values of parameters of fuel particles in fabrication and quality control.
The table sumrizes actual data for an industrial batch of fuel particles.
As we can see. the standard deviation of all investigated parameters from
the average value does not exceed 51.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comparison of requirements for fuel particle
parameters with attainable data (Ref. 44]

 

   
     
  

Attainable value

 

Parameter Standard deviation

    
 
 
 
  

”ens" within

batch

between
batches

   

Nuclear fuel 00,:

density. 2 of theoretical 2
diameter. un 60
0/0 0.005
dmax/dmin 0'020
Layers of pyrocarbon coating
(in direction from nuclear fuel
to surface):
porOus layer
density. g/cm3 0.05
thickness. um 3
intermediate layer
density. g/cm 0~05
thickness. um S
dense layer
density. glcm3 0'05
thickness. um 5
Total thickness of inside
pyrocarbon layers. um: 13
$16 layer
density. a/cn3 0-02
thickness. um 3-4
outside pyrocarbon layer
density. g/cn’ 0'05
thickness. um 5-0
Total thickness of coating. um 10
Mass content of uranium in 0~6

fuel particles. 2

Fuel particles are certified with consideration of the results of sampling
quality control. after which they can be used for fabricating fuel elements
of the required configuration.

The United States. Rest Germany and other nations have developed industrial
technological methods for making microspheres and precipitating protective
pyrocarbon and carbide coatings on them. The availability of reliable methods
for mass and sampling quality control enables fabrication of conditioned

fuel particles for making graphite fuel elements capable of providing a helium
temperature of abOut 950°C at the outlet of the HTGR core.

80

FOR OFFICIAL I SE ONLY
9.

[0.

ll.

l2.
13.
14.
l5.
l6.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFERENCES

Muller. N.. Ragob. N.. "Zun lnterpretationderbeatrahlungainduzierten
Dinensionlnderunsen hagelforligar NTR-Brennelenente". REAKIORAGUNG. 1976.

"Dragon High-Temperature Reactor Project". 16th Ann. Rep.. 1976-1975.
Kostikov. L. Ye. et al.. "Current State and Outlook for the Development
of Fuel and Phel Elements for Nigh-Teaperature Gas-Cooled Reactors".
AMAYA TEKIINIKA 2A RUBBZHW. No 9. I976.

winners. H.. "Des Verhalten von AVR-Brennelenenten". REAKIORTAGUNG. 1976.
p 619.

Hanesch. H.. "Untersuchung und Herstellung von Ragelforuiger datierten
UOz-Brennatoffteilchen“. EPA Jul-73041". 1971.

Wagner. P.. Nollabaugh. C. H.. Bard. R. J.. ”Zrc. a Key Ingredient for
High-Temperature Nuclear Fuel". lABA-SH-ZOOIIB.

Reynolds. 6. N. et al.. J. NUCL. HATER.. Vol 62. No 1. 1976. p 9.
Pononarev-Stepnoy. N. N. et al. in: "Voprosy atomoy naulti i tekhniki.
Seriya: Ataturvodorodnaya energetika" [Probleaa of Nuclear Science and
Engineering: Series on Atomic Hydrogen Power Engineering]. Preprint.

I. V. Kurchatov Institute of Nuclear Power [1A3 ineni I. V. Kurchatova].
No l, 1976. p 83.

”Vysokotenperaturnyye gazookhlazhdayenyye reaktory za rubezhoa" [Non-
Soviet Nigh-Teaperature Gas-Cooled Reactors]. No l. Hoscov. TsNIIatoainform,
AINF 336. 1977. p 172.

"Vysokoteuperaturnyye gazookhlazhdayenyye reaktory ta rubezhon“. No 2.
"Toplivo i tvely dlya vysokotenperaturnykh reaktorov" [Fuel and Fuel Ble-
ments for High-Temperature Reactors]. Moscow. TsNIIatoainforn. AINP 461.
1977. p 164.

Pechin. N. H. et al.. "Quality Control Tests for High-reaperature Gas-
Cooled Reactor Recycle Fuel". IABA-SR-7/3.

U. K. Patent No 1392602.

Japanese Patent No é9-93l6.

U. 5. Patent No 3752872.

Makhova. V. A. et al.. ATOHNAYA TEKHMIKA 2A RUBEZNOH. No 6. 1977, p 20.
U. 8. Patent No 38657105. .

Haas. P.. "Resin-Based Preparation of HTGR Fuels: Uranium Leading Devel-
opment Studies". TRANS. ANS. Vol 22. 1975. p 317.

81

FOR OMTNCIAI.USEGDNLV
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

North. J. H.. J. BRIT. CERAH. 5°C.. Vol 72. No 7. 1973. p 313.
U. K. Patent No 1362786.

Austrian Patent No 225114.

U. 5. Patent No 3477568.

U. K. Patent No 1297788.

Koizlik. K.. "Reviev on Characterization Methods Applied to “IR Fuel Ele-
ment Components". Jﬁl-1269. 1976.

Christopher. 3.. PRACT. HETALLOCR.. Vol 7. No 5. 1970. p 269.

Delle. H. H. et al.. "Quality Control Procedures for HTGR Fuel Element
Components". lAEA-SR-7/15.

Bairiot. H.. Thomson. J. H.. Insley. G. H.. "Design and Development of
Fuel for the H ". IAEA-Sm-Ill/Za.

Gyarmati. E. et al.. "Pyrocarbon. an Important Material for High-Tempera-
ture Gas-Cooled Reactor". J01-1052-RH. 1974.

Cyarmati. 8.. Nickel. 8.. "Stationare und dynamiache Abscheidung von
Sillzium-Karbid auf beschichteten Teilchen". Jul-900-RH. 1972.

lkawa. K.. Imanoto. K.. J. NUCL. MATER.. Vol 65. No 1. 1972. p 67.
Reyno1da. G. H.. J. NUCL. HATER.. Vol 50. No 2. 1974. p 215.

Nickel. H.. "Development of Coated Fuel Particles". BBRICHTE DER KFA JUL..
No 687. 1970.

Ford. L. H., Hilbert, N. 8.. 'Recent Development of Coatings for GCER
and HTGR Fuel Particles and Their Performance". TRG-Report 23225. 1973.

belle. H. H.. Koizlik. K. et al.. "Quality Control Procedures for HTCR
Fuel Element Components". [ABA-SR-7/13.

Herman. P. et 31.. REV. INTERN. HAUFES TEMPER. REFRACT.. Vol 9. 1972.
p 101.

Lackey. H. J.. NUCL. TECHN.. Vol 31. No 2. 1976, p 191.

Bongartz, K.. Hoven. H. et al.. "Hethoden zur Charakteriaierung von
pyrolytisch abgeschiedenem Kohlenstoff". Jul—1087-RH. 1974.

Holliday. J.. Price. H. S. T.. Siddal. R. 2.. 'Hethods of Inspection and

Testing of “TR Fuels". Proceedings of the International Conference "Nuclear
Fuel Performance". London. 15-19 October. 1973. 13/1-13/10.

FOR OFFICIAL l-SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

38. "ﬁber den elnfluna den Heesverfehren auf den Hert des optischen Anisotropic-
factors 0PTAF von Pytokohlenstoff", Jul-1082. 1974.

39. Lﬁhleich. 8.. Sutterlin. L. et 81.. ANALYT. CHEH.. Vol 255. 1971. p 97.

40. U. K. Patent No 1025109.

bl. Lackey. H. J. et 31.. TRANS. ANS. Vol 22. 1975. p 19‘.

62. Hayashl. 1.. Ivanoto. K.. J. NUCL. SCI. TBCHN.. Vol 13. No 3. 1976. p 132.

43. lwanoto. K.. 1km. K.. NUCL. SCI. TECH?!” Vol 12. No 7. 1975. p 1050.

66. Eyrts. L.. Caube. H.. "Vybor. raschet 1 razrabotka topliva dlya vysoko-
temperaturnogo reaktora" [Select10n. Calculation and Development of Fuel

for High-Temperature Reactorl. Fourth Geneva Conference. Report No P/288.
l97l.

COPYRIGHT: Instltut atonnoy energti in. 1. V. Kurchatova. 1977
Atonizdat. 1979

66l0
C50: 8|46/1052-A

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 621.039.516:62l.039.566

TRANSPOSING FUEL ASSEMBLIES T0 EQUALIZE ENERGY DISTRIBUTION AND IMPROVE FUEL
CYCLE IN RBHK REACTORS

Hoscow ATOHNAXA ENERGIYA in Russian Vol 52. No 4. Apr 82 (manuscript received
24 Apr 81) pp 231-235

[Article by Yu. I. Hityayev and V. K. Vikulov]

[Text] To reduce capital outlays on construction of nuclear electric plants.
provisions are made for balancing the power of fuel channels in power reactors.
In this way the required power is produced with fewer fuel channels. and there
is less variance in burnup of the discharged uranium. The average power of

a fuel channel is increased by balancing. which also reduces the fuel component
of adjusted expenditures.

The fuel channel power is equalized by profiling multiplication and diffusion
properties over the reactor core area. As demonstrated in Ref. 1. two-zone
profiling is optimum. In this case the average neutron multiplication factors
of the central kg and peripheral k8 regions of the reactor must be no less
than the necessary values k2) k2° and kg) ha? ensuring the required equaliza-
tion of fuel channel power and predetermined effective neutron multiplication
factor Ref) 1 (without considering the action of the reactor control rods).

In large channel reactors. (REP- l) is 2-5 times greater than (kgc- 1) (Ref. 2].
This leads to considerable underburning of uranium in the discharged peripheral
fuel assemblies (PFA). which must be extracted from the reactor at a burnup
that is lower than that of the extracted central fuel assemblies (CPA). To
increase the burnup of uranium in the PFA's. the peripheral region of the
reactor can be charged with uranium of higher enrichment. This is economically
advantageous since it reduces the fuel component of the cost of electric energy
by several percent; however. it entails production of fuel assemblies with
differing uranium enrichment. and the burnup of the discharged uranium is

still less than could be realized by using these fuel assemblies in the center.

Let us try to define the conditions under which the burnup of discharged uranium
could be increased by transposing PFA's with completion of burnup in the central
region of the reactor core. He will consider a two-zone channel reactor in
which fuel channel power is equalized by profiling multiplication properties.

i. e. kgP>*kgC. Let us assume that the law of change in km as a function

of uranium burnup P. i. e. k.(P). is linear and the same for CFA's and PFA's

[Ref. 3].

84

FOR OFFK’IAL lCSl-Z ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the simplest mode of continuous recharging, the central and peripheral
regions of the reactor are supplied independently with the same kinds of fuel
assemblies (Pig. 1. I). the uranium burnup in the discharged CPA's and PPA’s
being Po and P respectively. where P°>’P. This node does not provide for
transpositions and additional burnup of the fuel assemblies. and is the gener-
ally accepted mode of operaticn for channel reactors.

Another reloading mode can be imagined in which all fresh fuel assemblies

are loaded into the peripheral region of the reactor. operated there up to

tle same uranium burnup as in the first mode. and then transposed and addition-
ally burned in the center (see Fig. i. II). If operation of the reactor in

charge charge discharge charge discharge charge

3 ' _ gag-p 1 _ ‘ esp, ,

a

periphery periphery

     

ﬂ, P . .

V I .

discharge discharge transposition transposition zydischarge
I E

Fig. 1. Some modes of reactor recharging: I--independent recharging of center

and periphery; Il--all fresh fuel assemblies loaded into the periphery and

all additionally burned in the center; Ill--all fresh fuel assemblies loaded
into the periphery. and some additionally burned in the center

such a mode is possible. then uranium burnup in the CPA will vary from P to
some level P'>’P at which the transposed fuel assemblies will be extracted.
For continuous transpositions and linear dependence k.(P), the condition of
criticality for the same profiling of nultiplication properties will be the
same average burnup of uranium in this region as in the first node with inde-
pendent recharging of center and periphery. i. e.

,l' I: . In.
2 ' "'

l
whence

I". I’. — I'. (I)

Since P' > P.
I' «; l’ol'l. (2)

Conditions (1) and (2) are illustrated by Fig. 2.

85

FOR‘OFFH1AI.USE|)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Continuing our comparison of modes I and

II (see Fig. I). let us assume for the sake
of simplicity that the specific power of

the uranium in the CPA's and PPA's (q, HH/kg)
is the same and does not change with burnup
(P. rﬂ-days/kg). Let the number of CFA's

be n. and the number of PPA's be An. Then
for node I the expenditure of CFA's and PFA's
per day is

 

v,- my/l'.; u Anqll’:

The average burnup of uranium discharged
from the reactor is

 

HA

 

p, _"-'_'-. P" .,._'__4_
Fig. 2. Burnup of discharged '- " "'4’5 g :4 ’11)
uranium when the center is \ P
charged with fresh fuel assea- In node 11 (if it is possible). the additional
blies (a) and with fuel assen- burnup of uranium acquired by the fuel assem—

blies with burnup P (b) blies after transposition from the peripheral

to the central region will be APc -P. - 2?
(s Fig. 2b). Since the central region in this mode is continuously supplied
only with fuel assemblies that have been depleted on the periphery. their
expenditure in the central region must be equal to the expenditure on the
periphery. i. e.

I’I’n I:

l’.. (a)

whence
I’ ‘ ‘—‘,— I'... (4)

Using expressions (l) and (A). we find that the average burnup of uranium
discharged from the reactor in node I! is

-, I- (I , .
lull-‘I—I‘TI Ir (.I)
Comparing expressions (3) and (5). we readily see_that mode 11 is feasible

and is more advantageous than mode I (i. e. PIID’PI) when condition (2) is met.

Thus mode II. in which all fresh fuel assemblies are loaded into the periphery.
used there until reactivity is exhausted. and then all fuel assemblies are
additionally burned in the center. is advantageous only if the uranium burnup
in the PFA's is less than half the uranium burnup in the extracted CFA's in
node 1. in reactors of large dimensions. where neutron leakage is small.

such a condition is not realizable in practice since it leads to a dip in
neutron distribution in the center of the reactor core. and mode 11 is infea-
sible.

However. condition (2) can easily be met if PFA's are broken down into two
groups. and rather than transposing all PFA's to the center, we transfer only

86

FOR OFFICIAI. I‘SF. ONLY
FOR OFF" 1“. USE ONLY

the PPA's of the first group with relatively low burnup of uraniua P;<P¢/2.
while the remaining PPA's are used on the periphery up to some uranium burnup
P1 (see Fig. I. 111). Let us consider mode 111 also in comparison with mode
1 and let us assume that the specific power of the uraniu q in the CPA's
and Pl-‘A's is the sale and does not change during burnup.

For node 111. using exactly the same fuel assemblies. the burnup of uraniu
discharged from the central region in accordance with expression (1) will be

Pc'Po-Pi- (6)

where P; is the burnup of uraniu in "A's of the first group after utiliza—
tion on the periphery.

The additional burnup of uraniua that these fuel assemblies acquire after
being transposed and used in the center will be (Po-21"). since in this
case the central region is being continuously made up only with "Ms of the
first group. the expenditure of fuel assemblies in the central region vc must
be exactly equal to the consumption of PPA's of the first group. i. e.

”c== ”:3
n
”e“ _r.—2r. (7)
1
u.= 7? Arum:

where 0‘ is the fraction of PPA's of the first group among all PPA's.

For a given P1. the value of a; is determined from condition (7), and the
burnup of discharged uranium in PFA's of the first group is determined from
the condition of criticality of the peripheral region that simultaneously
ensures the required profiling of multiplication properties:

"I "a
‘k.,(l')all' ; 1‘1- \ I-.(I')d!’ rkE'J’. (8)

."
I'I . P.- .

where u, is the fraction of PFA's of the second group. where u1+o2- I. For
linear dependence k.(P), criticslity condition (8) has the quite simple form

'1,I’, 1 «J: l'. (9)
Consumption of PFA's of the second group is
I
”a fruit/’1’.

The average burnup of uraniun discharged from the reactor in node III will be

1;.” £h1£._l’-'_"3. . U")
l c; 1:

Using conditions (7). (9) and (10). Flu can he represented as

-, . .ww. 29,) _I'}_
In. “Misti, ill“,- 2’,.) '2’...

 

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFIHAI. USE ONLY

I‘. I'
1 a
important that in this case the burnup of uranium in discharged Cl-‘A's and
Pl-‘A's of the second group be the same. i. e. Pz-Pc-Po-h. in this case

 

A study of this expression shows that Fill has a maximn at PI .I. It is

" u I‘.:I|I'
"In I'rn‘ " .1! ‘ .

 

where ﬁﬁ> Fl .

Thus the operating mode of s reactor in which all fresh i’uel assemblies are
charged only into the periphery. used there. and then sale of the PFA's with
optimum uraniua burnup are transposed to the center where they are additionally
burned. while the rest of the PFA's are used on the periphery until the reac-
tivity of this region is exhausted. is more advantageous than independent
reloading of the central and peripheral regions of the reactor.

TABLE 1

Relative increase in uranitn burnup
with transposition and operation of some PFA's

jinn:
in the center (—;'i--—l)- Inn. 96
'l

A

,_.,.~|______ ______..__
I I

.u "mi u,n n,7 I u.- I MS l "J i 0.1!

"It: “.5 "gal ".27 I ",2: u,:n 0.25
".3 1.13’» 1.2.“- I.‘.'i l,:l Li? I.“
",7 :l,;'l l.‘.'l :l,ln :I,II ::,u| ;:,m'.
u't. n._|'..' “31’. l._.'1'i u.,-in 6.25 5.9:!

 

As can be seen from Table l. for the given assumptions and the values of A

and P/Po encountered in practice. the proposed recharging method enables an
increase in burnup oi the discharged uranium by several percent with a corre-
sponding reduction in the fuel component of cost of electric energy. To check
out the approximate results. a stricter two-dimensional model of the reactor
was used. enabling accounting for power and energy release of each channel.
For this purpose. the heterogeneous QUH-J-HEP program was used [Ref. 6] as
well as the VRH and VOR constant programs used in designing the RBHK [Ref. 5].

Let us note that the given calculations have qualitatively confirmed results
of approximate calculations. althOugh they showed less increase in uraniuu
burnup. For example at A-0.36 and FIFO-0.78. burnup increase was ~0.7Z.
as against L31 according to the data of Table l. Refinement is mainly by
considering equalization of the neutron field with transpositions of fuel
assemblies. leading to some increase in neutron leakage. and also by con-
aideration of non] inearity in the behavior of multiplication properties of
the medium with uranium burnup.

Calculations showed one more advantage of the given method of reloading. which
shows up in additional equalization of energy distribution due to transposition

88

FOR OFFICIAL l SF. 0Nl.\
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of partly burned fuel assenblies rather than fresh ones into the center. i. e.
into the region with maxi-u. neutron flux. If reloading is done on the working
reactor. equalization say be intensified by ”SXe in the transposed fuel
assenblies. This advantage becases especially important when an economically
advantageous increase in uraniu burnup by simply raising its initial enrich-
ment is impossible due to an inadnissible increase in the coefficient of non-
uniformity of energy distribution because of heat-transfer conditions. Such

a situation is typical of reactors in which the ninimu necessary reserve

is provided up to the limiting power of the fuel channels. and in particular
for the [DR-1500 and the W.

The nodel indicated above was used for calculating steady-state conditions

of recharging the block-section ”PIP-2600 reactor with nuclear superheating
of steam "Ref. 6. 7]. in which the plan provides for the given method of load
changing. Consideration was taken not only of the configuration and makeup
of the core (Pig. 3). but also of the fact that the power of the superheated
channels must be approximately half that of the evaporative channels. and

the region of elevated neutron flux density of the evaporative zones is made
up of the central regions of these zones. whereas in the superheated zone

the superheated channels in rows bordering on the zone of the evaporative
channels lake up the regions of high neutron flux density. The evaporative

 

;. .__£C zone--. -+- .50 logs—L

Fig. 3. Structure of the left half of the ”KP-21.00 reactor

core. The broken line shows the boundaries of sections (the

core consists of eight identical evaporative channel (BC)

sections and four superheated channel (SC) sections. Each

section contains 270 channels: 260 fuel channels and I!) for
control rods)

fuel assemblies are reloaded and transposed during operation of the reactor.
all fresh fuel assemblies being installed only in three peripheral eveporative
channel zones. from which some are transposed to the center. The superheated
fuel assemblies are reloaded and transposed with the reactor shut down. abOut
52 of the channels being renewed at one tine. In the superheated zone. fuel
assenblies are transposed from the three peripheral rows only to the three
ruws of superheated channels bordering on the evaporative channel zones (Fig.
3). No transposition of fuel assenblies is provided in the other regions

of the superheated zone.

To sisplify spatial calculations. a fixed periodic structure of the reactor
core was assued. Certain average values of uranium burnup were assigned
to the fuel assemblies transposed and reloaded from each region. In each

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“ll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

region the distribution of the remaining fuel elements with respect to ura-
nium burnup from the fresh or transposed assembly to the unit about to be
discharged or transposed was taken as discrete and uniform. Compensation of
operative reserve reactivity was also fixed by control rods. All this enabled
us to do variant calculations with minimum changes in load charting records
without considering the history of each fuel assembly. Criticality and the
required energy distribution in the reactor were ensured by varying the sought

average values of uranium burnup in the fuel assemblies at discharge or trans-
position.

TABLE 2

Some characteristics of the RBHKP-ZkOO fuel cycle
for different methods of reloading fuel assemblies

 

 

        
  
    

Without transposing
fuel assembl ies

With transposition
of fuel assemblies

    

Characteristic

Enrichment of uranium to be
loaded. 2

Average burnup of discharged
uranium. MU-dayslkg

Specific consumption of en- 10.8
riched uranium. metric tons/Gl-yr*
Specific consumption of natural 35

uranium required for getting ura-
nium of appropriate enrichment.
metric tons/CU-yr*

Fuel component cost of electric
energy. relative units

*Pover utilization factor was 0.8.

 

 

Calculations done at the same values of limiting power of the evaporative and
superheated channels showed that the proposed transpositions of fuel assemblies
into the region of elevated neutron flux density can appreciably increase

the enrichment and burnup of urnnium and improve the characteristics of the
reactor fuel cycle (Table 2). in particular. there is a reduction in the
requirements for enriched and natural uranium (by 20 and a: respectively),
and n 91 reduction in the fuel component of the cost of electric energy.

It is also important that there is only a slight increase (by approximately
251) in the total number of transport-technological operations with the fuel
per unit of time thanks to the appreciable increase in uranium input despite
the additional operations involved in transposing fuel assemblies.

In conclusion it should be stated that similar results to all appearances
can be obtained by using more complicated recharging modes with double or

multiple transpositions of fuel assemblies. As the simplest example we might
mention transpositions of the periphery-center-periphery type. where fresh

90

FOR OFFICIAL l'SF ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fuel assemblies are loaded only into the periphery. and after brief operation
there are transposed to the center for appreciable energy production. then
returned to the periphery to complete the fuel cycle. In this or other more
complicated cases. the periphery must contain both high- and low-reactivity
fuel assemblies in a combination ensuring the necessary profiling of multipli-
cation properties. However. in practice the nodes of operation with multiple
transpositions of fuel assemblies have a considerable disadvantage since they
lead to an appreciable increase in the amber of transport-technological oper-
ations with irradiated fuel. and are also detrimental to conditions of gas-
tightness of channels with repeated insertion of fuel assemblies.

REFERENCES

l. Rudik. A. P.. "Yadernyye reaktory i printsip naksimua Pontryagina" [Nucle-
ar Reactors and Pontryagin's Maximum Principle]. Hoacow. Atomizdat. 1971.

2. Vikulov. V. K.. Hityayev. Yu. 1.. Shuvalov. V. H.. AMAYA ENERGIYA.
Vol w. NO 2. '97]. P [329

3. Grishanin. Ye. l.. Ivanov. B. 6.. Sharapov. V. IL. ibid.. Vol 10. No 6.
I961. p 565.

1.. Gorodkov. s. 8.. Gurevich. H. 1.. Poznyskov. N. l... Preprint. Institute
of Atomic Energy. lAB-279lo. Moscow. 1977.

5. Dollezhal'. N. A.. Yenel'yanov. 1. Ya.. "Kanal'nyy yadernyy reaktor"
[Channel Reactor]. Moscow. Atomizdat. 1980.

6. Aleksandrov. A. P.. Dollezhal'. N. A.. AMAYA ERERGIYA. Vol (.3. No 5.
I977. p 337.

7. Dollezhal', N. A. et al.. in: "Opyt ekspluatatsii ABS 1 puti dal'neyshego

razvitiya atomnoy energetiki" [Nuclear Electric Plant Operational Experi-
ence and Outlook for Future Development of Nuclear Power]. Vol 2. Obninsk.

izd. FBI. 1976. p 233.
COPYRIGHT: Energoirdat. Atomaya energiya. 1982

66l0
cso: 8145/1368

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HON-NUCLEAR ENERGY

UDC 621.599:661.961.621;621.638.9

ENERGY-STORING SUBSTANCES AND THEIR UTILIZATION

Kiev ENERGOAKKUHULIRUYUSHCHIYE VESBCHESTVA I IKH ISPOL'ZOVANIYE in Russian 1980
(signed to press 28 Jul 80) pp 2. 238-239

[Annotation and table of contents fro- book “Energy-Storing Substances and
their "tilization".by n'ya L'vovich Varshavskiy, Isdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks".
1,000 copies, 240 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This monograph examines questions of the employment of certain substances as
secondary energy carriers. A classification of energy-storing substances is
given, along with an analysis of their energy storage capacity and methods for
obtaining them. The possibility of using energy-storing substances to obtain
hydrogen from water is evaluated.

The monograph is intended for scientific and engineering-technical workers
specializing in the area of power engineering. machine building and transpor-
tation. 138 illustrations, 38 tables, 126 bibliographic references.

Table of Contents

Introduction 3
Chapter I
Energy-storing Substances 6
1. 855 which release energy during chemical reactions 6
2. ass whizh release energy without chemical reactions 35
J. Liquid-slag E38 49
4. Silicon as E85 54
Chapter 11
Hydrides as energy-storing substances
1. Hydrogen storage batteries based on metal hydrides 60
2. Silane hydrides 72

Chapter [11
Reactors for obtaining hydrogen from water employing energy-
storing substances
1. Theoretical prerequisites 79
2. Experimental ESS-based reactor 100

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gmptcr IV

Hydride thermosorption compressors and their employment in

power engineering

1. Thernmchemical compression of hydrogen

2. Power-producing installations with thermosorption compressors

3. Operational failures in energy conversion systems and
th-zrmosorption compressor systems

1.. Thermosorption compressors in thermal and nuclear powerplant
circuits

5. Combined gas-turbine cycle

6. Production of secondary energy carriers in thermochemical

cycles
7. Installations with thermosorption compressors for hydrogen
liquefaction
8. Thermosorption compressors for separating hydrogen-isotope
mixtures
Chapter V

Employment of hydrogen in internal-combustion engines

1. Investigations on one-cylinder installation

2. Investigations on "Hoskvich-blZ" engine

3. Baployment of hydrogen as additive to gasoline in spark-com-
bustion engines

4. Investigation of internal combustion engine using hydrogen fuel
in diesel cycle

5. Thermodynamic analysis of engine operation using hydrogen fuel
obtained from water with the help of £88

6. Utilization of silicon as fuel for engines used in transportation

Chapter VI
Conversion of motor vehicles to run on hydrogen-containing fuel
with the use of energy-storing substances
I. Conversion of "Hoskvich-AIZ"
2. Conversion of VAZ-ZIOI to use hydrogen additives stored in
hydrides

Chapter VII
Gas turbine engines and steam turbine installations with hydrogen

added to primary fuel and with energy storing substances
1. hydrogen additives to basic fuel in gas turbine engines
2. Basic characteristics of gas turbine installations during
conversion to hydrogen and water vapor-hydrogen mixtures
3. Thermodynamic calculation of operating parameters of steam
turbine installations using ESS as fuel
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka". 1980

6900
C50: 1861/ 236

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

106
110
113
121

123
125

127
133
162
11.7
1108
156
158
168

169
185

193
195

20!.

209
210

217

225
233
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.313.22241.019.3
RELIABILITY OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY FOR ME GENERATION

Kiev NADEIIPDST' ENERGE‘I'ICHBSKIKH BLDITRMSHIN (SBORNIK NAUGINYIOI TRUIXW)
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Dec 81) pp 2, 1710-180

[Annotation and abstracts from book "Reliability of Electrical Machinery for
Power Generation", by c. c. Schastlivyy (editor-in-chisf), Izdatel'stvo "Naukova

dunks", 800 copies, 180 pages]
[Text ] Anna tation

This book presents theoretical and practical questions involved in increasing
the reliability, load-carrying ability and service life of high-power turbine
generators. Methods of constructing nathenatical models, important in the
design phase, of the generator elanents and assemblies which carry the heaviest
loads are exsnined which can be used to calculate loads under various operating
conditions and during overloads; general principles of constructing systems for
diagnosing and predicting the condition of generators operating in basis and
manipulated nodes, which are important in nanufacture and operation, are also
considered. New ways are analyzed for design facilitation of the problem of
reliability and service life of generators. The book is intended for specialists
in the area of modeling AC Iachinery.

Abs tracts

UDC: 621.313.322-81.006:621.3.029.3

INVESTIGATION OF INFLUB'CE 0F MODES ON RELIABILITY OF STATOR IN RICH-POWER
TURBINE GENERATORS

[Abstract of article by G. G. Schastlivyy, A. H. Tinoshilt and A. I. Bondarenlto]

[Text] This article investigates the influence of manipulative nodes on the
reliability of the end zones of the stator in high-power turbine generators
based on statistical analysis of the susceptibility to damage of two groups

of turbine generators asking up a general set related to bases and manipulated
operating conditions. The hypothesis of the inf‘uence of nanipulated nodes on
the susceptibility to damage of the teeth of the end groups of stators of high-
pover turbine generators is confirmed. 3 tables, 6 bibliographic references.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.313.33.065.57

ANALYSIS (I STATISTICAL “cum CHARACTERISTICS OF SYNCHROPDUS BIAXIAL DRIVEN
TURBINE GENERATOR

[Abstract of article by I. H. Postnikov, N. G. Vas'kovskiy, Yu. N. Vas'kovskiy,
S. N. Sergiyenko and Yu. N. Sitko]

[Text] This study analyzes the static angular characteristics of a 200 NH
biaxially excited synchronous turbine generator with different rotor winding
constructions. The required principles of connecting the rotor windings and
adjusting the excitation currents in than are presented. 6 illustrations,

2 tables.

UDC: 621.313.3.001

PROBLDI OF TEHPERATURP. DIAGNOSIS OF ROTOR IN ELECTRICAL MACHINE

[Abstract of article by G. c. Schastlivyy. A. I. Titko, V. V. Popov arr]
E. I. Gurevich]

[Text] This article presents the approximate functional diagram of temperature
diagnosis of the rotor of an AC electrical machine. The functional connections
between individual units of the system are disclosed. The most important factors
of temperature asymetry are determined. Expressions are given for determining
vibration caused by temperature asynnetry. 2 illustrations. 2 bibliographic
references.

UDC: 621.3.019:62-50.72;681.322.05

STRUCTURAL-FUNCTIONAL OMANIZATION 0P SYSTDi FOR TECHNICAL DIACIDSIS AND TESTIN;
0F STATUS PARAMETERS OF HIGH mm GENERATORS

[Abstract of article by G. 1.. Baranov, T. N. Slepysheva. and Ye. Yu. Komarenko]
[Text] A structural-functional diagram is proposed for a system for technical
diagnosis and testing of state parameters of generators to control its operation
reliability in a power system. The basic problems and principles of construction
are examined. 1 illustration, 7 bibliographic references.

unc: 621.313.3223537312.62.001.26
CALCULATION OF TWERATURE FIELD IN CYLINDRICAL SHELL 0P PINI‘I'E THICKNESS
[Abstract of article by V. N. Oatapenko and S. N. Shnyreva]
[Text] A nedlod is proposed for calculating the teamsrature field in a cylindrical

shell with finite thickness based on polynomial approximation of the t-perature
function in the radial direction. 3 bibliographic references.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.313.322:537.312.62.001.26
NONSTATIONARY TEMPERATURE FIELD IN CIRCULAR CYLINDRICAL SHELL 0P PINITE THICKNESS

[Abstract of article by S. N. Shnyreva]

[Text] A method is proposed for calculating the nonstationary temperature

field in a circular cylindrical shell of finite thickness which makes it possible
to reduce the temperature determination to solving a Cauchy problem for ordinary

differential equations with respect to the coefficients of Legendre polynomials.

3 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.322;621.391

UTILIZATION OF CORRELATION ANALYSIS IN ACOUSTIC DIAGNOSIS OF BEARINGS IN
ELECTRIC POWER MACHINERY

[Abstract of article by M. V. Hyslovich]

[Textl This study describes correlation analysis of the recordings of acoustic
noise occurring during operation of bearings in electrical power machinery.

As a result of the analysis, singularities of the correlation functions are
indicated which can be employed to diagnose bearings. The experimental data
provide the basis for a mathematical model which describes the acoustic noise
made by both defective and conditionally good bearings. 2 illustrations, 1
table, 3 bibliographic references.

UDC: (621.313.322:537.312.62)001.26

GENERALIZED MATHEMATICAL MODEL AND INVESTIGATION OF MAGNETIC FIELD, PARAMETERS
AND ELECTRODYNAHIC FORCES IN FRONTAL SECTIONS OF ELECTRICAL MACHINES

[Abstract of article by N. A. Predolyak]

[Text] A generalized mathematical model is developed for calculating the
magnetic field, parameters and electrodynamic forces in the frontal sections of
electrical machines considering the shielding action of the pressure plate-and
rotor shroud. The influence of the thickness of the windings, straightening and
shielding on these characteristics is investigated. 7 illustrations. 2 tables,
5 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.322-81

EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS 0F HEATING AND LOSSES IN HIGH POWER TURDOGENERATORS
NIT" HELP OF DATA ACQUISITION, RECORDING AND PROCESSING SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by V. N. Bondarenko, A. A. But, N. V. Sirenko and G. H.
Fedorcnko]

96
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

[Text] An automated system for gathering, recording and processing experimental
data is described which is designed for experimental research on thermal pro-
cesses of powerful turbogenerators and which increases the accuracy and infor-
mation yield of research. 2 illutrations.

UDC: 621.313.322:537.312/001.26
PHYSICAL NATURE 0? was EFFECT IN A CONDUCTIK: um
[Abstract of article by A. I. Titko]

[Text] This article examine the electranagnetic edge effect phenomenon which
is encountered in bounded conductive elements of high-current power devices.
The essence of the manifestation of the edge effect in the basic situations

in which it occurs is explained, and the concepts needed to analyze the
phenomenon are given. The qualitative nature of the eddy current direction
field in the regions of occurrence of the edge effect is demonstrated. lo
illustrations, to bibliographic references.

1106: 621.321

DIPLOYHENT 0F PIKCEHISE-LINEAR ACOUSTIC SIGNAL CONVERTER T0 DIAGNOSB ELECTRICAL
MACHINE ASSEMBLIES

[Abstract of article by A. I. Krasil'nikov an! H. V. Hyslovich]

[Text] This article examines the utilization of a piecewise-linear converter
to process acoustic noise arising in electrical machine assemblies in order to
disclose diagnostic signs. The noise source is a bearing. which is an sssanbly
which operates under the most difficult mechanical conditions and is the second
most common source (after windings) of electrical machinery malfunctions. The
Operation of the converter is analysed on the basis of s mechanical-acoustic
model of a single-row bearing and its equivalent electrical circuit. lo illus-
trations, 3 bibliographic references.

UDC': 621.313.013

MODELS AND ANALYTICAL DIPRESSIONS 0F MAGNETIC FIELD KKCITATION SOURCE IN
ELHITRICAL NACHINARY

[Abstract of article by N. A. Predolyak]

[Text] This article examines models of electrical machinery windings which are
tangentially straightened and non-straightened; corresponding analytical ex-
pressions are obtained in the form of dual-layer functions of magnetic charges
which are equivalent to the winding currents, as well as the components of the
volumetric and surface current density. 3 illustrations, 3 tables, 8 biblio-
graphic references.

97

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 536.5.081.3:62-25

HULTICIIANNBL ONOHMRONIC SYSTB! FOR MEASURING R010]! THEATURE OF BLEXITRICAL
MCIINBIY

[Abstract of article by V. N. Iondar. G. H. Fedorenko and V. N. Niholayevl

[Text] An optoelectronic system employing a pseudonoise data signal is
examined in order to increase the accuracy of monitoring the operation of

turbogenerators by providing constant nonitoring of the temperature of the basic
rotor parts. For-alas are derived for calculating the sensitivity. error and

speed of the system. Results of experimental investigations are presented.
3 illustrations, 5 bibliographic references.

unc: 681.3.06
[HPLD‘ENTA'MON OF REFERENCE FUNCTION IN DATA BASES

[Abstract of article by S. c. Kil'c‘ishev]

[Text] This article provides a brief description of standard functions imple-
mented by prograns of the SPOD. BANK and OKA automated data bases during re-

quest processing. data base retrieval and response formation. 1 illustration.
3 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.333.001Jo

INVESTIGATION OF MECHANICAL OOARAC‘I'ERISTICS 0F INDUCTION H010RS HIT“ “EL?
0? HAGNETOELASTIC MINCE].

[Abstract of article by Yu. Ye. Sharshunov, I. H. Cheburakhin and L. N.
Hakarov]

[Text] 1111s article substantiates the expedience of using a nagnetoelaatic
torque transducer in dyanometer testing of induction motors.

The construction and technical characteristics of a magnetoelastic transducer

developed for laboratory conditions are given. lo illustrations, 5 bibliographic
references.

”DC: 621.313.0102.045.56
IIICIIIZR IIARHONIC EMF AND EXCITATION HINDIK; OF HULTIPHASB BRUSHLBS EXCITER

[Abstract of article by A. Ye. Mashnev]

[Text] This article gives an estinate of the higher harmonic emf induced in
the excitation winding of a multiphase brushless exciter used to excite high-

power turbogenerators and their influence on the operating reliability of
the exciter. 2 tables, 5 bibliographic references.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.34.001.57-52:681.3.01.001.2lo
GAME-THEIRB‘I'IC “RING OF CGiPLEX SYSTMS
[Abstract of article by G. L. Baranov]

[Text] This article provides definitions of the structural states of compla:
systems and equilibrium conditions based on the extendibility of matched families
of random transitions. An algorithm is proposed for an iterative process of
rcpnlarlzins an arbitrary abstract irregular complex corresponding to the com-
plex system in question. 1 illustration. 7 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.013

CAUIULA‘I‘ION AND INVBTIGATION OF EDDY CURRBN'IS AID IDSSES IN DIORS 0F TIRBINB
AND CRYOTURBINB GENRA'IORS ALLOWING son VARIATION IN AXIAL DIRECTION

[Abstract of article by I. V. Khimyuk]

[Text] A three-disensional mathematical model is developed for calculating

eddy currents and losses in electrical machines allowing for axial variation.

This model is used as the basis for investigating the influence of frequency

and geometry on the spread of eddy currents and losses in the envelopes of the
cryoturbogenerator rotor. The model can be used to investigate eddy currents

in electrical machines with smooth rotors in linear approximation. 5 illustrations,
1 table, 2 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.3.001

WINDING COEFFICIENT AND DONGITUDINAL AXIS 0P CMSEQUZNT-MB RO‘IOR HIT}! mam
GROOVE ARRANGDIBNT

[Abstract of article by Ye. V. Zosulin, c. G. Levchenko and V. A. Yakovelko]

[Text] A method is described for determining the position of the magnetic

axes of an asymmetrical turbogenerator rotor. Expressions are derived for
calculating the winding coefficients. 3 illustrations.

"DC: 621.313.333

UTILIZATION OP THMRY 0P MAGNETIC CIRCUITS HITH (DUPLEX PARAMETEIS IN ANALYZING
INDUCTION MONRS

[Abstract of article by A. N. Cheldyshev]

[Text] Based on the general assumptions of the theory of magnetic circuits and
methods of calculating induction machines with single- and two-group rotors.

this article presents equivalent calculation circuits in which all of the
elements in the aagnetic circuit are represented by reluctances,
including the stator and rotor windings. The values of the parameters of a

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU} OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculation circuits are presented in accordance with the construction of the
machine both for the basic and any spatial magnetomtive force of the stator.
3 illustrations. 1 table, 7 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.322
SELECTION OF SUBSTITUTION CIRCUIT FOR PORN“. SYNGIROWIB OWNS
[Abstract of article by V. V. Tverdyakov and N. A. Kulichikhina]

[Text]. This article examines substitution circuits for powerful synchronous
generators. It is demonstrated that the experimental frequency characteristics
can provide the basis for determining the parameters of a circuit which allows
for differences in the relationship between the circuits of the rotor block.
field winding and stator. l illustration. 1 table. 6 bibliographic references.

UDC: 6243:621.313.333:621.3.012.6

INDUCTION ADJUSTABLE SUBWAY VENTILATOR ELECTRIC DRIVE

[Abstract of article by P. P. Verbovoy, G. A. Zantsov, G. F. Lavrent'yev and
V. V. Posm'ko]

[Text] An adjustable subway ventilator drive has been developed, built and
studied under laboratory and operating conditions which includes a type TSUR
thyristor voltage regulator and type A02-92-8Rd induction motor with two-
lamination rotor construction. The drive permits smooth start-up, braking.
reversing and adjustment of speed. and allows the fan output to be adjusted

within wide limits, increasing the efficiency of the unit and providing significant
savings through reducing power mmmtion. The drive is recmended for subway
fans and other ventilation installations with power of up to several tens of
kilowatts. l illustration, 7 bibliographic references.

UDC: 621.313.33.13.001

CAUSULATION 0F MAGNETIC FIELD OF INDUCTION MACHINE WITH SOLID ROTOR USING
FINITE ELmENT METHOD

[Abstract of article by Ye. V. Strunevich. Yu. A. Shumilov and V. I. Postnikov]

[Text] 0n the basis of the finite-element method, this article presents a
mnerical solution to the problem of joint consideration of eddy currents in

a smooth solid rotor and its saturation. The method is: applied to calculating
the magnetic field in the active section of a model machine. The raults of

the numerical calculation are compared with the results of the analytical theory.
3 illustrations, 5 bibliographic references.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. USE. ONLY

0130: 621.3.019.3:62-SO.72:681.322.05

BSTIHATI’JR OF CAWULATED PARAHETERS Pm mamcum AVAILABLE ACTIVE AND
RECEIVE POWER OF GBNZRA‘IOR CONSIDERING RELIABILITY

[Abstract of article by Ye. Yu. Konrenko]

[Text] A nethod and model are proposed for estimating paranetera to predict
available active and reactive generator power considering reliability. 2 illus-
trations, S bibliographic references.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukws dunka". 1981

6900
090: 1861/222

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIMI(MﬂﬂC1Al.USEGDNLY

NAVIGATION AND GUIDANCE SYSTEMS

NAVIGATION AND CONTROLLING MOVEMENT 0P MECHANICAL SYSTEMS

Kiev NAVIGATSIYA I UPRAVLENIYE DVIZNBNIYEM MBINANICNBSKIIB SISTIM
(SBORNIK NAUCHNYKI TRUDOV) in Russian 1980 (signed to press 31 Dec 80)
pp 2. 162-149 -

[Annotation and abstracts free book "Navigation and Controlling Movement
of Mechanical Systens (Collected Scientific ﬂbrks)". editor-in-chief

V. N. Koshlyskov. corresponding member, UkSSR Academy of Sciences,

600 copies. 141 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The collection contains a series of papers on the theory of gyroscopic
navigation systems and noving vehicle control systems. An examination is

made of problems of optimization. precision and motion stability.

Intended for specialists working in the field of theory and design of
navigation systems and control systems. and for upperclassmen end graduate
students.

Abstracts

UDC: 531.01

STABILITY OF THIN-ROTOR GYROSOOPIC PENDULUMJTYPB COMPASSBS
[Abstract of article by V. N. Koshlykov]

[Text] The Lyapunov function is constructed for equations of small oscilla-
tions of a spatial gyroscopic compass; the compass is shown to be unstable
in the presence of arbitrarily small discipative forces when the vertical
component of its angular velocity exceeds in absolute value the Schuler
frequency. A bibliographic references.

UDC: 629.13.014.69.506.h

UNIVERSAL EQUATIONS FOR INBRTIAL NAVIGATION SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by 0. F. onchuk. V. N. Kalinovich and S. H. Onishchenko]
[Text] Universal equations of ideal operation. and hence error equations, are

derived for inertial navigation systems which describe the behavior of plat-
for and non-platform inertial navigation systens and which can be used to allow

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the specific orientation of the reference trihedral (platform) in each in-
dividusl case, which provides a significance convenience in analytical investi-

gations and in integrating different inertial navigation systeme.
3 bibliographic references.

UDC: 531.01

HATHM ICAL MODEL OF momma 0F SIMLE-RUI‘OR (DRRECTABLE CYROCOHPASS
[Abstract of article by V. P. Vasilenko]

[Text] A matheutical model is constructed for the movement of a aimle-rotor
correctable gyroconpass in linear statement and with a more detailed description
than exists elsewhere in the literature. The equations allow for variability
of the kinetic moment of the gyroscope, cross-connections between the torsion
angles of the torsion bars and the angles of horizontal and vertical mismatching
of the rotor shaft and the tracking ball, as well as the moments applied to

the tracking ball through the torsion bar from the rotor. 6 bibliographic
references.

UDC: 531.36

SUFFICIENT CRITERION FOR “STABILITY OF SYSTEMS HIT“ INVARIANT PHASE SPACE
[Abstract of article by S. P. Sosnitskiy]

[Text] This article investigates the stability of systems with invariant phase
space. A theorem is proved which indicates sufficient conditions for instability
of systems with invariant phase space. The theorem obtained is applied to the
stability of equilibrium of acleronomic systems. 5 bibliographic references.

UDC: 531.01
UTILIZATION OF GYROCWPASS PLATFORHS 'm BUILD INERTIAL NAVIGATIONAL SYSTBIS
[Abstract of article by V. N. ialinovich]
[Text] This study examines the possibility of using gyrocompass platforms to
build inertial systems with the object moving at a variable distance with respect
to the center of the earth. Determination is made of the type of correcting
moments which emure imperturbahility of the gyrocompass platforms and their
required azimuth orientation. Platform oscillations are considered which are

caused by imprecise initial setting. the presence of outside moments and errors
and the newtononeter readings. 10 bibliographic references.

UDC: 513.01
OSCILLATIONS 0P GYROPIA‘I'FOIN CRIME II GEOGRAPHIC MERIDIAN
[Abstract of article by V. P. Vasilenko and A. N. Polishchuk]

[Text] This article investigates oscillations of a gyroplatform which is orient-
ed in a geographic meridian. Expressions are derived for the characteristic

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicators which determine the stability of movement and frequency of intrinsic
oscillations of the platform. 6 bibliographic references

UDC: 629.13.014.69-506Jo
CORRECTABLE INDITIAL SYSTDS. OBSERVABILITY AID PDDAL EQUATION
[Abstract of article by S. F. Boychuk]

[Text] This article states the problem of the damping of the oscillations of
inertial navigation systems when outside data is available as a problem of
observability, estimation and optimal (modal) equation. A general scheme for
optimal utilization of additional information available aboard the device is
constructed on the basis of Kalman's formalism. Nonstationary statement of the
problem is used to prove the assertion of the uniform observability of the error
vector, which consists of errors in computing the latitude and bearing and hori-
zontal stabilization errors of the platform, with outside information available
about velocity and latitude of the moving object. 8 bibliographic references.

UDC. 629.13.016.69-506.6

USE OF QUATERNIONS IN INERTIAL NAVIGATION

[Abstract of article by S. N. Onishchenko]

[Text] This article investigates singularities of the use of various kinematic
parameters (Euclidean vectors, Euler's parameters. finite revolution vector,

direction cosines of Euler-Krylov angles. Rodrigues-Bamilton parameters.
quarternions,cayley-Kleinparameters) hathe equations of self-contained inertial

navigation systems during numerical computer processing. it is concluded that
coding and processing of numerical information in inertial navigation system
operating algorithms using a non-positional system of residue classes is promising.
ll bibliographic references.

UDC: 531.383362—50
INVESTIGATION OF VARIOUS POSSIBILITIES 0F CONTROLLING GYROSOOPIC COMPASS

[Abstract of article by v. V. Novitskiy]

[Textl This article investigates versions of schemes for controlling a twin-
rotor gyroscopic compass which can be implemented in practice. It is demonstrated
that the smallest number of equations for this gyroscopic compass is 1. Two

of [our controlling moments are selected which are best for controlling the
gyrocompass. 6 bibliographic references.

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 62-50
WEAK DISCRETE EQUATION 0F "FAKLY DAMP- SYSTBB

[Abstract of article by V. B. Lorin and K. I. Nausenko]

[Text] This article presents an algorithm for synthesizing a cysts. for controlling
a weakly danped object in which the control is done over equal tine intervals.

The nethod of synthesis is based on a generalized Boss relation and on the neth of
perturbations of the eigenvalues of an orthogonal natrix. 7 bibliographic
references.

UDC: 62.502

OPTIMAL SYNTHEIS PROBLDI roa DISCRETE SYSTEMS IN ABSENCE OF mmmnon REGARDING
CERTAIN COORDINATES OF MOVING OBJECT

[Abstract of article by V. N. Suntsev]

[Text] This article presents a solution to the synthesis problen for discrete
systems when there is no intonation regarding certain of the coordinates of

the object when the control principle is for-ed in the feedback circuit.
7 bibliographic references.

U'DC: 62-502
STABILIZATION 0F PERIODIC SYSTDIS NITH IMMLETE FEEDBACK

[Abstract of article by F. A. Aliyev and V. 8. Latin]

[Text] This article examines a procedure for constructing an observer (systen
for obtaining estinates of phase coordinates of controlled object) for a linear
periodic controlled system (analog and discrete). The proposed algorithn is
compared with known identifiers. l3 bibliographic references.

UDC. 62-502+629.762.2(075)

ANALYTIC CONSTRUCTION OF STABILIZATION SYSTBiS FOR FLIGHT VENICLES AND ESTIMATION
OF EFFECTIVENESS OF RESULTS USING EXAMPLE OF HELICOPTER STABILIZATION CHANNEL

[Abstract of article by L. N. Bloldlin and S. l. Osadchiy]

[Text] This study uses the example of selecting the optical structure for the

autopilot of a helicopter control channel in the hovering state to demonstrate
tlu- effectiveness. of analytical construction algorithms based on ideas of optimal

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

filtering in problems of synthesizing flight vehicle stabilization ayatens.
Relatively simple synthesis algorithm are presented which are convenient for
solving problems in many practically encountered cases. 5 illustrations.

1 table. 5 bibliographic references.

COPYRIGHT: lnstitut mtuatiki AN USSR, 1980

6900
(:80: [861/218

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm. SYSTDi FOR ELASTIC MOVIES OBJECTS

Leningrad 5181'” UPRAVLENIYA UPRUGIMI PODVIZHNYHI OB'TEKTAHY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 10 Apr 81) pp 3-5, 193—200

ll-‘oremrd, bibliography and table of contents from book “Control Systen for
Elastic Moving Objec ts", by Aleksandr Nazar‘yevich Sinyakov, Izdatel'svo
Leningradskngo miversiteta, 1928 copies, 200 pages]

[Text] Foreword

The design of systems for controlling elastic moving objects involves significant
difficulties resulting from the elastic properties of the controlled object.

Cases are known [57] in which failure to account for this phenomenon during the
design process has led to substantial degradation in the control process during
flight. and even to malfunction of the flight vehicle. Methods of designing
systems for controlling elastic moving objects, prinarily flight vehicles, are

the subject of the work of V. A. Bodner [6], S. H. Belotserkovskiy,

Yu. A. Kochetkov, A. A. Krasovskiy and V. V. Novitskiy [61], A. G. Dutkovskiy [7],
S. V. Yeael'yanov [52], G. H. Kashin and G. I. Pedorenko [14], K. S. Kolesnikov
and V. N. Sukhov [19], A. A. Krasovskiy [20,21], N. T. Kukaov [22, 23]. S. V.
Luchko [2]. B. N. Petrov [50, Ye. P. Popov [36, 37]. 1‘. ii. Sirasetdinov [59],

Yu. 1. Topcheyev [31, 61], S. H. Fedorov [2, 29] and A. S. Shatalov [(0, 57].
While a significant portion of the questions in linear statement can be considered
resolved already, fairly complex problems arise when allowances are made for non-
linearities. both incidental and those specially introduced (nonlinear correcting
devices). The influence of the signals from high frequency elastic oscillations
on the angular stabilization contour with limitation of the speed of the actuating
device was first examined by Ye. P. Popov [361.

The work of Ye. P. Popov [37]. Ye. I. Khly'palo [55], S. N. Sharov [59], S. H.
Fedorov [29], A. V. Bakakin, V. I. Utkin, K. K. Zhil'tsov and B. V. Yefimv [50].

among others.is devoted to a development and investigation of nonlinear correcting
devices in oscillating systems.

The primary mathematical apparatus employed in this work is Ye. P. Popov's har-
monic linearization.

R. A. Nelepin's studies [30) are devoted to methods of synthesizing nonlinear
control systems based on precise analytical methods. The cross-section space

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

method which he developed is extremely promising for analyzing and synthesizing
system for controlling elastic moving objects. Extremely important findings
regarding the euployment of self-adjusting systems for controlling moving objects
have been obtained by a group of authors under the supervision of 8. N. Petrov
and S. V. Yemel'yanov [50].

The present monograph is devoted to the development of methods which can be used
to increase the efficiency of systems for controlling elastic objects.

The first chapter examines mathematical models of elastic moving objects. This
question is of major methodological importance in selecting the mathematical
apparatus and the methods of designing control systems.

The second chapter contains a very short exposition of problems of optimal
synthesis, as well as the operating singularities of systems for controllim
elastic objects with concomitant nonlinearities.

The. basic findings are presented in the following chapters.

The third chapter contains research on increasing the efficiency of systems for
controlling elastic moving objects by introducing autommous feedback.

The fourth chapter examines methods of neutralizing noise from elastic oscillations
of the objects in the control systems. Special attention is devoted to adaptive
processing methods based on the employment of nonlinear sections.

The fifth chapter is devoted to synthesizing null-finite control of elastic
moving objects.

The sixth chapter presents the results of research on employing nonlinear correcting
devices in systems for damping elastic oscillations.

The seVunth chapter also contains original material, but is auxiliary in nature.
It is devoted to using the logaritinic transitional process method to investigate
and optimize dynamic systems, including system for controlling elastic moving
objects.

Because of its limited size, the book does not include matters associated with
analyzing familiar schemes for constructing systems for controlling elastic
objects or with the singularities of employing digital computers for control pur-
poses. These matturs are explained thoroughly in the literature [1-6, 110, 20-22,
31.. 1.1. u. 56, 61. etc.].

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.
11.
12.
13.

110.

15.

16.
17.
18.

I9.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bibliography

Alekseyev, K. 3., Bebenin, G. 6., Upravleniye kosmicheskimi letatel'nymi
apparatami [Controlling space vehicles]. Moscow, 1974, 343 p.

Arena, V. D., Fedorov, S. M., lOtitrik, M. 8., Luchko, S. V., Dinamika
sistem upravleniys raket s bortovymi tsifrovyni vychislitel'nymi mashinami
[Dynamics of control systems for missiles with on-board digital computers].
Moscow , 1972, 231 p.

Barkovskiy, V. V., Zakhorov, V. M., Shatalov, A. S., Metody sinteza

sistem upravleniya [Methods for synthesizing control systaas]. Moscow,
1969, 326 p.

Belotserkovoskiy, S. M., chhethov, Yu. A., Krasovskiy, A. A., Movitskiy, V.
v., Vvedeniye v aeroavtouprugost' [Intrtduction to aeroelasticity]. Moscow,
1980, 384 p. -

Besekerskiy, V. A.. Popov, Ye. P., 'reoriya sistem avtomstichakogo
regulirovaniya [Automatic control system theory]. Moscow 1975, 767 p.
Bodner. V. A., 'l'eoriya avtomat icheskogo upravleniya poletom [Automatic
flight control theory], Moscow, 1964, 698 p.

Borodin, V. 1'. Ryl'skiy, G. I. Upravleniye poletom sanoletov i vertoletov
[Aircraft and helicopter flight control]. Moscow, 1972, 240 p.

Butkovskiy, A. 6., Metody upravleniya sisters-i s raspredelennymi parametrami
[Methods of controlling distributed-parameter systems]. Moscow, 1975, 568 p.
Butkovskiy, A. 6., Strukturnaya teoriya raspredelennykh sistem [Structural
theory of distributed systems]. Moscow, 1977, 320 p.

Vavilov, A. A., Chastotnyye metody rascheta nelineynykh sistem [Frequency
methods of calculating nonlinear systems]. Leningrad, 1970, 386 p.
Vasil'ev, D. V., Chuich, V. 6., Sistaly avtomaticheskogo upravleniya
[Automatic control systems], Moscow, 1967, 392 p.

Voronov, A. A., Ustoychivost', upravlyayemost', nablyudatel'nost' [Stability,
controllability, observsbility]. Moscow 1979, 335 p.

Corp, 0., Metody identifikatsii sistem [System identification methods]
lbscow, 1979, 342 p.

Kashin, G. M., Fedorenko. G.‘ 1., Avtonsticheskoye uprsvleniye prodol'nym
dvizheniyem uprugogo samleta [Automatic control of longitudinal movement
of elastic aircraft]. Moscow, 1971:, 312 p.

Kashin, G. M., Pshenichnov, G. I... Flerov, Yu. A.. Metody avtonatizirovannogo
proyektirovaniya sanoleta [Automated aircraft design methods]. Moscow,
1979, 144 p.

Kvakernaak, 101., Sivan, R., Lineynyye optimsl'nyye sistemy upravleniya
[Linear optimal control systems]. Moscow, 1977, 683 p.

Kozhinskaya, L. 1., Vornovitskiy, A. 3., Upravleniye kachestvom sist-y
[System performance control]. Moscow, 1979, 123 p.

Kozlov, Yu. M., Yusupov, R. M., Bespoiskovyye samonastraivayushchiyesya
sistemy [Non-searching selfaadjusting systans]. Moscow, 1969. 1.55 p.
Kolesnikov, K. 5., Sukhov, V. 1., Uprugiy letatel'nyy apparat kak ob'ekt
.wtomaticheskogo uprsvleniya [Elastic flight vehicle as object of automatic
control]. Moscow 1971:, 267 p.

Krnsovskiy, A. A., Analiticheskoye konstruirovaniye konturov upravleniya
letatel'nymi apparatsmi [Analytical design of flight vehicle control
circuits]. lbscow, 1969, 386 p.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Krnxovskiy. A. A.. Sistany avtomaticheskogo upravleniya poletom i ikh
nnnliticheskoye kotstruirovaniye [Automatic flight control systems and their
analytic design]. Moscow, 1973. 558 p.

Kuzovkov, N. ‘l‘., Sistemy stabilisatsii letatel'nykh apparatov [Plight
vehicle stabilization systems]. Moscow, 1976, 306 p.

Kuzovkov, N. T., Nodal'noye upravleniye i nablyudayushchiye ustroystva

[Nodal control and observing devices]. Moscow, 1976. 187 p.

Kuropatkin, P. V.. Optimal'nyye i sammstrsivayushchiyesya sistemy

[Optimal -and self—adjusting systems]. Leningrad, 1971. 304 p.

Kurzhanskiy, A. 3.. Upravleniye i nablyudeniye v usloviyakh neopredelennosti
[Control and observation under ambiguous conditions]. Moscow, 1977, 236 p.
Lebedev, A. A., Chernobrovkin. 1.. 5.. Dinamika poleta bespilotnykh letatel'nykh
npparatov [Flight dynamics of umanned flight vehicles]. Hoscov. 1973, 612 p.
Lehedev. A. A.. Krasil'nikov, H. 1., Nalyshev, V. V.. Optimal'noye upravleniye
dvizheniyas kosmicheskikh letatel'nykh apparatov [Optimal control of movement
of Space vehicles]. Nosed-I. 1974, 387 p.

Lening. DZh. Kh. and Bettin. R. 0.. Sluchaynyye protsessy v zadachakh
avtomaticheskogo upravleniya [Random processes in automatic control pr abless]
Moscow. 1958. 385 p.

Netody sinteza nelineynykh sistem avtomaticheskogo upravleniya [Methods

of synthesizing nonlinear automatic control systems]. Ye. P. Popov and S. N.
Fedorov. editors. Moscow, 1970, 1.16 p.

Nelepin, R. A.. Tochnyye analiticheskiye metody v teorii nelineynykh
avtomaticheskikh sistem [Precise analytical methods in theory of nonlinear
automatic systems]. Leningrad 1967, 356 p.

Nelineynyye korrcktimyushchiye ustroystva v sistemakh avtomaticheskogo
uprnvleniya [Nonlinear correcting devices in automatic control systems].

Yo. P. Popov and Yu. I. Topcheyev, editors. Moscow, 1971. 1062 p.

I’ervachev. S. V.. Valuyev, A. A. Glilikin, V. 11.. Statisticheskaya dinamika
rndiotekhnicheskikh sledyashchikh sistem [Staticsl dynamics of radio technical
tracking systems]. Moscow, 1973. 1.87. p.

Podval'nykh. A. S.. Sharov. S. N. "Nonlinear damping of oscillations in
automatic systems". AV‘DOHATIKA 1 TBLEHEKNANIKA, 1970, No. 7. p. 83-90.
Ponomarev, V. H., Teoriya upravleniya dvizheniyem kosmicheskikh apparatov
[Space vehicle movement control theory]. Moscow. 1965, 455 p.

Popov, V. 1.. Yunov, I. 0., "Controlling movement of elastic space vehicle
with respect to center of mass". in [Control in space], Vol. 1, Moscow,
1973, p 2&0-249.

Popov, Ye. P., "Nonlinear problems of angular orientation". Ibid, p. 112-119.
Pnpov, Ye. P.. Prikladnaya teoriya protsessov upravleniya v nelineynykh
sistcnakh [Applied theory of control processes in nonlinear systems].

Moscow, 1973. 583 p.

Puzrin, S. 8. Effekt sglazhivaniya funktsiy [Function smoothing effect].
Moscow. 1977, 110 p.

Rnbinovich, B. 1.. Vvedeniye v dinamiku raket- nositeley kosnlcheskikh
uppnratov [introduction to dynamics of spacecraft carrier rockets].

Poscow, 1975, 616 p.

anygraycv, A. P., Osnovy upravleniya poletom kosmchegukh apparatov i
korabley [Fundamentals of space vehicle flight control]. Moscow 1977, 665 p.

110
lol.

1.2.

63.

Mo.

(.5.

06.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.
53.

510.

SS.

57.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rogovoy. V. M., Cheremnykh, S. V. "Dinamicheskaya ustoychivost' kosmicheskikh
apparatov s zhidbstnymi raketnymi dvigatelyami [Dynamic stability of space-
craft with liquid rocket engines], Moscow, 1975, 1109 p.

Rozenvasser, Ye. N., Yusupov, R. M., Chuvstvitel'nost' sistem avtomaticheskogo
regulirovaniya [Sensitivity of autonmtic control systems], Leningrad, 1969,
206 p.

Romanovskiy, V. A. "Shock extinction of intrinsic oscillations in mechanical
system“. In Prikladnaya mekahnika v priborostroyenii [Applied mechanics

in instrument building]. No. 123, Leningrad, 1978, p. 70-75.

Sinyukov, A. M., Volkov, 1.. 1., L'vav, A.I.,. Shiahkevich, A. M., Ballisticheskaya
raketa na tverdom toplive [Solid-fuel ballistic missile]. Moscow, 1972, 511 p.
Sinyakov, A. N. "Nonlinear correction of control circuit of moving object
with narrowband noise". In Terisy dokl. Vsesoyuz. soveshch. po robototekhni-
cheskim sistemam [Report summary from All-Union Conference on robot systems].
Moscow, 1978, 167 p.

Sinyakov, A. N. "Synthesis of elastic flight vehicle stabilization system".

In Tochnoat' i nadezhnost' priborov 1 slate: letatel'nykh apparatov [Precision
and reliability of flight vehicle instrunents and systems]. No. l, Leningrad,
1979, p. 3-6.

Sinyakov, A. N., Dolbezhkin, V. A., Karamaykin, A. 8. “Improving dynamic
characteristics of automatic control system of nonlinear phase correction
device". Ibid, P.6-l2.

Sinyakov, A. N., Filatov, I. V., Khlypalo, Ye. P.,Metody issledovaniya
navigatsionnylth ustroyatv Ietatel'nykh apparatov [Methods of investigating
flight vehicle navigational devices] Leningrad, 1979, 97 p.

Sirazetdinov, ‘1‘. K., Optimieatsiya sistem a raspredelennyni parametrami
[Optimization of distributed-parameter systems]. Moscow, 1977, 497 p.
Sistemy s peremennoy strukturoy i ilth primeneniye v zadachakh avtomatizatsii
poleta [System with variable structure and their application in flight
automation problems]. B. N. Petrova and s. V. Yemel'yanov, editors,

Moscow, 1968, 3210 p.

Solodovnikov, V. V., Matveyev, P. 5., Raschet optimal'nykh sistem avtomaticheskogo
upravleniya pri nalichii pomekh [Calculation of optimal automatic control
systems in presence of noise]. Moscow, 1973, 260 p.

Teoriya sistem s peremennoy strukturoy [Theory of systems with variable
structure]. 5. V. Yenel'yanov, editor, Ibscow, 1970, 590 p.

Tikhonov, A. N., Samarskiy, A. A., Uravneniya matematicheskoy fiziki
[Equations of mathematical physics]. Moscow, 1977, 735 p.

Udilov, V. V. "Stabilization of coordinates of elastic aircraft". In
Primeneniye invariantnykh sistem avtomaticheskogo upravleniya [Applications
of invariant automatic control systems]. Ibscow, 1970, p 227-231.

Khlypalo. Ye. 1., Nelineynyye korrektiruyushchiye ustroystva v
nvtomaticheskikh sistemalth [Nonlinear correcting devices in automatic systems]
Leningrad. 1973, 651 p.

Cllcmous'ko, F. L., Kolmanovskiy, V.- 3., Optimal'noye upravleniye pri
sluchaynykh voemushcheniynkh [Optimal control during random perturbatiom]
Moscow, 1978, 351 p.

Slmtalov, A. 8.. Topcheyev, Yu. 1., Kondrat'yev, V. S., Letatel'nyye

apparaty kak ob"yethupravleniya [Blight vehicles as objects of control]
Moscow, 1972, 239 p.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

58. Filatov. I. V., Sharov. S. N.. Chuvstvitel'nost' chastotnykh kharakteristik
lapnlnitel'nykh mekhanizmov k parametram soputstvuyushikh nelineynostey
[Sensitivity of frequency characteristics of actuating mechanisms to
parameters of concomitant nonlinearities]. Moscow. 1979. 12 p.

59. Sharov, S. N. "Refined method for accounting for dry friction in automatic
systems". IZV. AN SSSR. TEIOiNIGiBKAYA KIBERNEI‘IKA, 1968, lb. 6. p. 160-170.

60. Shichanin. V. N.. Kulik, A. D. "Harmonic linearization of nonlinearities
with two-frequency input signal". IZV. AN SSSR, TEKHNICMESKAYA KIBERNETIKA
1974. No. a. p. 188-198.

61. Topcheyev, Yu. 1., Potemkin, V. G., Ivanenko, V. G.. Sistemy stabilizatsii
[Stabilization systems]. Moscow, 1976, 268 p.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
1. Mathematical models of elastic moving objects 6
1.1. Mathematical models of elastic moving objects as systems with
distributed parameters 6
1.2. Structural representation of mathematical models of systems
with distributed parameters 22
1.3. Mathematical models of elastic moving objects as systems
with lumped parameters 27
1.4. Description of elastic moving objects by equations in state
space 6b
2. Singularities of designing control systems for elastic moving
objects 10 6
2.1. Controllability. observability, measurability of elastic objects
as systems with distributed parameters 46
2.2. Controllability. observability. measurability of elastic objects
as systems with lumped parameters 52
2.3. Optimal synthesis of systems for controlling elastic moving
objects 55
2.4. Modal control methods in designing control systems for
elastic objects 58
2.5. Singularities of construction of observing devices of elastic
moving objects 59
2.6. Influence of noise from elastic oscillations on control system
with concomitant nonlinear characteristics 62
2.7. Principle of divisihility of movements in system for controlling
elastic moving objects 68
3. Increasing efficiency of systems for controlling elastic moving
chjects by introducing autonomous feedback 72
3.1. Synthesis of system for damping elastic oscillations of
flight vehicles 73
3.2. (ﬁmmsing dynamic properties of elastic objects by introducing
autonomous feedback 76
6. Methods for utilizing noise from elastic oscillations in control
systems of elastic objects 81

112
&&~‘~
.a

UN”
.0

D
s
9
s

4.5.

6.6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Neutralization of noise with help of anti-resonance filters
Neutralization of noise using model of object

Integrated instrumentation in systems for active damping of
elastic oscillations

Neutralization of elastic oscillation signals in integrating
angular position sensor and elastic deformation sensor
Adaptive nonlinear correcting device in control system with
nonstationary harmonic noise

Neutralization of nonstationary harmonic noise on basis of
serial processing of current extrema

5. Null-finite control of elastic moving objects

5.].
5.2.
5.3

5.6.

5.5.

Generalized conditions for null-finite control of elastic
objects

Null-finite control of dynamic objects without inherent
duping with elastic properties

Null-finite control of elastic flight vehicle

Null-finite control of elastic moving object described by
partial differential equations

Null-finite control of elastic manipulator

6. Employment of nonlinear direction devices in e1astic.oscillation
damping systems

6.1.

6.2.

6.3.

6.8.

Basic characteristics of switching-type nonlinear correcting
devices

Synthesis of elastic oscillation damping system using switching-

type nonlinear correcting device based on performance diagram
of transitional processes

Synthesis of elastic oscillation damping systems employing
switching-type nonlinear correcting device using curve-fitting
method

Switching-type nonlinear correction devices in control systems
with control signals of arbitrary form

Influence of dry friction on damping of elastic oscillations
Shock extinction of oscillations of elastic dynamic systems
Synthesis of elastic oscillating damping system of dynamic
objects based on "function smoothing effect"

Synthesis of optimal control of elastic oscillation damping
based on maximum principle

7. Some graphoanalytical methods of investigating and optimizing
dynamic systems

I.l.
7.2.

7.3.

Method of logarithnic transient processes

Mathematical approximation of experimental characteristics of
stochastic processes

Employment of logarithmic method of standard coefficients

for investigating and optimizing dynamic systems

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT:

6900

Izdstel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta, 1981

C80: 1861/220

113

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

82
86

87
91
93

106
120

120

125
131

136
137

160

160

151

156
158
161
164
167
170

17b
176

186

189
193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HIGH-ENERGY DEVICES, OPTICS AND PHOTOGRAPHY

UN 535.8: 531.71?.8
(PMCAL DEVICE ma “308136 SURFACE MUG}!!-

Leningrad ORIGIN“: mum 111A IZHIIHIYA SMWAWI WM]: in
Russian 1981 pp 2-3

[Annotation and foreword from book "Optical Devices for Measuring Surface
Roughness". by A. A. Kuchin and K. A. Obradovich, Isdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye".

197 pages]

[Text] Annotat ion

The book considers the special features of sessuring surface roughness parameters
by means of contactless optical devices. as well as the effect of the arrange-
ment cf their parameters. residual aberrations and design on the measurement
accuracy. A system is described for providing unity of surface measurement by
various methods.and the applicability boundaries are shown for each of these
methods.

This book is intended for engineering-teeming workers involved in the develop-
ment and operation of optical devices for monitoring surface roughness. It my be
used by technologists and workers in central measurement and monitoring labora-
tories concerned with various methods of surface achining.

Foreword

Optical devices for measuring roughness parameters. such as sicrointarferometers
and light chopping devices. have been manufactured since 1933. Since the produc-
tion of the first devices their design has constantly improved and new optical
devices have appeared. including grating microscopes. microproiile meters for
which other sessurement methods were employed. These devices found wide usage in
measurement and research laboratories since unlike contact devices (profile

letem) they can be used for contectiess measurements of surface roughness.

in recent publications such as ”Surface roughness and methods for its leaaure-
ment” by A. I. Kartashev. "Interfere-stars" by Yu. V. Kolomiytseva and "Measure-
ments and analysis of roughness. waviness and out-of-round of surfaces" by

I. V. Dunin—Barkovskiy and A. N. Ksrtsshevs. principIes are described of optical
devices action for measuring roughness parameters and their design.

However. these books consider primarily the theory of the two-bea- interference.
while there are no theories of other aethods and principles of existing optical

11b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

devices. Moreover. until now. nethods for normlising netrological characteris-
tics of optical devices to seaeure surface rougiuess psrsneters. nethods for

calculating the neesurenent accmcy of roughness pars-stars under actual condi-
tions. as well as netrologicsl provisions for these devices were not considered.

These questions acquired special isportsnce after one? 2789-73 “Surface roueimeee.
Para-eters. characteristics and deeigntions" was issued.

In this book which is offered to the reader. the theory of light chopping and
grating methods is described in greater detail. The results are given of metro-
logical investigations of all types of optical devices carried out under the
guidance and with the participation of the authors. The results of these inves-
tigstions were used as a basis for the new GM 9847-79 ”Optical devices for
Iessuring roughness psraleters. Types and basic perenters.” which contained

norms for error characteristics for all optical devices of simltaneous profile
conversion.

The book contains five chapters of which one and four and sections 2.5. 3.1; and
3.5 were written by K. A. Obredovich and the renining chapters were written by
A. A. Kuchin.

The authos express their graditude to F. ii. Solodukho for useful advice in writing
chapters two and four.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ”Heshinostroyeniye" 1981

2291
(180: 1861/193

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FLUID BMICS

UDC: 532.516

HYDRMYNAHIC THEORY 0!" LUBRICATION AND ANALYSIS 0? PLAIN BMINS OPERATIR}
UNDm STATIONARY CODITIOIB

Hoscow GIDRODINAMICHESKAYA TIRIYA mu 1 RASCHET WISHIPNIKW SKDL'ZHENIYA,
RABOTAYUSBCHIKH V STATSIONARIDH R8281!!! in Russian 1981 (signed to press 5
Nov 81) pp 2. 311.416

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Hydrodynamic Theory of Lubrication
and Analysis of Plain Bearings Operating under Stationary Conditions" . by.

Aleka-ay Konstantinovich Nikitin. Kamil Sanedovich Akhverdiyev and Boris Ivanovich
Ostroulthov. (editor-in-chief Candidate of Technical Sciences h. V. Korovchinskiy).

ladatel' stvo "Hanks". 1600 copies, 316 pages]
[Text] Annotation

Based on Nevin-Stokes nonlinear equations and Henckyv-Il'yushin equations. the
present monograph presents new methods for analyzing plain bearings using
viscous and viecoplaatic lubricants. radial bearings with infinite and

finite length in the presence of lubrication sources, porous bearings, bearings
with partially filled clearance and bearings in which the shaft noves in helical
fashion. “he results can be used extensively in calculating and designing
various types of bearings, drilling rigs and advamed aetal cutting and grinding

nachines .

The book is intended for scientific and engineering-technical workers. 60 illus-
trations. 2 tables, 101 bibliographic references.

Table of Contents

Introduction ' 3
Chapter 1 Plane nonlinear problens of steady-state novenent of viscous
inconpressible fluid between journal and bearing 11
1. Statement of the problem. Equations of notion and boundary
conditions 11
2. Theorem of existence and uniqueness l3
3. Expansion of solution in terns 'of powers or Reynolds number 19
lo. Bipolar coordinates 20
5. Equations of novement and boundary conditions in bipolar coordinates 21
6. Solution of N. Ye. Zhukovskiy-S. A. Guplygin's linear probla 23
116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. nethod of solving nonlinear problems 25
8. Defining 01 31
9. Defining W2 . 36
10. Interaction between fluid and journal 37
11. Some conclusions 63

Chapter 2 Method of expanding solution in terms of relative eccentricity 65
12. Statement of the problem. Equations of motion and boundary

conditions 1:5
13. Definition of functions *0 and 61 69
14. Definition of function 62 S3
15. Interaction between fluid and journal 50
16. Case of small clearance ' 61
17. Some remarks 66
Chapter 3 Plane nonlinear problem of movement of lubricant in

bearing during unifornly rotating constant load 66

18. Statement of the problem. 66
19. Equations of motion 81d boundary conditions and bipolar coordinates 68
20. Solution of linear problem 70
21. Definition of vn(n31). 72
22. Interaction between lubricant an! journal 72
Olapter lo Hydrodynamic analysis of ball bearing 81
A. Case of stationary balls 82
23. Statement of probles of tall suspension. Equations of motion

and boundary conditions 82
210. Definition of stream function 85
25. Interaction between liquid and inside ball 96
B. Numerical analysis of ball suspension 96
26. Computation of null approximation functions 96
27. Computation of first approximation functions 101
28. Computation of second approximation functions and determination

of lifting force 103
C. Case in which inside ball turns 105
29. Equations of movement and boundary conditions 105
30. Expansion of solution in terms of powers of Reynolds number 106
31. Determination of null approximation functions 107
32. Determination of first approximation functions 111
33. Determination of forces acting upon inside ball 131
34. Convergence of series with respect to positive integral powers of

Reynolds number 133
Chapter 5 Porous bearing of finite length 11.0
35. Statement of the problem. Equations of motion and boundary condi-

tions 161
36. Determination of velocity field and presure field in plane

linear problem of solid bearing 143

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

37. Method for solving problem

38. Determination of null approximation

39. Definition of first approximation

40. Determination of second approximation

41. Interaction of lubricant on bearing and journal

42. Analysis of results of theoretical investigation

43. Results of experimental investigation of uniform porous bearing
of finite length

44. Steady-state movement of lubricant in co-axial nonuniform porous
bearing of finite length

45. Isothermic steady-state flow of gaseous lubricant in co-axial
porous bearing of finite length

46. Non-isothermic flow of gaseous lubricant in annular space with
porous outside wall

Chapter 6 Flow of viscous and viscoplastic lubricant between two
eccentric cylinders, one moving helically

47. Steady-state movement of viscous incompressible liquid in space
between two eccentric cylinders. one moving helically

48. Steady-state movement of viacoplamtic liquid between two
unaligned cylinders allowing for heat exchange

Chapter 7 Radial bearing of finite length with lubrication sources
49. Statement of the problem. Equations of motion

50. Equations for additional pressure p'

51. Definition of p'

52. Interaction between lubricant and journal

53. Case of small opening

54. Case of lubricant feed through several openings

55. Case of lubricant feed through rectangular openings

Chapter 8 Steady-state movement of viscoplastic lubricant and
bearing

56. Plane problem. Equations of motion and boundary conditions

57- Steady-state movement of viscoplastic liquid in thin lubricating
layer between bearing and journal

58. Analysis of bearing of finite length with source of viscoa
plastic lubrication

S9. Hethod for calculating bearing of finite length with source of

compressible viscoplastic lubiicant

Chapter 9 Plane nonlinear problem of bearing with free surface in
lubricant layer

60. Statement of the problem. Equations of motion and boundary
conditions

6]. Expansion of solution in terms of powers of small parameter c

62. Null approthation (linear problem)

63. First approixmation

64. Finding type of free surface
65. Interaction between lubricant and journal
66. Definition of coordinates of ends of free surface
67. Nu-erical calculation of interaction between lubricant and

journal
68. Movement of viacoplaatic lubricant in bearing with tree aurtaca

in lubricant layer
(DPYRICHT: lzdatel'atvo "Nauka", 1981

6900
CSO: 1861/217
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IMREASING HEAT EXCHANGE EFFICIENCY IN POHER EQUIPMENT

Leningrad PMSHENIYE EFFBKTIVIDSTI TEPLOOBHENA V ENEGETICHESKM OBORUDOVANII
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 30 Nov 81) pp 2, 190-195

[Annotation and abstracts from book "Increasing Heat Exchange Efficiency in
Power Equipment", by Candidate of Technical Sciences Ye. D. Fedorovich, editor-
in-chief. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1350 copies, 189 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This collection presents lectures read at the 6th All-Union Conference on

Heat Exchange and Hydraulic Resistance in Power Machinery and Equipment Elements
which was held by the Scientific Council on the Integrated Problem of “Thermal
Physics" of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the Department of Physical-Tech-
nical Problems of Power Engineering of the USSR Academy of Sciences in
Leningrad 16-19 January 1979.

These materials provide a complete characterization of the current level of
research in leading heat engineering organizations in this country on such
problems as heat exchange durim condensation of steam and under high pressure,
the hydrodynamics of two-phase flow at high velocities. heat exchange in the
near-critical (thermodynamic) region of parameters, hydraulic analysis of
equipment in presence of generation and condemation of steam, etc.

The book serves as a useful aid for scientific workers involved in thermal
physics and technical hydrodynamics. graduate students and powerplant and factory
engineers.

Abstracts

UDC: 532 .526.536 .210

MODERN vacuums 0F INTENSIFICATION OF HEAT EXCHANGE DURING HOVD‘IENT 0P THO-
PHASE FLOWS IN CHANNELS

[Abstract of article by E. K. Kalinin and G. A. Dreytser]

[Text] This article examines findings concerning the method of intensifyitg
heat release with single-phase and two-phase flow in heat exchangers. Primary

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ntte ntion is devoted to threaded pipes and their optimization. Other methods

of intensifying heat exchange during boiling are also analyzed .. twisting of the
flow. depositing coatings of heat-insulating or porous materials on the heat
exchange surface and employing non-isothermic fins. Findings from the research
on intensification of heat release during condensation on threaded pipes are
presented. 9 bibliographic references, 8 illustrations.

UDC: 621 . 181 .5-16 3-001.”

iNVESTIGAT ION 0P NONSTATIONARY HYDRAULIC MODES AND STEAK-GENERATING SECTIONS
OF FUN-THROUGH BOILER INSTALLATIONS USING HATNDAATICAL HODEING

[Abstract of article by H. A. Kvetnyy, 0. H. Baldina and I. 1. Velyskov]

[Text] A method is presented for computer analysis of nonstationary hydraulic
modes in steam-generating sections of flow-through boilers with both sub-
critical and supercritical pressure; analytical experience using the proposed
method is also provided. The mathematical model developed can be used to
determine variation in the parameters over time and along the steam-generating
circuit, and also for branched pipes of individual elements in various
nonstationary modes associated with disturbances resultim from changes in the
consumption of the working medium, heat load. pressure, etc. Nodes are
examined which simiate start-up period (heating up from cold and hot states).
The use of the proposed method is explained using examples of investigating
the reliability of water walls in large flow through steam boilers. Some
constructive recomendations are obtained. 9 bibliographic references, lo
illustrations.

UDC: S36.7:530.l7

METHOD FOR PDDELING DYNAMIC “(X33883 IN CIRCULATION IDOFS 0F TWELBCTRIC
INSTALLATIONS IN DESIGN STAGE

[Abstract of article by V. B. Khabenslviy and Yu. A. 111ng]

[Text] A description is given of the general scheme of an analytical experi-
sental method for modeling dynamic modes in circulation loops of thermoelectric
installations in the design stage. The method is based on a combination of
investigations of transient processes in complex systems with the help of a
mathematical model and a group of physical models intended for verifying and
clarifying the mathematical model. In accordance with the methodological approach
proposed, an integral physical model of the installation is used to find effects
which are either not accounted for in mathematical model or are not described
accurately enough. Experimental investigations of the local processes dis-
closed are made on the basis of physical models of individual elements. The
results of the investigations are then used to clarify the mathematical model

of the installation under design. 5 bibliographic references. 1 illustration.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son 'omcuu. use onu

UDC: 532.517
CALCULATIONS 0F VARIABLE HYDRODYNAHIC NRCES IN STABILIZED-PHASE F109

[Abstract of article by B. S. Fokin an! A. F. Aksel'rod]

[Text] An analytical method is developed. on the basis of a nonatationary
hydrodynamic model, for investigating the intensity of pressure pulsations.
longitudinal and transverse pressure differentials, gas content and tangential
friction stress on the walls of the channel during movaaent of an adiabatic
stabilized two—phase flow. Cases of harmonic and chaotic oscillations of

the stream parmeters are examined. The analytical results are compared with
experimental findings. The experimental data on the mean-square intensity

of pulsations in the parameters of a two-phase flow are located mostly between
the calculated lines corresponding to harmonic and chaotic oscillations of
phase consumption. 16 bibliographic references, 6 illustrations.

UDC: 621.039.534.25
OP'I‘INIZATION OF NATURAL CIRCULATION LOOPS FOR MAXIMUM CIRCULATION CHARACTERISTICS

[Abstract of article by V. G. Popov and L. P. Fedorov]

[Text] This article formulates theoretically and solves the problem of
optimization of construction elements in natural circulation loops for the case
in which the volume of the circulation loop is given on the basis of design
considerations. The optimization results are compared with computer calculations
of circulation characteristics and experimental data. Results of optimization
of construction elements of an evaporation channel of the Field-tube type are
presented. 5 bibliographic references, 2 illustrations.

006: 532.551

DETRHINATION 0F INITIAL CROSS-SECTION 0F STEAM GENERATION IN STRFAH 0P
UNDRHBATED FLUID

[Abstract of article by V. H. Borishanskiy, G. S. Bykov and A. S. Siakin]

[Text] This article proposes the method for calculating the separation diameter of

a bubble and the cross-section of intensive stems generation. The separation diameter
is calculated considering the forces acting upon the bubble in a stream of

fluid circulating under pressure. The proposed analytical method generalizes
experimental material well for pressures of 2-16 HPa mass velocities of 130-

1.540“ kg/(mz'sec). channel diameters of (10-21)).0'3 a. water and freon-ll

and -21. 9 bibliographic references. 1 illustration.

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 532.526.536.24

CALCULATION OF ACTUAL STEAM CONTENT BY VOLUME AND CRITICAL LOADS IN EVAPORATION
CHANNELS

[Abstract of article by V. H. Borishanskiy, G. s. Bykov, A. S. Sinkin. V. I.
Kanshirin, and L. S. Svetlova]

[Text] This article exninea heat-exchange crisis during surface boiling of
underheated fluid and shows the relationship between critical heat loads and

the structure of the flow. The influence of the separation dianeter of the bubble
on the critical load value is demonstrated. Recommendations are given for
calculating the separation diameter of the bubble. the initial ateaa generation
cross section and the actual stean content by volune; conditions for the
transition from bubble to disperse-annular flow structure are examined. 6
bibliographic references, 2 illustrations, 1 table.

UDC: (621.311.25:621.039):621.181.61

EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF HEAT RRMSE ON “WEI. 0E ECOIDMIZER SECTION OF
STEAM GENERATOR \

[Abstract of article by B. L. Paskar', I. S. Kudryavtsev. B. H. Kozlov,

V. I. Kucherov, L. N. Artenov and V. A. Halkis]

[Text] This article presents the results of investigating heat exchange using
a model of the econoaizer section of a vertical steam generator for water-
cooled reactors. The experiments were nade using full-scale heat carriers

with paraaeters corresponding to the parameters of the econoniaer section of

.1 250-!“ vertical steal generator. The influence of natural convection on

heat release in the region of Ila/Re2 complex values >2'lO'“ is disclosed. It
is shown that heat release in this region can be calculated using the nethod
developed for the case of flow within a channel. Experimental data on heat
release in the forced convection region agree with the calculated data begin-
ning with values of Ra/Re2<2-10"'. 2 bibliographic references, lo illustrations.

DDC: 532.526.536.26

IMPESTIGATION OF HEAT EXCHANE CRISIS AND HYDRAULIC RESISTANCE IN BUNDLE 0F
"PAT-EXTRACTION RODS HITN INTENSIYYIK: DEVICES

[Abstract of article by Y':. D. Barulin. A. S. Kon'kov. A. I. Leont'yev.
N. V. Tarasova. T. l. Blagovestova. A. I. Ryabov and V. I. Filippov]

[Text] This article examines the effectiveness of intensification of heat
exchange by various intensifying devices as applied to bundles of rods in boiler-
rype reactors. Three designs of distancing devices used as intensifiers are

investigated. The findings of this investigation of heat-exchange crisis and
hydraulic resistance are generalized and conpared with the findings of other

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

authors. An empirical relationship is recommended for determining the maximum
steam content and calculating hydraulic pressure during flow of a water-steam

mixture in a bundle of heat extraction rods with various intensifying devices

in the range of mode parameters investigated. 7 bibliographic references.

A illustrations, 1 table.

UDC: 621.181.61:535.25

TEMPERATURE PULSATIONS 0F NEAT-TRANSFER SURFACE DURING TRANSITION T0 DEBRADID
HEAT EXCNANGE IN FLOW-THROUGH STEAM GENERATING CHANNEL HEATED DY SODIUM

[Abstract of article by Yu. V. Krasnoukhov, I. S. Kudryavtsev. B. L. Paskar',
A. V. Sudakov, Ye. D. Fedorovich and A. V. Shchedrin]

[Text] This study examines the statistical characteristics of temperature
pulsations of heat-transfer walls of a pipe (intensity. probability donnity func-
tion. autocorrelation function. spectral density. effective period) measured with
microthermocouples installed directly on the steam generating surface during

the transition to degraded heat exchange in straight-pipe and coiled channels
heated by sodium. A connection is obtained between the statistical charac-
teristics and the determining mode parameters (pressure. specific thermal

flow. mass velocity). The influence of heat-insulating deposits on the heating
surface on the pulsation characteristics of the layer is demonstrated.

9 bibliographic references, 10 illustrations.

UDC: 533:6:621:165

INVESTIGATION OF TRANSSONIC FLOHS IN NOZZLES AND BLADE CASCADES

[Abstract of article by L. M. Zysina'molozhen, L. A. Fel'dberg. I. G. Shapiro.
and A. L. Dnbkea]

[Text] Nonstationary phenomena are observed during transsonic flow in nozzles
and blade cascades which are associated with the occurrence of pulsating
compressionshocksand condensation and breaking away of the boundary layer.
Their nature is determined by the parameters of the flow and the geometry of
the channel. Investigations of the local values of the heat release coefficients
alnnn the contour of the blade indicated that significant changes in the tem-
perature stresses are possible in pulsating modes. An optical device which was
developed for photoelectric recording of the signal in combination with shadow
grams and interferograms made it possible to estimate the intensity of stream
pulsations in the blade cascades. when there is a pulsating compression shock
on a curvilinear Suction face of a blade there is a significant increase in

the intensity of the pulsation and variation in the forces in that blade zone
which must be allowed for. 2 bibliographic references. 9 illustrations.

124
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000: 532.55

HYDRAULIC RESISTAMIE 0F HELICAL COILS DURING “WEED” 0F SINGLE-ow! AND
TED-PHASE FLWS

[Abstract of article by Yu. V. Krasnoukhov and Ye. D. Fedorovich]

[Text] This study presents data on the hydraulic resistance of helical

coils (Dec-0.11 m. d| -0.16 m. coil pitch t-0.03 in) during movement of single-
phase and two-phase rows. Relationships are found which describe well the
experimental values of the resistance. An equation is recon-ended for deter-
minim the transition from laminar movement with macro-eddies to turbulent
movement. A formula is given which extends the experimental data on hydraulic
resistance when air is circulated, around the outside of helical coils.

‘ilo bibliographic references, I. illustrations. 1 table.
UDC: 621.1.013;5lol.12.012

INFLUENCE 0!" ML RESISTANCE 0N HYDRODYNAHICS 0? PM 01’ BOILING LIQUID
IN PIPES

[Abstract of article by V. V. Pisenko, V. I. Sychikov and G. I. Hulyava]

[Text] It is demonstrated that when an adiabatically boiling stream flows
out of a pipeline. the influence that flow-restricting devices have on the
flow rate results both from dissipative losses and due to the compressibility

of the two-phase mixture which is formed. Experimentally measured static
pressure profiles in a pipe with local resistance are given, and relative
total pressure losses are shown as a function of pressure at the input to the

runoff channel and the diameter of the diaphragm. 3 bibliographic references.
6 illustrations.

UDC: 536.26:621.039.526

TEMPERATURE MDE 0F COIL. HEATING SURFACE OF B" STW SENIORS

[Abstract of article by I. S. Kudryavtsev. ll. Ye. Lebedev, N. V. Hisoncw,
B. l.. Paskar', L. V. Savina. E. V. Pirsova and Yu. V. Krasnoukhov]

[Text] This study examines processes occurring both in the tubes and the
inter-tube space of a steam generating element designed as a coil with a
small pitch radius which is heated by liquid sodim. Temperature pulsations
of the inside wall of the pipe are measured experimentally. and the intensity
of the pulsations and their effective period are determined. Formulas are

obtained for calculating heat release when liquid metal flows about the
outside of the coiled surface. 8 bibliographic references, 6 illustrations.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.311.25:621.039.621.028

INVESTIGATION 0? PARALLEL OPERATION OF VERTICAL STMIGHT-PIPE BEAT “CRANE
DEVICESMITH COWWSATION

[Abstract of article by P. N. Arteuov, V. P. Desyatun, l. L. Kreydin, B. L.
Kreydin. V. A. lokshin. V. F. Hoskvichev and B. I. Sheynin]

[Text] This study provides an amlysis of the conditions of disruption of

the normal hyraulic mode in vertical straight-pipe heat exchange devices using
saturated or slightly overheated steam as the heating medium, and also presents
resu: ts of bench tests of steam condensing heating surfaces connected in parallel
along with results of industrial tests 1f steam reheater-separators. 2
bibliographic references, 5 illustrations.

U'DC: 621.382.026.017.”

(DHPACT “CO-PHASE THMSIPHONS roe AIR-EVAPQATION 0(1)le OF POWERFUL
SOLID STATE DEVICES

[Abstract of article by A. l. lsakeyev. I. C. Kiselev. V. V. Filatov. N. l.
Istmin and 8. ll. Batovl

[Text] This study examines results of investigating heat erchange during
boiling and condensation, as well as the influence of the degree of filling
of two-phase thermosiphons with heat carrier on the thermal stream released.

A machine method is given for thermal analysis of two-phase thermosiphons ut- .d
to cool high-power 5031.! state devices. 3 *ihlioglaldt .cferences. S illustrations.

UDC: 621.165.51:621.177

EXPERIENCE IN CRPATION AND INVESTIGATION OF SUPBHFATER-SHARA‘NRS FOR UNITS
NITH WEE RHCNRS

[Abstract of article by A. B. Anapol'skiy, L. N. Art-av, A. F. Bahanov, N. V.
Zuzulya, V. c. l‘lorozov. V. F. Moskvichev, B. L. Pasltar', Yu. 1.. Sorokin and

Ye. I). Pedorovich]

[Text] 11115 article describes the creation of the SPF-220 superheater-separators
for units using WER-loloO reactors. A brief description is given of the con-
struction of the series-produced equipment in research work aimed at improving
and debugging the equipment. This work includes investigating the thermohydraulic
clmractcr istics of the pipe bundle and separation elements. adjustment of
technological processes involved in welding the longitudinal fins and testing

tlu- devices at nuclear powerplants. Recomendations were given for improving

the construction of the equipment. its manufacturing technology and operation.

3 hihl iographic references. 2 illustrations.

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.187.30;621.18.016.b

HATER-CHEMICAL MODE AND TNMPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF INl'RA-PIPE PONTIONS

[Abstract of article by I. I. Gluincwsltaya, G. P. Sutotskiy, 2. Yu. Shtern and
T. O. Soltolova]

[Text] This study presents the results of investigating th. influence of
various parameters of SKI) :[not explained] boilers on the structural state and
thermic resistance of the layer of intro-pipe formations vher. exposed to
hydrnzine-amnia complexon and neutral-oxidizing water conditions. Naterials
on the period between flushing are given for different types of SKI) boilers.
10 bibliographic references. 4 illustrations, 1 table.

one: 621.175

DETERMINATION OF LOCAL VALUES 0? coarnmmrs OF HEAT- AID MASS-RELEASE FRO)!
COWENSED STEAM DURIm ZONE ANALYSIS OF CONDENSERS

[Abstract of article by A. A. Promyslov]

[Text] This article substantiates formulas derived by generalizing experimental
data for determining the local values of the heat exchange coefficient from
practically pure moving steam and the coefficient of mass release during con-
densation of steam from a moving steam-air mixture. In zone computer calculation
of condensers. the proposed formulas make it possible to reproduce the reduction
in the local coefficient of heat exchange from a moving steam-air mixture under
the influence of various factors which is observed during condenser testing

more completely than using previous formulas. l6 bibliographic references,

2 illustrations.

UDC: 621.311 .25 :621.039.621

RIULTS 0F IWESTIGATION AND EXPRIHENTAL INDUSTRIAL CHECKIM OF EFFECTIVENESS
OI" EMPIDYHENI' 0F SHAPED PIPE IN STW MBINE CONDENSERS

[Abstract of article by Yu. N. Bogolyubov. V. P.. Porcvkov, G. V. Grigor'yev.
N. V. Zomlya and V. A. Permyakov]

[Text] Experimental industrial tests of condensers made of pipes with annular
and spiral knurling produce good results. The increase in heat transfer achieved

is mt accompanied by an increase in pollution or a noticeable degradation in
the technical properties of the pipe. 9 bibliographic references. 2 illustrations.

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 620.191.8z620.l92.lo7

EXPERIHMAL AND THRQE‘IICAL INVESTIGATIONS 01" "HT CONDUCTIVITY 0? 1mm
IRON OXIDE DEPOSITS IN STEAM GHN‘I‘OR PIPES

[Abstract of article by V. P.Glebor. I. R. Hikk. R. A. Kruus, Ith. A. Kyaar,
N. 8. Eskin. V. H. Zusman, A. L. Lubny'gertsyk and V. A. Vares]

[Text] A description is given of a structural mdel of deposits based on
octahedral crystals. Analytical relationships are derived on the basis of the
model for the effective heat conductivity of the deposit layer. Special
investigations are madeuof the heat conductivity of magnetite. the material

of which the deposits consist. The analytical formulas were checked for the
model by solving the problem numerically. Cowarison with the experimentally
determined coefficients of effective heat conductivity of iron oxide deposits
indicated no mathematical divergence. ll bibliographic references, 5
illustrations.

COPYRIGHT: Izdate'.'s-:vo "Nauka", 1981

6900
C80: 1861/216

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: S32:550:662
APPLIED PROBLDIS IN HYDROHBCIIANICS

Kiev PRIKIADNYYB ZADACDII GINOWIKI (SBORNIK NAUCHNYKII TRUNV) in Russian
1981 (signed to press 7 Dec 81) pp 182-188

[Abstracts fro- book "Applied Problens in Hydronechanics". by A. Ya. Oleynik
(editor-in-chief), ltdatel'stvo "Naukovs duka", 700 copies, 188 pages]

[Text] Abstracts
UDc: 629.12:582.$9.0b1

EFFECT THAT BOUNDARY CWDITION IMPROVE”? IN VELOCITY POTENTIAL BOUNDARY VALUE
PROBLEN HAS ON CALCULATED SHIP WAVE DRAG

[Abstract of article by V. 6. Sim]

[Text] The wave resistance of a vessel is calculated by casputer based on

the singularity density expressed by 1 (Mitchell). 2 and 3 terns of the

series expansion of the kineaatic condition on the surface of the vessel with
the smallest possible Froude umber. The calculation is linited to 2 terns

of the series for an arbitrary Proude n-ber. 3 illustrations, 3 bibliographic
references.

UDC: 629.12:S3.2.59.0‘l
HYDRODYNAHIC PQCB ACTING UPON VESSEL mum DRIFTIN; AND YAHIRG IN HAVE

[Abstract of article by Yu. L. Voroh'yev]

[Text] This article describes an asymptotic theory of lateral rocking of a
ship steaaing without headway in deep water and shallow water. Solutions to the
problem are defined separately at a distance free the vessel (external sons) and
near the vessel (internal zone) and are then conpared asmmtically. The pro-
blen is solved in the internal zone enploying an original method which is of
independent imortance. Formulas for the hydrodyn-ic forces are described.

8 bibliographic references.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC. 629.12:532.59.061

APPARBN‘I' MASS 0P FRAME CONTOUR DURING HIGH FREQUENCY VERTICAL OSCILLATIG'S
IN SHALW HATE

[Abstract of article by Yu. L. Vorob'yev]

[Text] This study solves the problea of the apparent uses of fra-e contour
during high frequency vertical oscillations in shallow water. Results of
calculating the apparent use are given for a series of frame contours with

systematically varying paraneters for differing shallow water depth. 5 illus-
trations, 8 bibliographic references.

UDC: 629.12.532.S:629.125.8

ONE TRANSFORMATION OF THE INkaAl. PLANING EQUATION DURIK: SHIP HOVDENT IN
CHANNEL HIT" RECTAMULAR CIDSS SECTION

[Abstract of article by V. K. Labaznikav]

[Text] This article presents the transfornation of the integral planing equation
during novenent of bearing surfaces in the center plane of a channel with unbounded
depth. In existing forms of these integral equations, the half-width of the
channel is part of the argue-ant of the oscillating functions, which are nedaers
of infinite series. leading to difficulties in solving them. An original re-
presentation is obtained for the integral equation which allows it to be solved
efficienty. 2 bibliographic references.

unc: 532.593
HAVE RESISTANCE DURING NON-STEAM STATE :00va 0F SYSTD! OF SURFACE PRESURS
[Abstract of article by G. I. Zil'nan and Ye. M. Shifrina]
[Text] The problem of the wave resistance of a systaa of surface pressures
during non-steady state notion is solved. The theory of low-amplitude gravity
waves is employed. A method is proposed for calculating the wave resistance of
the plane-elliptical systens with large pressure gradient at their boundary.

Results of calculating the wave resistance for uniformly accelerated novenent
are presented. 2 illustrations, to bibliographic references.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 622.262:550.822
TRAISPOR‘I'ABLE ISLAND EASE FOE Pmmm PROSPECTUS AT SHALIDH DEPTHS
[Abstract of article by Ya. S. Barik, Yu. A. Plenkin and N. V. Shaybo]

[Text] This article describes a submersible base with an original anti-listing
stabilization syata. Results are given for model tests to determine the
operability of the system for providing stability of the structure during
submersion and flotation. and an estimate of the towing resistance of the struc-
ture in calm and rough water is given. 5 illustrations.

UDC: 633.6.013J52

PROBLEPB OF APPLIED HYDEODYNAHICS 0P FLEXIBLE FILAHDITS IN mus
[Abstract of article by A. Ya. Oleynik. N. V. Seltanov and V. A. Gorban']

[Text] This article reviews a number of studies and also analyzes individual
questions of the current status of research on the dynamics of ﬂexible filanents
in flows. Some problems of hydrodynuics are examined which are associated

with the development of models and calculations of the movement of flexible
constructions in liquid. Promising research directions are- noted. 50 biblio-
graphic references.

UDC: 626.02

EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION OF BENDING mmrs ACTH” UPON OCEAN PIPELINE mm
INSTALLATION

[Abstract of article by V. I. Korolev, K. Ya. Kapustin and H. A. Kanyshev]

[Text] This article presents a method for modeling and experimental determination
of the stressed state of the model of a pipeline laid on the ocean bottom. The
relationship between the static and dynamic moments in different pipeline sections
and basic factors is examined. lo illustrations. 7 bibliographic references.

000: 536.141

OSCILLATIONS OP FLEXIBLE 171me IN RANSVERSE FIOH RITE VARIABLE VEIOCITY
PROFILE

[Abstract of article by V. I. Korolev]

[Text] This article presents the results of experinental investigation of
vibration of filaments in a transverse flow with variable flow velocity along

the filment. Experimental spectra are obtained for the oscillations which
indicate a major influence of the fundamental frequency of the filament in
standing water on the frequency of iniuced vibration. The basic regularities
determining the shape of the frequency spectra of the oscillations are established.
1. illustrations, 7 bibliographic references.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

UDC. 5310.11

INTERACTION BE‘NBBN OSCILLATIN? FILM‘IENTS All) FIDN

[Abstract of article by V. l. Poddubnyy and N. V. Saltanov]

[Text] Based on a discrete model, a computer is used to investigate oscillations
of a tensile thread-body system in a flow considering nonlinear hydrodynamic
forces in the geometrically nonlinear case. The filament is assmed tensile
according to Hooke. It is shown that steady-state induced oscillations of the
filament occur about a quasistationary position displaced along the flow from

the equilibrium position. In a certain sense. this effect is equivalent
to increasing the "effective" coefficient of hydrodynamic resistance of the
filament. ’4 illustrations, 7 bibliographic references.

UDC: 53b.11

INVESTIGATION OF OSCILLATION 0F FLEXIBLE FIIMDI'IS IN FIDHS BASED ON DISCRETE
MODEL

[Abstract of article by V. I. Poddubnyy]

[Text] This study proposes. for cases in which the filament has the shape of
an arbitrary spatial curve, seeking the characteristics of the tensile filamaat
body systaa on the basis of a discrete model. The use of a developed com-
putational scheme is illustrated by examples which provide evidence of its
effectiveness. It is demnstrated that within the practically interesting
range of variation of system parameters even a relatively small number of dis—
crete elements provides sufficient computational accuracy. 2 illustrations,

4 bibliographic references.

UDC: 518:517.9:532

METHOD WITH ENNAKZED AGIURACY FOR MERICAL INVETIGATION 0F MISTATIONARY
FIDH ABOUT ARBITRARY BODY OF REVOLUTION PUT INTO MOTION SIMULTANEOUSLY

[Abstract of article by V. I. Kravchenko]

[Text] This article proposes a numerical method for solving complete Navier-
Stokes equations written in terms of the current in eddy function in a natural
coordinate system connected with the surface of the body located in the flow.
A finite-difference scheme with fourth—order accuracy with respect to spatial
variables is constructed for the problem of investigating nonstationary flow
about a body of revolution put into movement simultaneously. The question of
selecting a method for computing eddy formation on the solid boundary is

examined. An essentially implicit modification is proposed for the procedure
of calculating the eddy on the surface of the body in the flow. 5 illustrations.
1!. bibliographic references.

132

FOR OFFICIAL l’SI". ONIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100: 532.58

om: PROPERTY or run mismncs curve or A sour nuance mN-srm sure mvnIm
1N LIQUID

[Abstract of article by V. c. Belinskiy]

[Text] This article establishes the property of the curve of the coefficient

of resistance of a body during non-steady state move-eat in a liquid which makes
it possible to divide the coefficient of resistance into inertial and viscosity
components of the coefficients of resistance of a disk and cylinder located in
a non-steady state flow. 6 illustrations, ll bibliographic references.

UDC: 532.529: 532.582

APPAJ‘BN‘I' MASS 0P SYSTEKS 0F ELLIPSOIDS'

[Abstract of article by V. A. Gorban' and S. H. Srebnyuk]

[Text] This article examines the problem of the motion on. systems of oblate
ellipsoids in an ideal liquid. The Blokh-cinevskiy method is used to deternine
the coefficients of the apparent naaaes for chains and lattices of ellipsoids.
The calculation results are conpared with experimental data. lo illustrations.
9 bibliographic references.

UDC: 533.69.011

IWBTIGATION OF DEVELOPMENT OF unmc FORCE DURING NOW 01" THIN PROFILE
NEAR mos WITH BREAK

[Abstract of article by I. P. Akimenko. V. G. Belinskiy and I. I. Yefrenov]
[Text] A nethod is proposed for solving the nonstationary problen of the remnant

of a plate near a boundary with various corner angles. Examples of calculation
are given. 5 illustrations, 3 bibliographic references.

unc: 532.5
PROBLEH 0F [DADING 0P BODIﬁ IN LIQUID
[Abstract of article by V. V. Popov]

[Text] A numerical method is proposed for solving the hydrodynamic problen of
loading of a body by inertia in an ideal incompressible weightless fluid. In
contrast to existing solutions, the present one allows for deformation of the

free boundary of the fluid and change in the potential on it. 2 illustrations,
to bibliographic references.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-1‘1”“. USO-Z ONLY

UDC: 629.12

WFDREI‘ICAL INVESTIGATION OF INFLUENCE OF INITIAL IURBULENCB APO SHAPE OF
CONTOUR 0F FDDEL ON TRANSITION F804 LAMINAR 1'0 TURBULENI‘ BOUNDARY LAYER

[Abstract of article by L. F. Kozlov]

[Text] This article presents the results of theoretical investigations of
the influence of various geometrical parameters which characterize the shape
of the contour in initial turbulence on the length of laninar sectors in the
boundary layer of models of oceangoing transport ships. Variation in these
parameters is shown to have a significance on the hydrodynamic resistance of
the models. 7 illustrations. 8 bibliographic references.

UDC: 532.517.‘

BH‘IAVIOR OP COHPONBITS 0F TURBULENCE mm 0031“} SELF-SIMILAR DEVELOPER!“
0F TURBULM LAYER

[Abstract of article by V. S. Haderich]

[Text] This study examines the evolution of nomal Reynolds stresses during
self-similar developnent of a layer of turbulized liquid of finite thickness
after application of an instantaneous source to its surface. It is demonstrated
on the basis of solving the problen for eigenvalues and mnerical calculation
that the anisotropic components of the normal Reynolds stresses in the region
of self-sinilar development consist of the sun of the nonvinteracting
self-similar solution. each of which has its own exponential principle.

1 illustration, 7 bibliographic references.
UDC: 532.593
SOME EMPIRICAL RELATIONSHIPS 0F TURBULENT FLOW OF A DILUTE POLYMER SOLUTION

[Abstract of article by S. A. Matviyevskiy]

[Text] This article presents the raults of experimental investigation of the
flow of dilute solutions of polyoxyethylene in a pipe. The threshold friction
stress on the wall is found to be a function of polymer concentration in the
aolut ion. The limits of applicability of previous empirical relationships
between the characteristics of the flow and polymer solutions are analyzed,

and a refined -pirical relationship is given. b illustrations, llo bibliographic
references.

13!;

FOR ()Fl-‘K‘IAI. l SE 0le
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 532.593
TURBULENT NUMY LAYE! 0N PLATE 1N STRPA" OF UNIFORM Puma SOLUTION
[Abstract of article by S. A. Hatviyevskiy]
[Text] The flow of a turbulent boundary layer on a plate in a stream of a
uniform solution of polymer of optimal concentration is investigated. The
bomdary layer equations are solved enploying the inplicit finite dimensional

method. The influence of the rate of flow on the changes induced by the

polymer solution in the flow is examined. In illustrations, ll bibliographic
references.

(DPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dubs", 1981

6900
C80: 1861/2214

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MECHANICS OP SOLIDS

UDC. 621 . 178.311

OSCILLATIONS 0F KINWTIGALLY-DRIVD! HBGIANICAL SYSTDIS CONSIDERING ENERGY
DISSIPATION

Kiev KOLEBANIYA KINDIATIGIEKI VOZBUZHMYMKH WCHBSICIIG! SISTD‘ S [1me
DISSIPATSII ENERGII in Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Sep 81) pp 2, 217-218

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Oscillation of Kinematically-Driven
Mechanical Systems Considering Energy Dissipation". by Gsorgiy Stepanovich
Pisarenko and Oleg Yevgen'yevich Boginich, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks". 1300

copies. 219 pages]
[Text] Annotation

This monograph is devoted to an analytical investigation of oscillations of
nonconservative elastic systans of plates and rods with concentrated and lumped
parameters considering incomplete elasticity of cyclically deformed material.
The os;illations in these systems are excited kinematically by means of various
plane-parallel and angular harmonic movements of their fastening which vary
according to a defined principle.

The book is intended for scientific and engineering-technical workers involved in
matters of mechanical system oscillations. 23 illustrations. 62 bibliographic
references.

Table of Con tents

Foreword 3
Chapter 1 Initial hypotheses of scattering of energy in cyclically

deformed material 5
1. Basic characteristics of energy dissipation S

2. Hysteresis control loop equation in calculations of mechanical
oscillations 8
Chapter 2 Oscillations in systems with one degree of freedom 24
1. Longitudinal oscillations 24
2. Twistim oscillations 38
3. Transverse oscillations 50
Chapter 3 Oscillations of systems of rods with distributed parameters 62
1 Longitudinal oscillation of rods 62
2. hoisting oscillations of rods 73
3. Transverse oscillations of rods with constant cross section 82
1.. Transverse oscillations of rods with variable cross section 98

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter lo Transverse oscillations of stretched rods
Oscillations of rods with constant cross section
Oscillations of rods with variable cross section

Chapter 5 Transverse oscillations of short restrained cantilevered

1.
2.

l.
2.

rods

Oscillations of rods with constant cross section

Oscillations of aassive vertical rods with bottom end restrained

Chapter 6 Transverse oscillations of thin plates
Oscillations of rectangular plates
Oscillatiom of round plates
Bibliography

COPYR IGRT:

6900
C80 :

l.
2.

1861/221

Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dudta". 1981

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

116
1114
126

138
138
153
173
173
195
214
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 636
m-nmmsmm VIBRATION IMPACT SYSTBlS: DYNAMICS AND STABILITY

Moscow DVUHEnNYYE VIBROUNRMB SISTW: DIWIKA I USNYCIIIVOST' in MIL."
1981 (signed to press 13 Oct 81) PP 2-1.

[Annotation ani table of contents from book "No-Dimensional Vibration Inset
Systems: Dynamics and Stability", by Anatoliy Aronovich Kobrinskiy and Aron
Yefimovich Kobrinskiy, Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2650 copies. 336 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book is devoted to dynamic analysis of the unidimensional and two-dimensional
vibration impact systems which must be studied when calculating and building
numerous mchines. instruments and devices used in various branches of technology.

The book presents methods for findim periodic modes of movement of such systems.
disclose: their nonlinear properties and features, especially those associated
with two-dimensional structure. and studies their dynamic, dissipative and
accuracy properties dictated both by the systea parameters and excitation as
well as the geometric characteristics of the elements participating in the
impacts.

The theoretical results are illustrated using examples of specific engineering
systems and devices.

The book is intended for designers working in various branches of impact tech-
nology. and for specialists in question of the theory of oscillations of mechanical
systems.

Table of Contents

Foreword 5
Basic notation 7
Chapter 1. Introduction 9
1.1. Concept of vibration impact systems 9
1.2. Dynamic models of two-dimensional systems 13
1.3. Some technical applications 17
1.4. Dynamic phenomena in gaps and movable couplings 22
1 5. Periodic movements of vibration impact systems 28

138

FOR OFFICIA ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.6. Active vibration shifting systa 33
1.7. Stability of periodic wrenente 37
1.8. Cemetric existence conditions 61
Chapter 2. Base models 65
2.1. Ball on vibrating plane 65
2.2. Ball in cavity 67
2.3. Stability of synetrical periodic nodes 52
2.6. Coefficient of restitution as function of inpact velocity 56
2.5. Rusakov-Khsrkevich nodel 59
2.6. Stability of periodic mode 63
2.7. Elastic system between limiters 65
2.8. Dynamic characteristics of single-mass system. Drift 70
Chapter 3. System with two degree. of fr'sedas. Separation of mvenenta 76
3.1. Oblique impact 76
3.2. Inpact friction 80
3.3. Infinite iapact process 86
3.6. Shifting of material point along vibrating plane in continuous

addition nodes 88
3.5. "Breakaway" phenomenon 96
3.6. Stability of periodic modes of motion 99
3.7. The case of 11-0 103
3.8. Infinite impact nodes of motion of particles along vibrating

plane 1.12
3.9. Vibrating chute with stationary limiter. Viscous friction 119
3.10. Vibrating chute with stationary limiter. Dry friction 12.6
3.11. Single-layer ensemble of particles. Filtering 135
3.12. Toward the theory of vibroseparation 161
3.13. Transportability 165
Chapter 6. Systems with two degrees of freedom. Continued 168
6.1. Move-ent along curvalinear surface 168
6.2. Harmonic excitation 153
6.3. Stability of periodic nodes 159
6.6. "Ladder"-type chutes 163
6 . S . Paddi-nachines 167
6.6. Quasistationary modes. Separation mechanism 176
6.7. Particle stabilization on vibrating surface 178
6.8. Stability of periodic modes. Quasistationary transitional

processes 185
6.9. Particle in circular vibrating cavity 190
6.10. Stability of periodic nodes 198
6.11. Particle in circular cavity under the influence of centrifugal

force 203

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 5. Systems with elastic coupling 212
5.1. Free oscillations of vibration impact systens 212
5.2. No-dinensionsl Nsakov-Kharkevich model. Free oscillations 216
5.3. Constrained oscillations of conservative systms (It-l, l-O) 225
5.6. Constrained oscillations. General case (R<l) 233
5.5. Stability of periodic nodes 262
5.6. Suisymmetrical nodes of nation 2“
5.7. Symtrical node of motion . 256
5.8. Limiter in torn of regular polygon. Centralcoynatrical nodes 26"
5.9. Limiter in form of square 272
5.10. Case of kinematic excitation 276
Chapter 6. System with 2.5 degrees of freedom 282
6.1. Oblique inpact of disk against limiter 282
6.2. Movement of disk along vibrating plane 787
6.3. Movement of disk along curvilinear surface 295
6.6. Vertical vibration chute. Complex nodes :2 motion 302
6.5. Syuuetrical nodes of motion of rigid rotor in vibrating bearing

with clearance 310
Appendix 318
Bibl iography 330

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-natematicheskoy
literatury, 1981

6900
C80: 1861/219 - END u»

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON] '