FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10591
l6 June 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 20/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI: OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(F000 20/821

CouIenrs

INTERNATIGIAL

New American Conservatism Analyzed, Condemned
(B. '1‘. Grigoryan; VOW MRI, liar 82) ...........

Official Criticizes 0.8. Policy in Caribbean, Central America
(Juan Boris; “IE", 13 m 82) 0.00....UDOOOOOOOOOOUOOOO

NATIONAL
Former Propagandist Describes Work, Central Asians in
Military Unit
(Anastasiya Poverennaya; mum, No 31, 1982) ...u..

Structure, Functions of Local Council of Boononic, Social

Developnent Described
(RAYKQA I NAUCIDlo-TEIGMCHBSKAIA IN'I'EIJJOBITSIYA, 1981).

Saggested Lecture Topic on Brezhnev Trade Union Speech
(Editorial Remrt) OOOOOOOOUOOOOOUOQQOOOOOOOOOOOIOC'O...

0bkom Secretary on Raising Labor Productivity
(Editorial hwrt) .0IOOIOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.0.0.0.00...

Obkom Secretary on Transfer of Party Experience to Komsonol
(Editorial Remrt) coo0000e...00.00.00.000...0.00000000-

-a- [III-USSR-3S]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEH AMERICAN CONSERVATISH ANALYZED. COKDEHNED
Moscow VOPROSY FILOSOFII in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 157-159

[Review by B.T. Grigoryan of a book "Sotsialnaya Filosofiya Sovremennogo
Amerikanskogo Konservatisma" [Social Philosophy of Contemporary American
Conservatism] by A. Yu. Helvil, Moscow, Politisdat. 1980. 163 pages]

[Text] The book is devoted to one of the most important subjects of
contemporary ideological struggle—critical analysis of American neoconserva-

tisn ideology and social philosophy.

The turning of public consciousness in the United States and other Hestern
countries to the Right and the noticeable strengthening of these countries'
policy and ideology are a universally recognized fact today. The failure of
integrational ideology and the illusions of class peace and "harmonious
society" propagated by it, which manifested themselves with particular force
under conditions of serious economic upheavals and mass anticapitalist actions
in the latter part of the Sixties, has affected the entire bourgeois
ideology-from philosophic theories to various trends of sociopolitical
thought and led to strengthening and consolidation of conservative trends in
them. The growing popularity of conservative sentiments in the United
States. as noted correctly in the book, has been promoted by the discrediting
of American liberalisa's traditional optimistic sociophilosophical ideas

and technocratic schemes of "A Society of Abundance." "A Society of Universal
Prosperity," "A Postindustrial Society" and "Technotronic Civilization." The
myth of reformist and bourgeois ideology of unlimited possibilities for the
development of the capitalist society has been refuted by life itself. The
author notes the political slump of Left radicalism and the ideological
crisis of the "new Left" as another cause of the increased influence of con-
servative ideology. After stimulating the growth of sentiments of social
criticism and mass discontent with contemporary capitalist society in the
United States. the "new Left" found itself unable to offer any realistically
positive program of social reconstruction. At the same time. the increased
phenomena of leftist extremism and terrorism in their movement led to
devaluation of the idea of "Leftism" itself in the eyes of average Americans
and this has been greatly promoted by the bourgeois means of mass information
through a skillfully directed propaganda campaign. 0n the other hand. the
activity of the Right and conservative forces and groups as well as the
general confusion and disorder among liberals and Left radicals has been
favorable to the neoconservative turn in ideology (see p 5).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A broad program of propaganda "reidologization. more active propagation of
the bourgeois society's traditional ideals and values in a renewed form and
the formation of an antidemocratic and antisocialist outlook with the aid of

various philosophic and ideological ideas began to be implemented in bourgeois
ideology from the early Seventies. During the Seventies and Eighties. the

influence of conservative political and social and philosophic ideas reach a
high level and the official internal and external political aims become more
rigid. This policy and the ideology of contemporary conservatism are justly
regarded in the book as an expression of definite reaction by the influential
bourgeois circles in the Heat to the positive changes in international
relations elicited by the process of detente and to the successes of peoples
liberation struggle and general democratic movement in capitalist countries.
Neoconservatism in the United States also reflects a reaction by the imper-
ialist circles to the changed position and role of the United States and other

developed capitalist states in the contemporary world. The increased
aggressiveness of imperialism and. above all. of American imperialism.

connected with further narrowing of the sphere of imperialist supremacy in

the world and intensification of internal contradictions and rivalries in
capitalist countries. has been noted in the CPSU Central Committee's accounta-
bility report to the 26th party congress. The various theoriesofcontemporary
conservatism are called upon to fulfill the function of rationalization and
ideological justification of the reactionary policy in bourgeois society and
in the international arena.

Beginning in the Seventies. western columnists and scientists proclaimed the

coming of a "conservative revival" period and the appearance of conservatism
on the proscenium of ideological and political life. Lately the phenomenon

of neoconservatism has indeed become an important factor in policy and
ideology of the United States, Britain. the PRC and some other countries in

the Nest. The coming to power of such conservative figures as H. Thatcher

in Great Britain and R. Reagan in the United States is often appraised in the
Heat as a sign of a "new conservative wave," which supposedly will predominate
in the next 50 years or even longer.

Strengthening of conservative trends in the sociopolitical sphere relies to
a great extent on r specific ideological and theoretical base. In essence
we are dealing with a serious ideological reorientation within the framework
of contemporary bourgeois consciousness and ideology. which may have far-

reaching consequences.

it is obvious that the study of a broad range of problems connected with
contemporary conservatism is an extremely important task of Marxist philo-
sophical science--in the plan of its theoretical significance and in political
topicality as well. The question is about necessity of theoretical under—
standing and generalization of a principally new range of ideological and
political phenomena. which are being pushed increasingly into the forefront

of the ideological struggle.

In essence, the book being reviewed is the first monographic study in national

scientific literature of the stated range of problems. The work has been done
with material on social philosophy of contemporary American conservatism. At

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the same time, some of the conclusions are of general theoretical and
methodological significance. concern problems of typology and criticism of
bourgeois ideological orientations (first of all. of liberalism and conserve-
tism) and extend to the cardinal questions of evolution of ideological
strategy of contemporary imperialism. Main attention is devoted to the study
of conservatism's social and philosophical basis. namely its world outlook
and philosophical sources and its peculiar concept of peace, man. society,
culture. history and progress.

A concrete Marxist analysis of causes and peculiarities in the current
intensification of conservative trends in American sociopolitical and
ideological life and of increased interest in philosophical ideas of conserva-
tism is contrasted in a well-reasoned manner by the author with the widespread
thesis in vestern literature on an ideological "cycle." an alternate inter-
changing of "Right" and "Left" trends. The main causes of increased popularity
of conservatism lie in the sphere of a deep crisis. which today defeated the
ideology of liberal etatism that has ruled the United States and other
countries in the West since the Thirties.

The book‘s merit is in its attempt to develop methodological aspects in
understanding the ideology of conservatism and to analyze its inner typologi-
cal structure and basic features. Defining conservatism as a "particular
type of thinking in social sections whose position in society is threatened
by objective trends of social progress" (p 12), the author reveals sufficiently
firm ideological mechanisms by means of which one or another "outdated"
ideology acquires a conservative function. A debatable conclusion is offered
regarding conservative ideology being "secondary" in all its variations and
that it is derived from some other forms of ideology which are assimilated by
it only after they have "exhausted" their primary set social function (see

p M) . Special attention is devoted to exposing the anticommmist essense of
contemporary conservatism.

The author‘s analysis goes with good reason beyond the framework of the
already traditional dichotomy of "liberalism-conservatism" and reveals the
real inner heterogeneity of conservative ideology. Contemporary American
conservatism includes trends which can be traced to feudal-aristocratic
ideology. the free enterprise ideology and the ideology of state monopolistic
capitalism. Their specific philosophical sources, particular ideological
mechanisms of their formation and the social class base peculiar to them are
exposed.

Research in the book is based on a historical and typological principle. An
analysis of peculiarities of American ideological tradition serves as a
basis for revealing the basic stages of formation of conservative thought in

the United States and its ideological and theoretical sources. Among the
one must note the ideological traditions of classical conservatism which have
been placed into service of contemporary bourgeoisie and on the basis of
which the "traditionalist" variety of contemrary American conservatism is
formed. The second such source are the traditions of classical liberalism
with their "free market" ideal. which acquire a conservative function in
changed social conditions and become a base for the formation of the

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the "libertaristic" ("market") version of contemporary conservatism. And
finally, the third line in formation of the conception of contemporary
American conservatism is appearance of a strictly "neoconservative" opposition
to the theory and practice of neoliberalism. It is precisely neoconservatism
that is in a leading trend position of bourgeois ideology in the United States
today (and in some other Western countries) and to a great extent represents
the ideological and theoretical platform of those conservative political
circles which currently set the tone in Hashington and advance a program of

attack against the workers' standard of living and rights in the country and
of deliberate aggravation in the international situation.

In revealing the origination and peculiarities of neoconservative ideology.

the author views the problems in the context of deepening crisis of capitalism
and intensification of its socioeconomic and political contradictions.

Neoconservatism (its leading representatives in the United States--(D. Bell).
(5. Lipset), (I. Kristel). (N. Gleizer). (P. Podhorets). (S. Huntington) and
many other leading bourgeois philosophers. sociologists and politologists)
advances a program of a new moral "justification" of capitalism. However,
attempts made within its framework in search of ways and means for ideological
reorientation of contemporary bourgeois consciousness andtx>ensure"viability"

of the capitalist system have been unsuccessful and in fact have only testi-
fied to the further deepening of critical phenomena in imperialism's strategy
in the Seventies and Eighties.

It would have been expedient to devote somewhat more attention to precisely
this most important asepct of problems being examined in A. Yu. Helvil's
monograph. At the same time. there is no doubt that as a whole the book
being reviewed is an interesting research of some principally new trends and
phenomena in the ideological and political life of the Heat.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda". "Voprosy filosofii". 1982

9817
C80: 1800/467

1;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OFFICIAL CRITICIZES U.S. POLICY IN CARIBBEAN, CENTRAL AMERICA
PA131757 Havana PRELA in English 1232 GMT 13 May 82
[Report by Juan Burial

[Text] Havana, 13 May (PL)-The secretary general of the Soviet Foreign
office, Yuriy Fokin, indicated that his comtry calls for "the cease of all
subversive activities against Cuba and Nicaragua and other countries of

the Caribbean and Central America."

Fokin gave an interview to PRENSA LATINA, in which he spoke about his visit
to Cuba and analyzed (?aspects) of the international political situation.

He expressed the condeanation of the USSR to the u.s. attitude "of stepping
up the tension around Cuba, Nicaragua and in general in Central America
and the Caribbean."

"That policy," he said, "does not favor the cause of peace. It bothers the
peoples of the region and underlines their efforts ained at a quiet [word
indistinct) way."

He also referred to the conflict of the South Atlantic, in which Argentina,
while defending its sovereignty over the Halvinas Islands, is facing an
aggression of the war fleet of the British Government.

"Those British actions," he stated, "are aimed at the reestablishnent of
the colonial situation in the Halvinas, which contradicts the resolutions
of the United Nations."

In his declarations, the secretary general of the Soviet Foreign Office
also spoke of aspects regarding the meeting of the Soviet leader, Leonid
Brezhnev, and of 0.5. President Ronald Reagan.

1hc Soviets estimate that a dialogue of such a level requires a special
preparation and a previous examination of all the topics to be analyzed by
both presidents.

"The Soviet Union is in favor of preparing well the meeting and of holding
it next spring in one of the neutral capitals of Europe," expressed Pokin.

INJI‘DIWNCJAJ.IISII(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

"We would like the United States to have a (?constructive) point-of view,
for on this depends the results of such an important meeting."

Fokin has just ended a 6-day visit to Cuba, heading a delegation which held
talks with the Cuban Foreign Ministry.

His visit to Havana, he said, was related to the next holding of the
special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament.

The Soviet diplomat stated that the socialist countries and the nonaligned
ones will work together, in order to help this at neeting, which begins

in June , "to be carried out in a constructive atmosphere and to reach
positive and true results."

C80: 3020/1210

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FORMER PROPAGANDIST DESCRIBES WRK, cm ASIANS IN MILITARY UNIT
Munich KDNTINDIT in Russian No 31, (1982) PP 189-207

[Art icle by Anastasiya Poverennaya: "Russia and Reality: Coming Down From
the Lectern (Reflections on the Work of a Soviet Propagandist)"]

[Excerpt] when I was just starting out, callow youth made everything se-
now and exciting: new places, new people, interesting encounters.... Tine
and experience showed that though places and people could vary, the problens
remained the same all over....

In my hone town I could speak before whatever audience I chose: at a scientific
research institute, a House of Culture or an educational establishment. In

the provinces there was no choice. Lecturers usually traveled to the
"backwoods" at the invitation of some oblast comittee and usually delivered
their lectures at a regular nesting of the party or party-administrative

aktiv as part of the obligatory education for upper-echelon party bureaucrats.
The lectures were listed as "patronage" [chefskiy] and, therefore, no fee was
forthcoming. There was, however, a covert understanding between local party
organizations and the "Znaniye" society, with which we were all listed, whereby
they did their best to provide us with as great a "loa " as possible in the
form of several prearranged lectures for a fee at city and oblast enterprises.
We were thus often able to deliver as many as 30 lectures per week, so we were
not too bad off. No lecturer would ever think of traveling away from hone
without such an incentive, whatever the aural code of a communist night
prescribe.

I especially liked to travel up north, to Petrozavodsk, Murmansk or Kandalaksha,
at the height of the Arctic day. My ms: memorable trip, however, was to
Arkhangel 'sk. . . .

Upon arriving, I went at once to the oblast comnittee, obtained the necessary
materials and quickly began to prepare myself for the role of "the person from
the center" omniscient of everything, including the state of affairs in
Arkhangel'sk and the oblast, their achievements in the last 5-year plan, their
prospects for the future and their current "bottlenecks." I went over the
reports of enterprises, memorizing the names of the best plants and enterprises,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their executives and foremost workers, as well as those who had defaulted on
tne plan and were, therefore, open to severe criticism. This was the most
important and difficult part of the job. To be sure, only the first lecture,
the one for the executives, required such serious preparation. when it was
over, it didn't really matter where they took me or before whom I spoke. I
would pump my guide en route (and I think I have traveled by virtually

every means of transportation, from airplanes to a hearse!), and we would
agree on the topic of the lecture. But I came well-prepared for my first,
"patronage" lecture. At last I would be ready, having comitted to memory
all I w0uld conceivably require.

My brain would discard all that trash the very next day, but for the lecture
it was essential: such were the instructions of the Central Connittee's
Ideological Department: Wherever we spoke and whatever the topic, be it

“The International Situatioa," "l'he Economic Achievements of the USSR in the
Epoch of Developed Socialism" or "Problans of Communist ﬂoral Upbringing,"
every lecture had to be "dovetailed" to the life of the collective providing
the forum for it. The impact was indubitable, and I could always see how
readily our listeners succumbed to the hypnotic effect of the lecturer's

art. They took delight in whatever criticism was leveled at them, pleased
that the "person from the center" had something to say about than specifically,
which meant that "up there" they were known and remembered. In this way the
lecturer established rapport with the audience and at the same time strengthened
the masses' confidence in their own soviet power!

Someone once said: "If a person have how to do something, he does it himself,
if he doesn't, he teaches others; and if he can do neither, he teaches to teach."
Unfortunately, all our lectures, my own and my associates', fitted this aphorism
completely. For we would be telling knowledgeable people who knew their jobs
how to teach their associates and subordinates to "fulfill and overfulfill,"

to "catch up with and pass..."

So there I was in Arkhangel'sk. I had the best room in the best hotel in town;
I took my meals in the restaurant downstairs (for which I was issued a comfort-
able sum for expenses "to be reported subsequmtly"). And there I was on the
lectern, cementing my lecture. As I talked I watched the chairman out of the
corner of my eye (the lecture being part of the conference proceedings, the
presidium remained in place on the stage). I immediately took note that

the chairman was no novice and was pleased to see how deftly he sorted out

the notes with questions to the lecturer coming up from the audience. He
divided than into three little piles: the first, I knew, he would pass on to
me; the second would be divided between the secretary of the city party
committee and the chairman of the oblast executive connittee--these dealt

with local questions, with specific problems, so to say. He would do his best
to surreptitiously destroy the third pile of questions as soon as the lecture
ended. These were impermissible questions which one did not answer. Our

work was judged "upstairs" by, among other things, the questions asked by

our listeners. We also had to report to our superiors about the political
atmosphere in the audience, attaching a list of listeners' questions (from

the first pile, of course) to the name on the lecture we were supposed to
submit to the party organization.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'nnis time, however, I was more interested in the third pile and, taking my
seat next to the chairman after the lecture, I unceremoniously scooped it
OVer. First question: "Tell us openly: is pilot Belenko a traitor?

The PRAVDA report about him was phoney." Second question: "Hho conceived
the idea of the 'After Midnight' TV show for northern regions? "hat for?
According to statistics in our and neighboring oblasts, this has caused a
big jump in job related accidents and injuries. Do you hope to keep people
from listening to Western radio stations?-this a costly way of fighting
bourgeois propaganda." Third question: "For many years the state budget
lumps heavy industry together with the light and food industries. Everyone
knows that the heavy industry also includes expenses for the war industry.
“by are they concealed? After all, it is obvious that the sum of

17.6 billion rubles under the item 'Defense Capability‘ is hardly enough

to just cloth and feed the army. But what about armaments?" Or take such
a question: "Do you know that there is a huge personal herd of the
President of Finland Urho Kekkonen grazing in our tundra; it is assigned

to one of the collective farms, and the Soviet authorities will confiscate
it if the Finns refuse to return defectors?"

No, I didn't know that, of course, just like many other things. Now I do,
as well as many other things.

After the meeting I, as usual, made a rapid estimate of the percentage of
tricky questions with respect to the number of people present: there had

been seven such questions from the more than 800 people in the audience,

that is, less than 1 percent. This was not worth our attention. Only

numbers mattered. But I would add them to the card file I had been assembling
for several years. I had started out with the very best of intentions: I
wanted to understand, grasp and evaluate the reactions of my listeners....
This is what it has led to: I am an enemy of the people.... Can it be

that my work associates believe this?

My colleagues were all really nice people-~kind, responsive, good comrades.
Newcomers joined us rarely, and we had grown used to each other, like one

big family. Every day at 1000 hours our chief assembled us for a short
meeting or briefing, but we usually came in at 0900. During that hour we

felt completely free and unconstrained, as if without our official uniforms.
we chatted, bantered and swapped political jokes. That hour, I think, brought
us closer even than our friendly drinking parties (which, incidentally,

were fairly frequent). Most of the jibes and wiaecracks were, I recall, aimed
at our Leader and chief Agronomist, of whom it was said that he had managed

to garner a bumper harvest from his "Malaya Zemlya." Those moments were the
safety valve which made it possible for us to breathe easier before getting
into the straightjacket of our official uniforms which, though customary,

were tight, oh how tight! To be sure, at the time none of us probably even
realized it. What did we know about freedom and what it was like?

The first crack in our rock-hard positions was, it seems, caused by the Czech
August of '68. i remember that during that period even our merriment declined
somewhat. But soon, armed to the teeth with Soviet patriotism and the
principles of international friendship, we contained our personal. to put it

9
FOR OFF1CLA1.UBEGJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mi idly, astonishment. Every day we spent hours on the lecterns; we organized
e..dless meetings at factories, enterprises and scientific institutes; we

held rallies and seminars. Many people at the time wondered, couldn't
understand and were even indignant. It was our job to help the: to appreciate
the events correctly, that is, to accept the official line. He defended

the Soviet understanding of the term ”international friendship" from our
lecterns as good as our tanks in the streets of Prague....

I was neither a dissident nor a rights defender; I never read any banned
literature--that was an entirely different world of which we knew only

what we were supposed to know. I would never have matched up to the exploits
of those people, even if I had considered them to be right. Together with
everyone from our circle of so-called "party elite" I first denounced them
and later simply failed to understand them, thinking of them as "playing
populists." It is hard for me to say exactly when I began to change; it
matured gradually, somewhere in my subconsciousness. A definite part in
this change was played by the "impermissible" questions from my listeners.
Frequent trips into the "boondocks" were also very important because I could
see Soviet reality there without any enbellishmentsu ..

My trip to Arkhangel'sk was especially memorable.... It was there that I
acutely realized the utter uselessness of my work; during my encounters with
my listeners, I saw that we were poles apart and would never understand each
other. I will describe it as it happened.

After my lecture at the Arkhangel'sk City Comittee, I was whisked away to a
lumber camp. I was greeted by the secretary of the party comittee, who told
me that he had announced my lecture to the workers on the day before and that
it would be held between the end of the second shift and the beginning of the
third shift.

"They are all there, waiting, " he explained as he led me to the Red Corner.
"He have to work three shifts now, plus holidays, to take advantage of the
summer weather to get ahead with the plan. He have been lagging, so now we
have to catch up..."

The forest path took us to the newly built wooden club. The party secretary
unlocked the door, which opened into a fairly large hall with a stage on which
stood a table covered with a red cloth and a new lectern. .. and not a soul
inside! The windows were wide open.

The party secretary spread his hands, his face as red as the cloth on the table.

"Hell what can you do with such people? I locked the door so they have
escaped through the windows! what a crowd! I am sorry, do not be angry.

It is pretty hard on our workers right now, being springtime, and they all
have gardens to tend. If they don't plan: on time, there will be nothing

to eat in the fall. I should not have told them befordxand, of course....

But we will punish them-they will not get their thirteenth pay. Besides,

we will pay your fee for the lecture anyhow, only do not report this to anyone
anyone..."

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I was angry and disappointed but tried not to show it. I got into the car
and went on to my next "target," the "l‘rud" [Labor] sewing artel for manu—
facturing worker coveralls. '

After the lumber camp with its new, bright buildings and the refreshing
fragrance of the woods, everything at this settlement see-ed bleak and
dismal: there was not a tree, not a flower, nothing but and and puddles
arcund.. .. I was taken directly to the shop. The women ceased their

sewing and crowded around me, unconcealed curiosity showing on their dusky
faces.

The chief of production, a young woman, introduced me and announced the topic
or the lecture. The women went back to their sewing machines, two long rows
of them. Their faces were hidden and all I could see were flowery headscarvea.
I felt uncomfortable: it was hard to talk without seeing any faces.
Nevertheless, I began, but after a few words the clatter of a sewing mchine
interrupted me. I fell silent and the woman who had begun to sew said good-
naturedly, "Don't you mind me, honey, go right on with your yarn. I will get
some of my plan in while listening."

The other women objected loudly.

"Oh, come on now," the woman said, but stopping the machine nevertheless. She
reached over for a shopping net containing some food. "If I cannot work, I
can at least have a snack. Haven't had a morsel since morning."

I was well aware that all over the country the "Znaniye" society lecturers
usually spoke before worker audiences during the lunch break, and this always
made me angry. What right did we have to keep the workers from resting? This
way. in those 40 minutes they enjoyed neither their meal nor the lecture.
This was the first time for me, and my spirits plumeted, but I went on with
the lecture. Soon the women began to leave their seats and surround me in a
right circle. 'wen,‘ I thought, 'at least I've got them interested!‘ I
told them about the Soviet way of life, about the problems of free time,
about the psychological microclimate of a Soviet collective.

i then went on to compare all this with the capitalist world, demonstrating
our superiority with facts and figures, when suddenly someone plucked at my
sleeve.

"You are spinning a nice yarn, but listen to me for a moment! And look around,
too. Zinaida," she turned to the manager, "take her to the cutting department
and show her the material they are cutting for our team and the kind their
using for Lenka's. They get all the finer material, without any tears, and the
best quality thread.... Is that fair? We barely manage to get the plan done
while she has it all overfulfilled and is awarded the oblaat banner. And they
got a bonus, too. He complained to the director, but he says it is an honor
for us all. And that the artel's bonus would go to repairing the kindergarten.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The kindergarten, by the way, has been closed down for over half a year: one
authority closed it down saying it was in a condemned condition, while the
other says there is no money for repairs. So now we take turns to run off
during work hours to look after and feed the kids.... That is all talk!

He is obliged to provide a kindergarten without any banner...as if we were
fools and did not understand! All he wants is to get his own bonus!"

And there I was telling them about how to make better use of their leisure
time! Did they know the meaning of the word? And what did they care how
workers lived in the capitalist world when their own lives were so hard?

And yet my visit had given them some hope. In the shaplicity of their

souls they gave me a warm send-off. Totally ignorant of the party hierarchy,
they saw me as some big chief, and I could hardly keep up jotting down their
complaints. How, indeed, could I tell than that there was nothing I could
do to help them, that I had no authority whatsoever. Not even the authority
over my own convictions, in fact.... And they were growing weaker and weaker
after every such an encounter, so that each new day began for me with the
question: What can I do?"

The same question was worrying another person whom I met out there. Only
recently a student, he was now the chief engineer of a butter and cheese
factory in Arkhangel'skaya Oblast, and he seemed somewhat out of place there.
He chatted in his office while I waited for a car to take me to a lecture

I was to give at some army division.

"All my workers are women," he told me. "You have seen them: all wearing
rubber boots and dirty brown, once white smocks, and all swearing four-
ietter words without end."

"How do you manage here?" I asked.

"1 do my job. I want to rebuild this little plant: we've received new
Hungarian equipment, and I am excited by the opportunity to make the women's
work easier. To this day only 30 percent of the jobs are mechanized. The
other 70 percent are done with female hands. There are only three men at

the factory: the director, a stable—hand, and myself. It is hard work, though
actually they all ought to be booked for theft: they steal something awful.
You know for yourself: can you get butter or cheese at the store? At

first they were cautious, sizing me up, but now they know I will not report
them, so they are at it again. Every 10 days I have an inspection of the teams:
how much milk came in, how much was made from it. They come to me quite
openly and ask, ‘Grigoryich, what is my shortfall for these 10 days?‘

thite a bit,‘ I say, 'you are short 10 kilograms of butter.‘ 'Don't you
worry, Grigoryich, I will make it up over the next 10 days with a lOO-kilogram
surplus...‘ And they do...“

"How do they do it?" I asked.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"He cover up all shortfalls with cheese. Have you seen our cheese vaults?
They are above criticism. A head of cheese should shrink in the vault by

11 percent by the end of the year, but the humidity is so high that it
actually shrinks by hardly 7 or 8 percent. Besides, with our technology

it is impossible to determine the percentage of fat exactly and a variation
of plus or minus 2 percent is permitted. My lady cheeemsters have learned
how to save 2 percent on fat for every kilogram of cheese. So that I even
run up some comfortable surpluses for the factory as a whole..."

"1 was listening to you," the young man continued. "You talk nicely, but if
you lived here for a while you would understand what your lectures lack. And
after a while, you would most likely prefer not to give then anymore. In
the 2 years that I have been here I have nature! a full 20 years, so that now
I cannot help wondering: What next? I would like to return to the capital
and go in for science. I want to get away from all this."

more he was: 20 years old, knowing everything, and his mind made up. But
what about me? where could I go from here?

At that moment all I had before me was just another lecture. Prior to my visit
to the butter and cheese factory, I had received a phone call from the city
comittee asking me to speak at an army division where some military brass
from the Main Political Directorate or the Military District's political
directorate were on an inspection tour. They were ssseebling the officer

and propaganda personnel for a meeting and wanted me to give a lecture on the

subject of "Problems of Ethical Education in the Materials of the 25th Party
Congress."

I was back in my right place, cast in my usual role, with only com-ending
officers in the hall. That was good. It is so much easier to convince the
convinced. The words flowed light and freely, I was back "in my own

element" again. I told them (as well, indeed, as myself) what was ethical

and unethical from the point of view of the party norms of life. The
customary words flowed freely forth as I quoted passages from Lenin. Everyone -
was pleased, they gave me a round of applause—another familiar reaction.

but none the less gratifying for that.

After the lecture the division comander invited me and the high visitors

to dimer. The service was sumptuous: antique china and silver, the dishes
were already on the table, perched on little spirit stoves to keep them warm.
He took our seats and pitched into the food. There were fish of the most
expensive varieties, salad with fresh tomatoes, cucumbers and scallions....
This was the season when cucumbers went at Moscow's Danilovskiy Market for

8 rubles .1 kilo. and tomatoes for 12.

"Where did all this fine food come from?" I could not help asking.

"He confiscated the fish from poachers," the commanding officer explained, "and
we grow our own vegetables in hothouaes."

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"So you feed your men fresh vegetables the year round?" one of the visiting
brass asked.

"Not the whole year, but on Victory Day and the October holiday for sure,"
the comander replied.

I looked at him attentively. He had the rank of colonel even though he

could not have been more than 40. The club manager had mentioned that he was
from Moscow and was there without his family. So he'd most likely come for
his general'a shoulder straps: now it is impossible to get them serving in
Moscow or Leningrad. From the confidence he exuded, from the flare he assumed,
I could see that he probably had the backing of the Main Political Directorate.

There was no vodka on the table for some reason or other, so they'd be having
their drink in the evening, after I was gone.

Out in the yard by the mess—hall I found a major with construction battalion
insignia waiting for me.

"Please come to our unit,“ he pleaded. "It's not far from here. Give a
lecture for my men, they have just taken their oath of allegience. I will

have you taken right back to your hotel when it is over."

I would have preferred to get back to it at once, I was so tired, but I could
not refuse, and besides. I could do with the money. The military, you
should know, are orderly in everything: your lecture is hardly over when
there they are with an envelope containing the cherished tanner. They pay

on the spot. not like the "Znaniye" society!
0n the way we discussed the topic of the lecture.

"Perhaps I could tell the: about the international situation?" I suggested.

"No. no," the major objected. "That's too complicated a subject for our
construction battalion men. I know their level, so many of then have passed
through my hands. I asked one from the last call-up he hailed from.
'Tambov,‘ he said. 'Do you have any relatives living abroad?’ 'Yes. '
'Hhere?’ I asked. 'In Shuyal' he said. Better give th- something simpler."

All right, I thought, let it be something simpler, say "The Tasks of the
Youth Alliance in V. I. Lenin's Speech at the 3d Komsomol Congress."

when we got there we went straight to the cld). The hall was packed. I

began to resound the difficulties of the first years of the Soviet government,
the participation of Komsomol members and young people in building up the
Soviet state. But as I was going through the introductory remarks I felt

the absence of any comunication with my listeners. What was wrong? I went on,
quoting a brief historical aside they should have known from school. I felt
that it was getting harder and harder for me to speak. Didn't they understand
me? I was speaking distinctly enough, and the microphone was in order. But

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
they just sat there very still, without moving, the whole hall like one

face, all with close-cropped heads, all in the same classy-fitting uniforms,
all with dark, somewhat slanted eyes which see-ed to contain a mute question,
or was it just my imagination?

I was getting nervous. What had happened to my years of experience in the
art of lecturing? Why wasn't it helping me? were Lenin's words that "the
task is to study, to study and to study" so hard to understand? why every
Young Pioneer knows them! Or had I been too vague explaining the. harm done
to the development of Soviet culture by the theory and practice of the
"Proletkul 't" association?

I cast a pleading look at the deputy connander for political affairs, begging
for support, as I kept throwing the words at the quiet audience which seemed
to he listening but apparently heard nothing.

They finally came to life when I finished and the political officer stood up
and began to clap his hands and thanked me for "such a fine lecture,
delivered on a high ideological and political level." At that they all stood
up, too, and joined him with their applause.

I walked over to the political officer and asked why the men had not been
listening.

'bn the contrary," he assured me, "they were most attentive. I was watching
then. The thing is that some of tha are Kirgizians who understand no Russian
except for general comands..."

I was literally at a loss for words, and tears of dismay caused my throat to
contract. "How could you do that!" I barely managed to say, choking on the
words.

'lhe major, however, was quite pleased. "Don't let that worry you," he comforted
me. We all have our let-downs on our jobs. The lecture has done them no

harm, and it is served a useful purpose becanae la start has been nade/ [italics].
Their political education has begun!"

I have been living in the West for 2 years now, and my life has changed cowletely.
But have I changed? Yes and no. The past still has a grip on me in some ways;

it is not at all easy to pull out one's deep roots. Although I have gained
freedom, I as still not entirely free. One thing, however, is for sure:

having abandoned the Soviet propaganda rostrum, I no longer participate in its

1 [es .

1
FOIOI'l-‘ICIiLUSEONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Anastasiya Poverennaya was born in 1939. She was the secretary of a rayon
Konsomol committee in the town of Huron, on the Volga River, and later worked
there as the director of a House of Culture. She. was subsequently the
director of a lecture office in Novgorod, then worked as lecturer-consultant
on Harxist-Leninist education at the Officers' Club of the Leningrad Military
District's Political Directorate. She is presently residing in Heat Geruny.

COPYRIGHT: Kontinert Verlag Gubli. 1982

9681
C80: 1800/1063

16
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFNJAI.USE20NLY

NATIONAL

STRUCTURE. FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC, SOCIAL WHEN? DESCRIBED

Leningrad RAYKOH I NAUCHNO-TEKHNICHBSKAYA INTELLIGENTSIYA in Russian 1981 (signed
to press ll Sep 81 ) pp 25-30

[Excerpts from book "The Rayon Committee and the Scientific-Technical Intelli-
gentsia", Lenizdat]

[Excerpt] The comprehensive approach in planning presupposes a social orientation
in plans, a rational combination of aectorial and territorial development and in-
tcrsectorial and intrasectorisl proportions, strengthening of economic balance,
and fuller consideration of the interests of consumers in shaping production as-
signments.

The party has always considered the comprehensive approach to be a key principle of
social planning which permits thorough consideration of the requirements of propor-
tional economic development and resolving social problems.

Seven years ago a public council on economic and social development was set up at
the Snol'ninskiy Rayon committee of the CPSU. The purpose of the council was to
provide methodological and practical help to the rayon party committee in organiz-
ing and managing integrated economic and social development of the rayon. The
council is a public body under the rayon CPSU committee (see diagram on next page)
and works directly under its leadership. The council determines the ways and
methods of solving particular problems of economic and social development of the
administrative region and of production and labor collectives, and orients them to
raising work efficiency and quality. The council summarizes and disseminates pro-
gressive know-how in working out and implementing comprehensive plans of economic
and social development, and organizes fulfillment of its resolutions and recommen-
dations.

The principal areas of activity of the council are the following: improving organi-
zation and management of the public economy; improving the efficiency of the use of
labor. material, and financial resources. and the use of fixed production capital
and capital investment. The council also concerns itself with questions of raising
the technical level and efficiency of production and the quality of labor and out-
put produced through the efforts of specialists. The council gives close atten-
tion to communist indoctrination of the working people and population, refining

forms and methods of socialist competition. and to questions of maintaining a
clean. healthy environment.

17
FOI10FFIJA1.USI(INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Council of Economic and 50ch Development of the Smol'ninskiy
Rayon CPS'U Conittee.

(1) Ir: mmyu cones: '

 

kijpmn-Juus tours | I Oructcucuuuu ccxpcupu. 1n“. 1.

' m—'____..-_

 

 

 

'1.-hu.npc.1tcanun no uouounurcmuy j__ _: ' 3.111. npcnuareas no nay'IlIo-tulmmu'k'uuv '
|—-“) a connauuouy pasanﬂm | ‘5) nporptttx i

 

 

. nan;|_

tonepmeucveounue m
1mm: e M‘y

Kay: (1)
(2)
(3)
(3)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)

(18)
(19)
(20)

 

 

 

I ____________. l

S6) Ccnnn tour; I I

.'—-'—-l—.—.-.

3.

 

 

 

 

 

 

—- -— —l'=—lj -——|;—-- -—| I -
ken-“3.. E_(1o)(n)- iuzi 13 (1:) (1511216) :.2 (.18)(199-- i
4:: I' '22 2:: =
H 'i-EE Ii : ,z. i; .i 3:3 125.3% 1.? _ (20) i
i.§- .5: I; i ;2_.- s . ». == 4,3: I; : :: Oprronmcr .._
g; :I I1: '3 .3 i': mg: lag}: !'."s.:'.::::..:‘.?:“':
l':_:' ﬁg _I -i ' g E !$ ' g'§ gig :IE' I}: i nunocm’
3:1é5 :1 ' H; g 2:2 2| .2 82; .lg 5 ““55““:ou
I: '§§3;|1-:‘.c||3 ila§i3i§:'.%”§ :Is ; "“"'"’"‘.
5 gggggs-iélésllzlﬁglezlsgg1:35 -._:.§|. -
:—g:2:I2-::112.,:;,::;;251325;::::inha.

Presidium of the Council;

Chairman of the Council;

Accountable Secretary of the Council;

Deputy Chairman for Economic and Social Development;
Deputy Chairman for scientific-Technical Progress;
Sections of the Council;

Improving Control in Automated Control Systens;
Laior Resources;

Socioeconomic Planning of Development of the Collective;
Por Scientific lcsesrch Institutes;

Por Planning-Design Divisions;

For Industry;

For Construction;

Por Railroad transportation;

For Motor Vehicle Transportation;

socialist Coupetiton;
Por Dissemination and Introduction of Progressive Know-ﬂow Based

on Scientific.Technicel Research;
Council of Innovators;

Council of Tutors;
Organizing Conlittee for the Exhibition "Esperionce with Raising
Work Efficiency at Scientific Research Institutes and Design Bureaus

in Leningrad."

18
FOI‘OI'ICIAI.USIGHVLY
FOR OFF“ 1A1. USE ONLY

Lending workers, scientists, engineering—technical personnel, and party, Soviet,
and economic managers take part in the work of the council.

The council is headed By a presidium. The chairman of the presidium has two
deputies in charge of economic and social development and technical progress. 0r-
ganizational work is assigned to the accountahility secretary. The working units
of the council are 11 sections, the council of innovators, the council of tutors,
and the organizing committee for the exhibition "Experience with Raising work
Efficiency at scientific Research Institutes and Design Bureaus in Leningrad."

Each section has a chairman, a deputy, and an accountable secretary. The sections

are usually headed By annagers of science-production associations, enterprises,
or organizations.

The sections of the council include experienced specialists, scientists, engineer-
lag-technical personnel, and party and trade union workers. These are people who
not only have a good knowledge of their occupations, but also have a broad outlook.
For example, the deputy chairman of the section on scientific research institutes
is communist V. Ya. Paul', head of the division of development, organization, and
economics of scientific research at TsNIIHP [Central Scientific Research Institute
of the Maritime Fleet]. He is one of the authors of the methodology for compre-
hensive evaluation of the efficiency and quality of work at scientific institu-
tions and the organizer of socialist competition among the science-production
associations and scientific research institutes of Smol'ninskiy Rayon.

L. V. Ivanova, head of the sector on technical-economic substantiation at TsNIlHP,
also works actively in this sane section. She is a highly skilled specialist who
regularly analyzes the economic activities of the scientific research institutes
in the rayon . The results of her analysis are taken into account in evaluating
the efficiency and quality of their work.

The sections perform the following functions: systematic analysis of the state
and developmental trends in their areas; investigation of timely problems of
raising the efficiency of public development in the rayon; determining ways and
means or solving these problems; giving organizational and methodological help to
the rayon party committee and executive committee, and to enterprises and organi-
zations; submitting informational materials and analytic, forecast, and innovative
proposals to the presidium of the council on improving management of the economy
of the rayons; organization of quarterly socialist competition according to a
comprehensive system for control of work quality and efficiency (Ks UBKR); and,
snumarizatlon and dissemination of progressive knowbhow at seminars, meetings,
and science-practice conferences.

Here is how the work of the council is organized. The presidium and its sections
compile plans of work for the year. They are reviened at meetings of the sections
and or the presidium and coordinated with the bureau of the Soviet at the oblast
party committee.

The work plans of the sections include conducting scientific-technical conferences,

rayon seminars, quarterly "quality days," special days in honor of specialists and
innovators, competitive inspections, and scientific-technical exhibitions.

FOI‘DFIIJAI.U§E(NVLY
FOR 0|-’l-‘l(1AL USE ONLY

1b prepare for and conduct the planned activities the sections form working com-
missions made up of the most experienced specialists. The commissions have 3-5
members.

Monitoring performance of the plans of the council and its sections is assigned
to the accountable secretary. Each year before 15 January they compile reports
and send them through the section for dissemination of progressive know-how at

the Leningrad Central Scientific Research Institute to the Soviet of the oblast

party co-sittee.

The territorial-sectorisl principle of managing socialist production and the in-
tensified role of party organizations in solving management problems necessitate
the development and use of new forms and methods of managing the improvement in
work efficiency and quality at enterprises and organizations of the rayon.

One of the major projects carried out by the council in the 10th Five—Year Plan
was development of an integrated system to manage work efficiency and quality.
It is in operation today alongside sectorisl systems and supplements them with
respect to sociopolitical matters. In setting up this system the council made

use of the experience of the L'vovskays Oblast CPSU committee, the Hytishchi
City CPSU committee, and the Hoskovskiy Rayon CPSU committee in Leningrad.

The comprehensive control system contemplates planning improvement in work effi-
ciency and quality, keeping track of it, monitoring it, and evaluating the re-
sults. The evaluation is done by comparing work efficiency and quality coeffi-
cients achieved by enterprises, organizations, groups, and the rayon as a whole
with similar coefficients for a corresponding period of the preceding year.

The main principles of the evaluation are uniform methodology, establishing a
base indicator for work efficiency and quality, prompt and periodic evaluation,
comparability and objectivity, and publication of results.

The crucial indicators in the methodology for evaluating scientific research
institutes are the economic impact from introduction of new developments and
their high scientific-technical level, while for planning-design associations
the main indicators are reducing the estimated cost of construction of planned
projects and conserving materials and energy.

Each quarter the commissions of the council together with the industrial-
transportation division of the rayon CPSU committee review the report data sub-
mitted by enterprises and organizations, process it, and report on it to par-
ticipants in the rayon efficiency and quality day. The results of work on the
Ks UEKR are totaled at the same time as the results of socialist competition in
the rayon. Appropriate places are awarded according to these results.

COPYRIGHT: Leni zdat , 1981

11.176
(:50: [800/491 '

20
FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(IVLY
SUGGESTED LECTURE TOPICS 0" W TRADE UNION SPEECH

[Editorial Report] Hoscov SLOVO LEKTORA in Russian No 5. May 1982, carries on

p 17 a SOD-word list of "Themes of Lectures, Reports. and Conversations for the
Explanation of the Speech of Conrade L.I. Brezhnev to the XVII Congress of Trade
Unions of the USSR." Among the 60 topics listed are: "He will fulfill the
decisions of the XXVI Party Congress," "He will support the new and advanced.”

and'Trade unions in the political system of Soviet society."

OBKOM SECRETARY 0N RAISING LABOR PRODUCTIVITY

[Editorial Report] lbscow SLOVO LERTORA in Russian No 5, Hay 1982, carries on
pp 63-65 a Loco-word article title "In the name of creative and interesting
work" by A. Vorob'yev, secretary of the Zaporosh'e oblast' comittee of the
Ukrainian Cos-mist Party. The article suggests that the selection of good
lecturers and the preparation of interesting lectures will pronote improved
productivity among workers in increasingly mechanized enterprises.

OBKOH SECRETARY 0N TRANSFB 0F PARTY EXPERIENCE 1'0 rossomr.

[Editorial Report] Moscow mwoor KWST in Russian No 1. January 1982.
carries on pp 8-13 a 6,000dvord article titled "The Health of Party Experience
to the Konaonol" by H. Trunov, first secretary of the Belgorod oblast conittee
of the CPSU. The article describes the efforts of the B lgorod party organiza-
tion to involve Komsomol activists in its work in order to develop their leader-

ship capabilities.
COPYRIGHT: "Holodoy ko-mmist". 1982

(:SH: 1800/652 - END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY