NI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10703

l0 July 1982

Japan Report

ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY FORECAST FOR 1982

(FOUO 48/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
NOTE

Jrss publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/107
30 July 19

JAPAN REPORT

(POUO 48/82)

ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY FORECAST FOR 1982

CONTENTS

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Electronics Industry Business Forecast for FY 82
(Shoso Hatenabe; NIKKEI ELECTRONICS. 12 Apr 82)

Balanced, Orderly Growth
Slow Recovery Rate
Promising Growth Areas

Pierce Co etition
Good Grout For Coupoters

Medical Equipment
Conunications Equipment
Growth of Parts Industry

- a - [III - ASIA - 111
BLECTTONICS INDUSTRY IUSIUESS FORECAST FOR FY 82
balanced. Orderly Growth
Tokyo NIX!!! ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 261-263

[Article by Shoso Hetanabe, Assistant lditor: "Toward Orderly Growth, Hith
Balance Between Doneetic and Poreign Deland"!

[Textl Growth in Private-Use Sector Hill Stagnete. but Industrial-Use Sector
and Parts Hill Undergo Double-Digit Growth

Abstract: The FY 81 performance of Japan's electronics in-
dustry showed double-digit growth as the three sectors of
private use, industrial use, and parts coabined for a total
of over 10 trillion yen. AlthOugh electronics for private
use slowed on the donestic market, exports centered on VTR
were responsible for large growth. Electronics equip-en:
for industrial use has seen doaestic deaand account for the
aajor share, as has been the case in the past, but the con-
puter export-i-port situation has seen a turn in which ex-
ports have outrun iaports, and the entire product area has
becoae export-oriented. As a result, Japan's electronics
industry has seen its overall export ratio exceed 50 per-
cent, and its status as an export industry has been
strengthened considerably. The continuing recession in

the United States and Europe in FY 82 and the slow increase
in consuaption are expected to cause the private-use sector
to suffer low growth. A proportionate decrease in the
growth of electronics parts for this sector nay also be ex-
pected. 0n the other hand. both doaeetic and foreign de-
sand for products in the industrial sector is brisk. and
growth paralleling that of the previous year can be entici-
peted. The consequences of the trade friction with the
Uestern world are becoadng lore acute, but it seeas possi-
ble that this trend will see the brakes applied during

FY 82. and Japanese products nay enter u.s. and European
aarkets sore saoothly.

As has been its custoa in previous years. "It!!! ELECTRONICS sent out quas-
tionnaires to 96 electronics equipnent and parts asnufecturers in 193 areas

INJI‘OIIICIAI.IIII(I‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and by the end of February had received answers from 86 companies and 193
areas. This data, together with material obtained by the cooperative efforts
of the industrial survey department of the Nippon Kyogo Bank, sections 1 and
2 of the N130" KBIZAI editorial staff, and NIKKEI BUSINESS, were used to cosr
pile this forecast of the Japanese electronics industry for 1982.

Better Than lo—Percent Growth Overall; Total Production of 12 Trillion Yen

According to the grand total table (Table 1) compiled from these question-
naires, the total production of Japan's electronics industry in FY 82 is ear-
pccted to show a growth of 10.8 percent over the previous year and come up
to 12 trillion yen. This will represent double—digit growth over a 6-year
period, but the items responsible for this year's growth seem somewhat dif-
ferent from those of the past.

V'l'k Ends Sharp Initial-Stage Growrh Period

Looking first at electronics equipment for the private sector, FY 81 saw
moderate growth, as expected, in the area of color television tape recorders,
which. together with the expansion in VTR's over the previous fiscal year.
resulted in an overall growth of 18 percent. Video discs and sound equip-
ment did not perform as had been expected. In the particular area of sound
equipment. the mainstream system components began to suffer during the latter
half of the year, and for the total year they declined to below the previous
vcar's rate.

It is expected that moderate growth in color television and tape recorders
will continue in FY 82 as before. 0n the other hand. sound equipment will be
faced not only with the worldwide lack of increase in individual spending
power but also with the consumers' reluctance to make purchases, what with

the advent of DAD [digital audio disc] in the United States, Europe, and Japan,
as well as the changes in interest on the part of young people; thus there
seems to be little chance of recovery at least during the first half of the
year. Even assuming that DAD. which all companies expect to market starting
this fall, becomes a paying item, it does not seem possible that this market
area will register a plus.

Such being the case, FY 82 will again see VTR's serving as the prime force to
pull the private-sector electronics industry through. 0n the other hand. VTR
production in FY 81 exceeded 10 million units, and it will be difficult to
maintain a doubling pace, as has been the case during the past few years.
Japanese manufacturers export 80 percent of their total production and are
supplying 95 percent of the world's demands, but no great increase in the
American market can be expected in FY 82, while domestic demand is expected
to stall at about 2 million units. As a result, electronics equipment for
the private sector is expected to be at a low level of about 6.9 percent.
and total production is expected to be 6.15 trillion yen. Its fraction of
the total market will represent a 1.3-point drop to 36.3 percent.

summon“
Industrial-Use Electronics Expected To See Double-Digit Growth Overall

Production of electronics for industrial use is expected to be good overall
in FY 82. It is estinsted that computers and related equipment increased
18 percent over the previous year in FY 81. but this is expected to increase
another 18 percent or better in FY 82, and sales will close in on 2 trillion
yen.

At the present tine, there seem to be nothing in the counter area that

eight serve as a brake on growth. It has been reported that the new general-
use large cowuters which the various companies announced in FY 80 and 81 are
"receiving far more orders than expected.” and their production will go on-
strean in FY 82. OA-related equipment such as personal computers and Japa-
neselanguage word processors are expected to see their growth period approach-
ing, and they are expected to double or triple their growth in FY 82. Exports
exceeded inorts for the first time in FY 81, and this margin is expected to
increase in FY 82; total exports of all donestic industries are expected to
double. ’

Because construction investment by the Telegraph and Telephone Public Corpora-
tion for FY 82 is less than the previous year's expenditures. there will be

a decrease in demand in the government and public sector insofar as comaunica—
tions equipment is concerned. 0n the other hand. domestic private demand and
exports will increase, and the overall picture is expected to show roughly a
10-percent increase over the previous year. The demand on the part of the
Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation has been suffering ever since the
lifting of the donestic telephone stockpiling program, but Ills (high-level
infernation commieation system) development for FY 82 will be budgeted at
260 billion yen and will finally get off the ground. There are bold plans

to convert the entire country to digital exchanges and optical transmission
systen within this century. and if this INSPrelated construction msterializes,
there is ample possibility that the Telegraph and Telephone Public Corpora-
tion's needs will become sizable after FY 83.

Electric nessurenent equipment is also expected to show double-digit growth
in FY 82. Sustained by private industry's densnds for facility renovation
and by increased exports. industrial equipnent is predicted to expand lb per-
cent over the previous year. in the neasurement equipment area, the invest-
ment in m facilities is expected to hurt expansion in ordinary measurement
equipment. but there will be expansion in measurement equipment for semi-
conductor-related and optic-related areas. 0n the other hand, chances are
die for a big recovery in electronics equipment for medical use in FY 82.
The net effect is expected to be an increase of 13.2 percent over the previ-
ous year in electronics equipment for the industrial sector. for a total of
6.16 trillion yen. This sector will account for 36.2 percent of all elec-
tronics sales. which will be up 0.7 percent fron the preceding year.

Growth of Electronics Bquipnent Parts in Private Sector To Languish

The scale or growth in production of electronics parts in FY 82 is expected
to expand 12.7 percent over the previous year to 3.8 trillion yen. Its share

3

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the total electronics market will be 36.2 percent, up 0.6 percent from
last year.

Electronics parts expanded over the entire front during FY 81, to 20 percent
over the preceding year, for a total of 3.37 trillion yen. The main factors
responsible for this large increase were increased production in VTR and 0A-
relsted equipment and the increased demand for parts in multicomponent areas.
The growth rate in VTR is expected to decrease in FY 82. while the inactivity
in sound equipment is expected to continue for a while. with the result that
growth in demand for general private-use electronic parts will probably suf-
fer. 0n the other hand, the area of general parts for electronics equipment
for industrial use is expected to maintain its high rate of growth even after
FY 82. In the overall area of parts, the trend to "lighter, thinner, shorter,
and smaller" is taking over, together with improved performance and high
densification.

In the semiconductor area, there was sharp growth in the VTR area in FY 81, in
which the growth in individual semiconductor elements exceeded that of Ic
[integrated circuits]--something that had not been seen for a long time-~but
this area is expected to witness a turnaround in FY 82. On the other hand.
there will probably be no sharp increase in IC exports. The sharp increase
in the American market share taken up by Japan-made 16 memory and the de-
pressed business of the principal American semiconductor manufacturers have
increased the objections of the American side to Japanese to, and this is not
an atmosphere in which domestic manufacturers can be pushing unilateral ex-
ports.

Effort To Expand Domestic Demand Is Important Subject

Japan's electronics industry not only has exceeded 10 trillion yen in produc-
tion but also has upped its export ratio to over 50 percent. This amounts to
shipping more than 50 percent of domestic production overseas. Japan's elec-
tronics industry has already been in this situation for some time, and it has
come to the point where domestic factors will not determine the rise or fall
of this industry. The increasing trade-friction problem besetting Japanese
products has switched from a one-industry or one-product type to an entirely
different dimension. If the electronics industry is to look for more growth
in the future. it must somehow promote domestic demand in line with increased

exports.

To be sure. there are only a few areas in which the electronics industry can
by itself cause an expansion in domestic demand. 0n the other hand. there
may be a number of pathways by which a large project can be used as lever to
increase domestic demand, just as with INS. A balanced growth between domes-
tic demand and exports may be the situation that Japan's electronics industry
should be looking to in the future.

INDI‘OIIWCIAI.IEILCM'LV
Table l. Prospects for the Japanese Electronics Industry in FY 82

1.
2.
3.
lo.
5.
6O
7.
8.

9.

25.

(Unit: 1 Million Yen)

 

 

 

elumICaall(en) 0301300 aaszsoo 4301100 :17» 1000

ustSI (300s) (300s)

Ni» 2 MM em aims 3.13.100 in.» an ass

cam (on) 3.200300 0.000100 mum ms was

(an) (335$) (041$)

"Item on» W m m nu use
10 392a-983W'C. mm mu man- "as um
11 trawl . mm new moon was me
12 sauna 12783 183.“ am 106 Im
13 canon! «as» near swam n24 was
is man. mm cum nun mu nus
16' (Inna . near can» «can n2: ["1
is to teen usa- 1nan an nus
"es-am» amazes 3.374.430 0.000.200 no.9 "2.7

(309$) (300$) (31.8%)
10 ~e14aa nsnn1 Lana» szuI nts nus
19 I?! ﬁll! «nan «Lao nus an:
20 seal? :an anus «nan an: . use
:1 sea. ann- nrns nan» nan use
22 “I?" (saw mu m — ms
’3!" 0.31m»: wanna 12.00am no.0 no.0

20 (t§vy9.ttet(ﬂt) (man) (MM) (mam)
3'5 " ushnmnuunn-anrwm

 

FY 80 (actual) [constituent 10. Computers and related equipnent

ratio (1)] ll. Applied electronics equip-ent
FY 81 (estinted) [constitu- 12. Electronics equip-ent for nedical
ent ratio (1)] use

FY 82 (predicted) [constitu- l3. Hire cos-unications equipmt
ent ratio (2)] 16. Radio col-unications equipment
FY 81/80 (1) 15. Electric neaaurenent equip-ent
FY 82/81 (1) 16. Snell calculators

Private-use electronics 1?. Electronic parts (total)
equip-ent (total) 18. General electronics parts
(Total. excluding electronic 19. Electron tubes

ranges) 20. Semiconductor elenents
Industrial-use electronics 21. Integrated circuits *1
equip-ent (total) 22. Liquid crystal elalents
(Total. excluding 8-811 23. Total

calculators) 24. (Total. excluding electronic

ranges and anall calculators)
*l The FY 80 results for liquid-crystal elenents are only for
Jan-Mar 81

COPYRIGHT: likkei-HcGrav-ﬂill Inc. 1982

“WWW!”
FOR‘DFFNJA1.USE{DNLV

Slow Recovery Rate

Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 p 26‘

[Article by Ryoki Sugita. Editor in chief of NIKKI! BUSINESS: "Business for
FY 82--Low Autonomous Recovery Strength"]

[Text] He asked Ryoki Sugita, editor of NIKKEI BUSINESS.
for his outlook on this coming year's business; he expected
growth to hover at about 3 percent.

Japan entered FY 82 amid stormy economic problems such as the increasing
Japanese-American trade friction and the fluctuations in the yen exchange
rate. Hhile it may be said that the economy overall has been recovering since
last spring, the actual situation is that a series of positive and negative
factors have been in effect. The actual rate of growth during the third quar-
ter of FY 81 (Oct-Dec 81) was -0.9 percent compared to the preceding year, and
the decline in exports and the low rate of growth in domestic demand have re-
sulted in a recovery strength that is much less than had been expected.

Our country's economy is in a state of adjustment. much like that following
the second oil crisis, but what might be the situation if we compare the
present with FY 78, when there was sharp recovery after a 5-year period of
adjustment.

(Points of Similarity) The first item of similarity with the stage just be-
fore the previous economdc recovery is the business environment. Even though
the economy is said to be bad, the profit and loss base of business is cosr
paratively stable. The most recent operating profit rate does not suffer

in comparison with 1978 values, while the indicators that display the busi-
ness operating mind are on the same level as in 1978. if not somewhat higher.
At the ease time, consumer prices are following stabilizing trends, and the
employment picture, while suffering somewhat of a decline, is certainly no
worse than it was in 1978; when these points are considered, the environment
surrounding household finances is roughly the same.

(Points of Difference) 0n the other hand. there are some factors in this
present economic environment which are considerably different from the period
following the first oil shock, and there is some fear that these [factors]
may apply a braking effect on future economic recovery. The first is that
the tax load is considerably heavier in both household and business cate-
gories than in the 1978 period. That is to say, income taxes, which had been
following a "no increase or decrease" tax adjustment program over the past
few years. have actually increased at a rather sharp pitch. This increase
has suppressed the increase in households' disposable income end has become

a major factor in the stagnation of personal consumption. Secondly, there
was a large emergency budget drafted in 1978, by which means public finances
sought to play a major role in restoring the economy. but this leverage ef-
fect on the part of public finances is completely out of the question now.

FY 82 has seen a continuation of FY 81 in that general public financial ex-
penditures have been following a zero rate of expansion, and when seen from

INUI OFFICLAI.IEIE(IULY
the actual base, public finances have been exerting a minus effect on the
FY 82 growth rate.

At the same time, althOugh a relaxed policy is being adopted where fiscal
policy is concerned. the fact that the United States is maintaining a high
interest rate policy has affected the yen exchange rate, so it is not pos-
sible to adopt a super-low interest rate policy as was done in 1978. In
addition. the foreign economic environment which envelope the Japanese econ-
omy is worse than in 1978. The American economy displayed a fairly strong
recovery during 1978, and the three nations of Japan, the United States, and
Germany served as the locomotive which pulled world economy forward. 0n the
other hand, the present situation is that both the United States and Europe
are mired in stagflation, and large-scale business failures are causing busi-
ness and social problems. In this situation. the American economic distress
is spurring worldwide economic stagnation and nurturing the rapid energence
of the principle of protective trade. Despite the fact that the yen rate
has not suffered as much from the high American interest rates as some ex-
perts had predicted. the volume of exports has dropped. Just as the economy
of FY 81 was supported by a growth in the export rate, this unfavorable ex~
port growth rate will probably have a large impact on the overall economy.

(Investment in Facilities, and Individual Consumption) As indicated above.
public finances and the international environment are far worse than they
were in 1978, and the degree of economic recovery in FY 82 will depend on the
increase in business-centered economic activities of the people. Taking this
viewpoint, we look first at private invest-ant in facilities, and we see that
where there was overall stagnation as a result of medium-size and small busi-
nesses' difficulties in FY 81, there is a trend toward increased activity in
the area of investments in facilities. Considering the fact that business
profits in the last part of FY 81 were comparatively good, the will to in-
vest in order to survive has been strengthened. 0n the other hand, there is
stagnation in exports. worsening trade friction, and blunted domestic demand,
[all of] which are causing a psychological withering. and there is the possi-
bility of repeated delays and reductions in investment plans. The government
is anticipating a 10.5-percent increase in private investment in facilities.
but this may be expecting too much. In addition, the government is anticipat-
ing a 14.3-percent growth in private invest-eat in housing, but there has been
no reduction in the gap between income-producing power and the cost of homes
and land, and this anticipated rate of growth also seens beyond reach. Indi-
vidual consumption is expected to undergo a moderate recovery as the result
of the stable increase in income that will accompany the recovery in business
profits and the stabilization process. On the other hand. taxes and social
welfare costs are increasing, as mentioned before, and this tempo of recovery
is expected to be very moderate.

As a result, the autonomous recovery strength of the econosy in FY 82 is not
very strong and. first of all, the government's target of a 5.2-percent growth
see-s unreasonable. It may be possible to eke out a 3-percent growth rate,
which may be sustained for 3 years. Since the macroeconomic growth rate is

so weak, there is a good possibility that the differences between different
types of industries and businesses will grow. Even in the midst of a 3-per-
cent growth rate, there may be a life-and-death difference between businesses

FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR‘05FKJAI.USE‘ONLY

that profit through a conservation of energy and labor practices and those
that don't. At the sane time, there may be questions of just how to survive
and lay the foundations for the let century.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-HtGrawbﬂill Inc. 1982

Promising Growth Areas

Tokyo NIKIEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 265-269

[Article by Yasuhiro Hori, Nippon Kogyo Bank: "Environment and Changes in
the Electronics Industries in FY 82"]

[Text] The Industrial Survey Department of the Japan xogyo
Bank predicts that Japanese industry will naintain a high
rate of growth. as before. but that the rate of growth will
be soaewhat blunted compared to last year.

Scale of 10 Billion Yen Attained in FY 81

The electronics industry in FY 81 continued to grow as before. During the
period following the oil crisis, when Japan's economy was in a decelerating
trend, the electronics industry drew people's attention because it was buck-

ing the trend in a unique manner and accelerating its growth.

Production during the first part of FY 81 showed an increase of 16.4 percent
over the preceding year. to a tocal of 5.145 trillion yen, and this high rate
was sustained during the latter half. There has been a continuing trend of
double-digit growth for 3 years, and there is no question that the level of
10 trillion yen will soon be attained.

When we look at domestic demand, electronics equipment for the private sector
excluding VTR's, was limited, but the growth in electronics equipment for the
industrial sector and the demand resulting fro. the rational invest-ants on

the part of industry prompted stable, increasing trends in electronics parts
sector. All export areas are in good shape, and there was an amazing 30.5-
percent increase to 2.65 trillion yen, during the first period.

What about FY 82?

The electronics industry environment in FY 82 may be said to be so-so. Some
individual highlights are discussed below.

First of all, what is the export environment? As before, the economy of the
leading countries has not been able to take advantage of the opportunity for
economic recovery, and the developing countries are waiting for the leading
countries to show a recovery. Deflationary trends may be diluted from here
on as the demand for oil continues to moderate, but there is no denying that
the strength of the recovery is weak. Hhere the exchange rate is concerned,
the yen level is correlating well with American interest rates, and this
trend will probably continue for a while. There may be a downward revision

IOItOFFKJAl.USIi0NlN
in American interest rates by the middle of the year, but there is a good
possibility that there will be an upward revision. This is why the yen rate
may see short-term fluctuations. but no large rise in the yen rate is expect-
ed, so there may be little effect on the electronics industry's finances or
its competitive base.

"hat is of concern here is the latently developing anti-Japanese criticism.
which is intensifying in the form of trade friction. There is a good possi-
bility that Japan must give equal importance to measures other than competi-
tive efficiency.

Next. what about the domestic market? Individual consumption reversed the
expected trends in FY 81 and lapsed into a stagnated state, but consumers ex-
pect that improvement in consumption will accompany a stabilization of prices
in FY 82, and a moderate but sure recovery is expected.

The environment surrounding industry is. on the whole, good. Investments in
facilities on the part of large industries are being rationalized, a strong
investment attitude centered on investment in renovations is supporting the
foundation, and a moderate recovery is expected. There is great activity in
rationalization of business practices. Government and public expenditures
are expected to reflect the recent fiscal administrative situation and settle
at a small increase.

As a result, the rate of growth in production of the entire industry during
FY 82 is expected to be rather slow, but it is expected to continue to grow
as before. Looking at the different areas. industrial-use equipment and
electronic parts are expected to lead in growth. In the area of equipment
for private use, VTR, the prime mover, cannot be expected to maintain its
doubling pace because of the enlarged base on which comparison is made, in
addition to which there are the floundering of the audio market and the ex-
pected trade friction in color television; thus a slowdown in the rate of
growth cannot be avoided. These trends are discussed in greater detail on
an individual basis below.

VTR Hill Grow at a Rate Greater Than 10 Percent Over a Long Period

VTR has continued to surpass color TV in its long-term high rate of growth
and has strengthened its grasp as the main item in the area of equipment for
private use. The rate of expansion in the use of VTR in Japan is 10 percent.
while in the United States and Europe it is but 5 percent. The expansion
rate of household electric appliances will exceed 10 percent. VTR is expect-
ed to enter a real growth period should its price be cut to under 100,000 yen.
If this empirical rule is to be believed, than VTR will have considerable
latent growth potential, and a high expansion in this field can be expected.

The strategy for VTR for FY 82 is to lower the cost and develop small and
light portable units. As for performance, developmental competition on multi-
functional aress such as long recording, fast reproduction, and program sub-
scription has declined one step, and anxiety on the part of the customer at
the time of purchase has been eliminated. The eye of the customer is new

F0.l0!ll€lll.lll!(lﬂl¥
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY

directed at the price, and once the price comes close to 100,000 yen, there

is a good possibility for a boom in demand. A portable VTR can be carried
anywhere. and camera users love it. Furthermore, the demand for it is taking
in 8-mm fans as it finds increased use in households in general and among
students. On the other hand. it is important that measures be taken to keep
consumers from becoming averse to making purchases because of increased atten-
tion to ”8-mm video."

In the area of the overseas market, which accounts for 80 percent of the busi-
ness, the situation in some sectors is that inventory is accumulating, and
there may be an erosion in price. This is an area where the effects of the
fierce competition between Japanese industries for a share of the market are
felt, and there is a possibility that FY 82 will see a change in profit-
seeking policies and export strategies through selection of countries and
volume.

Stable Growth of Color TV

Color TV and audio play important supporting roles, but they seem to be under-
going development that is lacking in one major respect.

Domestic shipments of color TV have been displaying a weak trend for the past
several years as the result of sluggish purchases by consumers either as re-
placements or as new acquisitions. As consumer purchases recover in FY 82. a
groundswell in demand much like that seen when TV first became popular may
reappear. It is expected that there will be continued restrictive practices
as far as exports to Europe are concerned, and because of the trade confronta-
tion, no large increase in exports to the United States can-be expected.

There is a strong. latent demand potential in other countries, but the non-
oil—producing countries are suffering from deteriorating foreign exchange--
althougL there may be some fronts where there could be recovery.

The audio market, which has been moving at a high level. has seen a worsening
of its export environment. in addition to its having run its course, and has
been in a distressed state since the sumer of FY 81. Part of the background
for this is believed to be an aversion on the part of consumers to make pur-
chases because of the talk about digital audio. At the same time, there seems
to be a depletion of new ideas for new products, such as the radio cassette,
that evoke new demand. This set of severe conditions is expected to continue
through FY 82. but the situation is not completely hopeless. Small components
are catching on among the younger set and may make up for the drop in syscom.
Digital audio will make its appearance after this fall. The stage may not be
reached for full-fledged market development, but [digital audio] is expected
to make a considerable constribution to increased sales.

Software Is the Main Topic Vis-a-Vis Video Disc
What is being regarded with interest is the direction taken by video disc,
which has been developed as a large sales item by domestic and foreign com-

panies, following on VTR; a VHD type will be coming onto the market along
the optic mode. "hen this item increases in popularity, the demand for it

10
F0. OFFICIAI.IEIE(NULY
probably will approach that of a craze, but because it does not have recording
capability. attention will have to be directed at the software and volume re-
cord if it is to evoke general interest.

Computer Demand at Same High Level as Before

The demand for computers and related equipment is sustained by a strong desire
to rationalise and automate various sectors. and this high demand is seen from
large types of units to supersmall units. Semiconductor technology develop-
ment is promoting the low-cost. highly reliable. multifunctional pr0perties

of information equipment, while office automation (0A) is beginning to be ac-
cepted as a regular item. No change in active demand seems possible at this
time.

The demand for general-use computers. which are the main items, is predicted
to continue to grow at a high rate as a result of consumers' increased busi-
ness volume and the desire to enter into a network system. FY 82 is the spe-
cial year in which the new. very large computer series will make their ap-
pearance. and a large market is expected to be opened up. There will probably
be a fierce fight for market share between IBM and the domestic forces.
Preparations for the OEM (original equipment manufacturer) system are proceed-
ing in the export area. and good growth including peripheral and terminal
equipment is expected.

Demand for small types of equipment. such as office computers and personal
computers. is also active. This demand is the result of development in di-
verse treatment. their use by department and section units in large indus-
tries. and the desire of medium and small industries to rationalize opera-
tions. Businesses are beginning to become aware that reinforcing information
capabilities is an important way to lower costs in indirect areas and to
respond quickly to changes in environment, and these trends are expected to
remain active beyond any short-term improvement in business. On the other
hand, it is believed that various types of good-quality software must be
available if this Ca boom is to remain unchilled and to leave behind abso-
lutely no aftereffects. with the increasing reinforcement of sales strong-
holds in overseas areas. continued high growth in exports is expected.

Communications Equipment; Anti-American Friction ls of Concern

Looking now at communications equipment. first of all. a major trend reversal
is expected. in that the demand by the Telegraph and Telephone Public Corpora-
tion. which will spend 1.72 trillion yen for construction. represents a de-
crease of 28 percent from the previous year. On the other hand. demand by

the private sector reveals a great need for facsimile [equipment]. in-house
electronic exchanges (BPBX). and puahbutton telephones. Foreign countries
evaluate the main products exported overseas highly. and the Telegraph and
Telephone Public Corporation's deficit will probably continue to be more than
made up.

Of great concern at present is the increasingly protectionist attitude of the
United States. Should there be a revision in the communications law designed

ll
lili¢lﬂﬂ€lhl.ﬂ§l¢ﬂilﬂ
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

Lo close the market to Japanesedmade goods. there will be no question but that
exports to the United States, which account for one-third of [total] exports

in communications equipment, will be dealt a major blow. Communications are
intimately tied in with national defense and also are a future strategic indus-
try, but there are some problems which cannot be ignored from an economic
standpoint, making any solution very difficult. Japan is in a dilemma, in

that the better Japanese technology becomes. the more this friction will in-
crease.

whnt is clear is that the optical industry, which is considered to be the next-
gcneration large technology, finally seems ready to take off. The Telegraph
and Telephone Public Corporation's INS concept will really get moving in FY 82;
its main transmission pathways will be optical communication systems, and com-
mercialization is being promoted over the entire country. The market directed
at general industry, including in-plant measurement and control systems, is
gradually being developed.

Electronic Parts in Good Shape, Except for One Area of Distressed Growth

Electronic parts have maintained a long period of good growth. In addition

to the good showing of electronics equipment, particularly VTR, and the expan-
sion of exports reflecting the high foreign evaluation, there is also expan-
sion in the utilization area with the development in trends to mechatronics
that is responsible for this trend. This increasing trend will continue in

FY 82. On the other hand, it probably will be difficult to maintain such high
rates of growth as in the past. Because equipment manufacturers are introduc-
ing miniaturization, lightness in weight, and costdowns, greater use of IC
[integrated circuits] and composite systems is being promoted in the parts
used, and there are signs of troubled growth in the area of resistors and
condensers.

IC has become a basic industry through its role as a general-use intelligent
fundamental material, and FY 82 will see the start of shipments of 64K-class
items. Their price is undergoing a sharp decrease-only some four times that
of the 16K class, which is considered the ordinary-level item. Consumers are
anxious to see the introduction of this item, as a result of which the market
is witnessing sudden activity, and the different manufacturers will probably
increase production facilities, with an accompanying increase in production.

What is worthy of note here is the direction being taken by the American in-
dustrial world. and there is a resurgence in anti-Japanese criticism. "here
Japanese manufacturers had been able to garner a 40-percent share of the 16K
RAH market in the United States, it is reported that the share of the 64K RAM
is already 70 percent. American industry is considering coming up with com-
plaints claiming dumping, and it is said that the Department of Defense, cit-
ing the fear that domestic industry may be weakened to the point that it will
be too weak when it is needed, is going to propose the activation of national
safety conditions. [Our] problems with the United States seem about to be
rekindled on a level much beyond what they have ever been.

12

FOIiOIFICIAl.UBE(INLY
In another direction, American manufacturers are taking aim at Japan‘s high
labor productivity and process control technology and are actively locating
their plants in Japan. This move, coupled with the Japanese manufacturers'
reinforcement of their plants on American soil, seems about to reorient the
worldwide situation insofar as the semiconductor industry is concerned.

From the above discussion, there is no question but that the electronics in-
dustry will continue its high growth rate in FY 82. On the other hand, this
area includes a large number of problems that need to be resolved. Finally,
some of the principal subjects will be discussed.

The first subject is the response to the increasing load of investments in
research and development facilities. As seen in the example of the IC indus-
try in the most recent years, there is a very rapid tempo in technological
innovation, and the industry is increasing its status as a capital-accumulat-
ing industry because of the necessity to always be able to invest in high-
level facilities. For example, the scale of investments in research and de-
velopment facilities where 10 is concerned amounts to more than 30 percent of
sales, while the life cycle of the facilities has dwindled to 6 years. In
the future, both technological development strategy and reinforced fiscal
strategy will become indispensable functions, and a company's fate may well
be determined by its ability to make investments.

Secondly, there is the response to changes in product makeup. Changes in
product makeup resulting from rapid technological innovations are factors
which accelerate changes in industrial composition and expand differences
between industrial levels. An example that can be given here is the transi-
tion from crossbar exchanges to electronic exchanges in the communications
equipment industry. accompanied by a trend for large industries to handle
by themselves the production of principal parts; this is also reflected in
the share makeup between the large manufacturers.

The most important theme is how to avoid trade friction. The electronics
industry is an important pillar as an industry for acquiring foreign capital,
and avoidance of friction has become a national need. This is why the basis
of the problem differs between private use and industrial use and for IC.
"here private use is concerned, the Hestern countries are trying to create
opportunities to purchase from a well-equipped Japan, but where industrial-
use 10 is concerned, and the United States is moving to set up early defenses
against a Japan which is ever gaining strength. At the same time, it is
desirable that changes in production deployment accompanying technological
innovation be conducted in as short time as possible in order to avoid fric-
tion with developing countries.

Although there is no special remedy that is expected to have any effect in
this situation, it may be necessary at this stage to limit exports and rein-
force On-site production as means of escaping this anti-Japan criticism. 0n
the other hand, there are some promising aspects of our technological strength,
and technological agreements, promotion of joint development. and establish-
ment of cooperative systems may be needed. Re are certainly entering an era
where every effort needs to be made to overcome all ordeals.

l3

IOIiOFIICIAI.llIB(l'LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[(1')” . . .....

“mm." D 41m! l-II (2)
' ultra- (3)
l 3 D II“: (’1)

  
    

. -- .._.———-—

 

        

a I
I
' I
IS (2) I
nutm-
JIM-R).-
I0
II ~."
1 5 \lI-u
I :
l i
' m) !
In - - i
l i
I ’ |_' "j
i {at
5 5" I. Qw.‘
. i'r .
a J
. “ 3" . .
I ' ‘ ' I

(. IM- 12 au- 13“»:

m" (15‘ 1(9-'(11')’ m (35‘ (93' (1 '

Figure 1. Trends in Production and Hakeup Ratio of the Electronics Industry

Key:
1. 100 billion yen 6. 1979 13. Quarter
2 . Industrial electronics 7 . 3rd
equipment 8. 4th
3. Private-use electronics 9. lot
equipment 10. 1980
lo. Electronic parts 11 . 2nd

5. Total for electronico industry 12. 1981

COPYRIGHT: Nilakei-Hccrnw-nill Inc. 1982

16

momaamouu
Fierce Competition
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 270-273

[Article by Hutsuo Kodo and Hikio lanno of the Editorial Department, Nikkei
Electronics: "Production Scale of Electronics Equipment for Private Use To
Rise to 4 Trillion Yen Leve1"]

[Text] Both Domestic Demand and Exports in Fierce Environment

The environment surrounding the privatewuse electronics equipment industry

in FY 81 is not necessarily clear. The floundering economy and the lack of
growth in demand both overseas and at home stand out. VTR, which for the past
few years had been responsible for the good record achieved by electronics
equipment for private use, has seen its rate of growth stunted, although this
may be due partly to the vast scale of its market. At the same time, sound
equipment centered on system components has seen demand fall in both domestic
and foreign markets, and every producer has been forced to cut back produc-
tion. In addition, the video disc system, which appeared on the Japanese mar-
ket in the fall of 1981, and DAB (digital audio display), which is expected

to be put on the market in the fall of 1982, will require some time before
their markets are developed.

VTR, which first emerged in the mid-1970's and has since increased production
several times over, through various video games, attained a monthly produc-
tion figure of 1.12 nillion units in October 1981, breaking the 1 million bar-
rier. This was the result of the frenzied efforts of every manufacturer to
boost production in order to respond to the tremendous domestic and foreign
demand. It is expected that monthly production as a whole will reach 1.4 mil-
lion units in the spring of 1982. On the other hand, there is a trend, which
set in about the fall of 1981, toward reduced growth in demand, and there is
the possibility of excessive supply should all manufacturers maintain full
production.

In the fierce fight for [market] share being conducted between Beta and VHS
modes during the past few years, Tokyo Sanyo Electric, which is a daughter
company of Sanyo Electric and has been a mainstay of the Beta camp, last year
joined the VHS camp, and this activity by the VHS forces stands out. Beta
camp followers, such as Sony and Toshiba. seem to be retrenching somewhat.
but there is not expected to be any change this year in the ratio of seven
VHS companies to three Beta companies.

The video disc system, for which the household electric appliance industrv
has high hopes, saw the introduction in the market last fall of new products
in the form of CED (grooved static capacity) in the United States and optic
mode in Japan. Their sales have not affected the market. VED (grooveless
static capacity). sale of which had been expected to start in the spring of
1982. now has been postponed indefinitely. Despite these harsh conditions,
there is still strong demand for private-use electronic equipment, and there
is no doubt that the overall picture will see an improvement over the record
in 1981.

15

INJI1OIilCJAI.llﬂE(IULY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(HVLV

VTR for Household Use: 10 Million Level Passed, and Growth Blunted

VTR production in 1981 (calendar year) exceeded initial estimates by more than
1 million units, to a total of 9.5 million units. This is a very sharp rise

of 2.1 times that in 1980. As for deliveries, 1.55 million units were destined
for the domestic market (an increase of 67.4 percent over the previous year)
and 7.35 million units for the foreign market (113.6 percent over last year).
There are many who predict that production in 1982 will total 11-12.5 million
units.

The rate of use in Japan at the end of 1981 was thought to be roughly 10 per-
cent. It is generally the case that once the rate of use for a household elec-
trical appliance breaks the lo-percent barrier, there is a sharp rise in de-
mand. This is why the industry has high hopes for 1982. On the other hand,
VTR began to see demand decrease in 1981 just as the 10-percent rate was at
hand, and this trend is continuing into 1982. Because of this situation,

there have been some predictions that "it will be difficult for production to
attain 11 million units in 1982."

Product activities are seeing both the VHS and Beta camps strengthening their
multifunctional capabilities, and there are an increasing number of units
which can perform fast sending regeneration, static. images, and Roma trans-
mission. Niniaturized VTR is proliferating rapidly. and sets which weigh 3.8
to 6 kg or less, including the battery, have appeared. It had been said

2 years ago that "5 kg will be the minimum weight“ possible for portable sets.
and thus the speed of the development of miniature and lightweight sets is
truly amazing. There is no doubt that there will be even greater miniaturiza-
tion and reduction in weight in 1982. At the same time, miniaturization and
weight reduction are the top themes for the small color video camera to be
used with the portable VTR. 0n the technological side, it is noteworthy that
attention is being directed toward developing products which use a solid state
image element such as HOS [meta1~oxide semiconductor] or CCD [charge-coupling
device] for the imaging section; sales of video cameras using solid-state
imaging elements are expected in 1982, following the first sales of this type
of product by Hitachi Limited in 1981.

Reduction in price is also one of the major themes with VTR. At the present
time, the higher class items run 220,000-230,000 yea. the ordinary-type units
cost 160,000—170,000 yen. and the unit function low-cost units about 140,000
yen. The lowest priced item is the Sharp "My Video." which goes for 129,000
yen. Since there seems to be a shadow being cast over any increase in demand
in both domestic and foreign markets. this lowering in coat to stimulate
greater demand seems to be the main point with the manufacturers.

Color TV: Expectations for System Color TV

Total production for 1981 (calendar year) was 12.66 million units. which in
the course of the year broke the former record of 10.9 million units set in
1980. Whereas exports (excluding kits) increased 23.1 percent over the previ-

one year to 4.91 million units, domestic shipments declined 3.5 percent to
6.56 million units, displaying the difference in trend between domestic and

16

FOI‘OIF“JAI.U§E|HULY
foreign markets. 0n the domestic front. the miniaturized personal TV. which
was the item responsible for the increased demand in the past several years.
has seen s decrease in demand. There is stable demand for medium and large

multifunctional sound storage units; these run about halfway in demand, but

growth is stunted.

In addition to the situation described above. the economic picture in Japan
has failed to improve. and the net result hrs been a decline in domestic ship-
ments during 1981 from the preceding year.

On the other hand. the bud of a new development is emerging in the area of
color TV. which overall is not enjoying good growth. This is system color TV.
System color TV has a number of terminals and incorporates VTR, video disc
player, and audio equipment capabilities. In addition to the situation where-
by VTR has actually gained popular status on the domestic front and the fact
that video discs will appear on the market in the fall of 1981, there is con-
siderable interest in this system as a new-media color TV. The manufacturers
started real work on this system last year. and the fraction of this product
with respect to the total color TV field is still at the single-digit level;
there are assurances. however, that there will be a sharp increase in demand.
There are some in the industry who say: "This will be the mainstreaa of color
TV in 2-3 years."

Exports during 1981 to the BC (European Cos-unity) was 670,000 units. down
2.9 percent from the previous year. while exports to the United States in-
creased Sl.8 percent to 740,000 units as the result of increased demand caused
by the popularity of CATV. The EC is seeking a self-imposed limit on exports
in I982, and the problem of trade friction with Europe is presently rather
muddled; however. demand from the United States and from Middle and Near East-
ern countries has remained as strong as before, and the overall picture seems

favorable to continued growth.
Video Discs: Slipping Out of Tune

The large household electrical product on which the industry has been placing
its expectations as the mainline item for the 1980‘s is the video disc (VD).
which has finally appeared on the market. In Japan. Pioneer first came out
with the optical-type system in October 1981. while the American RCA came out
with its CED (grooved static capacity) mode in March 1981. The Japanese firms
Toshiba Corporation, Hitachi Limited, and Sanyo Electric have also started
marketing the same type of equipment as the Americans. The Japanese companies
not only market their own brands but supply DEM (under the respective merchan-
disers' brandnames) to large American retail outlets such as Sears. Roebuck
and J.C. Penney. In addition. Japan Victor and Hatsushita Electrical Indus-
tries olan to market their VND (groovelesa static capacity) model in April

1982.
Video discs. which emerged amid great expectations. are not enjoying favor-
able sales. Pioneer in Japan had expected sales of about 5,000 units per

month. but only in the first month was this target met. and sales have dropped
to about 3,000 units per month. In the United States. RCA had aimedatinitial

17

FOI‘OIFICIAI.UUI(IULY
son OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

sales of 200,000 units per year, but actual sales languished at less than
half the targeted level, at about 65,000 units. The main reason for this
sales inactivity is the small number of discs (recording bases). which does
not arouse the customers' interest. In Pioneer's case, it had come up with
but 160 titles by the end of March of this year. Since there are roughly
70,000 different records for audio use. there are many knowledgeable people
who say: "The number is too small." At the same time. the contents of disc
are centered on movie and TV programs. and there is nothing which exploits

the features of video disc; this is another factor responsible for the low
demand.

Because of this situation, inventories are stockpiling in the United States,
and bargain sales have started. In the case of the CED mode, the mnber of
sales below 300 dollars has increased, and RCA lowered its true price down
to 350 dollars as of February and started to sell its new product. Some
persons in the household electrical appliance industry say that when the VHO
mode is marketed this spring, there will be a brisk demand for video discs;
however. there is a good possibility that such a development will in the end
be just a hopeful dream.

Sound Equipment: "Structural Recession" Intensifies

The audio market tended to be low-key in both the domestic and foreign markets
In 1981, and the growth rates of every product with the exception of tape re-
corders stopped at the single-digit level (production base). So-so demand and
consumer coolness resulted in domestic demand's just breaking at 3 percent
over the previous year, while European and American markets are in state of
inventory excess. Almost all of the powerful manufacturers such as Pioneer.
Sony, and Toryo have cut back production in order to adjust inventories, and
production for 1982 will probably end on a low note. Because the confusion

in sales aimed at reducing inventories has brought chaos to retail prices.
audio will probably remain in a state of "structural recession" as long as
the overproductive nature of the industry is not rectified. It is already a
"recessed industry type index."

Although large growth is not expected, the demand for audio, centered on the
younger generation, will remain strong. Both the competition to develop new
products and the [market] share confrontation to meet these needs will prob-
ably intensify.

System components (syscom), the mainline product in the audio area, suffered
a great decline in 1981, and this trend is expected to continue this year.
Domestic shipments are expected to drop 20 percent for the second year in a
row. In its place, small components are coming out. Design innovations
utilizing electronic switch or photo diode display aimed at young men and
women may well make rapid advances. In view of the 60-percent rate of use
of stereo, the sale of small components as "second-generation stereo" has
possibilities which have manufacturers excited.

The popularity of headphone sets, represented by Sony's Walkman," shows no
sign of sbating. New products incorporating Dolby noise-reduction circuits

18

POROWICIALWONLY
may make their appearance. Radiocassettes will see multiple functions and
high add-on value additions. It may be of note to see how well microcassette
equipment is received in the music field. Accoapanying the multifunctional
nature and miniaturization of audio equipnent, it is believed that applica-
tion of nieces and seliconductor memory and the introduction of IC into main
circuits will become more popular.

In the area of digital audio. it may be well to note just how DAD and PCH
processors utilising VTR will proliferate and what degree of development will
be seen in digital cassettes.

DAD (Digital Audio Disc): Possibly 3 More Tears Before Real Use May Be 32-
pected

Digital audio disc (DAD), which has already been highly evaluated as the ”new
era record" to follow LP, is expected to appear on the market this fall. The
Phillips Company (Holland) and Sony produced an optical mode compact disc (CD)
through joint development. This unit has become the world's standardization
norm, and the powerful manufacturers of Japan and Europe have entered into
patent agreements witn Phillips in order to go into CD systee marketing.

There have as yet been no specific announcements of production volume or start-
ing dates. but the large Japanese companies that have strong semiconductor
technology. headed by Sony, are planning to display this product at the "All
Japan Audio Pair" this fall. Among these companies. those with record com-
panies under their umbrella--auch as Phillips, Sony, Hatsushita Electric Indus-
tries. Hitachi Limited. Toshiba Corporation, and Pioneer--are being watched
closely for their moves.

It is said that the cost of the player will be at least 150,000 yen, because
of the high cost of the semiconductor laser that is the heart of the system.
It is not known how many different types and what volume of records, which
hold the key to popular acceptance, will be on hand by that date. but many
manufacturers anticipate a large demand for players. It seems to be the gen-
eral consensus that it will he 3 years before really popular acceptance will
be seen. There is a possibility that some manufacturers will come out with a
product this year.

On the technological side, the aajor probleas are just how to improve the
yield of semiconductor lasers and to establish know-how in the mass production
of discs. In addition. there must be interchangeability between discs and
players made by different soft manufacturers and hard manufacturers. There
may be detailed conferences before long as to how to maintain quality thrOugh-
out the systen.

Japan Victor's AHD node can use both the VHD node of the video disc and the
play. and there is a possibility that it may reemerge should VHD become popu-
lnr.

l9

IIIICIHHKIAI.UBI(HULN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁCi$KALQIDKIICI ...l\..\.o.8 .l'l .Ila.“ .IDHKU. 2 an

out... .. on
3...... tﬁl. .. on

||l||l||lll||

 

.8. .9.
3%. II
.8 as
a! .1
a! .8
98 .8
.8 a!
.8 n8
98 .1
:5 II
WWW «3..
as. .3.
.8. .8.
.8. :8.
<8. «we
gtrI =8.
98 .8
n3. .3.
as. .8.
.8. II
.8. II
'C I.

.8.II3\B o

 

 

98. 0:5 838. and Ilmss. Sta
3... I 898 I m8... I
.3 ea :8 a. 8n..n 08..
..8. ..8 8.... 98.- 8.... 8...
".8. . ..8 8...... 3.... 8.8. ..8...
a. 9.8 Q8..- 83 8.... 8....
:2 o...— §d- 08.. 93.8. 98..
..8 ..8. 838 and 8...... ..8...
.8. ..8. 8...... 98.. 8a.». 8...
ms .. ..“EIII. .84.... I
3... . 8..l- I 1.8.... 98.. 8.... a...»
2... . 8n 8...: 8n. 8...- ..8..
.. .5 ..o: 98.3.. 98.... .83 8a...
2.... a... 8.3. 8...... 8...". 8....
.3. . a3.II.§w§h.Iowndo, 98.8. .. . 8.0M- I.
an. ..8. 98.2.... _ 8...”. 25.8.... 8......
3.... . 8 8.... . 2m... .5... 8.3
3.... ..8. and... 8...... 8...... ..8...
..8 ..8 83.8 .I-.o8.o. Easel - on}.
.2. I SS8.» .I - 8.8...." I
:m:. -w: aim.. II Iwﬁmma II
as a: I. . an In 5.
3.3333 . .ltltﬂn as!“

 

 

 

 

3...! 2....
1mm-.. II
3.8 R3
2.... 8...
898. ..8...
3N8 on;
22“. m...
3...”. a9...
..8... 8...
2...... |.I .
8o... ..8...
..... a.
5.8. 8......
Sen. .3...
5.8.. . .......8
8...... .3...
2...... 2....
3...... . ..8...
-n......... , 9.3...
$13.... I
83.9.... I
gr II o
Allviion—

333.00 on
..lIluIccc . c on

53in on
..khoﬁl on
.-.-......§..... :
4+«s.clu«_x.u== on
.T. 31...... an
naggm... uu
+lq+2... on
35n.h\.t.n00u
..hﬂ.k\.6K3.d
ICHI bu
va+wic 0n
..yln...~..-¢:: on

III‘Ig... vu

E>Ill.nu
rnoi. ﬂu
Da+.l.-u NH
Sn... tilt»... .S
......§...........u..o
sanlﬁvluuo

20

Inmates“
Vvv:

Key:

1. FY 80 (actual record) 17. Others
2. FY 81 (estimated) 18. Stereo set
3. P! 82 (predicted) ' l9. Stereo components
6. FY 56/55 (Z) 20. FM tuner
5. P! 57/56 (1) 21. Kiri amplifier
6. Volume 22. Record player
7. Value 23. uiFi speaker system
8. Electronic equipment for 24. Radio receiver
private use 25. General radio 2
9. Total, excluding electronic 26. Car radio
ranges 27. Other equipment for private
10. TV receivers (including use"3
kits) 28. Electronic range
11. Color TV 29. *1 Includes tape deck
12. Black and white TV 30. *2 Includes kits
13. VTR for household use 31. *3 Total of electric record
16. Magnetic sound-reproduction players, voice amplifiers, hear-
device *1 ing aids, CD transceivers, and
15. General tape recorder automobile speaker systems

16. Car stereo

._.”..- ‘-.-....._ ~o
I3):
.IIO

Im '/\
Ell “ -’

 

  
   
  

N' 9' -:'.|c,r- -!-I?‘.'3UHA{XI

 
 

kamsna(3)

 

VTR MIh.

 

(h)

._. ._.__1_J_i_i_L_L_L_iJ I
(S)l330567IOWIIIZI2.3456789I0llll
I'm-"I

6) teen _ (7):")

 

Figure 2. VTR Production and Inventory of VTR. According to
HITI Statistics

Data on Color TV Also Included for Reference Use

1. Production (10,000 units) 6. VTR inventory
2. Production of color TV 5. 1980
(including chassis kits) 6. 1982
3. VTR production 7. Month
21

IOI|DIFIJAI.UIIGIULY
FOR 0FFKJA1.USIIONLY

Electronic Ranges: Small Increase in Domestic Demand; Exports to Europe, for
Example, "111 Continue To Grow

The production of electronic ranges in 1981 exceeded 2.4 million units, which
represented a 29-percent increase (in number) over the previous year. Of this
total. 800,000 units were sold in Japan, and the remainder was exported to the
United States and Other areas. No large increase in domestic sales can be
anticipated for FY 82. The manufacturers have come out with a low-cost, sin-
gle-function unit costing about 50,000 yen to root out latent demand, and
there may be an increase of 100,000 units to 900,000, if only the number of
units is considered.

The plants which various manufacturers have established in the United States
have gone onstresm, so exports to the United States are expected to remain
about the same as last year. A considerable increase in the number and value
of exports to Europe and Australia is expected.

Composite ranges capable of oven cooking and steaming of food account for
roughly 80 percent of the total oven types. A recent development has been the
teaming together of a microcomputer and a sensor, whereby all the consumer has
to do is to place the food in the range and operate the starter switch, after
which the computer takes over; the number of units of this type is increasing.
There also are some models in which voice commands are used to operate voice-
synthesis-installed units to prepare the food.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-McGraw-Hill Inc. 1982
Good Growth for Computers
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 274-277

(Article by Norio Aoike, NIKKEI ELECTRONICS Editorial Office: "Computers.
Conmunications Equipment, and Measurement Equipment To Maintain Double-Digit
Growth"]

[Text] Overall Reinforced Aim Is To Export; [Japan-v.8. Trade] Friction Is
of Concern

Computers and Related Equipment: 0A and Dispersed Transactions in Full Force

Domestic demand is languishing, while exports are stagnating in the harsh
economic environment facing the industrial world, but the computer industry,
bucking the trend, is expected to continue its high rate of growth through
FY 82. The rate of growth is expected to be about 17-20 percent, and,
together with related equipment, production is expected to take a large step
toward the 2 trillion yen mark. It was in 1979 that the computer industry
became a 1 trillion yen industry, and this rate of growth is truly amazing.
At the same time, the industries which are responsible for this growth are
also noted for their effective conservation of labor, conservation of energy,
and rational investment practices, which is a noteworthy item.

22

FIIICIWHCIAI.USI(M‘LV
A trend to be noted in FY 82 is the full-scale emergence of 0A (office automa-
tion) and dispersed handling. 0A, which first boomed in FY 81, may go on to
blossom forth fully in FY 82. Because the time for celebrating is over, this
sector may appear to be in a state of stagnation, but the industry has great
plans to rationalize those business areas that lag behind the production areas
in the matter of automation, and individual 0A items such as office computers
and Japanese-language word processors are being introduced in various areas.
The day for DA in business is not far off, and systematized ties with co-uni-
cation can be expected, but this is an area in which very little has been done
by the manufacturers, and it will be interesting to see to what extent spe-
cific moves in this direction will occur in FY 82.

As far as general-use computers are concerned, the new intelligent large cosr
puters which all the companies had been gearing up for in FY 81 will now be
the subjects of a sales war. Assuming that the announcement of receipt of
orders for large computers is concentrated in the year of the announcement
and the following year, FY 82 may be said to be the make-or-break year, and
the significance of the outcome will be great. 18H. which is trying very hard
to catch up in its own country, came out with the sale of its "3081-K" at the
same time that it announced a new architecture and control program in an ef-
fort to shake off its pursuers; consumer reaction to these new products is
being awaited with interest.

Up to 550,000 Personal Computers

The office computer, the personal computer, and the Japanese-language word
processor, which are called the three sacred treasures of 0A, are all expect-
ed to undergo sharp growth during FY 82. Shipments of office computers are
expected to total roughly 65,000 units in FY 81, and sales to total more than
300 billion yen. They have already attained a considerable scale, but it
seems certain that FY 82 will see growth of about 30 percent above the previ-
ous year, and the sales total is expected to go over 600 billion yen. It was
in FY 80 that office computers hit the 200 billion yen level, which means that
sales will have doubled in the short space of 2 years.

A large part of this sharp growth may be attributed to demand on the part of
large industries. Office computers formerly were the computers for mainstay
industries that could not afford general-use computers, and for medium-size
and small businesses. As a result, a product that was both not too high and
not too low in price was the main line. The recent situation. however, has
been that top-grade and low-priced equipment has been selling well, while the
demand for mediunhgrade computers has languished. The customers for low-
priced computers have been medium-size and small businesses which were intro-
ducing computers for the first time, while high-grade computers have quite
recently been finding favor among large industries to augment their office
computers. The remainder are taken up by a leveling of the demands of previ-
ous consumers. Because of the addition of large-industries-other than previ-
oua consumers--that desire to go into dispersed handling. the pie is rapidly

growing larger and larger.

23

INJI‘OIFICIAI.IIBE‘0$HJV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is expected that the demand on the part of large industries seeking to
introduce dispersed handling will make up the greater part of this market ex-
pansion in FY 82. As a result, manufacturers, and particularly the large
manufacturers, may put more effort into production of high—quality computers.
There are many high-quality items of equipment that have several work sta-
tions with a communications function, and this type of function may see eVen
greater proliferation. General-use computers with up to 32 stations made
their appearance in FY 81, and further increases in the number of these comr
puters, as well as some with even more terminals, are expected to appear in
the market. At the same time, there are efforts to use office computers for
more varied work, and computers with multiple functions and a capability for
doubling up are expected to be developed, while the newly appearing types
are expected to be provided with a word-processing capability and an image-
treatment capability.

Shipments of personal computers will probably approach 550,000 units, almost
double the FY 81 output. Sales are expected to surpass the 100 billion mark,
and there are many estimates that visualize a 60-percent increase over the
previous year, to 120 billion yen. The "Survey of Computer Users," compiled
by NIHON KEIZAI at the end of 1961, showed only 58 percent of the industries
listed at the First Tokyo Stock Exchange have introduced personal computers;
the average use was 18 unit', indicating a good possibility that these were
but trial introductions, so there is a good possibility that FY 82 will see
the full-fledged use of office computers.

The driving force here is the 16-bit unit, which all manufacturers introduced
during the latter half of last year. The 8-bit unit used in the past required
considerable handling time, and not only were input and output time-consuming,
but the [units] possessed a small memory capacity and could handle programs

of only a limited nature, as a result of which they were not well suited to
business. The introduction of the 16-bit removed with one fell swoop all
these problems that had been experienced in the past. The manufacturers have
been influenced by this demand for 16 bit and are showing more of a tendency
to market the 16 bit. and there is a good possibility that the relative posi-
tions of the 8 bit and 16 bit will be reversed during the course of FY 82.

The market scale of word processors is still small. There seems to be a good
possibility that shipments for FY 82 will triple the FY 81 level to 60,000
units, but the 100,000-unit level may be difficult to attain, because the
frequency of use in any given sector is less than that of other 0A equipment.
A large contest to reduce prices started last year, and this contest is ex-
pected to become even more fierce in FY 82, so that the total sales figure
will not be expected to rise much above 00 billion yen.

There are presently a number of input modes to word processors, but most of
these are attuned to the professionals, and most amateurs find them difficult
to use. Furthermore, there are advantages and disadvantages to every mode.
This is why a number of manufacturers started introducing units which allow
the use of a number of input modes. This trend is expected to become even
stronger in FY 82, and the chances are good that the user will have his

choice.

24

F0!10FFI3AI.USI|NNLY
Although there is not expected to be such of a market for this in FY 82,
activities in local networks for systemstising, which is expected to be the
future direction of 0A, are drawing attention. ‘l'here already are lane.
centered mainly on the foreign-financed manufacturers, to market this prod-
not. while domestic manufacturers have also begun earnest developeent. and
sons products are expected on the market in FY 82. In the systematiaed 0A
market of the future, the manufacturer that receives orders for a local net-
work will be in an advantageous position, because he can expect orders for
the various sundry items of equipment to be connected to this network; the
future cowetition revolving about this local network is expected to be even
nore fierce than that which surrounds the sales confrontation for individual
0A equipment.

Order Situation Good for General-Use Large New Computers

The market for general-use computers was augmented by the introduction of
new intelligent large computers, starting with Nippon Blectric's "A008 1000"
and ending with the Fujitsu "hi-380." and a fierce conflict is in progress.
There are already in operation more than 3.000 general-use computers made in
Japan, and the greater part of the deannd is in the form of replacements.
General-use large computers have model changes every b-S years, and about
one-third of these installed units will be replaced by the new cowputers.
which it has been announced will cost 1 billion yen each. This is expected
to become a 1 trillion yen market, and the potential of this market remains
as high as ever.

It requires more than a year from the receipt of an order for a large type of
general-use computer until its delivery. and the announcalent of orders is
concentrated in the year after product announcement. "hen put in terms of the
life cycle, when an order is nsde after 3 years, a new series will appear be-
fore there has been much use on the old nodal. FY 82 is the second year fol-
lowing the announcement by the various companies of their present series, and
it is the final year in which orders will be concentrated. This is why the
sales competition is expected to be so fierce this year. Orders after 1 year
were "good beyond expectations,” according to all the companies involved. but
the situation should be resolved by the end of this year. As long as there
is root: for nsrket growth, a fierce battle for the market, even beyond expec-
tations. my be even more forthconing than in an.

Inn, which plays a major role in the sales battle. announced its "3081-1)“ in
November 1981 and then entered the market with its "3081-K" a year later.

K surpasses D in computing speed and performance. but what is of note is the
simultaneous announcenent of a new architecture and systen control program.
Should the architecrure and control program be altered. manufacturers of I!“
convertibles (interchangeable software) will require more tine to make the
conversion, and [IBM] will be at a great disadvantage in the competition. It
may be surmised that IBM had this point in mind, and it will be interesting
to see whether its goal is realised. Among the computers for general use,
the snail nodels are finding increased demand as terminal controls in dis-
persed handling, through demand for a host in a centrally concentrated trans-
action. There seems to be no doubt that this area, even moreso than the large
units, will see a growth of 20 percent in FY 82.

25

sonornaarmoutv
FINICNHHCJAI.USE10NLY

Minicoms. which are used in scientific and technological computations and in
on-site production control, are expected to undergo large growth in FY 82.
Because many of these are incorporated into various equipment items. they are
not flashy in appearance, but some manufacturers are eyeing close to a 50-
percent rate of growth. At the same time. minicoms basically are suited to
dialog-type dispersed transactions, and moves have been initiated to intro-
duce them for business transactions in areas where nothing has been used be-
fore. Such moves have already been introduced in the United States. and some
foreign-funded companies such as Japan Data General may head this movement in
Japan. In the area of specific product activities. the so-called super
minicom, which is a 32-bit instrument. is expected to see further increases.
The 32-bit minicom has transaction speed and memory capacity which are diffi-
cult to distinguish from the general-use large computers, and this differen-
tiation is becoming even more difficult as its market for business use expands
even more.

Exports of Domestic Makes to Reach 200 Billion Yen

There is a need to pay close attention to exports as well as to domestic de-
mand in FY 82. The large domestic manufacturers have completed preparations
for an export system to the United States and Europe. and some good results
are expected, regardless of whether the product is computers for general use.
office computers. peripheral equipment, or terminal equipment. In addition.
sole manufacturers of personal computers and manufacturers of terminals are
expressing a strong desire for exports. Even though total sales are rather
small. this is an area that bears watching.

Fujitsu entered into a cooperative agreement during the end of 1981 with the
British state computer corporation ICL. This will be the third partner where
large computers are concerned. following Amdahl in the United States and
Siemens of Heat Germany. It will be 1983 before the export of computers to
ICL will start. but the fact that ICL was rescued from the competition put up
by tan and was once more able to take its place among "the world's giants"
will probably raise Fujitsu‘s esteem in the eyes of the world. An agreement
has been reached with TR" where terminal equipment is involved for the estab-
lishment of a sales company, and the activities of this company are now on-
stream. indicating that the laying of the foundations for exports is about
over. and an increase of roughly 50 percent in exports to about 90 billion
yen is anticipated for FY 82. In addition, this company is aiming toward an
export ratio of 30 percent in FY 85 (it was about 13 percent in FY 81).

Nippon Electric will also double its exports of office computers to the United
States in FY 82. It will also reinforce exports to Southeast Asia and Aus-
tralia. The dealer network in the United States has been completed. and the
plans are to sharply increase exports of office computers and personal com-
puters. starting in FY 82. and to pioneer the way to large computer exports.
In addition, Hitachi Limited will engage in OEH export (exports using the
brandname of the customer) of its large computers. which have demonstrated
their worth. and will begin exporting personal computers in FY 82, while
Toshiba Corporation, Oki Electric, and Mitsubishi Electric are to expand their
exports of 0A equipment. Many manufacturers other than the large firms are

26

lilt¢lﬂﬂ€1hl.lﬂil(lULY
Itlui|u§IIlQIII .SIIIQI-IC§CI:UII .. on
2‘s«Iona-“IlligI‘..IIIBRIIIIQduhuﬁIIII I vn

baa-Ogilvg .. nn

t0€=....:° AQI_II§U0 :9 .Iggle ‘Ilﬁﬁue “Ulguaslqune: an

|||||||l||||l|||||

. 0.5— c.8— a . 0‘ 3— g 818~ 28.3 53 _°.§‘ ”avsﬁaz. an

    
  

_n8_ ll 98— II. :18: II 93:: Il nun. Il :II+III0 on
0.0: 3: S! 08 and 3.8 95.2 08.8 I! :05 II» ‘. $IIIA o a
3: 93 0d: 0.: 80a: 85 an: as as 32 at, III; on
«a: «.8. 08— 09— 82a 3.: 8n: 8: 58. 20.. IIlwla .. u
3: | 0.0: | 80.3 | 80.: | 002.0 | IIIQI-IA 0 a
98. 32 a! a! 8n- 83 and 83 a...“ a... CC w c a
0.8. 0.§ 0,8 .8 08.: 83. 3.2. a.“ 90.3 80.“ II on
u M: 0.| .2 h B 38 80.8 S 08. .0 8n: 5.! :|. .00 II: a an

08. 83: :0. .8 .. .IIEIO «a
3: 0.0: 0.0: ".8. 08.0: 23: .. .IIlaxI Gina
«a: 3: 32 M. :_ 08.3 8.3 83. 80. 8 a. B and IIIIA o«
3: 0.9 0.0: 0.05 838 89‘ all» 08. 80 g .0. ﬁ III! a u
:0: 0.5 2! is 80.: 3 08.9 08.: 08.2 80 _ IIIIII o u
I: 0.5 2! Z! 08.! 80.2. 80.00. 80 5 2.0.5 and: Ilcalu p a
3: 0d: . o. r: 3: 08.08 80.6. 08.3 08.0: «053 22a IIIII: 0 a
3.: | 08. | 08.5 | 8300 | n35 | IIHI a H
.4: 0d: 38. an. 838 and 8%! 984 nun :qn Ill v:
.0: 05 2.: 0.! 80.2.0 08.: 80.05 80.: 80.5 83: III na
2.: 0.5 3: 2n— §.0:. Sun 80. :0 83.0 843 II: a» x I q u \. n «a
as: | 3: | 80.80.. | 80.5.. | 5.80.. | at; I; 3
2.: | 8:!— | 80.30.: | 53.”.— IIIIb~anInuAno on
3.: | 3: | Bag | 83.0.0 I | 2.0 810.! o
5.: | 3: | I: 80.03 | 035" II ..=c!IlII 0

  

25» £0.34“: H "3:: modem «0000.; 3.25 95:03
no: Huauuwavcn now ucoﬂnuavm uoacouuooam «o coauoavoum vanquveum .n 0.33.
FDR‘O“W(1AI.[EHE(MNLY

11. Digital type 22. Applied electronics facility!“3
12. Computer main body 23. x-ray facility
13. For general use 26. Hedical uae
lb. For control use 25. Others
15. Peripheral equipment 26. Applied ultrasonic-wave facility
16. External memory facility 27. Electron microscope
17. Input-output facility 28. Broadcast-use VTR
18. Communicationa control 29. Industrial uae TV facility
facility 30. Electronics equipment for medical
19. Terminal facility uae
20. Auxiliary facilities 31. Electronic desktop calculatora
21. Computer application (hand calculators)
facility‘2

32. *1 (1) Total of computer and related equipment, (2) Applied elec-
tronic equipment, (3) Electronic equipment for medical use.
(A) Desk calculators, (5) Electronic meaaurenent equipment.
(6) Communications equipment (Table 6)

33. *2 Includes NC (numerical control) equipment

34. *3 Does not include high-frequency power application devices.
radiation measurement equipment, or Iedical measurement equip-
ment listed in the NIH tabulation

35. *4 The ultrasonic diagnostic equipment among the medical equipment
is, in part. doubly entered among the applied ultrasonic equip-
ment

16-Bit Personal Computers Presently on the Market

 

 

«3(1) (2)1-o (3) ma
mucosa (khan-Hrmm—r 1629s)"
"on (Brenna 17 neon
orcsooo (6)9”; (18):":23
pucanoo (7)581.- (19):“:
vmuooo (3)51“ . (20)::nn
smuso (9):“ - (21):":00
omnczoo (10)»un (gamma
wow (11)“. (23)::nna
amt (l2)v-rnus«xn (2h)“¥llﬂ
umo (13)"... (ash-nu
"(>100 (“Hus-77:2. (26):?8128
aunts (15)zltn (27)ws4n
1. Name of unit 10. Oki Electric Industry 20. Sept 1981
2. Maker 11. Seikoaha 21. Oct 1981
3. Shipment date 12. Sode Computer ayatem 22. Nov 1981
a. Yokogava-Hevlett 13. Nippon Electric 23. Nov 1981
Packard 16. Panmfacom 24. Nov 1981
5. Panafacom 15. Mitsubishi Electric 25. Dec 1981
6. Chuo Denahi 16. Oct 1977 26. Dec 1982
7. Sanyo Electric 17. Sept 1978 27. Apr 1982
8. Adachi Denki 18. Feb 1981
9. Fujitsu 19. July 1981
28

FOI‘OFFIJA1.USE(NILY
putting efforts into exports; exports of computers by donestic manufacturers.
which barely cleared 100 billion yen in FY 81. will probably break the 200
billion mark in FY 82.

In the background of this sharp rise in computer exports from Japan say be
cited the foreign countries' evaluation of the high reliability of hardware
made in Japan. They have good cost performance. and these products have ade-
quate competitive strength. so exports are expected to increase even after

FY 82. On the other hand, the number of articles in Western newspapers and
nagazines sounding the alarm against Japanese imports warn that a too rapid
increase in exports could result in trade friction. Unless steps are taken
so as not to incite repercussions from countries with which trade is conduct-
ed. a narrowing of the market is unavoidable.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-HeGraw-Hill Inc. 1982
Medical Equipment
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 277-282

[Article by Takashi Kohagaya of the NIKXEI ELECTRONICS Business Office:
"Electronics Equipment for Medical Use, Electrical Measurement Equipment.
Co-unications Equipaent”]

[Text] Languishing Domestic Demand

The nedical-sector electronics market. which had been growing at a rate of
20-30 percent per year. began to see some erosion in demand. starting about
the fall of 1980. and was then beset by the revision of the drug-cost stan-
dardization and consultation-fee laws on 1 June 1981. The cost of drugs was
lowered by 18.6 per: a:. As a result. the :aat practice of "making good
money on drugs to cover the cost of electronics equipment for medical use"
was no longer feasible. Consultation fees were lowered 8.1 percent. but be-
cause of the importance placed on physicians' technique. there was no in-
creased demand for medical-use electronics equipment. As a result. Ianagers
of medical organizations who were wondering about the future became sore care-
ful in their investsents in this area. There is a particularly strong mood
against the purchase of high-price products. and this practice is spreading.

x-Ray CT Battle Intensifying

The sharp growth in the NB market during the period from 1975 to 1980 was due
to x-ray CT (computer-aided tomography and ultrasonic diagnostic equipment).
of the two. the faltering demand for x-ray CT as 1981 began was severe. An
x-ray CT for crania [examination] costs 100 Iillion yen, while an all-body
X-ray CT costs about 200 million yen. and the paucity of purchases is causing
great consequences. The number of x-ray CT facilities in this country exceeds
1.500 altogether. and there is a feeling that a state of saturation has been
attained.

29

F0I10IIWCIAI.USE[DN13
FOI‘OFFNCJAL USI:(N‘LV

The production of X-ray CT in 1981 was down about 30 percent from the previous
year. This was not such a large drop in actual numbers, but the reduction in

price was responsible for this decrease. The unit for cranial use, which hit

the market faster, was the victim of this price decrease, as was to be expect-
ed. but the all-body unit is also seeing fierce price competition.

As a result, large manufacturers such as Toshiba Corporation have started
looking actively to exports as a means of bolstering this sagging market. Ex-
ports are increasing not only for the cranial unit but for the whole body unit
as well, and this trend is expected to be spurred on still more during FY 82.
in contrast. [the market for] x-rsy diagnostic equipment has been decreasing
only at a single-digit level. Since it is a very vital tool to the physician.
a hard-bottom movement is taking place. It is expected that angiography by
means of a simple venous injection will become poasible in FY 82 through
digital radiography (DR), and this is a bright subject. Starting with the
new product marketed by Toshiba in Harch. Aloca has been planning to import
and market the product of the American Technicare Company. and these loves
are adding to the fierce situation in the trenches.

Export Designs for Ultrasonic Diagnostic Equipment

The ultrasonic diagnostic facility is another item for which demand has fallen.
Just as with the x-ray CT, there is a feeling of saturation in the domestic
situation. and there is a strong impression within the obstetrical sector that
the field has been coapletely covered. There are a great number of manufac-
turers in this field; counting only the Japanese manufacturers, there are
roughly 10 companies, including Toshiba. Hitachi Hedico. Shinstu Seisakuaho.
Aloca, and Yohogawa Electric Hbrks. In addition. latecomers in the medical-
use electronic equipment area such as Mitsubishi Electric and Fujitsu are
looking for an opportunity to break in. According to industry estinates,
domestic production during 1981 was 18.5 billion yen. a sharp drop of 15 per-
cent from the previous year. No great expectations are seen in this area for
1982.

On the other hand. 1981 was a good year for exports. industry estinates place
the total at about 19 billion yen. for a 70-percent rate of growth over the
previous year. The Japanese linear ultrasonic facility, which scans in paral-
lel manner with ultrasonic beams, reportedly is rated very highly throughout
the world. The front runner firms, including Toshiba and Alcoa. are exporting
under their own brandnames. and a strategic HE export product situation is
developing. In addition. lateconer Tokugawa Electric has started OEH exports
(exporting under the custoners' brandname) with 63 (General Electric) of the
United States. Tokyo Keiki with France's COR, and Matsushita Communication
Industrial with Heat Germany's Siemens of the linear-type ultrasonic diag-
nostic facility. There is a possibility that this will be followed by exports
of the sector mode (in which the beam fans out just like radar) or the H mode

in addition to this linear mode.

Automated biochemical analysis facilities, electrocardiographs, electro-
encephalographs. ICU (intensive care observation facility), and CCU (facility

INIRTOIFICIAI.II§EiCI‘LV
for observing cardiac patients) head the list of medical equipment body
measurement and observation facilities that are caught up in fierce sales
competition. Of these types, electrocardiograph and electroencephalographs,
which have international competitive strength, are being seriously consider-
ed for export.

Developmental competition on post-x-ray CT seems likely to become the main
focal point in 1982. The top candidate is the “HR (nuclear magnetic reso-
nance) CT. The large class is intended solely for human use; it is presently
under test-production, with possible commercialisation by year's end. It is
appealing, in that it has a functional diagnostic capability in addition to
a morphological diagnostic capability. There is also the laser scapel, which
permits surgery with minimal bleeding; this is undergoing a price reduction.
Also, improved surgical techniques seem to be around the corner. The large
manufacturers are eyeing all these products with eagle eyes.

Electrical Measurement Equipment To Maintain Double-Digit Growth

Electrical measurement equipment (industrial measurement equipment, electrical
measurement equipment, electrical instruments) seem about to maintain double-
digit growth in FY 82. Even when production is estimated on the low side,
there is a good possibility that the 450 billion yen level will be exceeded.

0n the other hand, viewed on the basis or the calendar year, growth in elec-
trical measurement instruments shows u somewhat slowing trend. According to
Ministry of International Trade and Industry [HITI] statistics, the growth
rate for 1979 (on a monetary base) was a large 17.5 percent, and it was 16.7
percent in 1980, thereby maintaining this high rate of growth. On the other
hand, sales for 1981 totaled 394.9 billion yen, a low 12.6-percent rate of
growth. Although it may be said that investments in conservation of energy
and labor give rise to demand that has a firm base, the present situation
demonstrates that the electrical measurement equipment sector is not without
an edge in the face of the uncertain economy. The spotty nature of indus—
trial instruments, electrical measurement instruments, and electrical instru-
ments has advanced, and the good and bad types and items have been clearly
delineated. Although there is no direct tie with market trends, the proof
of Japan's improved status in this area can be seen in the fact that the
first international instrument exposition in Japan was held in October 1981.
at the Tokyo International Trade Center in ﬂsrumi, Tokyo.

Industrial Measurement Equipment at Heart of New Demand

Industrial instruments make up more than 50 percent of [all] electrical mea-
surement equipment. This area showed a growth rate of 15 percent in 1981,
displaying a rate of growth which exceeded the average of the rest of the
electrical measurement equipment field.

The most noteworthy product development in industrial instruments is the

growth of digital instruments. Up till the present time. the analog mode has
been used because of safety factors and ease of operation, but recent advances

31

INIIIHHWCIAI.USECNNLY
FOR‘DFFKJAI.U8£(MULY

in the digital area have led to the possibility that the present situation
will be turned around in 2-3 years. "hat is of great interest here is the
single-loop controller, in which each loop (a loop is a unit of measurement
control) has an independent control and observation function. Not only can
an instrument panel be used, just as for analog instruments, but there is
the added advantage that digital controls can be applied to small-scale
processes in which economic control had not been able to be realized with
the multiple-loop dispersed system used in the past.

This is an area which in the past had been exploited by integrated electrical
manufacturers such as Toshiba Corporation and Hitachi Limited on the basis

of their strength, but since the beginning of 1981, special electrical instru-
ment manufacturers such as the Yokogava Electric Works, Yamatake honeywell,
and Hokushin Electric Works have entered the fray, and the competition is be-
coming fierce. In addition. there seem to be great efforts being nade to
introduce optical fiber communications into the industrial instrument area.
Compared to the copper cable communications mode used up to the present time,
optical fiber communications will allow a spectacular increase in the number
of conmmmications that can be transmitted simultaneously, and it is superior
in the matter of conserving space and resources and is not damaged by light-
ning; these are just some of the many advantages it possesses. At the
present time, optical fiber communications is more expensive than copper
cable communications, but its full-fledged introduction into the industrial
instruments area should be coming along in a couple of years.

Also of note is panelless instrument installation, in which the control sec-
tion and observation section are separated to facilitate observation and
operations. This involves operation through display on a CRT; conservation
of space is said to be the top selling point.

Looking now at the directions in demand, demand associated with renovation
seems to be the mainstream in the area of private demand. Increased demand
is expected because of conservation of energy practices and rationalisation
in the steelmaking, machinery, and power industries. In another area, there
is a great desire to introduce rationalization in survival strategy in the
chemical and petroleum refining industries, despite the objective situation.
These industries posted good records in 1979 and 1980, but it is difficult
to predict whether this situation will continue.

Direct Export of Industrial Instruments Hill Grow

In the past, indirect exports ends up the major part of industrial equipment
trade. However. there was an increase in technology exports in 1981. The
three specialty equipment manufacturers-~Yokogava Electric Works, Yamatake
Honeywell, and hokushin Electric Horks--can be especially singled out for the
effort they place on the export of technology to China. The number of menu-
facturers that engage in exports to leading countries such as in Europe and
the United States is also increasing. In the particular situation of the
relationship with the United States, what had once been a strictly one-way
traffic from the United States to Japan has now seen technological strengths

32

FOR<OFHKJAI.U§B(NULY
evening up, and contracts are now being made on a nearly equal footing, as
exeqlified by the agreement between Bobushin Electric works and Fisher-
Porter.

Semiconductor Heasurenent Instrusents in a Rally?

Electric neasuraaent equipment, which ranks next to industrial equipment where
value is concerned, will probably register a double-digit rate of growth in
FY 82. On the other hand, when the production figures for 1981 (calendar year)
are reviewed, the growth rate was 12.9 percent. which was below that of indus-
trial instruments. and it will be difficult to maintain the growth rates of
more than 20 percent that were registered in the past.

The factor responsible for the sharp growth in electrical measurement equip-
ment up till now has been the high growth in semiconductor testing equipment
such as 1.81 (large-scale integrated circuits). Measurement equipment manu-
facturers such as Takeda Riken Industry, Ando Electric, and Hinato Electron-
ics, whose strength lies in this area. achieved spectacular growth. Their
growth rate in 1981 (production value base) was 28.2 percent. which was some-
what of a letdown from the previous year's growth (63.3 percent). To be sure,
the effects of the expanded aarket cannot be disregarded. but there can be no
denying that the investment in facilities by semiconductor mnufacturers was
mostly a one-shot deal. However. there does seem to be a possibility of in-
creased activity fron FY 82 on. and Takeda Riken Industry and Ando Electric
are racing for new and expanded plants. In addition to the above situation.
these manufacturers of measurement equipment are proceeding to set up over-
seas production sites, accompanying the trend to locate semiconductor plants
overseas.

Oscilloscopes. which make up the main part of general-use measurement equip-
aent. posted sales in 1981 (calendar year) of 19.3 billion yen. a 10.8-percent
rate of growth. A fierce price war has been raging over 10-50 ﬁlls, which is
a comparatively lowband region, and powerful manufacturers such as Hitachi
Electronics and Hatsushita Communication Industries are seeking to increase
their share of the market. The possibility that VIII-related investments will
drop considerably in FY 82 is a matter of concern. This is why each company
is strengthening its export plans. In addition, a new area to be noted is
optical-fiber-related measurement equipment, and the fight between Ando Blec-
tric and Adachi Electric for top position stands out.

In another direction. the market for electrical measurement equipment itself
is entering a stable growth period, and no sharp rate of growth can be ex-
pected from here on. The production value in 1981 (calendar year) was 35.7
billion yen. which was a slight decrease of 0.3 percent from the preceding
year. The largest market was in the area of electric power instruentation,
where there is lateral movement and some small increase. The nmber of hone
construction starts is low, and manufacturers such as Osaki Electric Industry
are directing their strength to exports directed at Southeast Asia and the
Hiddle and Near East.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-McCraw-Hill Inc. 1982

33

mmumowu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Communications Equipment
Tokyo NIKKBI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 282-283

[Article by Yoshiyuki Kitamura of the Business Office. NIHON KEIZAI SMIMIUM:
"Communications Equipment")

(Text! lo—Percent Growth in Development of Private Demand and Bxporta

Demand for communications equipment is increasing in an orderly manner. Ac-
cording to a survey by the Communications Machine Industry Association, the
demand for communications equipment in FY 81 (excluding parts for communica-
tions equipment) was 1.261 trillion yen. which represented a growth of 11.6
percent over the preceding year. Demand in FY 82 is expected to grow at
slightly less than the above [rate]--at about 10.1 percent, to 1,240,200.000.000
yen. Hhen these figures are brokendowninto wire and wireless equipment,

wire equipment (excluding parts) is expected to increase by 9.8 percent over
the previous year to 761.3 billion yen, while wireless equipment is expected
to grow 10.6 percent to $78.9 billion yen.

According to an interim survey by the Communications Machine Industry Associa-
tion, the demand for communications equipment is expected to increase at an
average rate of 10 percent in the 5-year span from FY 81 through FY 85. A
rate of growth close to this lo-percent figure is expected in FY 82.

when prospective demand for FY 82 (including parts for wire conunication
equipment) is broken down into different categories. demand by the public and
government sector. centered on the Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation
[NTT], is expected to total 522.1 billion yen. the private sector demand
428.9 billiOn yen, and exports 338.6 billion yen. The respective rates of
growth over the preceding year are 5.0 percent. 12.0 percent. and 16.6 per-
cent. As a result, the makeup ratio of the demand is 40.5 percent for public
and government sources, 33.3 percent for private sources. and 26.2 percent
for exports. The demand structure, which had been oriented mainly toward
NTT. now seems to be shifting toward private demand and exports.

The demand in FY 82 for exchanges. the main item in wire communications equip-
ment, is expected to total 251.3 billion yen, an increase of 3.5 percent over
last year. The demand for exchanges has been stunted during the past few
years because of the overall decrease in facilities investment by NTT. The
intermediate demand prediction put out by the Communications Machine Industry
Association foresees an average growth of but 6 percent for the 5-year period
from FY 81 up to 1985. On the other hand. this is also an area where elec-
tronification is developing rapidly. so that even though the overall growth
picture for exchanges is small. large differences in growth rates between
different areas are seen.

For example, sales of electronic exchanges are expected to total 179.1 billion
yen, which will be an increase of 15.5 percent. In contrast. sales of cross-
bar exchanges totaled 57 billion yen, a decline of 19.7 percent. The inter-
mediate predictions assign a 16.9-percent growth rate for electronic exchanges

34

F0310FFKJAI.UBE(HNLY
and a 20.6-percent decrease to crossbar exchanges. Electronic exchanges have
made the shift froa analog (space-divided) to digital (time-divided) exchanges;
the digital (tine-divided) exchanges are winning out.

As one phase of its proaotion plan for IRS (high-level information communica-
tion systems), NTT has been working in earnest since FY 81 to digitalize its
conmunications network. Digital exchanges were introduced for the first tine
at urban-suburban exchanges in FY 81. The introduction of digita1.exnhanges
is expected to be accelerated still further in FY 82, and it is anticipated
that all of NTT's purchases in the next few years will be digital exchanges.
This is a little earlier than had been planned initially. Along with this
trend to digitalisation, there are eye-opening developments in optical fiber
communications. NTT already had started commercialisation tests with 32-!
bit/sec and loo-a bit/sec medium and snail capacity modes in Dace-bar 1981.
Thought is being given to speeding up the commercialization of the boo-u bit/
sec mode that is presently being tested.

The demand for telephone application facilities has continued well. Demand
in FY 82 is expected to total 151.6 billion yen. which will be 13.6 percent
over the figure for the previous year. and push-button telephones are doing
particularly well. The demand for push-button telephones is expected to
reach 108.5 billion yen. This will be an increase of 14.7 percent over last
year. On the other hand, conpared to the rate of growth of 29.2 percent re-
corded in FY 81. there is no denying that this rate of growth is slowing down.

Demand for facsiailes remains good. The demand for FY 82 is predicted to be
139.6 billion yen. an increase of 29.5 percent over the previous year. Ac-
cording to the intermediate survey of the Communications Machine Industry
Association. an average rate of growth of 25 percent per year is predicted
for the 5-year period from FY 81 through FY 85. This good performance on the
part of facsimiles is partly a result of the 0A boon, which has created a
sharp increase in demand for facsimiles for business application, and partly
- a result of increased exports. Japan has completely overpowered other coun-
tries in production of facsiniles, and it is already being regarded as the
world's supply source for then. This situation may becoae even stronger; it
certainly will not abate.

The demand in FY 82 for carrier equipment is expected to total 165.3 billion
yen, for a 5.3-percent rate of increase. Hithin this category, signals trans-
mission equipment is seeing relatively orderly growth. along with the advances
in digitalisstion of co-unications networks, and sales in this area are ex-
pected to reach 50.3 billion yen--an 11.0-percent rate of growth over the
preceding year.

The breakdown in FY 82 demand for radio communications equipment includes
fixed office coamunications equipment, totaling 152 billion yen. which will
be an increase of 9.6 percent over the previous year. and mobile office con-
munications equipment, totaling 108.9 billion yen, a 13.9-percent increase
over last year. Demand for aobile equipment is expected to be greater in

FY 82. but the results of the intermediate-demand prediction show the dif-
ference between the two not to be as large. The field of fixed office com-
nunications equipnent is expected to grow an average 9.3 percent per year

35
IOI‘OIFKJAI.USICHWLV
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4. Production Estimates for Industrial-Use Electronics Equipment
(Ibnetary Unit: 1 Human Yen)

hh——__—-_uv-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I' -" - . mm a II
5.; a"? 3"}; 2mm___ ma)‘f'$_(_-n)
'_"h" = 11 L. n. ~ Auk—- 9i .

$ run. It.“ «so «sum "21 "L!

7 bum: Uni. I-M-r- W mm m I012 101,:

a 9 Rain! 1m» ISM!) I72.” I103 1m

Q tn; 0t- t’ll‘ﬂ' mu moo um III: III.
10 (9'42In7n41—9'4-r)
11 IIIIIJIH-§,I-9xn 5.5“ m can not; um
13 mum-arias (ﬂ‘lhﬁ '1 Pt 2) I.” um um «35 10:1
13 lliliin;ozz-—1';r) ”.219 m 35m 109.: Ml!
u ‘8 m- tau-un‘ (mum- aml sum m um um
13 (lst'J'zr-r-zx-I—ﬂxt‘)
10 1.2.51)” mural 6,99 11:) mo no.4 la.)
1" 18m «Alhtlhllﬂl'te’l
10 £08111 IPCMZI'I 4-2.1?!) 5.3!! m 1,!» In? nu
x9 ltmllll (LII; 112'. Iv :- I'Q'C’I SI.“ mm III" III? "5.9
an Q ”Intuit" 23.“ man man ma lull
21 911.1% In.“ mono mm "5.7 "4.6
38 1acxlltlltl¢ﬁﬂl1tllcrl I.” um "mo "12 "2.0
:3 mumzmi 0.0! m not» "6.0 "6.3
u ”3:33,ng _____ _ 27.3.3 m moo _m7 mu
28 Oil“ 1.0mm me 1.3001» nu MI
20 b «mama elm mm mm Illa nu
27 £4! 39.” £0.10 41M IOU mo
39 QR! M mm 25!.” I012 ms
29 I; I «an nun mm Into» mu ms
30 7 u r. ' ~' «nu mm mm mm am an
31 Q n. ".10 It!» I51!) 9” 916
33 1'40“ H mm mm ISLM m: ".12
)3 {MIKII mm mm It” In.) "4.2
3 ‘ { , n. , mm man man 101.7 no”
35 % ”I mm mm mm "6.0 "56
9 e u. 7.: mm um um I192 I013
37 " r 7 1 I 'I 30.1” mm mm I273 ID!»
33 In: It: mm mm mm» mm um
3.. "ﬁnal! 15.700 6.300 2mm :2“ "HI
44) '11: I13” I 3 man mono «um 94.]! m o
4; mamas: m woo woo III.5 mm
a % nu _ . _ ___‘ _ 21—.” m ”.m-"IMI lots
43 blﬂlull MIN 4!” 4m no; mo
44 IISII so” m 10.” ma m1
.9 9"tliill OM «no com mm 13.:
4g “vt'é’v‘rllrill m 51.” “M In! "2.)
4'7 ICILIﬂl 2mm 23‘“ mono mu III 2
«I wtﬂluil mm mono I52” 101.: mu
.9 ”Quit!!! W m m nu ms
3,, INILIIII 123m mm I‘m mas no.0
,1 I. "III mm 40.500 5.000 nm "LI
5: HIHIJISJJI I91“) now am mu mo
5, e an "no moo moo 100.6 ms

 

 

 

 

5. if.) ILIII'IIU. IQ. {'lultl;l. II? (IUILIII) 0144:: ‘.
“I'lIIIIHHICILIIDIIII-Bt 3 8 '5’“

Key on folloving page]

mammal“
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

56.

FY 80 (actual record)
I"! 81 (estisated)

FY 82 (predicted)
17! 81/80 (I)
n 82/81 (1) 5a. Value

Electrical measurement equipment
Electric instruments (power
gages. meters)

Electrical measurement equipment
Voltneters. s-eters, power
measurement meters

(such as digital nultiaaters)
Circuit meters (circuit testers)
Frequency time measurement
equipment (such as frequency
counters)

waveform neaauring equipment
(such as oscilloscopes)

Electron tubes, semiconductors,
circuit element material testing
equipment

such as 1.81 testers. ispedance
meters

Transmission characteristics,
radiovave-measuring equipment
(such as selection level meters.
electric field strength testers)
Total measurement facility (such
as PO! error rate neasuremant
devices)

Auxiliary measurement equipment
(such as signal generators,
records)

Other electrical measurement
equipment

industrial instruments
Process-use industrial instru-
ments (such as transceivars.
receivers)

23.
26.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
3°.
31.
32.
33.
36.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
60.

61.

‘2.
63.
66.
65.
66.
67.
68.

69.

50.
$1.
52.
53.

Other industrial instrument
nets treatment equipment
Communications equipment

Hire cosmonicationa equipment
Telephone

Exchange

Electronic exchange

Crossbar exchange

Others

Telephone application facility
Telephone accessory facility
lnterphone

Others

Telegraph facility

Facsimile

Carrier facility

Signal transmission facility
Broadband region terminal
facility

Carrier telegraph terminal
facility

Others

Radio communications equipment
Broadcast facility

Radio transmission equipment
TV transmission equipment
Radio communications equipment
Fixed office communications
facility

Mobile office communications
facility

Applied radio facility

Radar facility

Radio position locator

Others

(Note) Cospiled from actual records and estisates in co-unications
equipment, and from predictions by survey of the Commications
Machine Industry Association (radio co-unications equipment).
Parts are not included in wire commications equipment.

37

“WMONLY
FOR OFWKJAL USIZCNULY

through FY 85. and mobile office communications equipment to grow an average
of 10.8 percent for the same period.

Effects of Trade Friction an Uncertain Area

The factor which must be given the most attention in the forecasts for FY 82
Is trade friction. As mentioned at the start. the demand structure for com-
munications equipment is shifting from one controlled mainly by NTT's needs

to the areas of private use and exports. The forecasts discussed to this
stage assign considerable weight to exports. Because of this. if the United
States. which is [our] primary export market, puts import restrictions against
Japanese products into effect, a decrease in overall demand can be expected.

There is a very good possibility that this situation may materialize. Revi-
sion of the communications law is being debated in the United States at the
present time. but this law incorporates the principle of reciprocity, and
should this law be enacted, Japan's communications equipment industry would
become subject to a considerable impact which could not be avoided. Should
trade friction between Japan and the United States or Europe intensify in
the future. there may be greater criticism of communications equipment made
in Japan. In addition, there is a need to look carefully at the effects of
the antimonopoly decision decreed against ATGT in the United States. The
changes in the market structure resulting from the separation of the tele-
phone business company at AT&T should have a major impact on Japan's com-
munications equipment world.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-McGraw—ﬂill Inc. 1982
Growth of Parts Industry
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12 Apr 82 pp 284-292

[Article by Junichi Ogino and Takahide Nonaka of the NIHON KEIZAI Editorial
Department: "Electronic Parts Industry's Broadening Field of Activity"]

[Text] A Year When Overall Technological Strength Is Questioned

The electronic parts industry. which maintained a high growth rate of about
20 percent for 2 successive years, has shown signs of distress at the begin-
ning of FY 82. The role of prime mover for this high growth rate had been
played by VTR. but it now is suffering from an accumulation of inventory.
while audio products have been in a very depressed state since early August
of last year (1981). so every manufacturer has had to reduce production, and
all of this is contributing to this slowdown in growth.

Audio, VTR, and TV are large demand sources for electronic parts. This is
why the parts industry is affected when the above industries slow down.
Orders for parts used in audio equipment began to slow down last fall.
Orders received and production during thela [as printed] months from November
1981 to April 1982 decreased 10-20 percent from the preceding year. This
was followed by production readjustments in other circuit parts in January

38

IIIICHWNCIAI.IEHIIHNLY
1982. Ic (integrated circuit) is no exception, and the uncertain future has
resulted in a reassessment of plans.

Every company is displaying considerable discretion in estimating its produc-
tion for FY 82. If this were an ordinary year, inventory readjustments would
be completed along about April, after which demand would pick up again. This
year, however, there is a feeling that a rise in demand will be delayed. The
audio recession seems destined to last for a long period, while VTR, on which
there are so many high hopes, cannot be expected to maintain the rapid growth
it has undergone to date. It has been pointed out that there presently is a
delay in the time of acquisition of single parts by export.

0n the other hand, the situation is not all bad. VTR, which contains more
parts than color TV, will be expected to grow at least 25 percent. Miniature
and handy cassettes (with radios) may also show great growth. In addition

to these items of electronic equipment for private use, the demand is good

for parts for industrial and business equipment use. Various automated-
control items of equipment, automobiles, and so-called 0A equipment come under
this category. The active market is broadening, as far as the electronic
parts industry is concerned. It even has been said that ”there are no areas
in which we are not concerned" (Hatsushita Electronic Parts).

This trend emerged a few years ago. The results of efforts expended by dif-
ferent companies are already showing up as differences in the performance of
the companies. Other industries expect the electronic parts industry to be
a source not just of spare parts but also of information about electronics,
including electronic circuits. As a result, it is only natural that products
from the parts industry will come out in block form, unitized form. and sys-
tematized form. In addition, there may be many instances sinilsr to that in
which manufacture of magnetic condensers entered the field of chip resistors.
Parts manufacturers have entered an era in which their true technological
strength, planning strength, and developmental strength will come into ques-
tion.

General Electronic Parts: Further Development in Small, Lightweight, Chip-
like Parts

As shown in Figure 3, general electric parts have a high dependency rate on
electronic equipment for private use. Demand for parts will be stifled as
long as audio equipment does not recover. At the same time, there are about
1,600 parts which go into a single VTR unit. This is a large number, comp
pared to the 650 parts for a color TV set and 370 parts for a black and
white TV set. The growth rate of VTR will moderate. At the same time, there
will be increased use of 10 (including hybrid 1c use). Performances have
been standardized, facilitating conversion to 10. As a result, in the long
run there will be a decrease in the number of electronic parts requiring
leads.

0n the other hand, the number of chip parts with no Ic or leads will increase.
This trend is the same for other electronic parts. In the past, chip parts

39

FOI‘OFEKJAI.USE(NVLY
Ftﬂltlﬂﬂ(JAl.US£10NlV

were used for the purpose of miniaturization. lightness in weight, or thin-
ness. This enabled switches, connectors, and speakers to be made smaller

and lighter in weight. This means conservation of materials. But that will
not be the situation from here on. Chip parts will be used to automate as-
sembly. This is because a part with leads (automatic inserter) is less
readily automated than a chip part (automated installer) with no leads, and
parts with the same shape are more easily automated. This is why manufac-
turers say they wOuld like to convert not only resistors, condensers, and
coils to chip parts but other parts as well. A fierce conflict may be forth-
coming between the angular type and the circular type, where these chip parts
are concerned.

In addition, progress is being made in the automation of equipment adjustment.
Base plates with printed resistors are already being used in part of the VTR
production lines. There is no longer a need to use semifixed resistors or
condensers.

Differences Between Businesses in Circuit Parts Industry Is Widening

The trend to chips in circuit parts is very marked. There will also be ac—
tive demand for composite circuit parts such as printed resistors and LCR
(coil-condenser-resistor) blocks. Large parts manufacturers will push their
companies' technological and fiscal strengths in order to go into mass pro-
duction. 0n the other hand, medium-size and smaller manufacturers may not
be able to engineer such technological innovations. and differences in per-
formance are expected to widen even more.

The reduction in the price of metalfoil-type fixed resistors may become a
subject of concern in the area of resistors. Condensers in the form of
aluminum electrolytic condensers, tantalum electrolytic condensers, and mag-
netic condensers are attacking the market, exploiting their small size and
large capacity as weapons. Semifixed resistors and condensers for use with
trimmers (fine adjustment), which are finding an expanding market in cameras,
are expected to become still smaller and find an increasing market. On the
other hand, the trend to the aforementioned adjustment automation cannot be
ignored.

Since approximately last November, coils have fallen into a state of reduced
production--20 percent below the same period in the previous year. No quick
recovery is anticipated. More multiple products with small volume will be
coming into play from here on, and the number of composite products may in-
crease. There are also expectations for high-Q and high-inductance chip coils.
Leadlcss transformers may also make their appearance. Switching power sources
will proliferate, with the greater use of microcomputers. 0n the other hand,
competition will be fierce.

Parts in Hhich There Is Clear Demarcation Between Private and Industrial Use
Connectors probably are the item for which the greatest increase in demand
may be expected. This is because of the prospects of a large increase in de-

mand for use with business equipment and industrial equipment. Small con-
nectors with 2-mm pitch may also increase. As a result of all-out practices

40

FOI'0FFKJA1.USIII§LY
in line with the “departure from money“ and "conservation of funds" policies
[broughtonbyl the high cost of money in 1980, it has become possible to pro-
duce connectors at a lower cost than the United States, which is the leading
country where connectors are concerned, and even exports are now feasible.

A sizable demand for connectors for use with optical fibers has finally start-
ed to be created.

Light-emitting diodes using illuminating-type push switches and thin keyboard
switches are proliferating in the area of switches. Switches with sensor
capability and remote control capability are also increasing. Crystal oscil-
lators saw great growth in FY 81 due to the demand for VTR. but this market
may taper off in FY 82. There will also be a lowering of prices. 0n the
other hand, much slaller crystal oscillators, made possible by cutting inno-
vations, which still retain the same properties of the AT plates of the past,
and small units that oscillate down to very low frequencies are new products
which are drawing attention. Miniature tuners and tuners tuned in on American
broadcast satellites are also attracting interest.

Although paper phenol baseplates are undergoing stunted growth in the area of
printed circuit baseplates, glass epoxy plates and composite materials will
probably become popular. The use of chip parts is increasing baseplates with
both sides usable in the area of private use; the use of hard plates that are
less than 1.0 m- thick, thus reducing size and weight, is responsible for this
trend. At the same time. pattern pitch has been reduced through high-density
installations. Flexible plates are also increasing. Those finding practical
use have made the transition fron the 2-5 layer type used in the past to a
b-6 layer type. Multiple-type small volume products are increasing for use
with microcomputers. Paper phenol types are used here.

Magnetic Heads Expected To Be Used Industrially

Reflecting the depressed state of audio, no high growth rate can be antici-
pated for sound equipment. Speakers are awaiting narket recovery in radio-
attached cassettes. At the same time, growth in small-type speakers, the so-
called solid speakers and microspeakers, is expected. Magnetic heads for
use with VTR, floppy discs, card readers, or digital audio tapes will grow.
Production of projection heads for VTR has been attempted within each comr
pany; to date, Alps Electric and Tokyo Blectro-Chemical Industry have ini-
tiated mass production, and Matsushita Electronic Parts also sells this
product.

Magnetic Tape for VTR in Good Shape

Magnetic tape is in a good situation both for audio use and for VTR use, and
its use with floppy discs is awaited. In the partiCular area of tapes for
VTR use, each company is setting up increased production systens. Tokyo
Blectro-Chemical Industry plans to have monthly production of 10 million
reels by the end of the year, followed by Fuji Photographic Film, Hitachi
Maxell, Sony, Sunitomo-SM. Matsushita Electronic Parts, and Japan Victor-
all of which are planning to increase production. This may all be accom-
panied by a fierce price-reduction war.

41

FOI:0IIICIAI.[EII¢IMLY
FIHR13FF1C1AI.IISEZ(MNLV

Parts for Facsimiles and Relays in Good Shape for Communications Use

With the electronification of exchanges. [the demand for] parts for crossbar
exchanges is continuing to decrease. At the same time, telephone demand is
saturated, and no large increase can be expected in the entire area of wire-
communication parts. 0n the other hand, parts for facsimiles and control
use relays are in good shape. Be that as it may, the market competition in
control use relays is quite fierce.

Liquid-Crystal Elements for Character Display Growing

Liquid-crystal display elements, which were newly added to the statistics in
1981, have presently developed into a 3 billion yen per month market. The
principal applications are in small calculators and watches, but the market
in the toy and automotive sectors is expanding. Character-display applica-
- tion is showing particularly good growth, and growth on the order of 15 per-
cent is expected this year.

Electron Tubes: High-Precision Display Tubes in Good Demand

Braun tubes, which account for 75 percent of electron tubes, are in a declin-
ing trend. The sideways aovement of the color TV and black-and-white TV

market and the trade friction with the United States and Europe are of con-
cern here. On the other hand, there are great expectations for high-precision-
color Braun tubes for terminal monitor use in office equipment and computers.
In addition, small black-and-white Braun tubes for VTR image monitors and TV
camera viewfindera are expected to witness growth.

A continued high rate of growth is foreseen for picture tubes, which have
sustained good growth in the past. The growth rate of VTR cameras for house-
hold use is still on the order of 1 percent, and this is a product of the
future. There will be some increase in solid picture elements, but they are
not expected to take over the principal role in FY 82. In addition. the
market for fluorescent display tubes is expanding. 0n the other hand, there
should not be too much optimism. This is because competitors in the form

of liquid-crystal display elements, light-emitting diodes, and electrolumi-
nescent tubes lurk in the wings.

Semiconductor Elements: Light Elements and Power Elements to Grow

Silicon transistors, which had undergone a stringent supply-and-demand situa-
tion from the end of FY 80 through FY 81, went through a period of large
growth last year. It is a rare occasion in recent years for semiconductor
elements to show greater growth than Ic. This was the result of the greater
than expected growth in VTR. which uses transistors. In the past, VTR was
forever changing sodels in order to improve performance, and sass production
was barely keeping up. as a result of which the conversion of circuitry to

IC could not keep up. The net effect was that many separate electronic parts,
including transistors, were used. As growth in VTR moderates from here on,
conversion to IC may proceed. Hhen this situation is considered, there is no
doubt that the growth rate in transistors will slow down. In addition, the

62

70.40'FKJAI.UBI(HNLY
audio recession has created an oversupply situation. A major adjustment in
production schedules has been in progress since the end of last year. On
the other hand. new.markets such as digital audio can be expected to develop.
There may be increase in the mini-old type. among the package forms.

In addition. good growth is predicted for power H08 PET in the area of motor
control. Demand [for nos PET] as a switching power source will be expected
to grow still more.

Photo diodes may be expected to continue their growth in the optical area.
However. waves are beginning to appear. This is because of the fashion nature
of display elements. when this possibility is considered, it may be more
prudent to expect laterally directed strength rather than outright growth.

The GaAlAs visible light semiconductor will develop real strength in the de-
mand for digital audio display use. Light-receiving elenents also are in

good shape.

The market for converter use for American satellite broadcasts is increasing
where CaAs PET is concerned. Japan has market conpetitive strength in this
area. It is expected to find use as a tuner for color TV. According to
Sumitomo Electrical Industry, growth of more than 50 percent in GaAs base-
plates for PET use is predicted. The epitaxial-layer attachment type is the
mainstream at the present time. It is felt that methods of producing TET by
ion injection will increase in the future.

Although the volume is still small, GaAs-hole elements will find greater de-
nand as notor rotation control sensors. lnSb-hole elements are numerous in
this area. Amorphous silica is used not only in solar cells but as light-
sensitive bodies in duplicating equipnent. and production is increasing. In
addition. various types of semiconductor sensors. including thermisters and
varistors. are expected to grow.

Integrated Circuits (1C): HOS Is Undergoing Large Price Reduction

10 (integrated circuit), which has sometimes been called the new "bread for
industry." will probably maintain good growth. However, it is not without
some uneasy problems. The Japanese-American semiconductor war, which for
the past year or two had been in somewhat of a state of peace, reerupted
once more at the start of this year. The 31A (American Semiconductor Indus-
try Association) has been spearheading anti-Japanese criticism, which is
increasing day by day. The point is brought out that the 64-kilobit dynamic
RAH has captured 70 percent of the American market. "It is senseless to
argue over the market share at sanple time" (Japan Electron Machine Industry
Association) is part of the rebuttal being offered, but this appears to be
just a twitching of the nose of this LSI trade war. In addition. there is
the uneasy area that will increase if the American market does not recover
from the recession it is in. The recession in the audio industry is creating
uneasiness in the domestic market.

HOS, which makes up the greater portion of 1c. is undergoing severe price
reductions. This area will register roughly 30-percent growth where produc-
tion units are concerned, while monetary value will increase but 10 percent.

63

INJI‘OUIICIAI.IRII(I‘LV
F08 OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

This rate of growth is certainly not very large. In contrast, bipolar and
analog 10 may show growth of lore than 20 percent. At the same time, hybrid
Ic is expected to see stable growth of thick film for use in VTR.

Japanese-American Trade Friction Rekindled

Even those stanch Japanese leading manufacturers of Ic pale at the lost recent
escalation in the Japanese-American trade friction revolving about 10. Even
very high officials of the American Government are conplaining to Congress at
various hearings about the subsidy administration of the Japanese Government.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry, which is concerned about
further intensification of this friction, sent out an unusual mean to the
heads of Hitachi Liaited. Fujitsu, Toshiba Corporation. Mitsubishi Electric.
and Oki Electric Industry to "be careful of any export practices that might
lead to complaints of duaping.”

The "prime cause“ for this situation has been held up to be the 64-kilobit NAM
which Hitachi has been producing at the rate of 1 million per month since
April, while Fujitsu, Nippon Electric. and Toshiba expect to achieve this p'o-
duction level of 1 million a month by the end of this year. Furthermore,

each coapany is deeply troubled because this production is intended for ex—
port to the United States to serve as strategic goods.

According to IC market predictions, American aarket trends will be an impor-
tant key. Japan's Ic exports last year (January-Deceaber 1981) totaled 166.2
billion yen (Figure 4, Treasury Ministry customs statistics). North America
accounted for 57.0 billion yen, or 40 percent of the total. The American
market, which is the mainstay of these exports, has "seen a continuation of
rainy weather ever since the latter half of last year, and there have been
only a liaited number of clear days." This is a distressing situation. The
orders-versus-shipnent ratio (the fraction of outstanding orders versus ship-
ments per month) registered a sharp decrease from 1.02 in June of last year
to 0.97 in the following month of July, but since then this figure has re-
mained above 1.0. Many American aanufacturers have reduced income and prof-
its. This is one of the factors responsible for the anti-Japanese criticism.

One of the effective measures for resolving this friction is the mutual entry
into each other's country through the construction of plants. The Japanese
already have seen Nippon Electric, Hitachi, Toshiba. and Fujitsu construct and
operate plants on the American mainland. The volume of this on-site produc-
tion is presently increasing. Each of these companies plans to initiate 64-
kilobit RAM production sometime this year. On the other side of the picture.
the Americans have been represented by TI (Texas Instruments). which since
1968 has constructed three seaiconductor plants in Japan. while Motorola en-
tered into a joint company establishment with Toko. In addition, Pairchild
has formally announced plans to build an IC plant at Isahaya City, Nagasaki
Prefecture. Motorola is planning to construct a new plant in the Kyushu area,
while Intel is planning construction at the Tsukuba Research and Academic
City. and plant construction has become that much more active.

66

F0.‘0FFHJAI.U§E¢MULV
The purpose of this entry into Japan on the part of American nanufacturers is
to utilise Japan's business resources and expansion in sales through direct
entry into the market. Every one of these conpanies is planning to produce
the latest VLSI products at these Japanese plants.

To be sure, this entry of American manufacturers into Japan is a source of
wonderment to the Japanese. as this signifies that a urinet battle is to be
waged on one's own ground. Furthermore, as the “.81 age is actually about
to be entered, the first assault product. the “-ulobit RAH, will play the
principal role on offense and defense. Japanese Ianufacturers need to grasp
narket trends accurately, lay detailed product policies, and develop market-
ing strength so as to gain consuners at a level far beyond what was needed
in the past. In this manner. the response to internationalisation is greet-
ing a new stage.

005 Drawing Attention as Low—Power-Consuwtion Ices

030$ [conplenentary netal-oxide seniconductor] becones the subject matter
when 1c is viewed free: the standpoint of process technology. This is because
of its low power constnption. When a plastic package is used for nemory, the
heat release is responsible for more than BOO-Iii power consumption per chip.
Among the static type, the 6b-kilobit nl‘DS approaches this limit. Even RON
[read-only memory} will come close to this limit where the 256 kilobit is
involved; this is up to 128 kilobit for BYRON [erasable and electrically
programble read-only nenory]. In this runner, as the degree of integration
goes up, the power consuned will also increase if the sane systen is used,
and plastic packages will become no longer usable. This is why the use of
C105 for peripheral circuits is expected to be one way to lower power consump-
tion.

The sane situation exists in the area of logic circuits. In addition, design
is facilitated with 005 for logic circuits, and cans has the added advantage
of ease of use. This is why 008 is expected to assume a nainstream role in
large logic circuits, with the exception of those for high-speed use and for
sole special-use circuits. CNS will also increase in the area of analog and
digital hybrid chips.

Invest-eat in Facilities To Total 300 Billion Yen

Even though there is uneasiness over the recognition of the trade friction,
domestic lc manufacturers are projecting high growth rate as before. Demand
is expected fron microcomputers. 1c menory. analog Ic for VTR use. and D-A
converters for digital audio. IC ne-ory is the prime mover in this market.
Including the “-kilobit RM and BPROK. approxiutely a 30-percent growth is
expected overall. At the present tine. the lo-bit and 8-bit products are the
mainstrean of nicroconputers. Hess production of the 16-bit will go onstrean.
The 32-bit microcowuter may soon becone available. Sharp reported that its
k-bit microcomputer outperforned its snail desk calculators last year. Micro-
computers are increasing in volume through their combination with sensors.
Not only control equipment, autonobiles, and household electric appliances
but an unlimited nunber of areas of application is available. It is expected

1.5

son omcm. use MY
FIHRCMWWKJAI.USE¢NMLY

that independent product development and soft development will become active
in these areas in efforts to reverse [the situation of] American superiority.

There is great fervor for investment in facilities in order to meet these ex-
pected demands. Nippon Electric expects to increase its investment in facil-
ities by 10 percent or more. from the 38 billion yen in FY 81 to 42 billion
yen. A large fraction of this sum is destined to be put into a new produc-
tion line at the Sagamigahara plant. There also will be sizable investment
in the Nippon Electric plants in Kyushu and Yamagata. Hitachi Limited will
invest 35 billion yen. which represents a 25-percent increase over last year.
This plan involves the area under the main plant's jurisdiction. and if the
five subsidiaries. including Nikkan Electronics and Aoume Electronics. are
included, this investment will total 66 billion yen-oa 20-percent increase
over last year. This company intends to hold secure its position as the
world's top manufacturer of 64-kilobit RAM.

Toshiba is also planning a large investment. The Oita plant not only is the
stronghold for the static-type [RAM] but also has increased production of the
dynamic-type RAM, and it plans to produce 1 million units a month by the end
of the year. It will market a product of loo as access time. This effort is
being made to recover ground lost as the result of [the firm's] late entry.

In addition, it plans to invest 20 billion yen in its "VLSI development facil-
ity" (provisional name) and enter into test production of the 1-H bit RAM next

sunset 0

Many of the other manufacturers, such as Fujitsu, Mitsubishi, Matsushita Elec-
tronic Industries, Tokyo Sanyo Electric. and Oki Electric Industry. are also
planning investments that will exceed last year's levels. When the Sony.
Pioneer. Nippon Gakki, Citizens Hatch, Suwa Seikosha, Leco, Nippon Denso,
Clarion, and Shin Nippon Musen semiconductor manufacturers for domestic con-
sumption and Toto, Sanken Electric, Origin Electric. Shin Dengen Kogyo, and
Fuji Electric are added, the total will exceed 300 billion yen.

Total production in FY 81 for semiconductor elements and [C was 1.128.600.000.000
yen. The invest-ent in facilities that year was more than 200 billion yen.
This investment was roughly 20 percent of total sales. Production is expect-
ed to total 1.3 trillion yen in FY 82, and there will be investment of 300 bil-
lion yen. This is 23 percent of production. Research and development funds
are in addition to this investment. If investments continue at this rate.

they will soon be of a magnitude to compete with those of the semiconductor
industry. There is ample grounds for calling these investments "money-eating
bugs."

Single Crystal Si to 530 Tons

High-purity semiconductor-use Si has maintained its high rate of growth of
nearly A0 percent since 1978. Japan's single-crystal production last year
(January-December 1981) increased 32 percent over the previous year to 646 t
(tons), according to the Silicon Subsection of the New Metals Association.

and this year's total may increase 19 percent to 530 t (tons). The production
of polysilicon was last year 576 t, which was an increase of 23 percent over
the previous year; an increase of 6 percent to 600 t is expected this year.

#6
FOIl¢lﬂﬂ€1hl.USEiHULl
Japan‘s consmtion of polycrystalline nterial is expected to be 1.000 t this
year. an anount greater than the consuption in the United States (excluding

13K and

TI) .

Despite this situation. Japan's growth in polycrystalline sili-

con is slowing down. This is because, ever since high-cost energy took over,
only one silicon coupany specializing in high-grade laterial has increased

its production facilities, and the single-crystal lakers other than its parent
conpany (Osaka Titania Company. Nippon Silicon) haVe adopted a policy of nak-
ing up their shortages by inports tron the Ilenlock Cowany of the United States
and the Hacker Oonpeny of Heat Ger-any.

Electron Machine Industry Association's questionnaire survey.

Key:
1.
2.
3.
lo.

5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

lo.
11.

            

1C

Smﬂmg

509-3:
angﬁbum) iQnUBW

Figure 3.

 

  

sun.- r-u re 55”.- aA’ru aﬂn my". 0""

“1:3;
Haunt-m

) III“: as

Ship-ant-Hakeup Ratio According to Application

of General Electronic Parts
This figure was cowiled using the results of the Japan

This figure

does not include vire co-unications parts or Iagnetic tapes.

Ratio 12.
Export 13.
Others 11‘.
Co-unication, equipnent. 15.
neasurenent equipment 16.
Autombilea 17.
Caaerss 18.
Hatches 19.
Office equipnent. autonated 20.
sales equip-ent 21.
Cowuters and peripheral 22.
terninals 23.
Toys 26.
Electronic instruents
67

Electronic ranges

Household electric appliances
Audio

TV

First half of 1979

Second half of 1979

First half of 1980

Second half of 1980

First half of 1981

Second half of 1981

(FY 79: about 1.9 trillion yen)
(FY 80: about 1.279 trillion yen)
(FY 81: about 1.6b trillion yen)

“Will“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.7949. ..uwusonnou co van—.9198 01—9.:

9.8. ...... 5.: 5.: , 89...... . $4.8. $4.8. 8&8... 39.4. 29.5 .93... 4 r4
...... ...... 4a.... 39. 8...... 8...“. 8.3. 5.2. one 98.42 3.42.4 44
4.... 4.8 2... m9 8.: 8...: 8.... EN.» 5H4 898 33... .... 94

one. c2: «.45 :5 En 8—45 8..“ £8 5.2. .Dhmﬂiaﬂn_=:x\4%..“idal do.

 
   

as. “a: mam: 9N9— gi 5.8... 89.3 89.93.. 49.63.. ”459.38..” «Sﬂiﬂrurﬂ... no
...... ...S. 4...: ...... 92.5.... 98.39“ g 89.5... 98.98.. 53sz 35 A 04
99.... ...... ".44. 5: 894.4 89.89 89.3 9.9.4.4.. 8394 tag“... A «n
_ 3 ...! 3." 45. 89.4 89.4: 8.... 89.8" :39" 9.... w on
.....9. ...E. ...: 4...: 98.3 98.928 8.49 999.894 234.9 “4.1.4 .. . 1.... on
...: ........ ...... 2... 8...... 98.89.; 8...... 98.84.: 93.8.... B449: on
a ..9. 9 ...: S... 3.. 98...! 89.55 Bag... 89.85 39.8.... "4.9.84. o n . . on
...... .. ... ...... .4.... 89.8. 98.83. 89.9. 894.89. 5.33. 34.9.83... r v0
9.1.. . ...: ....S 999 82 89.“. 89.» 98.5” 8...... 794.49. no
...“... .....u: 4...... 9.2. 89......” 98.334 92.3 89.93.99 98.98.99 H.444... an
...... ...... ......m 2... ...-.... 39......” 8...... 98.4.5. 53.... n4. .3 .. an
...... _ .... ....E. .3... 9.9.5. 3.9.31.4 lira. Satan. 5.14.94 \ n .u4..~ A on
. . . 39...... .3959... I5... .. 34...»... .54.»! u. x I on
. 8...... . 39...! $9.4 55...... 62.94. H43. . .t . . .. on
84... 9.9.8. 84... 95.9.... .834. 3.5.9.3. 9.4.
9.5.: 59.62.... 84.... ...-......" 558.. ...uzlwzzui... on
a...” 89.99.. 8.4. 8.25.. 4.9.24... uslwxs4w. nu
.... ....4 ...-:5... 4 854 ...-4:5...” ..9.....4N...p. .5.in .93. .4 .... v n
=5... 99.9.5.4 895. 98.3.0 5.33.3 "4.54.: an
...-...... 59.54 89.... 89.9.4 3.34 a: w «a
83. 9.9.“ 84..” ......ﬂ. can "433...... .3
3.5.4... 93.92.... 89.8 98.5.4.“ 93.894 33:2... .4 .... on
95.42 9.5.4.... 89.... 92.92.... 5.9.453 9:34.. 99
3 in 89.42.: 93.9.... 89.24.44 59.34.94 "4.4.4 04
9.“. :1. 83...“ 3.. h.—
...=. ...... ......z 9... ... 9:... :1... .E... 94... no}... .. a 5.4.4 o.—
.. ...... .. . : .....e. ...-...... 89.9.. 98.... 98.9... 31.3. I .. ._ (.9: w 0»
... u. 9.4. ...... .5... 8a.... 83. 89.”. and. I .. _. . u \. .. r .. .... 4 t v.-
.. ...... .. u: . 4.... ......H 999.3.” 84..“ 95.49. 3.54. I .. .. A an
9...... 98 n9... 8.. 9...: a: 8...... 98.4 s . I ... ...: A ._ A «a
...3 ..8 .34 98.. 98.. B... on. 3.... .... ...... . ....._.a.. . A an
I E... . . 5...... I 98...... II 334. dilate!!! cu
. m4: . 31:9,... . .98.“: | . I. ilﬁ'll o 9.
.. 9.9.. 9.5.3.4... .. 99.48.... I . . . audit! 9
1.: a; ....- ls ....I -8... .... It. ......

3.8.3.9....v,.a§:n.tc....a n ..wluhliixn £34.13.”

Anew 99.3.3: .— .925 I‘m-430:0: .9003..— 08. .— .9995 nae-:5
AS4399.— owaouuuoau no couuosvoum “40999.35 83 n 0.38.

1.8

”WWW!”
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600080077-4

Ion manly.» .3. NB noun—5,300.3 .HH

. «......I-Nl-U‘nmxau It}!

.6. .N..
a. as.
75:. .
. 3.
0.2.

v.3.
Nd. .
......
0.5.
90..
a. ..
ed. .
... . .
cs.
.... . . .
at

«4......
...de.
36.
u a...

. ‘.—
.....5

....O.

.. ....

... ......

 

can. I I 8%» 8.2 g S.
.5. I I 8.: ﬁg 33 g
0.... I I 26.3. g. «.n 5.8. g
0.9. 0.3. I 28" g as. a as...
..3 «an a 3.2 8%. 3.: 3.0

. I adv. I 8M6: I. I Ian.“ I
«.8. . “.8. ..8. as.“ a 8nd. 3
v.2. ”in. a“. 893 SM.— gdr. an...

..8. 0.3. ma... gag EM. 3 a...
0.8. N.“— Qd: see. ad. 8%?— 8.“.
...... «.3. 40.. g. 8...». 8.3. g“.
in: Z... 0 2. $8.! 23.80.. 23.8 25.0.9
.40.. six. sﬁ. as. 98.5..“ 98.8 3.69..
6.3.. mg. 0.2. £34.. 8.... 36 and
N6: 3...... 08. 8,8. Sv..o..~ 8...; £08..
ca... 0.8. 0.8. g .g 983...... g.“ 28.28
was: 3... ad: $3.99 3.9 EH60 5.99

. ..n. as. . 3.. II

ma: in. GM: 33.8 ﬁg. g‘ g.
:4, 1—H 0.3 93.0 5.6— 8.0 5—
Cf... ....H. 73. ﬂag—N 8.2 a... 8h“.
.35. :45. . .3. 95.5 3.4- 8. .S a“

«No a! was. Elem 58...... 35.3. 8:»

n; .3! ...! Be... 35.... 25....- 9a...»
...... x .... a .... is... sad... 8: .B a! .S.
.. 2.. 9-5.5... EH. as.

23002. .1303 an E.

 

 

 

I. I law
I I Fltgx'
I I hits?!
0868 I ..rl+xIA
E... 3... +$Akfﬂﬁxl m». .tA
5:3 I INIIWCJCIH
8.... a C....w..§..|....dtcu.c...ll
24: 5 Gail!
“...! .96 Ilia...
8.3. 3.6. €a€h§n§ﬂ3€$¢

3s 3. :6. 21.2. \. .. r A
«3.8 3.: .alulul...0..uﬂ.+ . . a A
31“» 5.5. 53‘nCICW
....n .2... . u .. n .1
$3.. $8.9... . « .. n A
..%8 they.“ .. 8.5.30
3...... ......H +lq+!\...\u\.+é
as...» I..... II. I --I! ...-.1.
8.... .8... ... (....JA
96.... 03.2 r ...n . u A
«S... .0... I: (.....«A
2.... 8..“ and. ...A
«3.8 89.! $4013.. 553::
53. Bnﬁh Reclaﬁsmut:
22'. ES: ... .. n. . g
3...... .I ill-

in

uh

I.
On

b.
00

no
no
no
r 0

on
rn
vn
no
no
no
00

«v
r!
0'

69

mammal“

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000500080077-4
22.
23.
26.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
36.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
60.

61.
62.
63.
66.

65.
(660

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Others

Fixed resistors

Carbon-skin fixed resistors
Carbon fixed resistors *2
Metal-akin fixed resistors
Hire-wound fixed resistors
Network resistors

Others

Condensers

Variable condensers

Fixed condensers*3

Paper condensers

Aluminun electrolytic condensers
Tantalun electrolytic condensers
Magnetic condensers

Organic film condensers

Others
Composite parts
Transformers (including wire
rings)

Intermediate-frequency and high-
frequency transformers

Input transformer (includes step
transformer for transistors)
Output transfer-era

Power supply transforners

Others

Audio parts

*5

67.
68.
69.
SO.
51.
52.
53.
56.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
600

61.
62.
63.
66.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71 O
72.

Speakers

Less than 92 II in disaster
More than 92 n- in diaeeter
Microphone

Stereo headphone

Pickup

Magnetic head

Constituent parts

Tuner for TV

Crystal oscillator

Connector

Coaxial connectors

Other connectors

Switches (lilited to coanunica-
tion and electron equip-en: use)
Printed distribution panel

Less than 3 layers of conductors
For private-use equip-eat

For industrial use equipment

6 or sore layers of conductors
Other general parts

Receiving antenna for TV
Magnetic tape"7

Magnetic sound tape

Magnetic video tape

Others

See next page for *l-*8

IIIICIHHKIAI.USE¢M‘LY
. ...: u ...
m 3.2 7d.—
.. u: "...-H.—
...n. .. c...
.. E: . ...:
93...... .2...
9!. t ......
.....z _ : ......
.. :- ....“-
......u ...-G
u .2 a a:
c 6: n4...-
1...: a ..4:
ad:— ... $.—
ei. 0.9...
3! oi.
n.2— Eu:
on. .. I:
0.8 «E.
...—5 q i...
9.2— .4”.
:2 a 3
e 8. n ....
.8. ......
....n. e ..ﬂ.
SE. 9.3.
#3 v.3
“a! “a!
...”... =6.
...3 h o.
“....G want
...-o 35
and o ....
1 as 0....
: .B— c.8—
nsc. _ I.
.3...— I I
I! G.
33!} 05.0 o

.. ....
n at...
. . ....
h E...
......t

u. .u.
«......—
hﬂ _
1‘.-
...-e

.....M.
923

.I. e:
a 3.
«N:
3

o‘—

_2«._ .

w a

mi...—
GK».—
0 3—
9.5...—
.48

Hi.
98.
«.9:
n.8—
n.:_
”.3

“.5:
w!—
n E—
1.:
0’.

m. 2
“a:

I.

I I‘ll-.III

 

3m .

 

 

 

Homo;

 

cellos». 295:8» {whizguullltla ...... .15!!!

and» cougar a 3.25 E328:
373.»: canon—no.5 mo coauosvoum 03-1qu

mausoHHou no veg—«anon 0.31.:

._ 44:»...59... ..n A 0'

 

 

a. .h 9!... 53.8. 93...: ...—«.5 $2....
.5. 5...... Bag 8...... 9.1.... 23. 3...”: w... .4 no
.5. ......h. 23.9%... 8...: 8.21.. 5‘. 3.5... n ..v * A u v 3
an: ...-...... 335m llebwl I9w....ﬁ..|l9¢..ﬁ I-. 3.23.... .... fawn... A .3
.2: 5...... 85:. 8....” 95...... 8...» 522 A .. _. . ... A 3
3.: 8e... Soda 8.2 93.5» 3.. 5...... . .., _. : A on
..E. 83.. 8...! 83 83! 83. 3.8. . . .. . I: A on
1...... 8...: 82!” Bed 8...: 2.3 3...... A .. I x... J. bust? ..n
Eu... 88.: 28.3.... 89.3. Sad...» 23.: 3.95.... A w I I. e .. . \. n .. x on
9.5 6...... 323 8a.. in... 8..” 3......» «xx 2. .. hear») 00.
Eu. . 82!. Leann... 98.8. 8...:3Ixﬂd. Ian‘s... II A u w x. c . A .5
at. 85” 83s 8..." 8a..” a: 3.8 I: w an
n...... =85. 8.32." 89.3 8.53 3.8 .823 .. *1... I. n .. x. no
2: 8...; g.“ 89.8 832.“ 83. 35:3 .... ... .38: .. 3.... A an
24. 83. 98.33. 3.. 22.3 8.“. 3.9.3 . I A . u . I. n .. I. on
an 83 305 g Soﬁe us... 5.9 A I r v s . «car...» on
93. 98.2 832... 23. 839.. on... 33.3 .. I» . . A on
I 8a.»: I 23 -H. 9...." I $.03... 3
3. as... .8 a: 8n 8... an new on
3.: 898 83 8.3 as... and .8. kn... on
22 8.... 83 ans 8..“ 328 .3. a... cane m A on
n: 8.... 9 8..» a 83. a ...-.7. A an
3: a... 8.. 8... a. 8... 9. 53.. A «a
.3 89.8 83. 83¢ 82» 8.4g .84... :5. A «a
.2... 83.. 83 82. can .8... .a. I: on
...": 8%.! g 833 g :38 3.5 ... x. . .x. v A Tlo c an
3: 8...... 83 8a.: 83 .8... 83 ... \. . .\.. n A :5. on
3: 83:. 813 83: 89.3 838 5.: ... I. . a u A A. 2
mi. 33 .8'3..H 3.3 3H ‘68 and“ I. ; hmuIcehlqumAlI 0."
...k 3... a. on a 8n 2 5.... A on
98. 8.4. a g a «8.. ﬂ cc .« v...
...: ES". 98.. 98.9 8... 8..." 83 x. a . A n ... an
5: Sun 5: 82» a... ”in :2 ...... a A v I A «a
G: 83. n 83 s «.3 a ta... A n .—
...8. E .. 2 2 2 2 ..w... ...«A S
. I ...... .3 I 3...". I an! I Ikﬂo o
I 22...... .I. 23.8.. I 338.. w I..... III! 0
a. I. I... . I. a. .. I: u‘ul. I... . .

.332 8a.. 33. nap-=5
.2. ... «Sc...

51

mmmoum
FOR40FRK1AI.USE(NNLY

 

" 3.3—. ...=.\.. c".— vr 1...; v . 52+... 3F). ~...+!: . 3.59.6.0... . "Ye

 

ououuuacuuu .cn
82.8 .8

unusuao uuuauwuoou :ooaaum .Nn
Ac! cad aosu ouoav usuauua mcuxuuuuoz .Hn

novowv :ooadam .0n

aouowv Isucaahoo .ou

novown .QN

nuaoauqo neuusvuoouaom .nn

nonnu

oposuo .ou

mops» ouauoum .nu
nouuooau nozuo .ew
wanna hauux .nu

wanna onuaﬁuoun .NN

03

009:» aoaaawa .nn
acquuosvcu you .ON
>H noaoo non .oH

>H Ouuzlnvawlxuunn Mom .on

_ U”.
5....
1.»!—
«4...—
1......
:5..—
.2...—
_ .2

L... _ anaﬂﬁcmauf: .. _. x... .

31......

:51.
:‘J.

 

=1. :3
=55...—

 

.I-. .‘7

_._ menswervrk. .:ut_l_....:r .3. U..._—...T=._.._J:..Kc. m...

 

   

:55: 3!...“ 2...”...—

.-...-r.. :5. E

i... _ _ .- In

in... .n Edi:

35.1.4... 25.5.2

3-2.5 FE...—

EE.E...N 35.5....
. 3...: a .—

£3.52...

 

2.3.38»! g c: .33.. .58.: u. .

 
 

~0uan mausoHHOw co coacuucoo >02.

on: >9 you
Anonsu asuunv wanna aau avou<
nonau wcuhuuuuox

wuoguo

conuocuuz

nanny o>u3ououz

nuns» :oqauuaqcauh

wanna ncw>uooox

mono» :ouuoaau

uuuan o>uuo<

o=Hu> mhwuoco:

oa=Ho>

any waua up

any oaxaa uh

Avenuuvouav No xh

Acouuaauuo unanuuuanv an rm
Avuooou unduoav on an

23:55:. n . : ...-o....¢..,..........«..~ﬂ.r;ae. ..
«.17.. Six-P. ........ .62.".

”2.25.151;
.Eia 2a....mnﬂc...33.. \ ... ..

  

aﬂczaunvzcischau.n.t.+.n.u:m..

anwuq 4p.r!:ex+ :
..»..»..Hu..d¢3=§s. ..
\.~...uu....u..4..£2u.u.....n;.c .

    

 

 

.i::lu:_uwld!t
‘57.}... 99...
£3.92... m...
:33 —. .... u A
rt»;
.rA o. m
J- . k . . .
.J. a 1 . .
n2.......—.\..~. " A

 

 

.ha
.oH
.nH
.«H
.na
.NH
.HH
.OH
.o
.o
.n
.o
.n
.c
.n
.N
.H

40
no
0 m
00
b0
on
an
'0
00

“n
H0

A v
0..
o...‘
tv
$1

52

IKIICHHHCJAI.IEII(IULN
35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
60.
1.1.

42.

43.
55.

S6.
S7.
58.
S9.

60.
61.

62.

Gerunnius transistors Mo. Other seniconductor elesents
Silicon transistors 65. Integrated circuits

Electric field effect 66. Semiconductor integrated circuits
transistors 67. Analog to

Thenister 68. Digital 10

Vsristor b9. Bipolar type

Thyristor 50. nos type

Photoelectric conversion 51. Mixed integrated circuits
elenent 52. Thin film integrated circuits
Light-cutting diode 53. Thick fil- integrated circuits
Others 56. Liquid-crystal elesenta‘8

*1 The basic figures for parts classification and production records

*2
*3
u.
*5

*6
*7

*8

vere iron the MIT! Machine Statistics (nonthly report). tech FY
ends in March. (For exasple. FY 82 runs April 1982 thr-‘ugh thrch
1983)

Includes metal oxide skin type fixed resister

Includes netsllised paper condensers

Includes metal-organic fils condensers

Composite parts of combinations of resistors, condensers, and coils.
Does not include working parts such as transistors and 1C2

The volule unit of printed distribution lates is 1.000 In
Value unit for magnetic tape is 1,000 n . For emple, 1 cassette
of sound tape "0-60" is 0.363 s . “T-120" video tape (VTR tape)

0% VHS-type 120-sinute use is 3.112 I, and 8 type "b—lSO" is 1.898
s

FY records for liquid crystals are limited to statistics for
January-March 1981

S3

mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 

margin”!

  
 
  
   

 
  
   

(3)

IMNINICIHH'.

 

.0.

BMNI‘ IC IQA

.1..-. !_.L.:. . .L... -_..
9lll3579Hl3579lllil579l7

; (SFNIMZI') (6}. ‘I'llmil (.lrIJINQ-I (GYH‘ISIII T”

‘32. -.I_ ._|_‘ 1—.-
cis "'

Figure 4. 1c (Integrated Circuit) Production Trends and
Export-Import Trends

Production values from HITI Machine Statistics (monthly report).
Export-import values from Ministry of Treasury Customs Date;
Both exclude hybrid integrnted circuits.

1. Monetary value (100 million yen) 5. 78 (1978)
2. Integrated circuit (IC) production 6. 79 (1979)
3. Integrated circuit (Ic) exports 7. 80 (1980)
lo. Integrated circuit (IC) ilporte 8. 81 (1961)

1081': Nikkei-McGrav-Bill Inc. 1982

6106/95 END

54

VMMLIBIONLY