FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10418

26 March 1982

Translation

WARTIME OPERATIONS IN 1941-1945:

THE BREAKTHROUGH
By

A.I. Radziyevskiy

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OWAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HARTIME OPERATIONS. IN 1941-1945: THE BREAKTHROUGH

Moscow PRORYV (PO OPYTU VELIKOY OTBCHESTVBNNOY VOYNY 1941-1945 66.) in
Russian 1979 (signed to press 16 Nov 78) pp 1-192

[Translation of book "The Breakthrough (Prom the Experience of the
Great Patriotic War, 1941-1945)", by Army Gen Prof Aleksey Ivanovich
Radziyevakiy, Hero of the Soviet Union, voyenizdat, 17,000_copies, 192
pages plus diagrams]

CONTENTS

Introduction II...OoooooleoeeOOOOOOOOOOODOO000......OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOQIoee

Chapter One. Penetration in Operations of the Pirat Period of the Great
Patriotic "at OOOOOOOCOOOOOOCCIOO.'-OOO0.0.III.0.0COOOCOIOOCIOOOOOOOOJDOOo 6

1. Experience of Penetration in the Operations of the Sumner-Pall Can-
paign of 1941 .......................................................

2. Penetrationin the Operations of the winter Caupaign of 1941/42 ......

3. Penetrationinthe Operations of the Sumner-Fau.Canpaign of 1942 ..... 2

OGO‘

Chapter Two. Development of Theory and Practice of Penetration in world

war II IOOICOO...O...O0.0...IOD.OOIOOOODOOOIOCIOIOOOCOOOOOOCI.0.0.00.0... 33

1. Penetration in the Winter Campaign of 1942/43 ....................... 33
2. Penetration of a Static Defense in the Operations of the Sunncr-Fall
Campaign of 1943 ............................................. ...... . 48

Chapter Three. Improvement in the Forms and Modes of Penetration in the
Third Period of the War ................................................. 71

l. Penetration in the Operations of the 1944 Winter Caspaign ........... 71
2. Improvement of Penetration in the Operations of the 1944 Sonnet-Fall

C:.paign ............................................................ 88
3. The Art of Penetration of the Bneny'e Defense in the Operations of

1945 eoeaeeoe.ooeeoaeeoeaoeoaeeeeeeeaeeeoeeaaaeoeeoeoaaaooeeanoeooeee 113

Chapter Four. Results of Development of Theory and Practice of Penetration
in the Great Patriotic War .............................................. 150

III - USSR - POUO]
- a - [III - USSR - 4 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Types and Poms of Penetration of the Bunny's Defense
2. Selection of Axes of Advance and Breakthrough Sectors
3. Messing of Forces and Conbat Pomtions .
4. Delivering Fire on the Enemy ..
5. Breaking Through the Tactical Zone of Defense ..
6. DevelOpnent of Tactical Into Operational Breakthrough
7. Development of Operational Into Strategic Breakthrough .............

conclusion 0000.00.000.0000to000.000.000.00...It...0.0000900000000000000000

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

150
151.
159
162
165
169
171

174
INTRODUCTION

Penetration as a mode of offensive actions aimed at breaking up a fortified frontage
occupied by defending enemy troops by means of forming a breach (breaches) in the
defense, for subsequent maneuver to depth or toward the flanks, began to be employed
in the wars of the era of imperialism in connection with the establishment of con-
tinuous static fronts.

The absence of exposed enemy flanks and the impossibility of outflanking or en-

veloping the enemy compelled attacking troops to seek to accomplish the mission by
means of a direct frontal attack.

The need to penetrate a defense first appeared in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-
1905, but as a consequence of the newness of the problem and heavy casualties in-
flicted in a frontal attack, in this war neither side succeeded in accomplishing

penetration.

Bourgeois military theory, other than perceiving the difficulties of penetration,
was unable to see its laws and patterns, ways and means of accomplishment. Shortly
before world War 1, military theorists concluded from an analysis of the enormous
destructive power of rapid—fire weapons that a frontal attack was out of the
question. By virtue of this, the strategic war plans of the opposing sides were
constructed on the basis of improving outflanking and enveloping maneuvers. But
the battles fought at the beginning of World Her I showed that the rate of advance
of flanking troops did not exceed the rate of buildup of the defensive frontage by
the opposing side by virtue of engaging additional combined units and large
strategic formations. When the flanks of the steadily expanding combat front in-
pinged onto natural obstacles which were insuperable to ground forces - seas,
mountain ranges, as well as neutral countries -. the failure of strategic war plans
became obvious.

The art of warfare of the armies of all countries was faced with the problem of
penetration of a strategic front. without accomplishing penetration, it was no
longer possible to conduct offensive operations and to capture important strategic,
industrial and administrative centers, without which it was impossible to win a
war or to achieve those objectives for the sake of which a war was initiated.

All warring armies proved to be unprepared -- theoretically, technically, and
materially -- to accomplish penetration.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The search for a solution to the problem of penetration of a deliberate defense
continued throughout Horld War I, by attacking in a single narrow (12-15 km)

sector, on a continuous wide (60-80 kmo frontage, and simultaneously in several
sectors; artillery densities (up to 180 guns per kilometer of breakthrough sector).
degree of delivery of effective fir:, depth and degree of saturation of combat
dispositions with men and weapons increased from one canpaign to the next. Never-
theless attacking forces were unable to penetrate the defense to a depth where they
could shift to fluid actions. The cause lay primarily in the slow rate of advance.
Bndeavoring to penetrate the defense, attacking troops would mount one assault after
another, spalling off one piece after another from the solid core of the defense, as
it were. But the defending enemy, moving reserves to the endangered point, would
build up the depth and strength of the defense more rapidly than the attacking

force could wear it down. And operations usually would stall.

The appearance of tanks on the battlefield created realistic preconditions for
rapid penetration of a static defense. But bourgeois art of warfare failed to find
ways to realize their potential. By war's end the only problem which had been
besbany solved was that of penetrating a tactical defense by means of messed em-
ployment of artillery, tanks. infantry and aircraft in selected sectors. The
problem of exploiting and developing tactical into operational penetration, however,
remained unresolved.

During the civil war in the USSR, when cavalry armies were established. in a number
of operations Soviet troops succeeded not only in penetrating a tactical defense
but also in exploiting the attack to considerable depth, which constituted a
decisive condition for devastating defeat of the enemy and liberation of vast areas
of the Soviet Republic.

Synthesis of the experience of world War I and the civil war. as well as correct
determination of the combat capabilities of new weaponry enabled Soviet art of war-
fare to formulate a theory of the offensive operation in depth. It consisted es-
sentially in penetration of an enemy defense to full tactirtl depth, breaching and
smashing of the enemy's defense frontage in a sector where the enemy could not
deliver effective artillery fire from adjacent sectors onto friendly troops in the
penetration sector. Engagement of the breakthrough exploitation force, which con-
tained mechanized as well as airborne troops, sought to achieve rapid penetration
of offensive forces to operational depth, destruction of approaching reserves, com-
mand and control facilities and supply depots, and sought to deprive the eneny of
the opportunity to establish a defense along a new line.

Close teamwork and coordination between frontslly-advancing troops, the break-
through exploitation force and air should lead to completion of the defeat in
detail of the enemy's main forces in the zone of advance of the army or front and
offensive exploitation to the planned depth.

The forward operational echelon, which contained reinforced rifle corps, was sup-
wsedto advance to a depth of up to 20 kilometers on the first day of the offensive.
The breakthrough exploitation force, entering the breach in the area of the enemy's
main artillery positions or beyond the main defensive zone, was to penetrate the
second defensive zone without a halt in attack position and, routing advancing

enemy reserves. to capture areas and positions at operational depth, ensuring rapid
achievement of the operation objective.

2-?
FinlCNﬂﬂCJA1.USE(NVLY
when penetrating a hasty defense. it was recommended that the attack be mounted at
a weak point or unoccupied sector, with subsequent offensive exploitation to depth
or toward the flanks.

Penetration was to be accomplished with the approach of troops to the enemy's
defense or from close contact with the enemy.

The Great Patriotic war demonstrated that our prewar views on penetration were es-
sentially correct. Modes and method of preparing for and executing epenetration
experienced considerable development in the course of the war, however, which was
dictated by changes in the conditions of conduct of warfare, the capabilities of
our forces. the character of the enemy's defense, plus other factors. This volume
is devoted to an investigation of this process.

The investigation is broken down by periods of the war, and in each period by cam-
paigns, in which the general situation conditions for the majority of operations
were approximately identical. Within campaigns we investigated penetration of the
enemy's defense not in all offensive operations, but only in those which revealed
the characteristic features of its preparation and conduct, making it possible to
trace progress in achieving a practical solution to the problems of penetration in

a concrete situation and general development trends in theory and practice of
penetration.

This volume is based on a study of materials from the Central Archives of the
Ministry of Defense, military historical works. war memoirs and reminiscences of war
veterans published in the periodical press. The author also utilised his personal
combat experience in analyzing penetration in those operations in which he par-
ticipated.

CPSU Central Committee General Secretary Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stated in his speech
at the 16th Trade Union Congress: "He perceive the past as a rich reservoir of ex-
perience. as material for reflection, for critical analysis of our own decisions and
actions. we draw free the past inspiration for present and future deeds."1 This
statement also applies in full measure to military-historical experience.

Synthesis of the wealth of combat experience of the Soviet Army in matters pertain-
ing to penetrating an enemy defense in the Great Patriotic war and assimilation of
this experience by our command cadres will promote more successful accomplishment
of the tasks facing us today.

The author would like to express his profound gratitude to Maj Gen B. V. Panov, Col
A. A. Sidorenko, and Col N. P. Naumov for assistance rendered in working on this
volume.

FOOTNOTE
1. PRAVDA, 22 March 1977.

6-5
90! 0F11CLAI.US£10NLN
FOR OfﬂCIAL USE ONLY

Chapter One. PENETRATION IN OPERATIORS OF THE FIRST PERIOD 01’ was GREAT
PATRIOTIC WAR

1. Experience of Penetration in the Operations of the Summer-Pall Campaign of 1961

Soviet troops gained their first experience at penetration in the Great Patriotic
War in the July 1941 offensive in the western Sector. It was carried out in a very
complex situation. As a result of the treacherous attack by fascist Germany on the
USSR, our troops sustained heavy casualties in frontier battles. Their combat
capabilities were diminished, and they were forced to fight savage defensive battles.
The need for rapid deployment of new combined units and large strategic formations,
with a shortage of coamand personnel, command and control equipment facilities led
to a change in the organization ofﬁnres. Mechanized and rifle corps were abolished,
and the fighting strength of combined-arms armies was reduced by 50 to 67 percent.

Headquarters, Supreme High Command (Hq sac) established four army groups of 2-4
divisions each for mounting an offensive in the western Sector, and instructed them
to attack along axes converging on Smolensk (Diagram 1). Each army group was to
advance in a zone 30-50 km in width to a depth of up to 100 km from assembly areas
situated 12-30 km from one another, while Gen V. Ya. Kachalov's army group was

150 kilometers distant.

Command authorities of the Western Sector noted a significant flaw in the plan
proposed by Ho sac: "A weak point of this operation lies in the fact that the army
groups are isolated from one another by a considerable distance and, since each army
group is small, therefore they can be separately enveloped."1 This deficiency
was not corrected, however, due to haste in turning the troops to the offensive.

Scattering of the efforts of the front was aggravated by decisions made by the army
commanders, who were endeavoring, although the army groups were of limited numerical
strength, to advance on several axes and, as a rule, with an approach march. In
Gen V. A. Khomenko's army group, for example, each division was assigned a zone

of advance approximately 10 km in width. A common breakthrough sector was not
designated. 1n the zone of advance of the forces under the command of Gene S. A.
Kalinin and K. K. Rokossovskiy (50 km in width). three assault groups were formed,
each containing one or two divisions, separated from one another by a distance of
12-15 km.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The troops under the command of Gen V. Ya. Kachslov were to advance in a more com—
pact force -- all three divisions were in flank contact with each other.

As a result of planning the offensive operation by the army groups on several axes,
with limited artillery availability, there were on the average not more than 4 to 6
guns and mortars per kilometer of offensive frontage. The western Front also had
extremely little air support - 186 bombers and 102 fighters, only 39 of which were
of new types; 60 percent of the aircraft were under the command of the 20th, 21st,
and 22d armies. The offensive by the army groups could be supported by a maximum
of 118 bombers and 68 fighters. Air efforts were further scattered by the fact
that airstrikea were planned against numerous enemy targets, as a rule selected
deep in the enemy's operational dispositions. Such a limited number of weapons not
only failed toka q: dedefense to full tactical depth (14 km), but also resulted
in failure to neutralize the enemy's fire plan at the forward edge of the battle
area.

By decision of command authorities of the Western Sector, the army groups were to
turn to the offensive on 23 July, executing a forced march of 70-180 km. Such a
task was beyond the capabilities of divisions which had just been deployed. The
differing distance of the divisions from the battle line and attempts to initiate
an attack from an approach march led to their engagement at different times, which
weakened the force of the attic. to an even greater extent. In General Kalinin's
group, for example, the 91st Rifle Division commenced the attack on the morning of
25 July, while the 89th Division began the attack at midday.3' Because of all these
reasons, no deep breach in the enemy's defense was achieved on a single axis, and
the army and front operations failed to reach the exploitation phase.

A second offensive at Smolensk was undertaken in mid-August. Many of the deficien-
cies of the first offensive were corrected during preparations for and execution

of this offensive. Armies of 5-6 divisions each were formed on the basis of the
army groups. The axes of advance of the 19th and 30th armies were brought closer
together, which made it possible more clearly to delineate the front's main axis

of advance.

Breakthrough sectors were assigned to the armies as follows: 10 km to the 30th,

12 km to the 19th, and 5 km to the 16th.“ This made it possible to narrow the
division zones of advance to 1.3-3 km. In the 30th Army a support echelon was
formed of the 107th Tank Division and the 45th Cavalry Division, which to some
degree expressed the intention to execute the offensive on the basis of the tenets
of the theory of the operation in depth. Artillery densities increased to 20
pieces per km. There were improvements in massing of air support and organization
of teamwork and coordination.

But the enemy, concerned for his strategic center, reinforced troops in the
Smolensk ares, strengthened his defenses. and dug in a large number of tanks.
Therefore the battle groups formed of the divisions, which had been advancing

almost continuously from 25 July to 16 August, were unable to achieve even the
minimally required superiority in relative strengths in men and weapons. In addi-
tion, the troops lacked ammunition for massive preliminary bombardment. As a

result our combined units, when turning to the offensive, were able to penetrate
6-12 km deep into the enemy's defense only in a few sectors, but they were unable to
open a breach and exploit to the planned depth.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the end of August-beginning of Septedaer the troops of the Western Sector
launched a third offensive in order to pin down the forces of Army Group Center and
to defeat Guderian's forces in detail. The Reserve Front, which routed the enemy's
Yel'nya force and liberated the town of Yel'nya, achieved the greatest success.

The principal result of the offensive operations of the armies of the western
Sector in the Battle of Smolensk, in spite of limited advance, was the fact that
they forced the German—fascist cos-and authorities, for the first time in World
war II, to shift to defense on their main axis of advance.

At the same time the offensive operations of the Soviet forces at Smolensk in the
summer of l9bl demonstrated that an army of a new composition, particularly an army
group, was not capable of penetrating to operational depth even of a hastily taken-
up defense which, thanks to the employment of tanks and swift construction of
strong defensive works, acquired rather good stability. Penetration required, as
aq SHC had concluded, establishing "striking forces of 7-8 divisions." But no
practical ways had been found to implement this conclusion. Hhile at the army
echelon a concentration of effort in a single sector, narrowed 3-6-fold, was mapped
out fairly clearly, in the front a battle group was still broken down into separate
army groups, while on the whole a front operation did net have a clearly marked
front main attack. The requisite superiority over the enemy in men and weapons was
not established in the breakthrough sectors. Delivery of fire on the enemy's
defense proved weak, as did artillery and air support of the infantry and tank at-
tack.

2. Penetration in the Operations of the Winter Campaign of lle/AZ

The moat important events of the winter campaign of 1961/42 were the counteroffen-
sive at Moscow and the Soviet Army's general offensive.

The counteroffensive at Moscow began in a difficult situation for the Soviet Union.
A number of this country's economically most important regions had been captured by
the enemy. That part of the USSR which had been temporarily seized by the German-
fascist forces by November 1941 had accounted for 63 percent of the nation's pre-
war coal production, 68 percent of its pig iron and 58 percent of its steel, and had
produced 60 percent of the Soviet Union's aluminum, 38 percent of its grain, and

86 percent of its sugar.5 The situation was complicated to an even great extent

by the fact that a large number of industrial enterprises had been evacuated
eastward, including from areas adjacent to the front. Production of arms and
munitions had declined by December 1941. The troops at the front were short of both.
The enemy was blockading Leningrad, had broken through to Tikhvin, was advancing on
Moscow, and by December had envelOped the macaw industrial area in a half-ring and
had captured Khar'kovendthe Donbass.

Under these conditions liq sac made the decision to shift to a counteroffensive at
Moscow.

Organization and execution of penetration of a hasty defense in turning to a

counteroffensive at Moscow. The “q SEC plan for the counteroffensive at Moscow
called for mounting simultaneous attacksby the forces of three fronts at the enemy

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forces threatening Moscow, in order to inflict a decisive defeat on them and to
push them back as far as possible from the city.

At the rumour our forces turned to a counteroffensive, the enemy was attempting to
continue the advance only at Solnechnogorsk. Nero-Fominsk. and Tula. He was stopped
in the other sectors of the front and in the span of several days was able to es-
tablish a defense in the form of separate strongpoints and centers of resistance in
populated localities, at road junctions and on tactically important high grOund.

The strongest defense was to the north of Moscow. 0n the approaches to Tula gaps
between centers of resistance in places ran as much as several kilometers.

In a directive Hq SEC assigned the following missions to the fronts: to the Kelinin
Front: concentrating a battle group in the course of the next two to three days, it
was to frontally attack Kalinin and Sudimirka in the direction of Hikulino-
Gorodishche and Turginovo. Advancing to the rear of the enemy's Klin force, it was
to assist the troops of the Western Front in destroying that force.

Western Front: attack on the Klin-Solnechnogorsk and Istra axes, defeat the enemy's
northern force on the right side of the front; attack in the direction of Uzlovaya
and Bogoroditsk, into the flank and rear of the enemy's 2d Panzer Army, crush the
enemy's southern force on the left side of the front.

The armies of the right side of the Southwestern Front were to rout the enemy's
Yelets force and, exploiting in the direction of Oral, assist t2e troops of the
left side of the Western Front in defeating the 2d Panzer Army.

Thus the general plan formulated by Bo sue for the counteroffensive by the forces
of three fronts called for mounting four front attacks in a zone more than 600 kilo-
meters wide. From 2 to 6 armies were designated for each of these, which was a
significant step forward in the art of concentrating forces for an attack on
selected axes.

Hq SHC directives for the counteroffensive required decisive massing of manpower
and equipment on the part of the fronts. Hq SEC noted that individual assaults

in different sectors were ineffective, and ordered the commanding general of the
Kalinin Front to establish a battle group consisting of not less than 5-6 rifle

divisions, including the most battleworthy combined units, a large percentage of
Reserve sac artillery, all rocket launcher systems and tanks.

This idea was not convincingly incorporated, however, in preparations by the fronts
for these operations. Front attacks continued to be broken up into several army
attacks mounted on separate area (Diagram 2). The offensive strike by the Kalinin
Front was in fact executed by the forces of the 29th and 31st armies in discon-
nected sectors 20 km distant from one another. 0n the right side of the Western
Front attack forces included the 30th Army, lst Assault Army, 20th, 16th and
subsequently 5th Army. The distance between army attacks was as follows: 30th Army
and let Assault Army - 30 km; 1st Assault Army and 20th Army - approximately

15 km; 20th and 16th armies -- approximately 10 km. Distances were even greater
between the main attacks of the armies of the left side the Western Front (up to
50 km) and the right side of the Southwestern Front (90 km).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The complex conditions of shifting the fronts to a counteroffensive predetermined
the nuber of offensive strikes in the army operations and the density of troops on
their axes (Table 1).

Table 1. Some Figures on Organization for Breakthrough in the Armies at the Shift
to a Counteroffensive at Moscow

     

         

    

   
   
     
     

        

       
  

    

     

     

 

     
 

   

5 3 0-: .c E. 8 Densities in Breakthrough

ga ° 3'50 3,33“, '3 Sector

3 > 2 E; 5 .4 e e.s '§.s

“a as 83 “0...... Artillery

'A'U N '94: “40.30 33!

an! u- . 5.3 - o n.: u 'u n

so on m °8£ oe-

dl‘ 0 H01" III-d U 0.1

0-03 .58 MO 0 g 8.30

as: s, a": ﬁre. 55;:

:3 5‘3 23% gas: and;
29th 5 150 3 5
31st 5 3 2
30th 8 6 3-
1st Assault 6 5 2.1 4-5
20th 3.5 2 3 1-10
16th 7 2 8—10
50th 7.5 S -
10th 9.5 7 -
Kostenko Group 4 2 1-3
13th 7 2 -

The tactical order of battle of the fronts and armies, with few exceptions, was
single-echelon, with designation of meager reserves. The combined units and units
were formed for the most part into two echelons. Artillery groups were established
only in certain armies, as a consequence of a shortage of artillery. In the divi-
sions, APP (artillery in support of infantry) groups, consisting of one or two
battalions, were formed, one for each attack-echelon regiment. ADD (long-range ar-
tillery) groups were formed in the independent divisions, from RVGK [Reserve of the
Supreme High command] artillery, to suppress and neutralize enemy artillery and
reserves. The meager availability of artillery in the 10th Army forced the command
authorities to attach it primarily to subunits for joint actions as close support
guns.

The troops were extremely short of ammunition. As of 6 December they had from

1 to l.b basic combat loads, and somewhat more only for the 82 mm mortars and 152 mm
howitzers. This made it necessary to limit ammunition consumption from one fifth

to one third of a basic load, and for RVGK artillery - to 4-5 rounds per gun on

the first day oftheoffensive.

In the majority of the armies artillery preparation was limited to a brief bombard-
nent lasting 10-15 minutes. The preparatory bombardment ran 30-60 minutes only in
the armies of the Kalinin Front and in the center of the western Front. Artillery
support of infantry and tank assault and combat deep in the defense was essentially
not scheduled.

10

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE‘ONLY
The main air forces consisted of Moscow air defense zone aircraft and long-range
bonbers. Of a total of 1,170 aircraft, Frontal Aviation claimed 515, including

381 bombers and ground-attack aircraft. As of 6 December the Western Front had only
177 aircraft in operable condition. .

Air support of the breakthrough was to involve hitting the anew at strongpoints at
imediate tactical depth and artillery in fire positions. 0n the night of 6 Decen-
ber preliminary airstrikes were scheduled forward of the forces on the right side
of the Western Front, with aircraft to attack headquarters, oomications centers
and enemy reserves on the armies' main one of advance. Airfields in the Klin and
Vatulino areas were hit simltaneOusly. The great number of targets which were hit
led to a scattering of air efforts.

Low artillery densities, poor massing of air, and difficulty in organizing coordi-
nation between ground troops, Moscow air defense aircraft and long-range bombers
made it impossible to achieve a powerful, unified delivery of artillery fire and

airstrikes in the breakthrough sectors. Therefore infantry bore the min burden of
breaking through the enemy's defense.

Execution of penetration of the enemy's defense was rather difficult in the
sajority of armies, although defense depth was shallow at the commencement of the
counteroffensive. The divisions of the 29th Anny, for example, crossing over on

the ice to the south bank of the Volga on 5 December, were pushed back to their ini-
tial position of 6 December. I

The combined units of the 3lst Army, by nassing manpower and weapons inn single
sector, advanced 4-5 km on the first day. But on succeeding days, in connection
with the approach of eneny reserves, the advance slowed and seemed a protracted
character. The city of Kalinin was finally enveloped by the 10th day of the
operation, and was subsequently liberated by Soviet forces.

The troops of the 30th Any shifted to the offensive just before dawn on 6 Decen-
ber. Prior to comencenent of the assault, only in certain sectors did rocket
batteries fire several salvoes at eneny-occupied towns and villages. As soon as
the infantry connenced the assault, artillery proceeded to provide supporting fire.
A considerable amber of close support guns were nounted on sledges, which nade it
possible to advance then behind the infantry.

The surprise attack produced good results. The eneny, taken umares, was unable
to offer organised resistance. The strongpoints on the first line were taken by
dawn. Favorable conditions had been created for advancing to depth. Deep snow and
a lack of roads, however, nade it impossible to speed up the pace of advance. That
afternoon the enemy succeeded in moving up reserves and, together with retreating
troops, forming a new defensive line. Nevertheless, however, by evening depth of

penetration had reached 5 he on the main axis of advance, and the frontage had been
enlarged to 12 Inn.

The army commander engaged his reserves in order to complete the breakthrough and
crush the approaching reserves. By evening on the third day depth of penetration

was 6-10 kn, and the offensive involved a zone 35 Ina wide. many resistance had col-
lapsed, and the essay began to retreat.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The successful advance of the 30th Army helped the lat Assault Army. It captured
several villages, and by the evening of the third day had advanced to a depth of
10 km.

Penetration of the tactical defense had created the requisite conditions for an
advance at a faster pace. The lack of offensive exploitation echelons, however,
made it impossible to take advantage of this favorable moment. Such an echelon was
formed in the 30th Arny in the course of the operation, consisting of a motorized
rifle and cavalry division, a motorized regiment and a tank battalion. Its engage-
ment imediately boosted the pace of advance. In 3 days the mobile group ad-
vanced 36 km, thus facilitating the advance of the army's main forces.

After the 30th Army and the let Assault Army captured a stretch of the Leningrad
Highway, the tactical breakthrOugh was exploited to operational penetration. They
were able to shift to operational pursuit of the enemy.

Breakthrough in the zone of advance of the 20th Army took place more slowly, since

a shortage of artillery and amunition prevented reliable neutralization of the
enemy.

The 331st Rifle Division, reinforced by a tank battalion, an RVGK gun artillery
regiment and a rocket launcher battalion, began the offensive on 4 December in a
zone 4.5 km in frontage. As a consequence of hasty preparation for the attack, it
failed to achieve appreciable success, but suffered 20 percent casualties and lost
30 percent of its tanks.

Preparations for a new attack were made on 5 December. Following a brief bombard-
ment, on the following morning units of this division once again shifted to the
attack, together with all the army's troops. The attack was developing slowly. It
was accelerated by a bold dash by an assault force on four tanks. This force
fought its way into the village of Gorki and brought confusion into the enemy's
defense. The regiments took advantage of this and captured the village, which
opened up the approaches to Krasnaya Polyana.

In the 8 days of occupation, the enemy had transformed the village into a very
strong center of resistance. Upon reaching the village, the division's units were
halted. 0n the first day the enemy also succeeded in fighting off assaults by
other of the army's combined units.

The assaults on Krasnaya Polyana resumed on 7 December. One hundred artillery
pieces were diverted from the Moscow defensive zone, as well as some of the SEC
aircraft, in addition to army and front weapons, to support the advancing combined
units.7 Difficulty of coordinating with them via several levels of comand, how-
ever, made it impossible to utilize their capabilities in full measure. Units of
the army penetrated the village, but assaults within the village were of an
extremely savage nature. It was necessary to dislodge the enemy by force from
practically every house. That afternood units of the enemy's 106th Infantry and
2d Panzer divisions mounted a strong counterattack. It was beaten back, and during
the night of 7-8 December units of the 331st Rifle division, working in coordination
with the 28th Rifle Brigade, captured Krasnaya Polyana.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These combined units advanced 6.5 km on 8 December, thus completing the break-
through of the enemy's defensive line. The commanders of the combined units took
measures to execute tactical pursuit of the enemy, who had begun to retreat, in-
tending to advance 30 km in 2 days. But a lack of skis prevented them from form-
ing outflanking detachments. There were not enough tanks or troops on the roads
to neutralize the enemy by fire, in order to smash aside the enemy's strong road-
blocks. Therefore by the evening of 10 December the troops of the 331st Division
and the 28th Brigade had advanced 10-12 km.

Thanks to the successful actions of the brigades advancing on the army's flanks,
a breach formed in the enemy's defense. The army's combined units accelerated its
advance on Solnechnogorsk.

The 16th Army commenced penetration on 7 December with the forces of the 8th Guards
Rifle Division and the bath Cavalry Division, following a 13-minute preliminary
bombardment. After capturing trenches. emplacements and structures adapted for
defense on the outskirts of Kryukovo, the subunits encountered heavy enemy resistance.
The advance was particularly hampered by emplaced tanks. An effort was being made
to destroy them with assault teams and direct-fire artillery. The fighting assumed
a protracted character. That afternoon the divisions' support echelons were en-
gaged, and the 17th Rifle Brigade was added to the assault. Presenting a threat of
encirclement, they mounted a night assault and drove the enemy Out of Kryukovo and
neighboring villages. Penetration of the defense on the main axis of advance
enabled the army's other combined units successfully to commence the attack. The
enemy's defense was breached practically throughout the entire zone of advance.

Capture of Krasnaya Polyana, Kryukovo, and the preceding capture of villages in

the zones of the 3lst, 30th and 1st Assault armies disrupted the enemy's defense

and exerted a strong psychological effect on the German-fascist troops, which were
expecting an early capture of Moscow, or at least a substantial breather from the
fighting, cold andillness which had exhausted them. The unexpected attack shook
them. The resistance of the defending enemy troops in the zones of the 20th and
16th armies diminished considerably. They began a disorganized retreat, as captured
officers and enlisted men acknowledged, without control by their command personnel.8

The troops of the 16th and 20th armies now had a real opportunity swiftly to ex-
ploit tactical into operational success and to break through without a halt the
defensive line occupied by the enemy along the Leningrad raillineg But the 20th
Army did not have an exploitation echelon. In addition, the restricted nature of
off-road maneuver through deep snow and frontal assault on villages held by enemy
rear guards made it impossible to increase the rate of advance sufficiently to ex-
ceed the enemy's rate of withdrawal. The army's rate of advance increased some-
what following the capture of Solnechnogorsk on 11 December.

Exploitation of tactical into operational success took place considerably more
rapidly in the 16th Army. On 10 December Gen X. K. Rokoasovskiy formed three
mobile groups: under the command of Gen P. T. Remizov (165th Tank Brigade, 46th
Cavalry Division, and 17th Rifle Brigade); General A. P. Beloborodov (9th Guards
Rifle Division and 36th Rifle Brigade), Gen M. Ye. Kstukov (1st and 17th Tank
brigades, 89th Independent Tank Battalion, and 40th Rifle Brigade).

FIHIGDFFKJAI.USB()NL~
FIN!(NWJ(JAI.[EHE(NNLY
I I

At first the actions of these groups were not distinguished by swiftness or
mobility. But the mobile groups of Generals Remezov and Katukov played an important
role in offensive exploitation aimed at breaking through the Istra defensive line.
Swinging around the reservoir from the north and south, they threatened with en-
circlement the enemy force which had taken up position on the west shore of the
Istra Reservoir, which predetermined its capture and a subsequent advance to the
defensive line along the Lama and Russ rivers.

An important role in the defeat in detail of the Istra force was also played by the
mobile group of the Sth Army, containing the 2d Guards Cavalry Corps. This corps
executed a march to the vicinity of Kubinka Station, from which it was engaged
northward on the third day of the offensive. Crushing the main forces of the 78th
Infantry Division in the area of Safonikha, it wheeled abruptly westward, advancing
toward the Ruza River.

By 15 December the armies of the right side of the Eastern Front, having broken
throughtwodefensive lines, had advanced bO-SO kl, inflicting heavy losses on the
combined units of the 3d and 4th Panzer groups. '

0n the left side of the Western Front the main attack was mounted by the 10th Army.
Commencement of the offensive was proceeded by advance of combined units from depth
to assembly areas. In a Zb-hour period the divisions traveled 30 km or more along
snowbclogged roads, into the teeth of a blizzard, while the 326th Rifle Division
was proceeding at a forced-march pace. covering 65-50 km per day. The 322d Rifle
Division, traveling approximately 50 km in 36 hours, reached the town of
Serebryanyye Prudy by the morning of 7 December. Following a brief artillery
bombardment and delivery of fire by direct-fire guns, the regiments launched an
assault from the north and east, taking the enemy by surprise. In the course of
the engagement one regiment executed a maneuver to the southern edge of town and
immediately commenced an assault. without delay. The surprise attack from three
directions threw the enemy troops in the town into a state of confusion. While
offering resistance. the enemy desperately sought a way to escape. Nevertheless
after 3 hours of fighting two battalions of an enemy infantry regiment were routed
and the town captured. The division's losses totaled only 7 dead and 19 wounded.9
Repulsing scattered enemy counterattacks, the division continued advancing toward
Venev.

0f decisive significance for the army was a breakthrough in the center of the zone
of advance, where they were to capture the town of Hikhaylov, in which a strong
enemy garrison was stationed. This mission was successfully accomplished by a
night assault by the 330th Rifle Division, working in coordination with the 328th
Rifle Division.

The rout of the enemy at Serebryanyye Prudy and Hikhaylov led to formation of a
50-km breach in his defenses.

The army commana attempted to exploit through this breach. Forward detachments
were sent forward. Sledge teams were mobilized to speed their movement. But

nevertheless they did not possess the necessary mobility to outflank the enemy's
rear guard off roads.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI!0FFKJAL.USIZONIN

The divisions' main forces, advancing on the road, were frequently halted by air-

strikes; frontal assault on enemy centers of resistance led to protracted engage-
meats.

The rate of advance was also slower than that of the first day because the enemy,
having recovered from the surprise attack, began hastily closing the breach which
had formed in his defenses. The 10th Army did not have a mobile group which

could split the enemy's front more deeply: the blet Cavalry Division, dispatched in
the direction of the town of Yepifan', engaged the retreating enemy, turned from

the designated direction and was unable to accomplish the mission of capturing the
town.

The 50th Army shifted to the offensive on the morning of 8 December. In spite of
the fact that the enemy force facing it was somewhat weakened, penetration of the
defense was accomplished slowly, for the army's divisions were weak and fatigued
by defensive engagements. By 17 December they had managed to advance only 8-12 km,
and captured the town of Shchekino. Since the army was unable to breach the
enemy's defense, it was unable to advance to the rear of the enemy's 2d Panzer Army
and, working in coordination with the 10th Army, to encircle part of its forces.

0n the right side of the Southwestern Front the troops of the 13th Army launched
an attack on 6 December, hitting the enemy's Yelets force from the north. General
Kostenko's force was advancing from the south. One feature of the breakthrough and
penetration deep into the enemy's defense lay in the fact that in the enemy's
strongpoint-type defense. stacks wOuld be launched for the most part between
strongpointa and centers of resistance. The lot Guards Rifle Division, fer example,
attacking a weak point. had penetrated 16 km by evening. The 5th Cavalry

Corps initially engaged to capture built-up areas, but subsequently changed its
direction of attack and drove between enemy strongpoints, which enabled it swiftly
to advance to depth. On 8 December the corps advanced 10 kn, 12 km on 9 December,
and 20 ka on 10 December.11 The corps got behind the enemy's Yelets force. It was
only the slow rate of advance of the 13th Army's assault group which prevented en-
circlenent within a few days of the main forces of the 34th Army Corps south of
Yelets. In the course of offensive exploitation, however, the troops of the right
side of the Southwestern Front encircled its main forces and defeated then in
detail north of the town of Livny, which made it possible to consolidate two army
breakthroughs into a single front penetration and to create some preconditions for
developing the breakthrough into operational pursuit.

Penetration of prepared defensive lines in the course of a counteroffensive and
general offensive of Soviet forces. Seizure of the strategic initiative by the
Soviet Arny in the counteroffensive at Moscow forced the enemy to shift to the
strategic defense for the first time in World war II. On the Moscow strategic
axis he undertook considerable efforts to establish defensive lines on the Lama,
Ruza, Don and Shat rivers.

The 10th Army was the first to encounter the advance-fortified defensive line in

the counteroffensive at Moscow. Guderian had issued the order to prepare this line

at the end of November, subsequently making the decision to shift to the defense on
the night of 6 December, that is, on the eve of our counteroffensive.

15

FOI(MHHCLKLIRHEONLY
FIMRCNWHC1A1.1EHECN“LY

In 10 days time the enemy was able, using local citizens pressed into service. to
construct trenches and emplaccments, dugout shelters with from one to three layers

of logs, earth-and-timber emplaceaents, had adapted masonry buildings for defense,
had covered the sloping river banks with a sheet of ice at many points, and had
constructed barbed wire entanglements in places. .

For a number of reasons, front and army intelligence had not been able immediately

to discover the enemy's shift to defense and construction of defensive lines to the
rear, which prevented thetunmmnding generals from making a decision while still
approaching these lines and thus preventing the occurrence of scattered, disconnected
assaults by the combined units.

For example, the commanding general of the 10th Army made the decision to break
through the defense on the Don River on 9 December, that is, after several com-
bined units had already launched assaults to take this defensive line. This
decision (Diagram 3) consisted essentially in the following: pinning down enemy
troops with part of his forces in the Stalinogorsk (Novomoskovsk) area, he wOuld
disengage the army's main forces and redeploy them southward with the objective of
launching the main attack on the Yepifen'-Bogoroditsk axis.1i

As a consequence of redeployment of the divisions southward, the 10th Army launched
the offensive two days lhter than the designated time. On 12 December a hastily
organized assault, with weak artillery support, preved unsuccessful. Subsequent as-
saults launched that same day also failed to produce the desired results.

On the night of 13 December the efforts of the combined units were concentrated

on breaking through in the gaps between centers of resistance. Thanks to the ex-
tensive employment of artillery for direct fire at strongpoints on the flanks of
the breakthrough sectors, the enemy was neutralized and the attacking troops began
enveloping and bypassing his centers of resistance, threatening them with en-
circlement. The result was immediate. In the course of 13 December the defense
was penetrated in several sectors.

The army's rate of advance increased appreciably with penetration of the defensive
line on the Don River. In two days the troops of the 10th Army advanced 20-35 km.
The army's mobile group -- the blst Cavalry Division -— penetrated to a depth of
more than 50 hn,butthis division, weak in composition, was unable to accomplish
operational missions. A more powerful mobile group was needed. Such a force

had been formed by the evening of 16 December, consisting of three cavalry divisions
and one rifle division, with the objective of advancing swiftly to the town of
Plavsk, and capturing it without a halt. Unfortunately the army cavalry group was
displaying insufficient mobility, and it lacked striking force, since it contained
no tanks. In addition, execution of maneuver was complicated by deep snow. As a
result, the cavalry force failed to drive to the enemy's rear and failed to become
the spearhead of the army's operational attack. On 20 December the armies on the
right side of the Hestern Front reached the line on the Lama and Russ rivers.which
had been fortified by the enemy as a system of strongpoints set up in villages and
on hilltops. The strongpoints contained a large number of earth-and-timber pill-
boxes, dugout shelters, emplacements, trenches, and were girdled by "Bruno" type
barbed wire entanglements.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Western Front intelligence was unable to establish in a timely manner that the
enemy intended to halt the advance of our forces at this line. In connection with
this the offensive was launched in the formation in which pursuit was conducted,
that is, without establishing battle groups in the armies. Attempts to break
through the enemy's defense on the Lama River without a halt in attack position.
undertaken on 20-22 December, were unsuccessful.

On 23 December the command authorities of the western Front, convinced that suc-
cess could not be achieved by advancing on a wide front, issued an order to the
armies "to narrow the spearhead of attack at a specified point, breaklhroush the
enemy's defense on a narrow front with concentrated forces, and exploit by engaging
fresh forces."13

An attack based on instructions from the commanding general of the front was launched
24 hours later. It was impossible in such a short time appreciably to alter the
force groupings of the armies, and their attack inevitably assumed the character of
assaults along a broad front with the objective of capturing individual strong-

points. By 1 January the troops of the 20th Army had succeeded in capturing only
seven strongpoints.

The armies of the Kalinin Front, due to linearity of formation, were also advancing
slowly. By 20 December they had reached approximately the same line as the armies
of the right side of the Western Front.

By decision of no sac, at the end of December the main effort of the Kalinin

Front was shifted to the right side of the front in order to attack thev from the
north and capture it. Toward this objective it was planned to establish a battle
group of divisions from the 39th, 22d, and 29th armies. But time-uncoordinated ac-
tions by the armies along a wide front. with poor artillery support, was leading to
protracted engagements. The divisions of the 39th Army, for example, operating

in the army's entire zone of advance, were able to advance only 1-3 km in the first
three days. Only by narrowing the sector of active efforts to 20 km and establish-
ing a density of 60 guns and mortars per km in this sector was the Kalinin Front

able finally to penetrate the enemy's defense to a depth of 15-20 km and to open
a wide breach.

Similar deficiencies also characterized the armies of the other fronts. They at-
tested to the fact that the enemy's shift to defense on prepared, fortified lines
with a well-organized fire plan and obstacles, required a sharp rise in the level
of preparation for and conduct of defensive operations.

Massing of men and weapons on the axes of advance and delivery of effective fire on
the enemy, formulated in an ﬁg 880 directive letter dated 10 January 1962, proved to
be the root items, successful resolution of which determined the success of offen-
sive operations.

Changes which had occurred in the character of the enemy's actions were noted at the
beginning of the letter: "In order to stem our advance, the Germans have shifted to
the defense and have proceeded to build defensive lines with emplacements, ob-
stacles, and other field fortifications." It further stated: ”In order to ensure
penetration of the enemy's defensive line to its full depth... at least two

17

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions are essential: first. it is necessary to replace actions by individual
divisions disposed in a line, presently practiced by our armies and fronts,

with actions by assault groups concentrated in one sector; second, it is essential
to replace so-called artillery preparation with artillery support for the attack."
The makeup of the assault group of the amiss was specified at three or four divi-
sions, and in the front — several armies. In addition to massing the forces of
combined-arms large strategic formations, the directive latter also specified con-
centration of artillery: 60-80 guns in an army assault group sector, and 150-200 in
a front assault group sector.

Execution of the instructions of the liq SEC directive letter caused a sharp change
in preparation for and execution of offensive operations. This can be seen in the
experience of the thev-Vyaz'ma Operation, conducted by the troops of the Western
and Kalinin fronts in January-April 19102, and in particular in the advance of the
20th Any of the Western Front.

In view of unsuccessful attempts to break through the enemy's defense, which had
been fortified in advance, on the Lens River at the end of December-beginning of
January by the uncoordinated efforts of the lat Assault Army, 20th and 16th armies,
Bq SHC ordered the consanding general of the Western Front to form a battle group
of troops of the 20th Army, transferring to it part of the forces of the adjacent
1st Assault Army and 16th Army. By 10 January the 2d Guards Cavalry Corps, a
cavalry division, a tank brigade and four rifle brigades, five ski battalions, five
artillery regiments, and two rocket artillery battalions had been transferred over
to the 20th Army.

The breakthrough sector - 8 km -- comprised less than half of its 20 km zone of ad-
vance. The army's main forces and weapons were concentrated in this sector: both
rifle divisions, six of the eight rifle brigades, all tank brigades, and 77 percent
of artillery. To achieve better consand and control, the army's troops were
organized into three groups, each of which comprised a reinforced rifle division.
The 2d Guards Cavalry Corps comprised a mobile group. A decisive concentration of
men and weapons in the breakthrough sector made it possible to establish densities
which were fairly high for that time: approximately 3.5 rifle battalions, 60 guns
and mortars, and 12.5 tanks per km of breakthrough sector,“ and to achieve an
almost threefold superiority over the adversary. In the counteroffensive the rifle
divisions had been penetrating the defense in a zone of 3.5-6.5 km, while on the
Lama River the 352d Rifle Division, for example, was penetrating the defense in
sectors only 1.5 km wide.

Substantial changes in comparison with the counter-offensive occurred in the deploy-
ment of the 20th Army's artillery. An APP group was established in each combined
unit, consisting of 2-3 battalions. In the divisions l or 2 battalions would be
designated to support the attack-echelon regiments, and in the brigade - the at-
tack-echelon battalions. An army ADD grOup, consisting of two regiments, was formed
in the army. Rocket artillery battalions were placed directly under division com-
manders. Twenty-five percent of all regimental and antitank artillery was set up
for direct fire.

Artillery preparation for the attack was to run 1.5 hours. It was preceded by a
period of demolishing enemy installations. For the period of artillery support

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of infantry and tank assault, the battalions were instructed to deliver fire on
request by rifle battalion comanders and at newly spotted targets. Airstrikes were
to be employed to neutralize and destroy the enemy during the offensive.

According to the operation plan, on the first day the enemy's defense was to be
penetrated to a depth of 10-12 km.

The troops of the 20th Army launched the attack on 10 January 1962. It was snowing
heavily, which worsened conditions for the artillery. All aircraft were grounded.

At 0930 the army launched the attack. The 352d Rifle Division was attacking on the
main axis of advance (Diagram lo). Since the artillery groups contained few heavy
guns, they were unable to demolish and neutralize the earth-and-timber emplacements
and weapon emplacements in structures. The first assault was unsuccessful. Finally
at 1130 the regiments entered the village of Timonino, which had been transformed
by the enemy into a strong center of resistance. Its troops had resisted with the
stubbornness of the doomed.

Storming one earth-and-timber bunker after another, the division's subunits slowly
advanced. Due to a shortage of amunition, artillery provided little support of the
attacking infantry and tanks. In spite of all this, on the first day the regiments
of the 352d Division advanced 2-3 Ins, and an additional 6-7 Ian on the following two
days. This created conditions for engaging the army's mobile task force -- the

2d Guards Cavalry Corps, reinforced by the 20th Cavalry Division, the 22d Tank
Brigade, and 5 ski battalions. On 13 January the army's mobile group entered the
breach. The army's rate of advance picked up.

The achieved success enabled the let Assault Army, the 16th and 5th armies to join
in the offensive. The offensive frontage broadened, which made it difficult for
the adversary to localize the threat of deep penetration. Our rate of advance,
however, did not exceed the enemy's rate of withdrawal, which was due to a number of
factors. The mobile group did not possess sufficient striking power, since it had
an insufficient number of tanks, and it was having considerable difficulty maneuver-
ing through the very deep snow. The troops were critically short of amition.
Frequently units and combined units would advance primarily along roads, mounting
only frontal attacks on the enemy. By 25 January the armies of the right side of
the western Front had fought their way forward 50-70 km and were forced to halt for
an extended time at the Cshatsk defensive line.

Analysis of preparation for and execution of penetration in the operations of the
winter campaign of 19.61/62 indicates that penetration of the enasy‘s defense con-
tained a number of specific features which were determined by the general nature of
the armed struggle, by our force's shift to a counteroffeusive, and by its develop-
ment, without pause, into a general offensive.

Preparation of all armies for the counteroffsnsive at Moscow was accomplished on a
tight timetable, which prevented the enemy from establishing a deliberate defense.
The fact that the enemy was considerably under strength in troops prevented him
from establishing high densities in the defense, while the low morale and physical
tiredness of the troops diminished their combat efficiency.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In turning to the counteroffensive, only the troops of the armies (and not all of
them) began penetration simultaneously. Subsequently penetration broke down into a
number of sequential attacks mounted on the scale of combined units, units, and even
subunits, which diminished the force of the attack and affected the rate of advance.

In view of the low tank densities, the main burden of the breakthrough effort was
shouldered by the infantry and artillery. A lack of mobile 810099 in the

armies prevented them from rapidly exploiting to depth. In a number of armies such
forces were established in the course of the operation and played an important role
in boosting the rate of advance.

When the enemy shifted to a strategic defense, it became necessary to break through
a defense prepared in advance, which required a greater massing of men and weapons
and improved coordination of efforts. 'Advance establishment of mobile erUPS

in the armies accelerated exploitation of tactical to operational penetrations and
increased the rate of advance.

3. Penetration in Operations of the Summer-Pall Campaign of l9h2

The most characteristic features of preparation for and execution of penetration of
the enemy's defense in the summer-fall campaign of 1962, which on the whole was a
defensive campaign for our forces, can be seen in the example of the Khar'kov and
thev-Sychevka offensive operations.

The general plan of the Khar'kov Operation (Diagram 5) specified launching two at-
tacks: one from the Volchanak area and the other, the main attack, from the
Barvenkovo salient, on converging axes toward Khar'kov.

Forces attacking from Volchansk included the 28th Army and part of the forces of

the 21st and 38th armies, which were attacking on adjacent flanks. The northern
battle group contained 18 rifle divisions, 3 cavalry divisions, 7 tank brigades,

and 2 motorized rifle brigades. Ten divisions were assigned to the forward echelon,
8 divisions of which comprised the main forces and were to break through the

enemy's defense in a 26 km sector.

A mo b ile group. consisting of the 3d Guards Cavalry Corps, reinforced by a
motorized rifle brigade, was formed only in the 28th Army. It was to be engaged
at a depth of 15-16 km on the third day of the operation.

The southern battle grOup contained the 6th Army and Gen L. V. Bobkin's army group.
It contained 10 rifle divisions, 3 cavalry divisions, ll tank and 2 motorized rifle
brigades.15 5.5 divisions were assigned to the first operational echelon, 3 of
these to the main axis of advance.

The breakthrough exploitation echelon in the southern group included 2 tank corps
in the 6th Army and a cavalry corps, reinforced by a tank brigade, in Gen L. V.
Bobkin's army group. The tank corps were to move into the breach on the third day,
and the cavalry corps on the second day of the operation, at a depth of 10-12 km.

The reserves of the comaanding general of the front on the main axis of advance
comprised two rifle divisions and the 2d Cavalry Corps.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The armies designated to conduct this operation were able to establish the troop
densities specified in Table 2.

Table 2. Densities of Men and Respons in the Breakthrough Sectors of the Armies in
the Khar'kov Operation

  

Width of Zone
of Advance, km

 
   
 
   
 
  

fantry Sup-
» - rt Tanks

    
 

let 3.5
28th 2.5-6 . 5 12
38th 5.9 5
6th 10-10 6.6

   

Army group of General 5-6

Bobkin
Note: Average artillery densities are given in the numerator, and maximum densities
in the denominator.

 
 

The enemy's defense in the breakthrough sectors consisted of a system of platoon
strongpoints linked into centers of resistance, with gaps between them. Strong-
points at the forward edge were linked by commication trenches, which essentially
comprised the first fighting trench, continuous over considerable stretches. A
large number of earth-and-timber «placements were constructed in important
sectors, especially in villages. Emplaced tanks were positioned in the gaps be-
tween strongpoints. The enemy made extensive use of barbed-wire entanglements.

The main defensive zone, 8-12 km deep, contained two positions. In some sectors
the enemy prepared a second and third defensive zones. The enemy's total depth of
defense was 25-30 km.

This defense was to be broken up with a one-hour preliminary artillery bombardment,
with amunition consumption of 0.5-0.8 basic load. 0n the first day of the opera-
tion the armies distributed from 0.6 to 1.5 basic loads for the various artillery
and mortar systems. The contend authorities of the Southwestern Front, well aware
of the limited fire capabilities of the artillery, issued special instructions
which stated that in view of the low densities of artillfgy and limited issue of
anunition, massing of fire was exceptionally important. Therefore almost all

f irea were to be delivered only on well-reconnoitered targets. All battalion and
regimental artillery -- It to 6 guns from each infantry support group -- were set up
for direct fire, which increased artillery fire results.

Support of the assault phase was to be in the form of a rolling barrage, while sup-
port of infantry and tanks at depth was to be by fire on request. Planning of these
periods of offensive artillery support was assigned to the division artillery com-
manders, which could not help but introduce lack of coordination in the employment
of available artillery.

We should note that planned artillery capabilities differed substantially from ac-
tual capabilities. This is due to the fact that front and army artillery

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

headquarters had not drawn up detailed plans for redeployment of artillery units
and had failed to consider the fact that many artillery regiments lacked the
minimum requisite means of transport, as a consequence of which only 17 of the 32
reinforcement regiments were able to reach their fire positions by the evening of
11 May; 11 regiments were still en route and did not take part in artillery
preparation, while 4 regiments did not arrive until the offensive was in progress.17
For a number of reasons the front's air forces were unable appreciably to make up
for the lack of artillery fire capabilities to soften up the enemy's defense. In
the Southwestern Front they had not yet been unified into an air army, and 337 com-
bat aircraft (about 50 percent) were at the disposal of the armies. If one con-
siders that 70 percent of the bombers were P0-2 light night bombers,18 the extreme-
ly limited capabilities of the air forces of the Southwestern Front to suppress the
enemy's defense will be obvious. In addition, their main efforts were directed to-
ward neutralizing targets deep in the enemy's defense.

The main points contained in the in SEC directive letter of 10 January 1942 were

put more fully into practice in the Khar'kov offensive operation than in preceding
operations. The battle groups contained nx>or three armies apiece, and they were
assigned a commmxbreakthrough sector. The battle groups of the armies contained up
to 8 rifle divisions, while mobile groups were additionally formed in the

armies advancing on the main axes. The breakthrough sectors were still very wide,
however, which made it impossible to achieve greater superiority over the enemy and
substantial force densities, especially artillery.

On 12 Hay, following an hour of artillery preparation, the northern and southern
battle groups launched the attack. The troops, which were in good spirits and
well prepared politically, simultaneously attacked the enemy's forward positions
and, destroying the defending troops, immediately created conditions in a number of
sectors for a swift advance to depth. The success of the breakthrough was also
influenced by the fact that the morale of the enemy troops, which had been ad-
versely affected by our winter offensive, had not yet been fully restored.

In the northern battle group, the combined units of the 21st and 38th armies suc-
ceeded on the very first day in breaking through the enemy's entire main defensive
zone, advancing to a depth of 6-10 km. The divisions of the 28th Army, which were
attacking on the main axis of advance, moved forward only 1-3 km that morning, that
is, were able to penetrate only the first position, while in front of the second
position they encountered heavy fire from the reserves of the infantry regiments
and Subunits which had withdrawn to the second position from the forward edge of
the battle area. All the deficiencies in preparing for the operation affected the
actions of the 28th Army. The infantry and tank assault began at different times,
as a consequence of lack of coordination of their movement toward the enemy's for-
ward positions and the fact that the combat engineers had done a poor job of clear-
ing lanes through the minefielde. 0n the first day 22 tanks were disabled by
enemy landmines.19 The combined units of the 28th Army advanced only 2-4 km that

day.

The fact that the 28th Army had fallen behind adjacent units led to a unique jam
in the vicinity of Ternovaya, which threatened to disunite the efforts of the
assault group. The situation had to be rectified ﬂmnediately, which could be

22

FOI.OFFWCLKLIJSB¢JNL¥
achieved by attacking frontally and on the flanks with fresh rifle troops follow-
ing massive airstrikes and artillery fire, or by exploiting to depth in the sectors
where a successful advance had been achieved. Engagement even of one division of
the two divisions comprising the 28th Army's support echelon woald make it possible
to complete penetration of the main defensive zone and to create favorable condi-
tions for engaging the mobile group. We shOuld note that conditions of its
engagement had already been created in the zone of the 21st Army. The comand
authorities of the 28th Army, however, failed to take advantage of this. By evening
the divisions of the army's support echelon had just begun advancing closer to the
troops of the attack echelon. while the mobile gro u p remained in its position,
30-35 km from the battle line.

The attack-echelon troops, weakened by casualties and by the fact that part of
their forces had been diverted to cover the flanks, had slowed the pace of advance
by evening. The enm. taking advantage of this fact, began to nova up to the
breakthrough sector tactical reserves and forces from sectors not under attack and
to establish force groupings for sounting counterthrusts.

Thus the first opportunity to develop tactical into operational penetration was not
utilized.

On 13 Hey the northern force achieved the greatest success on the flanks. The
divisions of the 21st Army and the right-flank divisions of the 28th Army advanced
6-10 km. enveloping the enemy at Ternovaya. Divisions of the 38th Army advanced
an additional 6 km deeper into the defense by noon. But the stability of the
enemy's defense in the breakthrough sector was not completely broken, as a con-
sequence of the fact that the enusy was still holding in the center and on the
flanks. That afternoon the enemy nounted a counterthrust in the zone of the 38th
Army with two panzer divisions and approximately an infantry division.

Repelling the counterthrust was requiring more and more forces with each passing
day, especially tank forces (6 tank brigades were brought into action), for the
divisions of the 38th Army had very few antitank weapons. Since this was being
done with attack-echelon troops, the offensive capabilities of the force which was
attacking on the main axis of advance began dropping off sharply, which affected .
the pace of exploitation of the breakthrough. 0n lb Hey the rate of advance dropped
to 5-6 km. and on 15 May very little progress was made. Prospects for engaging the
support echelon and mobile task force for offensive exploitation had essentially
disappeared.

Penetration by the troops of the southern battle group was developing such more
successfully. By evening on the first day the attack-echelon divisions of the

6th Army not only had broken through the main defensive zone but had reached the
second zone on a 20 km frontage.20 Gen 1.. V. Bobkin's army group advanced to a depth
of 10-6 kn that morning. But the enuy's defense proved to be disorganized. and
General Bobkin engaged his mobile 3 ton p , which reached and seized a bridge-
head on the Orel' River by evening. The any group had advanced approximately 12 km.

Penetration of the enemy's defense on a frontage of more than 100 km and advance by
the troops of the southern battle group to a depth of 12-15 km made possible and
urgently demanded engagement of the 6th Amy's mobile group — 2 tank corps (ap-
proximately 300 tanks), for the enemy had begun hastily redeploying to the area the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reserves of the army corps and his 6th Army. But the coﬁined units of the mobile
group had not even been brought close to the attack-echelon troops and were now
35 km distant from them. Nor was the army's support echelon engaged.

The following day the troops of the southern battle group completed penetration of
the second defensive zone, but their advance amounted to only 3-5 km in the 6th
Army and as much as 10 km in General Bobkin's arm group. The sharp decrease in
the rate of advance of the 6th Aray attested to the need to build up efforts, and
particularly to engage the tank corps. In addition, the troops had actually reached
the previously designated point at which they were to be brought into the breach.
0n the night of 14 Hay, however, the point of engagenent of the tank corps was ex-
tended to beyond the enemy's rear defensive line, which was established at a depth
of 30 km.“- The comanding general of the front switched all aircraft supporting
the 6th Army to support of the northern assault group, into the flank of which the
eneny had launched a counterthrust. Nor was the commanding general of the 6th
Army engaging his support echelon. bus in the southern sector favorable conditions
for decisive developnent of tactical into operational penetration were not utilized
for a second time.

In the meantime the enemy‘s situation was becoming increasingly were critical.
Colonel Selle, former chief of engineer troops of the German 6th Artsy, writes:
"The events of the following day took on a threatening cast. Russian forward
units were approaching Krasnograd. ... On the Orel' River the front of the 8th
Corps, which was being defended by rear security units, was breached, and Russian
tanks with cavalry had begun advancing unopposed in a westerly direction. The
113th Infantry Division, which had launched a counterattack from the Yefremovka
area, following initial success was encircled on the east bank of the Orel' River
by enemy tanks and, sustaining heavy casualties, was thrown back several kilo-
meters.... The 6th Army's casualties and equipment losses were heavy.... The mood
was somber at the 6th Army's comand post in Poltava. Preparations began for
defense of the city. Measures were taken to ensure the safety of Kiev."

Penetration of the defense south of Khar'kov forced the comanding general of Army
Group South, Field Marshal von Bock, to waver. He now considered it impossible to
mount Operation Friedericus (code-name of an operation with the objective of en-
circling Soviet forces south of Khar'kov -- A. R.) and was inclined toward an at-
tack launched from the Losovaya area in the direction of Herefa, as safer for

his any group and at the same time less dangerous for our southern assault group,
for the support echelons and reserves of our 6th Army were positioned on this axis,
and tank corps of the mobile group could be redeployed here more rapidly when being
engaged. if a critical situation developed here. It was only an order by Hitler
which forced von Bock to undertake a counteroffensive northward from the Kramatorsk
area.

There is no doubt that the operational results could have been much greater if the
tank corps had been expeditiome engaged. But the comand authorities of the
Southwestern Front were endeavoring to complete penetration of the enemy's rear
defensive area by attack-echelon troops and only after this to engage the mobile
task force and support echelon of the 6th Army. This led to protracted fighting
for strong centers of resistance.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The advance achieved on lb Hay totaled 6-8 km.22 Only the 6th Cavalry Corps of
General Bobkin's group, taking advantage of freedom of maneuver, exploited at a
more rapid pace and drove 40 km deep into the enemy's defense.

The enemy hastily began redeploying reserves to threatened sectors. In addition

to the 113th and 108th Infantry divisions, the 305th Infantry Division was proceed-
ing from Khar'kov. Gradually the enemy achieved a balance of forces and, supported
by a system of fortified deep positions and providing his troops with air support

by aircraft transferred from the Crimean sector, began to stabilize the situation in
the rear defensive area. Prospects for engaging tank corps into the breach began
diminishing sharply. The entire operation was also loosing steam. The command
authorities of the Southwestern Front, however, had a different assessment of the
situation. On 15 May they reported to ﬂq SEC that the offensive was developing

well and that conditions had been created for the troops of the Bryansh Front to
shift to the attack and for further offensive exploitation by the assault groups.
"Judging from the enemy's actions, we conclude that he has not yet figured out the
general plan of our operation (p 1 ncer drives on Khar'kov), and he has directed
his main offensive effort toward a secondary sector of our front (38th Army), giving
freedom of action to our battle groups...." And further : "We have the impression
that at the present time the enemy not only is unprepared for aggressive actions on
the Kursk-Voronezh or Oboyan'-0skol axis but does not even possess strong forces in
order firmly to hold the Kursk-Oboyan' Pront."23

This was the situation estimate made by the front's command authorities two days
before the enemy launched a counteroffensive. It attests not only to excessive op-
timism on the part of the front's command authorities and poor knowledge of the
enemy's force grouping and intentions, but also indicates an endeavor to convince
Hq SEC to bring the forces of the Bryansk Front into the initiated operation and to
conduct it on a large scale.

On 15 May the attack echelon of the 6th Army succeeded by aggressive actions in
capturing a number of positions in the rear defensive area and thus for the third
time created conditions for engaging the tank corps. But by evening the tank
corps were 25-35 km from the battle line and were unable to enter the breach by
0300 hours on 16 May, as required by the order issued by the commander in chief of
the Southwestern Sector and the commanding general of the 6th Army2

Their engagement was postponed another 24 hours. that is, to the morning of 18 May,
when the enemy himself launched an offensive. New their engagement was not only
tardy but dangerous as well, for the southern group of forces was faced with

an ominous threat, which demanded immediate eastward redeployment of the tank
corps in order to prevent encirclement of the entire southern group of forces.

0n the morning of 17 May, that is. on the sixth day of the operation, the tank

corps engaged. But it was a belated move. The enemy succeeded in completing re-
deployment of his forces and that same day launched strong attacks, with the element
of surprise, on the troops of the southern and southwestern fronts. On 19 May our
offensive ground to a halt, and the troops were ordered to shift to the defense
along the entire Barvenkovo salient, to repulse enemy attacksandto reestablish the
situation.

25

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without going into the reasons for the unsuccessful outcome of the Khar’kov Opera-
tion as a whole, we should note that penetration of the enemy's defense was ac-
complished only by the armies' first operational echelon. Engagement of the sup-
port echelons of the armies and the tank corps was unwarrantedly delayed. Recon-
naissance of the enemy was poorly organized, and air engagement of the enemy's
reserves was conducted very feebly. The offensive of the Southwestern Front proved
to be isolated and unsupported by aggressive actions by the adjacent fronts. This

permitted the enemy freely to maneuver his forces and to mount powerful attacks on
our troops.

The breakthrough in the thev-Sychevka Operation merits attention. This operation
was conducted in the armor of 1962 with the objective of imbilizing the enemy's
forces in a passive sector of the strategic front; it embodied those methods of
penetration which experienced further development in subsequent campaigns of the
Great Patriotic War.

Proceeding from the stated objective, the general plan of the operation (Diagram 6)
consisted in mounting attacks by adjacent flanks of the Kalinin and western fronts,
clearing the enemy from the thev and Zubtsov, Karamzino and Pogoreloye Gorodishche
area, advancing and consolidating along the Volga and Vazuza rivers.

The Western Front mounted the main attack with the 20th and 31st armies in a sector
20 km wide, to a depth of only 35 km. A subsidiary attack was to be mounted some-
what south of the main attack, with the forces of approximately a rifle division.
Three days later, that is, when the enemy's reserves were diverted to the axis of
advance of the main force, the 5th Army was to launch an attack, followed by the
33d Army.25 The time difference in launching the offensive by these armies was due
to the necessity of transferring artillery support initially to the 5th and sub-
sequently to the 33d Army.

Concentration of the efforts of two armies and the front's forces in a single break-
through sector made it possible to establish densities which were high for 1942: one
division every 2-2.5 km, approximately 100 guns and mortars of 76 an and larger and
15-23 infantry-supporting tanks per kilometer of breakthrough frontage.

The combat formations of the divisions and regiments were as a rule arranged in two
echelons. In addition to a support echelon, a mobile group was formed in each
army, containing three tank brigades and in the front -- a mobile group consisting
of 2 tank corps and l cavalry corps}6

Duration of artillery preparation was specified at 90 minutes. Since M-3O heavy
rocket-propelled projectiles were employed for the first time in this operation,
they were expecting fairly good neutralization of the enemy's defense, in which
there was clearly noted a shift to a trench system with contruction of solidly-built
weapon emplacements in strongpoints and centers of resistance. In addition, they
established high densities of artillery designated for direct fire - 15—20 pieces
per km. Guns up to 152 mm were employed for this purpose. Support of the as-
sault was to be provided with a rolling barrage.

Two air armies were assigned to provide air support of the operation. Initially

they were to support breakthrough by the armies of the Kalinin Front, and subsequent-
ly the Hestern Front.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the Kalinin Front the main attack on nahev was mounted by the 30th Army, which
in composition had been strengthened to an assault army of prewar organization --
13 rifle divisions, 3 rifle and a tank brigades.” The front's subsidiary attack

was mounted by the 29th Army 15 kn from the main attack, employing 3 reinforced
rifle divisions.

The armies, proceeding from prewar views, also launched main and secondary attacks.
Thus four attacks were planned in the front operation, which extended approximately
50 km in frontage and less than 20 km in depth. Since two armies of the Western
Front were mounting a powerful attack only 16 kn from the Kalinin Front's secondary
attack and were to advance toward Zubtsov, that is, where the 29th Army was aimed,
the need for it to attack on an independent axis seems little justified.

Secondary army attacks by the forces of one or two divisions, with very weak artil-
lery Support, failed to penetrate a strongly fortified defense. Elimination of
secondary attacks and unification of the efforts of the 30th and 29th armies in a
single breakthrough sector would have made it possible to have a frontage of at
least 18 km instead of 12.5 kn on the main axis and 6 kn in the secondary sectors,
which would have made it difficult for the enemy to close the breach with hmnediate
operational reserves. Forces supporting the penetration on the flanks would be
almost out in half. One must agree here with the opinion of Gen L. M. Sandaloy,
former chief of staff of the 20th Army, who writes: "It is very probable that if
the Kalinin Front had combined its forces for penetration in a single sector, its
actions at thev would have resulted in earlier and more substantial success."28

Artillery densities on the main axis of advance, although high for that tine -- 113
guns and mortars per kilometer of breakthrough sector, were not fully in conformity
with the character of the enemy's defense. Approximately 50 percent of the tubes
were 82 mm mortars. while defense of the thev bridgehead constituted a field
fortified area consisting of two strong defensive areas and a large center of
resistance established in thev.29 0n the secondary axis artillery density was

67 guns and mortars and 50 rocket launchers.

We shoald note that the Kalinin Front had the capability to increase artillery den-
sity and improve its qualitative composition in the breakthrough sector. Only

50 percent of the front's artillery was assigned to participate in the breakthrough.3‘
The front's a armies which did not take part in the operation contained 22 artillery
and mortar regiments,31 at least half of which could have been assigned to the
operation.

Densities of tanks providing close support of infantry were fairly high for 1952 -
32 tanks per km of breakthrOugh sector on the main axis and 16 on the secondary.
But few tanks were assigned to the 30th Army's mobile group -- a tank brigade

and a tank regiment - a total of only 80 tanks. This force also included two
rifle brigades and an antitank artillery regiment.32

The command authorities of the Kalinin Front limited themselves to a comparatively
narrow range of neasures in order to gain the element of surprise. Preparations
were made for a faint attack in the narrow gap between the breakthrough sectors of
the 30th and 29th armies. From an operational point of view it was inadvisable,
because the enemy, taking preparations for the diversionary operations for the real

27

HOR‘OFIICMULIENBCﬂ'LY
INDI‘OFF1C1A1.lEﬂB(NVLY

thing and moving reserves to the northeast from thev, could use them to oppose the
forces both of the 30th and 29th armies, since his reserves were not more than 8-
12 km from the actual breakthrough sectors. Preparation of s diversionary front
operation fron an area south of the town of belyy toward the faint attack

being prepared (and which proved highly effective) by the Western Front at the
junction of the 63d and 59th armies, to repel which the enemy established a force
consisting of 3 tank divisions and l infantry division, could have been more ef-
fective. '

The offensive by the forces of the Kalinin Front began on 30 July 1942 in un-
favorable conditions. The enemy, having determined the day when the offensive would
be launched. brought his troops into a state of combat readiness. A solid overcast
and pouring rains made preliminary artillery bombardment and airstrikes difficult.
During the entire day only 86 sortiee could be flown.

Launching a nuaber of assaults, the 30th Army's battle group succeeded in penetrat-
ing the first defensive position. The conmanding general of the army engaged his
mobile group to build up the offensive effort. This force consisted primarily of
light tanks. They advanced slowly along the roads and cross-country routes, which
had been washed out by the heavy rains and were pockmsrked by shell craters; some
of the tanks bogged down. Artillery support of engagement of the mobile task force
proved ineffective due to the small numbers of long-range artillery and delay in
displacing the AP? groups.

As a result its attack proved weak and insufficiently coordinated with the efforts
of the attack-echelon divisions.

As a result of the first day of the offensive, an indentation had been formed in
the enemy's defense, 9 km wide and 6 km deep at the center. The enemy moved
reserves to the threatened sector and not only stabilized the front but at the end
of the day launched a number of counterattscks. Attempts to deepen and widen the
breach on the second and third days of the offensive led to an extremely modest ad-
vance by the army's forces. 0n the following day, after some redeployment of
forces and change in the direction of attack, the troops of the 30th Army succeeded
in reaching the Volga east of thev. Under threat of being outflanked by the forces
of the 31st and 30th armies, the enemy began to withdraw his troops from in front
of the 29th Army. As a result of stubborn, heavy fighting which lasted more than a
month, the troops of the Kalinin Front advanced from 8 to 20 km, but were unable
fully to accomplish the assigned missious. .

The offensive by the forces of the Western Front was delayed from 31 July to

4 August due to heavy rains. Following a 90-minute preliminary artillery bombard-
ment, assault battalions and forward units crossed the Derzha River on river-cross-
ing equipment and, accompanied by tanks, launched an attack. Sequential engagement
of the support echelons of the subunits, supported by artillery fire and airstrikes,
made it possible to build up efforts and make the attack almost continuous. without
a halt, to the depth of the entire first position.

The fighting for the town of Pogoreloye Gorodishche, which had been transformed in-
to a particularly strong center of resistance, assumed a more stubborn character.
At about 1aoo hours the right-flank troops, having enveloped the town, finally fought

28
FOI¢MHHKIAL.USE(NNLY
their way into it and wiped out the garrison defending the town. This aade it pos-
sible to link up the breakthrough sectors of the 31st and 20th armies and to push
the advance further.

The assault on the second position began that afternoon, following heavy artillery
bombardment and a massive airstrike. Units of the 161st Infantry Division again
sustained heavy casualties andwere essentially wiped nut. Arriving reserves of the
27th Army and 46th Panzer corps halted the further advance of the rifle divisions,
while the tank groups, due to delay on the Derzhe River crossings and in advancing
along the roads, which were still wet following the lengthy rains and had been
chewed up by the attack-echelon troops, were unable to engage on the first day.
Finally on the morning of 5 August they attacked together with the forward-echelon
troops and completed penetration of the main defensive zone. The breach created in
the enemy's defense was 30 km in frontage and 25 km in depth.33

The commanding general of the front decided to engage the front'a mobile group.

It again began to rain. however, whichhindeted movement of the tank corps across
the river and their advance to the points where they were to enter the breach. They
did not enter battle until 6 August, reaching the Vazuaa River on the following
day.34 But by this time the enemy had brought up his operational reserves -- 3
panzer divisions and an infantry division, intending to reestablish the situation
with two counterthrusts. The fighting took on a protracted character. Our troops
no: only repelled counterthrusta but also captured bridgeheads on the Oauga and
Vszuzs rivers.

The success achieved by the troops of the Hestern and Kalinin fronts was important.
The initiative had temporarily been seized in the western sector, and the enemy had
been deprived of the opportunity to redeploy 3 trained and prepared panzer and
several infantry divisions to the Southern Front35 to carry out their principal
strategic missions assigned for the summer of 1962.

*it

Analysis of penetration of the enemy's defense in the offensive operations of the
summer-fall campaign of 1962 indicates that a trend toward decisive massing of men
and weapons in breakthrough sectors was clearly evident in Soviet art of warfare.
This was expressed in assigning a common breakthrough sector for 2 to 3 armies or
in increasing the strength of l army. Concentration of a substantial number of
rifle combined units in a single breakthrough sector made it possible to double-
triple their operational density, which improved preconditions for penetrating the
enemy's defense and achieving deep exploitation. Host fully embodied in this was
an important point contained in the an SEC directive letter of 10 January 1962 and
its practical implementation.

Artillery densities in breakthrough sectors became double or triple those in the
winter campaign of 19h1162, reaching 100-150 guns and mortars per km. Mortars com-
prisedthe bulk of this density, however, which did not permit reliable delivery of
suppressive fire deep in the enemy's defense, thus creating conditions for penetra-
tion of the defense without a halt, at least to the enemy's principal artillery
position areas.

29

FOI1DPFKJA1.UBI(NELY
IN3I10FF1ClAl.lﬂﬂE(MVLY

Establishment of air armies in the fronts expanded capabilities of massed employment
of air. At the same time they contained extremely few bombers, as a consequence of
which aviation could not appreciably supplement artillery fire during preliminary
bombardment.

Tank densities also increased appreciably,especially in the operations of the Western
Front. Fairly strong mobile groups began to be formed in the armies, and in
certain instances even in the front. For a number of reasons, however, their en-
gagement was not always accomplished expeditiously and with precision. The ex-
perience of combat employment of armored troops was summarised in People's Com-
missar of Defense Order No 325, dated 16 October 1962, which laid out the basic
principles of employment of tank and mechanized combined units and units.

In spite of a clearly evident trend toward massing men and weapons in breakthrough
sectors, it was not accomplished to the degree which was possible and necessary.

An endeavor to mount secondary, blocking attacks in addition to the main attack was
leading to the scattering of forces.

The experience of offensive operations conducted for the purpose of pinning down
and immobilizing the enemy demonstrated that the best result was achieved when a
small number of attacks would be mounted, but of a force sufficient to ensure
breaking thr0ugh the defense and penetration by the attacking troops to a consider-
able distance (the Hestern Front in the thev-Sychevka Operation). In the endeavor
to immobilize as many enemy troops as possible right at the outset, that is, by
launching several attacks of little power along a broad front, the battle groups,
especially with hasty preparations for an offensive, as a rule failed to

penetrate the enemy's defense, to create a threat of reaching operational objectives,
and thus to force the enemy to move substantial reserves to the threatened sector.
Consequently, in preparing for offensive operations the main objective of which is
to immobilize enemy forces, penetration must be planned on a general basis, limit-
ing only the depth of thrust, and planning employment of mobile groups and sup-
port echelons in conformity with this.

On the whole. during conduct of offensive operations in the first period of the war,
which was essentially a defensive phase, the art of organization and execution of
penetration was improved taking into account change in the material foundation and
conditions of conduct of warfare. Trends toward massing men and weapons in break-
through sectors, increasing reliability of suppressive fire on the enemy's defense,
increasing the rate of penetration, and development of tactical into operational
success by engaging mobile grOups, support echelons and reserves, becaae clearly
defined. Soviet troops acquired certain experience in conducting penetration to the
entire tactical defense depth.

Synthesis of the experience of conducted operations and critical analysis of errors
which occurred made it possible by the end of the first period of the war to for-
mulate the principal points pertaining to matters of preparation for and execution
of penetration, which played an important role in successful resolution of this
problem in the subsequent periods of the war.

30

F0810FFK1A1.0531NVLY
1.

2.

3.

7.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

Central Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense, Fund 208, List 2511. File 20,
Sheet 353.

Ibid., File 766, Sheet 1.

See 5. A. Kslinin, "Bazayshleniya o minuvshan" [Reflections on the Pest], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1963, pp 139-160.

Central Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense, Fund 208, List 2511, File 66,
Sheet 36.

See N. Voznesenskiy, "Voyennsya ekononike 8883 v period Otechestvennoy voyne"
[var Econoay of the USSR During the Great Patriotic war], Moscow, Gospolitizdet,
1968, page 62.

TsAMO SSSR [Central Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense], Fund 202, List 9,
File 11, sheets 166, 165.

See L. M. Ssndslov, "Na noskovskon naprevlenii" [In the Moscow Sector], Moscow,
Hanks, 1970, page 257.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 373, List 6631, File 6, Sheet 7.
1b1d., Fund 1380, List 6776, File 3, shnets 7, 8.
Ibid., Fund 353, List 5866, File 605, sheets 32-36.

See 1. Kb. Basra-yan, "Ink nachinalas' voyns" [How the Us: Began], Moscow,
Voyenizdst, 1977, pp 696-698.

See F. I. Golikov, "V Moskovakoy bitve" [In the Battle of Moscov], Moscow,
Hanks, 1967, pp 68-69.

TsAMO SSSR, Fund 373, List 6631, File 21, sheets 11, 12.
Ibid., Fund 363, List 6631, File 31, sheets 29, 30, 38, 39.

See "Istoriya vtoroy nirovoy voyny" [History of World Her II], Vol 5, Moscov,
Voyenizdst, 1975, page 127.

See "Sovetakaya artilleriys v Valikoy Otechestvsnnoy voyne 1961-1965 33."
[Soviet Artillery in the Great Patriotic Har, 1961-1965], Moscow, Voyenizdst,
1960, pp 128-129.

TsAMO SSSR, Fund 229, List 170, File 65, sheets 131-135.

Ihid., Fund 251, List 666, File 165, sheets l65,.238.

161d., Fund 382, List 8652, F110 65, Sheet 26.

31

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

35.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1b1d., Fund 229, 1.10: 161, F110 836, Sheet “9.
16“., Fund 229, List 161, P110 836, sheet; 680, 681.
16141., P116 120, Sheet 331.

mm, F110 17, than“ 311-317.

mm” me 88, Sheet 27.

See I... H. Sandalov, ”Pogorelo-Goroduhchemhya oporatoiyn" [me Pogoreloye-
Gorodishche Operation], Moscow, Voyenudat, 1960, page 14.

mm SSSR, Fund 208, L10: 2511, File 1668, Shoot 26; P110 1087, sheets 65-71.

Ibid., Fund 213, 1.18: 2002, File 622, $113.: 16.
Sandalov, op. c1t., page 117.

rum 5881!, Fund 213, List 2002, File 121, sheets 1, 2.
Ibid., Fund 208, List 2511, F110 1064, sheet 187.
11:14., Fund 213, 1.13: 2002, File 627, Shut 67.

Ibid., P110 65, Sheet 23.

See “Istoriya vtoroy..." op. c1t., Vol 5, page 265.
‘l‘sAHO 8581!, Fund 208, List 2511, File 1466, Sheet 10.

See K. Tippel'akirkh, "Iatoriya vtoroy nirovoy voyny"
Moscow, Izd-vo Inostr. L1t., 1956, pagc 261.

32

m omcw, us: ONLY '

[History of World Bar 11],
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter M. DEVELOPMENT 01' neon AND PRACTICE 0? PENETRATION Ill WRLD
m H

1. Penetration in the Winter Campaign of 1962/63

By the beginning of the winter campaign of 1962/43 the Comist Party and Soviet
Governaent had done an enormous job of aobilising material and manpower resources,
increasing production of war naterials and strengthening the Soviet Arned Forces.
And althOugh this country's economic situation still remind difficult, and the
situation at the front was tense. thanks to the heroic efforts of the Soviet
people we had been able not only to replenish the losses sustained in the owner
of 1962 but also to increase the quantity of nilitary equipment at the disposal of
the fronts and armies.

Increased production of arms and conbat equipmnt nede it possible to adopt new
tables of organization and equipment for the rifle divisions, additionally to
deploy several tank and mechanized corps. and to begin forning sac Reserve artillery,
antiaircraft artillery and rocket artillery divisions. Unification of all air
forces into air armies was conpleted in the fronts. In the first period of the

war connand personnel acquired cowat experience, going through a difficult school
of combat against a powerful adversary. All. this expanded the capabilities of the
Soviet Army to conduct operations in depth.

In spite of the fact that in the summer of 1962 the enemy achieved large-scale mili-
tary successes on the Eastern Front, he failed to achieve his ultimate objectives.
The Hitlerite command authorities were forced to shift to a strategic defense in
mid-October. The troops of the Soviet Army were faced with a couple: task -- to
crush the enemy's strategic defense and to initiate a canpaign to liberate the oc-
cupied areas. To achieve this, it was planned to conduct a amber of offensive
operations. Each of these had its own specific features. The most characteristic
features of penetration in the winter campaign of 1962/63 were nanifested in the
counteroffensive at Stalingrad and in the operations on the Upper Don.

Preparation for and execution of penetration in the counteroffensive at Stalingrad.
liq snc began planning the oounteroffensive at Stalingrad in Septesber 191.2. As we
know, this plan consisted essentially in launching attacks by three fronts -— the
Southwestern. Stalingrad, and Don - breaking through the eneuy's defense in
several sectors and, exploiting toward Kalach along converging axes, encircling and
annihilating the eneny's nain force grouping in the Stalingrad area. The defeat in
detail of the Stalingrad force created an enormue breach in the enemy's defense,

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which presented the opportunity to crush the entire southern side of the enemy's
strategic front.

From the standpoint of execution of operational-strategic breakthroughs and their
exploitation, the plan of the counteroffensive is notable in the fact that the

axes of attack were selected with consideration of possibilities of establishing
battle groups primarily where the enemy's defense was weaker and where the line was
defenhd by less stable Romanian and Italian troops. At the same time the battle
groups were made strong enough so that they were capable of successfully accomplishing
a breakthrough and exploiting it at a rapid pace to the area where the troops of

two fronts would link up and form a sufficiently strong outer perimeter of en-
circlement. As a rule the efforts of two or three armies of one or two fronts wOuld
be linked on the axis of advance (Diagram 7). The 5th Tank Army and part of the
forces of the let Guards and 21st armies, for example, were to attack on the main
axis of advance of the Southwestern Front. A second powerful attack was to be
launched from the Don River by the adjacent flanks of the Southwestern and Don
fronts, with the forces of the 21st and 65th Armies. The gap between the two
breakthrough sectors was approximately 20 km, was defended by approximately 1.5
infantry divisions and did not possess more than tactical importance. Penetration
by the battle groups beyond the enemy's main defensive zone would make it possible
to isolate these forces, subsequently to annihilate them and to form a single inter-
front breakthrough sector.

The Stalingrad Front was to mount its drive toward the Southwestern Front. It wOuld
involve the efforts of three armies. Each of them, however, was to penetrate in a
separate sector. Under those specific situation conditions such a form of offensive
drive by the front was warranted. The opposing Romanian 6th Corps was defending on
a wider front than the enemy troops opposite the Southwestern and Don fronts, which
facilitated penetration of the defense and deep exploitation of the breakthrough.

In addition, with separate army offensive drives there would be a smaller volume of
operational redeployments, which was of great importance for gaining time and the
element of surprise.

The selected form of operational breakthrough made it possible to soften up the
enemy defense on a boo-kilometer front simultaneously in several sectors, which
made it difficult for the enemy to maneuver reserves for the purpose of closing
breaches.

Another characteristic feature of penetration was the fact that it was essentially
undertaken with an equality of forces bewteen the opposing sides. In order to
achieve the requisite superiority over the enemy in the breakthrough sectors, the
Soviet command authorities displayed a high degree of skill in massing men and
weapons. In the Southwestern Front, for example, 50 percent of the rifle divisions,
3 tank and 2 cavalry corps, approximately 80 percent of the artillery of the SEC
Reserve, all rocket artillery and a large portion of available aircraft were con-
centrated in the breakthrough sectors, representing a total width of 22 km. In the
Stalingrad Front two thirds of the rifle divisions of the armies carrying out the
penetration, all mobile combined units, and the bulk of artillery and air were con-
centrated in breakthrough sectors representing a total frontage of 40 km. This
made it possible to establish a two to one and three to one superiority on the main
axes of advance of the fronts. The superiority was even greater in the breakthrough

36

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NYLY
sectors of a number of armies. 1n the 5th Tank Army, for example, it was as fol-
lows: 2.5:1 in personnel. 5:1 in artillery, in tanks -- an absolute superiority
within the tactical zone of defense and 2.8:1 in the zone of advance.1

The densities indicated in Table 3 were achieved as a result of decisive massing of
men and weapons in the breakthrough sectors.

Table 3. Average Densities of Men and Weapons in the Breakthrough Sectors in the

Counteroffensive at Stalingrad2
km per rifle divi Guns and Tanksper
sion Mortars km of

In the per km of Break-
zone as Break- Break— through
a "hole through through Sector
Sector

  

Width of Hidth of
Zone of Break-

Advance, through
km Sector, km

 
 

Front, Army

 
   
    

 
  
      

 
  
    
 
 

            
     

 

Southwestern Front

5th Tank Army 13/37
let Army 5/25
Don Front

65th Army 15
Stalingrad Front

64th Army 3-6
57th Army 6/12
Slst Army 3/12

Note: Density of infantry-supporting tanks is indicated in the numerator, and
operational density in the denominator.

 

It is evident from the table that average densities of rifle troops in the break-
through sectors in the armies of the Southwestern Front were 2 to 6 times those in
the overall zone of advance. Artillery densities in the armies of the Southwestern
and Don fronts as a whole were in conformity with the Hq SEC instructions issued to
the Don Front on 15 October -- to have 60-65 pieces per km of frontage, not includ-
ing rocket launchers. 0n the Stalingrad Front they were half that, and therefore
the front scheduled the armies to launch the offensive at different times, in order
to maneuver artillery from one breakthrough sector to another. but this plan did
not succeed because there was insufficient time for manelvcx.

The tactical order of battle of the fronts was single-echelon, with up to two rifle
divisions assigned to the reserve. The armies which were executing penetration
contained two echelons. Mobile groups were formed in the majority of the at-
tacking armies. Their composition varied. In the 5th Tank Army, the mobile

grOup contained 2 tank corps and l cavalry corps, the 21st and 51st armies -- 1 rank
(mechanized) and l cavalry corps, and the 24th and 57th armies -- l tank
hechanized) corps.

35

FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The tank and mechanized corps were to engage on the first day of the operation,
3-6 hours'after initiation of the attack, at a depth of 3.5-5 km, that is, to com-
plete-penetration of the main defensive zone. By evening they were to penetrate
to a depth of 60-50 km on the main axes of advance. In view of an insufficient
number of infantry-support tanks in the armies, part of the forces of the tank and
mechanized corps were to be used in the close infantry-support role.

Thus penetration and its exploitation were to be accomplished solely by the

forces of the forward-echelon armies, with tactical air support. Unfortunately,
due to insufficient forces and the absence of powerful mobile offensive weapons at
the immediate disposal of the commanding generals of the fronts, they were unable
to move the operations at a more rapid pace.

The infantry combat formations were based on People's Commissar of Defense Order
No 306, dealing with maximum and simultaneous participation of infantry and in-
fantry weapons in combat, from the beginning to the end of an engagement. That
same order prescribed the following: "In order to avoid excessive bunching of
battlefield dispositions, and hence heavy casualties during the advance of an
average-strength division (7-8 thousand men), a zone of about 4 km in frontage, and
in no case less than 3 km in frontage, shall be assigned to the army battle group."
The division zones of advance on the main axes ran b-S km, which made it possible

to have a tactical density of approximately 2 rifle battalions per kilometer of
frontage.

The combat missions assigned to the rifle divisions for the first day were specified
to a depth of 11-20 km, and in certain instances to 28 km.

Planning of artillery combat actions was performed according to the principles of
artillery support for the attack. Artillery preparation was to run 80 minutes in
the Southwestern and Don fronts, and 40-75 minutes in the Stalingrad Front. From
15 to 20 minutes, or approximately 25 percent of artillery preparation time, was
allocated for neutralizing the enemy's defense with concentrated fire. The densest
suppressive fire was placed on the forward edge of the battle area and the first
defensive position. Infantry weapons fire was to be extensively employed in the
course of artillery preparation.

Air actions were planned for the first time in the form of an air offensive, which
included preliminary airstrikes and close support of ground troops at operational
depth. This ensured better coordination of airstrikes and artillery fire with the
advancing ground troops. Tactical air efforts, however, were still scattered among
the combined-arms armies, for the support of which air groups were formed. In
planning the air offensive, insufficient forces were assigned to close support of
the troops executing the penetration.

Soviet command authorities displayed great skill in gaining the element of surprise
in launching the counteroffensive. Measures of a strategic, operational and tac-
tical character were carried out for this purpose.

Penetration ofthe enemy's defense on the Southwestern and Don fronts commenced on

19 November with massive preliminary artillery bombardment. Adverse weather condi-
tions ruled out the use of air.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nature of penetration of the main defensive zone can be traced in the actions
of combined units of the 5th Tank Army (Diagram 8).

During the final artillery bombardment, infantry approached the enemy's forward posi-
tions and, at the moment artillery fire was shifted to deeper targets, initiated

the assault phase together with infantry-supporting tanks. The infantry and tanks
swiftly penetrated the enemy's forward positions. In a number of sectors the at-
tacking subunits succeeded in penetrating deep between the front-line strongpoints.
The single-echelon disposition of the regiments. however. prevented them from ex-
ploiting. In the 124th Rifle Division, for example. a successful advance was
achieved at the junction of the 622d and 406th Rifle regiments, but there was es-
sentially nothing with which they could exploit. Mounting repeated assaults, by
1100 hours the division nevertheless succeeded in breaking through the first posi-
tion in the center of the zone of advance and reaching the strongpoint on Bill 223.0.

Offering a stubborn defense and counterattacking, the enemy held up the division's
advance the rest of the day.

The 119th Rifle Division was advancing with greater success. By 1100 haurs its
right flank had broken through the first position and had reached Klinovoy, where
the enemy was hastily digging in with division reserves and thrown-back subunits.
The division's left flank was almost 2 kilometers further back.

The 47th Guards Rifle Division was experiencing similar success on the left flank,
but its right flank bogged down in fighting for the village of Bol'shoy.

Thus on the main axis of advance the army was presented by 1200 hours with condi-
tions for breaking through the enemy's entire defensive zone, but the fact that the
divisions had no support echelons ruled out accomplishing this mission.

A decreased rate of penetration of the main defensive zone demanded building up the
offensive drive with the armies' available forces. The cox-sanding general of the
5th Tank Army decided to engage his tank corps. which proceeded to move forward from
the assembly areas soon after the attack couenced. This enabled them to catch up
with the advancing infantry by 1300 hours.

The simultaneous appearance of great numbers of tanks on the battlefield had a
powerful effect on the enemy's morale. By fire and offensive momentum, the tank
corps smashed the enemy's resistance and swiftly advanced into the area of the
enemy's min artillery positions near Klinovoy-Livestock Unit 1. Haunting an
assault from the flanks and frontally, the four tank brigades smashed 2 artillery
regiments and an enemy infantry battalion. Only small groups of enemy troops,
taking advantage of fog. succeeded in withdrawing. The enemy's defense was
penetrated on the 5th Tank Army's min axis of advance. Exploiting, the tank corps
advanced 18-20 km by evening.

The 8th Cavalry Corps was engaged following the tank corps, exploiting in the
direction of the flank with the objective of establishing an outer perimeter of
envelopnent.

The success of the army mobile group a 1s 0 enabled the rifle divisions to in-
crease the rate of advance. By evening they had advanced to a depth of 3-19 km.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Penetration was accomplished in approximately the same manner in the zone of the
let Army. The 4th Tank Corps was engaged along two routes. Two brigades on the
right flank, deployed into combat formation, working in coordination with rifle
divisions, completed penetration of the enemy's main defensive zone at midday. By-
passing centers of resistance, they proceeded rapidly advancing to depth. The
brigades had advanced 30-35 km by evening, capturing Hanoylino.3 Forces on the
left flank advanced 12 km.

The 65th Army was able to penetrate only 3-5 km into the enemy's defense during the
first day. However, it drew the forces of the Romanian 1st Cavalry Division, which
facilitated the advance of the 21st Army. There is no doubt that if the 65th Army
had had a mobile group, the defense would have been breached on its axis of advance
as well.

The element of surprise in launching the offensive by the troops of the Southwestern
and Don fronts, the forming of two deep breaches in the enemy's defense and penetra-
tion in an additional sector producedconfuaion in the German-fascist command
authorities. This is evident from the missions assigned to the 68th Panzer Corps.
Initially it was assigned the mission of attacking the troops of the 21st Army,

who in the opinion of the enemy command authorities were mounting the main attack.
At midday the direction of the offensive drive was shifted to the zone of the 5th
Tank Army. The Romanian let Tank Division was to advance in a westerly direction,
while the German 22d Panzer Division and the Romanian 7th Cavalry Division were to
advance toward the northeast. The enemy was planning to use the offensive thrusts
of the combined units to close the breach which had formed in the defense. Our

tank and rifle troops, however, successfully repelled the counterthrust, which
created the prerequisites for a swift advance toward the designated lines.

On 20 November the 26th Tank Corps, skillfully employing battlefield maneuver and
flank thrusts at the enemy, began advancing swiftly. Capturing Perelazovskoye,

it opened up an avenue for the army's troops to operational depth. But the fact
that the brigades were dispersed along a large front, that there was only one radio
set at corps headquarters, and that the rifle divisions had fallen far behind led to
a delay in the advance of the corps toward Kalach. Finally at noon on 21 November
it proceeded to sweep toward the Don. with the lat Tank Corps advancing in echelon
behind it.

Penetration in the armies of the Stalingrad Front began on 20 November and also
took place in adverse weather conditions and without air support. Artillery
preparation began at different times: at 0730 in the Slst Army, at 0815 in the
57th Army, and not until 1350 hours in the ébth Army. In spite of the difficult
conditions of delivering fire, the enemy's defense nevertheless was for the most
part neutralized, which was promoted to a considerable degree by the element of
surprise. In short order the troops of the 51st and 57th armies had broken through
the first defensive position. Due to shattered morale, and weakness of his
reserves, the enemy was unable to take effective measures to close the breaches in
his defense. This enabled our rifle troops to reach the enemy's main artillery
position areas and to create favorable conditions for engaging the armies' mobile
groups. By evening the 5th Mechanized Corps had advanced 10-15 km, and the 13th
Mechanized Corps -- 16-17 km.

38

FOR 0F1ﬂC1A1.USE|)NLY
The success of the troops of the 64th Army was considerably less, since little
daylight remained for the attack, and it did not have a mobile group.

The armies resumed the attack on the morning of 21 November, following brief artil-
lery preparation. Repelling counterattacks by arrived enemy reserves, the 51st and
57th armies, completed the breakthrough on the main axes, consolidated it into a
single front breach, and cut the Stalingrad-Kotel'nikovo rail line, thus opening up
the road to Sovetskiy, where the troops of the Southwestern and Stalingrad fronts
linked up at 1623 hours, closing the perimeter of envelopment.

Analysis of the breakthrough in the November operation at Stalingrad indicates that
success was ensured by correct selection of main axes of advance, by decisive mass-
ing of personnel and weapons in the breakthrough sectors, by achieving the element
of surprise, by skillful employment of artillery and armored troOps, and by a high
degree of aggressiveness by the troops.

Experience in penetrating the enemy's defense in the Stalingrad area was further
developed in Operation 'Malyy Saturn," conducted on the Middle Don in the latter
half of December 1942 by the troops of the Voronezh and Southwestern fronts. On the
main axis of advance, an attack mounted by the adjacent flanks of two fronts, an
even larger battle group was formed - l2 rifle divisions, lo tank corps, and 2500
guns and mortars.

The breakthrough sectors of the rifle divisions were narrowed to 2.2-3.5 km.
Changes occurred in the tactical order of battle: the rifle divisions in the lst
Guards Army containednoechelons, with usechelon in the remaining armies, but all
regiments formed up in two echelons. This was a consequence of the influence of
the experience of the November operation, in which the regiments and divisions
began employing a two-echelon formation from the very first days of the offensive.“

Penetration of the enemy's defense was preceded by reconnaissance in force, con-
ducted on 1!. December 19b2, that is, two days before the offensive began.

Although it had also been employed previously, in this instance reconnaissance in
force was assigned more specific missions, defined by instructions issued by the
Supreme Comsnder to the Southwestern and Voronezh fronts at the beginning of
December 1962. Regarding preparations for an operation, the instructions stated:
"...Since the Germans know about our H-30s, which blast the entire forward edge

of the battle area, they have adopted the following tactic: they leave only securi-
ty at the forward edge of the battle area, while withdrawing forward positions to
a depth of 6-5 km. He should counter this German tactic with our own caunter-
tactic, which consists in the following: before conencing an attack, combat
reconnaissance should be conducted in order to locate the enemy's forward positions,
and we must reach the enemy's forward positions at all costs. A number of aggres—
sive reconnaissance forays are to be mounted, taking prisoners and obtaining

encugh information from then so that we do not waste munition. Reconnaissance in
force shall be conducted, by independent battalions, two days before an operation
commences."5

The offensive on the Middle Don once again confirmed that massing personnel and
weapons in breakthrough sectors is one of the most important prerequisites for

successful penetration. Increasing the strength of the defense also requires
higher densities of men and weapons, particularly artillery.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some new elements in development of the art of penetrating the enemy's defense were
revealed in the operation to defeat in detail the anally force encircled at
Stalingrad. They were dictated by the fact that the troops of the Don Front had

to break thrOugh a deliberate defense organised by the way along earlier
Stalingrad defense perimeters. The efforts of three armies were joined on the main
axis. The main battle group, deployed in a 16-kilometer sector, consisted of 13
rifle divisions and various reinforcement units. Thirty-three percent of the front's
rifle divisions, 50 percent of its artillery, 57 percent of rocket launcher and

75 percent of tank brigades and regiments were concentrated in this battle group.6

Narrowing the width of the front's offensive thrust and additional reinforcement of
the Don Front with artillery of the 830 Reserve made it possible to establish an
artillery density which was very high for the beginning of 1943. It amounted to
135.6 guns and mortars per kilometer in the breakthrough sector of the 65th Army,
which was 12 km wide, and 160-165 guns and mortars per kilometer in the zones of
some divisions. In addition, two rocket launcher divisions were concentrated in the
army's breakthrough sector. The high artillery densities made it possible to es-
tablish a 6:1-8:1 superiority over the enemy, and a 10:1 superiority on the main
axis of advance of the 65th Army, although overall artillery superiority was 1.7:1.

During artillery preparation a special time was allocated for delivering fire by
direct-fire guns. the density of which was 37 guns per km of frontage in the
breakthrough sector of the 65th Army. Another advance was made in organizing ar-
tillery7support of the assault phase, which involved a moving barrage to a depth of
1.5 km.

The offensive was launched on 10 January 1963. The infantry and tank attack was
preceded by close airstrikes and mssive artillery preparations. The high degree
of massing of artillery made it possible to soften up the enemy's deliberate
defense. Overcoming savage resistance by the encircled enemy troops, the motorized
rifle combined units advanced 6-8 km on the first day of the offensive in a number
of sectors.

Artillery density increased as the offensive frontage narrowed. In breaking through
the former inner Stalingrad defense perimeter, for example. artillery density in-
creased to 186 guns and mortars per km in the battle group's breakthrough sector,
and 222 guns and mortars per km in the breakthroagh sector of the 21st Army. By the
end of January artillery density in the sector of the 27th Guards Rifle Division
had been boosted to 338 guns and mortars per kilometer of frontage.8

The increased power of artillery fire led to a significant reduction in friendly
casualties and increased enemy casualties. 0n the first three days of the break-
through. the most difficult, casualties ran to lo percent of the army's strength,9
while on the final days of the assaula, in spite of combat in a built-up area,
casualties did not exceed 2 percent.1 Casualties among the defending enemy troops
exceeded 100,000 in the first 16 days of operation "Ring," amounting to almost one
third of the numerical strength of the encircled force.

In the counteroffensive at Stalingrad the art of penetration and exploitation to
full operational depth was raised to a new, higher level. Experience in penetration
once again demonstrated that success is achieved not only by possessing overall

1.0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
superiority over the enemy in personnel and weapons but also by the ability to
establish superiority on selected axes by strict economy of forces in secondary
sectors, as well as by gaining the element of surprise.

Penetration of the enemy's defense at Stalingrad was not immediately exploited to
strategic depth, since considerable efforts were required to repel enemy attempts

to relieve the encircled bite and to annihilate it. A lull which occurred in the
conduct of offensive operations enabled the enemy to strengthen the weakened sector
of the front by bringing up forces from his strategic reserve and from other sectors,
and thus to prevent the formation of a strategic breach in his defense.

Foreseeing this, the Soviet Supreme nigh Command provided for the conduct of a
series of operations to immobilize enemy forces in other sectors and to chieve
final collapse of the enemy‘s strategic defensive front on the scuthwest rn axis.
They include the Soviet operations on the Upper Don and the operation of the

Western and Kalinin fronts to eliminate the enemy's thev salient (Operation "Mars"),
and the operations of the Transcaucasian Front to rout Army Group A.

Preparations for the 0strogozhak-Roseosh Operation began in the last 10 days of
December 1942, when a solid ring had formed around the encircled enemy force at
Stalingrad, while an attempt to relieve it ended in defeat for Army Group Goth.

An Hq SHC directive called for the Voronezh Front to conduct an offensive operation
with the objective of defeating in detail enemy forces on the Upper Don and to
liberate from the enemy a section of the Lieki-Kantemirovka rail line. Support of
the operation from the south was assigned to the 6th Army of the Southwestern Front.

The enemy's main efforts were concentrated on holding the tactical zone of defense,
which consisted of a main defensive zone 6-8 km in depth and a second fortified
zone 12-20 km from the forward edge of the battle area. The enemy worked on in-
proving these defensive positions over a period of 6 months, with the exception of
a sector south of Pervomaysk, where he had just consolidated and where his defense
was weak.

By the end of December the Voronezh Front had 18 rifle divisions, 5 rifle and 9 tank
brigades -- more than 263,000 officers and men, about 6000 guns and mortars 76 mm
and larger, 909 tanks, and 208 aircraft.11 It enjoyed a 2.2:1 superiority over the
enemy in artillery and 3:1 in tanks, but was inferior in personnel and air forces.

The Soviet conmand authorities considered in detail all the features of the
prevailing situation in the forthcoming zone of advance and made a bold decision:
to break through the enemy's defense with three battle groups concentrated on
bridgeheads at Pervoye Storozhevoye and Shchuch'ye, as well as in an area northwest

of Kantemirovka and, exploiting along converging axes, to encircle and annihilate
the enemy force.

The selected form of operational penetration (Diagram 9) was lost in conformity with
the operation objective assigned to the front, the situation of our troops (pos-
session of bridgeheads on the Don) and the situation in which the enemy forces

feund themselves. In contrast to the countsroffensive at Stalingrad, only army
attacks were mounted here, while a cleaving drive was mounted by an independent

41

INJR‘OFF1C1A1.USII(HQLY
FOR 0511C1A1.USE1DNLY

rifle corps. Since the defense was better fortified than at Stalingrad, the of-
fensive thrusts seemed weaker. But in conditions where Soviet forces possessed the
strategic initiative and enemy troops were suffering low morale, their strength was
sufficient not only to penetrate the defense but also to exploit to operational
depth.

Since an enemy offensive thrust in the front's zone was improbable, the Soviet
connmnd authorities very boldly weakened secondary axes to form battle groups
capable of independently penetrating the enemy defense and exploiting to opera-
tional depth.

Five rifle divisions, one rifle brigade and three tank brigades were concentrated

in the 60th Army in a breakthrough sector 10 km wide. Various subunits and units

totaling 8 rifle battalions, 57 guns, or 1 battalion for every 10 kn and less than
1 gun per kilometer of frontage were left on the remaining 7S-kilometer frontage

of the army's zone of advance.12

In the 18th Independent Rifle Corps 3 rifle divisions and 1 rifle brigade with sup-
port weapons were concentrated in an 8-kilometer breakthrough sector. One rifle
division and independent subunits up to 12 battalions in strength remained to defend
sectors stretching 156 km.13

The 3d Tank Army formed the nest powerful battle group. Three reinforced rifle
divisions were assigned to its attack echelon, and 2 tank corps were designated

for breakthrough exploitation. On this army's left flank, the 7th Cavalry Corps was
to be engaged into the breakthrough gap.

The attack-echelon rifle combined units of the battle groups were disposed in one or
two echelons, and the rifle regiments - in two echelons.

As a result of decisive massing of men and weapons on the main area, somewhat
greater densities were established than when launching the counteroffensive at
Stalingrad, which ensured superiority over the enemy (Table A).

Table 4. Average Densities and Relative Strengths in Personnel and weapons in
Breakthrough Sectors in the Ostrogozhsk-Bossosh Operation

Densities in Breakthrough
Sector

    

Relative Strengths in
Personnel and Hea'-ns

   
    
    
 
  

    
   
    

Battle Group

   

  

      

   

     

km per Guns and In- Artil-
rifle Mortars fantry lery
division
40th Army 92 13.3 3.7:1 8.2:1
18th Independent
Rifle Corps 83 3.5:1 8.0 1 1.2:1
3d Tank Army 2.3:1 5.1 1 3.7:1

  

        

Note: Density of infantry-support tanks is indicated in the numerator, and opera-
tional density in the denominator.

62

FOR.OF1WCLALIISE1DNLY
In spite of the fact that the enemy troops were in a shattered state of morale, the
command authorities of the Voronezh Front did a great deal to achieve a maximum
element of offensive surprise, which was complicated by the limited extent of the
bridgeheada from which the 40th Army and 18th Independent Rifle Corps launched the
attack. Deception measures and dissemination of false information played an im-
portant role in this. During the period of preparation for Operation "Saturn,"
the 50th Army feigned preparations for an attack from the Storozhevoye bridgehead,
at the same time utilizing this simulation for preparing for its own offensive
operation. When the enemy's attention abated as a result of the offensive thrust
on the Middle Don, the command authorities of the 40th Army took a number of con-
cealment, camouflage and deception measures. All troop redeployments were carried
out only at night; a substantial portion of the artillery was deployed beyond the
river, in order to prevent the enemy from spotting it from ground observation posts;

Concentration and readying of troops for an offensive action were feigned south of
Voronezh.

Penetration of the enemy's defense was preceded by reconnaissance in force by
forward battalions, conducted 68 hours prior to commencement of the offensive. In
the 40th Army the attack by the forward battalions was supported by a one-hour
preliminary artillery bombardment. involving approximately half of all artillery.
Their actions were successful. By engaging the main forces of two divisions, they
succeeded in penetrating the enemy's defense on a 6-kilometer frontage to a depth of
3.5 km. Reconnaissance in force in the 18th Rifle Corps and 3d Tank Army made it
possible only to determine precisely the enemy's forward positions and fire plan.

The commanding general of the éOth Army, evaluating the results of the recon-
naissance in force, made the decision, with the approval of the commanding general
of the front, to launch the offensive on the morning of 13 January, that is, 20
hours prior to the scheduled time. Forward of the divisions which had already
softened up the enemy's defense, artillery preparation was replaced by shelling of
enemy centers of resistance, headquarters and batteries. The army's troops swiftly
completed breakthrough of the main defensive zone across the entire sector and
advanced to a depth of 10 km.

0n the following day the army's troops were compelled to repulse strong enemy
counterattacks, which led to some delay in exploiting penetration. The arny com-
mander engaged his support echelon: a division on the main axis of advance and a
rifle brigade to enlarge the breakthrough sector toward the right flank. By
evening they had succeeded in penetrating to a depth of 17 km and widening the
breakthrough sector to 50 km. Only on certain area, however, did the divisions
reach the second tone, which was defended by arrived enemy reserves. This made it
necessary to engage an additional division, handed over to the army from the front

reserve. Penetration of the tactical defense was not fully completed until the
third day.

The reasons for delay in breaking through the tactical zone of defense, in spite of
a highly successful beginning, were that the 40th Army had launched the attack
alone, a day before the general offensive, which drew operational reserves; as a
result of delayed arrival of the hth Tank Corp from the Southwestern Front, it was
without an exploitation echelon; it was seriously threatened by an exposed right
flank, which the commanding general was forced to secure by detailing substantial

43

FfHICHHﬂC1A1.lHﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forces. But the defeat in detail of the enemy's operational reserves within tac-
tical defensive depth opened up extensive opportunities for the troops of the 40th
Army to advance swiftly to the withdrawal routes of the main forces of the

Huzgarian 2d Army for the purpose of encircling it, which was completed on 18 January
19 3.

The troops of the 18th Independent Rifle Corps attacked on 14 January following a
2-hour artillery preparation. and broke through the main defensive zone on the

first day. The enemy, however, aware that Soviet troops were launching an attack
from the bridgehead in the Shchuch'ye area, moved up two divisions - a panzer and
an infantry division -- from the operational reserve against the corps. The
relative strengths equalized, and the corps advance was slowed for 3 days. Although
the corps proved unable to exploit the penetration on an independent axis, its ac-
tions played an important role in the overall course of the operation. Immobilizing
large enemy operational reserves, it prevented the ens-y from offering significant
opposition to exploitation of penetration on the axes of advance of the 60th and 3d
Tank armies.

The commanding general of the 3d Tank Army, receiving additional information on the
eneny, decided to extend artillery preparation to 90 minutes.1 This decision was
unquestionably correct. Mistakes made in the hasty planning of the artillery
bombardment, however, led to insufficient fire effect. In addition, a five-minute
lull occurred between the termination of artillery preparation and the attack,
enabling the enemy to recover and prepare to repel an assault. The supporting
tanks, which had become bogged down in a snow-choked ravine, were also delayed in
launching the assault. As a consequence of this the first assault was unsuccessful.
Undertaking new efforts, the rifle divisions with attached tanks were finally, after
3 hours, able to penetrate the defense to a depth of 1-3 km.

The commanding general of the 3d Tank Army was forced to engage his tank corps.
Their thrust decided the outcome of the breakthrough. By the end of the first day
they had penetrated the entire tactical zone of defense, eutstripping the infantry
by 6-8 km. The opened breach was 23 km deep and 10 km wide. The two right-flank
divisions, however, advanced Z-b km. Thus operational-tactical errors led to a
situation where the opportunity swiftly to penetrate the shattered defense was not
fully exploited.

The end results of the Oatrogozhshsk-Rossosh Operation proved substantial: the
Hungarian 2d Army, the Italian Alpine Corps, the German 24th Panzer Corps, and a
large part of the operational reserve forces of Army Group 3 had been routed; the
rail line had been captured on the stretch between Liski and Kantemirovka, which
was essential for the conduct of an operation to capture the Khar'kov industrial
area; a substantial area was liberated between Don and Oskol rivers. This
created favorable conditions for conducting the next operation -- the Voronezh-
Kastornoye.

This operation had many features which were similar to the Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh
Operation: the enemy was shattered to an even greater extent on the left flank of

the zone in which the new offensive was to develop; the enemy's defense ran along a
hastily occupied line, on bolstering which the enemy had expended all his reserves.

44

F03¢NHWC1AI.USE(MVLY
An influx of forces fron other sectors would be limited in the inediate future;
the Voronezh and Bryansk fronts were driving toward one another.

At 1300 hours on 21. January 1943, following a 30ainute preliminary artillery
bombardment, the loOth Amy launched the offensive. The ensny, who had been little
neutralized, proceeded to pour heavy artilleryaortar and nachinegun fire on the
advancing troops. Fighting along the arny's front sssueed a protracted and stubborn
character from the very beginning of the attack. The rifle divisions were able to
advance only in the center, penetrating 0.5-3 km by evening.

The loth Tank Corps, which was advancing in the attack echelon together with the
rifle divisions, was having success. In 2 heurs it advanced 6-8 kn, but took sub—
stantial casualties. That day it was unable to penetrate to operational depth.
Its total advance annexed to 16 kn instead of the planned 35 kl. Of all the rifle
divisions only one, exploiting the successful advance of the loth Tank Corps, ad-
vanced 5-6 kn. while the 2 rifle divisions and the brigade spent all day fighting
for the enemy's forward positions. As a consequence of this, coordination between
the tank corps and rifle combined units, which had been hastily organized in any
case, was disrupted, which was strongly reflected in exploitation to operational
depth. 0n the following day the troops advanced 10-18 km. It was only a lack of
fuel in the tank corps which prevented the capture of Kastornoye on 25 January.

Penetration assuned a protracted character in the 60th and 38th arsies. In the
13th Army, however, where superiority over the eneny was 6.7:1 in infantry, 9:1 in
artillery, and 5:1 in tanks, by 1500 hours the enemy's well-fortified defense was
penetrated to a depth of 6-7 kn, which acconplished the day's nission. This made it
possible to engage the army‘s nobile task force and two rifle divisions. By evening
on the second day the army had penetrated the eneay's defense to a depth of 20 kn
and had widened the breakthrough frontage to 25 Isl, which opened up the road to
Kastornoye.

The breakthroughs accosplished in the course of the Voronesh-Kastornoye Operation
and their erploitation to depth led to encirclsasnt and defeat in detail of more

than 11 enemy divisions, which created an operational breach about 160 km wide in
the eneny's defense. Together with the zones of advance of the 3d Tank Army and

the 18th Rifle Corps, the breakthrough frontage was about 300 kn.

During the ease days the offensive mounted by the forces of the Southwestern Front
into the Donbass and the Southern Front toward the. lower regions of the Don was

progressing well. The strategic breach in the enemy's defense was growing day by
day. By the beginning of February it amounted to 560 kn, and 900 kn including the
sector froa the Don to the Kuna, where snall anally forces were hastily retreating.

Collapse of the enemy's defense in the Southwestern Sector created favorable con-
ditions for further advance in the Western Sector and in the Northern Caucasus,
which made it possible to widen even taste the strategic breakthrOugh, exploitation
of which by seams of operational purusit could lead to even greater strategic
results. Unsuccessful actions by the Kalinin and Western fronts in mounting Opera-
tion "Hare," however, and the insufficiently decisive offensive by the troops of
the Transcaucasian Front nade it impossible, as noted, to reach the Deans and
Dnieper in the spring of 19103.

65

FOR omau. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The failures of these fronts were based on serious mistakes made in preparing for
and executing penetration.

The general plan of Operation "Mars" (Diagram 10) was as follows: the defense in

the area of the thev salient was to be split up by 8 thrusts munted by the western
Front and lo offensive thrusts by the Kslinin Front; wiping out the forces

defending this salient, they were to advance toward Smolensk. At the same time the

3d Assault Army of the Kalinin Front was fighting its way toward Velikiye Luki and
Novosokol'niki.

By virtue of the fact that a total of 13 battle groups were formed, the majority of
these, with the exception of the Zubtsov battle group of the Western Front and the
Olenino battle group of the Kalinin Front, were small in strength — two to three
divisions with a mechanized or tank corps. The great many separate offensive
thrusts, more than half of which were aimed at isnobilizing the opposing force. led
to a scattering of firepower. Althouﬁ: artillery densities were 70-85 and even 100
guns and mortars per km of breakthrough sector in some battle groups, half of these
weapons were mortars, which could deliver fire only on the first position.

Also unresolved was the problem of gaining the element of offensive surprise in con-
ditions when it was necessary to feign preparations for a large-scale operation,
in order to deceive the enemy regarding the main axis of advance in the campaign.

The offensive cosmenced in a snowstorm. As a consequence of poor visibility, ar-

tillery preparation produced poor results, especially in the breakthrough sectors
of the 20th and 31st armies.

Long before the operation cemented, the enemy pinpointed the deployment areas of the
battle groups, beefed up forces opposite them, especially artillery, and moved
operational reserves close to the flanks. When our artillery preparation began, the
enemy opened heavy return fire. The movement forward of infantry and tanks from a
distant assembly area was disorganized to a considerable degree, and coordination
at the moment of assault on the enemy forward positions was disrupted, for some
rifle submits were late or wandered off course in the snowstorm. Only certain sub-
units of the 31st Army's divisions succeeded in overrunning the enemy's front-line
trench.15 The regiments and divisions had nothing with which to exploit. It was
necessary to engage a division from the army's support echelon, which required con-
siderable time, during which the attack echelon divisions were under intensive
enemy artillery fire. "hen the fresh division was engaged, they poorly supported
its attack, and it advanced only 1 km.

0n the first day combined units of the 20th Army advanced from 1 to 3 km. The
holding forces advanced even less.

0n the second day the front com-and repeated artillery preparation, which resulted
in expending more amunition than was allocated for the entire operation.16 But

success was achieved only in the zone of one of the 20th Army's divisions. Here a
tank corps was engaged, mounting a headlong assault, smashing its way through to

the Rxhev-Sychevka rail line, and cutting it. Advancing without infantry support,
it lost 70 of its 120 tanks. Taking advantage of the gap which formed between the
6th Tank Corps and the rifle divisions, the enemy recaptured a number of villages.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Soviet col-land was unable on this and the following day to engage a cavalry
corps behind the tank corps. Finally on the night of 28 Member 2 cavalry
divisions drove through to the tank corps, but without driving open a breach
through which the successful advance of the entire army could be exploited. Cut

off from the Iain forces, they were subsequently comelled to take up partisan
actions.

Penetration was proceeding somewhat better on the Kalinin Front. Breaches were
driven into the defense to full tactical depth in the zones of the 22d and no:
armies. But this required engaging mechanized corps, for the armies' weak attack
echelons were unable to accomplish their assigned missions.

The 3d Mechanized Corps was engaged in the zone of advance of the 22d Army on the
second day of the operation, when the enemy's defense had not yet been broken, while
his operational reserves had just begun advancing toward the breakthrough sector.
This led to protracted fighting in the tactical zone of defense. The corps was
taking heavy casualties and advancing slowly. A rifle division, engaged from the

army reserve, failed to alter the operational situation on the 22d Army‘s axis of
advance. The penetration stalled.1

The let Mechanized Corps was engaged on the first day, when the offensive capabili-
ties of the lolst Army's attach-echelon combined units were still substantial. Re-
inforcing their offensive thrust, it completed penetration of the enemy‘s tactical
zone of defense and on the third day reached a depth of 33 km. It would be
dangerous to continue pushing the drive, for large enemy operational reserves

began to approach the exposed flanks and gaps which had formed between the mechanized
corps and the lagging rifle combined units.

The connander of the blst Army was unable to close the gaps with his weak reserve.
The enemy attacked through these gaps with 2 panaer divisions and l infantry divi-
sion and restored the situation.

Two more attempts were made in January to eliminate the thev salient, both without
success.

The enemy's failure to end 1942 with a decisive victory and his acknowledgement of
the inevitability of a protracted war forced him to shift to a static defense in
the Northwestern and Western sectors. Operations connected with penetrating this
defense indicated that in order to break through, massive delivery of firepower would
be required, achieved by establishing high artillery densities, improving the ac-

curacy of shelling, and by good coordination of movement of fire and combat forma-
tions.

Penetration of a static defense in depth also required that the attacking forces be
disposed in depth. The single-echelon formation of regiments and divisions,
mandated by People's Comaissar of Defense Order No 306, deprived advancing rifle
troops of the capability of exploiting through weakened sectors in the enemy's
defense and of building up the force of the offensive drive in order to achieve con-
tinuity of attack. In the course of the campaign the forces proceeded to dispose

the units and combined units in depth, A primarily single-echelon formation was
retained in the subunits.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFFKJALIEKZONIY

Tank and mechanized corps were a decisive means of developing tactical into opera-
tional penetration; the most advantageous moment to engage them was on completion of
breakthrough by infantry of the strongest defensive line - the first position, and
even better - enemy regimental defended areas. Their earlier engagement would lead
to considerable casualties.

Penetration of a less stable defense took place with lower troop densities. The
experience of operations indicated, however, that certain mistakes are inevitable
when preparing for penetration on a tight timetable, mistakes which lead to
diminished effectiveness of fire and coordination of troop actions. In order to
achieve definite penetration of defense and at an adequately rapid pace. troop
densities in breakthrough sectors should be close to those established when
penetrating a deliberate defense.

In the winter campaign of 1962/63 the element of surprise remained one of the most
important factors in preparing for and executing penetration both of a static
defense and an insufficiently developed enemy defense.

The diversified experience in penetration obtained in the course of this campaign
formed the basis of preparations for offensive operations in the summer-fall came
paign of 1963.

2. Penetration of a Static Defense in the Operations of the Summer-Fall Campaign
of 1943

By the summer of 1943, thanks to the selfless labor of the Soviet people, guided by
the Communist Party, output of war materiel had increased substantially. There was
also an appreciable increase in production of new military hardware. The numerical
strength of the army in the field had increased slightly in comparison with the
commencement of the preceding campaign - by 2b,000 men - but the number of guns
and mortars had increased by 28 percent, tanks and self-propelled guns by 26 per-
cent, and combat aircraft by 160 percent.

By the beginning of the campaign the transition by rifle troops over to corps or-
ganization was basically completed, which helped improve troop control and utiliza-
tion of troops in combat. Army and corps artillery were established. Breakthrough
artillery corps, gun artillery divisions, etc were formed in SEC Reserve artillery.
This greatly increased the capabilities of operational maneuver of large masses of
artillery and their concentration in breakthrough sectors.

Increase in the production of armored vehicles made it possible to form 5 new-or-
ganization tank armies and to increase the number of independent tank and
mechanized corps, independent tank brigades, tank and self-propelled artillery
regiments.

Following the defeat at Stalingrad and in the Caucasus, the German-fascist leaders
came to the conclusion that "there is no longer f possibility of bringing the war
in the East to an end by means of an offensive." 8 Having commenced preparations
for a large offensive in the area of the Kursk salient, they took all measures to
establish a strong defense along the entire Eastern Front. Hehrmacht headquarters

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operational Order No 5 of 13 March 1963 stated that "in some sectors of the front
the task boils down to wearing down the advancing enemy by attrition. Here we
should establish in advance a particularly strong defense, by employing heavy
weapons, improving fortification of positions, placing minefields where needed,
setting up rear-area strongpoints, establishing mobile reserves, etc."19

This order bolstered the German army's shift to a static defense disposed in depth,
as a rule consisting of two zones with two or three positions in each, fortified
with the extensive employment of fighting trenches, communicating trenches,

various obstacles, and solidly-constructed fighting bunkers and shelters.

At the end of 19b2 Soviet command authorities noted a trend on the part of the enemy
to shift from a centerbof-resistance type defense to a static defense and took
measures in advance which ensured successful penetration of such a defense. This
was expressed in purposeful guidance of qualitative and quantitative development of
weaponry, especially artillery, improvement in the organisational structure of
troops, and in methods of planning and executing penetration in operations and the
campaign as a whole.

In view of the fact that by the summer of l9b3 the Soviet Army did not yet possess
the capability to overwhelm the enemy simultaneously along the entire Soviet-German
front, the Soviet Supreme High Command, on the basis of a thorough analysis of the
military-political situation, proceeded to plan in advance a number of_sequential
operations on a wide front. This made it possible more extensively and purposefully
to maneuver reserves, especially SEC Reserve artillery, armored troops, air forces
and materiel, and to establish battle groups capable of smashing and breaking
through a static defense and exploiting each operation to considerable depth.

Hq SHC, having made the decision to exhaust the enemy in a deliberate and stubborn
defense in the area of the Kurek salient, made plans for a shift to a counterof-
fensive with the objective of routing the enemy's largest forces in the Orel,
Belgorod, and Khar'kov areas. After thie,oftensive operations were to be launched
to push toward the nnieper in the entire Southwestern as well as Western Sector.

In contrast to the two preceding Soviet offensive campaigns, the general plan of

the summer-fall campaign of 1963 clearly contained the idea of developing a number
of operational-tactical breakthroughs into strategic penetration, that is, formation
of a wide breach in the enemy's strategic front, in which mobile actions could be
undertaken by large forces and in order to close which the enemy would be forced to
bring in his strategic reserves and weaken other sectors of the front.

Advance planning of development of a number of operational-tactical breakthroughs
into strategic penetration signaled the beginning of a qualitatively new stage in
the evolution of penetration in Soviet art of warfare, which experienced its fullest
embodiment in the final campaigns of the Great Patriotic War.

Breakthrough in the counteroffeneive at Kurek. Hq SEC detailed large forces to con-
duct the counteroffensive: 132 rifle, 13 artillery, 3 mortar and 19 antiaircraft
artillery divisions, 17 tank corps and a large number of independent brigades,
regiments and battalions. Numerical strength totaled 1,396,000 nan, 19,100 guns,
and mortars, more than 3,600 tanks and self-propelled guns, and 2,172 aircraft.20

69

FIHICHWHCLMLIJ§B(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This comprised approximately 30 percent of the Soviet Army's total forces. They
were concentrated in a sector slightly exceeding 10 percent of the entire Soviet—
cerman front. Such a concentration of nen and weapons enabled the operational com-
mand authorities to establish powerful offensive forces and to choose decisive
forms of penetration and conduct of operations as a whole (Diagram 11).

The general plan of the Orel offensive operation called for mounting four powerful
attacks: from the north -- by the troops of the left side of the Western Front; fros
south -- by the troops of the Central Front with the aim of advancing west of Orel;
fron the east .. two splitting attacks by the nryansk Front directly toward Orel.

A different node of operational penetration was selected in the Belgorod—Khsr'kov
Operation; a powerful splitting attack, supplemented by several subsidiary attacks,
with the objective of splitting the opposing eneny force into two parts, en-
veloping and defeating the enemy in detail in the Khar'kov area.

By defeating in detail emy forces in the Orel salient and in the Khar'kov area, a
breacth to be forned in the enemy's strategic front, through which military ac-
tions cauld be pushed directly toward the Dnisper.

The importance of each operational sector in the strategic zone of advance pre-
detersined the composition of the battle groups. At the same time Bq SEC and the
col-sand authorities of the fronts determined the composition of each, to ensure that
it would be capable of successfully breaking through an enemy static defense dis-
posed in depth and of pushing the operation to the planned depth. Table 5 shows
the composition of the battle groups in the operations.

Table 5. Composition of the Battle Groups of the Fronts When Conencing the Counter-

1 offensive at Karel:2 3 ‘ 5 6 7
Battle Group Combined- Rifle Tank Indepen Air Artillery
Arms Divi- Armies dent 'x- Armies an Mortar -
00 -s Divisions :~

 

Orel Operation

Battle group on the

left side of the

Western Front (11th

Guards Army, 50th

Amy) 2 ll. 3 l 3 7 21
Main battle group of

the Bryansk Front

(63d and 3d armies) 2 12 |
Auxiliary battle grow ;

of the Bryansk Front

(61st Army) 1 6 I
Battle group of the

Central Front (68th,

13th, 70th armies.

2d Tank Army) 3 22 l 2 2 3 ll 16

* (excluding rifle division artillery regiments)

 

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 5 (cont'd)

 
    

Belgorod-Khar'kov
Operation

Main battle group of
Voronezh and Steppe
fronts (5th and 6th
Guards armies. 53d
Army, lst and 5th
Guards Tank armies)

Auxiliary battle group
of the Voronezh Front
(27th and 40th armies)

 

As is evident from the table, each battle group contained principally 2-3 combined-
arms armies, 1-2 tank armies, 1-3 tank corps, and from 2 to 4 artillery and mortar
divisions. Their operations were supported by one to two air armies.

In addition to these forces, Ho SHC specified that the following should be added to
the force groupings: to the left side of the Western Front -- a combined-arms army
and a tank army; to the Bryansk Front -- a tank army; to the main axis of advance
of the Voronezh Front - two combined-arms armies. Unfortunately the llth Combined-
Arms Army, the 3d Guards and bth Tank armies had not yet completed forming by the
commencement of the counteroffensive and joined the fronts while the operations were
in progress, which had a substantial effect on their development.

The power of the battle groups of the fronts was also increased because by the
summer of 1943 the combined-arms armies contained 2-3 and sometimes 4 rifle corps
and 7-12 rifle divisions instead of the 5-6 in the preceding campaign. They were
50-100 percent greater in numerical strength and equipment than armies without
corps organization, they were reinforced by 1-3 breakthrough artillery divisions,
by tank brigades and regiments, and were supported by large numbers of aircraft.
Tank armies were now of uniform composition. According to the table of organiza-
tion and equipment, they were to contain 800 tanks and self-propelled guns, and
approximately 700 guns and mortars. The strength of the battle groups was greater
than in the battle of Moscow, as follows: 50 percent in personnel, 360 percent in
guns and mortars. 500 percent in tanks, and 150 percent in aircraft. Battle groups

possessed 50 to 100 percent more equipment than in the counteroffensive at Stalin-
grad.

Powerful battle groups were formed by transferring troops to the fronts in advance
from sac Reserve, as well as by maneuver between fronts and armies. During prepara-
tions for the Belgorod-Khsr'kov Operation. for example, three breakthrough artil-
lery divisions and a rocket artillery division were transferred from the Bryensk
Front to the Voronesh and Steppe fronts. This made it possible to increase artil-
lery density by almost 20 percent in the 5th Guards, 27th and 53d armies.

The guns and mortars of rifle divisions in the support echelons, the artillery of
mobile groups and part of the artillery of armies operating on secondary axes began

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘DFTNCIAI.USE1MNLY

to be extensively employed in artillery preparation, in order to establish high
artillery densities in breakthrough sectors. In the breakthrough sector of the

5th Guards Army, for example, the artillery of the lat and 5th Guards Tank armies
and 6 artillery regiments from the divisions of the 60th army, which was to com-
aenCe the offensive 2 days later, were used for artillery preparation. In the
breakthrough sector of the 6th Guards Army, the artillery of the 5th and 10th Guards
Tank corps and 2 dhdsional regiments of the 27th Army were assigned to artillery
preparation, and in the breakthrough sector of the 53d Army of the Steppe Front -
the artillery of the let Mechanized Corps.”

The art of massing personnel and weapons on the most important area was raised to a
higher level in the oounteroffensive at Kursk. At Stalingrad average operational
density in the breakthrough sectors was as follows: 1 division for approximately

3 km of frontage, from 30 to 80 guns and mortars and from 12 to 17 tanks per km of
breakthrough Sean, Mile Inuit average operational density was as follows: 1 division
for every 1.6 km of frontage, 170-230 guns and mortars and 18-70 tanks and self-
propelled guns per km of breakthrough sector (Table 6).

Table 6. Average 05erational Densities During Penetration in the Counteroffensive
at Kurskz

 

      
     
 

Tanks SISSIf-
P
63? 3 kn

Entire Break-
Zone ‘
8.8

width of Width of
Zone of Break-

    

Front

nu per Rifle Guns and Hot-
aivision tars per km
u- Break- Entire Break-
V- through Zone through
Sector Sector
07 1.6

     

  
 
   
 

Western (left side) 60.1 183.1

Bryansk 1.9 .
Central .6 1.6 .
Voronezh l 9 70.0
Steppe 1 3 42.0

 

Relative strengths were increased sharply in favor of our forces by skilled massing
of men and equipment in breakthrough sectors, particularly by boldly weakening
secondary sectors.

Special attention in preparing for penetration was devoted to planning delivery of
fire on the enemy. In connection with the necessity of penetrating a static defense,
duration of artillery preparation in the Western Front was specified at 2 hours and
65 minutes, and at 2 hours and 50 minutes in the Voronezh Front. Depth of delivery
of massed artillery fire for effect on the defense ran 3-4 km. A moving barrage in
combination with sequential concentration of fire to the depth of the first posi-
tion in the enemy's defense began to be employed more frequently for supporting the
infantry and tank assault.

Our air power had increased by the summer of 1943. The advance of troops in the
Oral Operation was to be supported by more than 2000 aircraft of 3 air armies. The

voronezh and Steppe fronts had more than 1300 aircraft. In addition. 200 long-
rsnge bombers were assigned. In addition to quantitative growth of air power, air

52

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
efforts were being increasingly focused on supporting the advance of ground troops.
In the counteroffensive at Stalingrad 43.6 percent of all sortiea were employed for
this purpose, and 55.0 percent in the Oral Operation; 80-85 percent of all sorties
involved attacking targets in the enemy's tactical zone of defense.

Employment of air was planned in the form of an air offensive. Preliminary air-
strikes on the axes of advance of the battle groupswerevaried. On all fronts with
the exception of the Central Front, a large number of aircraft were assigned mis-
sions of mounting massive night strikes. Fifteen minutes prior to or immediately
before an attack, airstrikea would he delivered into the enemy's main defensive
zone.23 But the main efforts of the air armies were focused on supporting the ad-
vance of ground troops, which should be acknowledged as appropriate, for range of
artillery fire was insufficient to suppress targets at great depth, especially in
the course of an attack, when it became difficult to spot them from ground points.
The main targets of airstrikes in the course of an offensive included enemy person-
nel, artillery and tanks in the first and subsequent defensive zones, as well as
enemyreservesanving up toward the breakthrough sector.

The enemy's shift to a static defense dictated the necessity of somewhat reducing
the depth of combat missions. And the zones of advance were cut in half, which
helped increase tactical troop densities.

Rifle combined units formed up for the most part in two echelons, while regiments
formed in two and sometimes three echelons. Stronger artillery groups and

reserves were formed. Density of infantry-support tanks increased to 10-18 per km
of breakthrough frontage. Self-propelled artillery was included for the first time
in infantry-support tank groups; the self-propelled guns were to advance behind the
tanks and provide them fire support.

Mobile groups containing one or two tank corps were formed in the combined-arms
armies operating on the main axes for exploiting a tactical into an operational
breakthrough. Tank armies of uniform composition were first employed in the fronts
for this purpose. The Voronezh Front had two tank armies which, for the purpose of
maximum concentration of offensive tank power, were to be employed simultaneously
on a single axis, in the zone of a single combined-arms army.

Engagement of exploitation echelons was planned differently in each front and in
each army, taking account of the specific features of the enemy's defense and other
situation data. In the 11th Guards Army of the Western Front, for example, the

5th Tank Corps was to engage on the first day of the operation, after rifle combined
units had broken through the main defensive zone, while the 1st Tank Corps was to
engage on the second day. Subsequently the 25th Tank Corps as well - a reserve of
the commanding general of the front - was to be employed in this same army's zone.
In the 61st Army of the Bryansk Front it was decided to move the 20th Tank Corps in-
to the breach within tactical defense depth, while in the 63d Army the 1st Guards
Tank Corps was to be engaged following penetration through tactical defense depth.

0n the Voronezh Front it was decided to engage forward tank brigades - one from
each tank army forward—echelon tank (mechanized) corps (a total of approximately
200 tanks on a frontage of 10 km) -- in the area of the enemy's main artillery
positions in order to complete penetration of the main defensive zone. Hith the
support of specially designated artillery. acting in coordination with rifle

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

divisions, they were to penetrate the third position in the first defensive zone
and create favorable conditions for engaging the Iain forces of the corps. The main
forces of the tank armies were designated for penetrating the second defensive zone
withOut a halt and for offensive exploitation at inediate operational depth. It
was planned to engage the support echelons of the tank armies beyond the enemy's
army defensive zone.

Concentration of large masses of troops in the breakthrough sectors and the necessi-
ty of penetrating a well fortified static defense demanded particularly thorough or-
ganization of teamwork and cooperation. Reeatablishment of the corps headquarters
agencies facilitated this task at the army echelon. In organizing cooperation,
teamwork and coordination at all levels of command and control, principal attention
was focused on coordinating troop actions in taking up an attack position, con~
ducting preliminary artillery and air bombard-ant, and performance of combat mis-
sions by the troops. Coordination was organized most closely to the depth of
penetration of the main defensive zone.

Engineer support of penetration was in large measure organized in a new manner and
on a larger scale than in the past. As a rule attack positions would be provided
with an elaborate system of trenches. In connection with increase in density of
artificial obstacles in the enemy's defense, clearing of lanes through ninefields
became an important task of engineer troops. Usually two lgnea would be cleared
per rifle company and three to four lanes per tank brigade. 4 An important task of
engineer troops was preparation of routes for execution of troop redeployment and
maneuver, especially by tank combined units and units. Engineer subunits would be
incorporated into forward battalions, and would also be detailed for performing
special missions in the capture of particularly tough enemy installations.

Party-political work played an important part in preparing for penetration. The
victory at Stalingrad and liberation of considerable territory from enemy occupa-
tion was a good foundation for development of this work. The lull between campaigns
was utilized - regular political instruction classes and information sessions were
held. At these classes instructors would discuss the advantages of the socialist
state and the ever increasing capabilities of the Soviet Army, the enhanced interna-
tional prestige of the USSR, expansion of the struggle of peoples against fascism,
and deepening of the conflicts between fascist Germany and its satellites. Par-
ticularly extensive work was conducted with new troop replacements.

Extensive measures pertaining to concealment. deception and camouflage were con-
ducted in the armies of the Western and Brysnsk fronts in order to gain the element
of surprise. Preparations for penetration in the Sudzha area were feigned in the
voronezh Front. in an operational respect this offensive action looked convincing
and drew.the enemy's attention and forces. No less effective was accelerated
preparation to launch a counteroffensive in that sector where fierce defensive
battles had recently been fought. Hanstein wrote in his memoirs: "We were hoping
to smash the enemy sufficiently in the course of Operation Citadel so as to have a
breather on this front. This hopu subsequently proved fatal, however, for develop-
ment of the situation on the group's northern flank, since the enemy began the
offensive sooner than we expected."

The rapid shift from defense to a counteroffensive played an important role in
gaining the element of surprise, but only on those axes where powerful forces with

54
FORIOFFNJAI.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high troop densities had been established (Voronsah and Steppe fronts). The Central
Front, which had only 2 days to prepare for the offensive, was unable to establish a
strong battle group in a narrow sector of frontage, which affected penetration and
the operation as a whole.

In the Orel Operation the troops of the western and Bryansk fronts began penetration
early in the morning on 12 July, when the enemy was still attempting to achieve the
objectives specified in Operation Citadel. It was preceded by reconnaissance in
force by forward battalions, which the German-fascist command authorities assessed
as an unsuccessful attempt to keep available German reserves on the 0re1 salient
from being committed to the drive on Kurak and failed to take the necessary
preventive measures.

In the 11th Guard Army, as a result of considerable softening up of the enemy's
defense by heavy artillery preparation and airstrikes, in the course of which the
forward echelon of the enemy's 211th and 293d Infantry divisions sustained 50-

60 percent casualties, penetration began successfully, especially in the zone of
the 8th Guards Rifle Corps, where artillery density amoanted to 259.# guns, while
immediately prior to the assault phase a strike was delivered by 70 Pe-2 bombers.25
The attacking extended lines of riflemen closed the enemy to a distance of 150-200
meters while the final preparatory fire was still being delivered and, when fire
was shifted back to the second trench, attacked the forward positions, capturing
them without much enemy resistance (Diagram 12).

Attacking behind a moving barrage, the attack-echelon battalions of the regiments
of the 11th and 83d Guards Rifle divisions broke through three trenches of the first
position and penetrated 500-700 meters into the enemy's defense. When the moving
barrage was raised, the regiment's support echelons were engaged. The first posi-
tion was penetrated by 0830 hours. The regiments' third echelons were engaged to
add to the offensive effort. The corps commander engaged the 43d Tank Brigade --
the corps forward detachment.

While the 11th and 83d Guards Rifle divisions were immobilizing the enemy by fire
and assault in strongpoints east of Pochinok and Perestryazha, the 43d Tank Brigade
sliced into their point of juncture and advanced to a strongpoint in Otreshka, while
the rifle regiments reached the tactical approaches to the second position.

Artillery, part of which had changed gun positions, concentrated fire on the second
position, fortified as strongpoints. During the shelling, tanks and infantry ap-
proached these strongpoints and attacked when fire was shifted to depth. Following
stubbord fighting,the strongpoints in and to the east of Otreshka were captured by
the advancing combined units, and by 1200 hours they had reached the third position,
set up beyond the Pomins River.

The command authorities of the enemy's 293d Infantry Division, gathering remnants
of Subunits. launched counterattacks together with reserve units of the 53d Corps,
with artillery support, endeavoring to prevent penetration of the third position.
Heavy fighting erupted, especially in the zones of 11th and 31st Guards Rifle divi-
sions, which were forced to stand and repel counterattacks.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appreciable casualties were inflicted on the counterattacking enemy troops by

massed artillery fire and airstrikes, and by 1500 hours penetration of the third
position was completed at many points.

The commanding general of the 11th Guards Army gave the signal to engage the 5th
Tank Corps (136 tanks). Due to the fact that the roads were heavily damaged by ar-
tillery fire and the necessity of crossing two barriers of antitank obstacles and
the Polyanka River, the corps did not reach the deployment line forward of the
second defensive zone until 2000 hours, that is, 3-3.5 hours behind schedule.26
During this time the enemy had succeeded in bringing the main forces of the 5th
Panzer Division up to the second defensive zone and, together with retreated sub-
units of the 293d Infantry Division, organized a fairly solid defense. Two as-
saults on this defense, undertaken at 2030 and 2200 hours, resulted only in in-
significant advance by the corps and its neighboring units.

Thus the gap which occurred in building up efforts by the 5th Tank Corps prevented
penetration of the enemy's second defensive zone on the first day.

Redeployment of troops was accomplished during the night, and all artillery was
moved forward. But at dawn on 13 July the enemy once again mounted counterattacks
by groups of 15-30 tanks in the sector of the 8th Guards Rifle and 5th Tank Corps.
They were busy repelling these counterattacks up to 1200 hours. Thirty-four enemy
tanks were disabled, and large numbers of enemy personnel were killed. 7

The adjacent corps, engaging their support echelons - the lat and 84th Guards
Rifle Divisions -- during this time succeeded in penetrating deep into the enemy's
second defensive zone. The commander of the 8th Guards Rifle Corps concentrated
more than 250 guns in a 2.5 km sector and focused airstrikes on this sector as well.

The siaultaneous delivery of artillery fire and airstrikes by the 226th Air Assault
Division made it possible to shatter the enemy‘s resistance. He was able to hold
on for a certain time in the Staritsa strongpoint. But outflanking of this strong-
point by the 24th Tank Brigade of the 5th Tank Corps, the 63d Tank Brigade and
regiments of the 11th Guards Rifle Division hastened annihilation of the enemy in
this strongpoint. This opened up avenues to operational depth.

Penetration in the zone of the 61st Army was progressing'less successfully, chiefly
as a consequence of inadequate damage inflicted on the enemy during artillery
preparation and failure to follow the plan and schedule of support of the assault
phase. The divisions took 6-8 hours to penetrate the first position, and by evening
had advanced only 3-7 kr in a sector 12 km wide.

On the second day the commanding general of the army engaged a tank corps and two
rifle divisions from the support echelon to exploit penetration. But during the
night the enemy was able to move the 12th Panzer Division to Bolkhov from the Kursk~
Orel axis and to offer stubborn resistance to the troops which had resumed the at—
tack. In spite of the fact that artillery density was high in the sector where the
fresh forces were engaged (180-220 guns per km), they were unable to neutralize the
enemy. since the bulk of the artillery was delivering long-range fire from beyond
the aka River at inadequately reconnoitered targets. On 13 July the troops of the
olst Army, repelling enemy counterattacks. captured several centers of resistance,
but were unable to exploit penetration to depth.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On 15 July the commanding general of the army engaged another rifle division, his
reserve. but even this failed to result in a breakthrough. Redeployment of the
16th Artillery Division from the blst Army to the Voronezh Front greatly reduced
this army's artillery force. This made it even more difficult to break through the
tactical zone of defense, with penetration finally completed on 19 July, that is,
on the 8th day of the operation.

Troops of the 3d and 63d armies swiftly penetrated the first position. But sub-
sequently the advance slowed. The enemy began continuously bembing the troops,
especially of the 63d Army, and mounted several counterattacks.

Buildup of the offensive effort was hindered by the feet that a substantial pert of
the 3d Army's artillery and almost all its observation posts were sited on the high
bank of the Zusha River, far to the rear of the infantry combat formations and gun
positions of the batteries deployed on the bridgehead. This led to disruption of
coordination between artillery, infantry and tanks at the most critical moment in
the battle - during completion of penetration of the enemy's main defensive zone.
The greatest advance —- 6-7 km -- was achieved at the boundary of the 3d and 63d
armies. The advance ran 3-4 km on the remainder of the front.28

During the night the enemy succeeded in moving up to the breakthrough sector the
36th Infantry Division and forward units of the 8th Panzer Division. By mounting
strong counterattacks, with the support of large numbers of aircraft, on 13 July
they attempted not only to halt the advance of Our forces but also to drive them
back to their initial position. Massive fire delivered by the 2d Breakthrough Ar-
tillery Corps and airstrihes by the 15th Air Army succeeded in thwarting the enemy's
plans. Combined units of the 3d and 63d armies resumed the advance and, capturing
several strong centers of resistance, created conditions for engagement of the lat
Guards Tank Corps. But the enemy. discovering the advance of this corps to the
deployment line. mounted airstrikes on its tanks. Engagement of the mobile group
was delayed until the afternoon. By this time the enemy's 8th Panzer Divsion had
in its entirety reached the breakthrOugh sector and had closed the gap. They were
unable to increase the rate of advance, but nevertheless by evening the enemy‘s
secondzgefensive zone was penetrated. The gap was 25 km in frontage and 15 km in
depth.

The troops of the Central Front consented the offensive on 15 July. The limited
time available for preparing for the operation made it impossible to displace the
attack away from the main enemy force, which had just stopped its advance and still
had very dense combat formations. The force of delivery of fire, along a wide
frontage, proved to be much less than that required by the situation conditions.

As a consequence of this the armies on the right side of the front “advanced slow-
ly, overcoming the stubborn resistance of the Hitleritea, who were skillfully
utilizing their well fortified positions.... Now and then the enemy would counter-
attack with panzer troops, and he had plenty of these left."30

The commanding general of the front engaged the 2d Tank Army to accomplish penetra-
tion. Engaging the enemy within his first positions, it took substantial casual-
ties, but was unable to smash a gap in the enemy's defense.

Thus penetration of the enemy's tactical zone of defense in the Orel Operatic: was
successfully completed by the end of the second day of the offensive only on the

57

NOR OFFIClAl.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOI(HﬂHC1Al.USE(MVEV

axes of the main battle groups of the western and Bryansk fronts. Opportunities
to exploit tactical into operational penetration developed precisely on these axes.

The Western Front had two additional tank corps at its disposal for accomplishing
this mission (one was an element of the llth Guards Army, and the other was in the
front's reserve). In addition, ﬂq SHC was planning to assign to the front, ef-
fective 18 July, the kth Tank Army, which was completing formation in the Moscow
area. TheBryansk.Front had no reserve mobile combined units, and the 3d Guards

Tank Army, which had been forming in the vicinity of Plavsk, was assigned to it
effective 16 July.

The commanding general of the llth Guards Army, as soon as penetration of the enemy's
second defensive zone was completed. engaged on 13 July the 1st Tank Corps with a
support-echelon division of the 16th Rifle Corps. An offensive thrust by the two
tank corps and rifle division, with artillery and air support, enabled them to ad-
vance 25 km. They still were unable, however, to obtain freedom to maneuver. The
enemy moved up three panzer divisions and a motorized division to the gap which had
been opened. Intensive fighting raged. 0n the following day the enemy was finally
forced to begin a withdrawal. The conditions were right for further offensive
exploitation. But the tank corps had sustained losses and no longer possessed the
necessary striking power for independent actions at operational depth.

On 18 July, that is, on the seventh day of the operation, the 25th Tank Corps froa
the front's reserve was engaged. It was successful in its exploitation efforts.
Depth of penetration was increased to 70 km. One brigade had even reached Khotynets
Station on the Oral-Bryansk rail line. As a result of an enemy counterattack, how-
ever, this brigade withdrew toward the corps main forces. The army lacked the
forces to cut the rail line. Its zone of advance had widened to 150 km. By moving
reserves to the most seriously-threatened sector, the enemy equalized forces and
even mounted a number of counterattacks to rout forward units of the 25th Tank
Corps. Engagement of fresh forces was necessary in order to build up efforts and
reach operational depth.

On 18 July Hq SHC assigned the 4th Tank Army to the Western Front. It could not
take the line before 24 July, that is, on the 13th day of the operation, with
great delay, when the llth Guards Army could conduct aggressive actions only with
two divisions, since the tank corps had sustained heavy losses in combat with enemy
tanks. The adversary, exploiting the lull in the action, strengthened his defen-
sive positions. Therefore the 4th Tank Army would not be entering a breach as
planned, but would be commencing combat actions with penetration of a new enemy
defensive line.

On the first day of the offensive it was supposed to smash enemy resistance in a
sector 14 km west of Bolkhov and to advance 50-60 km to the south of it.31 Only
24 hours were given to prepare for executing the breakthrough. Due to the limited
time available, coordination was not properly organized. Artillery was not con-
centrated in the sector where the tank corps engaged. The tank brigades received
their mission assignments late in the evening and did not have time to make the
necessary preparations for the attack. As a result of all this the tank army, en-
gaging the enemy on 26 July, was only able to advance 2—4 km by evening. Nor did
the second day of the offensive produce the desired results. Finally on the third

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
day the army forced the enemy to begin a withdrawal. however, as a consequence of
the fact that the army had not succeeded in penetrating to full depth of the enemy's
tactical order of battle, he was able to carry out an orderly withdrawal, by bounds,
6-8 km per day.32

On the first few days in August the 6th Tank Army assigned at the end of July to the
Bryansk Front, sttenpted to break through to the Orel-Bryansk rail line near
Khotynets. the approaches to which were defended by a particularly strong eneny
force, which had previously been applying pressure on the troops of the llth Guards
Army. Penetration on this line was to be initiated by divisions of the 11th Guards
Amy, while the 4th Tank Army was to enter the gap for offensive exploitation.

0n 6 August the 11th Guards Army, following artillery preparation, advanced 3 kn in-
to the defense by 1300 hours. It was unable to push the advance further, since its
combined units no longer possessed the necessary striking power. But the comanding
general of the loth Tank Army waited until 1530 hours to order the 30th Urals
Volunteer Tank Corps to enter the gap. The delay in engaging this tank corps
prevented a continuous offensive drive of increasing force. The tank corps offensive
thrust was delayed, and engagement of other tank corps proved difficult in the
forested terrain. 0n the first day the tank aray advanced 4 kn, 5 Inn on the second,
and on 8 August it advanced 16-16 km, but was halted in front of a new defensive
line to which the enemy had withdrawn his forces. After penetration of this line
the army was delayed in front of the third line, and therefore was unable to break
through to operational depth.

Assessing attempts to develop tactical into operational penetration by the forces
of the 4th Tank Army, which had just completed formation and therefore was insuf-
ficiently smooth and coordinated, one must agree with the view of Her 1. Kb.
Bagramyan, at that time in cox-hand of the llth Guards Army, that it would have been
more advisable to engage it not on the approaches to Bolkhov, where the eneny had
a very strong, fortified defense, but toward [(hotynets,33 where the defense was dis-
rupted to its entire depth. At this point, even with an independent breakthrough
of the defensive line at the end of July, it could have penetrated to operational
depth and thwarted the enemy's plans of executing an orderly withdrawal to a
prepared defensive line to the rear.

The 3d Guards Tank Army, assigned to the Bryansk Front on 16 July, arrived in the
concentration area toward evening of the following day, having completed a 150

kilometer march. By this time the enemy had withdrawn to a well-fortified defensive
line along the Oleshnya River, while the offensive capabilities of the 63d and 3d
armies were already significantly reduced.

The 3d Tank Army also had 24 hours to prepare for the operation. As s. H. Shtemenko
testifies, in transferring the 3d Guards Tank Army to the Bryansk Wont, the
Supreme Comander reconnended that it be engaged "as quickly as possible, in order
to prevent the enemy from consolidating."3‘

But this decision inadequately took into account the enemy’s capability to organize
a defense on new but previously prepared defensive lines, along which the eneny

had merely to deploy his troops in their designated areas and to organize a fire
plan. This required 24 hours or less, while the tank divisions needed several hours.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

Therefore the attacking force gained little by seeking to break through such lines
with limited time to prepare for an offensive, but it lost a good deal. Poor or-
ganization of combat actions sharply diminished their combat capabilities, which in
the final analysis predetermined either a slow advance or total failure.

A breakthrough sector with a frontage of 16 km was selected for the 3d Guards Tank
Army. The following densities were to be established in this sector: guns and
mortars -- 1.3, and tedc -- 50. The enemy also had high densities in this sector:
35 guns and mortars, and 10 tanks. In addition, spotting the advance of the tank

army, the enemy called in large numbers of aircraft to attack it, flying 1000
sorties on 19 July.35

with these relative strengths, when the enemy's defense had been poorly recon-
noitered, the offensive had been organized hastily, and the element of surprise was
lacking, one could hardly count on rapid penetration. In spite of the high tank
operational densities, the 3d Guards Tank Army advanced 7-10 km that day, and 20 km
only 32 the southwestern axis. Its corps, however, were unable to reach the Optukha
River before the enemy had taken up a defensive poaition thee , and therefore were
unable to break thrOugh to operational depth.

Unquestionably another element in play here was the fact that liq SEC, receiving
information from the comand authorities of the Bryansk Front that the enemy had
begun withdrawing the htsmsk force toward Orel and that the path of advance of the
3d Guards Tank Army westward was blocked by strong enemy resistance, issued an
order to the comanding general of the Bryansk Front at 0200 hours on 20 July to
change the direction of sdvmce of the 3d Guards Tank Army and to initiate an at-
tack on the morning of 20 July with the objective of routing the Htsenak force.

Between 19 July and 10 August the 3d Guards Tank Army made seven attempts to break
thrOugh the enemy's defense and penetrate to operational depth, but was unable to
obtain maneuvering room. Advancing slowly and penetrating the defense like in-
fantry, it sustained heavy losses, while achieving limited operational results.
During the Orel Operation the army lost 60.3 percent of its T-3lo tanks and 72.9 per-
cent of its T-70 tanks.37 The army's battleworthiness was substantially diminished,38
and on 11 August it was withdrawn into the an sac Reserve in order to be rebuilt to
strength.

The experience of engaging tank combined units and fomations on the Western and
Bryansk fronts indicated that, without executing expeditious and continuous buildup
of offensive power to depth, it is difficult to achieve swift development of tac-
tical into operational penetration; employment of a tank army independently to break
through a prior fortified enemy defense, without adequate delivery of firepower, led
to heavy losses, in connection with which the front's forces were deprived on a
powerful means of offensive exploitation.

The initial experience gained in employing tank armies of the new organizational con-
figuration was taken into consideration in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation.

Penetration of the enemy's defense in the Belgorod-ldlar'kov Operation began on
3 August (Diagram 13). On the eve of this operation, just as in the Orel Operation,
reconnaissance in force was conducted with forward battalions, which confirmed that

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the enemy was strongly defending in the previous positions. Artillery preparation
began at 0500. The aircraft of two air armies mounted heavy airstrikes on the
enemy. As a result of the massive artillery preparation and airstrikes, the enemy
sustained heavy casualties, and his norale was shattered. Bis artillery was well
suppressed.

Infantry and infantry—supporting tanks, launching an attack with the support of a
noving barrage, within 2 hours had captured the entire first position and had ad-
vanced to a depth of 1.5-2 kn. One seat acknowledge that the rate of advance in the
attack, which was 1 kn per hour with aassive neutralization of the eneny's defense,
was insufficient. The reason was that the moving barrage was provided prinarily by
sac Reserve artillery, conunications and coordination with which were handled
through several echelons of caused, as a consequence of which shifting of fire was
delayed and the attack was conducted at a slowed pace.

Enemy resistance increased as our troops advanced deeper, but sequential engagement
of support echelons made it possible to build up the force of the attack. In a
period of 5 hours the troops advanced to a depth of 4-5 In on the Iain axes of the
fronts, breaking through two positions, and reaching the enemy‘s nain artillery
position area. Here the advance of the combined-ares conbined unite began to slow.
Due to insufficient long-range artillery. the third position proved to be little-
neutrslized. In addition, the effect of suppression and neutralization had es-
sentially disappeared 5 hours after artillery preparation had terainated. There
was a shortage of weapons which could reliably neutralize during penetration enemy
reserves occupying the third position, since a large percentage of the artillery
had begun changing position and could not support the advancing troops with asseed
fire with the previous density. The snall number of infantry-supporting tanks,
which in addition had taken losses, could not nake up for the inadequate fire
delivered by artillerys which by this tine had expanded 73 percent of the day's
anunition allocation. 9 In this situation a decisive role in conpleting penetra-
tion of the main defensive zone was played by the forward tank brigades of the let
and 5th Guards Tank arnies.

They proceeded to advance when the attack consnced. At 1200-1300 hours they en-
gaged and, together with the rifle divisions, completed penetration of the eneny's
main defensive zone. There was a possibility of advancing swiftly to the second
zone and breaking through it without a halt. But the 200th Tank Brigade of the
1st Tank Arny, which was operating in the zone of the 66th and 97th Guards Rifle
divisions, which lacked close-support tasks, was unable to outpace then, as it was
advancing for the most part through villages. The 69th Tank brigade was operating
in the zone of the 13th Guards Rifle Division, which was supported by the 93d In-
dependent Tank Brigade. After comleting penetration of the aain defensive zone,
it could proceed swiftly toward the second zone, which for the present was weakly
defended by arriving eneny reserves. Ignorant of the situation, however, the con-
nsnder of the 69th Tank Brigade could not leaks such a decision. Thus a favorable
mount for penetration of the eneny's second defensive zone without a halt on the
axis of the lat Tank Amy was not utilized by the forward tank brigades, and ad-
vance to the point of engagement of the train forces of the forward-echelon corps
was delayed.

61

FORMING“?
lNlltlﬂﬂClAl.USI¢l‘LY

The corps of the 1st Tank Army were advancing in a zone only 3-4 km wide, which per-
mitted only one route per corps. 0n approaching the forward edge of the battle
area, they would have to cross the narrow (5-7 meters), but with a swampy floodplain,
Vorskla River, spanned by five bridges. But since approaches to the bridges had not
been constructed, they were so damaged following passage of the forward brigaies that
the rate of advance of the corps dropped from 15 to 2 km per hour. The attack-
echelon tank brigades reached the line of the advancing troops as evening was fall-
ing rather than at the scheduled 1500 hours. The loss of 5 hours of time permitted
the enemy to occupy the second defensive zone with the forces of the 6th and 11th
ﬁnzrdivisions, which in the final analysis led to incomplete accomplishment of the
missions of the first day of the offensive. Finally at dawn on 4 August the 1st
Tank Brigade of the 3d Mechanized Corps succeeded in breaking through the second
zone at a weak point. thus creating conditions for offensive exploitation to opera-
tional depth.

0n the axis of advance of the 5th Guards Tank Army, the achieved continuity of
penetration exploitation produced results which were excellent for 1943. The for-
ward tank brigades of its corps, overtaking the rifle units, swiftly made their

way across the first defensive zone. The main forces of the tank corps broke
through the second defensive tone without a halt and had reached a depth of 20-26 km
by 1800 hours. It is true that the main forces of the 18th Tank Corps, due to the
fact that the troops of the 53d Army had fallen behind, had to be deployed to

repel enemy attacks from the east, which subsequently affected the assault on
strongpoints in the enemy's army defensive zone. As a consequence of weak artillery
support and employment only of frontal attack, they were unable to take these
strongpoints, which led to certain failure to achieve the day's objective and
affected offensive exploitation at operational depth. Thus in the Belgorod-
Khar'kov Operation, on the main axis of advance they were able to break through.the
solidly defended tactical zone by the end of the first 26 hours and to reach the
army defensive zone, although in a narrow sector. This created conditions for
offensive exploitation to operational depth. But involvement of the 6th Tank Corps
in frontal attacks to capture Tomarovka and the necessity of assisting the 53d

Army of the Steppe Front and supporting the flank of the 5th Guards Tank Army
against a threat of counterthrust by an enemy panzer division made it impossible to
reach operational depth on 6 August. On that day the army defensive line was
reached only by the 3d Mechanized Corps of the 1st Tank Army. It was not penetrated
until 5 August.

Penetration of the army defensive zone, defeat in detail of the enemy's Tonarovka
force, and offensive exploitation by the 27th and b0th armies, reinforced by three
tank corps, opened up an operational breach in the enemy's defense on the Bogodukhov
axis, to close which the enemy lacked sufficient forces. By evening on 7 August

our forces' breakthrough frontage had widened to 120 km. The tank armies advanced
to a depth of 100 km. and the combined-arms armies to 60-65 km.

nificant changes took place in its preparation and execution. The numerical

strength of the battle groups was increased, as were the troop densities and reliabil-
ity of delivery of effective fire on the enem . A deep tactical order of battle made
it possible continuously to build up offensive power and to conduct penetration at

an increasingly more rapid pace, with immediate development of tactical into opera-
tional penetration.
The modes of penetrating a deliberate defense employed by the Soviet troops, where-
by the defense was softened up with heavy artillery fire and sirstrikes. while
penetration was begun by rifle troops, with subsequent engagement of tank and
aechanized combined units and formations, echelon by echelon, proved to be
muchmnre effective than the unoriginal method employed by the Bitlerite army, ac-
cording to which penetration of the defense was assigned primarily to panzer corps,
which would form armored spearheads. In Operation Citadel, for example, the 9th
Army of Army Group Center, in penetrating a defense which had been in preparation
for a period of 2.5-3 months, was able to penetrate only 12 km in seven days, while
the llth Guards Army of the Western Front was forced to penetrate a defense in
which improvements had been in progress for more than a year. On the very first
day of the offensive it broke through the main defensive zone, on the following day
the entire tactical zone of defense, and opened a breach 25 km deep and 28 km wide.
In seven days it advanced to a depth of 70 km, or 6 times deeper than the enemy had
been able to penetrate.

0n the southern flank of the Kursk salient penetration of our defense was being con-
ducted by the enemy's 4th Panzer Army. In the first 26 hours it only broke through
the main defensive zone, while the battle group of the Voronezh Front penetrated two
zones. The 6th Panzer Army achieved this result only by the fourth day of the
operation. By this time the troops of the Voronezh and Steppe fronts had opened an
operational breach approxilately 90 km deep and more than 100 km wide.

The majority of fronts taking part in the counteroffensivs succeeded in opening up
deep operational breaches, but an insufficiently rapid rate of advance at immediate
operational depth prevented them from exploiting the breakthroughs without a halt,
in order to link them up into a single front and interfront breakthrough, which
would have provided optimal conditions for the troops to advance to operational
depth and for development of a series of operational penetrations into a single
strategic breakthrough.

Improvement of the art of penetration in general offensive exploitation in the

course of a campaign. The actions of the 60th Army of the Central Front at the
end of August 19k3 are an instructive example of penetration of the defense in

these conditions (Diagram 14).

Development of the Orel Operation led to the retreat of enemy troops opposite the
Bryansk and right side of the Central fronts to defensive position Hagen, which con-
tained three to four trench lines and a large number of solid weapon emplacements.
The front situation remained unchanged ahead of the 60th Army. The enemy's

defense opposite this army had been in preparation since March 1963 and was more
strongly fortified than the defense opposite the front's other armies.

On 16 August Hq SEC, having made the decision to launch a general offensive, as-
signed to the Central Front the mission of attacking in the general direction of
Sevsk-Hikhaylovskiy Farm, and subsequently toward Kiev. The main force grouping

of the Central Front, consisting of the 68th, 65th, and 2d Tank armies, was to
penetrate the defense in a 25 km sector and, exploiting, cross the Desna River with-
out a halt. The 60th Army was to penetrate in a separate sector 10 km wide, at a
distance of 15 km from the sector of the front's main force grouping.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ten days were allocated for preparing for the operation. Preparations for the at-

tack on the front's main axis were conducted hastily and without strict observance

of concealment, camouflage and deception measures. In addition, in connection with
postponement of the timetable of the offensive, the force grouping which was stand-
ing in attack position for the offensive was for five days in sight of the enemy,

who determined the front's main axis of advance and redeployed from less threatened
sectors the main forces of the 2d Army - five of eight divisions.‘°

The enemy's defensive front in the zone of the 60th Army proved to be considerably
weakened. In the sector where penetration was to be accomplished, somewhat more
than a regiment-size enemy force was defending, and most of its subunits had been
stretched out along the forward edge of the bottle area. The commanding general of
the army deployed in the breakthrough sect¢>r the 24th Rifle Corps, two tank
brigades, a breakthrough artillery division, and army artillery. This provided
only moderate tactical densities: 2.1 rifle battalions, 6 tanks, and 90 guns and
mortars per kilometer of frontage.61

In preparing for the operation, the commanding general of the army took measures
to achieve undetected concentration of troops. His staff worked out and executed a
plan of concealment, camouflage, deception and disinformation measures. which in-
cluded feinting actions on the army's left flank in order to give the enemy the im-
pression that preparations were being made for an offensive in that sector."2

The troops of the Central Front commenced the offensive on 26 August. 0n the main
axis the enemy, who was prepared to repel an attack, offered stubborn resistance
to the troops of the 68th and 65th armies, resulting in failure to exploit to
depth.

Within 24 hours the 60th Army had broken thrOugh the main defensive zone and had
advanced to the second zone. 0n the morning of the second day the army's support
echelon was engaged -- the 17th Guards Rifle Corps and the 9th Tank Corps. which had
been placed at the disposal of the army commander. In spite of the limited capabil-
ities of these combined units. which had taken casualties in preceding defensive en-
gagements, the troops of the 60th Army succeeded in quickly breaking through the
second defensive zone and reaching operational depth, where the enemy no longer had
reserves.

The conmmnding general of the front, taking advantage of the successful advance of
the 60th army, redeployed the 13th, 2d Tank and 61st armies into 1:3 zone.“3 with-
in five days the breakthrough gap had been widened to 100 km and depth of penetra-
tion had reached 60 km. Thus success in breaking through the enemy's front was
determined not only by the power of the offensive thrust but also by skill, that is,
an unexpected attack into a vulnerable point with subsequent buildup of efforts by
engaging the support echelon and troopsredsployed from other sectors.

Fearing a flank attack in the southern and southwestern sectors, the enemy began
withdrawing his troops opposite the Voronezh Front from the Sumy area. Advance of

the Voronezh and Steppe fronts in turn presented a threat of deep envelopment of
the strong enemy force in the Donbass.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The troops of the Southern Front broke through a deliberate defense on the Mius
River and, attacking the troops of the German 6th Army in the rear, defeated them
in detail, which sharply weakened the enemy's southern flank.

The stability of the enemy's strategic front was weakening day by day. The
German-fascist command authorities, realizing that it was impossible to hold the
Left-Bank Ukraine, hastened to withdraw their troops beyond the Dnieper, in order
to prevent their total defeat.

In order to disrupt the enemy's strategic front and to accomplish a hasty crossing
of the Dnieper, the Soviet command authorities reinforced the troops of the Central.
Voronezh and Steppe fronts with three combined-arms armies and a tank army. The
pace of pursuit of the enemy was stepped up. On the tactical approaches to the
Dnieper several gaps were formed in the enemy's front, exploitation in which would
make it possible to achieve strategic penetration. But the wide Dnieper lay in

the path of the Soviet forces. It delayed their advance by 6-8 days, which

enabled the enemy to set up a defensive front beyond the river and to avoid
strategic penetration.

One of the reasons why strategic penetration was not achieved on the far approaches
to the Dnieper is the following: during the fighting on the Kursk salient the tank
armies had sustained heavy losses and were unable to chop up the enemy's front so
as to beat the enemy to the river and envelop large forces on its left bank. But
nevertheless, even in these unfavorable conditions, our troops succeeded in seizing
a number of bridgeheads on the right bank of the Dnieper, thus thwarting the enemy's
plan to establish an impregnable eastern wall.

The experience in penetrating a static defents which was amassed in the course of
the summer offensive of 1943 was vividly embodied in the Kiev offensive operation.
The general plan of the operation called for an offensive thrust by the troops of
the 38th, 60th, and 3d Guards Tank armies and the let Guards Cavalry Corps from the
Lyutezhskiy bridgehead in a southwesterly direction (Diagram 15). The 3d Guards
Tank Army and the let Guards Cavalry Corps comprised the front' s mobile group,

which was to enter the gap on the second day of the operation in the zone of the
38th Army.

The 38th Army contained 4 rifle corps and was reinforced by the 5th Tank and 7th

Artillery Corps. The 60th Army was given a breakthrough artillery division and
other reinforcing units.

Defending opposite them were 12 infantry and 2 panser divisions from the 30 divi-
sions opposing the First Ukrainian Front, that is, almost half their strength. This
enabled the enemy to have a division every 6-5 km and 18-60 guns per kilometer of
defense frontage, which consisted of a system of powerful strongpoints linked by
trenches. The depth of the defense was 16-15 km.

The armies were disposed in two echelons. In the forward echelon the 38th army

would be attacking with 2 rifle corps reinforced by 2 tank brigades of a tank
corps and an independent tank regiment, and in the support echelon -- also 2 rifle
corps. In addition, a mobile group was formed in the army of the remaining forces
of the 5th Tank Corps. The powerful attack echelon and army mobile group were to

65

FOR1DFFKJAL.USE(MQLY
INJR O!11C1Al.lﬂSEICNNLY

penetrate the enemy's tactical zone of defense, and the army's support echelon and
front mobile group would be utilized for offensive exploitation to operational

depth.

Three rifle corps and a rifle division were advancing in the 60th Army's forward
echelon, and 2 rifle divisions and a tank brigade in the support echelon.

In order to establish high troop densities, the commanding generals of the armies
narrowed the breakthrough sectors to the maximum possible extent. In the 38th Army
it was 6 km, and 13 km in the 60th. In these sectors 2 rifle corps advanced in the
forward operational echelon, Supported by the bulk of the artillery. This made it
possible to establish high troop densities in the 38th Army, comprising 9 battalions,
380 guns and mortars, and approximately 20 close-support tanks (including the army
mobile group) per kilometer of breakthrough sector. Operational density of tanks
amounted to 70 tanks and self-propelled guns. In the breakthrough sector of the
50th Rifle Corps artillery density ran #16 guns and mortars per kilometer. This was
the highest artillery density achieved up to this tile in the offensive operations
of the Great Patriotic War.“

Troop densities were much lower in the 60th Army. while they were almost equal in
infantry, in artillery on the main axis they comprised only 76 guns and mortars per
kilometer of frontage.’°s Overall density of tanks on the main axis was only 10-12
per kilometer.

The armies' offensive was supported by all forces of the 2d Air Army.

Decisive massing of personnel and weapons made it possible to achieve a substantial
superiority over the enemy, which in the 38th Army's breakthrough sector was 3:1 in
infantry, 4.5:1 in artillery, and 9:1 in tanks.“

Gaining the element of surprise was also of considerable importance. Preparations
for the breakthrough proceeded with strict observance of camouflage, concealment

and deception measures. Redeployment of the 3d Guards Tank Army and the 7th Break-
through Artillery Corps from the Bukrinskiy to the Lyutezhskiy bridgehead, which en-
sured the element of offensive surprise, was executed skillfully. 0n the eve of
this offensive drive the 27th and 40th armies were to attack from the Bukrinskiy
bridgehead, diverting attention to themselves and immobilizing the enemy's forces.

Penetration of the enemy's defense began on 3 November with heavy artillery prepara—
tion lasting 60 minutes. No preliminary airstrike sorties were flown due to dense
fog. The effectiveness of artillery preparation was so great that infantry and
tanks advanced unopposed to a depth of 2 km. Only a few batteries of the enemy's
numerOus artillery were able to open fire.

The enemy, seeing that our troops were threatening to break through to Kiev, which
was only 10 kilometers away, began hastily moving reserves up to the breakthrough
sector. That afternoon the 8th Panzer Division appeared opposite the 60th Army,
and the 7th Panzer and 20th Motorized divisions in the zone of 38th Army. This
delayed the army's advance, but nevertheless by evening the troops had advanced to
a depth of 7-12 km.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At 2030 hours on 3 November ﬂq SEC, in a telegram addressed to the commanding
general of the front, demanded that the initiated operation "not be allowed to

drag out, since each additional day merely gives an advantage to the enemy, enabling
him to concentrate his forces in this sector, utilizing good roads, while on our
side of the front the enemy-demolished roads complicate and limit maneuver." liq SHC
ordered that roads leading to Kiev be cut, and that the city of Kiev be captured no
later than 5-6 November. "Hake sacrifices to accomplish this mission, bearing in
mind that these losses will be many times fewer than those which will occur if the
operation drags on."

The front‘s troops resumed the offensive at 1000 hours on 4 November. The enemy met
the troops of the 38th Army with counterattacks. Engagement of the army's mobile
group, followed by the 3d Guards Tank Army made it possible to achieve a break in
the penetration effort and to advance to a depth of from 3 to 5-6 km. The break-
through was completed that night, when the 3d Guards Tank Army, supported by com-
bined units of the 38th Army, attacked with headlights on. This stunned the enemy,
and he began a hasty retreat. Exploiting, the armies' combined units out the
Zhitomir highway, which ensured the prompt liberation of Kiev.

0n 5 November the 60th Army also completed the breakthrough. Kiev was liberated
the following day. The front's troops had penetrated 150 km by the end of the
operation. They had succeeded in establishing a bridgehead of strategic signif-
icance on the Dnieper, which played a decisive role in the liberation of the Right-
Bank Ukraine.

**t

In the summer-fall campaign of 1963 the Soviet forces had the task of penetrating
a static defense in depth, which was highly stable. Breaking open a gap in such a
defense required the forming of large battle groups, high troop densities, and a
6-10-fold superiority over the enemy in the breakthrough sectors, as well as
thorough organization of the combat operations of the troops participating in the
penetration.

An important area in development of the art of penetration was a steadily increas-
ing massing of men and weapons in the selected sectors. In the first period of the
war penetration in one sector was as a rule accomplished by the forces of a single
army. containing 5-7 divisions, while in the second period, especially in the

' summer-fall campaign of 1943, for the most part the efforts of 2-3 combined-arms
armies (15-20 divisions), l-2 tank armies (or 2-3 tank corps), as much as a break-
through artillery corps, with the support of an air army, were concentrated in a
single breakthrough sector or more than one sector located close to one another.
This quantity of men -wd weapons provided the required superiority over the enemy
and high troop densities, which made it possible to deliver massive, effective fire
on the enemy's defense and sequentially to build up efforts not only in the ocurse
of penetration but during exploitation to considerable depth.

In the summer-fall campai.n of 1963, just as in the second period of the war as a
whole, the art of achieving the element of surprise experienced considerable
development -- a very important factor in penetrating a deliberate enemy defense.

67

F03<HHHCJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The task of deception and dissemination of false information was extremely suc-
cessfully performed by ﬂq SHC. Achievement of the element of sur-

prise at the front echelon also became an essential element in planning and
preparing for an offensive operation. '

Employment of tactical and operational echelons which ensured sequential buildup of
efforts, maintaining superiority over the enemy and increasing the rate of penetra-
tion as troops advanced deep into the enemy's defense was specified and defined inthe
course of penetration. An important role was played by mobile groups of armies

and fronts, engagement of which was accomplished in part or in full when the attack-
ing troops reached the main artillery position area for completing penetration of

the main defensive zone and assault of the enemy's second sefensive zone without
a halt.

In the summer and fall of 1943 the art of developing tactical into operational
penetration in conditions where the enemy had shifted to a static defense in depth
was perfected. It was achieved by engaging the main forces of tank (mechanized)
corps and tank armies and their actions separated from the combined-arms large
units and formations which, engaging in offensive exploitation, would increase the
rate of advance, seeking to move the battle front as rapidly as possible to opera-
tional depth.

An increase in the combat power of battle groups, troop densities, and greater
skill in organizing and executing penetration made it possible to increase the num-
ber of successful breakthroughs from 50 percent in the first period of the war to
70 percent in the second. The acquired combat experience was utilized and en-
larged in the third period of the war.

FOOTNOTES
1. See "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny" [History of World War 11], Vol 6, pp 45, 48.
2. Table prepared on the basis of TsAHO [Central Archives of the Ministry of
Defense] Materials, Fund 331, List 5041, File 31, Sheet 16; Fund 375, List 5113,
File 122, sheets 15-34.
3. TsAMO SSSR, Fund 335, List 5113, Pile 124, p 13.

4. Ibid., Fund 242, List 6850, File 10, Sheet 240; File 5, Sheet 184; Fund 227,
List 140946, File 1, sheets 1, 2; Fund 266, List 271, File 19, Sheet 18.

5. Cited in K. S. Hoskaleno, "Na yugo-zapadnom napravlenii 1941-1943" [In the

Southwestern Sector, l94lcl943], second edition, Book 1, Moscow, Nauka, 1973,
pp 383, 384.

6. See "Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 511 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1941-1945" [Operations of the Soviet Armed Forces in the Great Patriotic War,
1941-1945], Vol 2, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1958, page 75.

7. See "Istoriya vtoroy...," op. cit., Vol 6, page 78.

68

INNR(Nﬂﬂ(141.lEﬂE(NVLY
10.
11.
12.
13.

16.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

26.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

TsAHD 5858, Fund 622, List 12568, File 20, Sheet 66.

See "Velikaya pobeda na Volge" [Great Victory on the Volga], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1965, page 655.

TaAMD SSSR, Fund 226, List 366, File 16, sheets 176-198.
See "Istoriya vtoroy...," op. cit., Vol 6, pp 110, 111.
See "Operatsii Sovetakikh...," op. cit., Vol 2, page 113.
Ibid.

See "Sovetskaya artilleriya v Velikoy Otecheatvennoy voyne" [Soviet Artillery in
the Great Patriotic War], Moscow, Voyanisdat, 1960, page 185.

TBAHO SSSR, Fund 208, List 2511, File 1667, sheets 11, 12.
Ibid., List 2513, File 1156, sheets 265, 266.
Ibid., Fund 213, List 2002, File 179, Sheet 61.

"Sovershenno sekretno! Tol'ko dlya konandovaniyal" [Top Secret! For Command
Authorities Onlyl], Moscow, Nauka, 1967, page 658.

Ibid., pp 699, 500.

See "Istoriya vtoroy...," op. cit., Vol 7, page 166.

See "Sovetakaya artilleriya...," op. cit., page 265.

See VOYEBNO-ISTORICHBSKIY ZHURNAL, No 7, 1968, page 88.

See "Sovetskiye voyenno-vozduahnyyo oily v Velikoy Otechestvenony voyne, 1961-
1965 gg." [Soviet Air Forces in the Great Patriotic war, 1961-1965], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1968, pp 186-190.

See "Inzhenernyye voyaka v boyakh ta Sovetakuyu Rodinu" [Engineer Troops in
Battles for the Soviet Hone1and], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1970, page 166.

See VOYENNO-ISIORICHESKIY ZHUINAL, No 1, 1971, page 20.
Ibid., page 22.

TsAHD SSSR, Pond 666, List 225565, File 2, Sheet 197.
Ibid., Fund 202, List 5, File 1636, Sheet 1.

See G. A. Koltunov and B. G. Solov'yev, "Kurekaya hitva" [Battle of Knrsk], Mos-
cow, Voyenizdat, 1970, page 215.

69

IND]:CHFFIC1A1.lEﬂE(HVLY“
31.

32.

33.

35.
36.
37 .

39.
40.

(.1.

42.
103.
44.
45.

106.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. K. Rokoaaovokiy, "Soldatekiy dolg" [Soldier's Duty], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1968, pp 227, 228.

See "Boyevoy opyt bronetankovykh i nekhanizirovannykh voyak v Velikoy
Otecheatvennoy voyne" [Combat Experience of Armored and Mechanized Troops in the
Great Patriotic Her], Vol 3, Moscow, Voyanizdat, 1964, pp 46-60.

Ibid., pp 63-68.

See VOYENNO-IS’IORICEBSKIY ZIIIIRNAL, No 7, 1963, page 910.

s. H. Shtenenko, "General'nyy ehtab v gpdy voyny" [The General Staff in the
War Yeara], Moscow, Voyanizdat, 1968, page 172.

See "Boyevoy opyt...," op. cit., Vol 3, page 16.

Ibid., pp 16, 17.

Ibid., page 41.

D. Rokoaaovakiy, op. cit., page 228.

IaAHO SSSR, Fund 203, List 51356, Ii1e 3, Sheet 2.

See "Operataii Sovetakikh...," op. cit., Vol 2, page 351.

See P. G. Kuznetaov, "General Chernyakhovakiy," Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1969, page
111.

Tom 8583, Fund 301, List 1&950a, File lo.

See Rokoaaovskiy, op. cit., page 232.

See VOYENNO-ISTORICHBSKIY ZHURNAL, No 11, 1963, page 9.
Team SSSR, Fund 1.17, List 10501, File 4, Sheete 208, 209.

See "Operataii Sovetokikh...," op. cit., V01 2, page 3819.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter Three. IMPROVEMENT IN THE FORMS AND MODES 0F PENETRATION IN THE
THIRD PERIOD OF THE “AR

1. Penetration in the Operations of the 1946 winter Campaign

As the 1964 winter campaign began, the military-political situation was character-
ized by further strengthening of the economic, political and military might of

the Soviet Union. At the same time the steadily increasing scale of offensive opera-
tions and stubborn eneay resistance were causing an increasingly larger expenditure
of materiel, a rate of consumption which our industry, in the absence of a lull in
military actions on the front, was unable to cover. At the end of 1963 and begin-
ning of 194b, for example, our industry was producing 160,000 tons ofnmmmunition
per month. But the consumption of a single advancing front was 60.000 tons. In
other words, Soviet industry was capable of supplying from b to 5 active fronts,
and yet there were 12 of then. There were also difficulties in supplying the
troops with fuel and lubricants. Continuous combat operations in the gigantic of-
fensive in the summer and fall of 1963 resulted in considerable casualties and
equipment losses. Many divisions needed rest and time for replenishment and combat
training.

The autumn season of bad roads deteriorated lines of communication and worsened
airfield basing and the capability of extensive maneuver during the conduct of
operations.

All these and other situation conditions imperativsly demanded a breather for the
troops and time to amass supplies, to bring units up to strength, to set up rear
services, and for other needs. Crushing defeat of the enemy in the summer-fall
campaign, however, created certain preconditions for successful continuation of the
offensive. Many enemy divisions, especially in the southwestern sector, were ex-
hausted, operational reserves were chewed up, while the enemy had virtually no
strategic reserves. since there were only 8.5 divisions in the strategic reserve
on the Eastern Front, and these reserves were under strength.

Continuation of the offensive without a pause in operations would make it possible
to thwart the enemy's plans to stabilize the Eastern Front on a line running along
the Dnieper and to liberate a substantial portion of Soviet territory by the begin-‘
ning of spring planting. Reaching the borders of the USSR would make it possible
to shift military operations onto the soil of Germany's satellites. which would
force them to seek withdrawal from the war.

71

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A careful analysis of the complex strategic situation existing at the end of 1943
enabled Hq sac to see realistic possibilities of dealing the enemy a powerful blow
in the winter of 1944 without a pause between campaigns. Implementation of these
possibilities, however, was a complex matter and demanded a number of revisions in
operation plans, missions of the fronts, and modes of conduct of the offensive, es-
pecially penetration.

Penetration of the enemy's strategic front in the winter campaign was to be ac-
complished in the Southwestern Sector. In addition to the political and economic
objectives of the planned operations, also taken into account was the fact that in
this sector the enemy did not have a well prepared defense disposed in depth, while
the Soviet Army had an advantageous configuration of front and a number of large
bridgeheads on the Dnieper. The main forces of the Soviet Army were also positioned
here, which made it possible to launch an offensive immediately, without strategic
redeployment, thus without giving the enemy time to establish a solid defense, to
redeploy his forces and rehabilitate previously routed units and combined units. In
addition to an offensive in the Right-Bank Ukraine, aggressive missions were also
assigned to the fronts operating in the western and northwestern strategic sectors.

Specific features of penetration in the operations in the Right-Dank Ukraine. The
strategic operation to liberate the Right-Bank Ukraine was conducted by the troops
of four fronts in two stages. The first stage ran from 24 December 1943 to

29 February 1944, as a result of which the enemy's strategic defense in the south-
western sector was shattered; the second stage ran from the beginning of March to
17 April 1944, when the Ukrainian Front accomplished a strategic breakthrough and
advanced through the Western Ukraine and to the Romanian border.

Soviet forces in the Right-Bank Ukraine were opposed by a powerful enemy force
grouping, which totaled 91 divisions, including 18 panzer and 4 motorized divisions,
1.2 million officers and men, 16,800 guns, 2,200 tanks and assault guns, and 1,460
aircraft.1 This enabled the enemy to establish very high operational troop densi-
ties -- 13 km per division.

At the first stage all Ukrainian fronts were employed in the battle to liberate the
Right-Bank Ukraine. The 1st Ukrainian Division was to mount the Zhitomir-Berdichev
Operation, the Second Ukrainian Front - the Kirovograd Operation, and the Third
and Fourth Ukrainian fronts -- the Nikopol'-Krivoy Rog Operation. The most
characteristic traits and features of preparation for and execution of penetration
in these situation conditions were displayed in the Zhitomir-Berdichev Operation,
which ran from 24 December 1943 to 15 January 1944. Initially the front contained
seven combined-arms armies, two tank armies and one air army. It totaled more than
450,000 men, 5,830 guns and mortars of 76 mm and larger, 1,100 tanks and self-
propelled guns, and 750 aircraft.

The forces of this front were opposed by an enemy force totaling 30 divisions, in-
cludings panzer divisions and l motorized division. It contained approximately
300,000 men, 600 tanks and assault guns, approximately 3,500 guns and mortars, and
500 aircraft.2 Consequently the troops of this front enjoyed a 1.5:1 superiority
over the enemy in personnel, 1.6:1 in artillery, 1.8:1 in tanks. and 1.5:1 in air-
craft.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Preparation for the breakthrough were conducted for a period of 9 days, immediate-
ly after repelling the enemy counteroffenaive in the Kiev sector.

The general plan of the operation called for launching four cleaving attacks in a
200 kilometer zone, with the front's zone of action extending a total of 490 km
(Diagram 16). The main attack was to be mounted on the Brusilov-Berdichev axis

by the forces of the 1st Guards, 18th and 38th Combined Arms armies, the 1st and
3d Guards Tank armies. The following subsidiary attacks were to be mounted: to
the right of the main attack -- by the forces of the 60th Army, reinforced by two
tank corps, in the direction of Shepetovka; to the left -- by the adjacent flanks
of the 40th and 27th armies, in the direction of Khristinovka, where they were to
link up with the troops of the Second Ukrainian Front and encircle the enemy force
defending the Kanev salient. 0n the northern side of the front. the 13th Army was
to attack with the forces of 2 divisions and a tank corps.

Thus all seven of the front's combined-arms armies were being utilized to accomplish
the breakthrough. A fairly strong force grouping was established on each axis,

with a particularly strong force (30 rifle divisions, 6 tank and 2 mechanized

corps) on the main axis of advance.

Although the enemy's defense was shallow and of a focal area type, and the battle
groups were fairly strong, nevertheless the front's command authorities, in view

of the experience of the preceding operations, assigned narrow breakthrough sectors
in order to establish high troop densities in conditions of seriously understrength
combined units: 18 km for the main force grouping, 15 km for the 60th Army, 10 km
for the 40th and 27th armies, and only 4 km for the 13th Army.

The selected width of breakthrough sectors provided the requisite conditions for
engaging the front's mobile groups and armies. At the same time the fact that the
breakthrOugh sectors were close to one another would make it possible, when penetra-
tion of the tactical zone of defense had been achieved, and breakthroughs were
widened toward the flanks, to join them into a single com-on breakthrough sector and
to form a wide gap in the enemy's defense.

High operational densities were established as a result of skillful concentration of
personnel and weapons in the breakthrough sectors: 2-3 km per division, approximate-
ly 180-200 guns and mortars, and more than 20 tanks and self-propelled guns per
kilometer.3 Density of close-support tanks was light, however -- even on the main
axis of advance, and then not in all divisions, it did not exceed 8-9 tanks and
self-propelled guns per kilometer of breakthrough sector.

Initiation of the offensive was not to begin simultaneously on all axes, but
sequentially -- initially on the main axis, subsequently, on the second day, on the
left side of the front, and on the right side of the front on the third day. This
would make it possible to employ air assets in massed numbers and more effectively
on each of the axes, as well as to maneuver part of the RVGK artillery from the
main axis to secondary axes.

Since the enemy's defense was shallow, it was decided to engage the mobile groups
during penetration of the main defensive zone or after the rifle combined units cap-
tured it. Engagement of the mobile groups after shallow penetration was also due to

73

FIHIOFFKﬂAl.USE(NVLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fact that densities of close-support tanks were low, and many of the rifle com-
bined units were far below T/O strength.

By decision of the commanding general of the front, a uniform procedure of deliver-
ing artillery supporting fire was established in all armies. Artillery preparation
was to run 90 minutes, while artillery support of the infantry and tank assault was
to be conducted by the rolling-barrage method.

The air support plan called for striking enemy headquarters, rail junctions and
reserves k8 hours before the operation commenced, while all ground-tttack aircraft
and bombers were to hit the enemy's tactical defense immediately prior to the assault
As penetration began, the assault by the main forces was to be supported with con-
tinuous delivery of fire on enemy strongpoints, and when the tank armies were en-
gaged, the main air effort was to be directed toward supporting then.

Penetration of the enemy defense on the main axis of advance commenced on the
morning of 24 December 1943. Actions by the main forces were preceded by recon-
naissance in force by the forward battalion. A specific feature of this activity
lay in the fact that it was conducted not on the eve of a general offensive, as had
generally been the practice up to that time, but directly on the day of the of-
fensive, a few hours before it comenced, which not only eliminated predictable
routine in the actions of the troops, but also deprived the enemy of the opportuni-
ty to take any measures to strengthen his defense. In addition, this had a certain
psychological effect. In case the reconnaissance in force was repelled, the enemy
could assume that the offensive, just as had been the case 111the past, would not
begin in the following day; he would lower his guard, expecting a lull of almost

26 hours.

The reconnaissaune in force was followed by heavy artillery preparation and air-
strikes. launching the attack, the troops of the front's main force grouping
quickly captured enemy strongpointa and centers of resistance in the first position
and assaulted the second position without a halt. Here the fighting took on a more
savage character.

In order to complete penetration of the enemy's tactical defense as quickly as pos-
sible and to break through to operational depth, both tank armies were engaged at
midday: the 3d Guards inthe zone of the 18th Army, and the lat Tank Army in the
zone of the 38th Army. As a result of their simultaneous attack, enemy resistance
was crushed, and penetration of the tactical zone of defense was completed by the
evening of this short December day. The tank armies had advanced to a depth of
15-20 km, and the combined-arms armies -- to 10 km.

0n the following day, in spite of a sharp deterioration in the weather (it had
started raining), which limited employment of air and made ground troops actions
more difficult. the combined units of the battle grOup were successfully advancing.
That same day the troops of the 100th and 27th armies cemented the offensive. By
evening the breakthrough had been widened to 80 km in frontage and to 20-30 km in
depth. Conditions had been created for operational pursuit of the enemy.

0n the third day of the operation, when the enemy's operational defense was severe-
ly battered, and the enemy had begun moving up reserves to the threatened sector,

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the wcuker forces or the right side of the front commenced to attack. The oULh
Army was particularly successful. In the course of the day its troops advanced
to a depth of 25 km. Forces were also successfully advancing on the other axes.

Thus penetration of the enemy's tactical zone of defense in all four sectors was
accomplished in the span of a single day, while by the end of the third day of

the operation all breakthroughs were linked up into a single gap 200 km wide, and
the armies proceeded to engage in pursuit of the enemy along a wide front. With
their offensive the troops of the First Ukrainian Front, enveloping the enemy's
Kanev force, had created realistic preconditions for its encirclemsnt and annihila-
tion, which made it possible to open up a substantial gap in the enemy's opera-
tional defense, exploitation in which could lead to a strategic breakthrough. It
was up to the Second Ukrainian Front.

A somewhat different form of operational breakthrough was selected on the Second
Ukrainian Front. Two attacks, launched south and north of Kirovograd, were to end
in encirclement of the enemy, after which drives were to be launched in the direc—
tion of Khristinovka, toward the troops of the First Ukrainian Front and toward
Pervonaysk. The armies of the right side of the front were to execute independent
breakthroughs with the objective of splitting the enemy's encircled Kanev force
(Diagram 17).

The Third and Fourth Ukrainian fronts were planning three army thrusts each for
conduct of the Nikepol'-Krivoy Reg Operation.

In contrast to the First Ukrainian Front, the battle groups which were to mount the
Kirovograd and Nikopol'-Krivoy Rog operations were much weaker, which affected the
troop densities established in the breakthrough sectors. In the breakthrough
sectors of the battle groups of the Second Ukrainian Front, for example, the
greatest artillery density was 120, while average density was 50-60 guns and
mortars per kilometer of breakthrough sector. Firepower was diminished additionally
by the fact that when the operation commenced the front was short on ammunition -
with 0.6-1.1 basic combat load, as a consequence of which only 0.6 basic combat
load was allocated for artillery preparation, and 0.6 basic load for close support
of the assault phase. Airstrikes could not compensate for the insufficient artil-
lery fire. There was little air available. In addition, the weather did not favor
employment of air.

Infantry and tank densities in the combined units were also low, due to a severe
shortage of men and equipment.

Although the enemy's defense was not particularly firm, the first defensive position
was quite stable, which required heavy delivery of fire. with low artillery densi—
ties and limited ammunition availability, however, it proved impossible to deliver
sufficiently effective fire. which affected penetration and the results of the
operations as a whole.

The troops of the Second Ukrainian Front commenced the operation on 5 January. The
enemy proved to be poorly neutralized in the breakthrough sector of the battle

group south of Kirovograd. The enemy had spotted our offensive preparations, and
he had well protected personnel and weapons from artillery fire. When the assault

7S

F0.:0FFK3A1.USE(NVLY
F1)R10FF1CJAI.IJSEiCNQLY

phase began, the enemy offered fierce resistance. Stubborn attacks by our divisions,
one after the other, were unsuccessful. The lack of close-support tanks and air
support was having its efffect.

In these conditions the cormanding general of the front ordered the 5th Guards Tank
Army to engage, with thendssion of breaking through the enemy defense together

with infantry, and accomplishing the day's objective. The tank army had 238 tanks
and self-propelled guns, and was engaged in two echelons: the 29th and 28th Tank
Corps in the first, and the 8th Mechanized Corps in the second. The tank corps also
advanced slowly, however, encountering an organized enemy defense, saturated with
tanks and particularly antitank artillery. By evening the joint efforts of the
combined-arms and tank large units had succeeded in completing penetration only

of the main defensive zone.

Penetration was developing differently on the axis of advance of the northern
battle group. The eneay, learning of the concentration of the 5th Tank Army south
of Kirovograd, failed to react to the reconnaissance in force in the zone of the
northern battle group and did not beef up its combat dispositkms opposite it. At
0900 hours infantry, supported by a rolling barrage, launched an assault. In the
zone of the 53d army the 5th Guards Mechanized Corps commenced the attack simul-
taneously with it. At 1100 hours, following penetration of the first position,

the 7th Mechanized Corps, containing only 61 tanks, engaged in the zone of the 5th
Guards Army. This offensive thrust by the two armies, reinforced by two tank corps,
made it possible to open a gap in the defense 18 km wide during the first hours, a
gap which the enemy was unable to close with tactical reserves, while his opera-
tional reserves were positioned further south. The tank corps penetrated the second
position, and subsequently the entire main defensive zone. By evening the 7th
Mechanized Corps had driven to a depth of 24 km.

The commanding general of the front had transferred the 8th Mechanized Corps here
from the southern force grouping with the mission of offensive exploitation. In
spite of the reinforcement, the northern force was unable to reach operational depth:
the enemy, in the belief that the main attack was taking place north of Kirovograd,
moved his panzer onus there.

Weakening of the enemy's defense south of Kirovograd enabled the 7th Guards Army,
together with the 5th Guards Tank Army, to break through the second zone and to
advance to a depth of 20 km by evening, while forward units reached the southeastern
edge of Kirovograd. 0n the second day the southern force advanced 6-7 km and linked
up with the northern force. Penetration reached 70 km in frontage and 30 km in depth.
The city of Kirovograd was liberated on the morning of 8 January.

The right-flank 52d and 4th Guards armies advanced 20-30 km in their sectors.
Although the results of the Kirovograd Operation were substantial, the troops of

the Second Ukrainian Front failed to break through to operational depth, to reach

Khristinovka. and there to close the ring of encirclement behind the enemy's Kanev
force.

Penetration on the Third and Fourth Ukrainian fronts failed due to insufficient
numerical strength of the battle groups.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The course of the first operations in the Right-Bank Ukraine showed that the enemy
still possessed sufficient forces to maintain the stability of his strategic front.
The enemy could be crushed only by launching a number of deep, cleaving offensive
drives, as called for by the initial plans, for which the front lacked sufficient
forces. or by initially mounting local offensive Operations with available forces.
in the course of which the enemy's defense could be shaken up, followed by deep of-
fensive thrusts, smashing the enemy's front and accomplishing the missions speci-
fied for the winter campaign. Hq sac, amassing forces for the summer-fall campaign
of 1944, chose the second way, for which three operations were designated: the
Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy -- by the forces of the First and Second Ukrainian fronts;
the Rovno-Lutsk -- on the right side of the First Ukrainian Front; and the Nikopol'-
Krivoy Rog -— by the armies of the Third Ukrainian Front.

The Korsun'-shevchenkovakiy Operation was the central and most effective operation
(Diagram 18). The main objective of this operation was annihilation of the enemy's
large Kanev force, which totaled nine divisions and a notorized brigade with numerous
support weaponsé comprising approximately 10 percent of the higher numerical
strength of forces defending in the Right-Bank Ukraine. Their total annihilation
would substantially weaken the enemy's forces and prevent him from establishing

reserves by pulling back from the Kanev salient, and beefing up the most
threatened sectors.

The German-fascist command authorities, endeavoring to hold the Korsun'—Shevchen-
kovskiy salient, which could serve as a bridgehead from which to launch an offen-
sive, were hastening to establish a stable defense. In the course of a short
period of time following establishment of this salient, the enemy succeeded in
adapting the majority of towns and villages for defense, in digging emplacementa,
organizing a fire plan, and constructing field fortifications in places.

The main defensive zone opposite the troops of the Second Ukrainian Front was from
3 to 6 km deep and consisted of strong points and centers of resistance linked by
trenches. Within strongpoints there was an elaborate network of fighting trenches.

of the battle area, but its construction was not completed by the commencement of

our offensive. The enemy's defense opposite the First Ukrainian Front was more weak-
ly fortified.

Preparations for the operation were conducted in a complex operational situation,
in which the troops of the fronts had just completed the preceding operations, had
expended a substantial quantity of men and equipment, and in a number of sectors
were fighting heavy defensive engagements with large enemy forces, as the enemy
still entertained hopes of reestabliehing the integrity of the Eastern Hall. Con-
siderable forces, especially of the First Ukrainian Front, were involved in the
fighting against the counterthrusting enemy panzar divisions. Part of the forces
of the front's 40th Army (the 136th Rifle Division, a regiment of the 167th Rifle
Division. part of the forces of the 6th Motorized Rifle Brigade) were even fight-

ing in a position of encirclement. This greatly complicated forming a front
battle group.

77

l1)R‘OFFIC1AJ.lEﬂE(M§LY
FOR 0511C1A1.US£10NL¥

The ammunition situation was extremely critical. The principal artillery systems
in the armies had from 0.7 to 1.5 basic combat loads.

Heather conditions were also unfavorable. A thaw had set in, the ice had broken up
on small rivers and creeks, and the roads were in a deplorable state. The weather
was overcast, which made it difficult to employ air.

Hq SHc's concept for the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation called for adjacent sides
of the First and Second Ukrainian fronts to drive toward one another in a pincer
movement, to break through the enemy's defense at the base of the salient and,
linking up in the 2venigorodka-Shpols area, to envelop and destroy the defending
enemy force.

Although defense at the base of the enemy's Kanev salient proved to be significantly
weaker, the commanding generalsof the fronts established fairly large battle groups
for the conduct of this operation -- two combined-arms armies and one tank army each.

Operational densities and relative strengths in the fronts' breakthrough sectors are
indicated in Table 7.

Table 7. Operational Densities and Relative Strengths in the Breakthrough Sectors
in the Korsun'-Shevchenkovekiy Operation

     
 

Battle Group Relative Strengths

Number of Tank
Guns and Hor-
tars (76 mm
and Larger)

Breakthrough
per km

Sector, km
In Artil-

Divisions
lery

In Tanks

Battle group of the

First Ukrainian Front 2'5:1 3'3:1 5'0:1

Battle group of the
Second Ukrainian
Front ' :1 10.6:1

* The figure in the numerator was specified by Hq SEC, and in the denominator --
the number decided on by the commanding general of the front. The figures in
parentheses include rocket artillery.

Proceeding from the character of the defense, it was to be neutralized not along the
entire continuous breakthrough sector frontage but by centers of resistance and
strongpoints. The plan of the commanding general of the 60th Army specified: "Since
the enemy's defense is of a focal type, the frontage of suppressive fire will be
reduced to half, which makes it possible to increase actual artillery density to
100-120 tubes per kilometer of suppressive-fire delivery area."5 Artillery fire
was planned against the most important targets in the 27th Army as well.

Artillery preparation was to run 35 minutes in the First Ukrainian Front and 56
minutes in the Second Ukrainian Front, From 10 to 20 guns per kilometer of frontage

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
were set up for direct fire, for knocking out important targets on the forward edge
of the battle area. Support of the assault phase in the Second Ukrainian Front was
to be by moving barrage in combination with successive fire concentration, and in
the First Ukrainian Front - Only by successive fire concentration.

Both fronts devoted considerable attention to gaining the element of surprise.
Toward this end, the battle group on the First Ukrainian Front was formed with
minimal redeployments. On the Second Ukrainian Front, in addition to measures
worked out in detail to achieve undetected concentration of troops in the break-
through sector, preparations were made for an operation to deceive the enemy. It
pursued the aim of convincing the enemy that preparations were being made for an at-
tack on a previous axis, west of Kirovograd, in the zones of the 5th and 7th Guards
armies. As Mar SU I. S. Konev notes, "phony tank and artillery concentration areas
were established here, for example, phony gun positions, and movements of troops
and equipment were simulated. All these measures as an aggregate greatly promoted
the success of the operation."6

The troops of the Second Ukrainian Front commenced the attack on 24 January, with
actions by reinforced forward battalions. Supported by artillery and small groups
of ground-attack aircraft, they shattered the enemy's resistance at the forward edge
of the battle area with a surprise assault, and by evening had advanced to a depth
of 6 km along a 16 km front.7

[n this situation it would have been expedient decisively to exploit the offensive
success achieved by the forward battalions, by engaging the main forces of the
front's battle groap. The front's comand authorities, however, would not alter

the original operation plan and did not engage the main forces that day. As a resuh;
the enemy had time to move forces to the breakthrough sector from other sectors.

0n the morning of 25 January, following 10 minutes of preliminary bombardment, the
main forces of the 4th Guards and 53d armies were engaged. They immediately en-
cOuntered stubborn enemy resistance. The suppressive fire had proven insufficiently
effective. Tactical air was not operating due to the bad weather.

It was necessary immediately to build up the efforts of the attacking troops. The
armies and corps, however, disposed in a single echelon, lacked the personnel

and weapons for this, and by 1400 hours the commanding general of the front engaged
the 5th Guards Tank Army in a sector only 6 km wide. This army, working in close
coordination with combined-arms large units of the 53d Aray. completed penetration
of the tactical zone of defense. By evening its forward-echelon corps (20th and
29th Tank Corps) had advanced to a depth of 18 km.

0n the second day the armies' advance slowed, since they were forced to repel a
number of counterattacks by units of the enemy's 10th and 3d Panzer divisions, which
had hastily been moved to the breakthrough sector. On 27 January the enemy mounted
cOunterthrusts from the south by 3 panzer divisions and from the north by 2 infantry
divishxs and a panzer division, and following fierce fighting succeeded in closing
the gap which had formed in the defense. The 20th and 29th Tank Corps were cut off
from the rest of the forces of the 5th Guards Tank Army.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the commanding general ol the front, estimating the situation, made a bold decision:
the 20th and 29th Tank Corps would continue advancing toward Shpola and 2venigorodm,
where they would link up with the forces of the First Ukrainian Front; the 18th Tank
and 5th Guards Cavalry corps wOuld respectively engage in the zones of the 53d and
6th Guards armies, would crush the opposing enemy force in cooperation with them,
and would exploit on the heels of the forward-echelon tank corps of the 5th Guards
Tank Army.

The 20th and 29th Tank Corps captured the town of shpola in a night battle, cap-
tured Zvenigorodka at 1300 hours on 29 January, and met the forward detachment of
the 6th Tank Army, which had reached the town.

The troops of the 6th Guards Army and 53d Army, working in coordination with the
18th Tank and 5th Guards Cavalry Corps, on 28 through 30 January fought their way
through the enemy's screen in the neck of the penetration, and swept forward in the
direction of Shpols, simultaneously establishing an inner and outer perimeter of
envelopment, which was in place by 2 February.

The troops of the First Ukrainian Front commenced the attack on 26 January. Fighting
was of a stubborn character along the entire penetration frontage. The troops of
the 60th Combined-Arms and 6th Tank armies encountered particularly strong enemy
fire. By evening they had advanced only 2-5 km. The 6th Tank Army's losses

totaled 59 tanks and self-propelled guns. Combined units of the 27th Army had suc-
ceeded in advancing 8-12 kn that day.

On the second day the forces of the First Ukrainian Front, exploiting the Success-
ful advance of the 27th Army, advanced 10 km on the right flank and 25 km on the
left flank of the breakthrough sector. The enemy's tactical defense was penetrated
along the entire front. At 1300 hours on 28 January the forward detachment of the
6th Tank Army, which had been dispatched ahead, reached 2venigorodka, where it
linked up with the 20th Tank Corps of the 5th Guards Tank Army. The enemy's Kanev
force was in a solid ring of encirclement. The rout of the enemy's Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy force, completed by the evening of 17 February, greatly weakened
the center of the strategic defense in the Right-Bank Ukraine. By successful execu-
tion of the Rovno-Lutsk and Nikopol'-Krivoy Rog operations, the Soviet forces had
also succeeded in putting the defense in disarray on the flanks as well. He

should note that in the Rovno-Lutsk Operation (Diagram 19) the command authorities
of the 13th Army had skillfully utilized a gap in the enemy's defense in the Sarny
area to penetrate to operational depth: two cavalry corps moved across forested-
swampy terrain through this gap and attacked the enemy force from the rear. In
this same operation the 13th Army's main forces accomplished penetration directly
from an approach march. The difficulty of organizing coordination with this mode
of penetration and difficulty in ensuring that the attacking forces reached the
enemy's forward positions simultaneously led to a slow breakthrough. It was only a
weakening of the enemy's operational defense by the unexpected drive by the cavalry
corps deep into the enemy's rear which made it possible to complete penetration,

to capture the Lutsk-Surazh-Rovno area, and to place the forces of the First
Ukrainian Front into a threatening position vis-a—vis Army Group South.

Completion of the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy, Rovno-Lutsk, and Nikopol‘—Krivoy Rog
operations ended the first stage of the enemy's defeat in the Right-Bank Ukraine.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Heavy losses had been inflicted on the enemy in almost 3 months of intensive fight—
ing. The morale of the enemy troops was low, a fact which could not help but
reflect in the stability of the defense, which proved weak in many sectors. All
this created the requisite conditions for a decisive breakthrough of the enemy's
strategic front from the Polesye to the Black Sea and complete liberation of the
Right—Bank Ukraine. The spring season of bad roads was setting in, however, which

in the opinion of the German command authorities would prevent the conduct of large-
scale offensive operations.

The Soviet command authorities, estimating the situation, decided to utilize the
opportunities which had risen and, in spite of the unfavorable climatic conditions,
to execute with the forces of the First, Second, and Third Ukrainian fronts the
second stage of the strategic operation to liberate the Right-Bank Ukraine.

The General Staff began planning the operation in February. "An analysis of the
strategic situation a: the front," writes A. H. Vasilevskiy," the status of the
enemy's troops, and our country's steadily growing resources gave the Supreme

High Comand reason to conclude that it was both possible and advisable to continue
the offensive of the Ukrainian fronts withoat any lull, in order to split the
German-fascist troops with simultaneous massive attacks on a wide front from the
Polesye to the mouth of the Dnieper and, annihilating then piecemeal, to complete
liberation of the Right-Bank Ukraine."8 In other words, this plan gave practical em-
bodiment to those ideas on which planning of the offensive in the Right-Bank Ukraine
in December 1963 were grounded (Diagram 20).

The First Ukrainian Front would mount the main attack in the direction of
Proskurov, with the troops of the 13th, 60th and let Guards armies, the 3d Guards
and lot\. Tank armies, reinforced by the front's entire artillery. Bach combined-
arms army would penetrate the defense in a separate sector. In addition, two army
thrusts would be executed on the left side of the front, in close coordination with
the forces of the Second Ukrainian Front.

The Second Ukrainian Front would penetrate the defense in two sectors, mounting the
main attack with the forces of the 27th, 52d, and 6th Guards Combined-Arms armies
and the 2d and 5th Guards Tank armies. Two armies, with flanks adjacent to the
sector containing the main axis of advance (60th and 53d), were assigned the mission
of establishing on these flanks forces consisting of 5 rifle divisions each and.
taking advantage of the breakthrough on the main axis, to moant attacks to support
the front's battle gr0up on the right and left, to enlarge the breakthrough sector
toward the flanks, close up the enemy‘s defense opposite the frontage of their
troops.

A subsidiary attack was to be launched 150 km from the main attack, by the adjacent
flanks of the 5th and 7th Guards armies.

The Third Ukrainian Front was assigned the following mission: utilizing bridgeheads
on the Ingulets River south of Krivoy Rog, launch a main attack with the forces of
the 46th and 8th Guards armies, a mounted-mechanized group and tank corps in the
direction of Novyy Bug. The forces of the right side of the front -- the 57th and
37th amiss -- were to launch an attack with the objective of pinning down the left-
flank combined units of the German 6th Army. The 6th Army and the 5th Assault Army

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

were to advance in the direction of Berezneg0vatoye and Snegirevka, with the mission
of crushing the right-flank combined units of the German 6th Army, acting in co-
ordination with the 8th Guards Army and the mounted-mechanized group. The 28th Army
was assigned the mission of advancing along the right bank of Dnieper in the general
direction of Kherson and Hikolayev.

Thus nine offensive thrusts were planned in this strategic operation, breaking
through the defense in 14 sectors. The frontage of army breakthrough sectors

ranged from 5 to 13 km. Breakthrough frontage was 25 km for the 60th Army, and 17 km
for the 8th Guards Army. The breakthrough sector on the main axis of advance of the
Second Ukrainian Front was 25 km wide.

We should note that while the strength of the First and Second Ukrainian fronts was
adequate for a rapid breakthrough in several sectors, the Third Ukrainian Front
would have difficulty penetrating in four sectors with its reduced strength, es-
pecially mobile forces, and short ammunition supply. It could have been reduced to
two breakthrough sectors, which would allow better massing of personnel and weapons,
and therefore more rapid penetration of the enemy's defense with fewer casualties.
Enemy forces could be immobilized on the secondary axis, with the enemy possessing
limited operationslreserves and concentrating them for the most part opposite the
First and Second Ukrainian fronts, by feigning preparations for an offensive, for
it was quite sufficient to hold these forces for only 24 hours.

In spite of a serious shortage of combined units, high troop densities and consider-
able superiority over the enemy were established on many axes by concentrating the
efforts of large battle groups in narrow sectors.

The commanding general of the front accomplished a large-scale redeployment of
troops in conditions of the spring season of muddy roads, forming large force
groupings, positioning them opposite a weak sector in the enemy's defense, and
taking up a threatening position opposite the enemy's main force in the Right-Bank
Ukraine. Combined units of the 60th and 1st Guards armies and part of the forces of
the 18th Combined-Arms and 3d Guards Tank armies were shifted 80-120 km westward.
The 4th Tank Army was moving out of the Kiev area, and would be executing a 300-
kilometer march.

According to the plan of combat employment of artillery, artillery preparation was
scheduled to run 65-56 minutes on the First and Second Ukrainian fronts, and 15-
30 minutes on the Third Ukrainian Front. Support of the assault phase was
provided by a moving barrage and sequential concentration of fire.

Airstrikes were to be delivered with the objective of destroying enemy aircraft on
the ground, breaking up rail traffic on the main lines, and disrupting coummnd,
control and communications. During the period of tactical penetration and deep ex-
ploitation, supporting air was to destroy enemy weapons and troops ahead of the
advancing forces, to provide the troops with cover against air attack, and to sup-
port engagement of mobile combined units into the gap. One division apiece of
ground-attack aircraft and fighters were allocated to the tank armies for perform—
ing the latter mission.

82

FOR 0" 'AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal mission of the engineer troops was to keep the troops moving across
the muddy ground. especially in crossing the Gorym‘ and Gornyy Tikich rivers.

The tactical order of battle of the fronts and armies was for the most part single-
echelon. But the front had strong mobile groups consisting of three tank armies.
and the Third Ukrainian Front -- a mounted-mechanized group. The combined-arms
armies kept one or two divisions in reserve. The corps were also disposed in a
single echelon, and the divisions in two echelons. This arrangement proceeded from
the fact that there was a serious shortage of combined units, that the enemy's
defense was shallow and inadequately fortified, and was aimed at achieving a power-
ful initial thrust which, according to the concept of the front's command authori-
ties, should ensure penetration of the enemy's entire tactical defense on the first
day.

We should particularly discuss engagement of the mobile groups. The 3d and 4th Tank
armies contained 730 tanks and self-propelled guns, while the 2d, 6th and 5th Guards
Tank armies had about 600. They were all engaged at a shallow depth: the 4th and

3d Guards Tank armies at a depth of 6-8 km, right behind the 4th Tank Corps -- the
60th Army's exploitation echelon -- and the 2d and 5th Guards Tank armies at

1-1.5 km. The lat Tank Army had been brought up to strength and was en route; it
could be engaged in the course of the operation.

Building up the offensive drive by tank armies in the course of breaking through
the main defensive zone made it possible to execute penetration without a halt,

to penetrate at a rapid pace, and to bring the fighting to operational depth in

short order.

Hq SEC and the command authorities of the Ukrainian fronts made a great effort to
achieve the element of offensive surprise. The most important measure taken by

Hq SHC was to designate a time for the operation to commence which the German-
fascist command authorities considered impossible for the conduct of a large—scale
operation. "We decided to exploit this unwarranted calculation," wrote Mar G. K.
Zhukov, "and mount a number of crushing attacks on the enemy."9 in the zone of the
38th Army the command authorities of the First Ukrainian Front conducted extensive
preparations for a large-scale offensive: activities included commander‘s reconnais-
sance. artillery ranging, phony concentration of a tank army and a rifle corps with
support weapons and, finally, on 2 March -- a partial attack. Strict camOuflage,
concealment and deception procedures were adopted to ensure undetected execution

of the redeployment. All this made it possible to keep the forthcoming operation
secret for quite some time. Only 3 or 4 days before the offensive began did the
enemy obtain certain information on the imminent attack by the forces of the First
Ukrainian Front from the Shepetovka area. And although the enemy decided to move

5 panzer and motorized divisions as well as a brigade to the sector under threat,
half of these forces had not yet reached that area when the front's forces launched
the offensive. At the same time the transfer of large forces to the right side

of the First Ukrainian Front weakened the enemy's operational defense opposite the
Second Ukrainian Front, which facilitated penetration on the Uman' axis.

Effective camouflage. concealment and deception were organized on the Second and
Third Ukrainian fronts. and troop redeployments along the front were reduced to a
minimum.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The troops of the First Ukrainian Front were the first to begin penetration, on

a March, in conditions where the enemy, convinced that he would not be able to

hold firmly to the threatened axis, undertook to withdraw his forces to depth. Ar-
tillery fire was delivered on the rear guards. Smashing their resistance, the
troops of the 60th and let Guards armies were in control of the entire main defen-
sive zone by noon. The tank armies which were engaged conducted offensive ex-
ploitation and advanced up to 30 km by evening, while the combined—arms armies ad-
vanced up to 15 km. The enemy's defense had essentially collapsed; there was now a
possibility of reaching a line Ternopol'—Proskurov that night or the following day,
to where enemy reserves were advancing, and to defeat them in detail withOut a halt.
But the extremely muddy ground made it difficult even for the tank armies to move.
In addition, the tanks of the 4th Tank Army were down to their emergency fuel
reszve, since they had been only half-fueled when the penetration began.

Advancing along muddy roads and destroying the enemy in strong centers of resistance
sited in large villages, on 5-10 March the main force approached a line running
between Ternopol' and the Southern Bug, where the enemy was hastily setting up a

new defensive line, on which the efforts of 10 panzer divisions and 6 infantry
divisions were being concentrated. Attempts to break through this defensive line
without a halt led only to the capture of bridgeheads and deep penetration of the
enemy's defense by units of the 3d Guards Tank Army and 1st Guards Army.

In directives dated 12 March, ﬂq SHC assigned the First and Second Ukrainian fronts
the mission of commencing a general offensive on 20-21 March, in the course of which
they were to complete penetration of the enemy's operational defense, envelop the
main forces of his lot Panzer Army, and carry combat operations beyond the Dnestr.

Although the First Ukrainian Front had a week before launching the general offen-
sive, the actual time which the armies could have for preparing for the offensive,
in view of repelling enemy counterthrusts and strong counterattacks, did not exceed
3-5 days. This amount of time is very short in conditions of execution of com—
plicated troop redeployments.

Organization and penetration of the enemy's operational defensive line were most in-
structive in the lat Guards Army. This army contained 6 corps. Four corps were to
be redeployed from the army's left to its right flank, a distance of 65 and 80 km,
in order to attack a weak point west of Proskurov. Together with the corps of the
3d Guards Tank Army, they comprised a battle group, which was to penetrate the
defense in a 16-km sector (Diagram 21).

The tank corps took up an attack position directly behind the rifle corps, so that
they could engage when the strongpoints in the first position were breached, over-
take the infantryat‘a depth of 5-6 km. and advance swiftly to operational depth.

A mechanized corps and rifle corps -- the armies' support echelons-m'were to en-
gage on the second day with an exploitation mission.

The troops of the lst Guards Army launched the attack at 1220 hours on 21 March,
following 40 minutes of artillery preparation. Although the exhausted and neutral-
ized enemy attempted to offer stubborn resistance. by 1500 hours the first posi-
tion was completely overrun. The small Ploska River, flooded by the spring thaw,
delayed the troops' advance. But by 1700 hours the enemy's entire operational
defensive line was penetrated.

8L
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the following day the troops of both armies advanced 15-20 kn and commenced
pursuit.

Penetration was equally successful in the zone of the 60th Army, where the lat and
4th Tank arnies were engaged to exploit the breakthrough. Their advance to opera-
tional depth and their swift actions, especially those of the fresh lst Tank Army,
led to total disruption of the enemy's plans, an effort to withdraw his forces
beyond the Dnestr. Army Group South was cut off, whereby its 4th Panzer Army was
pushed westward and its lst Panzer Army eastward, where it soon found itself in a
state of operational envelopment.

The battle group of the Second Ukrainian Front launched an attack on 5 March. Air-
craft were grounded by dense fog. Our attack took the enemy by surprise. The in-
fantry and forward detachments of the tank armies, with artillery support, quickly
smashed enemy resistance in the first defensive position. An important role in the

breakthrough was played by close support guns. of which the armies had from 20 to 30
per km of frontage.

Following penetration of the first defensive position, the main forces of the 2d
and 5th Guards Tank.anis were engaged at a depth of up to 1.5 km from the enemy's
forward position. By evening the 2d Tank Army had reached the Gornyy Tikich River,
having advanced 16-16 km. In order to exploit this advance, the commanding
general of the 27th Army engaged the 78th Rifle Division from his reserve. This

enabled the troops of the 27th Army as well to reach the Gornyy Tikich River by that
night.

Combat engineer units, assisted by the combat troops, had set up crossings by
morning. Combined units of the 2d Tank Army crossed the river and proceeded to ad-
vance toward Uman', moving into the zone of the 52d Army. Soviet tanks appearing

to the enemy's rear forced hin to begin a hasty withdrawal in the zone of the 52d
Army as well.

In order to exploit the advance of the 27th Army. the 6th Tank Army was engaged in
its zone by orders of the commanding general of the front.

A somewhat less successful penetration was achieved in the zone of the 6th Guards
Army, where the 5th Guards Tank Arny was engaged.

In order to intensify the offensive drive, in the evening of 5 March and on the
morning of 6 March the commander of the 6th Arny sequentially engaged the 41st and
62d Guards Rifle divisions. This made it possible to complete on 6 March, through
combined efforts with the 5th Guards Tank Arsy. breakthrough of the enemy's tactical
zone of defense, to reach the Gornyy Tikich River, and to place forward units

across the river on 7 March.

On 8 March. when the enemy's operational defense was shattered, the 5th and 7th

Guards armies launched an attack. They successfully penetrated the defense and
began offensive exploitation in the direction of Pervomsysk.

85

FIRICHHHCLALIJSE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The weather improved on the morning of 9 March, which enabled the 5th Air Army to
fly a number of airstrikes on the enemy's forces and to assist the ground troops in
their successful advance.

The enemy was forced to hasten the withdrawal. Soviet forces initiated pursuit.
The troops advanced to a depth of approximately 70 km in 6 days, in conditions of
muddy ground caused by the spring thaw. With the crossing of the Southern Bug, the
way was opened up to the Soviet-Romanian border.

Penetration was somewhat more difficult on the Third Ukrainian Front. Low artillery
densities, with very brief artillery preparation, made it impossible reliably to
neutralize the enemy's defense; during the course of the day the enemy was offering
stubborn resistance. especially in the villages. The Soviet advance began to slow
by the evening of the first day. A mounted -mochanized gr0up was engaged at 2130
hours at 6 March, in bad weather. Its attack took the enemy by suprise and
predetermined penetration of the defense to full operational depth. 0n the

morning of 8 March the mobile group captured the town of Novyy Bug. The front of
the German 6th Army was split open.

The mighty drive southward and southwestward by the First and Second Ukrainian
fronts, and development of the Bereznegovatoye-Snigirevka Operation of the Third
Ukrainian Front into the Odessa Operation led to the forming of a strategic gap in
the enemy's defense in the Southwestern Sector. Development of strategic pursuit
here made it possible to liberate most of the Central and Western Ukraine, to ad-
vance to the Prut, and to reestablish part of the Soviet border.

***

The winter campaign of 1944 enriched Soviet art of warfare with experience in
penetrating the enemy's defense in conditions of development of one campaign into
another without a pause. A shortage of forces and a certain underestimate of the
firmness of the enemy's defense in the Right-Bank Ukraine at the beginning of the
campaign prevented Soviet forces from breaking through the defense with cleaving
attacks along a wide front. Mounting a number of sequential operations along the
front, the Ukrainian fronts shattered the enemy's operational defense and sub-
sequently crushed the strategic front with deep, splitting attacks mounted in the
difficult conditions of the spring thaw.

In the Right-Bank Ukraine more than 70 enemy divisions were routed, and the enemy's
defense was penetrated in a zone 650 km wide and to a depth of 650-500 km. In

order to restore the strategic defensive front along the Carpathian foothills and
the lower rr'ches of the Dnestr River, the German-fascist command authorities were
forced to transfer 40 divisions and 2 brigades from Germany, Western Europe, Romania
and Hungary.10

The operations to liberate the Right-Bank Ukraine were characterized by employment
of diversified forms of operational penetration:

mounting a number of attacks with the aim of deeply splitting the defense
and the enemy's force groupings (Zhitomir-Berdichev, Proskurov-Chernovtsy, and Uman'-
Botosani operations);

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

penetration in two sectors with exploitation along converging axes, with
the objective of enveloping and annihilating enemy forces (Kirovograd, Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy, Nikopol'-Krivoy Rog operations);

penetration by cavalry corps, exploiting a gap in the enemy's defense, and
a frontal attack by combined-arms large units (hovno-Lutsk Operation);

penetration in a number of sectors along a wide front, with the objective
of breaking up the enemy's defense into separate parts, subsequently linking the

breakthroughs into a single large penetration (Bereznegovatoye-Snigirevka and
Odessa operations).

Such a great diversity of forms of operational penetration attests to the innova-
tive approach of the Soviet cot-rand authorities in selecting forms of penetration
taking into account assigned missions, grouping of forces and character of the
eneay's defense, as well as the state and grouping of friendly forces.

Proceeding from the fact that as a rule the enemy's defense was shallow, was in-
adequately fortified, and was constructed for the most part as a system of centers
o.‘ resistance and strongpoints, in the najority of front operations penetration
was accomplished in 3-4 or. more sectors. 0f the nine operations, for

example, the fronts penetrated as follows: in 2 sectors - three operations; 3-
4 or more sectors -- in six operations. The breakthrough sectors of the fronts on
the aain axis of advance ranged fro. 18 to 28 km. and usually the efforts of 2-3
combined-area armies would be concentrated in these sectors. The width of army
breakthrOugh sectors ranged 3.5-13 km, and as nuch as 17-25 km only in certain
instances, when breaking through a weakened defense.

The tactical order of battle of the fronts, armies, and the majority of combined
units and units involved a single echelon, since what was primarily needed to
break through a shallow enemy defense was a strong initial drive. Such a tactical
order of battle was also determined by the fact that all fronts in the Right-Bank
Ukraine contained large tank combined units and formations. During an offensive
in conditions of the muddy ground of the spring thaw, the absence of or a limited
number of close-support tanks and diminished coabat capabilities of rifle com-
bined units, on each occasion they took part in completing penetration of the
enemy's defense and subsequently were the lead force during pursuit.

In view of the fact that the tank troops were greatly under strength, front com-
mand authorities sought to concentrate on the main axis of advance the efforts of
several tank armies. tank and mechanized corps. which made it possible to employ
them in a massed fashion, to achieve decisive superiority over the enemy, rapidly
to complete penetration of the enemy defense and to exploit to considerable depth.

When penetrating a focal-type defense. duration of artillery preparation usually
did not exceet 60 minutes, while a rolling barrage was primarily used to support
the infantry and tank assault. The difficult conditions of muddy roads caused by
the spring thaw, which made a normal flow of mition to the artillery difficult,
were also a factor. Artillery extensively employed direct fire, which made it
possible to accomplish fire missions with moderate expenditure of rounds.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the course of the 1944 winter campaign the Soviet forces also gained experience
in penetrating a strongly fortified enemy defense at Leningrad, Novgorod, and in
the Crimea. Here narrow breakthrough sectors were assigned, running 12-16 km, in
which the defense was penetrated as a rule by the forces of a single, full-

strength combined-arms army, supported by considerable artillery and the bulk of
the front's tactical air forces.

Penetration of a strongly fortified defense required greater artillery densities
than was the case in the operations in the Right-Bank Ukraine, a much greater
number of large caliber guns (122 II and large) in the artillery groupings, which
were also extensively employed for direct fire, prolonged artillery preparation for
the assault. assignment in a nunber of instances of a preliminary period of ar-
tillery bombardment to demolish specific targets, a considerably larger consumption
of amnition, and employment of more effective assault support methods (a moving
barrage in place of sequential concentration of fire).

0n the whole the experience obtained in penetrating the enemy's defense in the
winter campaign of 19104 constituted a further step in the development of Soviet art
of warfare.

2. Improvement of Penetration in the Operations of the 19“ Sumner-Fall Campaign

The strategic situation which had developed on the Soviet-German front by the
summer of 19:36 was quite favorable for the Soviet Army. In the course of the winter
campaign the enemy had sustained heavy casualties and losses, and lacked the man-
power and economic resources to replace them. But Germany's war industry was

still working at full capacity, which made it possible regularly to supply the army
with weapons and material. In 19“ it received sufficient combat equipment to arm
225 infantry and 65 panzer divisions:l1

The Soviet forces, benefiting from the steadily increasing capabilities of this
country's war industry, field repair facilities and the excellent Job being done
by the military hospitals, entered the new campaign at full strength and well
trained. Morale was high. The quantitative and qualitative composition of the
Armed Forces enabled the Soviet Supreme High Comand to conduct large-scale of-
fensive operations with even more decisive objectives.

Thepohdcalobjctives assigned by the Comunist Party and Soviet Government to the
USSR Armed Forces in the smaller-fall campaign of 19“ included completely clearing
all Soviet soil of the fascist invaders, restoring the Soviet Union's borders
along the entire line from the Barents Sea to the Black Sea, and proceeding with

liberation of the peoples of Poland, Czechoslovakia and other European countries
from fascist enslavement.

In conformity with these goals, and taking into consideration the capabilities of
the Soviet Armed Forces, liq SEC drew up a plan for the sinner-fall campaign of 1966,
grounded on the idea of sequential mounting of powerful attacks in different sectors
which subsequently would lead to strategic breakthroughs in the Western and

Southwestern sectors and develop into a Soviet Army general offensive along the en-
tire Soviet-German front.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seven strategic offensive operations and a number of operations of operational
significance were conducted during this campaign. Penetration of the enemy's
strategic front in the Western Sector was initiated and executed by the Baltic
Front and the group of Belorussian fronts.

Penetration in the Belorussian Operation (Diagram 22). Attaching great importance
to standing ground in Belorussia, the fascist command authorities were maintaining
large forces here and had established a solid defense disposed in depth. In addi-
tion to a tactical zone, the Germans had established at depth four lines and several
intermediate zones and switch positions, the total depth of which was 250-270 km.

The most highly fortified was the tactical zone of defense, which contained two
zones. The main defensive zone, 5-6 km deep, consisted of two, and in places three
positions equipped with full-profile fighting trenches and linked by communicating
trenches. The second defensive zone was 12 km back from the forward positions.

The enemy had extensively utilized numerous rivers,swampy stretches of terrain, and
forests to increase the stability of the defensive line.

Forces defending in Belorussia included Army Group Center (3d Panzer Army, 4th, 9th
and 2d Field armies), as well as flank combined units of the 16th Army of Army
Group North and of the 4th Panzer Army of Army Group northern Ukraine. Forces
totaled 53 divisions and 3 brigades (including 4 panzer and 3 motorized divisions).
Of these, only 11 divisions were assigned to operational reserve, on a front ex-
tending more than 1000 km, divisions which in addition were immobilized by actions
by partisan forces, which was a weak point of the defense.

in determining the operation concept, Hq SEC proceeded from the character of the
enemy's defense and the marshy woodland terrain. The experience of uncompleted
operations conducted in the Hestern Sector in the winter of 1963/64 was also
thoroughly analyzed. It indicated that without a swift and decisive defeat of sub-
stantial forces in a number of sectors simultaneously, the enemy was capable of
executing maneuver, of withdrawing his troops to the next defensive lines, and of
maintaining the integrity of his front. Therefore in the Belorussian Operation Hq
suc decided that the forces of four fronts would simultaneously launch an offensive
on the Vitebsk, Orsha, hogilev, and Bobruysk axes, break through the defense in

6 sectors, encircle and destroy enemy forces in the Vitebsk and Bobruysk areas and,
advancing along converging axes toward Minsk, encircle and destroy the main forces
of Army Group Center. Subsequently additional forces would be engaged and the ad—
jacent fronts would shift to the offensive, with the objective of the complete
liberation of Belorussia, the western Ukraine, and a large part of Lithuania and
Poland.

The uniqueness of the concept of this operation was that elimination of the enemy's
Vitebsk and Bobruysk forces at the first stage of the operation would form opera-
tional gaps 90-100 km wide in the enemy's defense, through which large mobile forces
could penetrate to depth without delay. Advancing toward Minsk on converging axes,
they cauld envelop and, working in coordination with the combined-arms armies,
destroylarge forces of Army Group Center east of Minsk, to a (spth of more than

200 km. This would lead to the forming of a strategic breach approximately 500 km
wide, in order to close which the eneny would be compelled to bring up strategic
reserves and forces from other strategic sectors. In other words, this concept

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expressed in final form the idea of continuous development of tactical into opera-
tional breakthroughs, of operational into a strategic breakthrough, in the course
of which several large enemy forces would be encircled and destroyed.

In conformity with the general plan of the Belorussian Operation, the troops of the
First Baltic Front were to mount the main attack north of Vitebsk in the general
direction of Beshenkovichi-Lepel', to penetrate the defense in a single continuous
sector 25 km wide with the adjacent flanks of the 6th Guards and 63d armies and,
working in coordination with the Third Belorussian Front, to defeat in detail the
enemy’s Vitebsk-Lepel' force.

The troops of the Third Belorussian Front were to launch two attacks: one in the
direction of the attack mounted by the First Baltic Front, and another along the
Minsk highway. Penetration of ﬂu enemy's defense south of Vitebsk was to be accom-
plished by the forces of the 39th and 5th armies in a 16 km sector, and alo the
highway by the forces of the 11th Guards and 31st armies in a 17 km sector.1

The Second Belorussian Front was to operate on the secondary Mogilev-Belynichi axis,
splitting the 4th Field Army into two parts. At the same time its aggressive
actions were to prevent the enemy from stabilizing the defense on the flanks of the
large Belorussian salient with the forces of the central sector. This front was to
penetrate the defense with the forces of the 49th Army alone, consisting of four
corps in a 12 km sector.

The First Belorussian Front was to launch two attacks of approximately equal force:
one from the Rogachev area. by the troops of the 3d and 58th armies in a 15 km
sector, in the general direction of Bobruysk-Osipovichi; the other - from an area
between the lower reaches of the Berezina River and Ozarichi, with the forces of
the 65th and 28th armies, in a 14 km sector, in the general direction of Staryye
Dorogi-Slutsk, enveloping Bobruysk from the south.

In addition to this mission the left side of the First Belorussian Front, ac-
cording to Hq sac instructions, was to immobilize the opposing enemy force and
prepare for an advance on the Lublin axis.

According to the plans of the commanding generals of the fronts, 75 percent of
rifle divisions, 85 percent of artillery and almost 100 percent of tanks, self-
propelled guns and aircraft were assigned to the battle groups. This massing of
personnel and weapons made it possible to establish high operational densities in
all breakthrough sectors (Table 8).

It is evident from the table [see following page} that with a total frontage of

690 km (not including the left side of the First Belorussian Front), penetration
was to be accomplished in 6 sectors with a total frontage of 99 km, comprising

14.3 percent of the width of the front's zone of advance. As was indicated by the
course of combat operations, the extent of breakthrough sectors proved sufficient
both for successful execution of penetration and for development of the strategic

operation to full depth.

Average operational densities in the breakthrough sectors were 4-5 times those in
the entire zone of advance of the fronts, which attests to great skill in massing
men and weapons. The following superiority was achieved over the enemy on the

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8. Average Operational Densities During Penetration in the Belorussian
Operation

      
  

   
     
  
 

   

Division tars ~er kn
In en- In Break-
tire through
Zone Sector

  
   
  
  

   

width of Zone
of Advance, km

First Baltic

Third Belorussian

Second Belorussian

Firs: Belorussian
(right side)

First Belorussian
(left side)

Note: Densities in guns and mortars include rocket launchers but exclude antitank
and antiaircraft guns

most important axes: 3-b:1 in infantry. and 3-6:1 and more in artillery and
tanks.

The tactical order of battle of all four fronts (excluding the left side of the
First Belorussian Front) was single-echelon. This made it possible to employ a
maximum quantity of personnel and weapons to achieve a massive initial thrust with
the objective of penetrating as rapidly as possible the enemy's tactical zone of
defense, within which the main forces of Army Group Center were deployed. The

fronts had mobile groups of various composition for exploitation at operational
depth.

0f the 16 armies operating in the fronts' battle groups. only two (the 6th Guards
Army of the First Baltic Front and the 3d Army of the First Belorussian Front) were
disposed in two echelons, while the resainder were in a single echelon, with
designated reserve. Mobile groups - each consisting of a tank corps - were es-
tablished in four armies (11th Guards, 3d. 65th, and 8th guards). The armies, with
20-30 km zones of advance, were assigned a breakthrough sector of 6-12 km, where
from 50 to 80 percent of their men and weapons were concentrated.

The majority of rifle corps were disposed in two echelons. Their breakthrough
sectors ran 3.2-6 kn, which enabled them to achieve high tactical densities and
decisive superiority over the enemy in these sectors. All combined-arms large
units and units had artillery groups, which enabled the con-anders actively to in-
fluence the course of coabat operations.

Artillery preparation was scheduled to run 120-140 minutes, to the entire depth of

the main defensive zone, but only the first two positions on the Third Belorussian

Front. Large numbers of guns were designated for direct fire in all armies, with a
density of 18-23 per kn of breakthrough sector.

91

FOR OFFIC1A1.USEGDNLY
FINI(MWHCJAI.USEGDNLY

The a. .ult phase was to be supported by a loving barrage, sequential concentration
of fire, or a combination of these methods, to a depth of 1.5 km. On the First
Belorussian Front, in the zones of the 28th and 65th armies, the infantry and tank
assault was to be supported, for the first time in the war, by a double moving
barrage to a depth of 1.5-2 km.13

In order to increase the power of the initial thrust and to achieve rapid penetra-
tion of the tactical zone of defense, a large percentage of tanks and self-propelled
guns (approximately 44 percent of the total number) were assigned to close sup-

port of infantry. Their density averaged from 12 to 22 fighting vehicles per km of
breakthrough sector, and in some cases even more. In contrast to previous opera-
tions, independent tank brigades and regiments were utilized not in a centralized
manner at the division level, but were attached to subunits and rifle regiments,
which made it possible more closely to organize their coordination with infantry in
conditions of marshy woodland terrain.

The army mobile groups were to be employed to complete penetration of the main
defensive zone or to overrun the second defensive zone without a pause, while the
mobile grOups of the fronts were to be employed, following penetration of the tac-
tical zone of defense, to exploit tactical into operational penetration without a
pause. The strongest mobile groups were established on the Third and First
Belorussian fronts, which played a leading role in the strategic operation.

Table 9 contains the principal indices in planning the combat employment of mobile

groups of fronts and armies.

Table 9. Principal Indices in Planning Combat Employment of Mobile Groups in the
Belorussian Operation

Front, Mobile Group

  
 
 

 
 

1

First Baltic
Front mobile group -- lst

   
 

Tank Corps 20
Third Belorussian
Front mobile group -- Sth

Guards Tank Army 40
Front mobile group --

mounted-mechanized group 38
Mobile group of llthGuards

Army - 2d Guards Tank Cups 32
First Belorussian (rightside)
Front mobile group --

mounted-mechanized group 25
Mobile group of 3d Army -

9th Tank Corps 20
Mobile group of 65th Army —-

1st Guards Tank Corps 25

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 9 (cont'd)

 
 

First Belorussian (left

  

side)
Front mobile group -- 2d

Tank Army 805 35-40
Mobile group of 8th Guards

Army -- llth Corps 216 25-30

 

we should note that the 5th Guards Tank Army of the Third Belorussian Front and the
mounted-mechanized group of the First Belorussian Front were to engage in the gap
between 24 and 28 hours after engagement of the army mobile youps. Such a sequen-
tial engagement of the mobile groups would make it possible sharply to build up
efforts in the course of the operation (operational densities of tanks and self-
propelled guns were increased to 60-80 or more per km of engagement sector), which
ensured offensive exploitation to considerable depth and development of operational
into strategic success.

Depending on penetration progress in the northern and southern forces of the Third
Belorussian Front, engagement of the 5th Guards Tank Army was specified in two
variations: in the zone of advance of the 11th Guards Army, along the Minsk highway,

or in the zone of advance of the 5th Arty, with subsequent movement to the Minsk
highway.

Air activities were planned in the form of an air offensive. Immediate preliminary
airstrikes in all fronts were to be delivered during the night on the eve of the
offensive by night bombers (approximately 2000 sorties) and long-range bombers

(5 bomber corps). In addition, on the Orsha axis, where the enemy's defense was
particularly strong, during the last 30 minutes of artillery preparation #48 ground-
attaok aircraft and bombers were to deliver massive airstrikes.

Planned air support of the assault on the Third and First Belorussian fronts called
for concentrated strikes by ground-attack aircraft and bombers on enemy artillery
and personnel (on the Rogachev axis, for example, five strikes in the course of

2.5 hours. by 825 aircraft; on the Parichi axis -- three strikes by 5&0 aircraft).

0n the First Baltic and Second Belorussian fronts, where air forces were Substantial-
ly smaller, air support of the assault was to be accomplished by wave'

strikes by small groups of 6-8 ground-attack aircraft, with 4-6 fighters flying
cover.

When the army mobile groups engaged, as a rule they would be supported by l
fighter division, 1 ground-attack division and l bomber division. One or 2 air
cnrps were designated to support mounted-mechanized groups. while the 5th Guards

Tank Army was supported by 3 corps - 800 aircrews flying 1500 sorties on the first
two days of combat.

Execution of the above-enumerated measures, together with those performed by Hq SHC
(phony concentration of men and weapons on the Kishinev axis in Hay-June, conduct
of reconnaissance in force on 20-23 June in the zones of the First Ukrainian.

93

FOR 0W1WCIAI,USEGDNLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Second and Third Baltic fronts, etc), enabled the Soviet command authorities to con-
ceal preparations for the major operation in the summer of 1944, which in large
measure ensured successful penetration and conduct of the operation as a whole.

Even a week before our offensive began, when, according to the testimony of fascist
general Tippelskirch, the command authorities of Army GrOup Center learned of a
concentration of substantial Soviet Army forces in Belorussia, on the German

General Staff "the view that the Russians would launch the main attack against Army
Group Northern Ukraine continued to be dominant.... The response to a request by
Army GrOup Center to be given at least more reserves was that the general situation
on the Eastern Front did not permit a different deployment of forces."15 This was a
gross miscalculation on the part of the fascist command authorities.

0n the eve of the day of the general offensive, all fronts conducted reconnaissance
in force. 0n the First Baltic Front it began at dawn on 22 June, following 15-

25 minutes of artillery preparation. During the fighting the forward battalions
succeeded in penetrating to a depth of up to 1.5 km in some sectors and, in places,
in overrunning the first defensive position. In the 6th Guards Army, in the zone
of the 22d Guards Rifle Corps, subunits of the main forces of the attackrechelon
regiments (6 battalions with 3 to h tanks each) were engaged for exploitation; this
made it possible by that evening to penetrate the enemy's main defensive zone on

a frontage of 15 km and to advance to a depth of 5-7 km.15

The successful actions of the forward battalions required changes in the fire sup-
port plan for the attack. In the 6th Guards Army duration of artillery prepara-
tion was cut in half, with a smaller number of guns involved. In the 43d Army
the artillery of the lat Rifle Corps began delivering fire directly as support of
the assault, and in the 60th Rifle Corps -- artillery support of the assault began
at the end of artillery preparation,16 which was shortened by 90 minutes.

On 23 June the main forces of the front's battle group commenced to attack. Rifle
combined units, accompanied by close-support tanks and supported by artillery and
air, smashed the resistance of the 252d and 56th Infantry divisions and began
rapidly advancing deeper. The commanding general of the front ordered the lst Tank
Corps to engage in the gap, but the corps advanced slowly due to the recent rain,
which had ruined the roads. As Mar SU I. Kh. Bagramyan notes, its engagement would
have required freeing the roads, which could slow the movement of the successfully
advancing rifle combined units and the movement of crossing equipment to the Western
Dvina River. In addition, upon reaching this river, the corps would be forced to
wait for the infantry to arrive. Therefore the commanding general of the front
revised the plan of the offensive and decided to engage the tank corps after rifle
troops captured a bridgehead on the Western Dvina.1

That afternoon the support—echelon corps of the 6th Guards Army was brought into
action to increase the force of the offensive drive. By evening the front's troops
had completed breakthrough of the enemy's tactical zone of defense, had advanced to
a depth of 16 km, and had widened the penetration frontage to 50 km.18

On 24 June both armies of the front‘s battle group, pursuing the retreating enemy,
advanced to a depth of 30 km, expanding the penetration frontage to 90 km. They

reached the Western Dvina on a 50 km frontage and captured 5 small bridgeheads.
When an additional rifle corps was engaged from the support echelon of the 6th Guards

94

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Army, a single bridgehead was formed. 65 kn wide and up to 10 km deep. On 25 June
the 1st Tank Corps crossed over to this bridgehead and immediately began pursuit.
in coordination with rifle combined unite. That same day the forces of the 43d and
39th armies completed envelopment of the enemy's Vitebsk force.

0n the Third Belorussian Front reconnaissance in force was conducted on the after-
noon of 22 June. Two hours later forward battalions of the 5th Army overran the
first position. The regiments' attack-echelon battalions were engaged, which ad-
vanced to a depth of up to 3.5 km.19 The forward battalions in the zone of the
other armies were less successful. 0n the whole the reconnaissance in force showed

that the enemy's defense in the Orsha sector was considerably stronger than in the
Bogushevsk sector.

During the night of 23 June airstrikes were delivered on the major strongpoints
in the main defensive zone and on artillery positions. 0n the morning of 23 June,
following artillery preparation and preliminary airstrikee, the front's forces
launched an attack in both sectors.

The greatest success was achieved on the Bogushev axis. 0n the 39th Army's main
axis of advance it was noted half an hour before artillery preparation was ended
that enemy subunits, unable to withstand our massive artillery fire, had begun
pulling back from the front-line trench. The decision was made to shift artillery
fire deeper and to commence the assault along the entire front. Units of the 5th
Guards Rifle Corps swiftly overran the front-line and second trenches and, ad-
vancing without a halt, captured three serviceable bridges across the Luchesa River.
This made it possible for the corps main forces to cross the river by 1200 hours,
and an hour later to complete penetration of the enemy's main defensive zone. By
evening the corps had advanced 13-14 km and had widened the penetration frontage to
20 km.

Combined units of the 5th Army also were quite successful that day; exploiting the
successful advance achieved by the forward battalions on the previous day, they
launched a determined assault and penetrated the main defensive zone, broke through
the second defensive zone without a halt, and by evening had advanced 10-13 km,
widening the breakthrough frontage to 26 km.

Thus in a single day the troops of the 39th and 5th armies had completely penetrated
the enemy's tactical zone of defense and had widened the penetration frontage to

50 km. The following day. repulsing strong enemy counterattacks. they advanced 10-
20 km and captured the town of Bogushevek. That afternoon Gen N. S. Oslikovakiy's
mounted-mechanized group was engaged in the zone of the 5th Army for offensive ex-
ploitation; by 2000 hours forward detachments of this group reached a point north-
east of Bogushevak.

0n the Orsha axis, where the enemy's defense was particularly strong, on the first
day of the operation, the armies on the adjacent flanks were able to penetrate only
to a depth of 2-3 km. At the same time on the right flank of the llth Guards Army
the troops of the 16th Guards Rifle Corps and the 152d Fortified Area. advancing in
a weakly-defended marshy area, advanced from b to 10 km, breaking through the main
defensive zone.20 In connection with this the commanding general of the army
decided to redeploy to this point the support echelons of two rifle corps which.were

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

advancing on the main axis, plus a rifle division from his reserve. Their engage-
ment made it possible to advance to a depth of up to 14 km on the following day.
On the main axis advance along the highway once again was minimal.

Although the offensive action by the southern battle group had not yet achieved
total penetration of the tactical zone of defense, a deep crack formed in the
enemy's defense, promising rapid development of tactical into operational penetra-
tion and joining of two breakthroughs into a single common front breakthrough.

0n the third day of the operation the mounted~nechanized group captured Senno with-
out a halt and cut the Orsha-Lepel’ rail line. The 5th Army, working in coordina-
tion with it, advanced 20 km.

In connection with the very successful advance on the Bogushevsk axis, the com-
manding general of the Third Belorussian Front, on A. H. Vasilevskiy's instructions,
on 25 June put the 5th Guards Tank Army into the gap on the Bogushevsk axis, and
the 2d Guards Tank Corps in the planned breakthrough sector north of the Minsk
highway. Outstripping the infantry, by evening on 26 June the tank army had ad-
vanced 50 km, had captured the town of Tolochin and cut the enemy's lines of com-
munication west of Orsha, toward which the 2d Guards Tank Corps was advancing.

In connection with the successful advance of the front's right-side battle group,
the enemy was forced to begin withdrawing troops defending south of Orsha.

During the next three days the mobile forces and, behind them, the coshined-arms
armies were successfully advancing along the entire front and reached the Berezina
River by the evening of-28 June. In 6 days the troops had advanced from 80 to

150 km, while the breakthrough frontage, including the First Baltic Front, had ex-
panded to 200 km.

The troops of the Second Belorussian Front shifted to the offensive on 23 June. One
feature of the breakthrough here was the fact that it involved crossing a river with
a wide, swampy floodplain.

In the course of artillery preparation for the assault phase, which ran 2 hours,
specially designated reinforced rifle companies (one from each attack-echelon
regiment) crossed the Pronya River and overran three, and in places four trench
lines. By the end of artillery preparation the divisions' main forces had also
crossed the river behind them, on assult footbridges placed by the combat engineers.
The tanks and self-propelled guns. however, encountered major difficulties in cross-
ing the river, and especially the swampy floodplain, which slowed the pace of the
attack. By evening the troops had advanced to a depth of up to 8 km and had

widened the breakthrough frontage to 25 km.

On 24 June the troops of the 49th Army advanced 12-14 km. During the night of

25 June the enemy began withdrawing beyond the Dnieper. Combined units of the 33d
and 50th armies initiated pursuit. By evening on the fifth day of the operation
the front's forces, having advanced 80-90 km, completed breakthrough of the enemy's
operational defense and continued advancing toward Minsk.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR 0W11C1Al.USEiONLY

0n the First Belorussian Front penetration of the enemy's defense began on 20 June.
Reconnaissance in force had been conducted on the previous day, but since three
Soviet fronts were already engaged in offensive actions, the enemy had put his
troops into a full state of conbat readiness, and the forward battalions con-
ducting the reconnaissance in force were met with heavy fire and numerous counter-
attacks, and enjoyed limited success.

0n the night before initiation of penetration. the 16th Air Army and long-range
bombers delivered heavy bombing strikes onto the main defensive zone, flying 550
sorties.

Artillery preparation began at 0455 hours. Although the enemy was expecting it,

the force of the artillery fire and airstrikes shattered his morale, especially in
the zone of the left-side battle group. A total of 80 artillery and mortar bat-
teries. 11 separate guns, 56 weapon emplacements, 26 earth-and-tinber bunkers, 8 dug-
out shelters and 12 observation posts were destroyed and up to 1500 officers and

men killed in the breakthrOugh sector of the 65th Army.

When artillery preparation and preliminary airstrikes ended, the front's forces
launched an assault on both axes.

Combined units of the 65th and 28th armies launched the assault with the support of
a double moving barrage and close-support strikes by ground-attack aircraft.

The nature of conduct of penetration by rifle combined units on marshy woodland ter-
rain can be see in the example of the 18th Rifle Corps of the 65th Army (Diagram 23).

A total of 1087 guns and mortars 76 mm and larger, plus 353 rocket launchers were
deliver'ng fire in a corps breakthrough sector 5 km in frontage; forces in action in-
cluded u3 tanks and self-;ropelled guns, and 5 combat engineer battalions, which
amounted to 288 artillery systems, 16 tanks and l combat engineer battalion per km

of breakthrough sector. Divisions were advancing on a frontage of 1.5-1.8 km.

The assault on the enemy's forward positions took place in a unique manner. Followh
ing preliminary bombardment small assault teams assigned to reconnaissance from the
15th and 37th Guards rifle divisions swiftly overran the first-line trench. In the
course of the continuing artillery preparation the forward battalions crossed the
swampy stretches and 50 minutes before completion of artillery preparation took up
an assault position in the enemy's front-line trench. At 0700 hours close-support

tanks reached them, and a general assault began, supported by a double moving bar-
rage.

The artillery fire stunned the enemy sufficiently that during the first minutes of
the assault he offered very weak resistance. The advance of the attack-echelon
battalions was so swift that in certain sectors the moving barrage had to skip a
concentration point, and sometimes even two.21

The enemy took an hour to begin offering his first organized resistance. Blowing up
the bridge across the lpa River in the zone of the 69th Rifle Division, an enemy

task force held up the advance of tanks and self-propelled guns east of Rakovichi.
At this point rifle subunit, under cover of fire delivered by tanks, self-propelled

97

FMNl(Nﬂﬂ(]AI.USE‘DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

guns and close-support artillery, crossed a marshy area and pushed the enemy
northwestward. The combat engineers were able to begin repairing the bridge. At
0900 hours tanks crossed the Ipa River on this bridge, caught up with the infantry
and, working in teamork with it, captured Rakovichi.

The 37th Guards Rifle Division, supported by a heavy self-propelled artillery
regiment, by 0900 hours had put two regiments into Nikolayevka, while the third
regiment began bypassing Petrovichi on the north.

When the moving barrage ended, the main forces of the 15th Rifle Division proceeded
in a swift enveloping movement on Petrovichi from the south and southwest. Fearing
encirclement, the garrison of the Petrovichi center of resistance fled into the
forest in disarray.

Thus in 2 hours of offensive action all three divisions succeeded in penetrating
two enemy positions and advancing 3 km.

The enemy, endeavoring to halt deeper advance by the troops of the corps and adjacent
units, sent out task forces to bloclr. the most accessible axes -- to Chernin, in the
forest west of Nikolayevka, and to Vyazhny. At 1100 hours the divisions penetrated
the second position, but were stopped by stubborn enemy resistance. The enemy
mounted a counterattack with an infantry battalion and 5 tanks from the vicinity of
Chernin in the direction of Nikolayevka.

One of the company comanders, spotting tanks and infantry merging from the forest
north of Chernin, requested artillery fire, deployed his platoons toward the ad-
vancing enemy, and ordered the close-support artillery to take up position on a
ridge of hills west of Nikolayevka.

As soon as the enemy tanks and infantry reached the Ipa River, all weapons opened

f ire. The company was supported by adjacent units and artillery delivering fire on
request. The enemy counterattack stalled. Enemy casualties included 100 killed.
But during his withdrawal to Chernin the enemy succeeded in blowing up the bridge
across the Ipa River. Without this bridge the tanks could not cross the swampy
floodplain.

The infantry advanced toward Chernin under cover of massive fire support by at-

tiliery. tanks and close-support guns. As the weather improved, air activities
were stepped up.

In water up to their waists, the infantry slogged across the viscous mud of the
inundated floodplain and took up an attack position.

The artillery of the 69th Rifle Division, changing position, imediately prior to
the assault intensified fire on enemy centers of resistance, as a result of which
enemy ground was taken with light casualties.

Capture of the center of resistance in Chernin facilitated the advance of the 37th
Guards Rifle Division. By 1800 hours the main defensive zone on the right flank
of the corps was penetrated. 0n the left flank the 15th Rifle Division was fighting

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to take a strong center of resistance established by the enemy in Vyazhny. This
created favorable conditions for putting the army's mobile group into action in
the gap -- the 1st Guards Tank Corps.

The lead battalions of the attack-echelon tank brigades caught up with the in-
fantry as the rifle divisions broke through the enemy's first defensive position
and advanced behind the infantry. ready to exploit. Since the marshy terrain
prevented movement off regular roads and corduroy roads, the tank corps min forces
began moving in brigade columns. But anew artillery succeeded in demolishing the
corduroy road on the floodplain of the Ipa River, and the 16th Guards Tank Brigade
was forced to turn off onto the main road leading to chernin. The tank corps com-
bat formation became disconnected. To intensify the offensive thrust at the junc-
tion of the 18th and 105th Rifle Corps from a point near Chernin, the army com-
mander put into action the loath Guards Rifle Division together with the 16th Guards
Tank Brigade; passing through the combat formations of the 69th Rifle Division,
they led the advance on Knyshevichi. Rut stubborn enemy resistance on Hill 152.0
and the marshy Peschanka River valley delayed their advance all night.

The lst Guards Motorized Rifle Brigade reached Nikolayevka by 11000 hoars. Movement
of the brigade's artillery was delayed due to damaged corduroy road at Petrovichi.
And the fighting vehicles were moving slowly along the poor-condition forest road.
There was a new obstacle beyond the Vyazhny-Chemin road -- a very marshy stretch
of ground. Utilizing the crossing constructed by the 37th Guards Rifle Division,
the brigade finally reached tactical depth, captured Gamza at 2100 hours, and
Slobodka at 2&50 hours. The 17th Guards Tank Brigade was advancing in the left part
of the zone of the 15th Rifle Division. By 1700 haurs its battalions had overtaken
the infantry and fought their way into Romanishchi at midnight on 25 June.

Thus by evening on 24 June the enemy's tactical zone of defense was penetrated.

Exploiting the advance of the 1st Guards Tank Corps, the divisions of the 18th
Rifle Corps increased the rate of their forward movement. By evening they had

penetrated 12 km deep into the enemy's defense, widening the breakthrough frontage
to 10.5 km.

During the night of 25 June the enemy began withdrawing in a northwesteriy direction.

The success of the 18th Rifle Corps decisively influenced the advance of the ad-
jacent corps. The cos-lander of the 105th Rifle Corps engaged his support echelon
across its zone, while the 3d Guards Rifle Corps of the 28th Army, which had been
advancing slowly during the morning, increased its rate of advance upon engagement.
of the support echelon. and by 6500 hours on 25 June its forward units were crossing
the Tremlya River, after which it began pursuit of the retreating enemy.

mat afternom General Pliyev's mounted-mechanized group was engaged at a depth ff

9 km in the zone of the 28th Army and began exploiting the tactical breakthrough
into an operational breakthrough, advancing toward Glusk.

0n the first day coabined units of the right-side battle group were able to penetrate

only 2-6 km into the enemy's defense. Results were affected by difficulties con-
nected with crossing the marshy floodplain of the Drut' River, as well as the

99

FOR OFFlCIAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fact that the offensive thrust was directed against the strongest sector of the
enemy's defense.

0n the morning of 25 June the commander of the 3d Arny engaged two tank brigades
of the 9th Tank Corps. Once again there was 45 ninutes of artillery preparation
prior to the assault by the main forces. There was stepped-up Soviet air activity,
with more than 2000 sorties flown that day. By evening the troops of the right-
side battle group had completed penetration of the sain defensive zone and had
reached the second.

Combat actions on 26 June were a turning point along the entire front. Following
engagesent of all forces of the 9th Tank Corps and the support echelon of the

3d Army, the troops of the right-side battle group conpleted penetration of the
enemy's tactical zone of defense, and the troops of the left-side battle group
reached operational depth.

0n the following day the troops of the front encircled the enemy's Bobruyak force
and, having advanced to a depth of 70-80 km in four days, completed penetration

of the operational defense and created favorable conditions for offensive exploita-
tion on the Minsk axis.

Pushing the advance further, on 3 July the troops of the First and Third Belorussian
fronts liberated Minsk, the capital of Belorussia, and encircled an enemy force of
105,000 men to the east of Minsk.

Thus in 12 days Soviet forces in the central sector of the Soviet-German front had
routed the main forces of Army Group Center and had pushed its remnants westward
230-280 kiloseters.22 A breach more than 400 km wide had been formed in the enemy's
strategic defensive front in the western sector.

Pursuing the eneny. by ll July the troops of the fronts had completed defeat in
detail of the enveloped force and by 15 July, having advanced to a depth of more
than 500 km, were approaching the East Prussian and Polish borders.

Hq SHC, endeavoring maximally to exploit the results achieved in Belorussia, with
the aim of widening the breakthrough frontage and exploiting deep. reinforced the
First Baltic Front with strategic reserves —- the 2d Guards and Slst Combined-Arms
armies -- and ordered the First Belorussian Front to put into action a large force
which had been established on the left side of the front, and also ordered the
First Ukrainian, Second and Third Baltic, Leningrad, and subsequently the Second
and Third Ukrainian fronts to initiate an offensive.

of all the operations conducted by these fronts, deternining trends in exploitation
of a breakthrough, characteristic of the summer-fall campaign of 1944 were mani-
{csted to the greatest degree in the L'vov-Sandonierz and the Iasi-Kishinev opera-
tions (diagramst, 25).

The breakthrough of the enemy's strategic front in Belorussia created a critical
situation for the enemy, on the approaches to East Prussia, cradle of Prussian
militarism. The Hitlerite high couunnd hastily moved large forces into Western
Belorussia and Lithuania, in particular the 39th, 40th, 12th Panzer and 26th Army

corps.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, aware of the presence of four Soviet tank arnies between the
Polesye and the Carpathians, the German-fascist commmnd authorities were expecting
a Soviet offensive in this area and were holding south of the Pripet 26 of the 30
panzer divisions on the Soviet-German front. From this area they transferred to
Belcrussia only 6 infantry and 2 panzer divisions, which were replaced by l
panzer, l motorized and 6 infantry divisions from the OKH reserve.

By the beginning of the L'vov-Sandonierz Operation the troops of the First
Ukrainian Front were opposed by Army Group Northern Ukraine - the German 4th and
lst Panzer armies and the Hungarian lst Army, totaling 40 divisions (including

5 panzer divisions and l motorized division) and 2 infantry brigades. Operational
troop density was high -- 10-12 km per division.

Expecting an offensive by the forces of the First Ukrainian Front, the army was
preparing a strong defense. The main defensive zone, 4-6 km deep, contained from
2 to 3 positions. The second defensive zone was established 10-15 km from the
forward positions. Intensive work was in progress along the west banks of the
Western Bug and Gailaya Lips rivers. preparing a third. rear defensive zone. The
total depth of the enemy's operational defense ran 40-50 km.

A characceristic feature of the enemy's force grouping was the fact that the army
group's main forces occupied the tactical zone of defense, while the operational
reserves (5 panzer divisions, 1 motorized division, 3 infantry divisions, and an
infantry brigade) were in the hands of the army commanders. The panzer divisions
were positioned 15-20 km from the forward edge of the battle area on the probable
Soviet axes of advance, and consequently could be employed in fighting for the
tactical zone of defense, where the heaviest resistance could be expected.

The fascist command authorities considered the defensive sector in Moldavia and
Northern Romania to be the least threatened and the most stable. This assessment
was based, on the one hand, on the fact that the Soviet Army allegedly could not
conduct an offensive along the entire strategic front, and on the other hand, on
the fact of establishment of a very strong defense a: the southern end of the front,
in order to block the advance of the Soviet Army toward Romanian oil and the
Balkans. Army Group Southern Ukraine totaled 67 divisions and S brigades.23 The
majority of these divisions (32) and the strongest army, the German 6th, were
defending in the center of the army group's order of battle, where operational
density was 7.5-8 km per division. 0n the army group's flanks, however, opera-

tional density was 18—20 km per division, and the flanks were defended by Romanian
troops.

The enemy's defense was characterized by great depth, thoroughness of preparation,
permanent fortifications, and heavy saturation with men and weapons, especially on
the Iasi and Kishinev axes. The tactical zone of defense consisted of two zones of
a total depth of 8-15 km and more. Opposite the Second Ukrainian Front the second
defensive zone ran along the southern bank of the Bakhluy River which, with its
marshy floodplain, muddy banks and bottom, presented a formidable obstacle. Opposite
the Third Ukrainian Front the defense was fortified only on the Kishinev axis.
There were fortified areas in the tactical zone of defense in the vicinity of
Tirgu-Neamt, Tirgu-Frumos and Iasi. fortified with reinforced concrete and earth-
nnd-timber fighting bunkers and numerous defensive barriers covered by antitank and

antipersonnel obstacles. There were up to 7 reinforced concrete structures per km of
frontage in the fortified areas.2“

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At operational depth opposite the Second Ukrainian Front there was a third, army
defensive zone at a distance of 20-35 km, along the Hare range, well fortified
with individual strongpoints, covering each narrow pass and road junction. At
operational depth opposite the Third Ukrainian Front there were two zones, running
along the Kagil'nik and Prut rivers.

The German-fascist command authorities attached great importance to preparing a
defensive line along the Seret River, which covered the major routes into the
Romanian heartland via the famous Focsani gate -- an 80 km natural corridor between
the Carpathians and the Danube. As many as 1700 various reinforced concrete
defensive structures had been built here, as well as heavy zones of antitank posts
and water-filled antitank ditches. All accessible areas of terrain were protected
by barbed wire, minefields and demolition charges.

These are the conditions under which the L'vov-Sandomierz and Iasi-Kishinev opera-
tions would be conducted.

They occurred shortly after the Belorussian Operation. Therefore penetration in
these operations was planned along the general principles established by the summer
of 1966. However, the specifics of operational-strategic conditions and the views
of the commanding generals on the conduct of operations introduced new elements into
preparation for these operations and opening up of breaches in the enemy's defense.

The plan for the summer-fall campaign of 1944 prepared by Hq SHC assumed and
demanded unconditional and successful conduct of all specified strategic operations.
Therefore, in issuing directives to the Ukrainian fronts, Hq SHC specified forms

of operational breakthroughs and composition of battle groups which would guarantee
definite opening of deep breaches on the strategic axes, by exploiting which the
Soviet forces could push broad maneuver actions to considerable depth.

in both operations two powerful drives were to be launched on converging axes, with
the objective of encircling and destroying large enemy forces. For the First
Ukrainian Front accomplishment of envelopment involved considerable difficulties.
The curvature of the battle line toward the enemy was insignificant, a matter of
only about 40 km, and this was in the Kovel' sector of the First Belorussian Front.
There was essentially no advantageousbulge on the line of deployment of the battle
groups. The enemy was expecting an offensive by the forces of the First Ukrainian
Front, had stepped up reconnaissance activities, and had specified countermeasures,
in particular the withdrawal of troops to the second defensive zone along a con-
siderable sector of front. The enemy placed his operational reserve - the 3d
Panzer Corps -- opposite the southern battle group.

Table 10 shows the battle groups and troop densities established for accomplishing
operational breakthroughs in the fronts.

A :omparison of the composition of the battle groups of the fronts and troop den-
sities in the L'vov-Sandomier: and Iasi-Kishinev operations with counterpart forces
and densities in the Belorussian Operation and the two preceding campaigns in-
dicates that the quantity of combat equipment, and especially troop densities in

the breakthrough sectors had increased by approximately 20-35 percent in artillery
and 5-15 percent in tanks and self-propelled guns. The number of aircraft supporting

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Table 10. Composition of Battle GrOups and Troop Densities in Breakthrough

Sectors
L'vov-Sandomierz Operation Iasi-Kishinev Operation

  
 

    

Designation

  
    
       
      
     
 
 

 

  
    

orthern Southern IBattle Group Battle Group
:Battle Group Battle Group :of Second of Third
!of First of First :Ukrainian Ukrainian
lUkrainian Ukrainian iFront Front
___ iFront Front ‘
l
Combined arms armies ' 2 3
Tank armies I l -
Mounted-mechanized groups : l -
Independent tank (mechanized)
corps - 2
Rifle divisions 14 24
Guns and mortars 3250 3775 2 5500
Tanks and self-propelled guns ‘ 717 1084 116d 3 591
Aircraft '1300 1950 915 1037
Breakthrough sectors, km ' 12 15 16 18
Densities: I
kn per attack-echelon rifle
division I 1.5 1.5 2 1.5
guns and mortars :26-255 236-25b 240-250 240-280
tanks and self-propelled
70 56 25

guns l 35

the advance of the battle groups was approxinstaly the same as in the Belorussian
Operation, but was 20-30 percent greater than in the summer-fall campaign of 19k3
and 2-2.5 times that of the winter campaign of 19b6.

An increase in density of weapons in breakthrough sectors was also achieved by
narrowing their frontages. For example, initially the command authorities of the
Second Ukrainian Front planned a 22 km breakthrough sector, which meant 220 guns
and mortars per km of breakthrough sector. In order to increase the density to

250 guns and mortars, Hq SHC instructed the front to narrow the breakthrough sector
to 16 km.

High artillery densities ensured sufficient suppressive fire on the enemy's

defense in a 90-105 minute bombardment. whereby in the Second Ukrainian Front 50 per-
cent of artillery preparation time involved heavy specific-area bombardment, and

19 percent in the Third Ukrainian Front. The tiered disposition of enemy targets

on high ground forward of the breakthrough sectors made it possible to put 35—55

guns per kn on direct fire,25 which increased the degree of hit scoring on enemy
targets.

The double and single moving barrage in combination with sequential concentration

of fire became the principal method of close support of the assault on the Ukrainian
fronts.

103

FOIIOFEKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Characteristic for the First Ukrainian Front in employment oftaisvas an endeavor to
place the majority of tanks in the exploitation echelons; the commanding general

of the front believed that it was more advantageous to engage these echelons during
penetration of the tactical zone of defense. As a result, very few tanks were al-
located for forming close-support tank groups. The number in the northern battle
group. for example, was 169, and 119 in the southern battle group, or an average
of 12 percent as compared with 44 percent in the Belorussian fronts. This made it
possible to establish close—support tank densities of only 12—13 per km, and even
as few as 8 per km in the 38th Army.26 Some of the close-support tanks were
knocked out of action during reconnaissance in force, reducing their density to an
even greater extent.27

Thus the command authorities of the First Ukrainian Front underestimated the role
of close-support tanks and were emphasizing premature engagement of tank armies
with the objective of breaking through the enemy's defense. Hg SEC, having studied
the operation plan of the First Ukrainian Front, pointed out that tank armies and
mounted-mechanized groups should be employed not for penetration but for offensive
exploitation following a breakthrough. The commanding general of the front was
forced to change the sequence of engagement of tank armies and to lessen his ex-
cessive optimism regarding the capabilities of the combined-arms armies, which were
initially assigned the mission of advancing to a depth of 30—45 km on the first
day of the operation.28 The front command authorities did not, however, make
changes in the procedure of employment of close-support tanks.

0n the Second Ukrainian Front close-support tanks were employed in a massive
fashion at the division level, although in 1964 there was already a trend toward
utilizing them in the regiments and even battalions. But such a method was more
suited to the specific conditions of hilly terrain, on which the enemy concentrated
his main defensive efforts on hilltops. Swift capture of the hilltops damaged the
stability of the defense throughout the entire main defensive zone. 0n the average
close-support tank densities were 17 tanks per km. But by massing tanks against
key enemy tactical installations, their density increased to 40-50 per km, two to
three times the average. If even 10 tanks were disabled, so went the thinking of
the front command authorities, the remaining tanks would still reach the target,
and the strongpoint would surely be smashed.29

Massed employment of tanks also had morale-psychological significance, especially
against insufficiently stable troops.

The 6th Tank Army was to be engaged following penetration of the tactical zone of
defense.

The main air efforts in the lasi-Kishinev Operation were concentrated on supporting
penetration. 0n the Second Ukrainian Front, for example, more than 4000 sorties
were to be flown on the first three days of the operation, 50 percent to suppress
and destroy enemy personnel and combat equipment in the main defensive zone, and
almost 70 percent of sorties including providing the main force cover against air
attack. The distribution of air efforts was approximately the same on the Third
Ukrainian Front.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the L'vov-Sandomierz Operation the First Ukrainian Front had the most air as-
sets. Its aircraft could fly 6500 sorties per day. Bombers concentrated their
efforts on major targets and on the most critical moments of the offensive, which
increased the operational significance of bomber strikes -- bombers were employed
to support the engagement of mobile groups of the armies and fronts, to hold up the
enemy's operational reserves, to thwart their counterthrusts, and to support river-
crossing operations.

Penetration by the troops of the First Ukrainian Front was conducted in conditions
where the Belorussian fronts were successfully pursuing the enemy on the ap-
proaches to the Neman and the upper reaches of the Narew, threatening,envelopment
of the left flank of Army Group Northern Ukraine. The course of the Belorussian
Operation gave reason to assume possible deep withdrawal of enemy troops opposite
the right side or in the entire zone of the First Ukrainian Front, which naturally
had to be provided for in the operation plan;

By 10 July the command authorities of the First Ukrainian Front learned of the
enemy's intention to withdraw his forces to the second defensive zone.30 This in-
formation urgently required elaboration of a breakthrough plan variation involving
deliberate withdrawal of enemy troops from the first to the second zone. This was
not done, however. The commanding general of the front, basing his decision on
intelligence data, decided to conduct reconnaissance in force during the night of
13 July, initially by reconnaissance detachments consisting of a reinforced com-
many from each attack—echelon division, and subsequently by forward battalions as
well. supported by artillery, thus preventing delivery of artillery preparation
fire ogio empty ground, and conserving forces for defeating the enemy in detail at
depth.

At 2200 hours on 12 July, reconnaissance detachments began reconnaissance in force
on both axes. In the zones of the 120th and 76th Rifle Corps, which were operating
on the Rava-Russkaya axis. it was established that beginning at dusk the enemy's
88th and 72d Infantry divisions, covered by rear guards, had begun withdrawing
their forces to the second defensive zone. Directly ahead of the breakthrough
sector. units of the 291st Infantry Division repulsed an attack by reconnaissance
detachments.

The enemy had no intention of withdrawing his troops in the L'vov sector.

Reconnaissance results once again suggested that in conditions where the enemy

was offering such stubborn resistance in a position which he had decided to abandon,
enemy resistance in the second zone could be very stubborn. Therefore advance
planning of penetration of this zone was essential. On 13 July it was still pos-
sible to issue instructions on mmeumtaﬂdeployment of battle groups forward of the
second defensive zone, to specify probable breakthrough sectors. and to plan
delivery of fire for effect.

The offensive commenced on the morning of 13 July, by the forces of 7 forward
battalions, following 30 minutes of artillery preparation (Diagram 26). Subunits of
the 504th and 506th regiments of the 291st Infantry Division could not withstand
their assaults. By 1600 hours the forward battalions had advanced to a depth of 7-
8 km, that is, had crossed the main defensive zone.32 At 1800 hours, following
massive delivery of artillery fire and airstrikes, the main forces of the

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attack-echelon divisions, which by this time had moved forward to the level of

the forward battalions, attacked. They swiftly crushed the resistance of the

291st infantry Division and swept forward toward the second zone, but lacked the
momentum to break through it,33 for the main forces of the 42d Army Corps had suc-
ceeded in withdrawing to the second zone without heavy casualties and in preparing
to repel assaults. The weakest sector was the position to which remnants of the
29lst infantry Division had withdrawn, but this fact was not discovered soon enough.

The enemy moved up the 16th and 17th Panzer divisions onto the axis of advance of
the northern battle group of the First Ukrainian Front, which increased the
stability of the enemy's second defensive zone. Efforts to break open weak points
in the defense, which continued until evening, failed to produce the desired results.
All this indicated that the enemy, having discovered the main axis of advance of

the northern force. had concentrated his principal efforts precisely on this axis.

A massive attack was needed in order to crush enemy resistance, preparation for
which would require approximately 12-16 hours, using the hours of darkness for
redeploying troops and the morning for reconnoitering the enemy's defense and
planning artillery fire and airstrikes.

But the assault on the second zone began on the morning of 14 July following a
5—minute preliminary bombardment with a density of 90-100 guns and mortars, with

a capability of 200 guns per km.54 Following displacement, artillery had sited in
positions lacking a topographic base, and had not had time to register. lntel~
ligence on the enemy and his weapons in the second zone was very meager. Centralized
control of artillery had been disrupted, and due to the limited time available
(short July night) artillery fire had not been adequately organized and planned. As
a consequence of this little suppressive effect was placed on the enemy. The ad-
vancing troops encountered stubborn resistance. Airstrike activity was inten-
sified. The enemy's 16th and 17th Panzer divisions mounted a number of counter-
attacks.

kepeated assaults failed to produce significant results. Only the 76th Rifle Corps
of the 3d Guards Army, which was not an element of the battle group, succeeded in
probing a weak point in the enemy's defense. The lst Guards Tank Brigade (forward
detachment of the lat Tank Army) was engaged in its zone. working in concert, they
advanced to a depth of up to 8 km.

In connection with the difficulties encountered in penetrating the second defensive
zone. it was decided to regroup forces during the night, move the support echelons
of the rifle corps up into the front line, to conduct massive artillery preparation
on the morning of 15 July, and to complete penetration of the tactical zone of
defense.

Forty minutes of artillery preparation was scheduled and artillery density in-
creased for offensive action on 15 July by the 3d Guards Army. In the 13th Army
fire planning was performed at the corps and division level, which made it possible
better to plan artillery actions under conditions of limited time for preparing for
penetration.

The troops of the northern battle group resumed the offensive at 0830 hours. The
troops of the 13th Army were the most successful that day; artillery densities in

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR13FFKJAI.USEZONLX

its breakthrough sector had been increased to 200 tubes per km. Its corps broke
through the second defensive zone by evening. Their success was promoted by the
fact that the army‘s main efforts were concentrated in the sector of the tattered
29lsr infantry Division.

0n the following day the 3d Guards Army also broke through the second defensive
zone, which created conditions for engaging the mobile groups. The commanding
general of the front changed the initial sequence of their engagement. First, on
lb July. he engaged the mounted-mechanized group to assist the troops of the left—
side battle group in enveloping the defending forces in the Brody area, and on the
morning of 17 July he engaged the 1st Tank Army to accomplish deep exploitation of
the breakthrough.

These changes did not result in accomplishing two major operational missions in the
next 26 hours. Although the mounted-mechanized group had almost as many tanks as
the lat Tank Army, the fact that it contained vulnerable cavalry divisions com-
plicated its passage to operational depth through a narrow breach. This led to

the loss of a full 26 haurs. needed for exploiting tactical into operational
penetration. Only after the lat Tank Army was engaged was the enemy's operational
defense fully penetrated, with the troops of the right-side battle group obtaining
maneuvering room.

The fact that a tank army could more successfully enter a narrow breach is indicated
by the actions of the 3d GuardsTank Army, which penetrated to operational depth
through the Koltuv corridor, which was only 4-6 km wide. At the same time we should
note that engagement of the battle group of the lat Guards Army here on 16 July,

and the 4th Tank Army on 18 July cannot be considered successful from the stand-
point of development of the operation as a whole. A great number of troops massed
in a narrow gap, but they had no maneuvering room. Since the right-side battle
group had broken through to operational depth on 17 July, the 4th Tank Army could

be committed to battle behind the mounted-mechanized group, bypassing L'vov on the
north and northwest. For this it would have to execute a 110-120 km march to the
point of engagement, plus approximately 100 km from the point of engagement to
L'vov. In conditions where the defense was already broken up on the axis of

advance of the northern force and the lat Tank Army was advancing swiftly toward

the San, all this could take #8 hours, a maximum of 72. The 4th Tank Army could
reach the L'vov area by 19-20 July and attack the city from the unprotected north or
west .

Moving into action thrOugh the Koltuv corridor, the 6th Tank Army reached L‘vov on
19 July, that is, one of its tank corps reached the city. Encountering stubborn
resistance at L'vov. it was unable to continue advancing, and its forces were
scattered in four areas. Finally by 25 July the army commander succeeded in
gathering his forces together and commencing an assault on the city, which was cap-
tured through joint efforts of the 3d Guards Tank Army and 60th Army, but notuntilZ7
July. that is, 5-6 days later than could have been the case if the 6th Tank Army

had been engaged in the zone of the 13th Army.

Of course such a maneuver involved certain risk, for the enemy was endeavoring to
close the Koltuv corridor, and might succeed. But by mobilizing the battle group
of the 1st Guards Army and the antitank weapons of the front and the 5th Guards

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Army, comprising the front's support echelon, the Koltuv corridor and the ring of
enclrclement arOund the Brody force could be preserved. The capture of L'vov on
21-22 July disrupted the operational stability of Army Group Northern Ukraine, which
made it possible more rapidly to join together two operational breakthroughs into

a strategic breakthrough, and to reach the Vistula sooner and in greater force.

Penetration by the southern battle group was taking place in complex, at times
critical conditions. The main reason for this was the fact that the enemy. having
determined the point and time of commencement of the offensive, had made prepara-
tions to repulse it: he had put his troops on a heightened combat alert status,

had somewhat beefed up his combat formations, and had brought up operational
reserves to the breakthrough sector - the 1st and 8th Panzer divisions. Neverthe-
less the high troop densities established in the breakthrough sector, substantial
superiority in personnel and weapons, firm and flexible direction of the operation
by the commanding general of the front, and determined actions by all the troops
made it possible to break through a very strong enemy defense.

Comparison of penetration on the First Ukrainian and Belorussian fronts and expendi-
ture of forces required for its accomplishment suggests the conclusion that in con-
ditions where there is little probability of gaining the element of surprise,
weapon and equipment densities should be 30-40 percent higher than the figures
adopted for the prevailing conditions in a campaign in progress.

Penetration on the L'vov axis was also characterized by the fact that two tank
armies were squeezed through a 6-km gap to operational depth, a gap which proved to
he one third to one fourth the width considered necessary according to prewar views
and the established practice of engaging front mobile grOups. This experience in-
dicates that engagement of large masses of tanks is also possible without wide
"safety" zones on their flanks at the time of engagement. It is important to
deprive the enemy of the opportunity of delivering direct fire, to suppress and
demoralize large counterthrust forces. To achieve this objective,the First Ukrainian
Front extensively employed mass fires and concentrated airstrikes. For example,
the Second Air Army flew 1848 sorties against the enemy's lst and 8th Panzer divi-
sions, which sharply weakened the force of their drives.35

As in the Belorussian Operation, the defeat in detail of the enemy's Brody force,
which was encircled at tactical and immediate operational depth, led to the forma—
tion of a large gap in the enemy‘s defense, while the enemy was endeavoring at all
costs to hold the Hestern Ukraine and thus to block the path of the Soviet forces
into the Silesian industrial region and into Czechoslovakia, to which the Hitlerite
leaders had rcbased from Germany a large number of war plants and where a resistance
movement was gathering momentum, a movement which developed into the Slovak uprising.
By the 10th day the troops of the First Ukrainian Front had advanced almost 200 km
in the center of a zone more than 300 km wide. On 29-30 July the front's forces.
which had advanced a total of 350 km, crossed the Vistula and seized a number of
hridgeheads on the far side. During August these bridgeheads were linked up into

a single bridgehead 75 km in frontage and 20-60 km deep.

The successful advance of the troops of the First Ukrainian Front made it possible
to widen the strategic breakthrough to 1200 km. The enemy was able to stabilize
his strategic defensive front only by moving to the western strategic sector large

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
reserves from Germany, the Western European countries and other strategic sectors,
as well as by deploying them along natural barriers -- the Vistula and Narew rivers,
and along the fortified Bast Prussian border.

Al the same time we should note that the heavy expenditures of men and equipment by
the First Ukrainian Front on breaking through the tactical zone of defense and ex-
ploitation to operational depth limited its capabilities to exploit the strategic
breakthrough. The overall depth of advance by the front's forces proved to be half
that of the Belorussian Operation, although it had more mobile combined units than
in all the fronts which had been advancing in Belorussia north of the Polesye. In
addition, the four tank corps of the left side of the First Belorussian Front were
operating close to the zone of advance of the First Ukrainian Front.

Penetration in the lasi-Kishinev Operation, which began on 20 August with a
simultaneous offensive drive by the Second and Third Ukrainian fronts (Diagram 25).
had a number of notable aspects.

0n the Second Ukrainian Front, due to high artillery densities established in the
breakthrough sector. concentrated fire on key points in the tactical defense, and
the achieved element of surprise, the defense was suppressed well, with communica—
tions, command and control at the company, battalion, and regimental level com-
pletely disrupted.

Officers specially designated by front headquarters monitored the course of
penetration. As soon as the attack-echelon troops crossed the Bakhluy River, the
6th Tank Army was given the signal to advance. It entered the gap at 1400 hours.
This was the only instance in the Great Patriotic "at where a tank army entered a
so-called "clean" gap in the middle of the first day of an operation.

Although the second defensive zone was already penetrated, the 6th Tank Army was
unable immediately to break through to operational depth. The enemy had engaged
three reserve divisions, endeavoring with these combined units, together with re-
treating forces, to halt the advance of the forces of the Second Ukrainian Front
in the third zone, which ran along the Hare range. By stubborn fighting the enemy
was able to slow the advance of the front's battle group. But on the following day
Soviet trodes captured passes across the Hare range without a halt and completed
breakthrough of the army defensive zone. 0n the night of 22 August the 6th Tank
Army. commencing pursuit, advanced 35 km for the day, an additional 45 km on 23
August. and drove swiftly toward the Pocsani Gate, in order to penetrate the
fortified area without a halt and open up the road into Central Romania, Bulgaria,
and to the borders of Yugoslavia and Hungary. It brilliantly accomplished this
mission on 27 August, having fought its way forward 180 km in a week's time.

Penetration was proceeding equally successfully on the Third Ukrainian Front, where
in conditions of offensive actions from a bridgehead, they nevertheless achieved
the element of surprise. An important role in this was played by preparation of

a feint attack in the zone of the 5th Assault Army and conduct of reconnaissance in
force by that army on the day the operation began. This deluded the enemy abOut
the actual main axis of advance, and he delayed withdrawing the main forces of the
German 6th Army from the Kishinev salient, which facilitated their total envelop-
ment and annihilation.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the second day of the operation the 4th Guards Mechanized Corps, and subsequent-
ly the 7th Mechanized Corps as well were committed to action for offensive ex-
ploitation. The front battle group advanced 25-30 km. 0n the following day tanks
succeeded in breaking thrOugh to operational depth and in pushing forward toward
the area where they were to link up with the troops of the Second Ukrainian Front.
On 22 August the 7th Mechanized Corps covered 80 km. On the following day the
enemy's Iasi—Kishinev force, totaling 22 divisions, was encircled and soon there:
after defeated in detail. A huge gap had been formed on the southern side of the
German Front, which the enemy was unable to close. In this operation the front's
forces crushed the main forces of Army Group Southern Ukraine between 20 and 29
August and thus achieved a breakthrough of the enemy's strategic front in the
Southwestern Sector. This enabled them subsequently to cross the Eastern Car-
pathians and Transylvanian Alps, to liberate the Romanian and Bulgarian peoples
from the German-fascist occupation forces, and to reach the Hungarian and Yugo-
slavian borders. In a single month the troops of the Second and Third Ukrainian
fronts had advanced 500 km. It was not until mid-September that the German-
fascisr command authorities succeeded in establishing a new, continuous defensive
front, with the newly-formed Army Group South, consisting of the German 8th Army
and the Hungarian 2d and 3d armies.

The Soviet Army achieved excellent success in the summer-fall campaign of 1944.
Large German-fascist forces were defeated in detail in all sectors of the Soviet-
German front, and the enemy's strategic front was broken through twice: in the
western Sector, in a sector 1200 km wide, from the Western Dvina to the Carpathians,
where 100 divisions were routed, and in the Southwestern Sector -- from the
Carpathians to the Bulgarian Haritsa River, on a front of more than 500 km, with
56 divisions defeated in detail. Our forces had advanced from 400 to 700 km.

In both cases penetration of the enemy's strategic front was achieved by mounting
large-scale strategic operations, during which the enemy's defense was initially
softened up by simultaneous attacks in several narrow sectors of front, while sub-
sequently the opposing German—fascist main forces were enveloped and annihilated
by advances on converging axes, with simultaneous deep advance at a rapid pace.

As experience indicated, this mode of penetration of the enemy's strategic front
gave the Soviet forces continuity of offensive drives to considerable depth, of-
fensive exploitation at a rapid pace, reduction in the time required to conduct
strategic operations, enormous enemy casualties and combat equipment losses, with
friendly forces sustaining light casualties, and also led to exhaustion of the
enemy's strategic reserves and created advantageous conditions for conducting new
strategic operations in other sectors.

In the summer-fall campaign of 1944 the task of splitting up the enemy's defense
into separate pieces by several simultaneous thrusts (3-6 or more) was carried

out by the forces not of a single front, as had been the case in the preceding
campaign, but by the forces of a group of fronts, which was due to the fact that
the enemy possessed a strong defense disposed in depth and substantial operational
reserves, consisting for the most part of panzer and motorized combined units
capable of extensive maneuver and execution of powerful counterthrusts.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Depending on the concept of the operation, available men and weapons, the character
of the enemy's defense and his force grouping, the front executed penetration in

one or two sectors. 0f the 13 initial front operations conducted in June-August
1944, in seven operations the fronts penetrated the defense in two sectors, and in
six operations -- in one sector. If the front was attacking simultaneously on two
axes, a powerful battle group would be formed on each of these axes, capable of
independently penetrating the enemy's defense and exploiting to considerable depth.
In this case one would be designated the main attack, and the other a second attack,
but not secondary attack, since in its force, significance and role in the operation
it went beyond the framework of a secondary attack, which usually would be conducted
with a limited objective. Each attack would involve from two to three combined-arms
armies and one or two tank armies (or from one to three tank and mechanized corps),
with 3500-4500 guns and mortars, a considerable number of engineer troops, with
strong air support.

The main attacks in front operations were mounted for the most part against a weak
point in the enemyb defense, but in such a manner that the selected axes woald
bring our main forces into the flank and rear of the enemy's main forces (offensive
drives of the First Baltic Front at Vitebsk, the First Belorussian Front at
Bobruysk, the Second and Third Ukrainian fronts in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation,
etc). In a number of instances the main attack was delivered against strongpoints
in the enemy's defense when attacks on other axes failed to accomplish the mission
of routing the opposing enemy main forces (First Ukrainian Front in the L'vov-
Sandomierz Operation), or when major lines of communication passed through strong
defensive sectors, roads suitable for successful employment of large mobile forces
(Third Belorussian Front on the Orsha axis). Great importance was attached to the
element of surprise in selecting the main axis of advance. Particularly
characteristic in this regard are the attacks of the First Belorussian Front near
Parychi and the Third Ukrainian Front from a bridgehead south of Bendery. In these
sectors the enemy had totally excluded the possibility of mounting main attacks by
Soviet forces.

Men and weapons would be massed on the selected axes, and powerful battle groups
would be formed. For example, 50-80 percent of combined-arms large units, 60-

80 percent of artillery, and 90-100 percent of tanks and air would be concentrated
in breakthrough sectors comprising 6-15 percent of the entire width of the front's
zone. This made it possible to establish high operational densities -- an average
of 0.8-1.0 km per rifle division, 150-250 guns and mortars and 60-80 tanks and
self-propelled guns per km of breakthrough sector -- and to achieve a 4-6zl
superiority over the enemy in infantry, 6-lo:l in artillery, 4-8:1 in tanks, and
4-10:l in aircraft.

A most important ro1e in accomplishing the mission of penetration of the enemy's
tactical defense was played by rifle combined units, which were more heavily
saturated with tanks and artillery than in the past. Assigned narrower break-
through sectors -- 1.5-2.5 km per division and 3-5 km per rifle corps, they were
able to increase tactical densities of personnel and weapons to 5-7 rifle battalions
and to 20, and in some cases more,close-support tanks per km of breakthrough
sector.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a rule the combat formations of the combined-arms large units and units were
deep, figured for mounting a strong initial attack, capability to build up the
offensive effort during penetration, and conduct of an assault without a pause to
the entire depth of the enemy's main defensive zone. The depth of missions in-
creased in comparison with the summer-fall campaign of 1943. It became a rule to
assign an immediate objective to the regiment - capture of the first position
(depth to 2 km), for the rifle division -- capture of the second position (depth
h—S km), for the rifle corps -- capture of the main defensive zone (depth 6-8 km).
In most cases the subsequent objective for the rifle divisions would be capture of
the main defensive zone (depth 8-10 km), for the rifle corps -— advance to the
second zone or capture of the entire tactical zone (depth 13-17 km). In those
cases when an army mobile group was employed in the corps sector, the subsequent
corps mission (or the day's objective) would be assigned to considerable depth.

Increase in artillery densities in the breakthrough sectors and improvement in the
qualitative composition of artillery, as well as an increase in the ammunition
limit released to the fronts. taking into account amassed combat experience, made
it possible to increase the percentage share of massed fire in the artillery
preparation plan and to increase its effectiveness. In 1943, for example, 8-

20 percent of total artillery preparation time would be allocated to heavy
shelling. while in the summer-fall campaign of 1964 it amounted to 50 percent and
more. Depth of simultaneous suppressive fire on the enemy's defense increased to
5-6 km, and in some operations (Iasi-Kishinev and others) to 8 km. A double
moving barrage to the depth of the enemy‘s first defensive position was employed to
ensure reliability of artillery support of the assault phase. Artillery control
was also improved by establishing a well-structured system of artillery groups ac-
cording to the organizational-tactical principle, and enlistment of artillery
breakthrough division and corps headquarters for controlling artillery groups.

Typical of air support of penetration was extensive employment of massed airstrikes,
increased duration of continuous battlefield close support of ground troops, and
closer coordination between air and ground troops. The latter was achieved by

full adoption of the practice of controlling close-support air by representatives of
the air command, assigned to the command posts of the combined-arms commanders.

Improvement in the art of preparing for penetration and methods of its conduct made
it possible in a number of operations (First Baltic and Third Belorussian fronts

in the Vitebak area, the First Belorussian Front south of Bobruysk and on the
Kovel' axis. the Second and Third Ukrainian fronts in the Iasi-Kishincv Operation)
to achieve penetration of the enemy's tactical zone of defense to its entire depth
on the firSt day of the operation.

Development of tactical to operational breakthrough was achieved by engaging mobile
groups of the armies and fronts. As a rule army mobile groups would be covmitted

to battle on the first day in order to complete penetration of the enemy's tactical
zone of defense, but sometimes following breakthrough (the 7th Mechanized Corps of
the 37th Army in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation, the llth Tank Corps of the 8th Guards
Army of the Lublin-Brest Operation). Front mobile grOups, consisting of tank armies
and mounted-mechanized groups, would most frequently be moved into the breach after
the forward operational echelon had penetrated through the tactical zone of defense,
which was a new phenomenon in their employment and attested to substantial

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
achievements by Soviet art of warfare in resolving the problem of penetrating the
enemy's defense.

3. The Art of Penetration of the Enemy's Defense in the Operations of 1945

The 1945 campaign in Europe was conducted in a military-political situation which
was favorable to our Armed Forces. The enemy had been expelled from Soviet soil,
and the battle front ran through East Prussia, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary,
520-550 km from Berlin, and 650 km from the Elbe River, the designated point where
the Allied armies were to meet. As a result of the crushing defeat of the Hitlerite
forces in Northern Norway and Finland's withdrawal from the war, the battle line

had shrunk from 5450 to 2250 km. which enabled our command authorities to move freed
men and equipment to strengthen those fronts which were still active.

Thanks to measures taken by the Communist Party and Soviet Government, by the
beginning of 19b5 the Soviet Army was better armed and equipped than at any time
in the war. This created extensive capabilities to form powerful battle groups

capable of mounting crushing drives to great depth and to conduct an offensive at a
swift pace.

The concept of Hq SHC for this campaign called for a simultaneous offensive along
the entire strategic front, with the main attack to be launched on the Warsabierlin
axis, with the objective of crushing the German-fascist forces in East Prussia,
Poland. Czechoslovakia, Hungary. and Austria, with Soviet forces reaching a line
from the mouth of the Vistula River to Bydgoszcz, Poznan, and on to Vienna. Sub-
sequently an offensive would be launched on Berlin and Prague.

Penetration of the enemy's strategic defensive front on the Berlin axis. Seven
defensive lines had been established between the Vistula and the Oder, to a depth

of up to 500 km. The strongest of these lines -- the Vistula line -— consisted of
four zones with a total depth of 50—70 km. The defense was particularly solid op-
posite our bridgeheads in the Hagnuszew, Pulawy, and Sandomierz areas. The main
defensive zone consisted of 3-0 positions. Divisions in this zone were defending in
sectors 5-10 km wide. Enemy operational-reserve panzer and motorized divisions were
deployed against the bridgehesds. Subsequent defensive lines were set up for the
most part along rivers, which increased their strength and enabled the German—
fascist command authorities sequentially to shift efforts to depth, thus delaying
penetration by Soviet forces to strategically important objectives.

The defense of East Prussia was based on a string of fortified areas extending along
its eastern and southern borders, as well as on a number of strongholds.

To weaken the enemy's force grouping on the Berlin axis, the Soviet Supreme High
Command undertook operations in East Prussia and in Hungary, which forced the enemy
to move 18 divisions (including 8 passer) and 3 brigades from the center to the
flanks in October and December. In exchange, only 6 infantry and 2 panzer divisions
were moved into the central sector. The fact that the enemy's forces were weakened
by 10 divisions, including 6 panzer divisions, prevented him from establishing

strong operational reserves and occupying fortified defensive lines at depth in ad-
vance .

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the concept of Hg SHC (Diagram 27), the main attack on the Berlin axis
was to be mounted by the forces of the Second and First Belorussian and First
Ukrainian fronts in the Ostroleka—Krakow sector. A breakthrough of the strategic
front in this sector would make it possible rapidly to liberate Poland's central
and western voivodships and, advancing to the tactical approaches to Berlin, to
create the requisite conditions for completing total defeat of fascist Germany's
armed forces; subsequent advance by the Second Belorussian Front to the mouth of
the Vistula would cut off the enemy's East Prussian force and would lead to its
defeat, working in coordination with the troops of the Third Belorussian Front and

the Baltic Fleet.

Although the experience of the preceding campaign had demonstrated the great
effectiveness of an envelopment operation, in the January 1945 offensive Hq SEC
selected a different form of conduct of operations - delivery of a number of
powerful, splitting attacks to considerable depth. The Second Belorussian Front,
utilizing bridgeheads on the west bank of the Narew River, was to mount two power—
ful attacks at the boundary of Army Groups Center and A and then, forming a single
breach, was to push the advance toward the Baltic. The First Belorussian Front
also was to mount two attacks, utilizing the Magnuszew and Pulawy bridgeheads.
During penetration to immediate operational depth they were to merge into a single
offensive drive. spearheading directly toward Berlin. The First Ukrainian, Third
Belorussian and Fourth Ukrainian fronts were each to mount an offensive thrust.

If we consider that the breakthrough sectors of the battle groups of the First and
Second Belorussian fronts were 20-40 km from one another. we can state that at the
operational-strategic level these fronts were also mounting one powerful offensive
thrust each.

The enemy's defense on the Berlin axis was strongest against the bridgeheads.
Penetration required establishment of high troop densities, while deep exploitation
of the planned operations required the formation of several operational echelons.

In directives to the fronts Hq sac specified the composition of the battle groups,
the directions of offensive thrusts and breakthrough sectors, and artillery den-
sities, that is, essentially the principal matters pertaining to penetration were
determined by “Q SHC.

For example, in a directive to the First Ukrainian Front (and to all the others)

Hq SHC gave the following instructions: the main attack was to be launched by the
forces of five combinedvarms armies (45 rifle divisions), 2 tank armies, A tank and
mechanized corps from the Sandomierz bridgehead toward Chmelnik-Rodomsko. The
defense was to be penetrated in a 30 km sector, and artillery densities were to be
220 tubes per km of breakthrough frontage (76 mm and larger).

Actual force groupings and densities of men and weapons are shown in Table 11.
Troop densities were 15—20 percent greater than in the summer-fall campaign of
1954. and even higher in the zones of certain combined units. For example, in the

breakthrough sector of the 29th Guards Rifle Corps and the 8th Guards Army, artil-
lery density was increased to 390 guns and mortars per kilometer.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIMICMHWCIAl.lEﬂE(HVLY

Table 11. Couposition of Front Settle Groups and Troop Densities in January 1965

Offensive
First Belorussian First Uk-
Pront Front ninian Front
m
V Force Force Force
3 2 6 2
1 2

besignation

 

Combined-arms armies 8
Tank armies 2
Independent tank
(nechanizechorps 2 3 l 2 a
Rifle divisions 30 22 13 35 14 56
Artillery . 4800 770 1800 ‘ 5300 3800 8200
Tanks 1238 I535 375 1982 768 3266
Aircraft 1333 I6“? 2190 2582
Width of breakthrough
sector, kn 26 18 10 17 13 36
Densities:
kn per attack—echelon

division 1.5 1.7 1.5 1.2 1.8 1.4
guns and mortars per kn

of breakthrough sector 220 290 180 310 300 230-250

close-support tanks and

self-propelled guns

per kn of breakthrough '

sector 30 25 20 24 26 Up to 20
operational density of

tanks and self-

propelled guns per km

of breakthrough sector 50 71 32 106 60 95

Concentration of a large quantity of weapons in breakthrough sectors made it
possible to smash the enemy's defense with assurance, while dense combat fornations

and a deep tactical order of battle ensured penetration at a rapid pace and to full
depth.

New features appeared in planning delivery of fire on the eneny. In the First Belo-
russian Front artillery support for the attack was planned in two variations, taking
into account the specific features of initiation of offensive actions by the troops
of the front, where the assault by the main forces was preceded by actions by re-
inforced forward battalions or. as they were then called,'bpecial echelons." Ar-
tillery preparation for the assault by the forward battalions was to involve a
single massive 25-minute delivery of fire by all the front's artillery. concen-
trated in breakthrough sectors, and not only specially designated artillery (1-3
artillery regiments per battalion), as had usually been the practice in the past.
Close artillery support of the assault phase was to involve a single moving barrage
to a depth of 1.5-2 km. In case the forward battalions broke through the first
position, artillery was to provide support for engagesent of the nain forces of the
attack-echelon divisions, and in case of an unsuccessful attack - to conduct ar-
tillery preparation on a full schedule, that is. for an additional 70 ninutes (20
ninutes of repeat heavy shelling, 30 ninutes of demolition and suppression of

115

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂVlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

targets by methodical fire. and 20 minutes of a third heavy shelling). No less in-
portant was the fact that in the first variation artillery preparation was reduced

to 25 minutes. According to the second variation, massive shellings comprised almst
60 percent of total preparation time, and almost 70 percent including the first
heavy shelling.

0n the First Ukrainian and Third Belorussian fronts artillery preparation was to run
107 and 120 minutes. The percentage share of massed fire increased to 30-35 percent,
and in addition, methodical fire was to be extensively conducted during destruction
of enemy targets, which would increase probability of neutralization of the enemy's
defense. Depth of delivery of artillery fire on the enemy increased to 6-8 In in
all fronts. 0n the Second Belorussian Front artillery preparation was planned in
three variations, depending on the successfulness of the forward battalions which
were to attack following the first lSdninute heavy shelling, supported by a double
moving barrage.

Planning of several artillery preparation variations on the First and Second Belo-
russian fronts was a new element in planning fire delivery.

Air conbat actions were planned in the form of an air offensive. During penetration
of the enemy's tactical zone of defense, main air efforts were to be focused on
close support of the infantry and tanks of the battle grOups, and following break-
through -- on support of the actions of mobile forces. 0n the First Belorussian
Front 7945 sorties were to be flown on the first two days of the offensive, and
12,080 in the first three days on the First Ukrainian Front.

A heavy delivery of fires was planned in order to crush the forward echelon of the
defending enemy force and to prevent the enemy from withdrawing troops and organiz-
ing defense on lines prepared at depth. As was noted soon after the war by. GenH. S.
Halinin, chief of staff of the First Belorussian Front, we sought to establish a
system of offensive action which would be capable of penetrating the enemy's en-
tire tactical zone of defense and subsequently would be capable of swiftly con-
pleting operational penetration, so that we could capture ground before the enemy
was able to organize defense at these points with the forces of retreating units

and reserves arriving fron depth.

Troop formation and the planned character of combat operations were subordinated
to this same objective.

The tactical order of battle of the fronts which conducted the Fistula-Oder Opera-
tion was in two echelons. In the First Belorussian Front the 3d Assault Army was in
the support echelon, and in the First Ukrainian Front - the 21st and 59th arnies.
The exploitation echelon in each front consisted of two tank armies. The mobile
group of the First Belorussian Front also contained the 2d Guards Cavalry Corps.

In addition, the fronts maintained reserves.

The Third Belorussian Front was also formed in two echelons. in spite of the

fact that the operation was to be comparatively shallow -- 150 km. This was due
to the fact that on the front's axis of advance the enemy had a defensive line on
the Daime River with reinforced concrete fortifications, as well as the Heilsberg
fortified area and the Kosnigsberg fortifications, penetration of which would
require a build-up of efforts on an operational scale.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Second Belorussian Front had a single-echelon formation. The mobile group con-
sisted of the 5th Guards Tank Army, and the reserve - a tank corps and a cavalry
corps. This decision was made because five of the seven combined-arms armies were
required to form two battle groups. Part of the forces of the é9th Army was also
employed to widen the breakthroagh sector of the front's main force and to protect
it against counterthruats from the north, where several Army Group Center reserve
divisions were deployed in the Hasurian Lakes area.

From 8 to 9 divisions were needed to cover a sector 170 km wide, and the commanding
general of the front assigned 3 corps of the 69th and 50th armies to this. At the
sane time, in planning the operation the front military council was assuming that
since the enemy had concentrated his principal efforts on holding the main defensive
zone, it should and could be penetrated by the attack-echelon armies, establishing
army mobile groups in most of them, consisting of a tank or mechanized corps. This
would make it possible to maintain the forces of the 5th Guards Tank Army which,
entering a "clean" gap, would be able to advance to the Baltic Sea without much
hindrance.

The tactical order of battle of the armies was one-, two- and three-echelon.

A one-echelon tactical order of battle on the First and Third Belorussian fronts

was due to the fact that they had wider zones of advance, as well as the fact that
the command authorities of the fronts were endeavoring to establish a strong forward
operational echelon, assigning to it all rifle corps which, penetrating the defense
in narrow sectors, could sequentially build up efforts mi f pmsible penetrate both
defensive zones with their own resources, creating conditions for putting the tank
armies into the gap.

0n the First Ukrainian and Second Belorussian fronts the armies were formed for the
most part in two echelons. while the 3d Guards Army was formed in three echelons.
This was due to the fact that with a common breakthrough sector the majority of
armies of the First Ukrainian Front were assigned narrow tones of advance, while
the 3d Guards Army was in addition to thrust toward the flank in order to envelop
the enemy force at the boundary with the First Belorussian Front.

Eight of the 16 armies advancing on axes where front mobile groups were not employed
had their own mobile groups, consisting of one or two tank corps. In addition, ar-

tillery and antiaircraft artillery groups, antiaircraft artillery and engineer
reserves, and mobile obstacle construction detachments were established in the
armies.

The combat formations of the rifle combined unite and units were organized for

the most part in two echelons, which made it possible sequentially to build up
efforts when penetrating enemy positions and zones in the tactical zone of defense.
The width of the corps breakthrough sector averaged 2.5-5 km, and the division -
1.2-2.5 km.

Employment of tanks in the fronts followed the same principles as in the summer of
19k6. In the First Belorussian Front 22 percent of tanks and self-propelled guns
were assigned to the attack echelon, which made it possible to establish average

117

FOR 0F11C1AI.U851MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

densities of 25 armored vehicles per km of breakthrough sector in the armies of the
battle groups, and approximately 30 per km in the 8th Guards, 5th Assault, and 33d
armies.

0n the First Ukrainian Front close-support tank densities comprised 17.5 per km of
breakthrough sector, while the figure was 10.3 in the 5th Guards Army, and 13.7 in
the 52d Army.36

The fronts assigned tanks to the exploitation echelon as follows: the First
Belorussian Front -- 2160; and the First Ukrainian Front -- 2640 tanks and self-
propelled guns.

The views of the commanding generals of the fronts on employment of the exploitation
echelon during penetration were expressed in this difference. 0n the First Belo-
russian Front tank armies were to be committed to action following penetration of
the tactical zone of defense by rifle troops, for capturing the army defensive zone
without a halt, while on the First Ukrainian Front the principal, most fully
elaborated variation was engagement of tank armies to complete breakthrough of the
tactical zone of defense.37 One reinforced tank (mechanized) brigade was details
from each attack-echelon corps for final penetration of the main defensive zone.3

of the tactical defense. But it also had drawbacks. when tank armies were engaged
in the course of penetration of the enemy's tactical defense, they were forced to
operate in constrained conditions, to mount a frontal attack, and frequently to en-
gage enemy operational reserves without maneuvering room. With a shortage of
close-support tanks, this made it necessary to engage corps echelon by echelon, that
is,unit by unit. All this increased the physical and psychological stress on the
tank crewmen, increased vehicle utilization and tank losses to hostile antitank
weapons, and diminished tank army capabilities to execute a swift dash to opera-
tional depth.

The problem of completing penetration of the tactical zone of defense in the
operational sectors of tank armies was resolved more successfully in the First
Belorussian Front. The combined-arms armies (5th Assault and 8th Guards) received
up to 500 tanks and self-propelled guns. This enabled them to establish high close—
support tank densities, to ensure a strong initial offensive thrust, and to exploit
to a maximum degree the results of fire delivery and to execute an assault to
substantial depth.

This employment of tanks for penetration made it possible more closely to organize
their coordination with infantry, artillery, and engineer troops, to avoid expend-
ing tank armies for completing breakthrough of the enemy's tactical defense. and to
create favorable conditions for their actions at operational depth.

A new element in the employment of close-support tanks was the fact that they were
attached coapany by company to rifle battalions, while individual tanks would be
assigned to rifle platoons. Such tank employment became possible in connection
with an increase in the number of rifle subunits and improved combat skill of

the commanders of these subunits.

118

IN3R OWWWCJAI.thEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Army mobile groups were designated for performing two missions -- completion of
penetration of the enemy's tactical defense and offensive exploitation to opera-
tional depth. Normally they would be engaged following penetration of the defense
of the enemy's forward-echelon regiments, that is, two positions.

The limited nature of bridgeheads and attack positions with high troop density
created the threat of excessive density, and consequently increased casualties to
hostile fire. In connection with this, bridgeheads were to be provided in advance
with an extensive network of fighting trenches, communicating trenches, and for-
tifications, which could be used in defensive fighting to hold the bridgeheads and
for positioning troops immediately prior to an attack. Average densities of field
fortifications per kilometer were as follows: up to 10 km of fighting trenches and
communicating trenches, and up to 75 artillery and mortar emplacements; up to 27
command posts and observation posts; more than 100 dugouts and shelter trenches.
In order to achieve continuous buildup of offensive force from the bridgeheads and
uninterrupted supply to the troops during an advance to considerable depth, 26
bridges of various load capacity were constructed across the Vistula. from 5 to 15
per battle group or 3-4 bridges per army. In order to achieve maximum and swift
exploitation of massive delivery of fire by attacking troops, from 3 to 6 lanes
would be cleared through enemy minefields per rifle company, and 2—3 per tank com-
pany. Densities of engineer troops had been increased from 5 to 13 combat en-
gineer companies per km of breakthrough frontage in order to accomplish a large
volume of engineer support missions.3

Party—political work was entirely focused on preparing the troops for penetrating

a defense disposed in depth at a rapid pace and swift exploitation to depth. Par-
ticular attention was focused on increasing the men‘s combat skill and coordinating
the actions of the units and subunits of the various arms in performing combat
missions.

In consideration of the fact that in the course of the operation they would be
liberating fraternal Poland and fighting on German soil, a correct, internationalist
attitude toward the local population, including the German people. was instilled in
the men. At the same time discussions were held, at which instructors pointed to
the fact that the enslaved peoples of Europe were impatiently awaiting their
liberation. All this increased the troops' fighting enthusiasm and resoluteness of
actions in the course of the offensive. /

Achievement of the element of surprise was a complex problem, since a broad offen-
sive was possible only from the bridgehesds, and the locations of our planned
breakthroughs could not be a secret from the enemy. Therefore no sac and the com-
mand authorities of the fronts were endeavoring to conceal iron the enemy to a
maximum degree the force of the offensive drives which were in preparation and the
time of commencement of the offensive. with this objective ﬂq SEC stepped up com-
bat actions on the flanks of the strategic front, endeavoring to stretch out the
cnenyEYorces in Poland. As Army Gen 8. H. Shtemenko noted, this led Hitler to con-
clude that the Soviet Army intended to mount the main attack in 1965 across Hungary
and Bohemia. Consequently the Uehrmscht main forces were dispatched to that area. 0

The fronts were carrying out various camouflage, concealment and deception measures.
During the period of stepped-up combat actions in Hungary and East Prussia, a num-
ber of measures were taken to create the impression that the troops of the First

119

FOR10FFK1ALIEEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Second Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts were endeavoring to strengthen

the occupied bridgeheads and would not be launching an offensive in December-January.
Attack positions were being readied under this guise. “hen the troops proceeded to
prepare for the offensive, in conformity with the plans of camouflage, concealment
and deception, they proceeded to simulate phony axes of advance, concentration
areas, phony troop movements and unloading of supplies and withdrawal of troops

from bridgeheads. Simultaneously troops were moving to assembly areas for the
offensive. A great effort was made to deceive the enemy by feeding him phony docu-
ments, conducting phony telephone traffic, etc. Combat missions were communicated
to the troops in written form: to the corps 5 days in advance, to the attack—echelon
divisions 3 days in advance, to the support-echelon divisions 2 days in advance, and
to the regimental commanders -- at the same time, but orally.

On 12 January 1945, the troops of the First Ukrainian Front were the first to begin
penetration of the enemy's defensive line on the Vistula. Following a heavy 15-
ninute artillery bombardment (2-3 artillery regiments per battalion), the forward
battalions commenced the attack at 0500 hours, that is, 4 hours before dawn, and
captured the first trench line, from which the enemy had withdrawn a large part of
his troops to depth (Diagram 28).

O
Artillery preparation began at 1000 hours. Its power, as well as the fact that it
was conducted immediately following reconnaissance in force, which the enemy was not
expecting, shook the enemy troops to such an extent that many enlisted men, and even
officers panicked and began abandoning their positions without orders."l

Forty-five minutes before artillery preparation came to an end, along the entire
breakthrough sector rifle platoons, 1 platoon designated from each attack-echelon
battalion, began feigning a general attack. To add realism to the assault, 2 or 3
tanks operated with each rifle platoon. The enemy, knowing from past operations
that our main-force attack would begin with tanks advancing to the forward edge of
the battle area, took the feint attack to be the beginning of a general offensive
and moved out of the shelters to repel the attack those troops which had survived
the artillery fire. At this time a final, massive 15-minute bombardment was
delivered by the front's entire artillery. After this the main forces attacked.

The infantry and tank assault, supported by a double moving barrage, developed at a
rapid pace, especially in the 52d Army. As a result the double moving barrage was
terminated after delivering fire on the first main defensive line and two inter-
mediate lines, with shifting to support of the assault phase by the method of se-
quential concentration of fires. Abatement of friendly artillery fire enabled the
enemy to intensify resistance and even to mount several counterattacks, which led
to a slowing of the pace of the assault, especially during fighting for the second
position. This position also, however, was penetrated from 2 to 3 hours after the
attack began.

The buildup of enemy resistance indicated that resistance could be substantial in
the third position. As a consequence of this the commanding general of the front
issued an order at 1400 to commit the tank armies and independent tank corps to
battle. In order to complete breakthrough of the main defensive zone, one tank
(mechanized) brigade was engaged from each attack-echelon corps, while their main
forces were to penetrate the enemy's second defensive zone without a pause.

120

FOR 0511CLA1.USEIDNLN
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(NQLY

The forward brigades (detachments), jointly with the rifle combined unite, com-
pleted penet:ation of the main zone and swept foward toward the second defensive
zone. Conditions were right for engaging the main forces of the mobile groups. In
thr 3d and 5th Guards armies engagement of the main forces of the mobile groups

took place in a timely manner, which enabled them swiftly to reach the second zone.
In view of the onset of darkness, however, it was difficult to reconnoiter weakly
defended sectors and to clear lanes through minefields, which delayed the assault on
the second zone by the forces of some of the tank corps and forward detachments of
the divisions. When the rifle corps reached the second zone, attempts were made to
break through it at night. as a result of which they succeeded in penetrating the
enemy's dispositions, while the tank corps were able to break through the entire
tactical zone of defense and to reach the hide River by morning on 13 January, along
which ran the enemy's army defensive line.

Engagement of the main forces of the 3d Guards and hth Tank armies was delayed
approximately 16 hours, that is, instead of the afternoon of 12 January, they ac-
tually engaged at 0800 hours on 13 January close to the second defensive zone,
when the forward detachments, bypassing strongpoints, reached the Ride River,
having outpaced the main forces by 20-25 km. The delay in committing the main
forces of the tank armies to action occurred because at the moment they reached the
forward units of the combined—arms armies, all roads and routes were clogged with
artillery and transport vehicles advancing behind their units. The 3d Guards Tank
Army spent all night negotiating the enemy's main zone of defense without a fight,
while the corps of the 6th Tank Army halted behind the infantry formations until
morning on 13 January.“2

In connection with delay in committing the main forces of the tank armies, they en-
gaged when the enemy's 24th Panzer Corps launched a counterstroke, supported by

the second defensive zone, where withdrawn troops were holding important strong-
points. This led to protracted fighting, which continued thrOughout the day on 13
January. The second zone was finally penetrated by the front's troops on the
second instead of the first day of the offensive. The tank armies, however, did
not accomplish the objective of the first day of the offensive (to execute a hasty
crossing of the Ride River) until the third day.

Rout of the enemy's operational reserve -- the 26th Panzer Corps -- created the
requisite conditions for advancrng to operational depth. 0n the morning of 14
January the front's troops accomplished a hasty crossing of the Hide River, suc-
ceeded in breaking through the deliberate defense on this river, which was weakly
defended by the enemy, and in advancing swiftly to the defensive line established
on the Pilica River, to which the enemy was hastily withdrawing his scattered
troops. Beating the enemy troops to the river, the 3d Guards Tank Army executed
a hasty crossing and captured a number of important points and crossing sites.
That same day the town of Radomsko was captured, situated 30 km beyond the Pilica
River. 0n the following day the troops of the 6th Tank and 13th armies broke
through the defensive line on the Pilica River without a pause, after which they
initiated operational pursuit of the enemy troops opposing the First Ukrainian
Front.

Penetration of the First Belorussian Front began with a 25—minute artillery bombard-
ment. Air support, just as on the First Ukrainian Front, was not provided due to

121

FOI.OFIIC1Al.lEﬂE(lHLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE‘DNLN

bad weather. Shortening artillery preparations saved 30,000 of the 53,000 tons of
ammunition allocated for preparation.

The German officers and men knew that the troops of the First Belorussian Front
would quickly commence the attack, but they figured that artillery preparation

would last for one and a half to two hours, with fire shifted several times, and

they took refuge in solidly-built bunkers. But immediately following the preliminary
bombardment, 22 reinforced battalions and 25 rifle companies attacked on a
frontage of more than 100 km. Their attack took the enemy by surprise. 0n the main
axis of advance the attack was supported by a single moving barrage, and only on

the principal defensive lines, while the successive fire concentration method was
employed in the armies attacking from the Pulawy bridgehead.

He shall examine conduct of penetration by combined units in the example of the
6lst Rifle Corps of the 69th Army, which was attacking from the Pulawy bridgehead
(Diagram 28).

Two forward battalions reinforced by artillery and tanks initiated the attack in its
zone of advance. They overran the first and second trench lines while it was still
dark, without much resistance by the enemy, who had sustained heavy casualties from
the artillery fire, since the bombardment occurred at that moment when the enemy
was moving infantry from the first to the second trench. The greatest number of
enemy killed in action were found in the communicating trenches."3 One hour and

20 minutes later, following stubborn fighting, the battalions also captured the
third trench, which led to disruption of the enemy's entire fire plan and coordina-
tion. The enemy's thoroughly suppressed artillery either remained silent or was
hastily changing position.

Specially assigned platoons advanced behind the forward battalions and cleared the
trenches of remaining enemy personnel.

in connection with the successful actions of the forward battalions, the main forces
of the attack-echelon divisions attacked at 1000 hours. on orders by the army com-
mander.44 Artillery preparation was replaced by a 15~minute shelling of targets in
the second position. Since fog was complicating delivery of fire from indirect
positions, all guns in the regimental artillery groups were moved forward for

direct fire.“5 Their aimed fire gave effective support to the infantry and tanks.

At 1030 hours, following effective artillery bombardment, the 134th and 274th Rifle
divisions assaulted the second position. They quickly overran the first trench, but
soon the enemy, recoving from the blow, proceeded to offer steadily increasing
resistance. From a small wood east of Flerjanow, at the edge of which five earth-
and—timber fighting bunkers were situated, the regiments of the 134th Rifle Division
encountered stubborn resistance. The enemy mounted a counterattack from the forest
south of Cielenow.

The attack-echelon regiments, concentrating primarily fire from direct-fire guns and
tanks on earth-and-timber fighting bunkers and counterattacking enemy subunits,
captured the bunkers with a flanking maneuver and touted the enemy in the small wood.
The counterattacking force was neutralized by artillery fire and subsequently

routed by an encounter attack. The second position was penetrated by 1330 hours.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NQLY

The 27ath Rifle Division was counterattacked on the approaches to the second posi-
tion, just before engaging the main forces. Although it took only half an “0“: to
repel the counterattack, this time allowed the enemy to organize defense of the
second position, the assault on which did not begin until 1100 hours. The enemy
offered stubborn resistance, especially at the Lagow strongpoint, the approaches to
which were protected by minefields and an antitank ditch.

The division commander concentrated on Lagow the fire of the divisional artillery
group. While methodical, concentrated fire was being delivered, combat engineers
were clearing lanes through the minefields. Tanks and infantry, launching an
assault, smashed the resistance of the 55th Infantry Regiment and overran the second
position. Here too, however, the enemy mounted another counterattack. It was
halted by artillery fire, upon which attacking infantry and tanks threw the enemy
back, inflicting substantial casualties.

The main defensive zone consisted of a string of strongpoints and emplacements,
which enabled the troops of the 6lst Rifle Corps, neutralizing some of them with
artillery fire, to bypass Others and to advance more rapidly RJdEFh. The divisional
commanders, however, keeping their support echelons for an assault on the second
zone, would not commit them. Nor were the divisions' forward detachments sent Out.
Therefore exploitation was somewhat slowed, which delayed engageaent of the llth
Tank Corps. The onset of darkness made advance of units of the olst Rifle Corps
even more difficult. But nevertheless it reached the second zone by 2100 hours,
having advanced 15 km on that short January day. Breakthrough frontage increased
from a to 6 km.‘6 Its divisions, however, did not take advantage of all opportuni-
ties to penetrate the second zone without a pause.

Engagement of the llth Tank Corps into the gap began at 1400 hours, following
penetration of two enemy positions. Two tank brigades were advancing in the forward
echelon. Since enemy resistance was not weakening between the main and second
defensive zones, it became necessary to commit the forward detachments of the
brigades. The brigades' main forces were engaged through weak points, covered by
the forward detachments. This enabled the 20th Tank Brigade to reach the enemy's
second defensive zone by 2000 hours. The 65th Tank Brigade reached it together
with the rifle troops.

In view of the slowdown in the advance of the troops of the 69th Army, the enemy
succeeded in occupying the second zone with his 19th Panzer Division and remnants of
the 17th and 216th Infantry divisions. On a frontage of 18 km, where the 69th

Army was to bunk through the defense, the enemy had 8 fresh battalions and 4-5 com-
posite battalions made up of remnants of the 17th and 216th Infantry divisions.47

Since the enemy troops were taking up the defense hastily and in the dark, there
should be weak spots in the defense. Two such points were discovered, to the east
and south of the town of Zwolen. Attacking aggressively, the 20th Tank Brigade had
broken through the.second zone by 2100 hours and proceeded to bypass the town of
‘Zwolen on the north. Divisions of the 25th Rifle Corps exploited its successful ad-
vance. maunting a frontal assault on the town. In spite of all the difficulties of
mounting a night attack in a built-up area, the town was captured by 2400 hours.

123

FOR OFIWCIAI.US£13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The élst Rifle Corps would be penetrating the second defensive zone in the strongest
sector, defended by three fresh battalions ofthe 19th Panzer Division and a sub-
stantial number of withdrawn enemy troops. Therefore it was decided to attack on
the morning of 15 January. that is, after limited preparation time.

A total of 602 guns were concentrated in the breakthrough sector, which made it pos-
sible to establish a density of 103 guns and mortars per km of frontage. A fairly
high density of fire was established in 30 minutes of artillery preparation.

The offensive was resumed at 0930 hours. The enemy offered very stubborn
resistance, especially at points where panzer subunits were defending. After over-
running the first trench. the 134th Rifle Division was stopped. Three enemy
battalions, supported by 20 tasks, counterattacked. The divisional commander en-
gaged the support echelon to crush them, focusing it at the base of the spearhead.
The division's main forces attacked with it. Capturing the powerful strongpoint

of Hilcza Nola, they routed the counterattacking enemy forces and began rapidly
advancing.

In the 274th Rifle Division the support echelon was engaged to assault the second
zone. Its more powerful drive ensured a successful advance by the regiments. By
1200 hours they had penetrated the second zone. The 11th Tank Corps, together with
the 77th Guards Rifle Division, was engaged in savage combat with the 10th
Motorized Division, inflicting heavy casualties on it. This enabled it to
penetrate the third defensive zone without a pause and to reach the city of Radon
by evening on 15 January.

Thus the tactical zone of defense was penetrated in 24 hours, and the operational
zone in 48.

The advance of the troops of the First Belorussian Front from the Magnuazew bridge-
head was somewhat more difficult. While the 5th Assault Army succeeded in
penetrating the entire main defensive zone by 1200 hours on 16 January and by
evening had captured strongpoints in the second zone, which ran along the Pilica
River, the 8th Guards Army did not capture the main zone until 0300 hours on

15 January. The 61st Army only advanced 2-3 km that day. The reason for the
slowed advance of the main force of the First Belorussian Front was that in condi-
tions of poor visibility insufficient suppressive fire was placed on the second
position, while the number of close support guns was not increased.

0n the morning of 15 January the Magnuszew force resumed the offensive. The 5th
Assault Army attacked following a lO-minute artillery bombardment. The massive
shelling and smoothly-coordinated assault resulted in the rapid collapse of enemy
resistance, and the troops began successfully advancing to depth.

The 8th Guards Army commenced the attack following 40 minutes of artillery prepara-
tion, in the course of which enemy resistance in intermediate positions was
softened up, while the attack frustrated enemy plans calling for a gradual shifting
of efforts to the second zone. By 1600-1700 hours the army‘s combined units had
reached a position, which was a continuation of the second zone, established on the
Pilica River, and attempted to penetrate it without a halt. The enemy offered
stubborn resistance with the remnants of mauled units and arrived operational
reserves, and the advance slowed.

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At this time the main forces of the 1st Guards Tank Army reached the point at which
they were to engage. Following heavy shelling by the 8th Guards Army‘s artillery,
they proceeded to drive forward, and by the evening of 15 January the enemy's entire
tactical zone of defense in the zone of the 8th Guards Army was penetrated. But
while in the zone of the 5th Assault Army this immediately opened up the way for
unhampered movement to operational depth, in the zone of the 8th Guards Army it
was still necessary to smash the resistance of the tactical reserve -- the main
forces of the 25th Panzer Division. It is true that these forces were clearly in-
adequate to resist two armies. The division, enveloped by the troops of the 5th
Assault Army on the north and the lat Guards Tank Army on the South, attempted to
withdraw beyond the Pilica River, but it was preceded by tank army forward detach-
ments, which were crossing the river and had shut off the avenues of withdrawal,
which led to its total defeat. There were no troop-occupied positions ahead,
which made it possible to exploit swiftly to operational depth.

Enemy forces positioned between the axes of advance of the battle groups of the
First Belorussian Front were defeated in detail in the course of 16 January, after
which a single breakthrough sector of the First Belorussian Front was formed. The
troops initiated swift pursuit. Beating the enemy's reserves and retreating troops,
they penetrated the subsequent defensive lines without a halt.

0n the second day of the operation the troops of the 47th Army attacked, and during
the night of 17 January, the Polish 1st Army. They captured bridgehesds on the
Vistula River and threatened an attack on the Warsaw force from north and south.
Their actions made it possible to utilize all the forces of the 2d Guards Tank Army
to push the drive to operational depth. Engaged into a "clean" gap on the morning
of 16 January, that is, on the third day of the operation, it immediately executed
a 70-90 km dash, its main forces reaching the Zyrardow-Sochaczew area.

Penetration of the enemy's defense on the Second Belorussian Front began on the
morning of 14 January, following an initial 15-minute artillery bombardment. When
the forward battalions, having captured the first, and in certain areas the enemy's
second and third trenches, encountered strong resistance, the decision was made to
lift fire from the capture areas of the enemy defense and to continue artillery
preparation on full schedule. But results of artillery fire could not be observed
due to the heavy fog. Nor were preliminary airstrikes delivered.

When artillery preparation ended, at 1125 hours, the main forces attacked, sup-
ported by a double moving barrage. Reaching the second position, however, to which
the enemy had succeeded in withdrawing his troops, they encountered stubborn
resistance and were halted. It took several hours to prepare for an assault. If
massive suppressive fire on the second position had been provided for in advance,
this would have taken less time, and if suppressive fire had been delivered while
the tanks and infantry were approaching the position, it could have penetrated with-
out delay. In conditions of a successfully initiated assault, a substantial part of
the artillery proceeded to change positions and observation posts. This process
dragged on due to the poor visibility. Little daylight remained, and by evening

the troops had advanced only 3-6 km.

The low rate of penetration by the troops of the Second Belorussian Front was due
not only to the bad weather, which prevented air operations and diminished the

125
nos omdm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

effectiveness of artillery fire, but also to disruption of coordination of in-
fantry, close-support tanks and guns. and to the inability of reconnaissance to

spot enemy targets in conditions of reduced visibility and of artillery quickly to
commence massed fire on sectors where continuation of assaults was to occur. Dif-
ficulties in advancing were also heightened by the fact that in conditions of a

slow rate of penetration, the army penetrations were for the time being disconnected.
This enabled the enemy to deliver fire on the advancing troops and to launch counter-
attacks from the flanks, diverting substantial forces required for deep exploitation
of penetration. All these factors made it impossible to commit the army mobile
groups to action on the first day, as had been planned.

The offensive was resumed on the morning of 15 January. But during the night the
enemy had moved up reserves, including the 7th Panzer Division and the Grossdeutsch-
land Motorized Division. That day the front's forces repelled more than 70 coanter-
attacks. Units of the 7th Panzer Division, which mounted a counterattack, came
under massed prepared Soviet artillery fire and lost as many as 70 tanks and more
than 2000 officers and men."8 This somewhat weakened the enemy's defensive front.
Resuming the attack, rifle combined units pushed back the enemy forces, which made
it possible to engage a tank corps on each of the bridgeheads. Powerful offensive
thrusts by these corps succeeded in completing penetration of the main defensive
zone. Advancing 5-8 km, they initiated penetration of the eneny's second defensive
zone.

A decisive turning point took place on 16 January, when the weather improved and the
8th Mechanized Corps was engaged in the zone of the 48th Army, and the 4th Air Army
was able to deliver several massed strikes. By evening on the third day of the of-
fensive all breakthrough sectors were linked up into a single front breakthrough
sector. extending 60 km in frontage and 30 km in depth. The Second Belorussian
Front was greatly aided by the swift advance of the troops of the First Belorussian
Front. into the zone of which the enemy hastily redeployed the Grossdeutschland
Panzer Corps. All this created favorable conditions for engaging the front's mobile
group.

The 5th Guards Tank Army entered a "clean" gap on the afternoon of 17 January.
Sweeping forward, it penetrated the enemy's third defensive line without a halt and
by evening, having advanced 30 km, reached the Hlawa fortified area. On 18 January
it was enveloped from the north and south. and on the following day was cleared of
enemy forces. This opened up the road to the Baltic Sea for the troops of the
Second Belorussian Front, with the objective of cutting off the enemy's entire

East Prussian force.

Swift pursuit of the enemy on 15-17 January by the forces of the First Ukrainian,
First and Second Belorussian fronts created gaps in the enemy's operational-
strategic defense the depth of which in the fronts ran 160-80-60 km respectively,
which signified penetration of 3-6 operational defensive lines and a deep split in
the forces of Army Group A, which had no reserves left not only for reestablishing
defense along the Vistula but also for organizing defense on subsequent lines.
Remnants of its thoroughly-defeated forces were in a scattered retreat toward
Germany. All this predetermined the rapid development of operational penetrations
into a strategic breakthrough on a front extending from the Carpathians to the
Vistula, and soon on D the Baltic Sea, which had been reached by the troops of the

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Second Belorussian Front. The strategic breakthrough had been achieved essentially
on 17 January, the fifth day of the operation, when the enemy's defense was
penetrated on a 500 km front.

The offensive of the Third Belorussian Front began on 13 January. Following an
initial 5-minute artillery bombardment, reconnaissance subunits detailed from each
attack-echelon division swung into action. They deternined that the first trench
was occupied only by battle outposts, while the main forces had been withdrawn to
the second trench. In connection with this, the bulk of artillery fire was re-
directed onto the second and subsequent trenches. heavy fog and a low overcast,
however, restricted visibility to 100-200 meters, and in many places to 40-50 meters,
which influenced the effectiveness of artillery preparation. In the 5th and 39th
armies direct hits on the second trench were few. Because of this, they were not
able everywhere rapidly to take even the first trench, since the enemy, who was

not neutralized in the second trench, was placing heavy fire on the approaches to
the first trench, inflicting heavy casualties on the attacking extending lines of
rifiemen and the close-support tanks. The assault proceeded slowly and with dif-
ficulty. Coordination between infantry, tanks and supporting artillery was dis-
rupted, since the infantry line was too broken up. The assault became scattered in
axes and tine. The troops were forced to "chew througﬂ'the defense, rather than
sweeping it out. As a result the troops of these armies advanced only 2-3 km in a
day of intensive fighting, that is, penetrated only the first position, and not even
that throughout the entire zone. The troops of the 28th Army, where artillery
preparation results were much better, succeeded in penetrating 7 km into the
defense.49

The con-tending general of the front, determining the deficiencies of the first
day of the offensive, ordered the observation posts of the batteries and battalions
brOught closer to the combat troops, ordered establishment of firm communications
with the infantry, more close-support guns to be allocated to the companies, and
organization of closer coordination between infantry, tanks and artillery at the
regiment-battalion level. During the night the troops corrected the indicated
deficiencies and at 1245 hours on 14 oJanuary, following a 30 minute artillery
preparation, resumed the offensive.50 using this time the enemy had moved the 5th
Panzer, 56th and 61st Infantry divisions to the breakthrough sector from the
reserve and from sectors which were not under attack and, when Soviet forces
resumed the attack, launched strong counterattacks along the entire front.

On 14 and 15 January the troops ofthe‘Third Belorussian Front, engaged in savage
fighting, each day repelled more than 30 enemy counterattacks, each involving forces
from a battalion to a regiment, with tanks and assault guns. As a result the battle
group succeeded in penetrating not more than 2-3 km in 24 hours.51 Thus it took the
front' a forces three days to penetrate the main defensive zone, with advance to the
second zone in some sectors. The assault on the second zone, undertaken following
limited-tine preparation, in conditions where the enemy had taken up defensive
positions with withdrawn troops and had beefed up the defense with reserves, failed
to achieve tangible results. There was a definite threat that the front's offen-
sive could grind to a halt.

In order to deny the enemy the opportunity to maneuver and in order to increase the
offensive drive of the Soviet troops, the commanding general of the front ordered

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE1DNLY

the 2d Guards Army to have the left-side battle group (on the(nmkemenskoye) axis)
launch an attack on 16 January, and engaged the 2d Guards Tank Corps in the zone

of the 5th Army.52 This corps, engaging on the afternoon of 16 January, immediate-
ly encountered stubborn resistance and enemy counterattacka. By evening it had
penetrated the defense only 1-1.5 km, and by the night of 17 January had captured
several enemy strongpoints, but was unable to advance further. The enemy was con-
tinuously moving up reserves and was maintaining a continuous defensive battle line.

In spite of the limited success of the troops of the Third Belorussian Front, in
four days of offensive action they had inflicted heavy casualties on the enemy. The
enemy was also in a crisis situation, for the tactical defense was on its last

legs: in conditions where all operational reserves had been expanded, a breakthrough
at one point would be sufficient to collapse the defense.

The enemy command authorities, having exhausted their basic reserves against the
5th and 28th armies and the 2d Guards Tank Corps, were unable to reinforce the
defense in the zone of the advance of the 39th Army. Mounting a strong attack with
its left-flank corps, on the morning of 17 January the 39th Army completed penetra-
tion of the enemy's tactical zone of defense and proceeded to exploit toward the
northwest. The enemy began hastily retreating.

The commanding general of the front, exploiting the successful advance of the 39th
Army, engaged the lat Tank Corps in its zone.

0n the morning of 18 January the 1st Tank Corps entered the gap on two routes and,
destoying remnants of enemy forces in its path, reached the lnater River by evening
and accomplished a hasty crossing. The troops of the 39th Army, exploiting the
successful advance of the tank corps, moved forward as much as 20 km on this day
and also reached the lnster River. 0n the whole by the evening of 18 January the
troops of the Third Belorussian Front had achieved major operational success. The
enemy's defense was penetrated on a frontage of 65 km and up to 30 km in depth.
With the objective of exploiting the successful advance, on 19 January the command-
ing general of the front moved into the gap (on the heels of the lat Tank Corps)
the 2d Guards Tank Corps, transferred from the zone of the 5th Army, and on the
morning of 20 January - his support echelon -- the 11th Guards Army, which ad-
vanced 45 km by the evening of the following day and by morning on 22 January,
operating in coordination with the 5th Army, captured the town of Insterburg.

The enemy began withdrawing his forces to a permanent-fortification defensive zone
running along the Deime and Alle rivers, including the towns of Bartenstein and
Heilberg. But the enemy was unable to occupy this line along the entire front
either with retreating troops or hastily assembled reserves, and the line was
penetrated both without a pause and with a limited halt in attack position. The
troops of the Third Belorussian Front continued advancing directly toward
Koenigsberg.

The experience of penetration in the Vistula-Oder and East Prussian operations in-
dicated that in conditions of attack from bridgeheads and when penetrating a
particularly strong defense, the composition of battle groups should ensure es-
tablishment of especially high densities of men and weapons and maintaining over-
whelming superiority over the enemy during the entire conduct of an operational
breakthrough. At dc same time, in order to overcome the resistance of an enemy

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
force which has prepared for turning back an offensive, it is essential particular-
ly thoroughly to coordinate the efforts of the units and combined units of all
combat arms taking part in the penetration. In conditions of poor or limited
visibility, great importance is assumed by saturating the infantry and tank com—
bat formations with close-support artillery and moving artillery observation

posts close to the combat formations in order to ensure effective massing of fire,
prompt and timely shifting of fire during combat.

Experience also indicated that completion of penetration of the tactical defense
took place more Successfully in those armies which had their own mobile groups.
Army commanders did a better job of closely organizing their teamwork and coordina-
tion with combined-arms large units, engaged them in a more reliable manner, and
more rapidly exploited their successful advance.

Engagement of a front mobile group from the standpoint of achieving a rapid pace
of an operation proved to be more advantageous following penetration of the tac-
tical zone of defense. When committing tank armies to battle within a tactical
zone of defense and in conditions of establishment of very high troop densities,
they were unable rapidly to overtake the rifle troops and wasted motor transport
reSOurces. fuel and manpower on negotiating short stretches of roads and cross-
country routes deteriorated by the troops and vehicles of the combined-arms armies.

Crushing defeat of enemy troops occupying the tactical zone of defense and the
enemy's immediate operational reserves was one of the most important factors in
successfully crossing numerous defensive lines at depth without a pause and ad-
vance at a rapid pace - 25-30 km per day. The tank armies were advancing at an
average pace of up to #5 km per day, and on some days as much as 70 km. and up to
100 km ahead of the combined-arms armies. Such high rates of advance were being
achieved for the first time in the war, and the experience of attaining them has
retained significance up to the present day.

Penetration in the Berlin Operation (Diagram 29). The collapse of the strategic
front of the German-fascist forces in Poland and swift pursuit of the routed enemy
combined units at the end of January created conditions which led the commanding
generals of the First Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts to the decision to
cross the Oder River in a hasty river-crossing operation and to launch a drive
directly on Berlin. A reduction in the size of sectors of operations, however,
short distances from the areas of formation of reserves, an extensive road network,
utilization of the experience of the defense of Moscow and Leningrad by Soviet
forces, about which a great deal was being written at that time in Germany's news-
papers. enabled the German-fascist command authorities to move into the Berlin
sector a large quantity of men and weapons, to mobilize manpower and to set up a
very strong defense on the tactical approaches to Berlin.

In view of this circumstance. as well as the enormous political significance of a
concluding operation involving capture of the capital of the fascist state, the
Soviet Supreme High Command decided to create preconditions for conduct of a Berlin
Operation which would rule out even the slightest failure and would guarantee
penetration of a particularly strong, fanatically fought defense. with this ob-
jective the enemy was cleared from Eastern Pomerania, which made it possible to

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enlist the troops of the Second Belorussian Front for the Berlin Operation, bridge—
heads on the Oder River were held and strergttened, ad the 3d, 28th, and 31st armies

of the Third Belorussian Front, which had ended combat operations, as well as a
number of artillery and air combined units were redeployed from East Prussia.
Enormous work was done to restore lines of communication and to replenish the forces
with materiel and replacement troops. All this took more than a month.

By mid-April 1945 the 3d Panzer and 9th armies from Army Grouplkdchsel and the 4th
Panzer and 17th armies from Army Group Center were defending on the Berlin
strategic axis. German forces totaled 48 infantry. 6 panzer and 9 motorized
divisions, 37 independent infantry regiments, 98 independent infantry battalions,
and a large number of independent artillery and special units and combined units.
The enemy's Berlin force totaled 1 million men, 10,600 guns and mortars, 1500 tanks
and assault guns, and 3300 combat aircraft.53 These forces enabled the German-
fascist command to establish high operational densities. In the zone of advance of
the Second Belorussian Front, for example, they amounted to 9 km per division. the
First Belorussian Front -- 7 km, and the First Ukrainian Front -- 10.5 km per divi-
sion. The enemy established particularly high troop densities opposite the
Kuestrin bridgehead. Fourteen divisions were defending here in a 44 km zone, while
average 0 erational density was 3 km per division, 66 guns and 17 tanks per km of
frontage. 4 Essentially such troop densities were characteristic of the offensive
operations of 1961-1952.

Preparing to repel a Soviet offensive, the fascist command authorities established a
powerful defense on the approaches to Berlin. The Oder-Neisse defensive line con-
sisted of three zones and a number of intermediate and switch positions and was from
20 to 40 km deep. Immediately behind it was the Berlin defensive area, which con-
sisted of 3 defensive perimeters and fortifications within the city proper. Total
depth of the defense was 90-100 km. It was heavily saturated with weapons, mine-
fields, reinforced concrete pillboxes, antitank and antipersonnel obstacles, and
formidable strongpoints set up for a perimeter defense. The first zone was the

most strongly fortified. It contained three positions with continuous fighting
trenches, pillboxes and esrth-and-timber fighting bunkers to a depth of 5-10 km.55
Ne shOuld also note that the terrain between the Oder-Neisse and Berlin was ad-
vantageous for defense. The Seelow hills, the Oder, Neisse, (Dame), and Spree
rivers, a dense network of canals, rail lines and highways, a large number of

towns with masonry buildings, and forests -- all this greatly complicated the job

of the advancing forces.

The strength of the enemy's defense, however, lay not only in this. The fascist
leaders, realizing that the end was near, made a desperate attempt to force their
enlisted men, officers and general officers to fight with the ferocity of the
doomed. Falsifying history and exploiting the national feelings of the Germans,
and even Roosevelt's death, they succeeded in generating a desperate burst of
fanaticism in the ranks of the troops defending on the approaches to Berlin and
within the city itself.

Thus in the final operation of the war the Soviet forces would have to smash a very
strong enemy defense, defeat a large strategic force, and capture the huge fortress-
city of Berlin, with its 200,000-man garrison.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE OALY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet connand authorities, clearly aware of the great difficulty of the forth-
coming operation, prepared for it with great thorOughness. Three fronts were en-
listed to conduct this operation: the Second and First Belorussian fronts and the
First Ukrainian Front, which totaled 2.5 million men, 61,600 guns and mortars,

6250 tanks and self-propelled guns, and 7500 aircraft.“ Our troops had a 2.5:1
superiority in personnel, 4.2:1 in tanks and self-propelled guns. and 2.3:1 in air-
craft.

The Hq SHC general plan of this operation was as follows: the three fronts.

launching powerful attacks, were to penetrate the Oder-Neisse defensive line in a
number of sectors, after which they were to encircle the enemy's entire Berlin force,
split it up into segments and, destroying them piecemeal, capture Berlin and ad-
vance to the Elbe, where they would link up with Allied forces.

In order maximally to increase the penetrating force of the main battle groups of

the First Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts, ﬂq SHC demanded establishment of
an artillery density of not less than 250 guns and mortars per km of breakthrough

sector. Fifteen breakthrough artillery divisions were transferred to these fronts
to establish such densities.57

Hq SHC ordered that tank armies be engaged to exploit on the main axes following
penetration of the enemy's defense. The tank armies of the First Belorussian

Front were to bypass Berlin on the north and northeast. while the tank armies of the
First Ukrainian Front were to advance into an area 30-35 km southwest of Berlin.

At the same time Hq sac specified as a supplementary variation the possiblity of the
tank armies of the First Ukrainian Front swinging directly into the direction of
Berlin.

Guided by the concept of Hq SHC and the assigned missions, the commanding generals
of the fronts formulated their plans, on the basis of which preparations for the
operations were conducted.

The form of operational penetration selected by the commanding generals of the
fronts specified mounting three frontal attacks on the First Belorussian Front, two
on the Firs: Ukrainian Front. and one on the Second Belorussian Front. Acting in
combination, they would make it possible not only to split but also to envelop the
opposing enemy force, thus depriving the enemy of the capability to execute exten-
sive operational maneuver.

At the exploitation phase of the operation the offensive drives of the fronts would
branch out in conformity with the missions being performed both by the battle group
as a whole and by the individual armies. 0n the First Ukrainian Front. for example,
part of the forces of the main force grouping (2 tank armies and 1 combined-arms
army) were to turn in the direction of Berlin with the objective of encircling and
capturing it, working in coordination with the troops of the First Belorussian

Front if the latter encountered particularly strong enemy resistance. The three
armies of the Second Belorussian Front, after accomplishing operational penetration,
were to advance with the objective of driving the enemy's 3d Panzer Army against the
sea and totally destroying it.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Battle groups were formed to execute these drives, in relation to the significance
of each. Table 12 shows their composition and densities.

Table 12. Composition of Battle Groups and Troop Densities in the Breakthrough
Sectors in the Berlin 0peration*

      

    

 

I Tanks and

Width of kl per Guns and

   

Battle Groups of Fronts

      
   
 

Break- Selt—
through Propelled
Sector, Guns per

km km

Second Belorussian Front

65th, 70th, 49th armies, 8th Mechanized
Corps, lst Guards Cavalry Corps (17
rifle divisions, 3999 tubes, 860
tanks) 14 0.8

First Belorussian Front

olst Army, lst AVP, 7th Guards Cavalry

Corps (10 rifle divisions, 3 cavalry

divisions, 1430 tubes, 113 tanks) 7.5 0.75
47th, 3d, 5th Assault divisions, 8th

Guards Army, 3d Army, lst Tank Army,

2d Guards Tank Army, 9th, 11th Tank

Corps (34 rifle divisions, 7912

tubes, 2306 tanks) 24.3 0.8

33d, 69th armies, 2d Guards Cavalry
Corps (15 rifle divisions, 3785
tubes, 474 tanks) 12.5 0.9

First Ukrainian Front

3d Guards, 13th, 5th Guards, 28th,
31st armies, 3d Guards, 4th Guards
- Tank armies, 2d, 5th, 4th Guards
Tank Corps (40 rifle divisions,
6976 tubes, 1277 tanks) 27 l 0.7
|

     
  
   

50

14

96

32

47
52d Army, 2d AVP, 1st Tank Corps,

7th Guards Mechanized Corps (16

rifle divisions, 2232 tubes, 153

tanks) 9 1.5

248 15

 

* This table is based on figures contained in the following: "Operatsii Sovetskikh
Vooruzhennykh 511 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Operations of the Soviet Armed
Forces in the Great Patriotic War], Vol 4, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1959; "Berlinskaya
operatsiya 1945 goda“ [The Berlin Operation of 1945], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1950;
"Posledniy shturm" [Final Assault], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1970.

The most powerful force groupings were established on the main axes of advance of
the First Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts - 5 combined-arms armies, 2 tank
armies, and 5-6 breakthrough artillery divisions each. Such a composition of

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

battle groups ensured penetration of a defensetf any strength, under the most dif-
ficult operational-tactical conditions, and offensive exploitation to the scheduled
depth.

A fairly strong battle group was also established on the Second Belorussian Front,
the defense opposite which was somewhat weaker than opposite the First Belorussian
and First Ukrainian fronts. As a rule the secondary attacks of the fronts would be
mounted by two armies reinforced by SﬂC Reserve artillery, 350-600 tubes. One
cavalry corps each was attached to the 61st and 33d armies to forn army mobile

groups on the First Belorussian Front, and a tank corps each to the 52d Army and
2d AVP on the First Ukrainian Front.

Depending on position in the tactical order of battle, composition and assigned
support weapons, the breakthrough sector for the armies was specified at 3-6 km in
the Second Belorussian Front, 2.5-7 km in the First Belorussian Front, and 8-10 km
in the First Ukrainian Front.

The width of an army's breakthrOugh sector exerted direct influence on the width

of the breakthrough sector and zone of advance of the combined units and units.

In a number of armies the rifle divisions were assigned very narrow zones of ad-
vance -- 1-1.5 km, and even as little as 0.5-0.7 km for the 163d and 132d Rifle
divisions of the 57th Army. The reason for narrowing zones of advance and break-
through sectors of combined units was an endeavor to achieve high troop densities,
with elements substantially under strength following the recently completed Vistula—
Oder, East Pomeranian, and Silesian operations. 0n the average the numerical
strength of the divisions ran 3600-6000 men,58 while the rifle companies were at
half authorized strength.

Artillery density on the main axis of advance of the First Belorussian Front was
greater than that during the Vistula-Oder Operation by 25 guns and mortars per km
of breakthrough sector, and by 36 including rocket artillery. At certain, more im-
portant points in the breakthrough sector artillery density ran as high as 350-370
guns and mortars per km. Here the density increase ran 70-100 units.

In the breakthrough sectors of the main force of the First Ukrainian Front, artil-
lery density increased insignificantly, but if we compare it with the strength of
the defense, which was greater opposite the Sandomiarz bridgehead than on the

Neisse River, there is an appreciable increase in degree of delivery of fire on
the enemy.

Airstrikes considerably supplemented artillery fire. In the zone of the First
Belorussian Front the number of bombers and ground-attack aircraft in the Berlin
Operation was twice that of the Vistula-Oder Operation.

One also notes an increase in density of close-support tanks. While on the average
for the breakthrough sectors of the battle groups they were the same as in the
Vistula-Oder Operation, in the zone of the 5th Assault Army densities comprised

63.7 tanks and self-propelled guns per km of breakthrough sector.59 Such high close-
support tank densities created strong conditions for the army to be able on its own
to penetrate the enemy's entire tactical zone of defense, with a very high degree

of enemy resistance. In its zone. where the 2d Tank Army was also committed to

133

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

battle, operational densities reached the highest level of the entire Great
Patriotic Her -- 117 tanks and self—propelled guns per km of frontage.60

Established in the employment of close-support tanks was the principle of team-
work and cooperation with rifle subunits, right down to the platoons, to which
specific tanks were assigned.

The tank and mechanized corps attached to the combined-arms armies were to be

used primarily to complete penetration of the main defensive zone and to break
through the second zone without a pause. Engagement of tank armies was planned in
two variations —- following penetration of the tactical zone of defense, and during
penetration. Since very strong enemy resistance was anticipated,preference was
given to the second variation, especially on the First Ukrainian Front.

The Soviet Supreme High Command and the command authorities of the fronts, forming
strong battle groups, were seeking to achieve a high degree of superiority over the
enemy in the breakthrough sectors. since this was a most important prerequisite for
accomplishing penetration at a rapid pace. However, since the enemy had also es-
tablished high troop densities on our probable axes of advance, it was not always
possible to achieve great superiority over the enemy's forces. This is evident in

Table 13.

Table 13. Relative Strengths in Personnel and Weapons in the Breakthrough Sectors
of the Fronts in the Berlin Operation*

Personnel and Weapons

Personnel
Guns, mortars, rocket launchers
Tanks
Aircraft
lPersonnel
Guns, mortars, rocket launchers
Tanks
Aircraft
First Ukrainian Personnel
Guns. mortars, rocket launchers
Tanks
Aircraft

* This table was prepared on the basis of figures from the following: "Operatsii
Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 511 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Operations of the
Soviet Armed Forces in the Great Patriotic War], Vol 4, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1959,
pp 318. 331.

   
    
   
 
   

   

Second Belorussian

U“
0......

OO‘O‘DU&NU|HNO

  

First Belorussian

s e

e

H
oomwuuwwu

 

The figures in the table show that the least favorable ratio of personnel and weapons
was on the First Belorussian Front, althOugh the highest troop densities were es-
tablished there. They proved to be half or less that required on the basis of the
experience of numerous operations in the Great Patriotic var for accomplishing
penetration at a pace ensuring that the operation would not lose steam.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An entirely satisfactory ratio, definitely guaranteeing rapid penetration of the
enemy's defense, was established only in the breakthrOugh sectors of the First
Ukrainian Front.

The various operational-tactical conditions created in the zones of advance of the
fronts by mid-April demanded a diversified organization of delivery of fire on the
enemy's defense. The most important thing was the fact that the troops of the
Second Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts and one battle group of the First
Belorussian Front would be accomplishing penetration which involved crossing the
Oder and Neisse rivers. These rivers were of varying width and river flow condi-
tions, which was taken into consideration in determining duration and organization
of artillery preparation.

0n the First Ukrainian Front it was to run 165 minutes, and included the following:
preparation prior to crossing the Neisae River - 40 minutes; support of the river
crossing, seizure and holding of bridgeheads -— 60 minutes; preparation for assault
across the river -- 45 minutes. Close support of the infantry and tank assault was
to be provided by the rolling barrage technique, running 10 minutes, and support of
infantry and tanks during fighting at depth - by concentrated fire on request. En-
gagement of tank armies was to be supported by fire delivered by 2250 guns and
mortars to a depth of 20 km. Toward this objective concentrated fires were pre-
pared along nine prior-determined lines. Forward artillery'observer officers were
designated for sequential requesting of these fires.51

Air support of the penetration was assigned to the 2d Air Army, which had 2148 air-
craft. Close air support was scheduled to begin 65 minutes before crossing the
Neisse River, with strikes to be delivered by two bomber corps (230 sorties). A to-
talof 3600 sorties were designated for close air support of infantry and tanks.

0n the Second Belorussian Front the Oder River was to be crossed in two stages:
initially forward units would cross the east branch of the Oder River, capture the
ground between the branches, after which the main forces of the armies would ad-
vance to the west branch of the Oder River; than the west branch of the Oder would
be crossed, bridgeheads seized, and the requisite manpower and weapons would be
concentrated on these bridgeheads for penetration of the enemy's defense on the
river's west bank.

Artillery support for the attack in the armies was also organized in conformity with
these stages. An initial artillery preparation of the following duration was
specified for support of the crossing of the 0st Oder and the ground between the two
river branches: 90 minutes in the 65th Army, 120 minutes in the 70th Army, and 110
minutes in the A9th Army. with initiation of the attack by the main forces of the
arnies which were to cross the West Oder, a second artillery preparation of the
following duration was scheduled: 45 minutes in the 65th Army. 60 minutes in the
70th Arny, and 50 minutes in the 69th Army.62

Support of the assault phase and close support of infantry and tanks during combat
at depth was to be handled in all armies by the rolling barrage method, to the
depth oftheday's objective.

135

FtHICMﬂﬁCJAJ.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Offensive air support was assigned to the 6th Air Army, which had 1360 aircraft.
During the three nights prior to the offensive, preliminary airstrikea were to be
delivered by the forces of a night bomber division. Immediate preliminary air-
strikes were to be delivered by the ground-attack aircraft for 2 hours prior to
commencement of the attack, a total of 272 sorties. Air support was to involve
delivery of sequential waves of strikes on strongpoints, centers of resistance and
enemy artillery to the entire depth of the day's objective. A total of 4079 sorties

were schgguled for the first day, including 2671 ground-attack aircraft and bomber
sorties.

On the First Belorussian Pront it was decided to employ a method of fire delivery
which had been tried and proven in the Vistula-Oder Operation - brief but massive
artillery preparation supplemented by airstrikes. Its duration was specified at
20-30 minutes to a depth of 10-12 km, and up to 17-19 km in the zone of the 8th
Guards Army. Support of the assault phase to a depth of 2 km was to be with a
double moving barrage, and a single moving barrage for the next 2 km. Close sup-
port of infantry and tanks at depth was to be provided by the successive fire con-
centration method (depth 8 km).

In view of the strength of the enemy's defense and the possibility of engaging tank
armies during the fighting for the second defensive zone, artillery preparation
lasting 20 minutes was to be delivered just prior to committing the tank armies to
battle.

Offensive air support was assigned to the 16th and 18th Air armies (3988 aircraft).
Preliminary airstrikes were to be delivered 30 minutes prior to commencement of the
attack, by the forces of two night bomber divisions (120 Po-2 aircraft) and 11-4
aircraft of the 18th Air Army, while close air support would involve delivery of
sequential waves of strikes.

The tactical order of battle of the armies was twojand single-echelon, with one or
two divisions placed in reserve. A single-echelon formation was employed in armies
with mobile groups and in those in the zones of which a tank army was to be com-
mitted to action.

The combat formations of the combined units and units were in two and even three
echelons. A11 rifle corps and divisions of the Second Belorussian Front, for
example, contained two echelons. 0n the First Belorussian Front the corps of the
3d Assault Army and 69th Army (with the exception of the 61st) were formed in one
echelon, but their divisions and regiments were formed in two echelons, and the
remaining corps and divisions in two echelons.

The combined units and units of the First Ukrainian Front were similarly disposed.
A single-echelon formation was employed chiefly in those rifle corps in which
there were only two divisions, or one of the three was temporarily defending away
from the breakthrough sector, or an army mobile group was to engage in its zone
(the 3d Assault Army and 5th Guards Army).

The principal feature of engineer support in the Berlin Operation, chiefly on the
First Ukrainian and Second Belorussian fronts, consisted in the fact that engineer

136

INJR 0FF1CJAL USEICNHLY
units and combined units, as well as the combat troops had to accomplish two tasks
simultaneously: establish and maintain a sufficient number of crossing sites which
would ensure a rapid buildup of attacking troops on the enemy's side of the river

and penetration by these troops at the scheduled pace.

Hq SHC reinforced the fronts with engineer troops more generOusly than in any other
operation, which made it possible to establish high densities (Table 14).

Table 14. Quantity and Densities of Engineer Troops at the Commencement of the
Berlin Operation

   

Total Number of Combat
Engineer Battalions

  

Battalions in Operational Density
Breakthrough per km of Break-

8ectors through Sector (Bat-
talions

     
   
 

Second Belorussian 4.0
First Belorussian 4.0
First Ukrainian 3.0

Such high densities of engineer troops fully ensured accomplishment of all main
tasks pertaining to engineer support of the operation.

The principal motto of party-political work in the Berlin Operation was the follow-
ing: crush the enemy's Berlin force quickly and surely.

Thousands of primary and company party and Komsomol organizations were rebuilt to
strength or reestablished in the course of preparation for the operation; these
organizations constituted the vanguard of the subunits in performance of dif-
ficult combat missions. Company party organizer reserves were established in the
political sections of the divisions.

In order to ensure that the men gained a deep understanding of the objectives and
missions of the final operation, commanders and political workers extensively held
get-togethers with personnel and spoke at subunit party and Konsomol meetings.
Young replacement troops were acquainted with the powerful weapons of the Soviet
Army and the fighting history of the units which had brought them to the Oder and
Neisse; they participated in live-fire exercises at which they rehearsed the forth-
coming offensive actions.

Requests contained in letters from home -- to finish off the fascists quickly and
to return home victorious —- evoked a lively response in the men's hearts.

In the final hours before commencement of the attack, appeals by the military
councils of the fronts were read directly in the attack positions. Just prior to
launching the assault, the unitd colors were carried along the trenches. Combat
veterans and the best fighting men were designated to raise red flags over im-
portant enemy defensive installations.

The diversified, purposeful party-political work made it possible to achieve a
high level of fighting enthusiasm, which ensured penetration of the enemy's
defense and his total defeat in Berlin proper.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The combat actions of the fronts participating in the Berlin Operation did not
commence simultaneously. Because of a large-scale redeployment of the troops of
the Second Belorussian Front from Danzig and Gdynia, it was unable to complete
preparations for the operation by mid-April and commenced combat actions four days
later than the troops of the First Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts.

Out of operational-strategic considerations it was not possible to delay commence-
ment of the operation until the Second Belorussian Front was fully ready, although
the Soviet Supreme High Command fully realized that without the Second Belorussian
Front penetration might become difficult for the First Belorussian Front, since
reserves from the enemy's 3d Panzer Army, which was defending north of Berlin, would
enter its zone.

Commencement of the attack by the fronts was preceded by reconnaissance in force.
0n the First Belorussian Front it was conducted on 14 and 15 April by reinforced
battalions and regiments assigned from each front-line division, on the main
axis,54 and by companies from each division on secondary axes. During reconnais-
sance in force they were able to penetrate 2-4 km into the enemy's first defensive
zone on the main axis, and up to 5 km on certain other axes, which broke up the
integrity of the first defensive zone, pinpointed the enemy's fire plan, and
resulted in getting across the densest minefield zone.

On 16 April at 0500 hours Moscow time, that is, while it was still dark, artillery
preparation and preliminary airstrikes began. Artillery preparation resulted in
the expenditure of approximately 500,000 gun and mortar rounds of all calibers.
Preliminary airstrike activity was also massive, involving the participation of
night bombers of the 16th Air Army and the 5th Bomber Corps of the 4th Air Army

of the Second Belorussian Front.

As the assault phase commenced, searchlights were switched on, the blinding light
from which caused the enemy to become confused and greatly assisted in the Soviet
attack. As infantry and tanks proceeded to attack, 4 corps of the 18th Air Army
(745 bombers) delivered airstrikes on the enemy's defenses on the Seelow hills.

At the same time ground-attack aircraft of the 16th Air Army were providing close
support to the attacking troops. The airstrikes on the enemy were continuous.
During each and every hour of the attack, from 250 to 660 aircraft were in the air
above the battlefield.65

As a result of the artillery preparation and preliminary airstrikes, the enemy
troops occupying the forward position suffered from 30 to 70 percent casualties
and were unable to offer any serious resistance. Therefore in the first hour of
the attack the troops of the battle group penetrated the first position along the
entire front and penetrated to a depth of 1.5-2 km.66 Subsequently, however.

the pace of advance dropped off. The enemy began offering stubborn resistance,
and the Soviet troops, by virtue of the fact that the dust raised by the artillery
fire was transformed into a peculiar fog in the searchlight beams, were unable,
especially artillery, to spot enemy targets and deliver aimed fire on them. The
enemy was holding particularly tenaciously to the third position in the main
defensive zone. The German-fascist coamnnd authorities kept putting more and more
new reserves into action, including operational reserves. and were launching
strong counterattacks one after the other along the entire offensive front.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFiﬂ(JAl.USEZ(NHLY

By evening the 47th Army had succeeded in breaking through the main defensive zone
and reaching the second defensive position, having advanced 4-6 km. At 1000 hours
the commander of the 3d Assault Army engaged the 9th Tank Corps. By means of co-
operation and teamwork between infantry and tanks, with artillery and air support,
the enemy's resistance in the main defensive zone was smashed. By evening the army's
troops had advanced as much as 8 km and had reached the intermediate defensive posi-
tion.

The enemy offered the fiercest resistance to the troops of the 5th Assault and 8th
Guards Armies, but their infantry and tanks, with massive support by a double
moving barrage and ground-attack aircraft, nevertheless succeeded in smashing the
enemy's resistance in the main defensive zone and by midday reached the second
zone, which ran along the Seelow hills. The defense here, however, had been little
neutralized.

In addition, the enemy had moved up fresh reserves to the Seelow hills, including
the Muencheberg Panzer Division, and a considerable quantity of artillery from the
Berlin air defense zone. The Seelow hills rose 40-50 meters above the Oder River
valley and had 30-40‘ slopes cut by ravines, which made it difficult for our tanks
to operate and enabled enemy artillery to deliver aimed fire on our advancing troops
beginning at the far approaches.

Recalling that day's fighting, Mar 80 G. K. Zhukov wrote: “By 1300 hours I clearly
realized that the enemy's defensive fire plan here had for the most part survived,
and that we could not take the Seelow hills in the combat formation in which we had
initiated the attack and were conducting the assault."67

In conformity with this estimate of the situation, the commanding general of the
front, conferring with the army commanders, issued the following order at 1630
hours on 16 April: commit to action the 1st and 2d Guards Tank armies which.
operating jointly with the infantry of the 5th Assault and 8th Guards armies, are
to break through the second defensive zone.68 The second defensive zone, however,
was not penetrated with their assistance on the first day of the offensive.

The circumstances which had arisen made it necessary to prepare for penetration of
the second zone on a limited timetable. Preparation for penetration was conducted

at the level of the combined-arms armies, which was correct, for considerably more
time would have been required for all the forces of the front to attack simultaneous-
ly. The front's command authorities issued only a number of basic instructions:

the attack was to begin on the morning of 17 April, 250-270 tubes per km were to

be concentrated in the breakthrough sectors, and 30 to 40 minutes of artillery
preparation were to be conducted in the armies. The tank armies received in-
structions to operate johnny‘dth the combined-arms armies.69

Approximately as much ammunition was allocated for artillery preparation as was ex-
pended by the armies during artillery preparation on the first day of the offensive

The assault on the second defensive zone by the armies of the First Belorussian
Front commenced in the time interval from 0700 to 1100 hours. Artillery supported

the assault by successive fire concentration to a depth of 5 km.

139

F031MHWCIAI.US£<0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The enemy, relying on a well-fortified defense and numerous thrureas, continued to
offer stubborn resistance. However, in spite of the fact that the enemy threw
against the main forces of the front an additional three motorized divisions and
one aviation field division from his reserve, the enemy was unable to hold his
ground. The 47th and 3d Assault armies, with the 9th Independent Tank Corps and
9th Guards Tank Corps of the 2d Guards Tank Army, broke thrOugh the intermediate
position and, advancing 4—8 km that day, proceeded to fight for the second
defensive zone. The troops of the 5th Assault and 8th Guards armies, with the main
forces of the 1st and 2d Guards Tank armies, with air support, broke through the
defense on the Seelow hills following stubborn fighting, and advanced 11-13 km that
day. On the axes of advance-of the right-side and left-side battle groups, the
troops advanced 4-7 kn that day.

On 18 April the attack once again commenced following from 10 to 30 minutes of
artillery preparation. Although the enemy had moved up from the reserve against
the main forces of the First Belorussian Front 2 motorized divisions, 2 tank
destroyer brigades, a Volksaturm brigade, 2 infantry regiments, and a number of
independent antiaircraft battalions and subunits of the Berlin air defense zone, he
was nevertheless unable to hold ground. On the third day of the offensive the
front's main battle group, having advanced from 3 to 8 km, broke through the two
intermediate positions and reached the third defensive zone, which was breached on
the following day.

Thus by evening on 19 April the front's troops completed penetration of the enemy's
Oder defensive line on a 70 km front and advanced to a depth of up to 30 km. Dur-
ing this fighting the German-fascist 9th Army and reserves moved to this sector
from the 3d Panzer Army sustained enormous casualties. The rate of penetration,
however, proved to be less than planned.

The reasons for this were the fact that the defense in depth was occupied by troops
with a high degree of density and held by the enemy with fanatical tenacity.

Taking advantage of the difficult terrain on the Seelow hills, the enemy was able
to organize a very strong defense on these hills, employing withdrawn troops and
advanced reserves. Penetration of this defense required prior-scheduled prepara-
tion for the attack on a tight timetable at the army level, which was not done.
Launching an attack withOut a halt in attack position, employing arriving combined
units, the Soviet troops lost about 12 hours, during which the enemy continued
strengthening the Seelow hills and the Berlin axis on the side of the Kuestrin
bridgehead. This made it necessary to conduct artillery preparation and preliminary
airstrikes every day, and prevented the mobile troops from outpacing the rifle com-
bined units in order to achieve deep exploitation. In spite of these difficulties,
the front's troops stubbornly advanced. and Soviet artillery fired the first salvo
on Berlin at 1350 hours on 20 April.

0n the First Ukrainian Front reconnaissance in force was conducted during the night
of 16 April by reinforced rifle companies. It confirmed that the enemy was dug in
strongly on the west bank of the Neisse River. Artillery preparation began at 0615
hours. During artillery preparation troops were crossing the Neisse River, and
launched the assault at 0840 hours. The enemy offered fierce resistance, especially
during fighting at midday for the third position, to which the enemy had redeployed
part of the forces of the 21st and Fuehrer's Guard Panzer divisions in order to gain

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
time to organize defense in the second zone. The Soviet advance slowed somewhat.
Influencing factors included a shortage of close-support tanks, as well as the
difficult conditions of the forested, lake-studded terrain and large forest fires
which had ignited.

The commanding general of the front, noting that the rate of advance of the rifle
combined units had begun to drop off, decided to engage the 3d and 4th Guards Tank
armies, which began operating as forward brigades at 1400 hours. The engagement

of 6 tank brigades and a motorized rifle brigade greatly reinforced the offensive
drives of the attacking units. Enemy resistance in the third position was

smashed along the entire main attack frontage. By evening the troops of the battle
group had advanced 8-13 km on a frontage of 29 km and had reached the second zone,
while the forward brigades of the 10th Guards Tank Corps and the 6th Guards Tank
Army had penetrated into the second zone. The Polish 2d Army and the 52d Army on

the Dresden axis had also broken through the main zone and had advanced up to
10 km that day.

The success of the front's forces, in spite of the fact that the first day's ob-
jective had not been reached, was substantial. The enemy's defense was thoroughly
battered, and the enemy's combined units had sustained fro, 50 to 70 percent
casualties; captured alone exceeded 2000 officers and men. 0

The German-fascist command authorities, intending to halt the advance of the fronds
forces. moved up into the second defensive zone the main forces of the let Panzer
Division, the Fuehrer's Guard Panzer Division, as well as the Bohemia and Hermann
Goering divisions, the 60th Motorized Brigade, a reserve infantry brigade, and
other individual units and subunits.

The commanding general of the front decided to penetrate the second defensive zone,
preparing for the attack during the night, that is, on a restricted timetable.

One army or 2-3 corps breakthrough sectors were selected, depending on the pos-
sibﬂityand expediency of redeploying troops in the armies. Artillery fire with a
very high density was concentrated in these breakthrough sectors. Since the enemy's
defense was based on centers of resistance established in towns and villages, the
fires of several artillery regiments and brigades were massed against these

centers of resistance.

0n the morning of 17 April the 3d and 4th Guards Tank armies, working in teamwork
with the combined-arms armies, began penetration of the second zone. Offensive
thrusts mounted by the rifle corps, combined-arms and tank armies at weak points

in the enemy's defense made it possible to split it up into segments. In spite of
the enemy's desperate resistance, by evening the front's main forces had broken

through the second defensive zone in a lS-kilometer sector and had advanced from 8
to 15 km. while the troops of the Polish 2d Army and the 52d Army had penetrated
2-3 kn into the second zone.

Crushing defeat of the enemy's reserves in the second zone diminished the enemy's
capability to establish a strong defense on an army defensive line along the Spree

River. Intelligence established, however, that the enemy had maved up as many as
three divisions to this defensive line (the 275th, 346th Infantry. and 10th Panzer).

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICI AL USE ONLY

It was essential to hit the army defensive line before they deployed, which would
make it possible to break through it without a pause, exploiting weak or unoccupied
points in the defense. The commanding general ordered the advance of forces toward
the Spree River to be accelerated, and at the same time shifted the efforts of the
3d and 6th Tank armies into the zone of the 13th Army. where the enemy had less
capabilities to organize a firm defense. The main efforts of the 2d Air Army were
focused on suppressing and delaying advancing reserves and on the most important
strongpoints beyond the Spree River.

At 1300 hours on 13 April the forward tank brigade of the 7th Mechanized Corps
forded the Spree and seized a substantial bridgehead, onto which the corps main
forces had crossed over by 2100 hours. The 102d Rifle Corps of the 13th Army also
crossed the river here. The contender of the 3d Guards Tank Army also sent the
army's remaining corps to this crossing area. ‘

The 27th Rifle Corps, working in coordination with the 10th Guards Tank Corps of
the bth Tank Army, crossed the Spree in approximately the same manner. This made
it possible by evening on 18 April to establish a single bridgehead to the south of
Cottbua, on which all the forces of the tank armies and 13th Combined-Arne Army
were concentrated by morning on 19 April. They were opposed by the 21st Panzer
Division, which had already been considerably weakened, and the just-arrived 366th
Infantry Division, which was turning to the defense essentially beyond the boundary
of the defensive zone. The powerful offensive drive of the First Ukrainian Front
on the main axis of advance led to completion of penetration of the enemy's
operational defense, which gave it the opportunity to exploit toward Berlin and the
Elbe.

He should note that penetration of the enemy's defense by the front's forces, in
spite of the existence of three defensive zones and two river barriers, was accom-
plished without great delays as a unified, precisely planned process. Having
crossed the Neisse River, the front's forces immediately, without any pause, broke
through the strong, well fortified main defensive zone, after which they broke
through the second zone and even the third zone, once again involving a river-
crossing operation and without any breaks in combat actions. This experience has
retained its significance in present-day conditions.

The troops of the Second Belorussian Front proceeded to execute the first stage of
crossing the Oder River on 18 April. As a result of two days of fighting, the
armies secured for themselves an assembly area for putting the main forces across
the river. Nevertheless, the limited size of the assembly area (in connection

with flooding of the ground between the river branches) made it impossible to en-
gage large combined units, while tte artillery was forced to remain on the east

bank of the 0st Oder, 5-6 km from the enemy's forward defensive positions. All this
of course could not help but affect that course of subsequent actions by the front's
forces and required great exertion on their part.

At 0715 hours on 20 April artillery preparation commenced, and all armies of the
front's battle group began crossing the Oder. Front air forces did not go into
operation until 0900 due to fog.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As soon as Soviet units captured small bridgeheads, ferry crossing activities

began immediately, which slowly massed forces on the far bank. At 0800 hours the
units which had crossed the river launched an assault, but were met by numerous
counterattacks. By evening the troops of the 65th and 70th armies had succeeded in
widening the seized bridgeheads south of Stettin to 6 km in frontage. and 1.5 km in
depth. That day 31 rifle battalions of the 65th Army plus a stall quantity of ar-
tillery had been moved across to these bridgeheads, as well as 10 rifle battalions
of the 70th Army, without artillery. The troops of the 49th Army were less success-
ful in crossing the river. Due to poor intelligence. artillery was unable to
place effective suppressive fire on the enemy's defense, and Soviet subunits were
met by strong machinegun fire. As a result only individual groups of combat troops
succeeded in crossing the river and digging in on the far bank. Only lo rifle bat-
talions were moved across onto the seized bridgeheads that day.

During the next 3 days fierce fighting was waged to enlarge the seized bridgeheads
and to repel numerous counterattacks by four enemy infantry divisions and a tank-
destroyer brigade moved up to the river from the reserve by the high comand. Never-
theless, by evening on 23 April the troops of the 65th and 70th armies linked the
seized bridgeheads into a single bridgehead 30 km wide and up to 6 km deep. The
situation remained unchanged only in the zone of the 49th Army.

In subsequent fighting on 2!. and 25 April, the front's troops completed penetration
of the main defensive zone and, advancing up to 15 km, reached the second zone in
a sector 20 km wide. The enemy had sustained heavy casualties and was unable to
hold back further attacks by the troops of the front. Having broken through the
second defensive zone and comitting mobile troops to action, the araies of the
Second Belorussian Front initiated pursuit of the enemy.

During all these days the troops of the First Belorussian Front were continuing
savage combat; as in the past, they were forced to break through numerous enemy
defensive positions one after the other. resuming the offensive each day with ar-
tillery and air preparation. In these fierce engagements the tanks armies were
unable to outstrip the combined-eras large units and operated in the infantry for-
mations. In spite of the heavy fighting, the front's troops were advancing at a
rate of up to 12 km per day and, having broken through the outer and inner Berlin
defensive perimeters, were fighting on the outskirts of the city on 21-22 April.

The tank armies of the First Ukrainian Front, having advanced to operational depth,
were moving forward at a rate of 30-35 km per day, which enabled them to break
through the enemy's outer Berlin defensive perimeter by evening on 22 April, the
3d Guards Tank Army reaching the southern outskirts of Berlin, and the 6th Guards
Tank Army the approaches to Potsdam.

On 25 April the loth Guards Tank Army linked up with the 47th and 2d Guards Tank
armies west of Berlin. 0n 1 May the enemy forces which were encircled in and
southeast of Berlin were annihilated. Only Wenck's army remained, west of Berlin.
This meat that the enemy's strategic defensive front had essentially been penetrated.
The extensive maneuvering room which had been gained was brilliantly utilized for
the offensive on Prague by the forces of the First Ukrainian Front.

1103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole the Berlin Operation, which was the culmination of the triumph
achieved by our Armed Forces in the four-year war against fascist Germany and its
accomplices in the aggression, provided a wealth of instructive experience in
penetration of a strong defense disposed in depth, which in many aspects has re-
tained its significance in present-day conditions.

***

The USSR Armed Forces achieved a world-historic victory in the 1945 campaign in
Europe. The defeat of fascist Germany's armed forces was completed, and the
peoples of Central and Southeastern Europe were liberated from the Bitlerite oc-
cupation forces. From 12 January to 8 May the Soviet Army fought its way from the
Vistula to the Elbe, a distance of more than 800 kilometers, and brought the

war to a victorious conclusion.

Soviet art of warfare, having utilized all preceding combat experience, rose to a
new and higher level. In this campaign a strategic offensive, for the first time
in the Great Patriotic War, was conducted simltaneously along the entire Soviet-
German front. This deprived the eneny of the possibility of effectively utilizing
his reserves as well as defensive lines prepared in advance to considerable depth,
and led to splitting up of the enemy's strategic front.

A strategic breakthrough was achieved in January 1955 as a result of crushing the
enemy's strategic force on the Warsaw-Berlin axis and swift offensive exploitation.
A huge gap formed in the enemy's defense, extending more than 500 kilometers, in

a sector from Bydgoszcz to Krakow. The German-fascist con-land authorities were un-
able to establish a new strategic front until the beginning of February 1965,
utilizing a strong defensive line along the Oder River, and by moving 40 new
divisions into this sector.

A successful strategic breakthrough was achieved by mounting powerful frontal
attacks to considerable depth by several fronts working in coordination, which
resulted in splitting the enemy's strategic front in extensive areas, with sub-
sequent encirclement and annihilation of large German-fascist forces.

Bach front sought to break through the enemy's defense on the main axis of advance
with the efforts of 3-4 and sometimes 5 armies. In each instance the form of
penetration employed depended on the situation conditions and the character of the
tactical area of operations. The Third Belorussian Front in East Prussia and the
First Ukrainian Front in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations sought to penetrate
the enemy defense with 3-5 armies in one continuous breakthrough sector 24-39 km
wide. The First Belorussian Front in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin Operations and
the Second Belorussian Front in the East Prussian and Berlinoperations mounted the
main attacks with approximately equal forces, but they accomplished penetration

in 2-3 sectors, while in the Second Belorussian Front some armies penetrated the
enemy's tactical defense in independent sectors spaced at 3-5 to 7-10 km. The
overall width of army sectors ranged 20-22 km. This ensured initially splitting up
the enemy's defense into separate segments isolated from one another, and sub-
sequently, by the end of the first or second day, made it possible to link up all
army breakthrough sectors into a single front breakthrough sector of substantial
width -- 50-70 km and more. Employment of this mode of breakthrough was dictated

1104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by the increased combat capabilities of the armies, by the considerable experience
of the command authorities, and by the specific features of the situation in which
penetration was being accomplished.

The main forces of the fronts and armies would be decisively concentrated in
narrow breakthrough sectors: 60-80 percent of combined-arms large units, 60-90 per-
cent of artillery, 80-95 percent of tanks and self-propelled guns, and up to 100
percent of aircraft. This made it possible to establish a 3—S:l superiority over
the enemy in infantry. 5-10:l in artillery, 7-9zl in tanks, and 2—4:1 or more in
aircraft.

The 1945 campaign in Europe enriched Soviet art of warfare with the experience of
employing large tank forces. Tank armies, comprising mobile groups of fronts,
were utilized both for exploitation of penetration at operational depth and for com-
pleting penetration of the tactical zone of defense. In the former instance they
retained their striking power and were able to achieve deep exploitation of
penetration at a pace of 30-50 km or more per day. Engagement of tank armies to
complete penetration of the enemy's tactical zone of defense together with com-
bined—arms armies was dictated by the enemy's increased defensive strength. by
insufficient density of close-support tanks, and in many cases by the endeavor of
the commanding generals of the fronts to build up the offensive drive and to
achieve faster penetration of the tactical zone of defense in order to deprive the
enemy of the possibility of bringing up immediate operational reserves to

tighten troop dispositions in the tactical zone. With this utilization, however,
tank armies sustained considerable losses, which diminished their capabilities of
offensive exploitation at operational depth.

Army mobile groups consisting of a tank or mechanized corps were extensively em-
ployed in the operations of the final campaign in Europe. They would be committed
to action to complete penetration of the tactical zone of defense, and as a rule
exerted decisive influence on successful accomplishment of penetration of the
enemy's defense at a rapid pace.

Combat employment of artillery was characterized by an improvement in the qualita-
tive composition of artillery forces, increased firepower, and a further increase
in depth of simultaneous suppressive fire into defensive enemy positions during
the period of artillery preparation, and by improvement of methods of close ar-
tillery support of the assault by infantry and tanks.

Characteristic features in the combat employment of air forces included concentra-
tion of main efforts on supporting the actions of ground troops. increasing the
density of bombing and low—level attacks on enemy defensive installations, and
placing a portion of air forces under the operational col-sand of the commanders of
combined—arms and tank armies during deep offensive exploitation. In conditions

of fast moving combat and abrupt situation changes, which were characteristic of a
number of operations in 1965, the latter ensured rapid air assistance to ground
troops and maintaining close coordination with rifle and especially mobile combined
units.

In the operations of the 1945 campaign there occurred further development of the
art of battlefield maneuver and maintaining continuous coordination among all combat

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arms both during penetration and subsequent exploitation. Flexible, swift
maneuver on the battlefield, bypassing and envelop-en: of strongpoints and enemy
forces in combination with frontal attacks attested to the further development of
maneuver tactics.

The victory over fascist Germany constituted convincing proof of the total superiori-
ty of Soviet art of warfare over that of the German-fascist army.

FOOTNOTES
1. See "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny" [History of Ubrld Her 11], Vol 8, page 62.
2. See vovmo-Isroncassxu 211mm,, No 2, 1967, page 13.
3. Ibid., page 18. '

k. See "Istoriya vtoroy..., op. cit., Vol 8, page 71.

5. TsAMO SSSR [Central Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense], Fund 266,
List 12070, File 99, Sheet 3.

6. 1. S. Konev, "Zapiski komanduyushchego frontom 1943-1944" [Notes of a Front
Commander. 1963-1946], Moscow, Nauka, 1972, page 99.

7. Ibid., page 100.

8. A. M. Vasilevskiy, "Dela vsey zhizni" [Lifelong Cause], Moscow, Politizdat,
1973, page 376.

9. C. K. Zhukov, "Vospominaniya i razmyshleniya" [Reminiscences and Reflections],
V01 2, Moscow. Izd-vo APN. 1974, page 231.

10. See "Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 811 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1941-1945" [Operations of the Soviet Armed Forces in the Great Patriotic War,
1901-1945], Vol 3, page 171.

11. See "Promyshlennost' Germanii v period voyny 1939-1945 gg." [Germany's Industry
During the Var, 1939-1965], Moscow, Izd-voInostn.nt., 1956, page 95.

12. TsAHO 8358, Fund 241, List 2593, File 330, Sheet 48.

13. See “Sovetsksya artilleriya v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne 1941-1945 gg."
$oviet Artillery in the Great Patriotic War, 1961-1945], pp 4&1-442.

14. K. Tippel'skirkh, "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny" [History of World War 11],
Moscow, Izd-vo Inostr. Lit., 1956, page 661.

15. TsAMO SSSR, Fund 235, List 2074, File 119, Sheet 70.

16. See "Sovetskaya srtilleriya...," op. cit., pp 449-450.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.

See "Oavobozhdeniye Belorussii. 1944" [Liberation of Belorussia, 1944], Moscow,
Nauka. 1970, page 119.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 235, List 2129, File 28, Sheet. 8.

Sec II. I. Krylov, "Navsuechu pobede" [Marching to Victory], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1970, pp 201-204.

See K. N. Gelitskiy, ”Cody surovykh ispytaniy" [Years of Harsh Trial], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1973, page 489.

Tom 3381, had 463, List 34149, File 1, Sheet 84.
See "Operatou Sovetakikh...," op. c1:., V01 3, page 345.
See VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZBURNAL, No 7, 1964, page 88.

See Wanko-Kiehiuevekiye Karmy" [Iasi-nshinev Cannae], Moscow, Nsuka, 1964,
page 52.

See "Operatsii Soverskikh..." op. cit., Vol 3, page 452.
TM 8559., Fund 236, 1.18: 35149, File 2, Sheet 91.

See K. S. Hoskalenko, "Na yugo-zapadnou napravlenii" [In the Southwestern
Sector], Book 2, Moscow, Voyeaizdat, 1975, page 398.

See "Operacau Sovetskikh...," op. c1:., Vol 3, page 385.
See 'Yassko-Rishinevskiye...," op, cit., page 75.

See "Operatsii Sovetskikh...," op. c1:., Vol. 3, page 404.
See Konev, op. cit., page 248.

See H. A. Polushkin, ”Na sandmirskoa napravlenii" [On the Sandonierz Axis],
Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1969, page 57.

See Konev, op. c1t., page 248.

See "Sovetskaya artilleriya...," op. cit., page 480.

See "Operatsii Sovetsldkh...," op. cit., Vol 3, page 407.
lbid., page 111.

1616., page 109.

TsAHO 8858, Fund 324, 1.1a: 3336280, File 1, Sheet 8; Fund 315, List 4440,
File 55, sheets 4-7.

147

ron 6mm]. use ONLY
39.

‘0.

61.
62.

63.

66.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
50.
51.
52.
53.
56.
55.
56.
57.

58.

59.
60.
61'

62.

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NQLY

See "Operatsii Sovetskikh...," op, cit., V01 6, page 119.

See S. M. Shtelenko, "General'nyy shtab v gody voyny" [The General Staff in
the War Years], page 310.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 328, List 20718, File 60, Sheet 66.

TsAMO SSSR, Fund 669, List 33765, File 1, sheets 13-16; Fund 326, List 6756,
File 137, sheets 158—162.

See F. V. Danilov, "Radon-Lodzinekaye operatsiya" [the Radon-Lodz Operation],
Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1958, page 121.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 626, List 95713, File 1, Sheet 6.

See Danilov, op. cit., page 125.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 528, List 82257, File 16, Sheet 132.

See Denilov, op. cit., page 137.

See "Sovetskaya artilleriye...," op. cit., page 606.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 261, List 2593, File 988, sheets 160-163.
See "Sovetekaya ertilleriya...," op. cit., page 600.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 261, List.2593, File 819, sheets 77-79.
TeAMD 5883, Fund 261, List 2593, File 819, sheet 77-79.
See "Istoriya vtoroy...," op. cit., Vol 10, pp 322, 326.
See "Posledniy shturn" [Final Assault], Moscow, Voyenizdet, 1975, page 28.
rsmo 5889., Fund 233, List 2382, File 678, sheets 29-61.
See VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 5, 1965.

See "Fosledniy shturs," op. cit., pp 66—67.

See "Berlinskaya operatsiya 1965 g." [The Berlin Operation of 1965], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1950, pp 170, 176, 186.

Ibid., page 182.

Ibid.

See "Istoriya vtoroy...," op. cit., Vol 10, page 332.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 237, List 2396, File 1309, sheets 22-37.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
63.
66.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.

70.

Tam SSSR, Fund 15, List 6472“, File 181, Shut 124.
See "Berlinskaya...," op. cit., pp 193-197.

TBAHD SSSR, Fund 15, List 647244, File 181, Sheet 12‘.
TSAHO SSSR, Fund 233, List 2356, File 775, Sheet 8.
Zhukov, op. cit.. V01 2, page 361.

TsAHO SSSR, Fund 233, List 2356, File 804, Sheet 105.
Tam 8558, Fund 273, List 601802, File 1, Sheet 105.

TaAHO 5883, Fund 236, List 2673, File 2448, Sheet 34.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Four. RESULTS OF DBVEIDMNT 0? THEORY ARD PRACTICE OF PENETBATION
IN THE GREAT PATRIOTIC WAR

1. Types and Forms of Penetration of the Enemy's Defense

In the four years of the Great Patriotic War the Soviet Army conducted a large
number of offensive operations. The most important and most difficult stage in all
operations was penetration of the tactical zone of defense. The enemy would a1-
locate up to 80-90 percent of his manpower and weapons for holding the tactical
zone of defense, would apply the greatest fortification efforts, and would do the

best job of organizing fire plan and obstacle system. Finally, the majority of
operational reserves, especially psnzer and motorized combined units, would be
focused on holding it. By virtue of this, accomplishment of penetration of the
enemy's tactical zone of defense predetermined in large measure successful develop-
ment of an offensive to full operational depth and achievement of the end ob-
jectives of the operation.

Penetration consisted essentially in breaking up the enemy's defense with ar-
tillery fire and airstrikes, and by a determined ground attack, with the objective
of destroying personnel and combat equipment as well as opening one or several
gaps, offensive exploitation through which to depth and toward the flanks would
lead to collapse of the enemy's prepared and troop-occupied defensive positions.

Three types of breakthrough were successfully employed and developed during the
conduct of offensive operations by the forces of the Soviet Army: tactical,
operational, and strategic. They comprised a unified, and from the summer of 19104
on a continuous process of opening a breach in the enemy's strategic defense, but
at the same time each of them possessed specific qualitative features.

The content of tactical penetration was as follows: smashing of the defense with ar-
tillery fire and airstrikes. that is, killing enemy personnel and destroying combat
equipment, demolishing the enemy's defensive works, and profoundly damaging the
morale of the enemy troops, diminishing their will to resist; an infantry and tank
assault, supported by artillery fire and airstrikes; subsequent offensive exploita-
tion to depth and toward the flanks by rifle, tank and mechanized combined units,
working in close coordination with artillery, air, and engineer troops.

Operational penetration consisted in driving a breach to the enemy's full opera-
tional defense depth. This would be achieved by imediate deep exploitation of

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a tactical breakthrough by means of swift actions by mobile combined units and
formations, working in close coordination with combined-arms armies, artillery and
air, as well as by crushing the enemy's operational reserves and widening the
breach in order to make it impossible or maximally difficult to reestablish the
integrity of the defensive front on a new operational line.

Strategic penetration consisted in crushing the strategic front and driving a breach
in it large enough so that the enemy would be unable to close it with available
operational reserves and would be forced to move large additional forces from deep
to the rear and other strategic sectors in order to establish a new stable front.
The principal content of strategic penetration was consolidation of separate opera-
tional breakthroughs into a single breach on a strategic axis, pursuit of routed
enemy forces in a wide zone, penetration of hastily Occupied enemy defensive posi-
tions, and thwarting of attempts by means of counterthrusts to disorganize and

delay offensive exploitation, thus gaining time to stabilize the strategic front
along a new line.

In the Great Patriotic War the Soviet Arny employed diversified forms of operational
penetration, which were determined in relation to the concrete conditions of the
operational-strategic situation, the objective, concept and scale of the operation,
availability of personnel and weapons, plus other factors. The form of operational
penetration constituted expression of the general plan of penetration, organization
of the efforts of troops to accomplish it, and determination of axes of advance in
an operation which would lead to the driving of gaps in the enemy's defense, to
collapse of the defense on an operational or strategic axis, and would make it pos-
sible to achieve the operation objectives.

In army offensive operations (Diagram 30), an offensive drive on two or three axes
was the most widespread form of operational breakthrough in the first period of the
war. One or two attacks would be mounted on converging axes, with the objective of
enveloping opposing enemy forces.

This form of breakthrough was widely employed in the first period of the war
chiefly because in the specific conditions of combat at that time it enabled an
army to shift to an offensive (counteroffensive) very quickly, since it did not
require complicated redeployment of troops and their concentration on one
breakthrough sector. At the same time it contained a significant shortcoming,
which consisted in scattering the efforts of an army the fighting strength of
which in 1941 had diminished to half. With a large number of breakthrough sectors,
insufficient manpower and weapons to accomplish an operational breakthrough would

be placed on each. This would diminish the results of the undertaken penetration
actions or would lead to failure.

The imperative need to achieve maximum massing of men and weapons in the selected
breakthrough sector led to a decrease in the number of attacks mounted by an army.
1n the second, and especially in the third period of the war armies as a rule
would mount one attack, and most frequently by a front battle group penetrating in

a single sector. Only certain armies, in particular the 59th Army in the of-
fensive at Novgorod in the winter of 1964, mounted two attacks.

151

FIHICHHWC1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If an army was penetrating in a separate sector, it would usually mount a cleaving
attack or attack toward a point where the perimeter of envelopment of an enemy
force in coordination with an adjacent army was to close (the 11th Guards and 6lst
armies in the Orel Operation). when an army formed an element of a front battle
group, it would mount a frontal attack within the entire zone of advance, at the
center of the forward operational echelon of the battle group, or in part of the
zone —- at the center or on one of the flanks. In the latter case, in addition to
a frontal attack by the main forces, an army would frequently have part of its
forces exploit toward the flank with the objective of spreading the enemy's
defense. In some operations this mission would also be assigned to an army's main
forces (3d Guards Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation, the 28th and 49th armies in
the East Prussian Operation).

In front offensive operations (Diagram 31) the forms of operational breakthrough
went through the same evolution as in the army. In 1941-1942 fronts would usually
mount several attacks, each with the forces of one army. The number of attacks in
the offensive operations of fronts diminished to 2-3 by the end of the first and
beginning of the second period of the war.

The front attack would usually be mounted by the forces of an army or battle groups
up to two armies in strength. One or two would be splitting attacks, one or two
would be directed toward each other or toward an attack mounted by an adjacent front,
with the objective of enveloping a specific enemy force.

When the enemy shifted to a static defense, the number of attacks in the fronts
decreased to one or two. In the counteroffensive at Kursk, for example, the
Western, Central, and Steppe fronts mounted one attack apiece, while the Bryansk
and Voroneth fronts each mounted two attacks. In the operations of 1944-1955 the
fronts usually mounted one or two attacks, and only occasionally (the First
Belorussian Front in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations) three attacks.

Fronts mounted three attacks or more in the operations to liberate the Right-Bank
Ukraine, where the enemy's defense in large areas was shallow, of a focal nature,
and inadequately fortified.

When a front was executing penetration in one sector, the form of operational
breakthrough was a frontal attack on the flank or in the center of the zone of
advance. Its axis was selected in such a manner that the attacking troops could
advance to a linkup point with the adjacent front and envelop the enemy force (the
Second and Third Ukrainian fronts in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation) or split it to
full operational depth (the Second Belorussian Front in the Belorussian Operation,
the First Ukrainian Front in the Vistula-Oder Operation, etc).

During penetration of the defense on two or three axes, the form of operational
breakthrough comprised frontal attacks with subsequent close and wide envelopment
of a specific enemy force and deep exploitation by part of the forces or by main
forces (Bobruysk, L'vov-Sandomierz operations), or frontal attacks to full
operational depth, with the objeccive of splitting the opposing enemy force and
destroying in the course of development of the operation those forces remaining
between the axes of advance (First Belorussian Front in the Vistula-Oder Operation).

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the strategic offensive operations of a group of fronts (Diagram 32), as a rule

a number of attacks would be launched simultaneously (Stalingrad -- 7, Belorussian --
6, Vistula-Oder -- 4, Berlin - 6). The experience of the war indicated that col-
lapse of the enemy's defensive front in a strategic sector was possible when
launching several powerful attacks in a zone 650-700 km or more in width, encom-
passing from 15 to 30 percent of the active battle front. A series of powerful
attacks made it difficult for the enemy not only to parry them with available
reserves but also to determine the place and importance of each attack. The defeat
of a large enemy force in one of the strategic sectors would lead to a weakening

of enemy forces in the others, which made it possible successfully to conduct a num»
her of Successive operations, overwhelming a very large part of or even the enemy's
entire strategic defensive front.

In the conduct of operations by a group of fronts, corresponding forms of penetra-
tion would also be employed, depending on concrete situation conditions. In the
first period of the war they comprised a series of splitting attacks, some of which
would be directed toward one another with the aim of enveloping small enemy forces.
Such a form of penetration facilitated the establishment of battle groups on a
limited timetable and rapid commencement of an offensive by these groups.

In the winter campaign of 1942/43 the launching of frontal attacks on converging
axes became the predominant form of penetration. It made it possible, with an
overall equality of forces or a slight superiority over the enemy, to concentrate
the maximum possible quantity of men and weapons on the main axes, swiftly to

break through the defense and close the pincers, maintaining the external perimeter
of envelopment with limited forces by temporarily shifting them to the defense on an
advantageous line and even at separate points.

In the summer-fall campaign of 1963 there was a trend toward combining splitting
attacks with attacks with the objective of encirclement. It was manifested in
full measure, however, in the campaigns of the third period of the war.

Launching of powerful attacks with the objective of enveloping large enemy forces
was characteristic of operations of front groups in the summer of 1944. Forces
assigned to the outer envelopment perimeter, including tank forces, would establish
a mobile outer envelopment perimeter and conditions for operational breakthroughs
to develop into a strategic breakthrough without a pause.

In the operations of 1965, when the battle front had become much narrower, mutually
coordinated, splitting front attacks to full depth became the determining form of
penetration in the strategic operation. Encirclement of small enemy forces remain-
ing between attacking forces was generally accomplished by small forces and in the
process of overwhelming the enemy's strategic front.

0n the whole, development of forms of penetration of operational defense during the
years of the Great Patriotic Her indicates that the greatest success was achieved

in conducting a strategic operation by a group of fronts and launching a series of
attacks which straddled a substantial part of the enemy's strategic defense frontage.
Partial operations conducted by small forces, launching immobilizing attacks,

were rejected by the experience of the war. As the defense became more formidable,
the number of attacks decreased, but their power increased.

153

FOIAOFFKJA1.lﬂﬂE(MNLY
FIHR()FF1C1AL USEZCMNLY

Operational breakthrough in the form of mounting a series of attacks in an opera-
tion, first employed by the Southwestern Front in 1916, advanced from the area of

operational art to strategy and became characteristic of operations conducted by
groups of fronts.

2. Selection of Axes of Advance and Breakthrough Sectors

During the years of the Great Patriotic war, in the majority of military campaigns
smashing of the strategic front was accomplished in a single strategic sector. In
the final phase of the war, when the combat might of our Armed Forces had increased
sharply while the battle front had narrowed, it became possible to smash the front
simultaneously along its entire extent.

In selecting main axis of advance in a campaign and in operations, the Soviet
command authorities proceeded from Lenin's statement that in order to achieve
victory it is essential "to possess an overwhelming superiority of forces at the
decisive place and at the decisive moment...."1

The experience of the war indicated that correct selection of main axis of advance
depends on many factors, which are interlinked and interdependent.

The main axis of advance in an offensive operation would be determined primarily by
the objectives of the operation and the concrete situation conditions in which it
was conducted. It would be selected taking into account the operational situation
of friendly and enemy troops, their quantitative and qualitative composition, and
the disposition of the main forces, especially armor. In all cases that axis which
would lead the battle groups to the most vulnerable points in the enemy's main
forces and which would ensure rapid defeat of that enemy force grouping the defeat
of which would sharply diminish the stability of the defense as a whole was con-
sidered to be the most advantageous for mounting a decisive attack.

In the offensive operations of the Great Patriotic war the main attack was most
frequently mounted against the weakest, most vulnerable point in the enemy's
defense. These points were usually sectors with low densities of personnel and
weapons, with an inadequately developed system of field fortifications, and oc-
cupied by troops who were poorly trained and with poor morale. Weak points in the
defense were those sectors in which the enemy did not have large operational and
strategic reserves. Boundaries and flanks were always considered to be the most
vulnerable points in the defense, especially in those cases where they were in-
adequately covered, as well as sectors defended by troops with low morale and

poor fighting ability. Sectors of terrain which the enemy considered difficult-
access on the basis of tactical properties were also usually weak points in the
defense. As a rule the enemy assigned minimal personnel and weapons to these
areas. Attacks on such defensive sectors Iould take the enemy by surprise. Thanks
to the element of surprise which was gained, troops would gain great advantages
even when attacking across difficult terrain. Swift penetration and advance by

the attacking troops into the enemy's flank and rear would force the enemy to
remove troops from well prepared positions, to transfer them to the axes of ad-
vance of the attacking forces, and to fight on inadequately fortified or totally
unprepared ground. The Stalingrad, Iasi-Kishinev and many other operations

provide instructive examples of exploitation of weak points in the enemy's defense.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In selecting a main axis of advance, commanders always took into consideration
possibilities of maximum efficient employment of all combat arms and weapons, es-
pecially large masses of tanks.

Physical-geographic conditions and the character of field fortification exerted
substantial influence on selection of main axis of advance. Often these factors
would predetermine choice of main axis of advance. In the East Prussian Operation,
for example, the existence of the extensive Hasurian Lakes area was one of the
factors which determined the choice of main axis of advance for the troops of the
Second Belorussian Front, bypassing a difficult-axis area and the permanent
fortifications of East Prussia on the south and west, where terrain conditions
permitted deployment of a large tank force and promoted its rapid advance to the
Baltic Coast.

The experience of the war indicated that the terrain selected for mounting the main
attack should promote concealed concentration and deployment of the battle grOup,
should be convenient for preparing and occupying the attack position, should

offer favorable conditions for actions by large masses of artillery and tanks,
execution of maneuver, organization of operational and tactical coordination,

prompt and continuous hauling of supplies to the combat troops.

In many instances the time element would exert decisive influence on selection of
main axis of advance. In the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, for example, the trace
of the battle line at the eminencement of the operation was quite favorable for
mounting enveloping attacks with the objective of encircling the enemy's Khar'kov
force. As there was insufficient time available for large-scale redeployment of
troops. however, it was not possible to execute such offensive thrusts. Therefore
the Voronezh and Steppe fronts were forced to mOunt the main attack in the direction
of Belgorod-Khar'kov, with the objective of splitting the opposing German-fascist
force.

In the last war there were instances where selection of the main axis of advance
was primarily influenced by the desire to encircle and annihilate the enemy's main
forces, preventing their withdrawal. This was the case in the Stalingrad, lasi-
Kishinev, and many other operations.

In a number of offensive operations of the Great Patriotic War the main attack was
also delivered into the strongest points in the enemy's defense. This was the
case when initiating attack from operational bridgeheads, when it was impossible
to employ large force groupings in weak but difficult-access sectors (the Third
Belorussian Front in the Vitebsk-Orsha Operation), or with the aim of swiftly
crushing the most powerful enemy force. in the L'vov-Sandomierz Operation, for
example. Experience in penetration of a static defense disposed in depth, however,
indicated that such a defense, when occupied by staunch troops, offers enormous
resistance force. Penetration of such a defense involves heavy expenditures of
personnel and weapons and frequently is conducted at the limit of capabilities.
Shifting of attacks to weak points in the enemy's defense would immediately affect
penetration progress.

During the Great Patriotic war substantial changes took place in the role assigned
to the main attack and secondary attacks.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to prewar views. a secondary attack played a role of assisting the main
attack. The troops mounting a secondary attack would usually be assigned missions

of protecting the main force against enemy flank attacks and the mission of im-
mobilizing opposing forces. Sometimes a secondary attack would involve advancing

to a meeting point with the main force of the front or army, with the aim of en-
circling opposing enemy forces. These views formed the basis of determination of
the significance of attacks in the operations of the entire first period of the

war. A secondary (pinning) attack was a mandatory element of almost every operation.
And since usually few forces would be assigned to execute such attacks, they frequent-
ly would produce an extremely limited operational and even tactical result. This is
apparent even in such successful operations as the Rshev-Sychevka in the summer of
1942, in which the troop advance on secondary axes of the fronts was insignificant.

In the caunteroffensive at Stalingrad and Kursk the missions assigned to the troops
operating on secondary axes differed little from those assigned to the main-force
troops. They also were to break through the tactical defense and exploit to
operational depth. Precisely such missions were assigned to the armies of the

Don Front in the Stalingrad Operation. Correspondingly the forces mounting
secondary attacks were made stronger. A further increase in their strength is
observed in the third period of the war. when the capabilities of our fronts had in-
creased significantly.

The breakthrOugh sector, that is, that point in the enemy's defense where an initial
breach was to be driven. was the foundation point of an attack.

The experience of the war indicated that the width of a breakthrough sector should
always be in conformity with available manpower and equipment, especially means

of fire delivery, as well as the number and quality of combined-arms large units.
The designated breakthrough sector should be such that a convenient attack posi-
tion for the main force could be set up within that sector, and the personnel and
equipment assigned the mission of penetration could be deployed without discovery by
the enemy. In addition, one should consider the conditions of employment of ar-
mored troops, exploitation of tactical into operational success, and at the same
time the enemy's capabilities to oppose penetration.

In the caurse of the war the width of breakthrough sectors of combined units, armies,
fronts and battle groups experienced considerable changes. Prior to the war a zone
of 20-30 km was considered an advisable breakthrough sector width for an assault
army, and 60-80 km for a front. In determining width of breakthrough sectors, in
addition to combat capabilities command authorities also proceeded from the point
that a breach 20-30 km wide could not be under hostile artillery fire from the

flanks and would make it possible to exploit on the main axis without great hin-
drance; in such a breakthrough sector one could fairly easily engage a mobile

group, assigning two routes to each tank division; a breach 20-30 km wide could not
be closed by immediate operational reserves.

Change in the composition of combined-arms armies at the beginning of the Great
Patriotic Har led to the necessity of narrowing the breakthrough sectors of the

battle groups. Transition by the enemy to a static defense and the necessity of
increasing the densities of the troops executing penetration dictated a further

narrowing of breakthrough sectors. In addition, combat experience indicated that

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
direct-f ire weapons (antitank guns and tanks), as well as nachineguns and mortars
offer the greatest resistance to attack. not artillery sited in indirect fire
positions, which we had learned successfully to engage. Experience indicated in
turn that a narrow zone of connitnent to action was needed for reduced-strength
tank and mechanized corps. All this as an aggregate exerted influence on narrow-
ing breakthrough sectors, the width of which and correlation with the zone of ad-
vance in certain operations are shown in Table 15.

Table 15. Width of Breakthrough Sectors and Their Correlation With Zones of Ad-
vance in Operations of the Great Patriotic war

  

Front, Army, Battle Group Width of Ember and Percentage
Zone of Width of of width
Break- of Zone of
through Advance

Sector-s kn

       
        
 
   
 
 
      
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
    

Operation

  

Counteroffensive at Southwestern Front, 5th Tank 9
Stalingrad Army 40
Counteroffensive at Bryansk Front. 63d and 3d 19
Kursk armies 24
Voronezh Front, 6th Guards l7
and 5th Guards arnies 42

Belorussian First Belorussian Front
(right side), 1/.
65th and 28th arnies l8
L'vov-Sandonierr First Ukrainian Front, 6
38th and 60th arnies 21
Iasi-Kishinev Second Ukrainian Front 5
Vistula-Oder First Belorussian Front, 15
First Ukrainian Front 16
Berlin First Belorussian Front, 25
First Ukrainian Front 11

As is evident from the table, the width of the breakthrough sector of a front
battle group penetrating on an independent axis would not frequently run 15-20 km.

0f caurse breakthrough sectors of this width restricted the novenent of powerful
front battle groups. Therefore operation plans specified that breakthrough sectors
should be widened during penetration of the enemy's tactical defense by attacking
the flanks exposed as a result of opening up a breach in the eneny's defense. This
method of gaining maneuvering roon proved to be the lost expedient in expenditure
of forces. while penetration of the defense required 200-300 guns and nortars,
7-10 rifle battalions and 15-20 close-support tanks per kn of breakthrough sector,
widening of a breach was ecconplished with densities of one third that or less.

The experience of offensive operations conducted in l9bl—l9lo2 indicated that the

distance between breakthrough sectors should correspond to the force of the planned

attacks and the selected method of defeating the enemy forces remaining between axes
of advance.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the counteroffensive at Moscow and Stalingrad, front attacks were conducted
for the most part with the forces of army battle groups, but the enemy forces be-
tween then were small and were to be defeated by envelopment and splitting in

the course of penetration of the tactical defense, so that after passing through
the tactical zone of defense a single, unified front and even interfront break-
through sector could be established.

In the Stalingrad Operation, for example, the spacing between the breakthrough
sectors of the main force of the Southwestern Front and the force grouping of the
21st Army. which was attacking jointly with the 65th Army of the Don Front, was
approximately 33 km. This gap was defended by only one and a half divisions. The
threat of encirclement of these forces with simultaneous execution of splitting
attacks made it possible to defeat them in detail in short order.

An increase in distance between breakthrough sectors was observed with an increase
in the power of battle groups. In the 0re1 Operation, for example, the distance
between the breakthrough sector of the 11th Guards Army and that of the 61st Army
was 55 km, between the battle groups of the Bryansk Front -- 60 km, and between the
southern force of the Bryansk and the force grouping of the Central Front —- 65 km.
Envelopment operations aimed at encircling large enemy forces were widely employed
in the third period of the war. In determining distances between the breakthrough
sectors of battle groups in such operations, command authorities took into account
the composition and situation of the force to be encircled, as well as capability,
at specified rates of advance, to complete encirclemsnt of the enemy's main forces
prior to their withdrawal from the encircled area, swiftly to crush the encircled
force and thus to form a breach in the enemy's operational defense in which there
wOuld be adequate room for unrestricted maneuver of large forces with the objective
of developing operational breakthroughs into a strategic breakthrough, while it
would be difficult for the enemy to close the gap with available reserves. Table
16 shows the correlation of mutual spacing of breakthrough sectors with certain
parameters of operations in the final period of the war.

Table 16. Correlation of Distance Between Breakthrough Sectors of Forces Executing
Envelopment Hith Certain Parameters of Operations of 1944-1945

     
      
   

    
        

      
   
  
 

 

   
   
   

 

Operation Distance Distance Depth of Width of Required
Between to Linkup Possible Breach Formed Number of

Break- Area, km Enemy With- Following An- Divisions

through drawal, km nihilation of to Close

  
   
  

Encircled Breach

Force km

    
      
  
   
   
 
  

Sectors,
km

  

   
  
 
  
  

  
 

  

   
  

Vitebsk-Oraha 30-40 100 5-7
Bobruysk 50-60 90-100 5-7
L’vov-Sandomierz 60-70 120-140 7-9
lasi-Kishinev 100-120 250 12-15
Berlin 100 160-180 9-12

Note: Calculations are based on diagrams in: "Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh
811 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [Operations of the Soviet Armed Forces in
the Great Patriotic War], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1958.

_____—_———-—

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
One can conclude free the figures in the table that at a rate of advance of 15-

20 km per day, distance between breakthrough sectors was selected to be approxi-
maely equal to the distance to the linkup area, where the perimeter of envelopment
was to be closed, passing the enemy taking into account initiation of withdrawal
from the envelopment area following loss of the tactical zone of defense on the
axes of advance, that is, 2k-48 hours after Our troops commenced the attack.

when executing powerful splitting attacks in an operation (the Vistula-Oder
Operation, etc), the distance between breakthrough sectors would be such that in
the course of penetrating the enemy's tactical zone of defense his forces defending
between breakthrough sectors would lose all stability, and a single common front or
interfront breakthrough sector could be formed at immediate operational depth.

3. Messing of Forces and Combat Formation

Battle groups would be formed in the fronts and armies for accomplishing penetration
and exploitation in the Great Patriotic Hat. There occurred a particularly marked
shift to actions by batt1e groups after the Eq sac directive letter of 10 January
1942 came out, which formulated the most important points pertaining to penetration
of the enemy's defense, one of which read as follows: "In order to soften and

break up the enemy's defense, we must learn to operate in assault groups."

The strength of front battle groups incresed as the war progressed: 8-10-fold in
divisions, lO-20—fold in tanks and self-propelled artillery, lO-lZ-fold in ar—
tillery, and 18-25-fold in aircraft. Their qualitative composition also improved
greatly, by employing better tanks, self-propelled artillery, guns, mortars,
rocket artillery systems, and aircraft. In the counteroffsnsive at Moscow, for
example, the battle group consisted of 3-7 divisions, 35-125 tanks, 160-600 guns,
and 50-100 aircraft, while in the Berlin Operation it comprised 62-64 divisions,
1300-2200 tanks and self-propelled guns, 6200-7500 guns and mortars, and 1400-1800
aircraft.

Of the total fighting strength and numerical strength of the fronts, battle groups
as a rule would contain 50-70 percent of rifle combined units, 70-80 percent of
guns and mortars, and 80-100 percent of a front's tanks and aircraft. By deploy-
ing these forces in sectors the width of which comprised one fifthulone twentieth
of the width of the front's zone of advance, a decisive massing of men and weapons
would be achieved on the axes chosen for penetration, as well as establishment of
high densities and decisive superiority over the enemy, which constituted one of
the most important factors in successful accomplishment of penetration.

Troop densities steadily increased as the war progressed, in the operations of
1945 reaching 6-7 rifle battalions, 250-300 guns and mortars, and 20-30 close-sup-
port tanks and self-propelled guns per km of breakthrough sector. As force den-
sities increased in the breakthrough sectors and as a more advantageous ratio of
forces was established, there occurred an overall increase in the rate of
penetration of the enemy's tactical zone of defense.

Success and rats of penetration, however, were determined not only by densities of
personnel and weapons and establishment of superiority over the enemy, but also by
quality of preparation for penetration, the art of troop control, effectiveness of

159

FOR(MHWCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

awloymentof weapons, combat equipment and troops, achievement of the element of
offensive surprise, maintaining close coordination among combat arms, prompt and
timely build-up of efforts, plus other factors.

The combat formation was an important factor in successful penetration and exploits-
tion. It predetermined the force of the initial thrust, which was very important
for a successful breakthrough, and the sequence of build-up of efforts to the entire
depth of penetration.

Prewar views called for a deep tactical order of battle for the front's troops.
Losses sustained by the Soviet Army in the frontier battles, however, and the
strategic initiative which was in the hands of the enemy for a certain period of
time made it impossible to establish powerful force groupings and to have strong
support echelons, mobile groups and reserves in the fronts. 0n the other hand
the enemy's defense was shallow and of a focal-point type, which created certain
preconditions for penetration by a single front operational echelon. By virtue of
this, in the first two campaigns of the first period of the war, the fronts were
organized in a single echelon, with a small reserve designated (Diagram 33).

The experience of offensive operations indicated that although a single-echelon
tactical order of battle of the fronts made it possible to penetrate prepared
defensive lines, it did not provide for rapid exploitation of a tactical into an
operational breakthrough, and the enemy was able to establish new defensive lines
at depth. Therefore mobile groups consisting of one or two tank corps (the
Pogoreloye-Gorodishche Operation) and stronger reserves appeared in the front's
tactical order of battle beginning in the summer of 1962. With the establishment
of air armies, there developed considerably greater capabilities to deliver massive
airstrikes and provide close air support to ground troops in the course of an of-
fensive.

Quantitative and qualitative growth in the fighting strength of fronts and an in-
crease in the strength and depth of the enemy's defense predetermined subsequent
changes in the tactical order of battle of the front. Mobile groups consisting of
1—2 tank armies were established in the fronts for the first time in the counter-
offensive at Kursk. In a number of operations in the second period of the war, a
support echelon of one and sometimes two combined-arms armies was established in
the fronts (the Western Front in the Smolensk Operation).

In the third period of the war the fronts would usually be organized in two

echelons when conducting operations on main axes of advance. From two to seven
armies would be assigned to the forward echelon, and one or two combined-arms

armies to the support echelon. Mobile groups became a mandatory element of the
front's tactical order of battle. Their composition varied: 1-2 or even 3 tank
armies, 1-2 mounted-mechanized groups or 1-2 tank (mechanized) corps. Sometimes

a combined-arms reserve would also be established, consisting of a tank (mechanizew,
cavalry, or rifle corps. An air army was also included in the tactical order of
battle of all fronts.

The tactical order of battle of combined-arms armies changed appreciably
(Diagram 36). In 1941-1942 they usually had a reserve or small support echelon

(1-2 rifle divisions). In some operations mobile groups were formed, consisting
of reinforced cavalry combined units and several tank brigades, and 1-2 tank corps

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
beginning in the summer of 1942. In 1943 up to 1-2 rifle corps would be assigned
to the army support echelon, depending on the army's composition. Many armies
had mobile groups consisting of 1-2 tank (mechanized) corps. In addition, long-
range (DD), initial massed strike (AR) and rocket launcher unit (GHCh) artillery
grOups were formed in the army, as well as antiaircraft, antitank artillery, and
engineer reserves, and a mobile obstacle contruction detachment.

in the offensive operations of 1944-1945, armies executing penetration would most
frequently be organized in two echelons. One or two rifle corps would be assigned
to the support echelon. In some cases, such as when an attack was to be directed
into the flank, armies would even be organized in three echelons (49th Army in the
East Prussian Operation and the 3d Guards Army in the Vistula—Oder Operation).
Armies were organized in a single echelon, as in the second period of the war, when
the enemy had a strong tactical zone of defense but lacked operational reserves on
the axis of advance. In these conditions rifle combined units were disposed in
greater depth.

In many operations tank and mechanized corps would be placed in operational sub—
ordination to combined-arms armies to complete a tactical breakthrough. An army
artillery group began to be formed for carrying out fire missions in the army; this
group would be divided into subgroups, one for each forward-echelon corps. The
artillery group would contain 3-5 cavalry brigades, 2—4 independent artillery
regiments, 2-6 rocket artillery regiments, or 180-260 guns, mortars and rocket
launchers. This enabled the army commanders to deliver massive artillery fire on
important tactical and operational objectives and effectively to influence penetra-
tion. As in the past, an army antiaircraft artillery group and various reserves
would be formed in the army.

Development of troop combat formations was proceeding in approximately the same
directions as the tactical order of battle. In the first period of the war the
combat formations of combined units, units and subunits, in conformity with pre-
war views, were set mfortl'emost part in two echelons. Such a formation led to aa-
signment of two thirds of rifle companies to the support echelons of advancing
divisions, which sharply diminished the striking power of the attacking extended
lines of riflemen. Therefore People's Commissar of Defense Order No 306, dated

8 October 1942, introduced organization of combat formations in a single echelon
from the company to the division level, with designation of a reserve. The

cOurse of combat operations indicated, however, that a single-echelon formation
was advisable only for subunits. Units and combined units, with only a small
reserve, lacked the capability to build up the force of an attack, which was
required by penetration of an increasingly deepening enemy defense. By the begin—
ning of the summer-fall campaign of 1943, deep combat formations had become most
typical. Artillery groups, antitank artillery reserves and mobile obstacle con-
struction detachments were established in the combined units and units. Beginning
in 1944, close-support tank groups were employed not only in a centralized manner
at the division echelon, but also began to be attached to regiments, and toward
the end of the war to battalions as well.

On the whole the experience of the Great Patriotic War indicated that penetration
of an enemy defense in depth demanded disposition in depth on the part of the

161

FOI.OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attacking forces. The army forward echelon was to be capable of independently
penetrating the tactical zone of defense to its entire depth, thus creating the
prerequisites for successful offensive exploitation. There was an exploitation
echelon in the tactical order of battle of the front (army), capable of expedi-
tiously driving into a gap and swiftly exploiting to full operational depth. Bach
combined-arms commander -- from regimental commander to army conmmnder -- was to
have an artillery group under his command. It was most expedient to employ air,
especially with a limited number of aircraft available, in a centralized manner,
at the levelof the front.

4. Delivering Fire on the Enemy

In the battles of the Great Patriotic Har, fire was the principal means of breaking
up the enemy's defense - killing his personnel and destroying his weapons,
demolishing various fieldworks and obstacles, and destroying the enemy's will to
resist.

Artillery provided the bulk of delivered fire. Artillery accounted for 85-90 per-
cent by weight of all ammunition expended in aianadon. The most important direc-
tions in development of combat employment of artillery were an increase in ar-
tillery firepower and effectiveness of artillery support of penetration.

An increase in artillery firepower was achieved chiefly by increasing the density

of guns and mortars in breakthrough sectors and increasing expenditure of ammunition.
in the course of the Great Patriotic Har artillery densities increased from 30-b0

to 220-250, and in a number of operations as many as 300 or more guns and mortars
per km, or 3-6-fold in comparison with prewar views and 6-10-fold in comparison

with the offensive operations of 1941.

Artillery support of penetration was organized on the principles of artilleriyskoye
nastupleniye [artillery offensive, attack]. It consisted essentially in neutraliz-
ing the enemy's defense and in providing continuous support of infantry and tanks

by massed, effective artillery (mortar) fire.2 It included three closely inter-
linked periods: artillery preparation for the attack, artillery support of the
assault phase, and artillery support of infantry and tank actions deep in the enemy's
defense.

Essentially these same periods were included in artillery support according to
prewar views as well. But the last period had a different name -- artillery actions
to support the engagement of second echelons, repel counterattacks, immobilize the
rear and impede the approach of enemy reserves.3 The term "artilleriyskoye
nastupleniye." however, united all three periods into a continuous process of
delivery of fire on the enemy to the entire depth of tactical penetration.

The success of penetration depended in large measure on effectiveness of artillery
preparations. It was determined by a number of factors, particularly density of
artillery, accuracy of fire, quantity of ammunition allocated. duration, organiza-
tion and depth of suppression and neutralization of the enemy.

Reliable suppression. neutralization and destruction of the enemy in the course of
artillery preparation for the attack demanded a certain total firepower, which in-
creased with an increase in strength of the defense.

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with an increase of 6-10-fold in artillery density and ammunition expenditure per
gun of 50—100 percent as the war progressed, total artillery firepower per km of
breakthrough sector increased lO-lS-fold. We shOuld note, however, that total
firepower could also have been increased with less artillery density, for the fire
capabilities of guns and mortars, based on maximum permissible rate of fire, were
only 60-70 percent utilized. With a higher utilization factor, artillery densities
or duration of artillery preparation could have been reduced by 30-40 percent.

The bulk of the ammunition allocation would be expended during periods of heavy
bombardment. In 1941-1943 they averaged approximately 20 percent of the total
duration of artillery preparation, and even less in a number of instances. In the
operations of 1965-1965 the percentage share of time allocated to heavy shelling
incnnsed to 60 percent or more, but in many cases it did not exceed 25-50 percent.

In 1942-1943, in connection with the fact that the enemy shifted to static defense.
duration of artillery preparation steadily increased, in spite of some increase in
Soviet artillery densities and expenditure of ammunition allocated for artillery
preparation. In the operations of 1961 artillery preparation lasted 10-15 minutes,
60-90 minutes in 1942, while in 1943 it ran as much as 3 hours in such operations
as the Belgorod-Khar'kov.

There were important drawbacks to artillery preparation of great duration. In 2 or
3 hours of shelling the enemy would be able to determine the breakthrough sectors,
issue the necessary orders to his tactical and immediate operational reserves, and
even begin moving them up toward the threatened sectors, which made penetration
more difficult. In view of this, efforts were being made to find ways to shorten
the duration of artillery preparation without diminishing its effectiveness.

At first ranging, some or all shiftings of fire and silencing of fire were elimi-
mned from artillery preparation, since the latter did not produce the anticipated
results. Then battery fire was reduced, at the same time increasing duration of
heavy shellings. Finally, during periods of destruction fire and delivery of fire
by direct-fire guns, a considerable percentage of the artillery would continue to
perform missions of placing suppressive fire on immediate depth. All this made it
possible by war's end to reduce the duration of artillery preparation by 2-3-fold,
while the First Belorussian Front reduced it 5-7-fold in the Vistula-Oder and
Berlin operations.

Brief but massive artillery preparation would exert a very powerful psychological
effect on the enemy and his morale and would do a fairly reliable job of softening
up the defense. It nevertheless failed to produce the anticipated results, however,
when penetrating a strong fortified defense (the Berlin Operation).

The organization of artillery preparation changed considerably in the course of

the Great Patriotic War. In order to achieve the element of surprise, command
authorities began commencing artillery preparation with extremely heavy shelling,
shifting destruction of targets with fire from indirect fire positions to a sub-
sequent time. In order to avoid disclosing the ending of artillery preparation and
thus to deprive the enemy of the opportunity to ready his troops to repel an
assault, the final period of heavy shelling would have the same intensity of fire
as that with which artillery support of the assault phase would begin. Rocket

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

artillery salvoes would be time-distributed throughout the entire artillery
preparation. Duration of the first and last periods of heavy shelling steadily
increased, and by war's end had increased to 15-25 minutes, which made it possible
to deliver more effective fire on the enemy and to achieve a strong effect on his
morale. This was especially important just before the infantry and tanks launched
the assault phase. Alternation of massed and battery fires, destruction fires and
phony shifts of fire, when they were employed, varied for the majority of artillery
preparations.

A steady increase in artillery density in breakthrough sectors and improvement in
its qualitative composition made it possible to increase the depth of delivery of
effective fire on the enemy's defense. In 1941-1942 the defense was neutralized by
massed fire to a depth of 1.5-2.5 km and somewhat deeper, in 1943 -- to a depth of
up to 3—4 km, and in 1944-1945 -- to 6-8 km and more. In the concluding operations
of the Great Patriotic War depth of neutralization reached 8-10 km, and in the
Berlin Operation -- 10-12 km. Suppressive fire was placed on the defense to a
depth of 17-18 km in the zone of advance of the 8th Guards Army.“

The endeavor to increase the depth of neutralization of the enemy's defense was not
always warranted. Hith a shortage of artillery this led to scattering of fires, as
a result of which not even the first position was well neutralized. In addition,
delivery of suppressive fire on the enemy at great depth was as a rule little ef-
fective, while the morale effect exerted by fire during artillery preparation
usually had dissipated by the time the attacking troops reached the enemy.

Methods of artillery support of the infantry and tank assault were selected in each
operation in relation to the character of the defense, availability of artillery,
especially large calibers, as well.as ammunition availability. "hen penetrating

a focal-type defense and when there was a shortage of artillery or ammunition,
close support of the assault phase would involve successive concentration of fire.
When the enemy shifted to a static defense, more and more frequently a single moving
barrage, and subsequently a double moving barrage would be employed in combination
with successive fire concentration. Different variations of a moving barrage were
worked out and successfully employed on several fronts: creeping fire (Leningrad
Front). intensifying moving barrage (Voronezh Front). double successive fire con-
centration (Third Belorussian Front), etc.

Depth of close support of the assault phase increased from campaign to campaign,
and by war's end had reached 2-2.5 km, and as much as 4 km in the Berlin Operation.
Artillery support of infantry and tank actions during deep combat was provided by
the fires of individual guns, platoons and batteries, self-propelled guns, as well
as concentrated and massed fire of battalions, regiments, brigades and artillery
groups. 1he latter sometimes totaled as many as 200 guns and mortars.

Aircraft played an important role in delivery of fire on the enemy. During the war
46 percent of all sorties involved air support of offensive ground actions. Up to
70 percent of these resources were employed on the main axes of advance of the
fronts. In the Berlin Operation, for example, 2760 aircraft were operating on the
main axis of advance of the FirSt Belorussian Front, or 71 percent of the aircraft
of the 16th Air Army. with a shortage of aircraft, as was characteristic of the
first period of the war, air resources were for the most part employed for close

:64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
support of infantry and tanks during penetration. Only occasionally did ground-
attack aircraft and bombers deliver airstrikes at the end of artillery preparation.

In 1943 the air forces of the Soviet Army transitioned to actions in the form of

the air offensive. which included two periods: air preparation and close air support
of the assault and advance by infantry and tanks deep in the enemy's defense. Some-
times, in particular when breaking through the blockade of Leningrad and the storm-
ing of Sevastopol'. preliminary airstrikes were delivered. But a more widely
followed practice was the delivery of airstrikes during the night prior to com-
mencement of an offensive. In the operations of l9h4-l945 air support was divided
into preliminary airstrikes and close support.

Preliminary airstrikes would begin long before the offensive commenced and would in—
volve concentrated strikes and actions by small groups and single aircraft on a
broad front, day and night, with the objective of killing and exhausting enemy per—
sonnel. particularly in the tactical zone of defense and at reserve force concentra-
tion locations, as well as artillery disposition areas, command and control
facilities, and other targets.

During close air support of the assault, on which usually one third of total re—
sources would be expended, primarily targets in the breakthrough sectors would be
hit. Airstrikes would as a rule be timed to occur toward the end of artillery
preparation. The aim was to overlap the moment artillery shifted from artillery
preparation to close support of the assault, when tanks and infantry were initiat-
ing the assault. The majority of airstrikes were against artillery and mortar
batteries, to prevent them from delivering fire to cover the forward edge of the
battle area withacurtnin of fire immediately prior to the assault phase.

When providing close support to the attacking infantry and tanks, aircraft would
deliver concentrated and massed airstrikes, attacking in waves. As the fronts
received increasing numbers of ground-attack aircraft and bombers, they began em-
ploying with increasing frequency massed airstrikes, the operational effect of which
was considerable.

Successful offensive air support was achieved primarily by the power of airstrikes,
by teamwork and cooperation, and by skilled coordination of air support missions
with artillery in place, time, and target. Supplementing artillery fire in those
areas where delivery of artillery fire was difficult or impossible, aircraft
performed very important operational-tactical missions.

5. Breaking Through the Tactical Zone of Defense

In the first offensive operations of the Great Patriotic Her, troops frequently
would undertake penetration from approach march, as recommended by the 1936
Provisional Field Service Regulations. Experience indicated, however, that attack-
ing a defending adversary from approach march involved enormous difficulties and
produced little res Its. Reconnaissance was unable to gain a thorough picture of
the enemy's defense, and artillery was unable to place adequate suppressive fire.
Mutual coordination was inadequately organized. Units would take caSualties while
approaching the enemy's forward positions, and the assault phase would be conducted
in a disconnected manner. which frequently led to failure. An attack from approach

165

INJR OFTWCJAI.USE(NNLYI
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Western Front in the counteroffensive at Moscow), as well as during exploitation
in an offensive operation or during penetration of defensive positions at depth.

defense was commencement of attack from close contact with the enemy, following
good Suppressive fire on the enemy's defense by artillery and airstrikes, with sub-
sequent buildup of efforts from depth (Diagram 35). As a rule the infantry and
tank assault would begin simultaneously across the entire breakthrough sector and
w0uld be conducted with continuous close artillery support. The depth of the
attack steadily increased with an increase in power of fire delivered on the enemy
and heavier saturation of the attacking troops with tanks, close support guns, and
engineer subunits, as well as improvement in the quality of organization of team-
work and cooperation, reaching 3-6 km in the third period of the war. The attack
did not proceed without a halt to such a depth across the entire breakthrough sector,
however. because the degree of neutralization of the enemy and his resistance to
the attacking troops were not the same everywhere.

Deep offensive exploitation in the first period of the war was usually accomplished
by engaging the support echelons of regiments and divisions, which was supported by
a lengthy period of heavy shelling. Their efforts were frequently focused directly
on strongpoints. When wide and close envelopments were employed, deep offensive
exploitation was more successful. Sometimes close and wide envelopments would end
in encirclement of enemy strongpoints. But assignment of substantial forces to
take strongpoints, especially from the attack echelon, adversely affected deep
offensive exploitation and consequently the rate of penetration of the main
defensive zone as well.

In spite of the fact that beginning in the summer of 1962 the enemy's main
defensive zone was only 3-4 km deep, in order to complete penetration of this zone
it was often necessary to repeat the assault several times, while penetration to
full depth of this zone was accomplished in the course of 48 to 72 hours, and only
occasionally (the Pogoreloye-Gorodishche Operation) would be completed in a single

The protracted character of penetration of the main defensive zone was also due to
the fact that the attacking troops, having expended ammunition on artillery prepara-
tion and close support of the assault, would have little artillery fire support.
When tanks were in short supply, the highly vulnerable infantry would sustain heavy
caSualties and advance slowly: battle groups lacked strong mororized mobile groups.
while those formed of cavalry combined units did not possess the requisite
penetrating power to complete breaking through the defensive zones.

Combat experience acquired by the Soviet troops. increased reliability of delivery
of effective fire on the enemy during artillery preparation, improvement of close
fire support methods, greater numbers of tanks in close support of infantry, and
the appearance of strong mobile groups in battle groups made it possible to
penetrate without pause not only to full depth of the main defensive zone but also
frequently to full depth of the entire tactical zone of defense. In the coanter-
offensive at Stalingrad, for example, the majority of tank corps were engaged to

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
accomplish offensive exploitation or to complete penetration of the main defensive
zone. This made it possible to build up the efforts of the rifle divisions and
rapidly to reach the enemy‘s main artillery position areas. With a high rate of
advan.e by the tank brigades,the enemy's artillery was unable to prepare to repel
their attacks, which created favorable conditions for the entire battle group to
advance deep into the enemy's defense.

Offensive exploitation changed with a shift to static defense. In connection with
the fact that the forward echelon of the regiments would only break through the
first two trenches with a deep penetration attack, The support echelons of the
regiments would be engaged to complete penetration of the entire first position and
to capture the second. In some cases, when the forward echelon of the regiments
succeeded in capturing the entire first position, the support echelons of the
regiments would be engaged for penetration of the second position. But most
frequently the support echelons of the divisions would be brought into action to
accomplish this mission -- into the gaps between the forward-echelon regiments or,
in exceptional cases, by leapfrogging past their combat formations.

The problem of completing penetration of the second defensive zone and offensive
exploitation into the second zone would usually be resolved by committing the
support echelons of the corps or mobile groups. But considerable time was required
to put the support echelons of the corps into battle; they did not possess

adequate mobility and striking power, and therefore they were slow in accomplishing
offensive exploitation toward the second zone, on foot. In order to deprive the
enemy of the time and opportunity to organize continuous defense in the second zone,
and thus to localize the breakthrough, the Soviet command authorities, basing their
thinking on theory of the operation in depth, engaged mobile groups of armies, and
in a number of cases of fronts as well to complete penetration of the main defensive
zone and to advance into the second zone. Possessing good cross-country capability,
they would advance in columns to the start line, deploy into combat formations with-
out a halt and, together with infantry, closely supported by specially designated
artillery, would complete penetration of the main defensive zone. Massed employment
of tanks exerted great psychological effect on the enemy, and he usually was unable
to withstand their attack.

The problem of penetration of the second zone during the Great Patriotic War arose
in 1942, when the enemy began establishing such a zone in his defense. The second
zone was usually situated beyond the range of the bulk of artillery; it could not be
observed from ground observation posts, and reconnaissance of targets in this zone
could be accomplished only by air; on the presumed axes of advance it would be
occupied in advance by reserves, or their advance would be timed to coincide with
the fighting for the main defensive zone. The difficulty in breaking through the
second zone also lay in the fact that the entire battle group had to advance 10—
15 km, to prepare for penetration almost anew, or to conduct the offensive action
in such a nanner as to reach the zone before enemy reserves had taken up positions,
and to prevent the enemy from reestablishing a continuous front. -

Various modes of penetration of the second zone were employed in the operations of
the Great Patriotic War: without a halt in attack position, with a limited-timetable
preparation for an assault, and following deliberate preparation for attack.
Penetration without a halt in attack position was the principal mode. When this
mode was employed, troops would usually take advantage of unoccupied or

167

F03'0FFKJA1.USE¢UNLX
FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY

lightly-occupied sectors of the second zone of defense and would continue to ad-
vance without delay. No more than 26 hours would be allocated for preparing for an
attack on a limited timetable. Penetration with deliberate preparation wOuld be em-
ployed in those cases where the second zone had been occupied in advance by strong
reserves, and one or two days would be expended on preparations for the breakthrough.

for the operation, while the adopted plans would be refined by the army commanders
during completion of penetration of the main defensive zone. After plans had been
refined and detailed, operation orders would be issued first of all to the forward
detachments, the principal mission of which was to advance as swiftly as possible
to the second zone, avoiding combat with the enemy's retreating troops and rear
guards, and seizing in the second zone ground from which penetration w0u1d be ex-
ploited by the forward echelons of the combined units. If combat by the forward
detachments indicated that the enemy was firmly entrenched in the second zone, the
corps commanders, on the basis of instructions from the army commander, would

make the decision to penetrate the zone with limited-timetable preparation for the
assault, or with deliberate preparation.

when advancing into the enemy's second defensive zone attacks as a rule would be
delivered at weak points -- points unoccupied or hastily occupied by enemy troops.
even if they were less easily accessible, or where the stability of the defense had
been broken by the actions of forward detachments or mobile troops.

Success in penetrating the second zone would be determined in large measure by
skilled massing of troops.

The number of breakthrough sectors would be determined by the conditions in which
offensive actions in the tactical zone of defense had taken place. Usually one
breakthrough sector would be designated for the corps, for the most part at the
boundary between advancing combined units, which made it possible to concentrate
at this point the bulk of personnel and weapons in the process of approaching the
second zone. Sometimes more breakthrough sectors would be designated, if several
sectors had been captured in the second zone. But when the enemy succeeded in
defending firmly in the second zone, the army would break through the defense in a
single sector, in which the efforts of two corps and the army proper would be com-
bined.

The experience of the war indicated that if the second zone was occupied by the
enemy even in haste, penetration would be successfully accomplished when a substan-
tial superiority was established: 5-8:l in artillery, and 2-3zl in infantry and
tanks. Such a superiority could usually be achieved with the following troop
densities: up to 3 rifle battalions, approximately 100 guns and 6-10 close-support
tanks per km of breakthrough sector. In the mobile group densities in the break-
through sectors would run 50-90 guns and mortars, 30—50 tanks, and 1-2 motorized
rifle battalions.

The second defensive zone would be softened up for the most part with a period of
heavy shelling or 20-40 minutes of artillery preparation. during which infantry
and tanks would approach the enemy's defense and, when shelling ended, would assault

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the forward positions. Close support of the assault phase would usually involve
a rolling barrage or fire on request. But if intelligence established that that
the second zone was being solidly defended, a moving barrage would be employed to
support the assault.

The problem of breaking thrOugh the enemy's second defensive zone in the last war
was successfully solved by the troops of the Soviet Army, thank. to which battle
groups would be able to advance to adequate maneuvering room on the first or seconu
day of the offensive.

6. Development of Tactical Into Operational Breakthrough

Development of a tactical into an operational breakthrough required solving two
problems: faster offensive exploitation to depth, with the aim of thwarting enemy
attempts to reestablish the tactical defense or to established organized resistance
on new lines, and widening of the breach toward the flanks to the extent where
approaching operational reserves together with retreating troops could not form a
continuous front during the entire time of execution of penetration.

The first problem was the most important and difficult one. It would be handled
for the most part by mobile groups in close coordination with rifle troops, artil-
lery and air. Prior to the battle of Kursk, the functions of development of tac-
tical into operational penetration were for the most part assigned to combined-arms
and tank armies of mixed composition. Experience indicated, however. that tank
(mechanized) corps, advancing at a rapid pace, would get considerably ahead of the
rifle divisions, and coordination between them would be disrupted, while command
and control of combined units of differing mobility was difficult. In addition,
development of tactical into operational penetration within the framework of an
army operation was further complicated by the fact that the army lacked the aircraft
which were extremely essential to provide close support for the advance of mobile
troops which had outstripped the rifle combined units.

In view of this, at the beginning of 1943 uniform tank armies were established,
consisting of l-2 tank corps and l mechanized corps. Such tank armies were a
resource of Hq SEC and would be attached to fronts which had begun performing the
main functions of development of a tactical into an operational breakthrough. Usual-
ly a front operating on the most important axis would receive one or two, and some-
times (Uman’-Botosani, Proskurov-Chernovtsy and L'vov-Sandomierz operations) three
tank armies. They would comprise a mobile grOup and were designated for exploita-
tion of tactical to operational success.

Tank armies would be committed to battle with the objective of completing penetra-
tion of the main or second defensive zone, or following penetration of the entire
tactical zone of defense. The character of employment of tank armies was also
determined in large measure by the personal views on this matter by the various
commanding generals of the fronts. Mar SU I. S. Konev, for example, always ad-
vocated employment of tank armies to complete penetration of the tactical zone of
defense. But early commitment of armies to battle sometimes resulted in loss of
up to 30-40 percent of tanks just during tactical penetration, which diminished
their combat capabilities during exploitatﬂxlto operational penetration.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hq SHC and the commanding generals of a number of fronts sought to complete
penetration of the tactical zone of defense with rifle combined units reinforced by
close-support tanks and artillery, as well as by army mobile groups. Mounted-
mechanized grOups would most frequently be committed beyond the second defensive
zone, for their engagement into a penetration gap usually wOuld involve heavy
cavalry losses, which led to loss of those qualities essential for swift actions

at operational depth.

Engagement of front mobile groups following penetration of the tactical zone of
defense, especially when a "clean" breach was formed, enabled them to advance swift-
ly to depth, splitting the enemy's operational front, which led to greater results
than the commitment of mobile groups within the enemy's tactical zone of defense.

In those cases where tank armies were employed to complete penetration of the
enemy's tactical zone of defense, echelon—by-echelon engagement of their forces was
the most advisable: initially the forward brigades of tank (mechanized) corps --

to complete penetration of the main defensive zone together with the forward
echelons of the combined-arms armies, and subsequently the main forces -- to break
through the second defensive zone. In this case rifle troops continued to retain
sufficient offensive capabilities to complete opening a breach in the most solidly
defended area in the tactical zone of defense, with moderate artillery reinforce-
ment and the assistance of tank combined units. Tank (mechanized) corps, assigning
part of their forces to forward detachments, would be able, together with in-
fantry and close-support tanks, to smash the enemy's final powerful antitank gun
line, formed by his artillery fire positions. to assault the third position without
delay, where the enemy had not been able to set up a continuous defense and, with
penetration of this position, to create favorable conditions for swift advance by
the main forces to the second zone, which was the most important prerequisite for
its penetration without a pause, and consequently for developing tactical into
operational penetration.

Successful engagement of tank and mechanized combined units also depended to a
considerable degree on the width of the breach opened up in the enemy's defense.
According to prewar views, a breach should be from 20 to 25 km wide for a mechanized
corps, 6-8 km of which would be designated for the movement of tank divisions and
6-8 km gar protecting tanks from effective hostile light-artillery fire from the
flanks.

The experience of the war indicated that not more than 2-3 km was needed to protect
advancing tank columns from fire from the flanks, that is, the effective direct-
fire range of artillery and tank guns from each flank. This made it possible suc-
cessfully to engage a tank army in an 8-12 km zone, and independent tank corps in a
4-6 km zone.

Engagement of tank armies, tank and mechanized corps would be supported by artil-
lery fire and a substantial number of the front's aircraft. After crossing the
tactical zone of defense, mobile groups would advance swiftly toward the army
defensive zone and would push toward important operational objectives or toward

a mobile group advancing from another direction, with the aim of closing the pinccrs.

170

FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY
Combined arms large units and formations would also take part in development of tac-
tical into operational penetration with a deep offensive thmst. breaking through
the second defensive zone and exploiting to operational depth with their forward
detachments, which would consist of up to a reinforced tank brigade sent out from
the corps or army. In some operations oodained-arms armies in the front's support
echelon would also be employed to exploit to operational depth.

Widening of the breakthrough sector would usually begin with penetration of the
strongest defensive line, when weakly defended flanks would be discovered, present-
ing the opportunity to smash the defense on the flanks without large expenditure of
personnel and weapons. During penetration of a shallow defense of the focal-point
type, this would be performed during penetration of the first position, for which
part of the forces of the flank combined units would be utilized.

when the enemy shifted to a static defense, opportunities to attack in the direction

of exposed flanks would usually arise following penetration of the main defensive
zone, but more often following penetration of the entire tactical zone of advance.

Widening of the breakthrough sector was a component part of the conduct of penetra-
tion and played an important role in opening up operational breaches. It therefore
would be planned in advance, and appropriate manpower and weapons would be allocated
for this mission.

7. Development of Operational Into Strategic Breakthrough

Soviet forces accomplished a strategic breakthrough on five occasions during the
Great Patriotic War: in the Southwestern Sector in the winter of 1942/43. in the
Right-Bank Ukraine in the winter of 1966, in Belorussia and Romania in the sumsr
of 191.4, and in Poland in January 1945. A strategic breakthrough was the result
of an offensive by several fronts. when their operational breakthroughs were linked
up into a single cannon breakthrough, which forced the enemy to begin a retreat in
the zone of an army group and to take measures to reestablish a strategic front
along a new line.

Development of operational breakthroughs into a strestegic breakthrough would be
accomplished by conduct of a number of successive or simultaneous operations, in
which an important role would be played by operations to envelop and annihilate sn-
circled enemy forces.

In the winter campaign of 1962/43, as a result of the encirclemsnt and subsequent an-
nihilation of a very large enemy strategic force at Stalingrad. an enormous breach
was formed in the enemy's defense. In November 1942, however, our fronts did not
possess adequate forces for simultaneously crushing the encircled force and of-
fensive exploitation on the outer envelopment perimeter. As a result of the lull
which ensued, the enemy succeeded in temporarily closing the gap with combined units
from the newly-formed Army Group Don.

Rout of the enemy in the Northern Caucasus and on the Upper Don, which followed soon
thereafter, disintegrated the strategic front in the Southwestern Strategic Sector;
in order to restore this front the enery was forced to redeploy large forces from
Germany and a number of countries in western Europe.

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The strategic breakthrough in the Right—Bank Ukraine in the winter campaign of 19410
was accomplished by a series of successive operations. In the Zhitomir-Berdichev,
Kirovograd, Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy and Rovno-Lutsk operations, the enesy’s defense
was shattered on a 1000 kilometer front, and the enemy sustained heavy casualties.
Unexpected splitting offmsive drives by the three Ukrainian fronts in March 1944
led to the collapse of the enemy's strategic front in the Right-Bank Ukraine, as a
result of which he was pushed back into the Western Ukraine, to the Carpathians and
the Romanian border. In order to reestablish a strategic front, the eneny was
forced to redeploy a great many combined units from Romania, Hungary, Yugoslavia,
ﬁance, Denmark, Germany, and sac Reserve.

In the sumer-fall campaign of 1944 development of operational breakthroughs into a
strategic breakthrough was accomplished by enveloping and destroying large enemy
forces, with simultaneous deep offensive exploitation, which led to the forsation
of huge, deep breaches in the enemy's strategic defense. One specific feature of
this method consisted in the fact that development of breakthroughs from tactical
to strategic was taking place continuously, which constituted a new quality in the
development of Soviet Army offensive operations.

In the winter of 191.5 the enemy's strategic front in the Western Sector was crushed
by powerful, swift splitting offensive drives by the troops of the First and Second
Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts, with the assistance of the Third Belorussian
and Fourth Ukrainian fronts. On breakthrough of the tactical zone of defense, a
number of battle groups began pursuit, and on the third day of the operation common
front and interfront breakthrough sectors were formed, in which swift deep drives
developed, which led to the total collapse of the enemy's strategic front and the
advance of the troops of the Soviet Army and the Polish Army to the Oder and
Neisse.

In two campaigns Soviet forces failed to achieve a strategic breakthrough. In the
winter of 1941/42 the Soviet Army did not yet possess large tank and mechanized com-
bined units, which made it impossible swiftly to surround large ener forces, to
split his front in the Hestern Sector, and thus to form a strategic breach in his
defense. In addition, liq SEC was guilty of a certain scattering of men and weapons.

In the summer-fall canpaign of 1943 the Soviet Army conducted a number of succes-
sive operations on a front up to 2000 km wide. The overall advance ran ZOO-700 km,
and a number of prerequiistes were created for developing operational breakthroughs
into a strategic breakthrough in the Southwestern Sector, the most important one.
Soviet forces did not however, succeed in completing the process of achieving a
strategic breakthrough.

One of the reasons for this was the fact that expenditures of personnel and weapons
on accomplishing operational-tactical breakthroughs in the enemy's static defense
were considerable. In addition, the turn to a countaroffensive at Kursk was made
following heavy defensive battles. By virtue of all this, when the conditions arose
for the conduct of operational pursuit, the large strategic formations did not

yet possess sufficient troops, especially mobile troops, to punch into the enemy's
defense, to penetrate deep into his dispositions, to smash his retreating columns,
and thus to establish and widen areas unoccupied by enemy troops.

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Another important reason was the fact that the selected forms of operational break-
throughs failed to provide for envelopment of large enemy forces, the annihilation
of which would immediately form a wide gap in the enemy's strategic defense. There
were still insufficient forces available to crush the entire strategic front with
splitting offensive drives. In spite of the fact that in the course of the campaign

118 divisions were routed, only 16 divisions were totally gnnihilated,6 while the
number was 65 divisions in the winter campaign of 1962/6 .

Another reason for the failure to accomplish a strategic breakthrough was the fact
that at the moment when Soviet troops had shifted to operational pursuit in a number
of sectors, their path was blocked by the wide Dnieper. It enabled the enemy to
gain from 6 to 8 days, to survive the crisis and to lose only a number of important

areas on the west bank of the river.
FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 40, page 6.

2. See "Boyevoy ustav pekhoty Rrasnoy Armii" [Red Army Infantry Field Service
Regulations], Part 11, Moscow, 1942, Article 623.

3. Sec "Taktika artillerii" [Artillery Tactics], Part 1, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1941,
page 253.

4. See "Sovetskaya artilleriya v Velikoy Otechestvsnnoy voyne" [Soviet Artillery
in the Great Patriotic War], pp 689, 757.

5. See "Taktika tankovykh voysk" [Tactics of Tank Troops], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1960, page 125.

6. See "Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 811 v Vslikoy Otechestvennoy voyne"

[Operations of the Soviet Armed Forces in the Great Patriotic Var], Vol 2,
page 467.

7. Ibid., page 665.

173

FOI‘OFF1C1A1.USE'0N1Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUSION

The experience of the numerous operations conducted by the troops of the Soviet Army
in the Great Patriotic War indicated that penetration was the most difficult stage
of an offensive operation and required thorough, comprehensive preparation, detailed
planning, thorough knowledge of the enemy, his defense system and modes of action,
skillful employment of available personnel and weapons, firm, flexible, and con-
tinuous troop control.

A deliberate defense possessed great strength and stability. The art of penetrating
such a defense was expressed first and foremost in skilled concentration of per-
sonnel and weapons on the selected axis and in the selected sector, and establish-
ment of decisive superiority over the adversary. This was achieved by courageous
weakening of secondary sectors, redeployments within a front and within an army, as
well as maneuver of SEC Reserve manpower and weapons. A high degree of skill in
massing men and weapons was displayed by those commanders who possessed a

thorough understanding of the essence and nature of penetration.

Fire, and particularly artillery fire constituted a decisive means of breaking up
the enemy's defense. Fire would be delivered in preparation and continuous close-
support accompaniment of an infantry and tank offensive drive to full depth of
penetration. The orderly system of offensive artillery and air support developed
during the war years, with precise calculation of shells, bombs, and sortiee by
target and objective, dimensions of the area under fire and time, reliably ensured
effective damage to the enemy's defense and successful advance by the attacking
troops. The experience of the war indicated that matters pertaining to delivering
fire on the enemy should constantly occupy the center of attention of commanders
and staffs at all levels, and the combined—arms commander must possess thorough
knowledge of the combat capabilities of weapons and skillfully utilize them in the
attack.

A mandatory condition for successful penetration of the enemy‘s defense was at-
tack with the element of surprise, which would catch the enemy unawares, paralyze
his will, induce confusion, disorganization, and prevent the enemy from fully
utilizing the capabilities of the defense. Therefore concealed preparation for
penetration, deceiving the enemy regarding true intentions and employment of

forms and modes of action unknown to him constituted an inseparable part of opera-
tions planning and were a special concern of Bq 830, the commanding generals of
the fronts (armies), the conmanders of combined units, units, as well as staffs.

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Participation in penetration by large forces of the various arms, aviation, and
special troops, with their diversified weapons and combat equipment, demanded
precise unification and coordination of their efforts in objective, place and time
to full penetration depth. Poor organization of teamwork and cooperation and imr
precise allocation of missions would lead to uncoordinated actions by the combat
troops, to scattering of their efforts. incomplete utilization of combat capabili-
ties, and to limited results. Therefore thorough organization of coordination

of all forces and weapons participating in penetration was a primary obligation of
commanders at all echelons and one of the decisive factors in achieving success.

The experience of the war indicated that initiated penetration had to be conducted
aggressively, with determination, at full effort, in order to achieve deep penetra-
tion as rapidly as possible. Therefore prompt and timely buildup of efforts,
execution of maneuver, and response countermeasures to enemy efforts to close

a breach with reserves constantly occupied the attention of commanders during con-
duct of penetration.

Most frequently penetration of the defense would be accomplished in a nonuniform
manner. Prompt and timely exploitation, taking advantage of weakened points, gaps
and breaks in the enemy's defense for the purpose of widening and deepening the
breach by attacking with fresh forces or shifting the direction of efforts by the
advancing troops constituted one of the important conditions for successful
penetration.of the defense to its full operational depth.

ContinuOus achievement of success was of great importance not only for disrupting
the enemy's defense but also for increasing superiority of morale over the enemy.
Successful penetration boosted the spirits of our troops and diminished those of
the defending enemy forces. At the same time the experience of the war indicated
that any forward movement should be prepared for and closely coordinated with fire.
Assaults on an enemy force which was umsuppressed or little suppressed by fire
would usually lead to substantial casualties and failure, which always had a
negative effect on the fighting spirit of the attacking troops, and wOuld lead to
slowed, cautious actions, which in turn led to a decrease in the rate of advance.

No matter how great the initial success might be, no matter how hard the enemy

was hit, he would continue offering stubborn resistance and frequently undertake
crafty actions. Therefore, alongside a determined advance to operational depth,
commanders sought to maintain vigilance and precise organisation in their troops,
which protected them from unexpected attacks. Those commanders who allowed them-
selves to relax upon achieving breakthrough of the enemy's operational defense,
who forgot ﬂout the enemy's creftiness and cunning, frequently would get into a
difficult predicament, and would suffer setbacks, even if only temporary, setbacks
which, however, would have a negative effect on the and results of the operations
in progress.

0n the whole the experience of the last war showed that the commander should
thoroughly understand the complex nature of combat, should have the ability to es-
timate the situation quickly and correctly and to make appropriate decisions, should
possess a high degree of professional training, Communist conviction, willpower and
organizer abilities, should display innovativeness and initiative, and should

175

INDI'OFFIC1A1.USIZ(HHLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEIONLN

have the ability to train, indoctrinste and lead his men into battle in order to
achieve victory.

A thorough study of the wealth of combat experience of the last war is an in-
dispensable means of developing such qualities, understanding the processes which
are taking place in military affairs in present-day conditions, improvement of mili-
tary thinking and expanding of military knowledge. Innovative utilization of this
combat experience, taking into account the changes in nilitary affairs which are
taking place, is of great significance for further increasing the conbat night of
our Armed Forces, for strengthening the country's defense capability, and for further
development of military affairs.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A -- army

ak -- army corps

TFp -- panzer group, tank group
u -- and

mu -- mechanized corps

rp.reH -- general...'s group
yd -- assault

cd -- rifle division

19 - guards

kk -- cavalry corps

md -- panzer division, tank division
nd -- infantry division

rd -- mechanized division
pcaepe -- reserve

c5p -- rifle brigade

map -- tank brigade, panzer brigade
kd -- cavalry division

oxp -- security

p -- reserve

MCOp -- motorized rifle brigade
mk -- tank corps, panzer corps
FD " group

an -- long-range

on -- rifle regiment

TA -- tank army

BA - air army

mn - tank regiment

Hm -- air force

¢ - front

Hff -- mounted-mechanized group
ck -— rifle corps
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

 

I
2‘ l "I
7. n. n. ".15. u.- “ x
I
”u .
/,',/
‘ 410-"“"" 2"
I
b

   
 

  

Yam-mo 060m”- (1)

non—one CIOMI u 20 2' 1. I9".
‘ ‘ (2')

    

a Hannaona-uq yum. "nu-luau num-

Diagram 1. Situation in the Western Strategic Sector. 20-25 July, and Forms of Opera-
tional Breakthrough in the First Offensive in the Smolensk Area

Key:
1. Legend 6. Kalinin 12. Dnicper
2. Position of the opposing sides, 7. Rokossovskiy 13. Hogilev
20-25 July 1941 8. Kachalov
3. Axes of advance of army groups 9. Smolensk
4. Western Front 10. Vitebsk
S Khomenko 11. ﬂeetern Dvina
178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Maul/Imam”) orallra)

mum Ann (’3) /
"usurp"

w
Key:
1. Kalinin Front 3. Army Group Center 5. Moscow
2. Western Front 4. Kalinin
_____________._.

    
  
     
   
 
  

{7.3 Ill-J "

   

n'. «O

a:

...

he..._

(3) “loﬂoltlz *

Diagram 3. Plan of Comading General of the 10th Army for Breaking Through
Defensive Line on the Don

Key:
1. Don

2. Lyutorichi 3. Boaoroditsk
-—-_._._~

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Diagram 4.
Lama River (

Key:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

Penetration of c

January 1942)

180

OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Venom-m own-noun

«s":::::*:::;.:::~- "(“53"-

¢m .. .
Ow; .53:’:.:;.L‘.:”°' ’63”.

 

Monomer-o I I13.“ I. (1.)

Diagram 5. Concept of Khar

Penetration (May 1942)

Key:
1. Legend 4.
2. Axes of advance at first stage 5.

of operation
3. Axea of advance at second stage 7.

of operation

________—————

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

in

'kov Operation and Depth of Advance by Forces During

Status on
Southwestern Front

6. Southern Front
General Bobkin's group of forces
FOR OHICIAI. bSE ONLY

0, xuuuuucun (5)

 

2,0 OPOIIT '9
V (7)
(6)
SAIM‘II‘I'
OPOIIT
“nu. “

83‘

“I

Yam OMS-lulu- (1) ' "l

Manon-n "no. no n-ucn, . - 7h)

coco-nu (2) '
— ﬂo-o-o-u cvopo- 1(3)" non meal

(’0)

”uncle-nu cnooo- - uo-uv uueu
'29.. I942:

Diagram 6. Concept of the thev-Sychevka Operation (August 1942)

Key:
1. Legend 1.. Position of opposing sides at
2. Axes of advance according to end of August 1942
operation concept 5. Kalinin Front
3. Position of opposing sides at 6. Western Front
end of July 1942 7. Volga
162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mp - 811:“qu "our (1)
In! 67‘

(2)
10mm”
mm

2“

‘ nyrnnunrraa(‘)

 

Diagram 7. Composition of Battle Groups, width of. Breakthrough Sectors and Their
Spacing in the Counteroffenaive as at Stalingrad

Key:
1. Southwestern Front 3. Stalingrad Front
2. Don Front 4. Stalingrad

183

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OBLY

 

Int,"

    
          

   
  

Yemen-e Mos-noun
noon-cu- solo;

a: «not! I. ".42:
(3

I 'I 0 IO ll ‘21.

Inc-o" ID. ".421.

(2)

% 3’1!)

"00!.qu

bat Actions of Combined Units of the 5th Tank Army Dw
venbei' 1962)

2. Position of troops
3. By evening on

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
uncut!
"our (5)

\\“'° ”.‘

(8)

.... <6>‘
scrutiny!”

Yam-Ive oOos-unn (1) ’ “up“... “D"

J
[Bio-I'm. I03:- I “‘1430. (2) ..

"om-aunt oo-c- n 2| I. ‘31.

Hnnfu-n-ull yum sOcIoaoqtuo-Pocto
unus- «con-- (3)

Nears-are.- '“MI 0 90‘ I no-
Kacuoommcnloi MOVIE" (0

 

Diagram 9. Forms of Operational Breakthrough in the Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh and
Voronezh-Kastornoye Operations and Composition of Battle Groups

Key:
1. Legend 5. Bryansk Front
2. Position of troops on 6. Voronezh Front
3. Axes of advance in Ostrogozhsk- 7. Southwestern Front
Rossosh Operation 8. Voronerh

Io. Axes of advance in Voronezh-
Kastornoye Operation

185

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Diagram 10. Concept of Operation "Man" (1962)

Key:
1. Kalintn Front 2. Hestern Front.
3. Smolensk

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬂ OPOIIT
(7) 3101.0!"

   
   

 

  

      
  
    

"Hun? yen-(«11.7)
.c, '

2 Y‘ (c I”)

    
   

  

  
   
     

I” 5" 7
~ , . ’, n .1 rune"
\ " / ’2 “ ”our
\ x s
’ \
\ 414' ﬁg? Q
‘\' Q ' /4 e
(11.) sum ¢ . ‘/ ’7’ I:
«r- ' u .3
(13) try/m . ‘
mm . / ,
4. .. A
r C. -_\— _ . —/
/’ Ill
9‘ ~_\
- 5%
f 7 Z In an
___ 9 '
2‘ lléllbllbllﬂﬂ
”our
[ ma:
fly-000 It". “7'6“
0
f on:
”Palltgl'c‘llllﬂ OH)
on?- . (11)
, m ’m ( 0)
° " 1 , 7 1 .
'7’ "$32?”
an .”’
”‘m’i” ' ‘ an
(15) 41;, h
DOV—cam! l 11:01 nauvp- '2'. ””0. (12
_ IIQ'YnlI-IDY .'u I 1 3",“uu'
I a do. I
’////, "3:5: (“35' "" m"
PFOI-I oeona a ”anon-o Inn-out ' ,

 

will

many-noun

r2»-

Diagran 11.
and Conpooition of Battle Groups

Key:
1. Legend 6.
2. Position of opposing sides at
beginning of counteroffensive
3. Soviet battle groups
6. Points of engagement of tank 7.
armies 8.
5. Position of fronta at end of 9.
counteroffensive
_____.____._._____

   
 

w Mule—glgvouﬂ - noun, IOIID‘

noun-Ia yup. ”a ape-- ap-
nom-oao I no“. vacuum-u 6

 

   
 

\

    

Axis of advance of 10.
60th Army when 11.
launching g neral 12.
offensive 13,
Western Front 14,
Bryansk Front 15.
Central Front 16.
187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.. m:

Forms of Operational Breakthroughs in the Counteroffenaive at Kurak

Steppe Front
Voronezh Front
Southwestern Front
Army Group Center
Bryansk

Arny Group South
Khar'kov
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1)

   

 
 
  
   
 
   
 

Yeas-w.- man-e...-
nose-cue nose-- - yum 12 1 (2)

-‘ " I. 00 '11
. - -- - 12.00 I11
I“ r ~ - I690 I11

.. .. - new” '11

 

- sc In! 3.1

 
  

U '4. (J

   

 

Consul Beo-

(‘

 

....

Diagram 12. Penetration of Enemy Defense by the 8th Guards Rifle Corps (July 1943)

Key:
1. Legend 2. Position of troops on morning
3. By evening

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
,. ch-uc econ-ovum- (1)
—-no-.-¢.-. oole- I 1-” 3 0 (2)

,, _. .. .......... <3)

- I2-l8.00 8.0 ”none-nun sol-c- - new“ 3 D

 

Diagram 13. Actions of Tank Armies when Exploiting Penetration in the Belgorod—
Khar'kov Operation (August 1943)

Key:

1. Legend _ 2. Position of troops on morning
___________.

3. Position of troops by evening

,89

FOR OFTTCIAL USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vmuo oIoo.-~o‘:'

mica-no I ”.‘.‘,I. —n.-.-.--. n ”JJII. “Jun”. QIA - I,‘

 

Diagram 14. Penetration of Enemy Defense by Troops of the 60th Army (August 1943)

Key:
1. Redeploynent of

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Diagram 15.
Key:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

1;; "Hanan
‘ "our (3)

(h) unvooorvn.

   

Yuan-u won-w..-

a

_—ﬂ0Iomc-u um: I '1" 2‘ I2 431

(1)
win-noun- "we: no...-
"' I-Io Yup-nncnwo (mo-no

(2)
Ko-quapu m~uquo~anwnu~

W an wic-

- new." ”I? 03‘.

 
     

”
a—
m
HIE-i.- - ICIOI, 05 I 4‘!

   

r-Berdichev Operation

3 Hide Front in the Zhitoni

Diagram 16. Splitting Attacks on

Key:
1. Axes of advance of troops 3. First Ukramian Front
of the First Ukrainian lo. Kirovograd
Front

2. Counterthrusts by German-
faacist forces
___.___.———

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- (1)
2 - a IIIPIIIIOIIIM OP OI”

cum-hen".

yono-nue OCOQIIIQI-n

’ 'L-aa noun-one ache- - uelou 1 l
none—«no “no: I 7'” 6.1 m

.l
,. . «mu 5 “dd-Had .. n - "no" 15.!

glue." 0.!

 

Dlagram 17. Penetration of Enemy Defense in Kirovograd Operation (January 1944)

Key:
1. Second Ukrainian Front 2. Kirovograd

193

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       

(2) ”I ‘ >
m ymuuclm
«our

e In.” 25 I m“.-

I. nc no" 16 t A..$Hnw note- emcee-u.

w _ ..
9"-
_____————-

Penetration of Enemy Defense in Knrsun‘-Shevchenkovsk1y Operation

Diagram 18.

(January 1965)
3. Second Ukrainian Front

Key:
1. Counterchrusts by enemy
forces 4. Kirovograd
2. First Ukrainian Front
.__________________

194

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
f .(n

  

   
     
     

Venoe-uo

 

Mono-u Me- n 21.1.01. mum...- non-one nuc- n 38.2- «v.

  

Diagram 19. Offen
Rovno-Lutsk Opera:

Key:

cive by Forces of Right Side of First Ukrainian Front in the
ion (January 1944)

1. Belorussian Front 2. Independent units
“N

In.‘

ﬂ. ﬁ, 17. 07. "7. ”-

'//-‘-§:>/E,;:~Ei:\\\“ .
{‘9 w; '.

mm Ag:

.Mm,

".1

an ’"

iniagran 21. Formation of Battle Group of let Guards Army for Penetration of
'Defensive Line During Operation (Hatch 1946)
l

{ Key:

 

 

f 1. Proskurov

 

197

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_ . . w
:3 0 ea :30- . rune. ens-loco: i .30....“ 00.0 a veto. auntie-o: i

. E Ollie l
god 6‘0 8.. .- I010. oncoloeoc i 3:0... :15: I 546. lulelﬁﬂuc I

  

«3.9.1.3009 oar-33a

 
       

\..

1/ :3... d» 2“.

Penetration of Enemy Defense by the 18th Rifle Corps of the 55th Army

in the Bobruyek Operation (June 1964)

Diagram 23.
Key:

Position of troops at beginning
of operation

1.

199

FOR OFTWCLAL USE:(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
   

H SEIOPICCIMU
"our

  
  
 
 
 

n: be (6)
\ 1m- YIIPIIIIIMM
ova-8‘. cram

. I"??? 2% v "A
> _-: «u...- O "f"
' I n

q":.=$§f’.o;.s

  
 

[KP/UH ”(Pl

   

[all u I! l\
V"
IMHO-v-
Yam-ac “nun-u
nOMNOWNIC-q .. “use, —_3a.\lua 43) Ono-u- ua ﬁll-now.
-_- .‘CD‘III onduuln

mmﬁ:';e.°:,-_1-ggg;::; 302-)“ Wm“; ..... ......... n...

Diagram 24. Breakthrough Plan of Commanding General of the First Ukrainian Front
in the L'vov-Sandonierz Operation (July 1944)

Key:
1. Position of troops at beginning of 5. First Belorussian Front
operation 6. First Ukrainian Front_
2. Objective of combined-arms armies 7. Army Group Northern Ukraine
for second day of operation 8. L'vov

3. Objective of front'a troops for
fifth day of operation
a. Point of engagement of tank armies

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- {mil-W77“ A 'h ‘
. . Nun-i

.1'

i

y m 1 Anna"

; M»

a

0'.“ -C

‘ Inc-o
‘
n " u

Ix
"t

'OI....“
.‘0 II I

 

Diagram 26.
Sandonietz Operation

1. First Belorussian Front First Ukrainian Front
3. Corps Group C (up to 8

Key:
2.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(3)

'“' nuance“!
'W mm

t run (8)

" ~ (1.) .
\ 1’. $510,100",

(6)
4-. rmumlu
omit

Diagram 27. Concept of no SEC for Penetration of Boa-y Strategic Front on Berlin
Axis (January l9h5)

Key:
1. Baltic Sea 7. Army Group Center
2. Third Belorussian Front 8. Hanan

3. Second Beloruaaun Front 9. Army Group A

A. First Belorussian Root 10. Berlin

5. First Ukrainian Front ll. Dresden

6. Fourth Ukrainian Front 12. Prague

__________._————-—

203
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

..3...o. 00.; ..
:0. <9 8.: t

{9. 1: 8.00 I

40. in. I:
~Iucg§23

mail- ..3._.: 8.: .. II: ..

i .51.: cod. ..

 

Amy in Visuals-Oder

Penetration of Defense by 618: Rifle Corps of 69th

Operation (January 1965)

Diagram 28.
Key:

C
n
0
z
e
V
1
3
D
e
f
e
d
m
A
1”
I4
0
2
e
m
u
1
8
n
e
f
a
a
1.0
un
CD
.3.
VS
1L

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an" s unusu- nu-s ‘
In.“ [MIMIC W-
's" so unmask-cu s

cocoa-d W

' , e .3 . f an .- um mus
dﬂpopuo so u... "m.“ 2:". ~ ”3:51...." “amount spot a nus

my“ spy-"g us you ”9". spy-spans ﬂop-N Innuen- ”out
ops—c

 

Diagram 30. Forna of Operational Breakthrough Employed in Army Offensive Operations:

a) breakthrough in several sectors; b) breakthrough in two sectors, working in co-
ordination with adjacent army; c) breakthrough in one sector with envelopoent of
may tactical force, in coordination with adjacent army; d) breakthrough in one
sector, by front force; e) breakthrough in one sector, toward adjacent army. by
front battle group; f) breakthrough on flank of army zone of advance, by front
battle group

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“a ‘ . ﬂ an putt-count ﬂop“

L ’ c:‘l;::::-:5.;;‘:-:a ‘3'.“51...’ encouumo comps-org?“ Iﬂln. .-

--f-ccn-you-w no.) I s ( Mutt-cue o ran-.4: ' a . '. "r
ztluﬂ Fauna-Cy nun In)!“ (I: g...“ . "our"

..lnuv harp-"I

1' no no do n uu-vu n as you-u...- a u f ”pope: u nucleu- «up.
Scum-"52. ”noun 6-5.5?"- "0:37“, ' u-an ¢ Iln‘£%‘:-'I..

I l won-a 1 - no (- pou- o Wml'q ] u u
1 Mum . luau-o. Moan-(:5: cup-u) noun-on (I‘d taunt-a-

no Oout'vM-ﬁ

Juan-pun nan-In ”pow-y

 

Diagram 31. Forms of Operational Breakthrough Employed in Front Offensive Opera-
tions:

a) breakthrough with a number of army thrusts (western Front in the counteroffensive
at Moscow); b) breakthrough in one sector with pinning attack (Kalinin Front in the
thev-Sychevka Operation); c) breakthrough by splitting attack, by battle group of
group of fronts (Southwestern and Voronezh fronts in operation "Little Saturn");

d) breakthrough in two sectors with simultaneous envelopment of enemy force (Bobruysk
and L'vov—Sandonierz operations); e) breakthrough by frontal attack in one sector
(Second Belorussian Front in Hogilev Operation); f) breakthrough in several sectors
with the objective of splitting up the opposing enemy force (First Belorussian

Front in the Vistula-Oder Operation)

207

FOR‘0FT1CJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. L's-"mm M 06"."! l. ”N!" «op-u upon-can... fun"... 0.... gm
we he‘ll-us ﬁs- uunun wuss ”on-u u.-
put la u- rea-pun" u-tuauuvus unfunny: 0.3..“-
M ”was! (us-[um no." “a

' Con-ups u)

Npumm Gun 0 my." elbow. no cuOla-ulcl n. - 0mm. Mops-v

bps-luau ﬂop-u an In. manual cunts is]: u ﬂea—mun We“
nun: unpuu-un c ”op-m c «Output-n:- Una-000nm Mum)
Ol’y-mn- Ipfnssllsu- pun-u. '41," a Ily‘v-y

”OD-OM. U pony-u- Mun-un- (I)... *W‘“

[upon a "76-" “no":- Mans-llamuuuu sup.-

c-n cups-n) nu]
l'

 

Diagram 32. forms of Breakthrough Employed During the War in Strategic Operations
of a Group of Fronts:

a) snashing enemy defensive front with splitting attacks (the counteroffensive at
Moscow); b) breaking through eneny defense by the main forces of fronts on con-
verging axes (counteroffensive at Stalingrad); c) splitting eneny defensive front
with an interfront frontal attack supplemented by thrusts in secondary sectors
(Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation); d) opening a breach in the enemy's defense with at-
tacks in several sectors, with envelopment of enemy forces and deep offensive ex-
ploitation (Belorussian Operation); e) penetration on converging axes by the forces
of two fronts, with simultaneous deep exploitation by the main forces of fronts
(Iasi-Kishinev Operation); f) splitting up the enemy's defense with frontal attacks
(Vistula-Oder Operation)

 

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Diagram 33. Development of Front Tactical Order of Battle in Offensive Operations
of the Great Patriotic War

Key:
1. Front reserve 3. Front air forces
2. Front 4. Support echelon (sometimes)

 

Diagram 34. Development of Army Tactical Order of Battle in Offensive Operations of
the Great Patriotic Var

 

209

INDR OFIICJAI.IEHE(MHLV
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

00-" ulna o a

(2) 3.2:.”(3) $2“) '::(5)

(‘9

           
 

         

 

 

rnyG-ml nonopmnu aun- - Pyon-u no“ a 6m- (coat-tonne!

"W” ....... “”‘m A 9...... mm... m... (12) "32:::.°.::.':.u:'21'€3"mm"

9 3:;T:-:L:o‘n(9osaou I?§§) A B-oou Juno-so guns-0(13) 0; ° |r:..g::£°c.-Ei;.)qggun («unsound-nu)

noun-u.- top-n ounce (nap-am) (18)

     
        

 
    
  

napoleon scone. noun-(11.)

Cocoeao'ouo-uue - use-”(1
Bvoou- mono-ea nopenoo(15

gnu-u. 01-!- “I seamen“-

... MIO'U - tau-o. up- Goo.
. ,..

    
 

    

Diagram 35. Schematic Diagram of Penetration of the Enemy's Tactical Zone of
Defense in 1944-1945

Key:
1. Second defensive zone 9. Airstrikes
2. Third position 10. Concentrated and massed fires
3. Main defensive zone for supporting infantry and
4. Second position tanks during combat at depth
5. First position 11. Start lines
6. Depth of close support of 12. Support echelons of regiments
assault 13. Support echelons of divisions
7. Double moving barrage 14. Forward detachments of
8. Single moving barrage and divisions
successive fire concentration 15. Support echelons of corps

16. Forward brigades of tank
(mechanized) corps

17. Main forces of tank (mechanized
corps

18. Mobile groups of fronts (varia-
tion)

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. 1979

3024
C80: 8144/0356

- END _

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY