m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10467

20 April 1982

Worldwide Report

LAW OF THE SEA
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MT!

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by spas. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ration was sI-marized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
LAN OF THE SEA

(rouo 2/821
CONTENTS

ASIA
JAPAN

Japan Metreased by U.S. Action on Law of Sea, Seabed Mining
(Various sources, various dates) ....................

Four Nation Agreelnent

Background of Four-Nation Agreement

'ASAHI SHDIBUN' Editorial

LDP's Sea Law 8111

Japan's Future Policy

'Knowingly Missing the 8118', by Takehioa Kondo
Facing a Dilema, by Tsuneld. Hartman
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

JAPAN DISTRESSD BY U.S. ACTION 0“ LAW 01' SEA, 3mm MINING
your Nation Resin-t '
M30629 Tokyo none in English 0605 an 3 Feb 82

[Text] Tokyo, 3'Peb “ODD—The United States. Britain, West Germany and France have
notified Japan of their decision to sign a "tentative agreemnt" on development of
the seabed mineral resources on January 19, the Foreign Ministry said Hednesday.

Under the agreement, private enterprises of the four nations are to start prospect-
ing for various seabed mineral resources earlier than any other countries.

The agreement is not "exclusive" and is telporary until a formal treaty is reached
at the United Nations conference on the law of the sea, according to Foreign Hin-
istry officials.

Japan did not join the agreement because it considers that development of such min-
eral resources should be promoted under international leave now being worked out
at the United Nations, they said. '

The Japanese Government plans to express its view to the four countries by l’ebru-
cry 19. they said.

At the U.N. conference on the law of the sea, which started in 1973, agreement has
been reached on more than 90 percent of all existing problems to date and the mining

problem finally emerged as the only outstanding issue. according to conference
,aources.

Background of Four-Nation Agreemt
M50469 Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 3 Feb 82 morning edition p 3

[Text] The United States legislated domestic laws pertaining to the development

of seabed resources in June 1980 and, to date, the United Kingdom, West Germany

and France have followed suit. However, Japan has been mable to venture a similar
action because, for the most part, she lags behind the other nations in the develop-
ment of technology. Although the exploration ship "Hakuryo-Haru" has started

FOR OFFIJAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operations, as a government source says, "at present she lacks the capability of
discovering prospective mining areas," so there is no trump card for enacting do-
mestic laws at an early date.

Another reason lies in the delay in reaching an agreement at the UN conference on
the law of the sea, which is supposed to set the rules for the development of world
seabed resources. Even if the proposed UN treaty on the law of the sea is adopted
at the next meeting, it will not take effect before 1988, because it has to undergo
ratification procedures in every nation concerned. Hence, Japan was off her guard,
believing that it would not be too late even if she timed domestic legislation to
fit in with the UN schedule.

While Japan was slow in taking the necessary steps, Reagan's 0.8. Administration,
believing that securing strategic seabed resources would contribute to the security
of the Western world, took a bold course and concluded the quadrilateral agreement,
through the cooperation of the three European countries. However, since developing
countries are expected to voice strong opposition, the 0.8. Government is said to be
studying a revised draft treaty that might keep the four-nation agreement in harmony
with the UN treaty, in an effort to find a comromise with developing countries at
the UN conference on the law of the sea.

But, unless that draft treaty is adopted, the four nations will go ahead and estab-
lish their mining districts and undertake exploration and development projects.
Hence, Japan is put into a situation in which she has to find ways to cowromise
while protesting the four nations. All in all, it is necessary for Japan to equip
herself with the qualifications to participate in the project at any time in order
to carry out negotiations to her advantage.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shiubunsha 1982

'ASABI SHIMBUN' Editorial
Tokyo ASAHI EVENING news in English 13 Feb 82 p 5
[ASAHI SHIMP-UN 11 February editorial: "Law of the Sea")I

[Text] The 11th session of the 3d UN conference on the law of the sea is opening
in New York on March 8. It is the opening of the "final session," for which an
unusually long term of 8 weeks has been set, and the participants are determined
to arrive at an agreement.

But with this important session coming up, there have been several deplorable
developments. One of them is the submission by the United States, which had re-
fused to participate in the deliberations on the grounds that it was reviewing its
own law of the sea policy, of six conditions for returning to the discussions.

The other is the fact that the United States, Britain, France and West Germany are
going forward with preparations to sign a mutual agreement on the development of
seabed resources. These two moves are related to each other. and both cast dark

shadows over the future of the conference on the law of the sea.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ever since 1973, the conference on the 1a: of the sea has faced rough going and
several times it appeared about to break up. The confrontation between the advanced
and developing countries over the development of deep seabed resources was parti-
cularly severe, but as a result of the tenacious efforts of various countries, in-
cluding the United States, an unofficial draft was drawn up in 1980.

Despite this, the Reagan Administration, soon after the inauguration, listened to
the complaints of private- companies and declared that it would carry out a drastic
review of its sea law policy. It refused to participate in the deliberations of the
conference on the law of the sea, which held up the deliberations for a whole year.

This alone is very deplorable, but the six conditions it has submitted are very arro-
gant. and blatantly so in its stipulations that "the contents mat be such as to ob-
tain the ratification of the Senate" and 'revision of articles will not be recognized
unless they are approved by the United States."

The conditions submitted by the United States demand basic changes in the draft of
the treaty already drawn up. As long as the United States sticks to these condi-
tions, not only will agreement not be reached during this session, but there is the
danger that it will disintegrate in midair.

Ihe four-nation mutual agreement is related to this American attitude. Predicting
that no agreement would be reached on a law of the sea, the United States has been
taking legal steps within the country and has been making preparations for independ-
ent development. It wants to go a step further and draw the lines for prospecting
areas among the four countries. At the same time, it is clear that use of such
steps as "threats" in order to push through 0.8. demands at the conference on the
law of the sea is a hidden goal of Aasrican policy.

Japan apparently has decided not to participate in this mutual agreement, and this
is only to be expected. Some think Japan should participate because they are
afraid Japan will be left behind; but Japan should advocate the signing of a law
or the sea treaty and development under such a treaty. In fact, Japan should
reprimand the four countries.

As we have pointed out time and time again, isn't the United States being blinded
by iuuediate profits and underestimating the significance of the establishment of a
law of the sea treaty? If a new international order concerning the sea can be
established on the basis of the consensus of over 100 countries, the effect it will
have on the future international situation will be incalculable. We wish the United
States would adopt a broader viewpoint and work toward agreement in this session.

At the same time, the other countries should not inpatiently force through a

vote without the United States, but stick to the policy of agreement by all parti-
cipating countries. Japan should also revise its policy of following the lead of
the United States and should frankly explain to the advanced nations that they can
no longer go ahead on their own just because they have the technology.

we hope the signing of the treaty, which has been scheduled for this fall in Caracas,
will be achieved without fail.

COPYRIGUT: Asahi Evening News 1982

3
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LDP's Sea Law Bill
0H170633 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 16 Feb 82 morning edition p l

[Excerpt] The 1.0? has finned up a plan to introduce a bill for enactment of an
"interim law on deep seabed mineral resources developunt" (temporarily nosed) in
the current Diet session in order to make arrangements for developing; deep seabed
nodules containing nickel, cobalt, and other linersls. For the develop-ent of deep
seabed resources. the United States, West Germany, Britain and France have agreed
to sign a four-nation agreemnt featuring a systen of reciprocal nations. They
have called on Japan to join in this agreemt, on condition that she will enact

a pertinent domestic law. The Japanese Government has shown a passive attitude
towards joining this agreement and adopting the donsstic la in question, on the
grounds that "the agreement. eulusive in nature, will incur opposition anong de-
veloping countries and that Japan has little to gain from it." On the contrary.
the LDP's judgment is that there is need to enact a relevant law so that Japan

can become party to the agree-ant at any tin. The LDP Dietmn have already a
tentative draft bill. Using this as a basis, the LDP policy affairs research coun-
cil's special comittee on deep seabed resources will start full-scale work next
week to draft a bill. '

The tentative draft bill, prepared by chairman of the special comittee Tanisuke
Hatmuki, Yoshiro Hayashi and other Dietnen is made up of nine provision. includ-
ing one on "reciprocal nations," in which the idea of recognizing each other's
mining fields is incorporated. Thm the tentative draft has obviously been pre—
pared as a step toward joining the four-nation agreement. In anticipation of the
adoption of a treaty at the UN law of the sea conference, the tentative draft has
a provision for reviewing this law when the treaty is signed.

The LDP's reason for beginning to enact a domestic law is that it feels a sense of
crisis at the possibility that Japan will be left behind in the develop-ant of deep
seabed resources if she does not act now.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

Japan's Future Policy

(”171435 Tokyo JIJI in English 1412 GMT 17 Feb 82

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HITI sees no merit for Japan in participating in the four-country accord as the
forermning quartet is given priorities in the demarcation of exploratory conces-

sions under the pact, working to Japan's disadvantage.

It also considers it necessary to honor therlMl. conference with a view to acting
in concert with the Third World.

Technology for mining manganese nodules, now being developed in various countries,
is expected to be put into practical use in about 10 years.

MITI plans to take the initiative in such technological developunt in Japan by
undertaking a nine-year. 20 billion-yen (about 83.06 million dollars) program
starting in the current fiscal year ending in March.

COPYRIGHT: .1111 1982
'Knowingly Missing the Bus'
0W90136 Tokyo THE JAPAN TIMES in English 8 Mar 82 p 5

[Article by Takehisa Rondo: "Rush Is on for Manganese Nodulesnand Japan Is
Knowingly Missing the Bus"]

[Excerpts] While more anxious than ever before to secure this mineraldmeager
industrial nation stable supplies of vital metals, Japan is knowingly missing
the bus--at least right now. '

The four Uestem powers—the United States, Heat Germany, France and Britain--are
saving fast to conclude a mutual agreement to extract metallic nodules found in
abundance on the ocean beds. Today's Forty-Riners are rushing for aanganese
nodules experts call "the last untapped resources available."

The agreement. once reached, will authorize the participating comtries to ex-
plore and mine the nodules through exclmive negotiations among them. And domestic
mining sources agree such an accord will come “very soon."

The stage: The Pacific sea floor spreading over about 9 million square kilometers
to the Southwest of thehawaii ‘Islands.

Not introduced well to average citizens, manganese nodules are of profound con-
cern for either policy-lake“ or leaders of key industries in any advanced states.

Critical metals are of more importance to Japan. the country dependent on foreign
nations for more than 98 of those trade resources. "Japan will be one of the na-
tions hardest-hit in an embargo and any other form of import stoppage," an in-
dustry source said.

Though well aware of the urge for Japan to make safe uninterrupted rare metal
supplies. Tokyo government leaders presently accept the recent nave for a quad-
lateral deep-sea Itinera1~development pact as a step clashing head-on with United
Nations efforts to ensure increased share of maritime resources for developing
Third World countries. ~

5
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ISO-nation third U.N. conference on the law of the sea spent much of its
discussions since 1973 to establish guidelines for a multi-lateral development of
manganese nodules, the "fortme commonly shared by mankind."

In mid-1980, the conference of the international body came up with a draft of a
maritime law treaty, putting an end to the decade-old North-vs.-South scenario
between advanced and developing states.

The drafted deep-sea mineral mining boils down to a compromise "parallel” method,
under which the United Nations would create an international organ and approve
mining interests, vastly organized into consortiums, to tap the metallic nodules.

lobbied by domestic mining capitals, the United States, however, soon voiced op-
position to the U.N. plan because of virtual smaller-.- shares for private parti-
cipants. U.s. firms, which had heavily invested, feared the lion's share would
be pumped out into a new U.N. organ.

"For the Americans, its meaning is incalculable in terms of national security,"
the source said.

Late in January, President Ronald Reagan announced plans authorizing private 0.8.
mining concerns to develop ocean-floor metallic resources in the Atlantic. In
March last year, the Republican President proposed to spend $100 million to in-
port critical metals for strategic purposes.

"Everything has come from surging resource nationalism," an official at the
Natural Resources and Energy Agency explained. "Nobody can deny have-nations
may form an OPEC in metal. We should have such metals in case of rain."

Separate from prolonged procedures at the United Nations for orderly ocean-bed
resource development, the quartet and the Netherlands, Belgian, Italy and Japan
have taken steps in the last two or so years to organize rules of their own. The
forerunner four states, in a tentative agreement, are to go ahead with explora-
tion work as a stopgap until a law of the sea treaty is formalized.

Partially urged by internal mining companies whicn had channeled investments.
the United States earlier completed a set of domestic laws on deep-.sea mineral
mining. west Germany, France and Britain, the countries where the concerned
projects are led by central governments, followed U.S.'s suit.

with the 11th session of the U.N. conference due to come on March 8 for debate
on the issue further, the Japanese Government, some domestic industries and
related businesses, appear to remain lukewarm.

"A certain sense of frustration is harassing government officials," said Presi-
dent Kunio Ohta of Deep Ocean Mining 00., a group of 23 Japanese firm concerned.

What concerns the Tokyo government is in fact that Japan may tarnish its image
among the developing countries by joining the four-nation alliance. The more

practical theory: the expected agreement will not benefit this country as a
lateconer.

6

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Actually, Japan, as the agency official put it, is years behind the four early
starters in manganese nodule development efforts, while (hta asserted "there‘s
no gap of technology" for recovery of nodules from the ocean floor.

Also lying as a big stuﬂaling block to Japan's full participation in Joint man-
ganese mining is disagreement between the Foreign mistry and the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry (MITI). "The Foreign Ministry is for the 0.8.,
but the MITI is always worried how the Third World will think," alts said.

Some mining industry sources blame Japan's sethack on ineffective developmt
efforts in this country, being made separately by the government and private
businesses.

Ohta's Deep Ocean Mining formed a consortium on an equal footing with Inco of
Canada, AMR of West Germany and Sedco of the United States. bur similar
multilateral partnerships also are operatingin nnganese nodule development, which
involves mining and energy giants like Kennecott, Lockheed and m.

In separate projects, the Natural Resources and Energy Agency and the Industry
and Technology Institute have previomly invested fmds totaling 10 billion yen.

From both long- and short-term points of view, government officials and lawmakers
are now opposed to Japan's joining with the four advanced states, because, as
some Diet officials said, the participation will infringe on the spirit of the
public use of high seas.

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIMES 1982

Facing a bile-n
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KBIZAI in Japanese 13 Feb 82 p 62-62
[Article by Journalist Tsuneki Maruyama]

[Text] The UN Conference on the Law of the Sea: Disturb-
ance Is Inevitable Due to the 0.5. Bardline Policy--
Behind the Scenes of Manganese Modules Development

The lO-yea "marathon conference" will soon be concluded. The law of the sea
treaty has . 'e to a standstill at one stroke through Reagan's review policy;
Japan's position is difficult.

Beginning on 8 March, the final session of the third UN conference on the law
of the sea will take place in New York. The United Nations convoked this con-
ference in 1973, and ever since a marathon conference has been conducted over
a 10-year period. At the 10th session last year, agreement was supposedly
reached which was said to be a product of compromise by the respective coun-
tries.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unexpectedly, however, at the 10th session, the United States proposed that the
deliberations up to that time be completely reviewed; the law of the sea reached

a deadlock, like a ship that was about to enter a harbor striking a rock. Bach
participating country was quite put out by the surprise attack of Reagan's compre-
hensive review diplomacy, and the session ended in a state of confusion.

The U.s. Aim Is To Secure the Horld' Strategic Materials

The aim of the review policy of the Reagan administration is the deep seabed
mineral resources, in particular, to secure national interests in the mining of
manganese nodules. According to the previous agreement, there was to be a
parallel system whereby such development would be placed under international
supervision, extensively incorporating the requests of the majority of develop-
ing nations and, at the same time, the private sector was also to be allowed to
participate in such development.

But the United States and its private sector, which had once acknowledged this
agreement, could no longer tolerate this, and it broke its promise even though
this meant antagonizing the entire world. By this action the mechanism involved

in the policy decisions of the 0.8. Congress and the dreadful lobbying activities
have come out into the open.

Then why did the United States switch to an extremely firm attitude and actually
ignore international custom regarding such a conference? Here there is a strong
political odor attached to the issue of the mining of manganese nodules. This
is because nonferrous metal resources are excellent world strategic materials
for the future.

The resources contained in manganese nodules are as shown in the accompanying
table. The mining of these resources is limited on land, but there is an almost
inexhaustible supply ihathe seabed. Whether or not this can be put at one's

own disposal will make a great difference in world strategy. without manganese,
not a pound of steel can be produced; without the cobalt contained in the nodule,
no airplane can be manufactured.

The potential of the nonferrous metals is less than that of oil and iron. But
when we consider that it is now obvious that the nonferrous resources on land are
limited, like a large ship that cannot move when even a small cogwheel is missing,
their qualification as a strategic material is high, so they hold a crucial key.

In fact, the terrestrial resources of manganese nodules are unevenly distributed;
they are found in such African countries as Zaire. the Congo, and South Africa.
On the basis of oil in the Middle East and nonferrous resources in Africa, the

United States and the Soviet Union have tied their major strategies to these
areas.

The reality is that the Soviet Union and the United States are balancing power
along a vertical line drawn by the former and a horizontal line by the latter,
with Egypt and Israel in the center, like a cross. The "hidden attraction" is

the existence of various abundant nonferrous metals contained in manganese nodules.

8
FOR 0FFK]AJ.USEZONLY
H-

U.S. "Domestic A'ffairs" Hhich Called for a "Delay"

Regarding the trend of the 11th session of the conference on the law of the sea,
which will take'place from March till the end of April, for the present, the
attitude of the’United States is quite unpredictable. The situation is moving
toward a delicate stage wherein the United States will either blow up the UN
lo-year marathon conference by forcing its way through, or it will set at the
table of the full-dress meeting which the other countriu regard as the final
decisionmaking conference. In the past half year. Assistant Under Secretary of
State J. Durand], the head of the U.S. delegation, and the U.S. Industry
Association (AB!) have been energetically engaged in the behind-the-scenes
maneuvering regarding the review policy through discussions and negotiations.

me reasons why the United States called for a "delay" in the draft treaty,
which should have been settled at the 10th session last year, are as follows:

First of all, the United States considers that the regulations limiting develop-
ment of deep seabed mineral resources, and specifically manganese nodules, do not
sufficiently reflect the 0.8. political and economic role in the planned interna-
tional seabed organization or in the international development public corporation.
This reflects a belief that a crisis might occur if the profits of the Third
World should become overriding, overshadowing interests of the United States.

the biggest consumer.

Second, the United States greatly fears that with the present international voting
mechanism, its view will not be reflected "fairly" regarding the use of man-
ganese nodules, for which it is the largest producer and consumer. The United
States wants to amend the provision so as to have its views, as an advanced tech-
nology country, forcefully recognized by the board which is supposed to become

an executive organ of the international seabed organization.

Third, the present draft provides for limits on the production of and access
to manganese nodules. Because of this, the United States insists that it cannot
establish a regime so as to promte smooth production as the largest consumer.

Fourth, the present draft is naturally advantageous for the international develop-
ment corporation (enterprise) which is expected to be established by the intern-
national seabed organization, but it is obvious that it will become an obstacle

to private enterprises, the main development body, obtaining a license for de-
velopment.

Fifth, the draft will result in providing an insufficient guarantee to the mining
activities of the private sector, which has substantial mining rights. The
United States considers that a guarantee should be given to provide an opportunity
for the private sector to invest in and accomplish the project successfully.

It appears that the United States is determined to oppose the draft, which does
not specify these various points. Here we can see the surfacing of a very real

attitude of confrontation between internal adjustment within the advanced country
and the North and South issue, which is presently of great international interest.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The U.S. Private Sector Puts Pressure on Reagan

There was in incident in March of last year, when the 0.5. negotiating delegates,
on the way to the settlement of the conference on the law of the sea, were arbi-
trarily dismissed by then Assistant Secretary of State Clark. Hardliners from
the Reagan camp were hastily designated as replacements and were ordered to halt
the negotiations. This was the beginning of the sudden switch in 0.5. policy to
a stand for a strong United States.

Prior to this. the way of thinking supported under three presidents, Nixon, Ford
and Carter, had led to a package treaty on law of the sea. The development of
deep seabed resources, fishing rights, economic water areas, ocean pollution,
technology transfer, and the freedom of sealanes and aviation were considered

as a package treaty.

Richardson, the chief delegate to the conference on the law of the sea during the
Carter administration, was anxious to conclude the treaty at the United Nations;
as he said: "We only have one choice, and that is a package treaty."

With the appearance of President Reagan, the attitude has changed drastically
through the policy review operation, which is due to the fact that nonferroua
metals as strategic materials have been recognized as an extremely important

issue.

_The private enterprises which make up the U.S. Mining Council have been putting
intense pressure on the government on the grounds that the draft treaty does not
provide a stable and realistic seabed mining regime for commercial development by
private enterprises and that access for investors is not guaranteed.

Japan Driven Into a Hamlet—Like State of Mind

Thus, the third UN conference on the law of the sea all depends on what move
the United States will make. Japan is being put in an extremely difficult situa-
tion.

Japan has to depend on foreign sources for the supply of nearly 100 percent of
its nonferrous resources; therefore, it is eager to secure manganese nodules.
Despite this, however, it can neither fail to pursue diplomacy in every direction
while firmly holding onto the UN principles, nor can it abandon the line of
cooperation with the United States. The fact that among the participating coun-
tries, Japan alone supported the United States in the previous session, to the
scorn of the South countries, is still fresh in our memory.

The United States, on the other hand, has already been accepting applications
from mining districts from U.S., Japanese, and European industries, regardless
of the course of the conference on the law of the sea. This is based on 0.8.
domestic law; naturally. however, the developing nations oppose this as being
invalid in terms of international law. Japan also faces the dilemma that if it

should delay applications due to consciousness of the "South," it could not shut
out from favorable mining districts.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the meantime, four governments—the United States, Britain, Heat Germany and
France--have notified the Japanese Governmt that on 19 February they will sign
a secret agreement on monopolistic development of deep seabed mineral resources
which will become effective innediately. That means starting action before ob-
taining the consent of all the countries concerned regarding the allocation of

mining districts. Because Japan has taken the position of stressing the import-
ence of the United Nations, it is cornered, and the situation has grown tense.

Japan professes to be a country of the sea; nevertheless, the government and the
private sector as a whole have not made substantial efforts in the development
of the sea. At the beginning of the 1970's, an ocean development boom was cre-
ated, but no fruitful discussion has taken place for 10 years. Its "charge" is
about to be questioned at the third UH conference on the law of the see when it
comes to a showdown.

At Last, Japanese Industry Has Formed a "Research Association"

Belatedly, however, at the beginning of this year Japan also established a
"Technological Research Association, Manganese Module Mining System Research
Institute" as one of the large projects sponsored minly by the Agency of Indus-
trial Science and Technology under MITI. It is planning to conduct research for
approximately 9 years.

Thus far, the Metallic Mining Agency, in particular, has engaged in investiga-
tions using a research ship for deep seabed manganese nodules, the "Dai-ni
Hakuryo-Maru." Also, the Deep Ocean Mineral Resources Association (coupnly re-
ferred to as DOMA) has been conducting extensive investigation activities with
regard to manganese nodules. '

Furthermore, with respect to the activities of the private sector, the Sumitomo
group and the Mutsubishi group have joined international consortia to promote
development research, the former with Inco and the latter with Kennecott. There-
fore, it is not as if Japan did not have any research foundation.

In the light of the entire industry. however, these activities were definitely
undertaken in the manner of sideline work, so that, in terms of recognizing the
significance of nonferrous resources as strategic materials, these were in no

way adequate. Without Japan's own developmental technology, participation in the
mining market is not possible. The establishment of manganese nodule mining tech-
nology is so urgent that it is unavoidable.

In order to meet the situation, the task of the "Manganese Research Association"
is vital. The members of the association number 17 companies-dshikawajima-Harima,
Ebara Corp, Shosen-Mitsui, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Sumitomo Metal Mining,
Sumitomo Heavy Industries, Sunitomo Electric Industries, Pacific lbtals, Nippon
Kokan, Nippon Mining, Nippon Denlto, Hitachi Shipbuilding and Engineering, Mitsui
Mining and Smelting, Mitsui Shipbuilding and Engineering, Mitauibishi Metal

Corp, Mitsxbishi Heavy Industries. Msidensha Electric—and the Metal Mining
Agency.

Each will undertake a share of development and engage in the development of re-
spective systems such as handling, assuring control, mineral lifting, and
collection.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fortunately. Japan’s shipbuilding and electric engineering rank among the top

in the world, so the technological gap with the United States, which is the mat-
ter of most concern, will soon be filled. Japan is also good at promoting a pro-
ject once its target is determined.

Casting a side glance at the conference on the law of the sea association, direc-
tor Hirakaua says: "We will at least conduct technological development in prep-
aration for the 'action before the audience'," thus indicating enthusiasm. 0n
the other hand, although irregular, the Japan-v.5. Ocean Conference has met five
tines. mainly consisting of Japanese and American partliamentary members. At
last, the Diet menbers have begun work.

Although the UN conference on the law of the sea is unfamiliar to the public in
general, since this is the year of decision and because the session is approach-
ing, Japan's diplomatic ability is being weighed. Japanese diplomacy concerning
resources is torn between the Japan-0.5. and the North-South relationships as to
how will it meet the difficult problem of securing national profits while main-
taining international cooperation. The responsibility of the authorities con-

cerned is grave.
Key:

1. Volume of metals contained in manganese_

nodules deposited in the Pacific Ocean . . I . . 3| - ..
2. Volume of metals contained in 1 *‘FﬁLtIHTo7/ﬁ/InL-33aaﬁﬂl
K

  
   
 
  
 
  

   
   

manganese nodules 2- :fiﬁgngqunlltfo

  

 

 

3. Nickel -.___ ____ '1“... . _ ._ 3"!” _ gin->71; ..
4. Cooper iv a a 2 m n a u (“J-4
s. Cobalt 211 - - LMWla
6 Manganese 9””. I" a & u cor.
' p' ntmmnuunn H.200»:
7. Manganese nodule reserves nlnunlrsuummau ’ m:
8. 1.7 trillion tons —-——-———-- __-..-

(mmunun'u n a — r.
9. Terrestrial reserves '“ ‘ H ‘ "5

10. Annual consumption volume of the world (1977)
11. 648,000 tons

12. Approximately
13. Volume of metals contained in nodules/terrestrial reserves

14. Times
15. Source: HITI Resources Investigation Association, "1981 Resources

and Energy Yearbook . "

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

9711
cso: 41201173 3ND

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY