FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10188
15 December 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 46/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the Poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EGYPT

IRAQ

FOIOII‘HCIALUSEONLY

JPRS L/10188

15 December 1981

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 46/81)

CONTENTS

Interview With 'Ulnar al-Talmsani
('Uner al-Talmasani Interview; AL—WATAI AL-‘ARABI, 25 Sep-1 Oct 81)

Former Nasirist Official in Exile Calls for Reconciliation
(AL'HATAﬂ AL' .ARABI. 23-29 Oct 81) o'oosoossoc-concessosososososo

Task of Getting Ration To Rsnounce Israeli Link Reviewed
(AIPHAM AIP'ARABI’ 3° Oct-5 Nov 81) OIOIOOIOOOOOOOOODOIOODOO0'0.

Prominent Dissident Analyzes Domestic, Arab Causes of Rift
(AI’HATAN AIP'AMBI’ 3o Oct-5 nov 81) OOOOOOOOOIOOIOOOOIIOOOOCO...

Status of Prominent Female Detainee Reviewed
($31” Pakhri; All-“AT“ AIF'MI, 30 mt-S NOV 81) oosossnssososoo

Foreign Minister Interviewed on Conditions for Peace
(Sa'dun Hamadi Interview; AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI, 210 Sep 81) ........

Oil Minister Discussed Policy. OPEC
(Tayih 'Abd-al Karim Interview; AL-HAM Alp-'ARABI, h-io Sep 81) .

1

13

18

20

26
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERVIEW WITH 'UHAR AL-TAIMASAN I
Paris “PHAT“ AL—‘ARABI in Arabic No 261 25 Sep-l Oct 81 pp 35-37

[Interview with 'lhar al-Talnasani by Ala-HAT”! Alr'ARABI: “Violence Will Not
Scare Us and Leniency Will Not Deceive Ilsa" date and place not specified]

[Text] When Sadat's policy was about to clash with the Muslin Brotherhood in
Egypt. we went for a press intervial with 'Unar al-Talnasani, the leder of the
Egyptian Muslin Brotherhood and the chief editor of the magazine Ala-DANA? which
was confiscated. Today. the clash has taken place and al-‘ralnasani and his
comrades are in prison as are thousands of political detainees and leaders of
religious novenents. The talk we had with his a few days before his inprisonnent
forms the first line of defense at the new Muslin Brotherhood's trial. This
interview is also the third Inost important journalistic coup recorded with inorb
tant Egyptian detainees and fugitives since Al-ed Parghali and Lutfi al-xhwali.

[Question] Let us start by defining the Muslin Brotherhood's position as a "force"

among the opposition forces in Egypt. On what basis does this group build its
opposition to President Sadat and his policies?

[Answer] Yes, we are in the opposition. Our opposition prinarily focuses on
the fact that the existing syste- had neglected to apply in this Muslim country
God's laws "may he be glorified." For this reason our opposition is basically
aimed at the system itself and not toward obtaining power by changing those who
are in the government. or by replacing then. The Malia Brotheer do not
aspire for governing per ac. and do not care who is in power. But what simply
and solely concerns then is the principles of governing. In our opposition, we
adhere to the righteous and pure lslanic systen, without defamation or accuse-
tion...without slander or seizing of opportunities...without abuse or suspicions.
We are objective and we do not concern ourselves with individuals. Deqaite that,
we know that this philosophy does not please the authorities and does not even
please their opposition. But when did we tdte into consideration either one of
then? we strive to please only God. We hope we are right.

What we really want, and that answers the second part of the question. is the
Koran as the source of legislation. We are requesting that the constitution and
the political parties be abolished. We are requesting the boycott of ideas that
cone to us from the Nest and from the coll-mists. and which are alien to our

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

religion. we are asking to resist and fight imperiali- in every place. Re
are requesting holy war "Jihad" against Zionist. That is all we want and these
are our requests.

Camp David is a True Evil

[Question] Every one of your points is radically different from Sadat'a policies.
Each point needs more clarification...what do you say about that?

[Answer] As for applying God's laws, "the Sharia" had talked about it. with
regard to our stand concerning the parties in Egypt, we reject then because

their platform.- are situational. Each party has a platform that changes according
to circumstances. In addition. these parties, in their struggle to get to power.
aim for their own interests and for propagating their ideologies. They also
restrict their activities to only worldly matters. Our stand against imperialism
and Zionism is also very clear. It is enough that we opposed the peace treaty
with Israel from the outset and we think it is a pure evil from every angle.

[Question] Then, you wholly agree that the Arab countries were right in boycotting
the Egyptian systm?

[Answer] Indeed they were right in their boycott. But I have to say that some
Islamic countries erred in what was supposed to be done in handling the dangers

of that treaty. After that step it was necessary for those countries to unite.

1f Egypt was thinking about obtaining stability through this treaty, Israel did

not have this in mind. What she had in mind was the breaking of Kalil unity.
Israel succeeded. and some of those countries helped her succeed. The Muslim
countries are responsible for Israel's success. Should we help her too? If the
Islamic countries reconcile. unite and agree among themselves. that will undoubtedly
halt Israel and help Egypt to free itself from that treaty that helped Israel

in hurting Muslims and in continuing its aatagonius.

[Quest ion] How?

[Answer] Israel challenges us with uninhibited boldness. Look what Begin had
said! He said that bombing the Iraqi nuclear plant was only the first step in
order to strike at any development in any Islamic country. This means that he is
not satisfied with protecting the "security of lsr-l" inside her borders. but
he is boasting that he wants to strike at the heart of the Islamic countries...
"he: did we do when we were faced with that iwertinent bragging? Is it enough
to be satisfied by the Security Council condemnation of Israel....Should a

decision like that satisfy us?
The Syrian-Soviet Maneuvers

[Quest ion] Then. how do you see the Arab situation now?

[Answer] I will talk to you about tangible and precise matters to explain this
situation. A couple of days ago, the newspaper published that an Arab country
can: a military delegation to the Soviet Union to conclude an area transaction.

what is the size of the army of that country, and what is their fighting cqia-
bility? Who, in reali ty. is in charge of their technical military col-and?

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h’hat is the confrontation capability of these purchased arms, and what is their
usefulness? Does communism sympathize with believers and as a result give them
the best of what it has or is it a way to circulate wealth "the billions" in
the East once and then in the "est at another time? Is it not to prevent their
evil? But it will not be prevented. Is it not to get their approval? But that
will not be gained. At the same time Russia deride: Hafiz al-Aaad by holding
major maneuvers near Lataltiya. Do you know why these maneuvers took place?

Were they to scare Israel? I wish they were. The reason for these maneuvers is
to frighten the Syrian people.

Motto of the System

[Question] Let us talk again about the Muslim Brotherhood...and about what is

going on in Egypt. What exactly happened to your mqazine AIrDAHAT? Do you think
that it will be published again?

[Answer] What happened is that, on 29 July, people from the Bureau of Investi-
gation burst into the magazine office and confiscated papers. They also ordered
some workers to leave and take with them their clothes so that they could go

home. Then they closed the doors for about 6 hours and confiscated several copies
of the last issue of August because they considered its contents offensive to
President Sadat and his policies. In reality, we are surprised by what took
place. Isn't that an abuse of the laws. freedom and constitution? Why was the
National Egyptian press silent about this aggression? They are praising the system
for what is emitted against the dignity and freedom of the citizen. The vice-
Squad sees and hears what is shown on television and does nothing about it, even
though what is shown is corrupting the morale of the youths... But the Ministry
of Interior trembles at an article that is beneficial and does not corrupt or
harm. AL-AHRM had the temerity to publish a cartoon that is heretical and an
assault on the constitution, and rabody in the goverment did anything about it.
All people know who is behind that heresy. If goverment officials give it as
much attention as they give in pursuing the Muslim Brotherhood by various means

of spying and wiretapping, they would have spared this country the dangerous
consequences that are steadily approaching. But it seems to me that the motto

of the goverment toward the Muslim Brotherhood is "any danger compared to the
Husl im Brotherhood is no danger."

He will Not Resort to Court

[Question] what will be your reaction toward governmental actions? Hill you
resort to court?

[Answer] The Muslim Brotherth exists with or without the magazine. Our call
will continue to get to people by every mean. "111 we resort to court? This

will never happen. ..because God judges rightly between them and us. He will not
blame anyone, because we do not have the right to place bless. We are sure that
some of our officials demand a blind obedience...“ refuse them what they want.

Let everyone know that we are not the kind of people who become soft under entice-
meat, and we do not fear violence that frightens others...we believe what happened
to us had to happen. and what missed us could not happen to us. God values
everything. Thus what happened to us was a trial by God of us. Some used to be
suspicious concerning our stand toward the present system as an opposition, to the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

point that some parties said that we support the present system by our opposition,
and that between the systen and us there was a gentleun'a agreement. God, nay
he be glorified. neant to refute their suspicions.

Religious Incidents are False

[Question] You are accused by the goveruent of being responsible for the recent
religious incidents. "hat is your opinion?

[Answer] That is a lie because we were the pacifying factor during the incidents.
wring various religious incidents, the govern-em: used to resort to us...and we
used to carry out our duty not for the geverment's sake, but because our religion
recommends us to do so.... I tell you that the convention of Islamic groups was
the most inportant factor, with the help of God "nay he be glorified," in ending
the incidents of "Al-Zawiyah Al-Hanra'." All people know that. Pewle felt it
even though officials denied it.... As for threats one day from here and one day
(run there, nobody will feel their weight but those who are threatening. Because
not the weight of an atom can escape the eye of God, the nest high, whether on
earth or in heaven.

[Question] There are diverse Islamic organizations which do not follow you.
How do you look at then when they call everyone who does not belong to then a
"sinner?" Is there any coordination among all of you?

[Answer] whoever confesses the two creeds, follows then, and perforns his religious
duties is not a sinner. whether he belongs to an Islalic organization or not.

At any rate, we regularly meet with their officials to make one work plan until

our goal is achieved.

To Whom It May Concern

[Question] If you are asked to say a word to anyone who is interested, what would
you say?

[Answer] I say that every official in this country knows well that we are the
last people to conspire, plot, destroy, be sold, agitate, and provoke. In spite
of this. the investigation and intelligence bureaus concentrate on the malim
Brotherhood. Whoever believes we are not aware of it should correct his under-
standing.... We do not deceive anybody, at the sane tine no nethod did or will
ever deceive us no matter how gentle or compassionate it night appear to us.

I wish events would come to a head and close, confiscate, accuse. restrict and
try us. I wish that would take place. This is the melting of pure gold in order
to rid it of every impurity. We do not look forward to trouble...we ask God, nay
he be glorif led, for well-being. But if that is inevitable, people should know
that for those whom Qadhsyi and Assad could not alienate from their religion and
struggle, neither .1 hurricane nor the rage of stones, nor darkness wi.l prevent

Vthaa (run spreading their doctrine..\"God hath purchased of the believers. their persons
and their goods; For theirs (in return) Is the garden (of Paradise)." Sureh al-Taubah;
Section xiv: 111

COPYRIGHT: AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI 1931

9786
080: 4506/23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roam NASIRIST MICIAL IN mu: CALLS m mun?!“
Paris AL-HAIAN ALc'AIABI in Arabic 23-29 Oct 81 p 49

lirticle: "An Egyptian Opposition Voice Calls for Dialogue: 'Abd-sl-Hajid Parid:
bet Us Give Mubarak a Few Honthsﬂ/

lllfexgl 'Abd-al-Hajid tarid, a leader of the Bgyptien opposition abroad, who is
currently devoting himself full time to administering the Center for Arab Studies
in London, has an opinion on the latest new developments in Bgypt. In su-ery,
it is that the new Bgyptian president must prepare to carry out a donestic recon-
ciliation within Egypt. however, the time for such a reconciliation has perhaps
not come.

He asked the men who worked for a long tine alongside Jamal 'Abd-al-naeir and still
is faithful to his principles: “through your knowledge of the sybols of Egyptian

politics, do you believe that nusni liubarak will contime with the political plat-

forn al-Sadat followed?"

He replied, "In principle, there is no one in the world who wholly res-bias or
approxinetes another person. If we accept this supposition. the answer to the
question will be that Hubarak will not necessarily proceed with the same platform
and style that al-Sadat relied on in his overall treatment of domestic and foreign
political matters. It is true that Mubarak announced, right after al-Sadat's
death, that he would continue with this policy and platfora, but, in spite of that,
I believe that it is still very early for the new Bgyptian president to be putting
his notions forth and crystallizing them in a specific direction, as far as foreign
or domestic affairs are concerned."

I§uestio§7 How is the opposition supposed to act while awaiting this crystalliza-
tion?

[Answer] My personal opinion is that we mat wait awhile. waiting will give the
new president the opportunity to work quietly, because he will be judged by numer-
ous foreign and dcmstic factors. Not a long tine will pass before everything be-
comes clear. After that, it will be possible for all the detacl'ssents of the
Egyptian opposition to determine their position on mbarak's policies and practices
on the domestic and foreign levels. However, I stress that there are basic points
which will be the determining ones in this area, first among than Egypt's return

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to Arab ranks. Mubarak must find the way for such a return, because Egypt, by re-
turning to the Arab nation, will find the appropriate solutions to its political
and economic problems in a better and more honorable mm: for itself and its
history, instead of working apart from its Arab brothers.

will It Allow It Or Not?

/§uestio_n7 But do you believe that the United States will allow a change in the
course of Egyptian policy, especially since all evidence indicates the presence of
a concentrated, influential American presence in Egypt following al-Sedat's de-
parture?

[Answegl Whether or not it will allow it will be one of the basic challenges facing
Nubarak in the first period of hiu presidency, and he nust find a solution to it

in the light of Egypt's interests, which are linked to Arab interests generally.

I know very well that the Americans consider Egypt one of the basic pillars for
protecting their interests in the Middle East. principally the oil of the Gulf.

All the American research and studies we have in the Center for Arab Studies show
that American strategy in the Middle Bast up to al-Sadat's death was based on two
foundations:

The strategic alliance with Israel.

A direct or indirect presence, with political and military weight in some countries
in the area, in the form of military bases or joint facilities and maneuvers,
specifically in Egypt, the Sudan and mrkey. ‘l'he Anericens' alliance with al-Sadat
was essential to their strategy, as was their alliance with the late Shah of Iran
as far as their interests in the Gulf went.

Continuing with his analysis of American strategy in the Middle Bast, he added,
"Perhaps that explains the state of real panic that occurred in American political
and military circles directly after al-Sadat's death, especially since the new
American strategic plan in the region was in its final stages, after the period

of review of its broad outlines had passed. If Egypt in the new era continue to
pursue its fonner line, that will greatly ease things for the Americans. ‘l'his ex-
plains their extreme euphasis on the new regins in Egypt these days. I wonder if
the Americans will continue to rely on Egypt es in the previous period, now that
it has become clear to then that the opposition in Sgypt, with all its detaclnants,
has teeth and fangs and has demmstrated its effective influence on the course of
events."

In the course of the response he said, “It is necessary to spend a linited period
of time which might not be more than a few months for these aspects to be fully

clear."
The Killing itself

l§uestiog7 0n the subject of the opposition, which detacl'unt in it killed el-
Sadat?

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

lgns ’ In the first plece it wee el-Sedet who killed himself. I would elnost sey
thet connitted suicide. It is e seying thet violence breeds violence. Al-Sedet,
when he confronted the opposition with ell its detecl-ents. without distinguishing
between right end left, Heels-s end Copts, when he shut down ell the newspepers end
ne_;ezines thet expressed differing opinions. deteining or trensferring journslists
end university professors fro. their pieces of work-when he did ell this end such
e1: besides, he wes thus creeting conditions end circunstences by hieself fro-
which whet occurred letely in Egypt hed to result, end heceuse of which it occurred.
Thet is, e confrontetion of violence by violence. violence which reeched the point
of sssessinetion. So he is totelly responsible for killing Iii-self.

I§uestiog7 Personelly ere you in egrenent with whet hes heppened, thet is, the
essessinstion end liquidetion of el-Sedet in the neuter in which it hsppened‘!

lgnswegl In principle, I en not in egresnsnt with the idee of essessinetion.
Assessinetion in itself does not end enything. thet is e style which violetes the
nsture of the Bgyptien people end it is e pletfore in lgypt which is new, except

for some limited steges in Egyptien history. If we review ell the sets of politicel
essessinetion in Egypt, we will see thet they occurred es s result of reeching e
stege of "totel repression of the expression of divergent opinions." Therefore I
wern thet continuing this style in the nodern ere will result in contimed hlowpe
end nejor incidents in Egypt. On this subject, I hope thet the new regine will teke
this historic truth seriously, try to eeke e netionel reconcilietion with the op-
position, end put ell Egypt's interests shove ell interests or connections. this

is the only proper wey to stert s new stsge in Bgypt’s history.

l§uestiog7 Are you optimistic thet there is e likelihood thet the new regime will
proceed to teke such e step?

answer-[- In eny event, this type of step cennot he cerried out in 24 hours. Let us
teke our time end weit.

COPYRIG'IT: 1981 AL-NATAN AL-'ARABI

11887
(:80: 4504/71

7
FOR OFFICIAL USEI ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TASK (P elm-ms NATION ‘1'0 WI ISRAELI LIB mm

Peril AL-HA‘IAN AL- 'AIABI nin Arabic 30 Oct-S Nov 81 pp 18, 19

lzrticle: ”The 'Sinai Grace Period' Ie the Problennlgypt and the Arabe. between
Subjective and Objective Pactore27

lzexy Since al-Sadat'e aeaaaeination a few waeha ago, the queetion haa arieen:
will Egypt return to the Arab nation? ‘rhe enawera eo far have been Ina-crane. ea
have the beta. However, no Arab official has contacted the new Bgyptian preaident
to propoee euch a return, and the lmtian preaident hie-elf ie waiting for the
Araba to tone back to lgypt and not vice weree, becauae it ia they who broke off
reletione with it. In thie letter frol- Cairo. an etteqt ia nade to interpret
thia "waiting" and ite eubjective and objective reeeona. Independent judpent has
it that the For emit will repeat the Baghdad conference'e invitation to aneni
Mubarak to put him aeriouely in contact with Arab eoliderity.

After hie return iron the lgyptian praeident’e funeral. Claude Cheyeeon. the trench
foreign niniater, eurprieed public opinion with a atate-ant that eat off a diplo-
natic bonb when he eaid "Now that al~8adat ie gone, a najor obetacle that had been
obatructing the reetoretion of Egyptian-Arab relationa ha been eliminated."

In spite of the violet criticieu that thie etate-ent net in A-erica and Heetern
Europe, ea it waa considered a diplo-atically inelegant etatemnt in theee circlee,
Cheyeaon held to hie poaition and continued to interpret it and juatify it in ac-
cordance with hie conviction that there would be no goalin any efforte nade for
the sake of peace as long ea Egypt wee ieolated fro. the Arab aituation.

Cheyaeon'e etetement ia correct, but it ie aerioualy deficient becauae he hae taken
into consideration only the aubjective factor, embodied in the pereon of al-Sedat.
who until the moment before hie aeeaeaination wee continuing to bet on Iarael
against the Arabs, Palestine and lgypt'a Arabhood, burning all bridgee between hie
regine and the Arab netionaliet poeition. At a tine when he wee preieir; "begin'e
honeety and nobility," he wee deacribing all the Arab rulere in the vileet tar-e
principally inbecility. At the end. an an Arab prime ninieter aaid, he apared no
one except Preaident Nunayri, Preeident Siad barre and Sultan Qabua.

Therefore, the continued rule or deﬁance of the etage by ab Sadat'e paraonality
ruled out from the beginning any atteepte, however covert, to repair the bridgea
between Egypt and the teat of the Arab nation.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this context, Claude Cheysson's first reading was correct, as was his second
reading on the inpossibility of arriving at peace by isolating Bgypt. The two
readings are correct, but when one pauses before these two points their inner
meaning collapses, and here Cheysson comes to appear as a person who is given as
an exmwple in the Arab situation of breaking up the facts by reading the verse of
the holy Koran that says "Do not draw near to prayer," then stopping on purpose
before the end of it--”while you are drunk."

'l'he Objective Side

Cheysson, in his reading, neglected the On David agreenent, which is the objective
side of the issue and is more inortant than the subjective one. In building
Egyptian-Arab bridges, the Egyptian regime, which al-Sadat has departed from and
which he left to his vice president, ﬂusni mbarak, oasically comes up against the
obstacle of Camp David. ‘l'his obstacle has been aggravated by the detention of
figures and leaders of the Egyptian nationalist movement, which is against the
peace and normalization, because, while the issue of the detentions has an internal
side, no one should ignore that it has an Arab nationalist side: no one can con-
sider that Egyptian bridges could extend to the Arabs over the bodies and the free-
dome of the domestic national movement.

From the moment al-Sadet vanished, the refrain of Egypt's return to Arab ranks has
been repeated. That is a refrain that characterized by s concealment of and de-
liberate refusal to see Cesp David. The American and European press has written
that circles in the Arab league are studying the possibility of inviting Egypt to
take part in the Fez suit to be held toward the end of November, and that the
new Egyptian officials have agreed to take part in the conference on condition
that it be postponed till next year. However, the secretariat general of the
league hastened to deny the American and luropean press' notion and declared that
no one had raised the idea of inviting the Bgyptian regime to take part or of
postponing the date for holding the conference.

Here the same refrain shifts to Rabat, in a new musical context. The Americsn and
European press has reiterated that King Bassan the Second is seriously working as
a mediator to bring Egypt back to the league after a long absence, and that to that
end he sent his premier tutti bousbid to Cairo to be his representative at al-
Sedst's funeral and to broach the plan with liusni Mubarak. However, the fact that
Bousbid did not appear in the funeral procession cancelled this refrain as well.

Finally, the refrsin in the American and European press shifted to Riyadh and took
the form of a Saudi fomlation on the multifaceted efforts that are covertly be-

ing made to restore Egyptian-Saudi relations to the state they were in before Carp
David, as if nothing had happened! "met, an official Saudi spokesman hastened

to deny that any contact of that kind had been made.

Then came the role of llusni Mubarak, who, after he had assused the presidency,
announced that none of the "Arab friends" (note the use of the word "friends" in-
stead of ”brothers”) had got in touch with him on rssuing relations, and that be
personally considered that the resumption of relations had to come about through
the Arabs’ initiative because they were the ones who had broken their relations

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with Egypt, as a result of their opposition to the c.) David policy. Mubarak also
announced that he was loyal to this policy which the inner president had drawn up
and paid for with his life. He added that the restoration of relations with the
Arab "friends" was in no event to be a substitute for peace and friendship with
Israel.

Thus the objective fact governing the position in the region has becoee clearly
crystallized: this is that the Can David policy is what severed the relations be-
tween Egypt and the Arabs, is what prowted the Egyptian any to assassinate al-
Sadat (one of the three engineers of Carp David), and lastly is what is standing
as s stmbling block to the restoration of Egyptian-Arab relations to their natural
course even though the subjective ale-ant in the rift has been elinineted.

The Region and the People

However, this fact, sinple and central as it is, interacts, following al-Sadat's
assassination, with a fact of axtruae coqlexity. when the Arabs declared the
rift with Egypt and suspension of Egypt's nubership in the Arab uague, following
al-Sadat's rejection of the Baghdad conference offer, they were careful to make a
distinction between the regime and the Arab people in Egypt. It is to be observed
that this concern and distinction were most intense following the 35—second opera-
tion that ended al-Sadat's life, and the slogan "Glory to Arab Egypt and death to
traitors“ was raised.

This concern assumed an intense aspect, to the point where sons Arab parties re-
corded a sort of despair over Egyptian popular nova-ant against the regine and
belittled the weight of the nationalist opposition with all its parties. These
nationalist forces today are returning to the ranks of the Arab forces which have
continued to be careful to distinguish between the regiee and the people and to
have confidence in the powers and the genuine nature of the people.

It appears, in following the course of events, that the new Egyptian president is
basing himself on a policy of two contradictory liner-first, his declaration that
he would continue with the policy of Can David, the peace and the nornelisation

of relations with Egypt, and second, a suspension of al-Sadat's attacks on the
Arabs, some aspects of which were obscene, and the opening of a dialogue with ewe
forces in the domestic opposition, in lieu of dealing with then through the agencies
of repression and the well-known Law on Inpropriety.

Is the Opposition Plural?

Some observers note that the positions of the donestic opposition over the new
president are starting to differ. The Socialist Labor Party, represented by its
head, Ibrahim Shukri, declared conditional support for ﬁusni Mubarak in the course
of the referendum on the presidency, and after that a eeeting between bin and liusni
Mubarak occurred. After this meeting Shultri declared, ”The current circustances
in Egypt are delicate and sensitive," and said that he still opposed the Cup David
agreements but supported President llusni Mubarak in confronting Israel, ending the
policy of cnmity toward the Arabs, and promising release of detained persons. lie
was eager to define some of the points on which he supported the new president’s
orientation.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wholly to the contrary, the National Progressive Unionist Grasping, after its
emergency meeting cheired by Khalid whyi-al-Din, its secretary general, declared
that Husni Mubarek's decision to proceed with the Carp David policy had coqelled
the grouping to vote "no" on his election as president. However, the party secre-
tary went on, "Huberak's press and television statements following the referendus
on his steps, which were aimed at stopping attacks on the Arabs, rapidly ending
the investigation into the detainees and releasing everyone whose guilt is not
proved, ere statements which contain a position that deserves support." Nonetheless,
the new Egyptian president did not invite Khalid Huhyi-al-Din to meet him, and this
indicates a CL?“ attespt to fragment the ranks of the opposition and limit their
cohesion in resisting the policy of Cup David and hostility to the Arabs.

Mumtaz Nasser, member of the People's Assembly and official spokesman for the
nstionsl coalition, expressed his concern over this attespt and severely opposed
the imposition of martial law following al-Sadat's assassination, saying "The issue
in essence is not opposition to or support for a former president or a current
one--it is the continued unity of the national coalition whose work has been proved
by events. Perhaps Husni Mubarak ha! the right to be given time, but this in no
way changes the basic progrem of the coalition. which is aimed at confronting Cw
David, bringing Egypt back to its Arab and Palestinian cause, ebrogating all laws
restricting freedoms, bringing down the isomrishing 'liberalization' policy and
immediately freeing all detainees unconditionally."

Reliable sources stress that the national coelition leaders, along with the leaders
of the Grouping and Labor Parties, have begun to be active in this direction, in
order to maintain the unity of t'1e national movement, especially since it does not
foresee thst the new regime will be stable or endure if it continues al-Sedet's
platform of clashing with the nationalist movement end its program.

It seems that there have been hidden contacts between the men of the regime and
some opposition forces aimed at giving Mubarak a specific grace period for crystal-
lizing his policy. The new president has requested that the opposition use its
influence to obtain a corresponding grace period from the Arabs as well. His claim
in this is that only less than 6 months remain until the date for the Israeli
evacuation from Sinai; this specifically is the grace period he is requesting from
the nationalist oppostion forces domestically and from Arab forces, lest Israel

be given s pretext not to evacuate. After that, the whole issue will be presented
to the Egyptian people and the Arab nation, with the goal of determining s new
policy.

An Attenpt at Reconciliation

It has been noted that this request is receiving considerable support from some

parties in the nationel forces. However, there is e fee: that Husni Mubarak will
probably seek recourse to formal concessions which will not effect the essence,

during the transitional grace period, end thus will have gained time to undermine
the ranks of the nstional forces and the Arab forces both.

Underlining this probability is the fact that al-Ssdat's departure has actually
placed Israel in e dilems which of necessity will turn critical, and it finds

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

itself faced today with two difficult options, even in the context of Carp David
itself. The first is to evacuate the remaining portion of Sinai, in spite of the
departure of al-Sodat, whose existence was considered a basic guarantee; this raises
contradictions within the Israeli entity whose early signs started to appear with
the refusal of settlers in the north of Sinai to evacuate their settle-eats except
through armed force. The second is for Israel to refrain from evacuating, thus ex-
posing itself as a racist colonialist power which cannot be dealt with because it
evades its written undertakings and offers no hope for peace with any Arab country.

People who speak of these two options consider that the Israeli iron is hot today
and that it is ready to strike, once again stressing that the Cow David group is
not the force for peace but that the force for peace is the totality of Palestinian
rights supported by an effective Arab solidarity that includes Egypt within the
Arab family.

Observers expect that as this tendency grows the Arab suit in Pas will be aimed
at reconciling the demand for a grace period with the strategy of united Arab ac-
tion by repeating the Baghdad conference invitation that al-Sadat had rejected to
Mubarak. Hhile waiting for the invitation fro. res, and the response to this invi-
tation, the question on Egypt and the Arabs after al-Sadat's departure is insist-
ently being raised in all quarters.

COPYRlG-l'l‘: 1981 AL-UATAN AL-'ARABI

11887
050: 6504/71

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRWININT DISSIDBNT AMLYZBS 0088110, A“! (30888 0 km

Paris AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 30 Oct-5 Nov 81 pp 22, 23

lirticle: "Rik-at Mm Zayd to AL-He‘i'ell AL-‘Ml: Al-Sedat's Assassination Is a
Continuing Hovenent and There Are Arab Canes for Egypt's Isolationﬂ/

lzexgl Dr Hilnsat Ahu Zayd, a former Egyptian ninister in the era of Jenal 'Abd-al-
Nasir, considers that the assassination of al-Sadat does not necessarily nean the
assassination of the political systen he iaplanted. She is convinced that the
Palestinian segment of the Cap David agreennts are a failure, that their econonic
gamble failed, uv: that lgyptian thinking, which is isolated in the Arab context.
has begun to be characterized by chauvinisn. This conversation with her is an at-

tespt to convey a picture of one hasiriet party's interpretations of the Egyptian
situation after al-Sadat.

l§uestiog7 Could we learn about the nova-ant you represent in Egyptian society,
the role it is playing, and its political platter-7

[Answer] In reality, we are a ease movement that represents a large sepsnt of the
Egyptian people. This large sepent is edodied by Ilasirisn, which has been nore
closely linked to the people and the nasses then with the elite or a ninority sep-
arate from the nass novenent. Therefore it does not constitute a party in the re-

strictive sense of the word; rather, it constitutes a current, and this current in
reality expresses the hopes and pains of the Bgyptien people.

So far. from the standpoint of popular organisation, this love-ant does not have a
clear organizational context. However. we are working in the form of an agreement
or specific intellectual context and in the context of the 23 July 1952 revolution.
which the novenent has not swerved ﬁrm and cannot swerve from because it has not
yet achieved its goals. The Sadatist apostasy has caused it to retrench and has in
reality caused us to start roughly iron zero in this netter.

Therefore we express on a broad scale a noveunt in every Egyptian village and
town, and our concern is to he a "framework for political action"--organized action
calling for a restoration of solidarity to Arab ranks. a restslption of work with
the masses, and a restoration of couitnent to the cause and the rights of the
toiling class.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

/§ucstion_7 "hat is your position on the Egyptian regime under President husani
Mubarak? Is there scope for cooperation with this regime?

/_4nswe_x_'/ He consider the new Egyptian regime an extension of the policy al-Sedat
drew up, which led Egypt into isolation from the Arab situation. The content de-
tentions that are taking place in the context of the Sadatist line mean that there
has been no change in platform. In the face of this continuation of el-Sadat'e re-
gime, we can only say that we will continue to oppose and fight this regime in or-
der to bring Egypt back to the national context and bring the Zionist flag over
Cairo down. It is a stigma of disgrace that this flag is flying while part of
Egypt is still occupied. How can you raise an enemy's flag and consider yourself
free? How can you normalize relations when you are forced and coupelled to normal-
ize? It would be a hundred times better for Sinai to be occupied than for rela-
tions to be normalized in this fashion. Defeat here is not defeat--defeat lies

rather in starting to negotiate while the enemy's troops are occupying one's ter-
ritory.

TheHInimm

I§uestion_7 What is your contact with the Egyptian opposition domestically and
abroad?

lénsvegl In reality, the channels of contact we are naintaining are with the
nationalist movement abroad. This novement, which has broken off into different
detachments, is on a nininal basis. This mini-am with which we are working, even
in the Egyptian National Front, entails bringing down al-Sadat's regime, restoring
democracy to Egypt, and continuing the canaign against the Zionist presence and
American colonialism in Egypt. Naturally there are contacts with the opposition
domestically and we have not broken off continuous coordination with it.

l§uestiog7 On what is your opposition to the Egyptian regime based? Is it re-
stricted to oomestic policies or does it include foreign policy as well?

IZnswegl We are opposed to Sadatist policies domestically and abroad. 9e opposed
the policy of economic liberalisation which alcSedat drew up; since al-Sadat
changed the economic systems and opened up to foreign investors, factories have no
longer been built to use Egyptian manpower, but Egypt is a tremenims h-an re-
source; it is qualified.

To that we night add that foreign debts have started burdening Egypt. There is no
self-sufficiency even as far as food goes. Then el-Sadat eliminated the role of
the public sector and put it at the service of the private sector, transforming the
labor movement from a productive force to a consuning force. The purpose in all
this was to crush the economic foundation which is the basic pillar of the Nasirist
political foundation. It was necessary to liquidate the public sector, inundate
Egypt with debts, starve the Egyptian people and cut back educational services.

In the era of ‘Abd-al-Nasir, education was like water and air, as they say, and so
was medicine.

1’:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one of the results of the liberalization has been the enargence of a parasitic
class consisting of 2 percent of the people which is the beneficiary and is applaud-
ing every plan of al-Sadat's. This class cane into being to suck the blood and
labors of the people.

This is our opinion on domestic policy, which we are against. We are against the
existence of the party which rules politically and is trying to create new parties
today. The formal opposition which al-Sadat's regime is establishing through Islam-
ic law we are also against; we do not consider that it has arisen frol the people.

we are also against the policy of holding refereulums because that distorts the
will of the Egyptian people. It is not reasonable to have 12 million people go to
the polls to give a vote of "yes" or "no," agree themselves to iwrison themselves
in the prisons of the opposition and vote on security measures and national. unity
without knowing what these security measures are. In brief, we are opposed to the
domestic policy and foreign policy al-Sadat has followed, which the new president,
llusni Mubarak, will continue.

Egyptian Chauvinism

l§uestiog7 m: is the extent of the influence of Bgyptian-Israeli relations on
the Egyptian cultural identity?

lénswegl This question gives us no rest. This part of the world, the Arab nation,
is distinguished by geographical boundaries that make it an integrated unit and are
actually propitious for cultural and geographic unity. There is unity among the
people, because we go back in our roots to a single origin. There is also a social
and cultural heritage which is based on the unity of language, the unity of culture
and the unity of literary and scholarly output.

At the time Israel is carrying out a process of culturally fusing together all the
dispossessed coming from all countries of the planet, from Poland, Eastern Europe,
the whole west, and the Arab world, through the settlements, the Arab citizen is
experiencing a rift in his culture. It wants to break up this integrated cultural
legacy to keep us from achieving cultural unity.

History books in Egypt today omit everything that was and is written about hostil-
ity between Egypt and Israel, which plundered Palestine and is striving to trans-
form Arab culture and turn historic emity into friendship! Likewise, in the
mosques, Koranic verses in which the Jews appear as an aggressive people, an
enemy of God, who fought the prophet in all the settlements that existed in Medina
and Yathrih, are prohibited.

In addition to that, there is the perversion of such senior men of letters as

Najob Hahfuz and Tawfiq al-Hakim, by seducing them with scientific titles and money
so that they will innerse themelves within the crucible in which they are fusing
together the process of normalization.

They have also started to have a big influence on curricula. Zionist scholars
have started to invade Egyptian universities with their conferences, in spite of

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resistance on the part of some university professors. Even the media have been
mobilized in service of the Zionist orientation.

In addition to that, the boycott of Egyptian literature and Egyptian literary out-
put has actually created chauvinisn on the part of sons Egyptian literary figures,
as a consequence of their feeling isolated, and this has caused then to rush into
the embrace of the Zionists.

They are trying to control the cultural channels that link Arab society to Egyptian
society, and divert Egyptian sympathies and Arab nationalist smathies into the
channels of the Israeli intellectual invasion.

A Return to Baghdad

l§uestiog7 Hill al-Sedat's departure bring on Arab solidarity, especially since
some observers expect a delay in the toning Arab sumit, while waiting to learn
what the developments in Egypt will lead to?

/ .nsweg/ The question that is at issue today is whether there will be a retrench-
.ent from Cam David and the nor-aliration process. Hill the Egyptian officials
review their position on the resolutions edqsted at the Baghdad conference? Yester-
day al—Sadat rejected the Arab offer, and today Mani Mubarak is saying that we
will never boycott the Arabs and they met sake the first step. That means that he
will not back down from Camp David and the treaty it is linked to. Are the Arab
kings and presidents ready to accept Egypt while it is burdened down by such a
treaty and such connections? This neans opening the back door for Israel to infil-
trate forcibly into the Arab nation.

There is another thing. Perhaps llusni Mubarak has wanted to "liberate" all of Sinai
in its third stage--so should you wait until next April, or, as they say, until you
become liberated and Egypt returns to Arab ranks? Personally I believe that the
normalization process will continue after April. Israel today is at the stage of
testing husni mbarak's intentions because it will be prepared to renegs on its
decision.

Therefore it seems as if the period is one of a testing of Hubsrak's intentions in
the Arab and Israeli contexts. He finds hiuelf between two halves of the pincers.
All the plans that have been put forth on the international stage are aiaed at
building political bridges between Israel and the Arabs and at the the tine between
the Arabs and Israel through Egypt.

Here we wonder whether the Arabs are sufficiently integrated and prepared to stand
against the plans that will weigh then down. I consider that they are not able to
stand as one man at the present tine. There are nany schisns in the Arab nation
and that is the reason why the doors are being opened to ntmerous plans. Ithe Arab
nation is suffering from a lack of unity even in its political orientations. To
that end I consider that the next emit conference could be postponed, because
there is no concurrence of ideas on the projects that have been set forth or on a
clear plan. Evan oil is almost lacking in effectiveness, because the Arabs differ
even on setting the price of oil and have removed it fro: the struggle.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

why the Detentions?
l§uestiog7 why are the detantions going on in Egypt?

lénswegl The detentions have involved more than 7,000 people so far. He realise
that students are the stronghold of revolution and they started a big detention
campaign shortly before the opening of the universities. The reason is that al-
Sadat had the new list, a list of which he said "I have a list of young people and
if they join the resistance movement I will detain them."

The canpaign of detentions is proof of what? It is proof that the assassination of
al-Sadat was not an isolated matter. It proves that the ruling Bgyptian regime is
totally renote from the people and developments seong the people. It also proves
that the struggle is not factional, as has been said, for today there are no acts
of aggression in the fectional context. history shows that Bgypt has not known
factional massacres or factional struggles; similarly, the Islnic religion respects
tenples end churches.

So we wonder why the detentions are going on today. The first detentions were on
factional pretexts, but what are the purposes of the ones today“? These detentions
are proof that the movement which started with the assassination of al-Sadat is a
ramified, interconnected one, a political novenent in the first place, a national
and doustic movement which is trying to correct the course which al-Sadat put us
on 11 years ago.

He also wonder why the Asyut movement occurred after al-Sadat's assassination; it
was because it really wanted the revolution to continue until Egypt was rid of the
normalization of relations with the Zionist world, Egypt regained its Arab face,

and the truth and matters were returned to their proper place as far as the liberal-

izat ion policy went .

He must intensify the caspaigns against the opposition, domestically and abroad.
Even domestically people have started to be afraid of foreign opposition; why? Be-
cause it is turning the whole world's attention to what is going on with regard to
the journalists; the men of ideas are all in prisons because they opposed al-Sadst's
policy-~they were not factionelists. Are the 67 journalists who were transferred
from the media to other centers, headed by HIM nasanayn haykal, factionalists?
The goal is to silence the Egyptian opposition ad subject Egypt and the Arab nation
to the service of Israel and America.

common: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

11887
CSO: (0504/7 1

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

$161118 W Him ML! DB‘I‘AINEB 33mm

Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARASI in Arabic 30 Oct-5 Nov 81 p 106
/_7\_rticle by Sales Fakhri: "The 'lnfernel' Nawwal al-8a’dewi: House to M27

lgexgl Nawwal al-Sa'dawi, the Egyptian doctor and writer, has been in prison since
6 September, as one of the thousands who were involved in the caspaign of repress-
ion before al-Sedat’s assassination. We have deemed it proper to go back to her
latest book "Firdawsua Voice from hell" which was issued in French, and asks a
reflective critical pause before it.

The voice came from far off, bearing centuries of silence, a silence disrupted by
sighing, then whispering, before it was tramfornsd into a cry but remained con-
cealed--crying though not even the ears of the person making the cry could hear it.

what is the fear or ignorance that made women keep silent, and still does? Their
fear of non, father, brother, husband and son, of the persons who are at once guard-
ians and oppressors. or their fear of the unknown?

Roma in our world are even unaware that there is a world beyond "the world of the
harem" which they come from. They are unaware that there is freedom beyond the
prison walls. Vision is blocked and flying over horizons that are not mapped out
for then is forbidden, even in dream.

More oppressive of wosuen than the nan are the wean the-selves, in their undeclared
solidarity against-women!

"Firdaws--a Voice from Hell" is the offspring, the offspring of talk, the talk of
“F eraws." In it, Nswwal al-Sa'dswi states in a loud voice. in the face of all
women and men, all she wants to state. She speaks of the prostitute's rebellion
on the eve of her execution for killing a piap, after he had pushed her into so:
with all the men who left their traces on her body. her rebellion is in her
choice to be a prostitute, ultimately. free and independent, rather than re-ein a
wonan deceived in marriage as in love, when the streets become her final refuge
following one defeat after the other, from childhood in Upper amt, where her
father preferred his cow to his wife and daughter, to adolescence in Cairo, where
her uncle the professor refused to let her go to school "because there were nen
there" and hastened to marry her off to a tyrannical stingy old nan to get rid of
her after he had seduced her.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Her flight from family oppression did not save her from the oppression of society.
the men all turn into valves in a vorld vhere "thievery is protection."

The voice of Firdsws is one that does not coqlain and does not give cruises, but
accuses: it accuses the paternal, maternal. police, bureaucratic and political
systems. She discovered that this system classifies all the women in it as proati-
tutes--of various prices: the female emloyee who sells her body cheaply. out of
fear of unenploylnent, or the professional prostitute who "iwoses" her price. Bork
in itself does not add honor to the person who has it in a society that is daainated
by wretchedness.

In this passionate angry confession by one woman to another, the voice of Pirdavs
and the voice of Nawal al-Sa'davi beeo-e one and speak for all the silence of
Arab women.

Nawal el-Sa'navi

Newal al-Sa'dawi, an Egyptian doctor, was born in the village of Kafr Table]: on
the banks of the Nile.

She is the author of novels, short stories and scientific research which have been
nourished by the experience she lived through as a doctor and woman, revealing and
giving power to the face of Arab women.

Among Her Books

Scientific research: "Honen and Sex,” "Han and Sex," "femininity Is the Basic At-
tribute," "Honen and Psychological Struggle," and "The naked l'ace of Arab “men."

Among the novels and short stories:

Women at the Zero Point," "hoe Hanan in One," "Death of the Last Man on Earth,"
"Children's Rounds," "The Death of Ilia Former Excellency the Hinister," and "She
Has the Weaker One."

COPYRILHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABi

11887
680: 4500/? l

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE OIL!

IRAQ

FOREIGN MINISTER INTERVIEHED 0N CONDITIORS P03 PEACE
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 260. 26 Sap Bl pp 26-25

[Interview with Iraqi Foreign Minister Sa'dun nannadi by Florence Ra'd: "Continua-
tion of the War is Better than a Truce which Could Cause it to Be-explode"; date
and place not specified]

[Text] Iraqi Foreign Minister Dr Sa'dun Hammadi is constantly attending meetings in
the Arab and international decision-saking capitals on five continents. It is
difficult for a jaurnalist to seat with hie, except in a structured and tine-limited
news conference. A quiet diplomat who has gained the ability to think methodically
from his academic life, and vast diplomatic experience from his political life, and
who was an author and journalist before taking on his very important mission at this
stage of Arab history. Our colleague Florence Ra'd interviewed hi. about the issues
of the hour, concerning war, peace, oil and strategy.

[Question] What about the Iraqi-Iranian war, now that a year has past?

[Answer] The day the war began, we said that we wanted it to be short. If the other
side prefers that it be prolonged. we are prepared for that. Clearly the Iraqi forces
are still in the positions that they occupied during the first week of the war. what
has occurred this year are futile attempts [to dislodge them] which has cost the
Iranian side dearly.

with the war a year old, I do not think that Iran's situation is better than it was

a year ago. This is well known and clear to everyone. In contrast to that. the Iraqi
regime has established its position. power and capability, with increasing popular
support. Also. the Iraqi economy has not been affected, as witnessed by the jour-
nalists. who have come from various parts of the world and have reported what they
have seen.

0n the international level, the curve of Iranian relations with the world is obviously
on the downturn. because no one is convinced of the soundness of the Iranian position.
However, the international colmissions that were formed and which made their efforts
In Baghdad and Teheran have not recorded any observations about the Iraqi position.
Iraq's Arab and European relations, as well as its connections with the non-aligned
nations and the Islamic Congress. are all excellent. If the mediation efforts have
so far been unsuccessful. we must only be patient until a just peace is achieved.

We don't want to achieve a temporary truce. returning later to war again. The con-
tinuation of the war is better than a truce which could cause it to re-explode.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What is our concept of a just peace? He understand it to be guaranteeing Iraqi
rights on land and in the Shatt al-Arab, and Arab rights regarding the three islands,
as well as Iran's sbandonnent of the policy of hegenony in the Gulf region. It

nust refrain fron interference in the internal affairs of the neighboring Arab
countries, respect freedon of navigation in the Gulf and the Straits of Ear-us, and
be observant of Arab security and international interests. Hatters such as these
deserve patience, and deserve more sacrifice on the way to a lasting peace.

Our Obligation and Others

[Question] After the incident of the prime linister's office. Iran threatened
through one of its officials to obstruct navigation in the Straits of nor-us. What
do you say regarding this threat?

[Answer] There are two questions here. The first is that Iran has tried, since

the war began. to use this weapon to frighten the world and to gain international
intervention, in order to rescue its deteriorating military position. I believe that
this attempt will continue as long as this collapse is increasing. Therefore, in

our discussions with the nediators. we have been very anxious to have freedon of
navigation and means of international cos-unications be a part of any agreenent
reached, not only to protect Arab security, but also as a perception of ours of
responsibility toward vital world interests.

The second question is our conviction that everyone in the world. whether nearby or
far away, understands very well today that Iraq is making secrifices--not just nata-
rial but also hunan sacrifices, which cannot be equalled by any other sacrifice--
on behalf of the interests of others. These others are not equal in recognizing
this fact. We are defending Arab rights and Arab honor. we are fighting for Arab
interests. Re are not a member of any ailitary alliance. We are not obl-gatsd to
any international group. Our basic obligation is to use our arnsd forces when the
independence and security of the Arab nations is exposed to danger. A day will
come when everyone will stand up to their responsibilities, and the Arab world will
understand that Iraq made sacrifices for interests that were broader than its own
national interests.

[Question] What was the purpose of the recent battle of al-Khafajah?

[Answer] It was not the first battle in al-Ihafsjsh. Last January. the Iranians
attacked in this area. as well as Sarbil Zahab. I am not finiliar with the military
aspects fros the technical, logistics point of view. but apparently the Iranian side
thought that. through this area. they could begin a countsrattack capsbale of
developing into a conprehensive attack, leading to the withdrawal of Iraqi forces
fros the front that they occupy. Possibly, in their estisation. this area was the
best one for such an attempt.

[Question] If peace is impossible. would the partition of Iran be the solution?

[Answer] If Iran persists in aggression against Iraq and in denying Iraq its rights,
would Iraq be expected to care about Iran's unity? This is illogical. Under normal
conditions. we seek the friendship of neighboring countries, for easy reasons. We
are neighbors, bound together by historic relationships. The reasonable man tries

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

to live in peace with his neighbors, but what if your neighbor takes a hostile
attitude toward you? In any event. the Iranian officials are persisting in their
attack against us. Despite that, the opportunity is open to then to search for peace.
If the cord of the search for peace is finally cut, and Iran does not recognize

Iraqi rights, then we would not care about Iran's unity, particularly since there

are internal movements demanding self-rule.

Non-Alingment

[Question] Next year Iraq will host the non-aligned conference. If it is still
continuing, will the war force the postponement of this conference?

[Answer] We see no difficulty facing thes matter. Everything is going as planned.
and only Iran will not attend, despite the fact that we had hoped that it would
attend. However. there is an Iranian precedent. which is its non-participation in
the Islamic summit conference held in Ta'if. Iran's absence helped to make this
conference a success.

1 want to say that the non-aligned conference will be held, whether Iran attends or
not, and it will be held as scheduled. He should note that Iran has not formed a
new government as yet, apart from the fact that I have not found any text or evidence
that Iran is suitable for Imlbership in the non-aligned movesent. “hat I do recall
is a request from the government of Mahdi Barsagan for such a membership. At that
time. Barragan understood the movement and wanted to join. At that time, Iraq
supported the request submitted by the Iranian government. but after Barragan's
removal, I no longer heard about any positive position coming out of Iran. All that
I heard was negative, whether it was opposition to holding the conference in Baghdad,
or encouraging the member nations not to attend. Iran is talking about "neither

East nor Heat." I don't understand what that phrase neans. We have not yet heard
anything about the principles of non-alignment. All we hear are the many statements
by the Iranian leaders and religious sen talking frankly about the Iranian regime's
"duty" to interfere in the affairs of other nations, such Iraq, Bahrain or the Arab

Gulf states. These statements. as well as the idea of exporting the revolution

abroad, are hardly compatible with the principles of non-alignment. These are
principles drawn up to prevent any kind of ideological or religious domination of
one state by another.

[Question] "hat is your evaluation of Iraqi relations with the nations of the Arab
Nest, following Tariq 'Aziz's trip to these countries?

[Answer] in general, they are excellent relations. The purpose of the trip was two»
fold: to make direct contact after a long period of personal separation, and secondly
to consult about the question of Lebanon, the request to hold the Arab summit con-
ference and the timing of that; the new Arab League charter; the present stage of

the Arab-Israeli dispute; Arab relations with the new administrations in Paris and
Washington, and finally, the problems of the Arabs themselves, whether in the west

or the East.

Pan-Arab Consideration

[Question] ﬂow w0uld you describe Iraqi-Tunisian relations?

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE OIL!

[Answer] They are developing in accordance with an ascending curve. I expect that
they will continue to develop.

[Question] Do the Arabs reciprocate Iraq’s pan-Arab commit-ants and sacrifices?

[Answer] The officials statements prove the extent of this response. The fact is
that the fundamental Iraqi position is to stand beside the Arab states, i.e., an
Arab state exposed to attack by a foreign state, irregardless of regimes or bilateral
relations. It is a pan-Arab position that we are committed to. whether the others
reciprocate or not, and we will continue on this path. We used to want the pan-Arab
consideration to be the basis of the positions of all the Arab states.

when the Iraqi-Iranian war broke out, some Arab brothers took the neutral position
regarding this war, by virtue of the fact that the Iranian revolution supported the
Palestinian case. But after the crash of the Argentinian airplane, and after the
use of Cyprus' Larnaca airport for tht flights of several aircraft that transported
arms between Israel and iran, it became evident and was certainly proved that the
Isrqeli enemy, was cooperating with the revolution that claims to be Islamic and
demands the liberation of Jerusalem.

Iraq has explained the facts and has given everyone the documents. It is talking
with everyone and relying upon their care and concern. We hope that some Arabs

will change their positions. So far, the only Arab regime that cooperates with the
Iranian regime, and which persists in this cooperation, is the Syrian regime. The
important thing is the disclosure of the evident arms connection between the Iranian
and Zionist regimes. This connection is east significant and is sore isportant than
any other consideration.

This disclosure has shed light on the truth of the great powers' allegations,
especially the United States, that they want to see a quick end to the war, and that
they have a neutral position with respect to Iran. We have confirmed that there is
an arms connection between Iran and the Zionist enemy, whether it be equipment or
spare parts that Iran has received through Israel. This equipment is American made,
and the deal could not have been concluded without American approval. The question:
Does the United States in fact want an end to the war?

Another observation that we want to make is that the Iranian regime makes the most
fanatical claiss, that we know of. of any regime with regard to Islamic principles,
and the most ferverent claiss about caring for the Palestinian case. But the
disclosure about its cooperation with Israel means that it is a regime that says one
thing and then does the exact opposite. It uses religion as a cover for its
political interests, and when its interests require that it violate the letter and
spirit of the Islamic religion, it does not hesitate to do so. The Iranian regime
works for its own self interests; other things are secondary in importance. In this
eatter, one would suppose that the Muslim and clergyman among them would especially
recognize the truth. The regime that claims the most adherence to the principles

of Islam is the one that is the most ready to cooperate even with the Zionist enemy
that injures our honor, occupies our holy places and makes our people homeless. we
have prepared a memorandum about the claims of the Iranian regime that we will
distribute to all Arabs and give the widest dissemination possible.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] What does this memorandum contain?

[Answer] It does not contain all the information but does have the basic informa-
tion about the arms cooperation between Iran and Israel, and contains irrefutable
evidence about this relationship.

[Question] Hhat does the PLO think about this matter, since it was the one that
carried Out a reconciliation mission between Khomsyni and the Iranian Opposition?

[Answer] One supposes that you should direct this question to the PLO. We are
awaiting clarification from it about this question. 'ihe important thing is that
irrefutable proof exists. We are prepared to inform everyone about the information
that we have. I do not believe that the PLO's position today regarding the Iranian
regime is the same as it was previously.

[Question] What is your view regarding Lebanon's request to hold a special aux-lit
conference?

[Answer] We have been diccussing this matter. It is essential for us to do some-
thing positive. If the intention is of itself just to hold a sun-alt, than there is

a sunlit in 2 months. The intervening period is not long. From our experience with
Arab action, we think that it would be extremely difficult to hold two conferences
close to one another. But if the intention is to advance the date of the next ems-it,
we have no objection to that.

[Question] What is your position regarding the new American administration, after
your recent contaacts?

[Answer] I have not gone to the United States except to attend the Security Council
session. We have nothing that would prevent us from seating with the American
officials, if they request that. but we will not meet with them secretly. As for
our position regarding the American administration, based on the evidence that this
administration is farther away from the Arab position than the previous admaistra—
tion. then it must be closer to the Zionist position. For that, we rely on President
Reagan's position during the election campaign and the statements of officials
regarding the settlements and Jerusalem, their position regarding the attack on the
Iraqi nuclear reactor and the Israeli attacks against Lebanon, their position re-
garding the continual arming of Israel, and the smggling of their arms to Iran
through the Zionist entity. Note that this smuggling is in violation of American law.

In any case, the opportunity is still open to Vashington, if it adopts a position of
support for Arab rights, which the international conunity has endorsed on many
occasions. Without this position, US.-Arab relations will not inprova, and I expect
that they will worsen. As for Iraq's relations with the United States, there is
nothing new there. It is possible that they will get worse; it is also possible
that they will improve. They are subject to America's position regarding the
Palestinian question.

[Question] Will there be diplomatic relations in the foreseeable future?

[Answer] Now?...no. In the future, anything is possible.

2].
1"“in OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

[Question] What is your view regarding Prince l'ahd'a initiative?

[Answer] Iraq is committed to summit resolutions. I think that this initiative will
be discussed at the emit conference to be held in Rabat next Nova-bar.

[Question] What was the object of the visit that Major 'Abd al-Selan Jalud nade
to Iraq?

[Answer] Major Jslud visited Iraq after the hosting of the nuclear reactor. [is
discussed bilateral relations, and sons of the Arab issues. this visit was an
opportunity to elininate many of the misunderstandings.

[Question] Don't you think that flooding the international narket with oil will
help to prolong the Iraqi-Iranian war, since the super powers are filling up their

oil storage areas, whether the war ends or not? Are the brother Arabs haadlasa of
this?

[Answer] We have ends it clear that increased production is not in the Arab'a
interests. We have tried to reach an agreement on pricing. In our dialogue, we
have supported the wish for cooperation among the Arab nations on behalf of a
unified position. taking into consideration the basic Arab interests and the
responsible international position with respect to the interests of the oil-con-
suming nations. especially the small nations.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-ARABI

7005
C50: 6406/60

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OIL MINISTER DISCUSSED POLICY, OPEC

Paris Ab-HA‘I‘AN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 238, 6-10 Sep 81 p 55

[Interview with Iraqi Oil Minister Tayih 'Abd-al-Karia. by Aimed Hafiz: "Tayih
'Abd-al-Karin to All-“TA“ AL-‘AEABI: "Iraq Has Not Sold a Drop of Its 011 on the
Black Market”; date and place not specified]

[Text] “hen the OPEC sessions in Geneva ended in nothing,
Iraqi Oil Minister Tayih 'Abd-al-Karin was perhaps the east
affected because he had exerted extraordinary efforts to

achieve a compromise that would preserve the organization's
unity and cohesiveness if not it very existence. Ala-"ATM

AL-‘ARABI held a dialogue on oil letters with him.

[Question] It is only natural that the war should have had effects on all aspects

of life in the country fighting this war. What effects has the war had in the Iraqi
oil sector?

[Answer] It is no secret that the political leadership in Iraq anticipated the war
before it broke out between us and Iran. All the events and circunstances which
preceded the war warned of its occurrence, and these circumstances were well known
to everyone. But what I want to eaphasire is that with regard to petroleur-and
Iraq is in the vanguard of the petroleum exporting states--we took into considera-
tion all the possibilities in case of the outbreak of war. Therefore. we were not
surprised by all the developments which occurred subsequently.

[Question] But hasn't the war affected the rate of production and exportation of
Iraqi petroleum?

[Answer] Host assuredly. It is unreasonable that production and exportation levels
should remain unchenged after the country has been transformed from peace to war.

Production Must Continue

[Question] Let's deal with the question of production first. It is known that Iraq

has producing around 2 million barrels per day before the war. "hat is the current
production figure?

[Answer] Naturally. the figure has declined. but not by much. Allow me to assert
that specifying the current figure is not the imortant thing. What is important

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is that production continue and not stop just as the other industrial plants and
factories in Iraq are continuing production. For all states that are experiencing

a state of war, the important problem becomes to continue the production cycle. Con-
tinuation is the most important thing and casing to a standstill is the greatest
danger. As for the levels at which production continues. they must inevitably fall
off. But this is a com-onplace occurrence throughout the world.

[Question] "hat about exportation?

[Answer] Naturally, Iraqi oil exports have declined since the beginning of the war.
however, the amount that we have been exporting has begun to grow steadily in recent
months compared to the first months of the war. In any case, we have not stopped
exporting Iraqi oil abroad since the war began.

Re Have Begun To Implement Alternatives

[Question] After the attack on the port of Search by Iranian planes and the diffi-
culties encountered in exporting Iraqi petroleum via the Gulf, what are the alter-
natives?

[Answer] Currently. Iraqi oil is being exported via the pipeline between Rirkuk
Baniyss on the Syrian coast as well as through the other pipeline that extends from
the Iraqi oil fields to the Turkish coast.

[Question] Are these two pipelines sufficient to export quantities of Iraqi oil?

[Answer] No, they are not sufficient. For this reason, we have completed a study
for two new projects involving the construction of two additional pipelines. the
first will extend from the oil fields in Iraqi territory to the Jordanian port of
'Aqabah on the Red Sea, a total distance of 1,300 kilometers. with this pipeline,
Iraq will for the first time gain an outlet to the Red See through which it can
export its oil. The second pipeline will extend from Iraq through Kuwait and
finally to the Red Sea in Saudi territory-near Yanbu', to be exact. The capacity
of this pipeline will be around 1 million barrels per day, or 50 million tons of oil
a year. with these projects. Iraq will have access to both the Mediterranean (Syria
and Turkey) and the Red Sea (Jordan and Saudi Arabia).

[Question] When will work on these two projects begin?

[Answer] Very soon. He have already completed the studies and bids will soon be
invited from international companies on the projects.

[Question] Let's get back to OPEC. its problems, and the disagreements of its
members in the recent conference. Hhat does OPEC represent to you in Iraq?

[Answer] It represents a very important organisation to every member state in the
organization. It protects the rights of the producer states against the exploitation
and harassment of the big industrialised states that consume this vital resource,
which is the main pillar of industrialization and even life itself in all states of
the world without exception. He in Iraq believe that the continued operation of this
organization is a strategic goal of far-reaching importance. It is incumbent upon

27
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the member states in this organization to overcola the peripheral disagree-ants in
which each state seeks to achieve its own temporary interests. Because if these
disagree-ents continue to worsen, the organisation will be threatened with extinction.
Then the agree-ant that binds the exporting states will be dissolved and the indus-
trialized states will single out each state individually and impose on it whatever
terms they please. Chaos will reign throughout the world oil market and there will
cone to be strong petroleua states that sell their oil for much higher prices than
other states which may not be able to find anyone to buy their oil. This will have

a negative impact on the rates of acoustic and social development in the oil-pro-
ducing OPEC member states. all of which are members of the developing Third Hbrld

states .

Nature of the Disegreements

[Question] Do you believe that the disagreements along the OPEC states are economic
or political?

[Answer] Both economic and political. Each state wants to achieve its economic
interests through production levels based on the nature of the oil reserves stored
under its land area. It also seeks to achieve the price that will bring it the
greatest amount of profit to confront development problems and meet its daily aub-
sistence needs. There are states for which oil does not represent the sole source

of income. There are soaa OPEC member states that have small populations and others
that have large populations, such as Indonesia, Nigeria, Algeria, and others. All

of these are factors in the decision-making processes involving each state individ-
ually. The OPEC states are united by one characteristic only: they all belong along
the developing states of the world. Aside from this, each state has its own problems.
circumstances, and nature.

This is from the economic standpoint. From the political standpoint, each state also
has its own political courses and ties which may differ considerably or very little
from those of the other member states in the single organisation OPEC. For this
reason, disagreements among the OPEC member states are a natural phenomenon. However,
at the sane time, these states should not pemmit the disagreements to tear then apart.
This could bring about the collapse of the oaganiration that was established funda-
mentally to protect their rights collectively in confronting a united opponent, the
industrialized consuner states. A aolution-a compronise~- can ultimately be

reached for every disagreement. Perhaps this is what caused us to do everything we
could to arrive at that compromise in our recent OPEC meetings in Geneva. In an
organization such as OPEC in which decisions are made unanimously, there must be a
coaproaise agreed on by all states. There is no room for singlehanded action or

for a state or group of states to dominate the rest of the member states.

[Question] but don't you feel that the developing consumer states have suffered
considerably from the continuous and regular increases in oil prices?

[Answer] One of the positive aspects of OPEC is that it has taken this into considera-
eration. This issue has been debated and an agreement has been reached that sets

the economic aid which OPEC will pay to the importing developing states. This aid
ranges between 3 and 5 percent of its oil revenues in the industrialized world.

This percentage. which appears small. represents a huge sun. I recall that the

figure in 1976 was $1.5 billiin. There is a proposal that was submitted by Iraq—-

28
FOR 0510“. USE ON..Y
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as a matter of fact, it was proposed by President Saddam Busayn personslly--calling
for the establishment of a "world fund" to compensate the losses of the developing
states due to oil price increases. This proposal was accepted in concept and in
content, and we hope that final agreement will be reached on it soon. The petroleum
exporting countries cannot sell their petroleua at two prices: one for the rich
industrialized states and the other for the poor developing states. Therefore. the
only solution that remains is through aid offered by the petroleum states and also
aid from the rich industrialized states to the poor developing states. However,

the industrialised states offer only three-tenths of a percent of their tremendous
annual income from industry and economic activity.

The Iraqi Solution

[Question] what in your opinion is the most important issue that the OPEC states
must reach agreement on whatever the nature of the difference that govern their
relations?

[Answer] Agreement on a long-range price policy along with specification of the
production levels in every petroleua state individually. This policy must allow
for rates of inflation and growth in the industrialized states as well as declines
or gains in the dollar, because the dollar is the accounting currency on the basis
of which the OPEC states sell their petroleum-and because of its recent oil
importance. You should realize that the OPEC states‘ losses due to declines in the
dollar have amounted to $2¢2 billion free 197‘ until the present. Moreover. there
is another fact that many people may not know, namely. that in spite of the recent
gain in the value of the dollar, its purchasing power is still less than it was in
1973.

[Question] To what extent does Iraq appear to be ready to discuss these issues with
OPEC?

[Answer] we are completely ready to present everything necessary in order to enable
the organization to continue performing its role. He believe that discussion of

the issues I have mentioned is of considerable importance. Iraq views these issues
as among the most important and vital issues for which the member states of the
organization must arrive at radical and long-term solutions. It is sufficient to
say here that Iraq is in the vanguard of the Opec states that adhere to all decisions
of the collective organisation. He have never sold a single drop of our oil on the
black market. that market which has caused so many complications in world oil markets

and prices.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-AEABI

8591
C80: 6604/11 END

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY