FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10457

14 April 1982

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POUCY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FQUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDdIIf. REPORT
TELEcomumcmous POLICY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

CPOUO 9/82)
CONTENTS
ASIA
JAPAN
Telecommunication Liberalization Examined
(NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN, various dates) ................

"EST EUROPE

FRANCE

Ariane 4 Expects 43 Percent of Market From 1986 to 1990
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET COSMOS, 6 Feb 82) ......ﬂ...

Potential Marketa. Launch Reliability
Geostationary Satellite Launch Coat

Briefs
Ariane Operational Launch in April

Ariane Launch Set for April

-.-' [In-ww-uo

FOI10i1lC1A1.USE(NVLY
TELECOMMUNICATION LIBERALIZATION WINE

Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIMBDN in Japanese 18. 19, 24. 25 tab 82
(18 Feb 82 p 3]

[Text]

Postal Services Ministry Tale-Communications Policy Bureau Director
General HORIZUHI held a press conference on the 17th, and stated
as follows on the problem of liberalizing data communications: "In
regard to the revising of the Public Tele«Communications Law this time,
private information and communications enterprise operators will not
be permitted to offer high-level information and communications services
(VAN)." So saying, .e clarified the outlook that the contents of the
proposed liberalization of data communications will be limited to
fields excluding high-level information and communications services,
for the time being. Therefore, the possibility has also appeared that
the overall opening of the market for data communications, as sought by
information and communications business circles and the economic and
industrial circles, will be delayed on a large scale.

In connection with the problem of liberalizing data communications,
the Government-LOP side has already decided on a policy to incorporate a
revised Public Tele-Communications Law in a "package bill concerning
the re-adjustment or rationalization of [projects which require]
permission or approval," instead of enacting a new law. At the press
conference held on that day, HORIZUMI also said, "The actual situation
is such that this time, the enactment of a new law (as called for by
the Postal Services Hinistry) has become difficult." Thus, he formally
expressed his intention to give up submitting a new'data-communications
bill (bill concerning added-value data transmission services) to the
current Diet session.

However, the Postal Services Ministry says, "The preconditions
(including the preservation of communications secrets) for the
llberalizing of high-level information and communications services as to
private information and communications enterprise operators have still not
been established (through negotiations with HITI)" (Bureau Director

1 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
General HORIZUHI). Thus, the Ministry plans not to include the
liberalization of high-level information and communications services
(added-value data transmission services) in the Public Tale-Communications
Law Revision Bill, though it had decided to do that.

As for the revising of the Law this time, the proposed liberalization
will be limited (1) to "joint use" of communications circuits by two
or more companies, and (2) to "use by others," in-which private
communications enterprise operators will lease communications circuits
from the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation and sub-lease
them to other enterprises, and which will not be accompanied by any
message exchange (meaning the transmitting of information as is,
without changing the contents thereof, as in the case of the telephone).
This means that approval will Virtually not be granted to the
liberalization of message exchange, which liberalization will be
indispensable for private information and communications enterprise
operators to offer high-level information and communications services, or
to the connection of public communications circuits, specific communications
circuits, and public communications circuits (so-called public-specific-
pubiic connection) which is necessary for the establishment of
information-processing networks.

On the other hand, HITI intends to seek strongly the Postal
Services Hinistry's overall opening of the market for data communications,
on the strength of the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research
Council's recommendation calling for the overall liberalization of
data communications. For this reason, the focal point has shifted to
the problem of whether the proposed liberalization in the field of
high-level information and communications services will be incorporated
in the Public Tele—Communications Law Revision Bill this time.

[19 Feb 82 p 3]

{Text}

The problem of whether efforts should be made to cope with the
proposed liberalization of data communications through the enactment
of a new law (data communications law) or through the revising of the
existing law (Public Tele-Communications Law), on which problem the
assertions of the Postal Services Ministry and MITI yere in a sharp
conflict, has come to an end along the line of revising the Law no;
in force, with the Postal Services Hinistry's having given up
establishing a new law. The reason for this is that the Postal
Services Ministry's view urging the establishment of a new approval or
permission system was not accepted, due to the large-scale current of
administrative reform, calling for the re-adjustment or rationalization
of [projects which require] approval or permission. With this as a
turning point, however, the Ministry has shifted to the tactic of
restricting the liberalization this time. The focal point is whether
high-level communications services, which can also be said to be the

2 r
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nucleus of the proposed liberalization of data communications, will
be included among the objects of the liberalization through the
revising of the Law this time. The Postal Services Ministry intends
to give up liberaliting high-level communications services, but
MITI and industrial circles concerned are showing strong repulsion
against this. The problem of liberalizing data communications will
enter its second round of development as to how far the scope of
liberalization should be expanded.

"Has the Postal Services Ministry really given up enacting a
new law?" News about Postal Services Minister MINOHA’s statement,
which said that "the PoStal Services Ministry has given up enacting a
new law," was conveyed to the Government-LOP side on the 16th. At
that time, MITI leaders looked as if they were unable to quite believe
[the news]. On the other hand, the Postal Services Ministry administrative
officials concerned were also bewildered, as they were unaule to
grasp the real intention of the Postal Services Minister.

The major reason why a decision was rapidly reached to give up
the planned enactment of a new law, was the Provisional Administrative'
Affairs Research Council's second recommendation calling for the
re-adjustment or rationalization of the approval or permission system.
The Government-LB? side earlier decided to cope with the proposed
liberalization of data communications through a "bill concerning the
package handling of the re-adjustment or rationalization of the
approval or permission system." The atmosphere within the LDP was
as represented by the view that "such a bill (as a new bill called for
by the Postal Services Ministry), which will necessitate the granting
of approval or permission, cannot be included in the proposed bill
calling for the re-adjustment or rationalization of the approval or
permission system" (LDP Administrative and Financial Affairs Research
Council Chairman HASHIMOTO). Moreover, at a Cabinet meeting, slated
for the 19th, the Government will decide to "respect the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council's recommendation." The large-
scale current of administrative reform by the Government and the LDP
as one body can be said to have become connected with the settlement
of the problem in the form of revising the Law now in force.

However. the Postal Services Ministry has not made overall concessions,
though it has given up the planned enactment of a new law. .Rather,
it is resorting to the tactic of rolling back with the substantial
contents, in place of discarding the formal problem of whether [the
situation should be settled] through the enactment of a new law or
through [the revising of] the Law now in force. The first step for
that purpose was the emergency press conference which Postal Services
Ministry Tale-Communications Policy Bureau Director General MCRIZUMI-
hold on the 17th. MORIZUMI definitely stated as follows: "The
preconditions (including the preservation of communications secrets
and co-ordination of fields between private industrial circles

concerned and the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation

3 ;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[NTT]) for the liberalizing of high-level communications services (VAN)

as to private information and communications enterprise operators have
still not been established through negotiations with MITI. If, this time,
efforts are to be made to cope with the situation only through the
revising of the Law now in force, private information and communications
enterprise operators cannot be permitted to offer high-level
communications services."

This means that the POStal Services Ministry is still not changing
its posture, to the effect that high—level communications services
cannot be extended except under a new law. It also says that it will
give up the proposed liberalization in the field of high-level
communications services, in which field it has been planning to
carry out partial liberalization in the form of enacting a new law.
if it is said that the existing Law alone should be revised. It is
thus carrying out operations to submit a new bill to the next Diet
session, as expected at the very beginning, with its usual persevering
posture seen when the three Ministers reached agreement on the
establishment of a new postal individual annuity system and the
handling of the Postal Savings Deliberation Council's recommendation.’
When asked if “this will result in delaying the liberalization of
data communications," Bureau Director General MORIZUHI replied,

"The Government office, which has jurisdiction over the data
communications-connected legislation, is the Postal Services Hinistry.
His logic is that unless the Postal Services Ministry moves, the bill
cannot be submitted [to the Diet].

If the Postal Services Ministry's assertions are to be accepted, then
the proposed liberalization will be limited to the following cases
through the revising of the Law this time: (1) "Joint use" of
communications circuits by two or more companies; (2) "use by others,"
in which private information and communications enterprise operators
will lease communications circuits from NTT and sub-lease them to
other enterprises, and which will not be accompanied by any message
exchange (meaning the transmitting of information as is, without
changing the contents thereof, as in the case of the telephone); and
(3) the connection of computers through the use of personal circuits.
This means that approval will virtually not be granted to the
liberalization of message exchange, which liberalization will be
indispensable for private information and communications enterprise
operators to offer high-level information and communications services,
or to the connection of public communications circuits, specific
communications circuits, and public communications circuits, which
connection is necessary for the establishment of information-processing
networks.

This field of high-level communications services is a star field
in regard to the liberalization of data communications. Unless that

field is liberalized to private information and communications enterprise
operators this time, the realization of the future image of the

a .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
data-communications liberalization age, in which simultaneous conferences
will be held on the television screen, for example, between the Tokyo
head office and its branch offices in Sapporo, Fukuoka, and other

remote areas, will be delayed to that extent.

Therefore, from the stand that "if the field of high-level com-
munications services is not liberalized, it will decrease the meaning
of liberalizing data communications," hITI intends to carry out
strong activities to secure the inclusion of the liberalization of
the high-level communications service-field in a reVision bill concerning
the Law now in force. It is the Provisional Administrative Affairs
Research Council's second recommendation which supports HITI's
assertions. The recommendation notes as follows: (i) In connection
with the use of data-communications circuits, liberalization should ‘
be carried out, with the exception of the system of exchanging .
messages alone, with an unspecified large number of persons as the
objects; (2) in order to clarify the scope of the minimum necessary
degree of restrictions, a negative-list formula (formula calling for
liberalization in principle and also the listing of plans which cannot
be carried out) should be adopted; and (3) in regard to mutual connection,
the standards for granting approval should be clarified when a separate-
approval system is carried out. In short, the recommendation calls for
the overall liberalization of data communications.-

The proposed liberalization of data communications cannot but be said
to be incomplete unless the field of high—level communications systems
and exchange of messages are liberalized. In that meaning,.future
negotiations between the Postal Services Ministry and HITI on the
scope of the substantial liberalization may be said to be an important
testing place, from the standpoint of liberalizing data communications.

(Note) high-level communications services (VAN) mean that data will
be exchanged and processed, between the data communications systems
of different companies through the connection of their own respective
computers with NTT's communications circuits, and through the
establishment of networks which will use those computers as switchboards.
This is the most developed form_of data communications. Private
information and communications enterprise operators are planning such
services as a future image of data communications services. They are
also said to be added-value communications services.

V

*ﬁﬁtkt‘kﬁﬁ*

S .
FOR.OFFNJA1.USE13NLY
The Postal Services Hinistgx's and MITI'a Wave of Thinking as to Liberaliza-

tion of Data Communications

 

Postal Services .HITI
Ministry
(1) Joint use (by companies

which have continuous

business relations)

No message switching Liberalization in Liberalization in
principle principle

Message switching Only between com— Liberalization in

panics which have principle
close business

relations
(2) Use by others
No message switching Liberalization in Liberalization in
principle principle
Message switching
Between specific persons Report systemﬁ Liberalization in
principle
Between non-specific APPP°val system* Liberalization ex-
persons eluding message
' switching which will
impede services by
NTT
(3) Mutual connection
Public circuits-specific
circuits Liberalization ex— Liberalization in
cluding message principle
switching -
Public-specific-public
circuits Separate approval Liberalization in
principle

(Note) The asterisked systems will not be included in the revising of
the Law this time. .

[24 Feb 82 pp 1-2)
[Text]

The Postal Services Ministry formulated the general outline of a
Public Tele—Communications Law revision bill in connection with the
problem of liberalizing the use of data communications circuits, and
obtained the general approval thereof at a meeting of the LDP Policy
Board Communications Department (Chief: Yoshihide MORI), held on the
morning of therzyth. The general outline has been drawn up, accompanying
the fact that in response to the Provisional Administrative Affairs
Research Council's second recommendation concerning the proposed
re—adjustment of the approval or permission system, the planned submitting
of a new bill (data communications bill) to the current Diet session

has been given up. Under the general outline, the utilization of

data communications circuits, which utilization is banned at present,

will be liberalized to a rather great extent, in the information-processing
field. however, it blocks the road leading to the liberalization of
high-level communications services (VAN) which are expected to develop

in the future. The Ministry will submit its revision bill gen-

eral outline to the Administrative Management Agency on the same day.
However, MIT! and the Administrative Management Agency are showing
repulsion against the Postal Services Ministry's second draft on the
strength of the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's
recommendation calling for the overall liberalization of data

communications. Complications will probably arise before the problem can
be settled.

In regard to data communications, information will be processed
through the direct connection of computers and communications functions, as
in the case of the National Railways' Green (TN: First Class Ticket) Windows
and the banks‘ on-line systems. They are said to be the third communications,
after telegraph and the telephone. At present, restrictions are being carried
out on the private information and communications enterprise operators'
leasing exclusive-use circuits from the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
Public Corporation (MTT) and their processing information. Industrial
circles concerned have strongly criticized that this has been
impeding the development of industries.

At the very beginning, the Postal Services Ministry had planned to
liberalize the use of data communications circuits through the revising
of the Public Tele-Communications Law now in force, and also through
the enactment of a new data communications law. It had also intended
to put up a new net of approval or permission over the field of data
communications in the form of establishing a new law. The LDP
Administrative and Financial Affairs Research Council, etc., criticized
this plan, from the stand that it "will go against the current of
administrative reform." The Ministry has finally decided to give up
enacting a new law and to submit a revision bill as to the existing
Law to the current Diet session. ‘

Under the Postal Services Ministry's second revision-bill general
outline, the use of communications circuits by companies, which have
business relations with each other or with one another, will be
liberalized, in regard to the “joint use" of such circuits by two or
«are companies. Also, as regards the exchange of messages (meaning
the transmitting of information as is, without changing the contents
thereof, as in the case of the telephone), it will be approved, for the
first time, if it is to be carried out between or among companies

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ VI‘I'ILIRI. UOI‘. UI‘LI

which have close business connections with each other or with one another.
It will become possible to establish communications systems, for

example, between manufacturing industrialists and retail business-persons,
between tourism enterprisers and hotel-keepers, and between transportation
enterprises: and warehousing enterprisers, which systems have been

banned up until now.

With regard to "use by others," which is regarded as a focal point,
from the standpoint of fostering and developing the private information
and communications services, and in which information and communications
enterprise operators will lease circuits from NTT and sub-lease them
to other enterprises, it will be liberalized if it is for data-
processing purposes. However, in regard to high-level communications
services which will be accompanied by the exchange of messages, and
which the Postal Services Ministry had planned to incorporate in the
proposed new law, [the liberalization thereof] will not be approved,
partly for the reason that "it is impossible to preserve communications
secrets through the revising of the Law now in force." Therefore,
under the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan, it will be impossible
for private information and communications enterprise operators to offer
such high-level communications services as computer communications services
or mail services (services for transmitting documents for office
automation).

Moreover, concerning the connection of public communications circuits,
specific communications circuits, and public communications circuits
(so-called public-specific-public connection) which will become indispensable
for private information and communications enterprise operators to
offer information-processing networks, it will be placed under an
individual approval system, on the grounds that there is fear of its
causing the utilization of services similar to telegraph and telephone
services which are the regular services of NTT. The connection of
public communications circuits with specific communications circuits
(public-specific connection) will not be approved, either, in the case
of carrying out message exchange.

ﬁztkkkfzkktﬁ

Far Removed from Overall Liberalization, MITI to Show Reoulsion

In connection with the Postal Services Ministrst draft plan for the
liberalization of data communications, HIT! intends to show strong
repulsion, from the stand that the exchange of messages in regard to
use by others will be limited in actual substance, and that it is far
from the overall liberalization of data communications, as sought
by hITI up until now. It also intends to press for a large-scale
revision of the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan.

In regard to the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan, HITI has
particularly taken up the following points as problems: (1) The

8 .
FOR OFWWCJAI.USEGDNLY
information-processing system (such as mail services), including

message exchange as to use by others, has not been approved, and the
oroposed use by others will also be inconsistent with the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council's reconmendation calling for
liberalization in principle; (2) in the case of use by others, the scope
of liberalization will be limited, when compared with joint use, and
this will be disadvantageous for medium and small enterprises which .
cannot but rely on the networks to be established by information-processing
enterprisers: and (3) the concrete contents of the planned liberalization
are not clear, because they will be decided on the basis of the

Postal Services Ministry Ordinance or on the basis of the standards

for granting approval.

MITI plans to sound out the Postal Services Ministry on its way
of thinking as to these concrete problematical points and to seek the
revising of the Public Tele-Communications Law in the form of rollouing
MITI's basic policy for securing the overall liberalization of data
communications.

ﬁﬁkﬁz‘zaﬁnfzﬁ' .

Gist of the Postal Services Ministry's Draft Plan for Liberalization

of Data Communications

 

Following is the gist of the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan
for liberalizing the use of data communications circuits:

1. Joint Use of Specific Communications Circuits: The individual
approval system concerning the joint use of specific communications
circuits shall be abolished, and at the same time, the Postal Services
Ministry Ordinance shall be revised as follows:

(i) Necessary communications for services, which have continuous

transactions, can be freely established if they are for data-processing
purposes.

(2) If they are State organizations, local public entities,
two or more persons who engage in the same line of business, or
persons who have close business relations with each other, [the use
of communications circuits], including the utilization of telegraph and
telephone services, can be freely secured, though it has not been
approved up until now.

2. Joint Use of Public Comunications Circuits: Restrictions on
the joint use of electronic computers, etc.. shall be abolished,
with regard to contracts for the use of public communications circuits.

. 3. Use of Specific Communications Circuits by Others: The standards
concerning use by others, as set forth in Paragraph l, Article 55-13
of the Public Tele—Communications Law, shall be revised, while

9 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I‘ILIAL UDL UIVL'

30.. 0.5200
LEI-8.3.0... 0:2 05 no coma—>3.

:3 0:8 .00
$028.01.. 0128 0.2. we 0301.8.

:3 0:03035'3-0”:
0:2 0..» on 03:... 2.9 we c2521

12.9.9.0 53 02.6.3: yo coma—>0:

.2329.» .5.— 020330 no :30?!—

0uca..q?5 buss:
26:3... .336 0.2 .0 c3013..

02.0595 >533:
acutﬁom .329. a... ho 033:0:

sci—.31." 0..»
3:: 0:730 no 5053.

.130: .2530... «333...: .3 .31....
02:000.. 03 00..- 3.) 31.950 Soda-oasis
9:95 1.... 64:02.0 .039:— uo c3uu0ccoo

5:0 c0423 0n 0.5.38.0
0.030! 00015. .05 0a 4.3.. 0:39.? 23.00
$5.008 3:00..- 660 039.... no 63.30.88

:5. ..
0.. 1:: £059.80 .Iolouau 3 00:08:00

.0022:
manna-£5008 8.80.. no: .13... 0500009...
5;: .026 to no 8056-00 3 «5000098

30.3085. 0.3 nelson-.800 .0350 3’5005

1:: .02.. 2330330 .3. 3:0 03.008

.00.: on .24..
002......— acnuguouauaunv Lou 02.330 .0 05

.30 .3253 0A 1:: 0030.30 9:0 3:
v...- aaouu0a0u no 0!. 0..» Indie—0.3 50:32:04:
‘53:: 00050.5 002.. 9.1.2. we 03... 0.3 5
9c... .3303.— 000003 .13: .30.. «o no 09059000 3
”300009.:— 0u0n.rou£ 05 9.152.!»qu .9."an
b33305 .13.. £02.. .3333“? 0:000:

01:000..
on St. 267...... 02 2:: 5355-000 E00002!
0:0 €2.3qu- 0A :1. 2.80 05 :0 33.3500:

:3 Zia—w 0.: 5:: 95.50 Lou. :0...—

0:59;“.
«co—unuuciloo
Suﬁ..— vzl .Uumuuono
Jung no :3 505.8

loucaa
.32....- «33:2:
2» no :3 .33..
. .
20%.. .a Cu squat:

as no 2:21:35.

09.2.5.0
duo-00. new ne’er—5.2

060. 007300.- uo .501.—

55.9.0
0.0000. no... 43.9.9.2

loom ue c3309.“—

 

a..c:..umc:lu.d 38 mo coquauzzcns .3. 52¢ :95 019335.. 00u~>50w .303.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
restrictions on use by others shall be eased on a large scale, in order
to enable the free use of circuits for data-processing purposes.

u. Mutual Connection of Specific Communications Circuits and
Public Communications Circuits: In reference to the connection of
specific communications circuits and public communications circuits,
the individual approval system shall be abolished, and efforts shall be
made to enable the connection thereof under the certain standards to be
prescribed by a Postal Services hinistry ordinance. Moreover, the connec-

tion of public communications circuits, specific communications circuits, and

public communications circuits can be secured with approval, though
i: has not been approved up until now.

5. Connection to Electronic Computers, Etc., to Be Installed by
Others: Connection to electronic computers to be installed by
contractors under the use-by-others system and to electronic computers,
etc., to be installed by others involved in the contracts can be secured
if it comes under the certain standards to be prescribed by a Postal
Services Ministry ordinance, or if it obtains individual approval.

3

6. Installation of Input and Output Equipment, Etc.: The Public
Corporation or companies can offer input and output equipment, etc.,

to contractors for the use of specific communications circuits or
contractors for the use of public communications circuits.

Supplementary Note: When the Public Tele-Communications Law is
partially revised, in order to consolidate the use of data communications
circuits, the strengthening of the Penal Regulations, which is an
urgent task, shall be carried out.

(1) In regard to persons who engage in public tele-communications
serVices, the provisions of the Penal Regulations concerning their
obligation to preserve secrets shall be strengthened.

(2) The amounts of fines, mentioned in the Penal Regulations,
shall be revised.

naanannaen

[25 Feb 82 p 3]

[Text]

MITI on the 2uth formulated an opinion of criticism, to the effect
that the general outline of a Public Tale-Communications Law revision
bill, drawn up by the Postal Services Ministry in connection with the
problem of liberalizing data conmunications, "is still far from liberal-
ization." HITI says that if the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan

11
FOR 0F?1C1A1.USE‘ONLN
run Vl'l'lkiﬂla U93. Vl‘b!

is to be followed, then problems will remain as to the following points:
(1) The scope of liberalization is indefinite; therefore, there is the
fear that depending on how it is operated, it may violate the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council's recommendation calling for
the liberalization of data communications, as a general principle; and
(2) this will prove disadvantageous for the processing of information

by medium and small enterprises, which are unable to have their own
computers, when compared with big enterprises. MITI will strongly
request the improvement of these points in the course of the Postal
Services Ministry's drawing up a draft revision bill, from now. But the
Ministry is not changing its posture of revising the Law along the

line of its general outline. For this reason, further complications

are expected before early ﬁarch, when a final decision is expected to be
reached on the revision bill.

Data communications mean the processing of information through the
direct connection of computers and communications functions, as in
the case of the on-line systems of banks. Due to the vigorous
renewal of technology and the appearance of new forms of services
in rapid succession, voices calling for the liberalization of the use '
[of data communications circuits] have become stronger, centering on the
enterprises and information-processing services business-persons
who use computers. In response to this request. the Postal Services-
Ministry drew up its revision-bill general outline on the 2uth. In regard
to the general outline, MITI points out that there are concrete'problems
as to the liberalization of "message exchange" and "use by others."

Message exchange means the transmitting of information as is,
without changing the contents thereof, as in the case of the telephone,
even if it goes through a computer. Data communications for processing
large amounts of information will inevitably include message exchange.
However, the contents of the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan
are such that depending on how the Postal Services Ministry Ordinance
is operated, message exchange can be restricted,in actual substance.

The stand of HITI is that there is fear of its violating the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council's recommendation which emphasizes
that "message exchange should be liberalized,in principle."

Use by others means that information-processing-enterprisers will
lease circuits from the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation
(NTT) and sub-lease them to other enteprises. The main objects for the
joint use of communications circuits by two or more companies are
big enterprises. while [those for use by others] are medium and small
enterprises which are unable to have their own computers. However,
under the Postal Services Ministry's draft plan, use by others will be
restricted strictly, compared with joint use. HITI says, "For example,
when trying to establish business contacts by telegram through the
use of data communications circuits, it will not be permitted in the
case of use by others, though it will be possible, in the case of
joint use. There is the fear that this may cause gaps in information

12
FOR‘DFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
services. which can be used, between medium and small enterprises and
big enterprises.

*kaﬁﬁﬁk ﬁfth

Prime Minister Orders Co-ordination of Views between MIT! and Postal
Services Ministrz -- Data Communications

Postal Services Minister MINOHA called on Prime Minister SUZUKI
at the Prime Minister's Official Residence on the 2uth, and explained
the outline of the Ministry's draft of a Public Tele-Communications
Law concerning the liberalization of the use of data communications
circuits, which draft was submitted to the LDP Communications
Department on the same day. In this connection, the Prime Minister
ordered the continuation of studies between MITI and the Postal
Services Ministry as to high-level communications services and other
parts on which co-ordination has still not been carried out between
the two sides. Moreover, concerning the part which is included in
the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council's second

recommendation, but which is excluded from the Postal Services
Ministry's draft plan this time, the Prime Minister presented a request,

saying, "I want you to explain it fully to the ProVisional Administrative
Affairs Research Council."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C80: 4106/90

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARIANB 4 BXPECTS 43 PERCENT OF MARKET FROM 1986 TO 1990
Potential Markets, Launch Reliability
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 6 Feb 82 pp 34-35

[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The Arianespace company has tor the first time released, during the meet-
ing on the future European launcher, the results of a new market study relating
to the Ariane 4 launcher for the period 1986-1990. This study, carried out in
1981 with the help of the Sligos company, based on an informationeprocessing
simulation of the satellite market for the period 1985-1991. has been used parti-
cularly to determine what configurations of Ariane 4 rockets will be the most
suited to that market and to quantify the system-response parameters of the
Arianespace company's operations. enabling appropriate guidelines to be drawn up
for the latter. The results, presented by B. Guillaumat of Arianespace. place
the potential market, in terms of the number of satellites that could be launched

by Ariane A over the 5-year period 1986-1990, at between 50 and 62 satellites,
these figures representing two estimates (medium and high) of the new European
launcher's ability to penetrate the potential global market.

The simulation took into account the Ariane 4 launcher that will be available by
the beginning of 1986 for operational use, in six configurations (depending upon
the use of two or four solid—propellant and/or liquid-propellant boosters) with
nose cones 4 meters in diameter and 9.5 to 13 meters in height depending upon the
mission (single or double launchings). These six configurations were selected as
the best suited on the basis of the following criteria:

--Mininization of the number of launchers used for any given scenario (specifying
a number of satellites to be launched);

--Minimization of the overall cost of the launchings (which takes into account,
on the one hand, the actual cost of a given launching and, on the other hand. the
fill factor for the launcher):

--Hinimization of the risks inherent in the dispersion of the overall launch

costs of a given scenario. depending upon the launch dates actually requested by
the potential clients. To eliminate the effect of individual cases, a large

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

number of configurations of dates were drawn up for each scenario. Each mission
model thus generated yielded its own multiple launching associations, hence a
dispersion of costs. Furthermore, for each mission model several sets of asso-
ciations are possible, account taken of degrees of freedom. Optimization yields
launchings at minimum cost, the others falling within a cost spread of around

5 percent.

The performance characteristics of the six configurations of Ariane 4 launchers
that have been chosen for launchings into geostationary transfer orbit will
enable single launchings of satellites weighing respectively: 2,000 kg (Intelsat
5A or direct-TV satellites), 2,600 kg (enhanced direct-TV satellites), 3,000 kg,
3,200 kg, 3,700 kg (Intelsat 6) and 4,200 kg (enhanced Intelsat 6). The same
configurations with the SPBLDA expansion unknown] system (375 kg) will enable 7
double launchings respectively as follows: 1,450 kg (Telecon or direct TV) and
775 kg (meteorological): 1,450 kg (Telecom of direct TV) and 1,175 kg (Telecom):
1,450 kg (Telecom or direct TV) and 1,375 kg (Telecom or direct TV); 2,000 kg
(Intelsat 5A or direct TV) and 1,325 kg (Telecom or direct TV); 2,450 kg (direct
TV) and 1,373 kg (Telecom or direct TV). Satellites weighing 3,000 kg (enhanced
SPOT [Earth Observation Probe System]) can also be launched in the single-launch
mode into heliosynchronous' orbit.

The study took .nto account only the period 1986-1990, considering the years 1985
and 1991 only as representing baundary conditions. Ariane's potential market is
thus estimated at 178 satellites over the 1985-1991 period (7 years) and at 143
satellites over the 1986-1990 period (5 years). The world market (outside the
USSR and not counting U. S. military satellites) for the same periods is, respec-
tively, estimated at 238 and 207 satellites. Taking into account only satellites
covered by current, scheduled, known or planned programs, the simulation has in-
tentionally underestimated the potential market for the period 1988-1991 in the
interest of realism. The world and potential markets have been broken down into
five country groupings, ten types of missions, two types of orbits (heliosynchro-
nous and geostationary): and nine classes of satellites (see tables).

The simulation has in particular identified the possibilities of association of
satellites permitting double launchings with Ariane 4, the criterion used for
this selection having been the determination of a minimum launching cost for a
given mission model, and this criterion being subject to adjustments in actual
practice to deal with inevitable delays attributable to the-satellites. The
simulation thus yielded more “realistic' possibilities of association within a
deviation of around 5 percent from the minimum-cost association.

Thus, the study has resulted in the following findings: Ariane 4 can expect to
launch between 50 and 62 satellites (medium and high estimates) during the period
considered (1986-1990), representing a penetration of 35 to 45 percent into the
potential market. This will represent between 32 and 41 launchings (single and
double combined) in 5 years, or a little over 6 to 8 launchings per year (an
estimate that is compatible with the xourou complex's launching capabilities).
The launch coefficient, which takes into account a certain mission scrub rate,
attributable either to the launcher or the satellite, is estimated at 15 percent.
These market assumptions yield a mean fill factor of 08-89 percent for the number
of missions and the period considered.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ariane Launcher'e Potential Market for 1986-1990 (Source: Arianegggcez

Country
Grouping

 

Europe
United States

International
bodies

Other developed

countries

Developing
countries

Total Market:

1985-1991
(7 years)

1986-1990
(5 years)

 

Tbtal Market“

 

share
Satel- (per-
lites cent}
43 16.6
135 52.3
24 9.3
25 9.7
31 l2.l

- 258 100

207 -

Ariane's Potential Market- 1986-1990

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Medium Bstinate High Estimate

Share Share Share

Satel- (per- Satel- (per- Satel- (per-

lites cent) lites cent} lites cent!
43 24.2 30 88 34 100
55 30.9 4 22 6 33

24 13.5 4 9.5 6 14.3
25 14.1 6 25 . 6 25
31 17.3 6 24 _;§L__ -40
178 69 - - - -
143 - so - 62 -

__________________________.___._______.._...__._._.______________..________
* Worldwide. except USSR and other communist countries.

16

FIIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600050033-5

' I‘UK UI'I'ILIAL Ubb UIVLI

Ariane Market Forecasts: 1986-

 

 

Pent
I Item E

Market penetration (percent):
Ariane potential 3!
Worldwide z

Satellites launched by Arianex
Total
In low orbits

' In geostationary orbits
Total launched weight (tons)

Number of launches
Single
Double
Total

Average launches per year (5 years)
Number of satellites per rocket (average)

Pill factor (percent):
single launching: - 8
Double launchings - 9

Average ' 8
_____________.____———-———-

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

- 17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600060033-6
Geostationary Satellite Launch Cost
Paris AIR ET cpsms in French 6 Feb 82 p 35

{'Article by Pierre Langereux]

{Excerptj Geostationary Satellite Launch Costs.
(Source: BSA [European Space Agench)

       

 

       
      
 
      
 
      

uﬁﬁluns (2) Mme so than. mm on m..., (6) c.“ u a...“
(3) 0:ch (4)1vmkzien 5)Gurnc~one “Hal. 3 am“ m

 

 

Ihmulomm —

 

am 26 12 new
"no use

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

\._'2_A'-I~o ML 0 :90“. — a nun
31w- *3”? wr. __«_~s._* ‘_'_if_!__w =1 ‘7»?—
II: sumo o SSHS-A o ‘09:: nun __ __' 1M _ _; Im a 4m
til-um. 0 ms _ _ ___2I I50 ___—. . 223:) a) 3m
' Shame 0 Congo: -___—___' - ___Emo __ so um

 

 

In Shun. + onoulm Image)

In SMII 9 Fence. 9 men

 

'Note: These estimates are based on the following (1981) costs of launchers:

1 Shuttle $60 million. 1/2 Shuttle I30 million, 1 Ariane 44 L $70 million,

1/2 Ariane 44 L $40 million. The (1981) costs of upper stages are: 1 ms (solid)
$30 million, 1 Centaur (cryogenic) $30 million. 1 SSUS-A (solid) $16 nillion.

1 8808-0 (solid) $10 million. 1 perigee motor (liquid) $20 million, and 1 apogee
motor (liquid) $2 million. The integrated propulsion system (IPS) serving as
perigee and apogee motor is calculated at $8 million.

 

 

Key:
1. Launchers. 5. Geostationary orbit- kg.
2. Payload weight in orbit. 6. Launch cost.
3. Low orbit- kg. 7. Cost as/payload ratio - $/kg.
4. Transfer orbit- kg. 8. shuttle + 198.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

9238
C80: 5500/2118

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

1982 (tentatively, after 20 April) with two European geostationar satellites--
MARECS-Z and SIRIO-2--that will use for the first time the SYLDA Ariane Double
Launch System] developed by Arianespace. This first operational launch (L5).
which follows four flight test launches (Ll through L4) carried out between
December 1979 and December 1981, will also be the first launch of the "promotion-
a1 series" that is being sponsored by the BSA. Seven operational launches are
planned under this promotional series, four in 1982 and three in 1983. Subsequent
launches, after September 1983. will be done by the private company Arianespace.

partici sting in the program. Text [Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 6 Feb 82
p 35] COPYRIGHT: A. a c. 1932

ARIANE LAUNCH SET FOR APRIL--1he first operational launch of the new European Ariane
rocket is currently planned for 22 or 23 April of this year, at Kourou (French
Guyana); its payload will be two new European geostationary satellites, HARECS B and
Sirio 2. This will be the fifth launch of the Ariane rocket, which is henceforth
qualified after the success of three out of four flight tests conducted between
December 1979 and December I981. This will also be the first launch carried out
with the new double launch system, SYLDA, specially developed by Aerospatiale.

SYLDA is an adapter shaped like an enormous egg, made of carbon fibers for reasons
of lightness and rigidity. One of the satellites is placed inside, while the other
is attached to SYLDA; after insertion into orbit, the latter opens in two, to
release the satellite placed inside. The satellite HARECS B is the second European
maritime telecommunications satellite built under BSA direction, for the new
organization for maritime telecommunications by means of Inmarsat satellites. The
satellite Sirio 2 is a new European experimental satellite built in Italy for ESA.
Sirio 2 will have two missions: distribution of data (treated images) from the
European meteorologic satellites Heteostat (HDD experiment), and synchronization of
atomic clocks by laser telemetry accross the Atlantic (LASSO experiment). [Text]

[Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 20 Feb 82 p 37] [COPYRIGHT: AIR ET COSMOS I982]
1|,023

END
C50: 5500/2136 19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY