FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10689

27 July 1982

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE

(FOUOI 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JTIS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the inforo
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB
27 an

USSR REPORT
Cousmen Goons AND Donesnc Tame

(MO ‘IO21

Cou'reurs

comm Goons PRODUCTIOI' m DEW“

Local Paper Blane. Party for Contact Good. Shortage
(W, 10 AP: 82) .000....OCOOOOOOIOOOOOOIO0.0.0.000

Efforts To Get New Product. to Huh: Ductibod
(A. Ya. You-av; savanna WSWS‘I'. no 2.

HI!“AP! 82) 00.000.000.000...o000cocoooooooooooooooooooo

Confectimry Industry “Manama. Plan:
(ll. 3. Kodincvo; WW“ I mlmsnu

mmm'. “O 3’ 1982) 00.0.00.00000009000000.0000

M. «tr-Ho! "If M'V
MWMONLY

CONSUMER COWS PDDUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

wen. mm sum mm ma cousuun coons summon
n31. mm in Russian 10 Apr 82 pp 1. 3

[Report on speech of Second Secretary of the Tul'sheye Oblast Conittee of the CPS!)
V. H. Suslyak at an oblset nesting of the aktiv: "Improve Trade 8:: vice”)

{Text} Trade. public dining.... You will not find e person who
would not use the services of enterprises of this sector. And
the delsnds on those working in it are steadily increasing. The
sphere of services is being enlarged. the masher of people using
thee, particularly public dining. is increasing. And. on the
other hand, demand is increasing, the tastes of shoppers. the
visitors of cafes and dining rools, if one say say so, are becon-
ing sore and nore refined. "hat previously passed unnoticed and
was explained as inevitable difficulties of the function of our
country. now will not be accepted by the Soviet people.

The party is doing much in order to ilplesent in practice its
progrsl policy of increasing the Interiel end cultural standard
of living of the people. This goal hes also been incorporated in
the plans of the llth Five-Year Plan. which outline the further
increase of the well-being of our people. A significant role in
this is being assigned to trade, which is set forth in the decree
of the CPSU Central Co-ittee and the 088! Council of Ministers

"0n assures on the Further Develop-sat of Trade and the Isprove-
sent of the Trade Service of the Population During the llth Five-

Year Plan."

ﬂow is it being fulfilled, what is it necessary to undertake in
order to raise the sector to a higher level? This question was
submitted for discussion to the oblast neeting of the aktiv of
party, soviet. trade union. Rouse-01. econouic and trade organ-
izations.

Second Secretary of the Oblsst Co-ittee of the CPSU V. H. Suslyah
delivered the report at the usting.

0n the basis of specific examples V. l. Suslyah showed how trade is developing in

our oblast. As the wages and incone of holkhos farners, the output of consuer
goods and the production of agricultural products increase, the co-odity turnover

mandamus“
FORiOFﬁKJAl.USE¢NVLY

of enterprises of trade and public dining increases. During the years of the 10th
l-ive-Yesr Plan it increased by 23.5 million rubles, or 18 percent. The floor space
of stores was enlarged by 33, 000 a2 ,the number of seats at public dining enter-
prises increased by 19,000. About 10. 000 units of refrigeration, technological

trade and other equipment were installed, on which more than 60 million rubles were
spent.

The structure of the commodity turnover is being systematically improved, the sale
of nonfood consuaer items is increasing more rapidly, which once again confirms the
increase of the standard of living of the working people. In the past 10 years the
sale of footwear. clothing, fabrics, knitted goods, furniture, passenger cars,-
sporting, cultural and personal goods has been expanded in the oblast.

Much has been done on the adoption of advanced forms of trade. The uork schedule

of many trade enterprises has been changed. the specialization of the network of
stores has been carried out.

The trade organizations also began the llth Five-Year Plan quite well.

Taking into account the importance 4! the service sphere in the accomplishment cf the
socioeconomic program of the party, the party and soviet organs in recent years have
taken a number of steps on the sharp increase of the level and standards of the
service of the population of the oblast. These questions have been repeatedly exam-
ined at meetings of the party and economic aktiv and the bureau of the oblast com-
mittee and at sessions of the oblast soviet executive committee. The city and

rayon party committees have begun to examine more frequently and specifically the
work of trade organizations. have stepped up the monitoring of the activity of pri-
mary party organizations and have increased the demandingness on the personnel of
this sector. During the past 3 years alone more than 900 salespeople, cooks and
chiefs of stores and dining rooms have been admitted a candidate aembers of the
CPSU.

The speaker cited as a positive example the practical work of the people of Alek-
ainskiy Rayon. The material and technical base of trade organisations is being
consistently developed in the rayon. The positive work being performed in Teplo-
Ogarcvskiy, Kimovskiy, Odoyevskiy and Plavskiy Reyons was noted.

At the same time. V. H. Suslyak stressed. the achieved level of trade and public
dining in the oblast still does not meet the requirements of the 26th CPSU Congress
and the increased demands of the population. The growth rate of the coemodity
turnover is low in a number of rayons, as a result significant amounts of money
are being accumulated by the population and are being received by savings banks in
the form of savings. The demand of consumers is being poorly studied, proper con-
cern is not being shown for the assurance of the mandatory minimum assortment of
goods at stores, dishes and items at dining rooms, restaurants and cafes through-
out the workday. Going to stores, dining rooms and cafes takes people a lot of
time. They frequently encounter lack of consideration for their needs and low
standards of service. And the party organizations are poorly increasing the re-
sponsibility of economic managers for the unconditional fulfillment of state plans
and are not fully utilising the right granted to them to monitor the activity of
the adainistration.

FOI!OFFKJAI.USEINVLY
roaomaumouu

The administrations of trade and public dining of the oblast soviet executive com-
nittee, the ministration of Workers' Supply of the Moscow Basin and the oblast
union of consumer cooperatives are obliged to give practical assistance to the col-
lectives of trade organizations, to put things in order in the distribution of
goods, to set up unraitting control over the work of trade enterprises and to in-
crease the responsibility of econonic lanagers for the assigned utter. The de-
crees of the party and the governaent, which outlined an extensive progran of ac-
tions for the workers of state trade, public dining and coast-her cooperatives, are
required for this.

At the meeting the question of increasing the output of consumer goods was dis-
cussed with ell urgency. ‘l‘tday in the oblast 215 enterprises of 3S ainistries and
departments are engaged in this. Last year l,“$,000,000 rubles of goods for the
population were produced, the plan of the production of cultural, personal and
household goods was exceeded, the State Seal of Quality was awarded to any items.

however, the existing potentials are being utilized far from coepletely. A great
shortage of the goods, which could have been produced by our enterprises, is being
felt, this especially concerns the simplest goods and goods of everyday dasnd.

An important role in the improvement of the supply of the papuletion with goods is
being assigned to the staff of the Administration of Trade and the oblast union of
consumer cooperatives and to wholesale bases. taking the demand into account, their
aanagers are called upon to influence industry, to stimulate the production of the
goods needed by the population and to ensure their progress.

For the present, as in the past, errors in detereining the demand for individual
types of goods, disruptions in the sale of the goods available at bases and were.
houses and shortcoeings in the distribution and use of cosmodity resources and in
their shifting are being penitted. Above-standard stocks of goods, the storage of
which requires additional expenditures, are accumulating in enormous amounts due

to errors in the detereinetion of consumer dsaend and the drawing up of orders for
goods and to the inadequate level of co-ercial work.

The wholesale bases and enterprises of retail trade are not setting up a barrier
against the penetration of low quality goods, which are not in deaand by the popu-
lation, and are not exercising the right to pay the cost of goods after their a' -
ceptance with respect to quality. The practice of concluding agreements of cor era-
tion with industrial enterprises is being timidly introduced.

A detailed analysis of the state of public dining in the oblast was made in the re—
port of v. n. Suslyek. Its organisation solves not only important econosic. but
also major social problems. It was proposed by the decree of the CPSU Central Coar-
aittee and the USSR Council of Ministers to implusent neasures on the improvement
of the operation of public dining enterprises, the increase of the quality of the
output being produced and the standards of service, the introduction of the indus-
trial technology of preparing food, the expansion of the output of prepared dishes,
convenience foods, culinary and confectionery itena and the developaent of the net-
work of dietary nutrition.

Last year a step forward was taken in this. Public dining inproved soaewhat. In
three trusts of dining roons the centralised production of convenience foods was

POIOHICIALUSEMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organized. the consolidation of a nunber of confectionery shops was carried out.
Five food combines are in operation, which is making it possible to utilize more
efficiently the food resources and to use advanced production technology.

However. there are still many shortcomings and errors here as well. It is necessary
to use the available local sources more completely and efficiently for replenishing
the resources of foodstuffs and to create more subsidiary farms of enterprises and
organizations. In the oblast during the past 2 years an additional 39 pig sties
for 5,700 hogs were put into operation by means of new construction and the renova-
tion of old facilities. The total hog population as compared with 1976 increased
by 5.500 and came to 18,800.

But there are also serious omissions inthis matter. In a number of places the
weight gains are low. The Administration of Public Dining. which is slowly devel-
oping the material and technical base of fattening. has lost its former reputation
with respect to this indicator. In the oblast union of consumer cooperatives and
the railroad departments of workers' supply the hog fattening centers are small.

the production cost of pork is high. Food scrape are being poorly utilized by all
the trade systems.

The city and rayon party cmittees. the city (rayon) soviet executive consitteea
and economic managers need to examine thoroughly the state of affairs in hog fatten-
ing, the development of the hothouse system and pond fishing. Serious attention
should be directed to the purchases of surpluses of agricultural products from the
population. comission made and the operation of kolkhos markets. The share of
kolkhoz markets in the total volume of the retail conedity turnover of the oblast
does not exceed 1.5 percent. while for some cities it is even less. The markets in
Venev, Bolokhovo, Donskoy and several other cities have not been put in good order
and have not been readied for spring and suuer trade. The Oblsst Administration
of .‘larkets is not solving satisfactorily the questions of the development of their
material and technical base. At the same time, the trade organizations should de-
velop more boldly the direct contacts with kolkhoses and sovkhozes on the receipt
of agricultural products at the place of their production and should introduce ev
tensively in practice the container transportation and storage of potatoes. fruits
and vegetables. Now, when a shortage of some products, and especially meat
products and milk. is being felt. it is necessary to trade in them continuously and
in a broad assortment on a comiasion basis.

Last year an agro-industrial association of fruit and vegetable growing was set up
in the oblast. During this time some positive results have been achieved in its
work on the procurement of potatoes. fruits and vegetables. However. great tasks
face the association. Many cucumbers. tomatoes, onions and what are called "other"
vegetables are still being brought in from other oblaats. Moreover, their volumes
are increasing from year to year. due to which the state is suffering great losses
and the demand of the population is being poorly met. In his speech at the meeting
of the aktiv A. P. Usenko. the chief of this association. dwelt on the steps which
have been envisaged for elisinsting these shortcomings.

Both the speaker and those who spoke during the discussion talked about the need

to develop more rapidly the material and technical base of trade and to use better
the capital investments for this. The situation with this is far from well in the
oblast. During the past five-year plan alone assets. for which it would have been

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOICMHﬂKIAI.USE(MVLY

possible to build 10 large department stores. were not assimilated. A similar
situation is also forming during the present five-year plan. At the same time in
the oblast there are 55,000 m2 of floor space and 65,000 seats for public dining
and capacities for the storage of about 60,000 tons of fruits and vegetables less
than the standard. The provision of the population with floor space in the cities
of Tula, Novomoskovak and Donshoy and in Bogoroditskiy, Zaokskiy, Leninskiy and Uz-
lovskiy Rsyons is law. There are especially not enough industrial goods, furniture
and vegetable stores. The load in public dining per seat for the oblast is 14 peo-
ple, while in Bogoroditekiy Rayon it is 88 people, in Uzlovskiy Rayon--73 people and
Yefremovskiy Rayon-38 people. Much work on the development of the public dining
network at industrial enterprises. construction projects and educational institu-
tions still lies ahead; there is much to be done in the countryside.

Trade organizations should perform much work on the renovation of enterprises,
their reequipment and the introduction of advanced trade technology. The task is
being set to increase labor productivity considerably, to mechanize and organize
labor in such a way so as to ensure the further development of the network of

stores and the cmmnodity turnover without the attraction of additional manpower re-
sources .

V. l. Kupriyanov, chief of the Oblast Administration of Trade, dwelt on the means
of further developing the sector. He reported that a plan-program of the complete
rationalization of state trade of the oblast had been recently approved by the
oblast soviet executive committee, the specialists of other trade systems and organ-
izations had taken part in drafting it. The plan calls for the construction and
placement into operation of stores with a floor space of 36,000 m2, the renovation
of 72 existing stores, the creation of 11 shops for the packaging of goods and the
increase of the level of the mechanization of labor to 33 percent. At the same
time the further specialization of operating trade enterprises, the concentration
in cities of the sale of everyday demand goods at stores like the self-service de-
partment store and of technical complex items, fabrics, clothing and footwear and
goods of the children's assortment st specialized stores, department stores and
other large trade enterprises, and the expansion of the sale of large items by
models, with their delivery to the home of customers, are planned.

However, it should be emphasized that much organizing work, the persistence and
initiative of the managers of trade and the necessary assistance of the city and
rayon party committees and the city (rayon) soviet executive committees will be
required for this.

With the first steps of the implementation of the outlined measures on the complete
rationalization of state trade, V. I. Kupriyanov said, we were convinced that this
program should be an intersectorial one. For this reason, as well as taking into
account the experience of other oblasts, for carrying out the effective monitoring
of its timely introduction, in our opinion, an interdepartmental council headed by
one of the deputy chairmen of the soviet executive cornittee should be set up in
the oblast soviet executive committee.

The need in Tula for a large modern department store arose long ago. Its construc-
tion was called for by directive organs. However, the RSFSR Ministry of Trade is
not allocating assets even for the design work. The financing of the second section
of the fruit and vegetable base has been halted. Second Secretary of the Tula

FINI¢HWHCJAI.USECINLY
NOR OFFICJAI.US£1H§LY

City Committee of the CPSU A. I. Afanas'yev indicated these and other needs. Hav-
ing told about the extensive program of setting up multipurpose subsidiary farms.
A. i. Fedorov. chief of the Department of Horkers' Supply of Kireyevskugol'. raised
the question of allocating for them the necessary technical equipment, equipment
for hog-raising complexes and seed for hothouses. In his opinion. it would be
feasible to set up in the Oblast Administration of Agriculture a special division
which would coordinate this work. G. I. Katasonova. director of Store No 121 of
the Proletarskiy Rayon Food Trade Organization. spoke about the need for the im-
provement of the centralized transportation of goods. which facilistes the labor of
the workers of the counter. It is necessary to use more extentively in practice
the sale of goods in packaged form. having fitted out a special shop for this. and
to introduce more rapidly means of mechanization. which would make it possible to
supplant manual labor and to increase the prestige of the occupation of salesper-
son. T. V. Nikolayeva. a cook of Dining Room No 8 of the Second Trust of Dining

Rooms (Tula). showed how profitable it is to centralize the preparation of con-
venience foods.

It is necessary to study in earnest the questions of inprovsment the structure

of the management of trade in the oblast. The formed arrangement of the adminis-
tration in many ways is obsolete and does not meet the requirements of the times.
Much parallelism in the activity of the local organs of the administration is being
permitted in the cities and rayons. which is hindering the efficient use of re-
sources and the material and technical base and is decreasing the responsibility of
personnel for the state of the trade service of the population. In Leninskiy,
Belevakiy. Shchekinakiy and several other rayons a very large number of organiza-
tions have been involved in the functions of the organisation of trade. Many of
them are small and are being used for the wrong purpose. The oblast soviet execu-
tive committee, the Administration of Trade and the rayon and city party committees.
V. H. Suslyak emphasized. must look into this and must approach from a state stand-
point the solution of the questions of the rearrangement of the management of trade.

The great amount of work on the designing and creation of the automated control sys-
tem of state trade of the oblast on the basis of the hardware of the computer cen—
ter of the Central Statistical Administration has to be continued.

Assignments on the improvement of the organization of labor. working conditions and
labor safety procedures. the training of personnel. as well as other measures. which
provide for the strengthening of cost accounting. the tightening up of the policy
of economy. the assurance of the safekeeping of socialist property and the reduc-
tion of losses in trade. have been specified. All this should promote the increase
of the efficiency of the work of the sector and the level of the trade service of
the population.

At the meeting of the aktiv the correct conclusion was drawn: in order to achieve
the further increase of the quality of trade service. it is necessary to improve
the work with personnel and to tighten up order and organization in trade collec-
tives. There are many experienced and conscientious workers here. The work in the
Zapechenskiy Rayon Food Trade Organization, in which the created party and party-
Komsomol groups are actively showing their worth and competition has been skillful-
ly organized. is being organised well. Other collectives and leading workers of
state trade and consumer cooperatives were named at the meeting. It is necessary

FOI:(MHWC1A1.IENE(HVLY
to disseminate advanced know-how sore consistently. to educate everyone on the
basis of the exaqle of the best and to eradicate shortcoeings sore resolutely.

It is iapossible also not to note the fact that as a result of poor educational
work at nany enterprises the standards of the service of workers are low. The
cases of rudeness and an inconsiderate attitude toward cuetoaers. the putting aside
of scare goods, their sale through personal comections. and at tiles speculation
in then are arousing the just indignation of the population. 1.. D. logechuk. chief
of the Adninistration for Coabating the Babeasleaent of Socialist Property and
Speculation of the Oblast Administration of Internal Affairs, indicated this in

The executives and specialists of the obleat trade ayetens are not engaged pr0per-
ly in organising work and are establishing shortco-ings sore than they are eliminat-
ing then. The party, trade union and Koasonol organisations should isprove every-
where the work on the selection, place-eat and training of personnel. especially

of the aiddle level and of asterially liable people, on the increase of the party
stratus among the leading occupations of trade and public dining and on the increase
of the level of organizing and political work. while the control and inspecting
organs, economic managers and the oblast council for the coordination of audits
need to step up state. departmental and public Ionitoring of the work of trade
organizations and enterprises. Only by co-on efforts will we be able to achieve
the elimination of the existing ahortconings and the establisllsnt of the proper
order in the activity of enterprises of trade and public dining.

Responsible tasks have been set for 1982 for the oblaat trade workers. In order to
fulfill then. it is necessary everywhere to iwcrease labor productivity, to iaprove
connercial work and to utilize fully the available reserves. It is necessary to de-
velop extensively in the sector the socialist coapetition in honor of the 60th an-
niversary of the formation of the USSR, achieving a high quality of the service of
the population. Careful preparation for the service of workers during the spring-
sI-er period is the priority task of trade workers.

Measures on the further developaant of trade and the increase of the quality of the

trade service of the population of the oblast were outlined in the adopted resolu—
tion.

7807
C80: 182 7/125

MOI-"GALIISIWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

casual: Goons mm All) 01mm

EFFORTS 1'0 63'! RN rumors ‘10 m unseen!)
“deco! WA “WWI" in mm In 2, Net-Apr 1982 pp 2-6

[Article by A. Ye. Yeti-av. USSR firet deputy nininter of light induetry:
"leproving the Orgenieetion of Production of New Productn")

[text] "The cut in to reine the level of plenning end
economic perforeence. to bring th. into confornity with
the require-onto of the prenent ntege—the etege of nd-
venced nocieline. to nchieve e euhetentiel rine in the ef-
ficiency of nociel production. e teeter pece of ecientific-
tectmicel progreee end e rine of lebor productivity. ir
prove-nut of product quelity end to echieve on thet henie e
eteedy edvnnce of the country'e econouy end the Soviet peo-
ple'n proeperity." (Pro- the decree of the CPSU Centrel
Co-ittee end USSR Council of hinintere entitled ”On In-
proving Plenning end Strengthening the Influence of the
Economic unchenien on Increeeing Production Efficiency end

work Quelity”)

The perty'e econoeic policy in the period of edvenced eocinlien hee been de-
fined hy the 26th CPSU Congrene. It in eieed nt e eteedy riee of the Interiel
end culturel level of the people'e living on the beein of dyneeic developnent
of production. higher production efficiency. teeter ecientific-technicnl prog-
reee. end ell-out inproveoent of the quelity of work in e11 entitiee of the
netionel econony. Light induntry hen en ilportent piece in perforning thie
tenk.

In the yearn of the 10th Five-Yen: Plen the value ot phyeicel output in-
creneed 17.2 percent. end lebor productivity rone 17.8 percent. The entire
growth of output over the 5-yeer period (note then 12 billion rublee) wee
achieved by reieing labor productivity.

In cerrying out the decieione of the petty end government. USSR Hinlegproe
[hinietry of Light Induntry] end the nor]: collectivee of enterprinee in the
nectar hnve peid perticuler ettention to increeeing the output of ecerce prod-
ucte. goode for vhich there in e eeee denend. md children'e productn. All
the induetry'e eubnectorn experienced development during the 10th Pive-Yeer
Plen. hinting equipnent vee euhetentielly reneved. full encheniention of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heavy and laborious processes was carried out. introduction of the conprehsn-
sivs product quality control syst- was comlotod at sore than 1.500 enter-
prises. tho systsa for product certification was inproved. and fulfill-ant of
eight cowrehsnsivs standardisation prograss co-snced.

A great deal of organizational work has been done in the sector to inprove the
quality and assortasnt of products.

The activity of the lsthetic Co-ission for Clothing fashion and Standards of
the Scientific-Technical Comcil of USSR ninlegpronnthe body which coordi-
nates the work of styling. scientific research and designing organisations and
the base enterprises in the field of working out n pronising direction for
fashion and developing the assortnent of productt. has been developing accord-
ing to plan.

A cosprehensive plan of efforts to inrove the sssortnsnt of goods of light
industry was adopted for the first tins in the 10th Five-Year Plan. It in-
cluded scientific-technical developnent projects to create nu types of prod-
ucts from experinental prototypes of fabrics and naterials to erperiaental
lots of finished products. which contributed to tho manufacture of funds-sn-
tally new products and to strengthening the relationship anong the related
suboectors of the industry.

One of the priority tasks facing light industry in the current 5-year plan
continues to be further inrove-snt of the assortnsnt and quality of products.
A number of aeasures have been drafted to perforn this task. For instance. a
procedure has been defined for organising the production of new products
whereby the period of tine fros develop-ant to initial production is loss than
2 years. The following stages have accordingly been envisaged:

i. first stagr-devslopnent of the prerequisites for a pronising fashion line.
developnent of an asaortnent of fabrics. asterials and products in new styles
and colors and their delivery (at all-\mion Isthods seminars) to styling orga-
nizations and base enterprises of the suboectors of the industry. Guided by
the decisions of the esthetic co-ission. the specialists of the related sub-
sectors of the industry create new prototypes of fabrics. naterisls and fin-
ished products on the basis of contracts for creative cooperation;

ii. the second stage of the effort-«asking up fron these prototypes the load-
ing and base collections of fabrics. naterials and finished products-clothing.
footwear and leather accessories. The pork is done so as to take into accomt
the relevant arsortnent groups. the direction of fashion and the prosising de-

velopnsnt of the product six.

The decision on s pronising direction for styles and develop-ant of the as-
sortnent. approved in a plenary nesting of the esthetic conission. is the ba-

sis for the industry in creating stylish new goods.
the d-snd for these goods is formed and studied on the basis of the first ea-

psrinsntal lots of goods and of particularly fashionable products. which are
sold at negotiated prices in nnufacturers' outlets as well as in retail trade.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If organisations in the trade sector reach a favorable conclusion. the new
goods go to KhTS [artistic-technical councils] of the union republics and 11888
Minlegpron. There an assessnent is nade of their quality and the representa-
tive sanples are approved. Industrial collections are nada up of the approved
representative sanples of the new and current assortnents. and the collections
are then certified before presentation at the wholesale trade fair.

So that the work on the assortment and quality is systematic. USSR Hinlegpron
has drafted jointly with Gosstandart [State Ce-ittee for Standards] a pioneer-
ing docuentuGOST (State Standard] 15.007-81 ”Syste- for Product Developnsnt
and Putting Products Into Production. Products of Light Industry. Basic
Principles." The standard calls for the planned creation and introduction

into large-scale production of the new assortnent of products for all subsec-
tors of the industry, as well as for their approval by the constner. This en-
sures that densnd is created and studied before the product is put into pro-
duction.

In connection with the higher requirements which the industry is to nest in
the light of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. USSR Minlagpron has out-
lined a large plan for further work on the creation. study and forecasting of
demand. Work in accordance with that plan. which began in the 10th Five-Year
Plan. has continued in the 11th. The plan calls for expansion of the network
of nanufacturere' outlets. for introduction of a system of conprehsnsive study
and forecasting of public demand for goods. and for conclusion of contracts
between industrial enterprises and the trade organizations concerning the cre-
ation and approval of the new assortnent and the creation of demand for it.

In order to make a systematic study of public demand and the conditions of the
market. research was done in the 10th Five-Year Plan to study and prepare for
introduction in light industry the SKIPS [Systen for Conprehensive Study and
Forecasting of Public Denand] for woolen fabrics and garnents nade from then.
The results of this effort have in part been tested in the light industry nin-
istries of bass}! and RSPSR (city of Rostov-na-Donu).

The system provides for a procedure whereby infornstion is gathered on demand
and is exchanged with organizations in the trade sector. The introduction of
SKIPS in all subsectors of light industry is continuous.

Fashion is becoming one of the inportant criteria of a product's value. IIhsn
fashionable new products are created. than. before their large-scale produc-
tion begins. the demand for those goods has to be created first. It is inor-
tant to make extensive use of advertising and to organize pronotion of new
products.

At this tine. when the market for certain groups of products has becone quite
saturated. the work of forning. studying and forecasting custoner denand is
becoming especially important. This effort makes it possible to achieve naxi-
nun balance between supply and demand and. as a result. to ensure fuller sat-
isfaction of the needs of the public for necessary products. which ultimately
determines production efficiency.

$ 10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

It is toward that goal that esnufacturers' outlets have been organized in
light industry over the last 5 years. Their task is to furnish a close link
between suppliers and consueers. to inrove the advertising and promotion of
goods. and to raise the level of customer treateent. “here are now 65 such
stores operating in the industry in all union republics; their experience in-
dicates that they are having a constructive effect on production. It is in-
dispensable that all no: products be tested in these stores. The release of
the first experimental lots of goods and their sale (approval) need to be or-
ganized before submittal to the Kh‘l’s of einistries and before approval of the
representative samples. In this case the question of satisfying custoeer de-
nand will be resolved effectively and fever errors will be made by putting
into large-scale production goods for which there is no daaand.

At the present time nore than 300 enterprises in the industry have organised
experinental production operations and experimental sections for the aanufac-
ture of the first experimental lots of goods and especially fashionable arti-
cles. To asks this work aore efficient. the USSR State CoInittee for Prices
has approved the "Regulation on Procedure for Establishing Negotiated Prices
on First Experimental Lots of Goods and Bspecially Peahionable Articles and
for Differentiation of Trade Discounts." he first experimental lots of a
product are sold according to the technical conditions or descriptions ap-
proved by the directors of the organisations; the prices are set by agreeaent
between the parties (the producer and consumer).

Definite experience has been acquired in organizing the production and sale of
goods on negotiated terns by certain enterprises of the light industry ainie-
tries of RSPSR. LeSSR. essn. USSR. mas. tease. ‘i'aSSR and ArSSR in 1980 and
1981.

In 8888 goods have been sold at negotiated prices at nine enterprises and in
UkSSR at five.

In RSPSR especially fashionable articles have been manufactured by 95 enter-
prises. including 55 enterprises of the garment industry. Production associ-
ations and enterprises in Latvia and organisations in the trade sector have
concluded contracts for the manufacture and delivery of negotiated prices of
articles under 52 designations. in Armenia under 102 designations. including
articles belonging to u. designations which were sold even in the first half
of 1981.

A new regulation on the activity of the K1118 has been adopted in order to en-
hence their role and responsibility. The nuts are the only body whose deci-
sion predator-nines development of the assortment of goods and the style and

colors of products over the planning period. Under this regulation the Kh‘l's
of USSR Hinlsgprom approve representative samples of new fabrics and asteri-
ale. The representative samples for finished products are approved by the

Kh‘l‘s of the republic ministries. and the councils of USSR Hinlsgprol ens-ine
only the actual groups of products. This is necessary so that it is possible
to work out a uniform artistic and technical orientation in dmlopnent of

this assortment of goods and to ensure the aanufacture of high-quality prod-
ucts. as well as to monitor the level of performance of this of ministries of

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the union republics. During the year about 60 councils are held at which the
best sanples of products are selected and approved.

In recent years coeprehensive concils have becons widespread in addition to
the eectorv‘ds end special-topic councils. Their work is nore effective.
since it affords the possibility of exenining not only finished products. but
also all the eaterials necessary to produce the products.

The experience of the 143511 Hinlegpron deserves attention and widespread dis-
senination. A Kh'l‘s has been specifically set up in the republic for children's
goods; twice a year it exanines all new developnents end the current aseortnent
of fabrics. neterials end finished products sinultaneously. This lakes it pos-
sible to quickly analyze the assortnent of articles for children of various
ages and also to deternine the need for replacement of outdated nateriels and

products.

The results of work on the assortnent serve as the basis for creating indus-
trial collections. which are subnittsd at annual wholesale trade fairs. In
the llth Five-Year Plan provision has been neds for further suspension and re-
newal of the assortment end for inprovenent of the quality of finished prod-
ucts on the basis of widespread introduction of new and inproved models. opti-
mum use of high-quality rev neteriele and supplies. nan-node fibers. progres-
aive nethods of finishing. introduction of new designs and styles. use of up-
to-dete new fabrics (lightweight fabrics. nixed-yarn fabrics. and fabrics with
a nap). artificial leather. velour and split leather. and the use of high-
quality accessories.

0n the basis of the coepreheneive plan of efforts to ieprove the assortnent of
products of light industry in the 1981-1985 period the ministries of the union
republics have drafted neasures that call for expansion of the sssortnent of
finished products.

Thanks to perfornance of these neasures in the first year of the 11th Five-
Year Plan the production of goods in the superior quality category has in-
creased (their relative shere is 13.5 percent). as has the share of products
with improved quality bearing the index II (relative share 10 percent).

The highest results in producing products bearing the state Quality ulen
have been achieved by the enterprises of Arnenia (24.2 percent). 3878! (21.5
percent) and Lithuania (20.62 percent); for goods of inroved quality bearing
the index N this has been done by enterprises of RSTSR (15.6 percent) and Let-

via (M percent).

We should especially note the light ninietry industries of republics where a
rather high and alnost identical level of output has been achieved for prod-
ucts bearing the state Quality bblen and the index Ila-these are RSPSR. 3533.
LaSSR. £881! and UkSSR. The performce of the enterprises of these republics
has been nost valuable and effective.

we should also note that every year there is a substantial renewal of the as-
sort-ant of goods produced at enterprises of Moldavia (57.6 percent) and

12

FOR ONCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lithuania (57.3 percent). Their success has been aided by good organisational
uork. high discipline in carrying out tasks. and widespread creative initia-
tive.

Bosevor. while the effort that has been node deserves favorable praise. vs
cannot fail to speak about the serious shortcoaings that still exist. 11s have
to take into accomt that in recent years there has beat a sharp increase in
the purchasing power of the public. and fashions and nrkst conditions have
changed. As a result the voluna of production and quality of a nudrer of
goods in the industry which have been attained no longer east the d-mds of
custoaers and of the trade sector.

In Uzbekistan end Georgia. for eagle. though the output of products bearing
the state Quality ”la is rather high. production of goods of inroved qual-
ity bearing tho index 11 is only one-half or one-third of that level. which
casts doubt on the correctness of deternining both tho neoneso and also tho
quality of products certified.

In 9 nonths of 1981 SO enterprises in tho industry vere deprived of tho right
to release products belonging to 162 designations bearing the state Quality
nobles.

Temporary prices (index 8) were rescinded ahead of schedule on products he-
longing to 116 designation.

The ninistrios of the union republics should pay serious attention to see that
the renewal of products is realistic. Every year a large number of new prod-
ucts are put into production. The rats of renewal of the assert-sot of goods
for the ninistrios reached 57 percent in 1980. But only sons of then are
awarded the state Quality Enhlse end tho index II (6-12 percent). when a truly
new and inmod product is put into production. it should as a rule be non-
factored in the superior-quality category and with the index 11.

The ﬁns are continuing to porfors at a low level. The vork of the KhTS in
certain subsectore of RSPSR Ministry of Textile Industry and the ninlegproa'o
of 1151’“. 11:888. “8811. 688R. TaSSI. K1881! and mass deserves to be criticized.
The molar of producte rejected by the ”ITS of USSR Hinlegpron and interdepart-
nental co-isaions following up on these ninistriee is 1.0 percent.. In these
republics they are substantially hiking up the valuation of the level of prod-
uct quality. and that results in unsatisfactory preparation of industrial col-
lections for fairs. This results in inconploto sale of goods for the planning
period and accunulation of goods in warehouses for which there is no donand.

It is necessary to increase the level and responsibility of KhTS nenbere for
the decisions they note. the objectivity of assessaent of the products sub-
nitted for production. and correct detersination of the newness of products so
as to take into account the relevance. econonic efficiency and manufacturing
efficiency of their production.

Attention should especially be paid to correct doternination of the level of
product newness. The KhTs determines the newness (renewability) of a product

and places it along goods of ilprovod quality bearing the index 11. At the

13

POROFI-‘ICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sane time. according to data of the 0888 Central Statistical Adninistration.
there is only one-tenth as many products bearing the index N in the total vol-
une of production. The ninistriea of sectors should find out what is the mat-
ter and guide the effort of the relevant authorities.

In order to enhance the role and responsibility of [MS for introduction into
production of fabrics. materials and products of inproved quality that meet
custoners‘ requirements. the Standard Regulation on the Artistic-Techical
Council of the USSR Hinistry of Light Industry has been adopted. Regulations
on the KhTs of USSR Hinlegpron for the subsectors of the industry have been
drafted and approved on the basis of the standard regulation.

Ministries of union republics had an obligation to draw up the list of prod-
ucts on which they approve representative sawles. But not a single republic
ministry has so far done so. Which accounts for the offenses which leS of
ministries of union republics are col-sitting in their work.

The level of organization of production of the first experinsntal lots of
products and especially fashionable articles at negotiated prices still rennin
unsatisfactory.

Most ministries of union republics. industrial associations and enterprises
are slow to organize this effort. Production of such products has not begun
at enterprises of TuSSR and 1.1883. and their production is altogether inade-
quate in U:SSR and KiSSR.

Many light industry ministries of union republics issue planning targets to
subordinate enterprises without assigning then organisational measures and
physical resources.

USSR State Co-ittee for Prices has granted psrnission to enterprises of the
sector to set negotiated retail prices on the basis of annual contracts with
manufacturers' outlets in the systen of USSR Hinlegpron before conclusion of
5-year agreensnts. But only certain enterprises have this per-lesion. The
reason for the insignificant manufacture of new products at negotiated prices
is a failure to fully understand the importance of this matter in a nuinr of
republic organizations and the incorrect treatment of the regulation on proce-
dure for establishing negotiated prices of first experimental lots of products
and especially fashionable articles.

For example. in 01:53:. 35511 and LsSSR the KhTs of ninistries are even now
working jointly with trade. examining the assortment of goods and putting the.
in the category of especially fashionable articles. This violation of the
regulation that has been approved is greatly holding up and delaying the ap-
proval of new goods at negotiated prices. The period fron creation of proto-
types to introduction into production is getting longer. so that the articles
are losing their newness.

Checks run in the republics by specialists of USSR Hinlegpron before the
wholesale trade fair in 1982 showed that in a nunbar of union republics cer-

tain subsectors of the industry were working piecensal in creating new

1‘

F0! omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

products. Year after year gar-ant people have been presenting at the fair
clothing asde nsinly fro- fabrics of the current assortsant. Yet textile peo-
ple are every year renewing at least 700 out of the 3.500 types of fabrics.

So far there is no systenatic and purposive transfer of nuly developed feb-
rics and materials to garnent and footwear enterprises in the republics. All
of this is being done with a lag of nesrly a year.

If new products that correspond go the presot fashion are to be asnufactured
prmtly. the creative collectives of the industry have to be fore responsive
in their work. They have to organize that work so that not a single fabric.
neterial or product is created without a specific destination. In republic
ainistries the adeinistrations (divisions) responsible for the assortnent
should take under their particular oversight the develop-ant of new fabrics
and asteriale. their transfer to related enterprises. and the aanufscture of
new types of products tron then.

The work to expand the network of the industry's Inuiscturers' outlets in
3858. 6883. Less: and ArSSR cannot be called satisfactory. Only one store has
been opened in AaSSR. M81! and 8883. Unfortunately. we have in the industry
very few such stores as "Novinka" in lisv and "Lotos" in Riga. where the inno-
vations of the industry are tested. All the other stores have not yet becone
a laboratory for shaping and studying the damn! for new goods.

The party has given light industry inortsnt tasks in furnishing the necessary
aasortnent of high-quality goods to our country's population. In order to
solve these tasks. we have to substantially inprove the organizational effort
and discipline in perfornsnce of tasks and expand the creative initiative of
the industry's specialists at all levels.

COPYRIGHT: MAL "MAYA WW”. 1982

7045
630: 1827/!”

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”OFFICIALUSIONLY

CONSUMER GOODS PROWCI‘ION AND DISTRIN‘IIOII

UDC 6“.1‘3"603"
CONFECTIONARY INDUSTRY acumvams. PLANS

Moscow WBOPEKARMAYA I KDNDITERSKAYA mmsr' in Russian No 3, 1982 pp 5-5

[Article by N. s. Kudinova, Administration of the Confectionery and Sugar Starch

Industry of the USSR Ministry of the Food Industry: "0n the Develop-ant of the
Confectionery Industry"]

[Text] In the speech of General Secretary of the CPSU Central Co-Iittee Conrade '
L. I. Brezhnev at the Movaber (1981) CPS!) Central Co-ittee Plenul it was indi-
cated that the food progre-non both the econoeic and political level-is the cen-
tral problem of the 11th Five-Year Plan. Its solution involves a high rate of

agricultural production and the intensive deve10pnent of the sectors of industry.
which serve it.

The confectionery industry fulfilled the 1981 plan by 100.6 percent. In all
3,762,500 tone of confectionary itens were produced, of than 23,500 tone were in

excess of the plan. As coepared with 1980 the output of products increased by
81,900 tone, or 2.2 percent.

The RSFSR, Ukrainian SSR, Lithuanian SSR. Belorussian SSR. Moldavian SSR. Kirghiz
SSR. Tejik $511 and Estonian SSR Ministries of the Food Industry achieved the great-
est exceeding of the production plan. They also completely fulfilled the addition-
al assign-eat. The plan was fulfilled by the Kazakh 58?. Ministry of the Food In-
dustry by 100.5 percent. but the additional assigmasnt fell short by 500 tons.

The 1981 plan was not fulfilled by the Uzbek 88!, Georgian 88R. Azerbaijan SSR,
Latvian $58 and Arnenian SSR Ministries of the Food Industry. For the lost part
this was due to the inadequate supply or the uneven supply of several types of raw
materials, particularly nolasses. dairy products. fats. phosphatidea. essences and
vanilla. At the sale tine the growth rate of the production of output with respect
to 1980 in some of these republics was higher than for the sector as a whole. ”Thus.
for the Georgian SSR Ministry of the Food Industry it was 3.5 percent. the Azer-
baijan SSR Ministry of the Food Industry--3.0 percent, while for the USSR Ministry
of the Food Industry it was 2.2 percent. The Ukrainian SSR. Xasahh SSR. Lithuanian
SSR, Moldavian SSR. Tsjik SSR and Turk-en SSR Ministries of the Food Industry have
a sufficiently high rate.

The plan on sold products was fulfilled by the sector by 101.6 percent, the in-
crease as against 1980 was 2.9 percent. A significant mount of retail products

16

mmmmv
roe OFFICIAI. [.83 ONLY

was additionally produced as a result of the inprovuent of the aseortnent. For
the RSFSR Ministry of the Food Industry. for mph, in the mount of 27 nillion
rubles with an assigusent of 7 nillion rubles. for the Ukrainian 88!! Ministry of
the Food Industry in the anount of 12 nillion rubles as against 7 nillion rubles.

The inprovenent of the structure of the assortnent eade it possible to increase as
con-pared with 1980 the production of candies end glared chocolate by 10.8 percent
(to 373,000 tons), chocolate. toffee and candied fruit and fruit paste its-s re-
spectively by 24.5. 8.5 and 6.8 percent. Local. nontraditional types of raw eate-
rials were used: apple powder. seal nede fro. puffed groats. puree nsde froe

wild apples. powder nade fros grape seeds, puree nede fro- beeta and carrots and
free nountain ash. recooked carrots and beats and others. however. the production
volunes of itsns with the use of local types of raw nateriale are still snail. The
reserves. which pronote the efficient consunption of raw nateriels. particularly
cocoa beans. were not put cospletely to use.

The yield of ground cocoa fro. cocoa beans on the average for the sector is 83 per-
cent. At the sane tine at theTrostyenets Ukraine Plant it was 81.6 percent. at
the Aktyubinsk and Alisa-Ate factories-41.7 percent, at the Kuybyshev Rossiya Fac-
tory--8lo percent. The yield of cocoa butter fron ground cocoa for the sector is
45.3 percent. The highest yields were achieved by the Kuybyshev Rossiya Factory--
47.8 percent. the L'vov Svetoch Factory—67.2 percent. the Karagande Factory—

b7.6 percent. this indicator is more than 1.6 percent at the Gor'kiy Association.
the Pern' Factory, the mar'kov Oktyabr' Factory. the Trostyanets Ukraine Plant

and the Vinnitaa Factory. The increase of the yield of cocoa butter fron 1,000 tons
of processed cocoa beans by 1 percent nakes it possible to produce in retail prices
products worth 380.000 rubles. Consequently. the increase of this indicator at
enterprises with low yields to the average sectorial indicator will increase the
retail cot-sodity turnover by approximately 6.7 nillion rubles a year.

At some enterprises the content of cocoa butter in the cot-sercial and production
cocoa cake also considerably exceeds the recipe norn. In particular. at the Yere-
van Confectionery and Hacaroni Conbine. the Yengiyul' Latest Association. the
Kirovabad Association. the Alna-Ata. Aktyubinsk and lustenay factories.

The work on changing rte assortment of items containing cocoa products. particularly
with respect to the group of chocolate and chocolate items. was carried out inade-

quately.

Thus. the output of chocolate without additives (Sport. Detskiy, Vanil‘nyy) in-
creased in 1980 as conpared with 1979 by 2,100 tone. or 24 percent, while as con-
pared with 1978 it increased by 36-fold. The proportion of chocolate without ad-
ditives in its total output is highest at the Rot Front Association. Lenkondpron.
the Frunze, Dushanbe and Yangiyul' factories and the Tbilkonditer Association. At
the sense tine a number of enterprises are not producing at all cocoa-consuning
chocolate without additives: the Gor'ltiy Association, the Ufa Factory. the Trostya-
nets Ukraine Plant. the Kaunas Factory. the Tallinn Kalev Factory and the Kirovabad
Association.

In all 16 enterprises of the sector produce Assorti candies. here the consump-
tion of cocoa beans per ton of candies ranges fron 510-540 kg (the Kuybyshev Ros-
siya Plant and the Karaganda Plant) to 875 kg (the Dushanbe Shirin Plant) depending

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFFICIALUSBONLY

on with what filling the Assorti is produced. Cocoa beans are being consumed most
efficiently at the Kuybyshev sossiya Association as a result of the high yields of

ground cocoa and cocoa butter, which have been achieved here, and- the proper
selection of the assornaent.

For 1982 it is planned to produce 3,762,000 tons of confectionery itas. For the
purpose of improving the assortment and improving the product quality asaigmenta
have been established for the ministries of the food industry of the union repub-
lics on the production of candies, glazed chocolate, with ere-I, liqueur, fruit.

whipped and combined fillings (145,000 tons), caransls with liqueur, cream, whip-
ped, milky and cooling fillings (296,000 tons), rich cookies, pulled cookies.

cookies like Yubileynoye. Zemlyanichnoye and Radushnoye. crackers and biscuits
(200,000 tons).

The basic directions of the developnent of the sector for 1982 are the following:
the maxim saving of raw material and material resources by the reduction of
losses at all the stages of the production. storage and transportation of raw
materials and materials and the improvement of accounting and nonitoring;

the decrease of the sugar content of items. primarily as s result of the change of
the assortment of cookies. caramels and candies. In the group of cookies it is
necessary to decrease the production of the varieties Shaklaaatnoye, Chaynoye.

K chayu. Populyarnoye, Oktyabr' and Sakharnoye with a consuption of more than

230 kg of sugar per ton and to increase the output of cookies with a sugar content
of up to 200 kg (Rucheyek. Polyanka. Yabloko. Garmoniya, Zenit);

the efficient use of cocoa products. which envisages the increase of the yield of
cocoa butter; the decrease of its content in conercial cocoa cake to 17 percent
and in production cocoa cake to 12 percent; the decrease of the output of choco-
late without additives and of Asaorti with chocolate-consuming fillings;

the extensive use of local types of raw materials, whey-concentrated and dry.
f mic and vegetable powders, puffed groats. soybean and bleached flour. surface-
active substances. fruit and berry half-finished products and so on.

Assignments on the introduction of standard plans of the organization of labor and
the brigade form of the organization of the stimulation of labor with allowance
made for the coefficient of labor participation have been established for the min-
istries of the food industry of the union republics for the purpose of the economy
of manpower resources and the improvement of the organisation of labor.

The workers of the confectionery industry of the country will do everything in
order to accomplish the tasks set by the November (1981) CPS!) Central Cor-ittee

Plenum.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Legkaya i pishchevaya promyshlennost'", "lGIlsbopekarnaya
i konditerakaya promyshlennost'". 1982

7807
cso: 1827/93 END

18

FOR OﬂiClAl. USE ONLY