FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10652
12 July 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM

FOUO 6/82

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR 0FF1C1A1.USEGDNLY

JPRS [u

12 Jul)

HORLDMIDE REPORT
Teaaoaxsn

FOUO 6/82

CONTENTS

WEST EUROPE

PEARCE

Syria, Carlos, Yugoslavia, Swiss Ties Examined
(Jacques Duquesne; LB POINT, 26 Apr 82) ..................

Harbeuf: Identity of woman with Swiss Passport Sought
in Yugoslavia
(LE PIGARO. a Kay 82) ....................................

Savasta Relates Red Brigade Ties with PLO, French Network
(LB rtcano, a May 82) ....................................

ITALY

Role of Paris Language School in Italian Terroris-
(EUROPBO, various dates) .................................

'Hyperion' School. by Marcella Andreoli
'Hyperion' Reply
Andreoli, NUOVA POLIZIA Replies,

by Marcella Andreoli

SPAIN

Terrorism in Spain-Chapter I
(EL TERRORISHO EN ESPANA, 1982) ..........................

Terroris- in Spain--Chapter 4
(EL Tennonrsno EN ESPANA, 1982) ..........................

Assassinations by ETA-H May slow work at Lenoni:
(Ander Lanaburu; CLHBIO l6, 17 May 82) ...................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

SYRIA, CARLOS. YUGOSLAVIA, SWISS TIES EXAMIN-
Paris LB POINT in French 26 Apr 82 pp 56-61
[Article by Jacques Duquesne: "The Onslaughts of Fear"]

[Text] One dead and 63 injured in the incident on Rue
Harbeuf in Paris. Agonizing scenes. This dramatic
onslaught of international terrorism again increases
the fear of the French people. It makes insecurity the

number 1 political issue. This gives new prominence to
the Defferre-Badinter controversy.

Here are four scenes from a Black Thursday.

The first is tragic. almost unbearable. At 9 am Thursday morning. a booby-
trapped car explodes on Rue Harbeuf in Paris. a few steps away from the
Champs-Blysees. There is immediate panic : cars burn, a gas line explodes,
a conflagration breaks out in a restaurant. shop signs and windows fall on
passersby who are running in every direction, panic-stricken and stained with
blood. The damage is considerable, debris is scattered over hundreds of

meters; the hand brake lever from the boobytrapped car will be found in the
Europe 1 courtyard. far from here.

One woman. Nelly Guillerme, age 30. is dead. Near her a young man of 18

has almost lost a leg. torn off by the explosion. Sixty injured persons will
be hospitalized. At this hour. when the office crowd is on the way to work.

it is a miracle that there were not more victims. There is also an elementary
school of Rue Harbeuf which had just closed its doors.

From all evidence. the instigators of the attack wanted to produce slaughter
in the very heart of Paris.

One other reason prompted them to pick this location. The offices of the
paper AL HATAN AL ARAB! (THE ARAB NATION) are located on the fourth floor

of the building at 33 Rue Harbeuf in front of which the boobytrapped car was
parked.

AL HATAN AL ARABI is not just any paper. It is located in Paris because it
had to flee Lebanon due to Syrian threats during the civil war which ravaged

1
IN)! OIWHCJAI.IJSIICM§LY
FOR OFFKJAL USE ONLY

the country in 1976. There was a price on the head of its owner, Valid Abu
Zahr, a Sunni Moslem Lebanese. in Damascus. Even in Paris, the paper was no
longer published in peace: last 19 December, an explosive device made of
three sticks of TNT was defused literally at the last minute in front of its
premises. This did not intimidate the journalists: they had been the first
in the Arab world to dare to run an investigation by Jean-Louis Peninou in
LIBERATION in February asserting that the assassination of Louis Delamare.
French ambassador to Beirut. on 6 September 1981, had been ordered by Syrian
autLorities.

The Shadow of Carlos Over the Palais de Jusrice

The second scene: while the bomb was exploding on Rue Marbeuf. an impressive
array of police was falling into place around the Palais de Justice: mobile
police. helmeted rolice wearing bulletproof vests, and even men from the
national security force specially trained for hostage situations. This is
because the 30th summary court is preparing to sentence three persons of note:
they are called "Carlos' friends." Protected by bulletproof glass, there is
the Swiss Bruno Breguet, age 31. previously sentenced to 12 years in prison;
Magdalena Kopp, the small pale German with curly hair. well known by police
who track terrorists; and their French accomplice. Michel Jacquot, a former
accountant linked to members of the movement for Corsican independence (see

LB POINT No 497). It was to obtain the release of the Swiss-German couple
arrested on 16 February for possession of a S-kilo bomb lacking only a detona-
tor, that Carlos. the orchestrator of many of international terrorism's
demented attempts. wrote to Gaston Defferre on 1 March. The letter was signed
with his fingerprints and was in the form of an ultimatum: if the government
does not let them go quietly (as other governments have already done for
other friends of Carlos), France will pay--in the form of deadly attacks, of

course 0

 

l. Bruno Breguet and his mother. A 5-kilo bomb.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FHFIAI. NSF. ONLY

As the letter had been revealed by a curious leak. the government was not

able to give in. So. there they are, before the judges; but they are not
saying anything. Except for Michel Jacquot who, mocking and vehement. intends
to free himself of responsibility.

But, now something unexpected and unacceptable happens. While the judge calls
for unusually light penalties--3 years minimum for Breguet. 2 years for Kopp--
the defendants' lawyer. Hr Jacques Verges. will deliver an astonishing
defense. if the term can be employed. in the vehement tone for which he has
been known in courts for close to 3 decades. "Whatever your opinion." he
shouts to the judges. "my clients will get out of prison and go home. You
know it. Their friends will not stop until they are released. And in a day.

a week. or a month. it will no longer be possible for the government not to
release them."

 

2. Jacques Verges, interpreter of an ultimatum.

The observation is clear. But. never before has a lawyer been heard to thus
interoret a terrorist ultimatum before a French court. Mr Verges' business
obviously prevented him from going to Rue Marbeuf to see what an explosion of
several kilos o‘ explosives actually means. As it also probably prevented
him from going to the Saint-Germain-des-Pres Drugstore one Sunday in Septem-
ber 1974 when a grenade attack commanded by Carlos caused 2 deaths and 3h
casualties. That time. Carlos won. He wanted to secure the release of a
Japanese man being held by French authorities. They had refused him until
then despite the seizure of hostages at the French Embassy in La Haye on

[3 September I974. They gave in the day alter the Drugstore attack.

So. would Carlos. the man who said in 1979 in the only interview he ever
granted (to AL HATA AL ARABI. deservedly): "The Revolution is my supreme
euphoria." the man who calls himself Ilitch in memory of Lenion. and who is

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

considered the number 1 international terrorist. would the elusive Carlos be
responsible for the Rue Marbeuf incident? On Thursday, no one yet dared to
assert this. But no one is excluding the possibility quite to the contrary.
Things are not simple, we shall see.

A Syrian Commando in Paris

The third scene: when the boobytrapped car explodes on Rue Harbeuf. Gaston
Defferre is in his office with the members of his staff--a routine meeting.
But. when the minister learns of the attack. he cannot help but think of the
reports that the administration has received in recent days. Memos from the
head of foreign security (formerly the $0803) sent to the Elysee Palace
reported on acts of retaliation planned against France by certain Arab
countries from the Front du Refus. beginning with Syria. following Francois
Hitterrand's trip to Israel. Syria. who no one any longer doubts had the
French ambassador to Beirut, Louis Delamare, executed by its hit-en (first.
as a warning. some rockets were fired on the embassy gardens).

It took months of investigation to establish this. since at one time the
possibility of Iranian or Iranian-Syrian action had been raised. but it is

now a certainty. A certainty which was echoed in a TF1 broadcast on Rednes-
day evening. just on the eve of the Rue Marbeuf attack. A broadcast which
was widely appreciated by the French colony in Beirut: they have been
reproaching Paris authorities for having bristled for too long after the
ambassador's death before allowing "escapes" from the Syrian authorities--or
organizing them--wirhout at the same time taking any concrete actions toward
Damascus.

it must be known that in Beirut 200 French cooperatives and 80 embassy
employees are experiencing a concern close to panic. Since a blast of 5 kilos
of explosives destroyed the French Cultural Center on 15 March leaving

several wounded. Especially since. on Thursday 15 April, the embassy
cryptographer. Guy Cavallo. age 28. and his young wife Caroline. age 25 and

6 months pregnant, were killed in their home by two bursts of machinegun fire
from a young blonde woman accompanied by two accomplices. Finally since. on
Sunday night April 18th. an embassy department head. Gilbert Houze. age 47.
seems to have been threatened by another attack.

In all these crimes or attempts, the action of individuals controlled by the
Syrians seems obvious.

After Beirut. Vienna. 0n the night of April 18th, bombs explode in the
Austrian capital: they damage the Air France office and the embassy. And on
Thursday morning when Gaston Defferre is told of the explosion in Rue Harbeuf,
he had just received a report from the French security police indicating that
the two bombs in Vienna could hear the Syrian signature.

This is not nll. A memo from the police. dated about 15 days earlier. had
informed the government that a Syrian commando was going to arrive in Paris to
take action against opponents of the Damascus regime. and that an attack would
take place precisely on 22 April. Following this memo. police patrols had

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been ordered to watch the residences of the heads of AL HATAN AL ARABI and the
paper's headquarters. They were not very effective.

The announcement of the attack therefore does not surprise the minister.

From then on, everything will happen very quickly. Everything is decided in
the morning between the Elysee Palace. the minister of the interior and the
Quai d'Orsay. And the statement which Gaston Defferre reads to the press at
midday has been reviewed by Francois Hitterrand himself. On the one hand.
it seems to discard the theory of retaliation by Carlos. in speaking of
"settling accounts of which France is unaware." 0n the other. it implicates
Syria by announcing the expulsion of two of its diplomats from Paris and the
recall of France's ambassador to Damascus for consultation. "When the
government does this." it adds. "it is because it thinks it must." This is
the first time that a European government has dared to make such a decision
following an act of terrorism.

In the afternoon. Claude Cheysson. minister of external relations. will explain
that the actions of these diplomats. even if they are not "necessarily linked"
to Thursday's attack. "were not acceptable." One of them. the military
attache. had organized a knife and axe attack against Syrian opponents of the
regime who were demonstrating in Paris at the beginning of March. In our
times. so goes diplomacy. As for the cultural attache. the paper which the
bomb found at AL HATAN AL ARABI in December was wrapped in. was purchased by
him. But. there has been no success so far in establishing his personal
responsibility.

At the Burial of a Minister

Between noon and 1 pm, a solemn Claude Cheysson. with drawn features. was
attending a mass at the Church of Saint-Louis—des-Invalides in memory of Louis
de Guiringaud. his predecessor at Quai d'Orsay. In the nave. the political
landscape seems unreal: in the first row. Valery Giscard d'Estaing and his
wife; Raymond Barre and his wife are sitting with the chief ministers of the
former administration.

At the end of the service--this is the fourth scene--Claude Cheysson walks up
before the altar which is decked with a bundle of tricolored flags. Speaking
without notes. distressed by the suicide of Guiringaud. a friend of his for

35 years. he mentioned the missions of the former minister to war torn
Lebanon. How. then. could he avoid thinking of his own anguish regarding the

hornet's nest in the Middle East to which France is again paying a heavy
tribute?

Nations Which Arm Killers

For. from all evidence. everything holds in the terrorist incidents which have
followed in succession these past few months. In the Rue Harbeuf incident.

of course. at the end of last week the investigators had not established a
direct link with Syrian enterprises. They only knew that the boobytrapped

car. an Opel registered in Vienna. had been rented 3 days earlier from Hertz

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm UI'I-ll IAI. USE. ONLY

of Ljubljana (Yugoslavia) by a woman who presented false Swiss papers in the
name of Hargrit Staedelman. It had been parked at midnight Wednesday by a
man with a dull complexion.

But. two facts had really struck the police:

This is not the first time that terrorists have come through Yugoslavia.
The perpetrators of the Antwerp attack (a boobytrapped pickup truck had

exploded last 20 October in the diamond dealers' district, killing three
persons) came via Switzerland and Zagreb.

The use of false Swiss passports. with German Swiss identities, was a
specialty of the notorious Baader gang.

Among these facts. the police find a new element which supports one of their
convictions. In fact, for 1 year they have been convinced that new terrorist
connections were being established in France. And they have proof that close
ties have been formed between international networks and French activist
movements. The last issue of LB POINT mentioned numerous details supporting
the existence of this "dark network of terrorism."

However. this network would not be complete without the addition of some
nations as accomplices. The overall configuration is as follows: the
terrorists. specialists brought in from the Middle East. land in France to
perform punctual missions; the activist movements supply them with hideouts,
stolen cars. weapons. and possibly false identification. Some embassies also
obtain ammunition for them. The recently arrested German terrorists from the
Baader gang went to the embassy of a Middle Eastern country to get their
explosives. Explosives such as "penthrite" which are difficult to obtain
sometimes seem to come through there. It was penthrite which was used at Rue
Copernic, and also as the raw material for the bomb discovered in the car
belonging to "Carlos' freinds." Breguet and Kopp. 0n the other hand. it is
not yet known (not all the tests have been completed yet) whether penthrite
was used in the attack on the Capitole.

The countries whcih supply terrorists with this kind of logistical support
obviously do not do it for free. Quite often they are also the instigators
of the attacks. They just go to specialized teams for a "contract." as it is
called within the trade. In Beirut, the world capital of terrorism. they are
common. There are friends of "sons" of Carlos. of course. but also pro-
lranian groups. Also. last but not least. in Damascus there is the
Palestinian rebel Ahu Nidal, whose story is worth a digression because it is
significant. Abu Nidal, sentenced to die by Yasir Arafat's Fatah organized
several attacks on leaders of the PLC. which sentenced him to the death
penalty. However. Abu Nidal has been living in Damascus for close to 1 year.
Arafat continues to ask the Syrians to render him harmless. but they are
being careful not to. For they thus have a major asset in hand for overall
negotiations with the PLO. Among "Arab brothers."...

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Curlns Returns to the Scene--ln Damascus

The terrorist offensive against France is perhaps not Syria's action alone.
Francois Mitterrand's trip to Israel aroused concern in other Arab capitals.
And a man like Bali al-Hasan. one of Yasir Arafat's advisers who is

onsidered moderate. told the Lebanese magazine MONDAY MORNING at the beginning
of last week: "France's new position on the Middle East creates grave threats
for peace in the area. By being the first European head of state to visit
Israel. Mitterrand has put an end to this country's isolation. and the blood
which has been shed since then is the result. In fact. this trip gave Begin

a freer rein in the occupied territories. We consider Hitterrand’s position
as actually hostile to the PLO."

But. although Syria (which is currently experiencing the greatest domestic
difficulties) is not alone, it does intend to be in the forefront in this
hattle--to retain leadership of the Front du Refus. and possibly to settle
other accounts. Isn't France in the process of rebuilding the nuclear
reactor at Tamouz. thus rendering service and prestige to the Iraqi regime,
Syria's sworn enemy? Didn't France pass a very harsh judgment on the Iranians
who tried to assassinate the Shah's former prime minister. Shapur Bakhtiar.
while Syria supports Khomeyni's regime?

With regard to the Rue Harbeuf incident. an informed observer of Middle
Eastern affairs also explains: "Its instigators were killing two birds with
one stone. since this is a quarter where Arab interests. refugees from the
Middle East. and Arab travelers in certain large luxury hotels are very
numerous. So. they will be frightened. Possibly, they will be prompted to
leave Francc--which has become unsafe-dwith their funds." It was the poet
Georges Schehade. A Lebanese fittingly. who once wrote: "A man who is afraid
is effective and dangerous if you knew how to use him."

What role does Carlos play in these subtle and deadly games? Although there
is a "Carlos myth.” and although any explosion is sometimes too easily
attributed to the Venezuelan killer. Carlos is not a myth. Contrary to what
is sometimes written. he is not dead. He was identified very recently
abroad. The French police seem convinced that although he lives in Tripoli
most of the time. he now works for the Syrians. having found the PLO too
moderate for some time now. Generally contenting himself with the role of a
“professor of terrorism," he trains young rebels who are sometimes called
“sons of Carlos"; he even supplies them with b' wk documents signed. in his

fashion. with his fingerprints to give more weir to the threats his troops
may issue.

The connection between Carlos and the Syrians in the recent attacks has not

been clearly established. But--and this is the important thing-the French
Government has become certain that at least 10 attacks committed over the past

months were financed by the Syrians. And, in replying to a visitor who
questioned him on Thursday on the expulsion of the two diplomats from the
country. Francois Mitterrand quoted the Arab proverb: "If you beat your wife.
you may now know why. But she. she knows."

7
FOR OFTWCIAL.USEIDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USP, ONLY

 

3. Carlos in Algiers in 1976. Two birds with one stone.

A Cancer Feeding on Itself

This presentation of international terrorism carries two lessons. The first
is that it is now a matter of a type of cancer which is feeding on itself.

In other words. it is nrowinu by always just escaping its instigators. The
terrorism which originated in the Middle East has already-—the events of

past months seem to prove it-—partially gotten out of the Palestinian control.
Likewise, one day it will go beyond the Syrians. The history of the past two
decades has shown that it was impossible for financers of terrorism to control
it for long. It always slips out of their hands. of course. to survive. it

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-ﬂll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

needs a favorable environment providing aid and protection. It will always
find one because there are always special forces interested in destabilizing
some nation or some democracy (for democracies are much more susceptible to
terrorist action). And. among secret services. the K63 and Colonel Qadhdhafi's
forces are always ready: in their eyes any activity which destabilizes the
west is good. even when they do not exercise complete control over its

perpetrators.

The second lesson. which must be continuously repeated. is related to the
first: it is that terrorism is a major problem for Western governments. Of
course. France has been more or less spared (except for Corsican incidents)
terrorism which originates domestically. There are numerous reasons for this
good fortune: some have to do with the nature of French society itself.
others with circumstances of history (in a recent interview with the weekly
L'UNITE. Alain Ceismar, former leader of May 68. cited the proximity of
Leftists "to a certain number of people of very high moral character such as
Sartre. Foucault, Clavel and others." among other reasons, but the actions of
certain ministers of the interior may also be added to this.

But. this is only relative good fortune. because the borders are permeable:
international terrorism can prosper in France as elsewhere and be dangerously

contagious.

Indeed. this has been seen these past few months. The sum total of attacks
perpetrated in the capital. although not numerically greater than last year.
is both more dramatic and bloodier. On 12 November. Christian Chapman.
American charge d'affaires in Paris. escaped an attack. And. for a week.
bombs were bursting just about everywhere in public places: "Fouquet's."
Roissy. the Champs-Elysee Drugstore. the Berlitz cinema. the Lyon station.
East Station, and so on. All these bombs, or almost all of them, would have
been capable of killing. and it was a miracle that no victims were recorded.

On 18 January. Charles R Ray. United States assistant military attache. was
killed. A deed claimed by the Lebanese Armedkevolutionary'Factions. a group
which is in fact connected to the Syrians. In February, the FLNC alone made
43 attacks. In March. two policemen were killed in an incident in the Basque
region. Finally. on 3 April. Yacov Barsimantov. secretary of the Israeli
Embassy. was assassinated in his home. There again. responsibility was
claimed by the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Factions. in other words the

Syrians.

We see that the process is clear: international terrorism. which causes many
deaths. grafts itself onto domestic terrorist activity which until now has

fortunately been less bloody. But. between the two. a complicity is formed.
In the past few weeks. connections between Carlos' friends. the FLNC. the

Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Factions. and Direct Action (which reappeared in
December. making attacks on luxury stores in Paris). have been demonstrated

(see LE POINT Nos 699 and 500).

For, terrorism. whether national or international. has an incredible
exponential effect on the French people's feeling of insecurity. In fact. the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

important thing--politically--is what passes through the minds of France's
citizens. The fear caused by attacks such as the one in Rue Marbeuf. of which
the media immediately broadcast frightful images. revives the fears and anguish
aroused by ordinary crimes-~thefts, assaults, burglaries--of which the French
people are informed daily by word of mouth and with which they are obsessed.
This contributes to making safety their primary concern.

Why wouldn't they be obsessed when the number of offenses in the Paris area
increased by 25 percent between the first quarter of 1981 and the first
quarter of 1982? And. this rate would be even higher if they hadn't decided
between these two dates to stop including certain offenses in the statistics;
and especially if all crimes were reported.

And Delinquency Added to Fear

Why wouldn't public anxiety increase when the number of complaints filed in a
city like Nice had doubled in 1 year? Between the 1st quarter of 1981 and the
[st quarter of 1982. house break—ins increased by 80 percent in Nice, 150
percent in Cannes. and 172 in Antibes. Violent theft (mostly street assaults
without weapons) increased by 86 percent in Nice. 11 percent in Cannes. and
152 percent in Antibes. In this area, all records for increases in petty
crimes or larceny have been smashed.

How could the French people help being obsessed with safety when they tell
each other unbelievable tales? Here, they are emptying the pockets of all

the passengers on a subway car. Somewhere else (it was outside Marseille last
week), a railcar was forced to stop by a pile of stones and boards placed on
the track by youths who then, as if in a bad Western. assaulted the car and
rushed in to insult and threaten the passengers, without touching or robbing

them.

Somewhere else. when a young delinquent was arrested by the police. he was
saved by a mob of his friends: he took off. handcuffed behind his back;
three policemen were injured. Everywhere in the big cities. stores are
robbed. windows are broken. women don't dare to go out at night, apartments
are burglarized, bags and briefcases are stolen right up to the office door.
and these are no longer reported.

More than ever. fear is part of daily life. And. it is to this atmosphere

or fear, of obsession with fear, that the terrorist assaults are being added.
Now everything takes on another dimension. Now security becomes the number 1
issue. And, the Defferre-Badinter controversy. eclipsed for a moment by the

Rue Marbeuf incident. regains its disturbing prominence.

COPYRIGHT: "Le Point" 1982

9693
C80: 6131/504

10
FOR 0FFH1AI.USEi0NLY
NARBEUP: IDENTITY OP.HOHAN WITH SHTSS PASSPORT SOUGHT IN YUGOSLAVIA

Paris LE PIGARO in French 4 May 82 p 13

[Text] Police of the crime squad investigating the Rue Marbeuf attack last week
went to Ljubljana, where the boobytrapped vehicle had been rented. however,
they have now returned to Paris without having found out anything to identify
the perpetrators. It appears, therefore, that this trip did not come up with

anything new to help identify the members of the terrorist network which carried
out the attack.

The main objective of the French police officers, assisted by their Yugoslav
colleagues, was to try to identify the young woman who rented the orange Opel on
19 April from the Hertz company at Bernik-Ljubljana airport. She had presented
a Swiss passport under the name Margit Staedelman, born in 1950 in Zurich. and
resident of that city. It was evidently a false identity.

The investigators, who had brought with them to Yugoslavia photographs and
identification sheets provided by Interpol of young women identified by judicial
police of Western countries as members of terrorist organizations, showed them
to employees of the Hertz rental office. However, the latter did not recognize
any to be the young brunette woman, about 30, who had rented the orange Opel.

The French and Yugoslav police also showed the photographs to hotels in the
city. However, the investigation was unsuccessful: No trace of Margit
Staedelman was found. The investigations in Ljubljana are not over, however.
The Yugoslav police are now going to check the lists of passengers who arrived
at Bernik-Ljubljana airport on 19 April and preceding days. The young woman

who rented the Opel probably did arrive by plane, and if the check is successful
at least her arrival date will be known.

Nevertheless, that will not answer the question that police have been asking
ever since the beginning of the investigation: Why did a terrorist group choose
Ljubljana in Yugoslavia as the place to rent a car which was to be boobytrapped
in Paris? The only apparent explanation is that it was an attempt to confuse
the search during the initial hours of the investigation, since checks on a
vehicle are more difficult aboard. The police point out that the motorcycle
used in the Rue Copernic synagogue attack had been bought in Paris, and this
enabled identification of the terrorist, who was carrying a false Cypriot
passport under the name Alexander Panadryu.

ll
The association of co-owners of the building at 33 Rue Harbeuf, as well as the
neighbors of the paper AL HATAN AL ARABI, had filed suit for the eviction of the
paper from the two apartments it had rented. However, the suit was disuissed by
Marcel Caratini, presiding judge of the Paris civil court. The applicants

were concerned at being next to the paper which had been the target of the 22
April attack which killed one and wounded several. However. the ruling stated:
'since the attack on the paper AL "ATAN AL ARAB! was by a third party. one cannot
on the basis of this association assign to the intended victim of the attack
responsibility for the abnormal risks of proximity. Though the ruling judge

can order the eviction of a tenant under exceptional circumstances, even when
there is a continuing lease, this can only be done when it is the fault of the
tenant himself that his presence has become a cause for concern.‘

9920
C80: 6131/506

12
SAVAS‘I'A RBLA’PBS RED BRIGADE TIES WITH PLO, Pm REM!!!
Paris L3 PIGARO in French 4 May 82 p 13

[Text] In Rome yeste:day, 'converted' terrorist Antonio Savasta referred to the
”French network“ maintained by the Red Brigades as part of their presuned con-
tacts with the FLO.

Savasta was in the third day of his lengthy testinony at the trial of the ter-
rorists who first kidnapped, then assassinated, the leader of the Christian
Democratic Party, Aldo Moro, in 1978. Savasta, whose revelations had made pos-
sible the breaking up of the core of the Red Brigades, expanded on the accusations
he had made on Friday.

He confirmed, despite the vehement denials his statements had elicited in Beirut,
that the PLO on two occasions delivered significant quantities of weapons to the
Red Brigades, after contacts had been established in France.

The first delivery was reportedly made by sea from the Riddle Bast, the other
via the Italian-French border, and both were nanaged'by Mario Horetti, the leader
of the Red Brigades, who was arrested a year ago and is also one of the accused
in this trial.

Though without providing any new names, Savasta corrected the presiding judge,
who had used the tern “agency" in the course of questioning him about this net-
work: He said, "I have never used that term because what there was in France
was only a network of comrades and not a central organization like the CIA.”

He explained that the 'Prench network' ceased to exist after the arrest of
Horetti a year ago. "The break in the movement which followed was decisive. it
was no longer possible to obtain the telephone number of the PLO representatives
in France or to contact then."

He said that the French network had also made it possible to help in the escape
of members of the Brigades being hunted by the police. He added that the
relations between the Red Brigades and the PLO were ”equal to equal.”

Savasta denied that there had been any contact between the Red Brigades and
either the Israeli secret services or Libya. A Palestinian offer to train

Brigade members in camps in North Africa was declined by the Red Brigades,

saying that the border crossings would be too difficult.

13
Finally, Savasta denied any formal relationship with the Basque Fatherland and
Liberty Group IETA]--military, which the Red Brigades regarded as 'too
nationalistic." He had, however. known a certain "Diego'I of the Comunist
Fighting Formations (close to the Red Brigades) who had received military
training in the Pyrenees. (APP)

(These statements at the trial of Aldo Moro's murderers, as reported by APP,
give details of the former ties between the Brigade members and the PLO repre-
sentatives assigned to Paris. A “comrades network“ established in France
around 1978 would have made it possible to establish a supplies and arms channel
and a fallback network for the Red Brigades members. The statements also
revealed that the channel for arms from the Middle East and the support network
was run by Palestinians led by an Italian. There is no indication of French
participation. However, during this same year, 1978, six Italian terrorists
were arrested in France. including Olga Girotto and Marco Donat-Cattin, leaders
of Prima Linea [First Line], a dissident branch of the Red Brigades. In the
same period, about 20 members of the Action Directe movement were also arrested,
and at Brusc, in the Var, two Italian members of the Red Brigades, accompanied
by Mohand Hamani, a member of Action Directe, were arrested. The latter, who
had been promptly released, was picked up again at the beginning of this month
in a garage containing an arms cache. An automatic weapon seized in this batch
intended for terrorist use had already been used in an anti—Israeli attack in
Paris. Some documents found in the garage mentioned the Red Brigades. Thanks
to a number of supporters operating in Paris, the PLO-Red Brigades “French net-
work” reportedly still exists in 1982.)

9920
C50: 6137/506

la
FIII(IWWCJAI.USE(NNLV

ITALY

ROLE W PARIS IANGUAGE SCHOOL IN ITALIAN TERRORISM

'Hyperion' School
Milan EUROPBO in Italian 29 Mar 82 pp 6-10
[Article by Marcella Andreoli]

[Text] Vanni Hulinsris, one of the executives of hyperion, the famous Paris
school of languages, has been charged by police with a crime. The carabinieri
charged him with having supplied the Red Brigades with weapons and protection
from France. Michele Galati, ex-leader of the Veneto Red Brigades column,
turned over information to the carabinieri. (He is the brother of Paolo, who,
in conversations with UCIGOS [Central Office of General InVestigations and
Special Operations], made possible the discovery of the prison where Gen

James Lee Dozier was held.) The information given by Michele Galati seemed

to throw unexpected light on the Red Brigades and their decade-long adven-
ture.

Yes, unexpected light: All the old Hyperion story now acquires new weight
and un undoubted credibility but not only because of Galati's revelations.
It is a story that deserves to be told, starting with its last chapter,
which began on 3 February this year at Udlne, when the carabinieri arrested
Vanni rulinaris under a procedure that was really unusual: they picked him
up on the street in a faked kidnapping. And for a days-~another singular
event-~his lawyers could learn nothing about him, nor were they able to
locate the jail in which he was being held. The only thing that happened was
that a carabiniere contacted the Mulinaris family, old pasta manufacturers,
to tell them tersely "that Vanni was not kidnapped but arrested." Nothing
more. But was this news reassuring or alarming?

In those a days Vanni, 37, friend of Renato Curcio and Mario Horetti in the
early 1970's, was interrogated without letup in a cerabinieri barracks that
was protected by a secret classification. There was nothing strange in
this. The strangeness was perhaps that the carabinieri who interrogated him
appeared clothed In hooded capes: evidently so that they might not be
recognized. But why? Because they are carabinieri of the Secret Service

or because they consider Hulinarls "very dangerous"? In any case, the ob-
ject of the interrogation was clear: relations between Hyperion and the Red

15
FOI!OFWHJAI.USI(M%LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Brigades. The warrant under which Danni was arrested spoke of an armed gang
and subversive association, but behind this formula there's another chapter
of the story.

Two months earlier, on 2 December 1981, a couple of secret service agents
intercepted mlinaris in the company of his girl friend, Pia Serafin. They
were returning to Paris after a brief trip to Udine, Vanni's hometown.
Naturally, he was followed: it seemed a choice morsel, also because Vanni
had left his friuli hometown about 10 years eralier and for may years the

family had heard nothing from him. Between 1972 and 1973, his father had

thought of selling his pasta factory to finance a search for his son and to
get some information on his mysterious disappearance.

On that 2 December 1981, secret service agents got onto Hulinaris' tracks,
followed him to Italy, and then on the train for Paris where they continued
to shadow him, carefully noting the names of persons whom he contacted.
That's how they learned that on the evening of 3 December unlinaris met
with two persons at the Popular Culture Club in Rue De Nanteuil. It was a
sensational discovery. After a rapid search, one of the two persons turned
out to be no less than Lanfranco Pace. The other was a certain Ippoliti.

For those who might not remember, Lanfranco Pace is the man arrested by
Judge Pietro Calogero in the investigation of "7 April" Autonomy [Autonomia].
He was later turned over to the Roman judiciary who accused him of kidnap-
ping Aldo Moro but later suddenly absolved him of any wrongdoing whatever.
According to the original charge, Pace, together with his friend, Franco
Piperno, acting on behalf of the Red Brigades, had tried to begin negoti-
ations with the PSI [Italian Socialist Party] which, through a countervail-
ing exchange, was to lead to the release of the Christian Democratic leader.

When they arrested him, the carabinieri charged Vanni Mulinaris with compli-
city in the affair, but he denied it. He claimed he never Imew Pace. In
his defense, he maintained that after all there would be nothing wrong if
Hulinaris had met Lanfranco Pace, even though Pace, after having been re-

leased, once again became the target of investigations into the affairs of
the Red Brigades.

But in the meanwhile, the carabinieri and even the prosecutor’s office
charged mlinaris with a series of increasingly more serious misdeeds. In
reality, it was a crescendo of accusations that was completed toward the end

of February when the Venice Assistant Prosecutor charged Vanni mlinaris
with a new crime that was fully documented: traffic in arms that, according

to the magistrates, was centered in Hyperion. It was a serious crime,
which put an entirely new face on :he famous Paris school of languages.

1t was Michele Calati, who said in .1 statement to the police: "I know that
Mario Moretti, when he went to Paris, met Vanni mlinaris at Hyperion."

The Red Brigades member told a tale that was rich in details. He explained
that beginning in u‘hy, 3 years earlier, he had suspected that Hyperion might
be tied to the Red Brigades. His suspicions were aroused on that very day
when for the first time (it was My 1979) Hyperion was linked with the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inwstigations of terrorism. If what he says is true, Galati was in Venice
in the company of thrio bretti.

Hearing the word Hyperion on the radio, lbretti was shocked, and betrayed
great concern. he said, "How, they reached Paris." Clearly, he feared that
the investigations of Hyperion could go further. In view of the prosecu-

tors' activities, Horetti perhaps had never revealed as much anxiety as he
showed on hearing the news that the "7 April" investigation had penetrated
the Paris sanctuary. "as it then a sanctuary that must rennin among the
Red Brigades' mysteries?

Perhaps it was. The fact is that according to Galati, Mario Horetti went

to Paris every time he had to rake an agreement for the purchase of weapons.
Even Antonio Savasta, the terrorist accused of the General Dozier kidnap-
ping, explained that Horetti regularly went to Paris. "He met pers0ns whose
name he never wanted to reveal. I know that he made those trips in order
to make agreements for the shipment of weapons. The weapons were supplied by
the PLO, the Arafat group which, when it denied its relations with us, caused
extreme discontent with the Red Brigades. ‘me impact of this was lessened
only by statements made by Moretti, who was always ready to maintain that

it was politically correct and understandable that Arafat would deny even
what could not be denied."

Savasta went further: in his deposition to the authorities in the Moro case,
he also explained that Lanfranco Pace was, to all intents and purposes, a
Red Brigades member and that Franco Piperno and the other Autonomy leaders
represented a link in the ties between the Red Brigades organization and
Autonomy. The most sensational aspect of this revelation was in the new
personality it attributed to Pace: for a long time he had been believed to
be a member of Autonomy, and was treated as such at the semiofficial meet-

ings in the Moro case, but in reality was a Red Brigades member, and had
been so_ for a long time.

"hen on the evening of 3 December Vanni mlinaris met Lanfranco Pace at the
Paris Popular Culture Club, was it a meeting between old friends or a atm-
mit meeting between executives of terrorist organisations? Even though he
was accused of serious crimes such as trafficking in arms, being a member of

an armed gang and subversion associations, Dillinaris still had not cried
scandal or set off a witch-hunt, and his defense attorneys still had not

asked for his release on bail. That is, they did not follow the conduct
adopted by Franco Piperno and Toni Negri. Why the silence? Because the

charges were well-founded, or because at times silence is golden, that is,
more useful to the plans of the defense?

The efforts made by the secret services covered a long period of time. But
beginning when? One step backward: in 1979, investigations of Hyperion be-
gan under very tight security, but one day the news came out in Italian
newspapers--and it was supplied by one of the high officials of the ser-
vices--that an investigation of the language school was being conducted in
Paris. This leak completely wrecked the collaboration between the Italians
and the French because the latter pulled back in an angry outburst. More

17
FOR WI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than incautioua, the disclosures seemed to be intentional, that is, a move
to stop the investigation. Has Hyperion being protected from high places?
The fact is, in any case, that in the early 1980's, our 007's went back to
work. A report of the Rome Police Flying Squad dated 3 January of that year
confirms this. In fact, the report states that "Cooperation with French au-
thorities was resumed." Cooperation was resumed from the point at which it
had been interrupted, that is, with the discovery made by Judge Pietro
Calogero of the unusual circumstances that three founders of the CPM, the
Metropolitan Political Collective, and of the Proletarisn Left--the two or-
ganizations which later were to result in the creation of Red Brigades--now
were together in Paris directing a luxurious language school.

The three persons were Vanni Mulinaris, Corrado Simioni and Duccio Berio,
all of whom were very well-known, particularly in Milan, at the end of the
1950's. They disappeared between 1971 and 1972 when the nascent Red
Brigades began to engage in the first kidnappings. What had happened to
them? They were in Paris, covered with gold, surrounded by success and the

prestige of a cultural association that was very much appreciated by the
rich French bourgeoisie.

That is not all. The Italian secret services discovered also that the
famous trio Mulinaris-Simioni-Berio lived under the same roof in Paris.
Behind the Hyperion symbol were an additional seven persons, all formerly
militants of the CPM and the Proletarian Left. 80 this was another big
scene. And it was all the more sensational because the president of the
school was Francoise Tuscher. She, too, came from that old revolutionary
source. Then, as though that were not enough, who should appear at
Hyperion but Roberto Ropelato, who had been investigated but cleared in
the Superclan (that is, super-clandestine) affair, a meteor in the revolu-

tionary firmament of the early 1970's whose protagonist was Simioni and
others of that clique.

The record of 007 was enriched by other stories. Hyperion had large amounts
of money available (see box) and its monthly expenditures went into the
thousands of francs. Where did the money come from? Certainly, Hyperion
had income from various sources. The Milan provincial administration sends
groups of students there, for courses in languages. Fiat and Total also

send their employees, and even the Pbmpidou Center has ties with the school.
The Paris elite are present at every Hyperion activity.

Is all this as it should be? Investigation followed investigation; our 007's
discovered that some collaborators of Hyperion spent time without remuner-
ution for work that had nothing to do with teaching languages. However,

that work permitted them to leave Paris and return to Italy, to contact pro-
fessional offices, to knock on the doors of police authorites, prefects and
presidents of local administrations. The work consisted of selling sub-
scriptions to people on that level to the Italian magazine NUOVA POLIZIA

[NEH POLICE], a magazine aimed mainly at policemen. Thus even employees of
Hyperion publicized the magazine in Italy. They said it was profitable work.
Here they to be believed? And how did it happen that ex-revolutionaries of
1968 were so busy, and from Paris, with a police who, even though new, was

18
FOR‘OFFICIAI.IEHE(NULV
FOR 0Fi1C1Al.lEiE(HHLY

still the same hated police'of those not-too-distaat years? Here the ghosts
of the 1968 revolution returning, but in a different guise?

It may be hard to believe, but the word ghost is written in the record of
our 007's. In fact these three words appear: the kindly ghosts. Just
like that. In reality, this is the symbol for a collateral activity of

Hyperion which, although it is named a language school, is also involved
in household services. The kindly ghosts in fact offer silent help in the

houses of Parisians who leave them empty over the weekend or during vacations.
That is what is stated in the leaflet that EUROPBO dug up. A short time ago,
however, the business went bankrupt.

Who managed the kindly ghosts? It was the Hyperion bookkeeper Innocente
Salvoni, 32, also a participant, like all the characters in this story, in
that famous meeting at Chiavari. Renato Curcio and Mario Horetti, who were
out on bail, laid down the rules of underground activity and the green light
was given the Red Brigades. Salvoni, despite the fact that he described
himself as an artisan, married Francois Tuscher, the president of Hyperion.
During the Horn case, this artisan-wedded-to-culture went through some gruel-
ing moments because of the Christian Democratic leader. But perhaps it was

a ghost, or an error made by the investigators.

In any case that picture was the reason why no less than Abbe Pierce, power-

ful founding abbot of the Emmaus Community, left Paris for Rome where he had
"important talks." The prestigious abbot has a favorite niece, the ever-

present Francois Tuscher, and, at least until some time ago, never failed to
officiate at the baptism of every Hyperion initiative in order to impart a
kind of lay benediction on these ex-l968 revolutionaries.

Secret agents discovered at Home that Abbe Pierre had a meeting with Benigno
Zaccagnini, then Christian Democratic secretary. In fact the investigating
magistrates rushed to Zaccagnini for confirmation of that meeting. But
Zaccagnini denied the 007 reports.

In the investigators' notebooks there still remains, unsolved, another ques-
tion: why did those in Hyperion open two branch offices, one in Rome and
the o:her in Milan, just a few days before the Hora kidnapping, and close

them immediately after the kidnapping? Or was this a coincidence? Or what
else?

Concerning the Hyperion branches throughout the world there is almost an en-
tire police literature that has the overtones of a detective story.

Branches included one in London, an apartment of 40 rooms mostly empty, and
another at Brussels. Not only that: Duccio Berio, the one of the presti-
gious trio, had created a theater company that specialized in 'tbmmedia
dell-Arte" and had called it Scalzacani [paupersg indigents]. Its head-
quarters was on Boulevard Beaumarchais. It participated in the Rennes

theater festival, in Brittany, received financing totaling tens of millions
of francs.from the Paris Cultural Council.

19
liDl‘O!‘N(JAI.USI§(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The police literature on Hyperion branches has a hint of the detective

story in London where two secret agents went to focus in on it. One day
they nearly had heart attacks when they found that their rooms in the hotel

had been thoroughly searched. Any policeman would have interpreted that
event as a warning to desist.

The 007's almost had a second heart attack another time when in France,
near Rouen, they did not even succeed in getting close to an office of
Hyperion because it was very heavily guarded. It was the villa where

Corrado Sininoni and a few of his intimates were spending the weekend.

And now, Targeted, suspected, investigated, Hyperion performs its final
miracle. It clones itself. At the moment of danger, rather than disap-
pear, it creates another twin school that is called Kiron and its head-
quarters is established in a building that had been used to manufacture
brassieres, on Rue Faubourg Poissonnier. Kiron accepts applications for
courses in mosaics, theater and "sciatzu." If Hyperion, according to

Greek mythology, was a sun word meaning "higher," Kiron is instead the
centaur which saves Peleus from the "scheming of the courtesans of Acasto."

Since Simioni, Mulinaris and Berio are educated people who understand the
meaning of words, do they perhaps think that Kiron will save them from some
"scheme"?

The minor literature of 007, under the chapter entitled Hichaele Galati, re-
calls that Hario Moretti, when he was to make agreements to import arms from
the Middle East, went first to Paris, and perhaps concluded his agreements
under the Hyperion sun. Was the top leadership of the Red Brigades located
there? Hould Hyperion perhaps by the mythical "grand old man"?

if the revelations made by the ex-head of tho Veneto column turn out to be
well-founded, it cauld be a short step to the identity of the person who for
ill years has directed Red subversion. At that point it would be necessary
to discovir who really runs Hyperion: The Mltinaris-Simioni-Berio trio,

or some intelligence service?

Rome Police Report on Hyperion Business Affairs: School's Books 00 Not
Balance

0n 3 January 1980 the Rome Police Flying Squad sent Judges Achille Gallucci
and Pietro Galogero a report on the Hyperion language school. The report be-
gan with details of a "business report":

"Somewhat luxurious offices were the subject of a rental contract for 25,000
francs per quarter. Professor-8' salaries: average of 2,000 francs for 15
professors. Two thousand francs for the cook; 1,500 for the governess, in
addition to the salary of secretary De Roux totaling 1,400 francs per

month and part of the rent totaling 1,600 francs per month for the apart-
ment of Duccio Berio.

"It was learned that the Hyperion debts totaled 30,000 francs per month not
counting the expenditures for food for about 15 persons. Income came from

20
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"lhv tuition or 180 students reported by the school (from 20 to 30 francs
lu-I’ lumr), and the lessons for the Connedia dell-Arte students (15 francs
per hour). It is unlikely that this incou can account for the luxurious
furnishings of the offices.

"Furthermore, it was somewhat difficult to accept some statements by Hyperion
officers. Particularly: Berio, in charge of public relations, who affirms
that he receives no salary and states that he contributes 3,500 francs an-
nually out of his own pocket. Francois ‘l‘uscher, Hyperiod president and
French language teacher, says she receives no salary and that her support
comes from handicraft work done by her husband Innocence Salvoni. The

latter also works at the school with no pay.

"Corrado Simioni, the person who rents the two apartments (2,600 and 3,000
francs per month) says he receives no remuneration for his duties as a cul-
tural adviser for Hyperion. although he met support a family.

"The teachers reportedly are content with a salary equal to 2,000 francs on
the average. while the secretary and the cook receive 3,400 and 2,000.

"the persons who interrogated those involved (ed. note: They were question-
ed by the French police in the late spring of 1979) confirmed that the great
majority of them in 1968-1969 were members or founders of the Italian
Proletarian Left. They included: Francois 'l'uscher, Innocente Salvoni,
Duccio Berio, Vanni mlinaris, Corrado Siminoni, Donatells Zotta, Claudio
Agular, Alberto Pinotti. Giulia Archer, Attilio Galli, Pia Serafin.

"The officers of the organization have made many trips in Europe, most of
them in Italy and Great Britain. Expenditures for the trips lead to the
assumption that there are further financial sources.

"Finally it is interesting to point out that lawyer Michel Tubisna, born in
Algiers and residing in Paris, according to testimony by Sartorio Cristiane,
was present when the Agora Association was established from which Hyperion
was created. The aforementioned individual was the secretary of the Inter-
national Defense Comittee of West European Politican Prisoners and above
all of the members of the Baader gang, and of lawyer Klaus Croissant.

"Tubiana, who is presently a member of the European Defense Association, an
organization that will oppose the European Anti-terrorism Convention, on

2 May 1979 participated in a press conference organized by the Information
Connittees on the Italian situation in favor of Antonio Negri and of the
other persons investigated in the 7 April incident."

As Bettino said: According to Craxi. the Grand Old lhn was in Paris.

Bettina Craxi once more surprised and aroused the curiosity of everyone. In
the no-confidence debate regarding the second Cossiga government, he had
launched the idea of the Grand Old Man: the hidden brains behind terrorism.
It was 18 larch 1980, 2 years after the Moro kidnapping.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the Montecitorio 'Transatlantico" [meeting place for newsmen in the parlia-
mentary building] Craxi took this newspaperman by the arm with that distract-
ed air of indirection he ASSumes when he wants to strike a blow without giv-
ing the impression that he is doing so. And he returned to the subject.

The Grand Old Man: "as he an elderly person? Not necessarily a single per-
son, rather, probably, it might be a group of persons. And certainly not
elderly: it was necessary to go back into memory, Craxi said, to seek
among those persons who had begun their political career with us, who had
demonstrated intelligence, political talent and then suddenly disappeared;

he recalled, for example, a name, a certain Corrado Simioni, ex-socialiat,
later a comrade of Renato Curcio....

And where was it necessary to search? Abroad, naturally.
near or far? Not very far. In Paris? Right, in Paris, why not? This

Simioni was in Paris. And recently, Craxi added, he changed his place of
residence, who knows why...?

But east or west,

Shortly aftenuurd Craxi's bald head was surrounded by numerous colleagues.
The next day all the newspapers spoke of the trail being followed in the
search for the Grand Old Man. ”as it merely a hypothesis that flashed from
the mind of a very imaginative politician? Or was it prophetic intuition?

[Signed] Pasquale Nonno

9 _ _.
i.. when

E5019 de Langues

§

 

Hyperion's insignia

22
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

\l WHIS MA.
.L\ lfll '

 

Inzzignia of the Kiron School, one of the Hyperion
affiliates; offered courses in mosaics and the theater

 

Abbe Pierre, founder of the humus Goununity

25
FORMAL USIONLY
F0!’0F‘ﬂ(]Al.USE¢MNlY

'Hyperion' Reply
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 10 May 82 p 150
Hyperion, Culture and Terrorism

The article by Marcella Andreoli entitled, "It Is Spelled Hyperion; It Means
Grand Old Man" (ﬁUROPEO 13) is extremely defamatory and irresponsible, It
mixes truths about the activities of the Hyperion school and the life of
some of its employees with lies and fantasy-politics inventions. There is
nothing to hide about what we do and, rather, since what we do is cultural,

our work depends on gaining a reputation. That's why the school's literature
even reached you.

i emphasize that the French police 3 years ago, following false conclusions
by Italian newspapers, carried out a long and thorough investigation of us.
At its conzlusion, the French Interior Ministry declared it had no grounds

for any accusation either against the Hyperion school, or against its indi-
viiuals.

It is true and widely knoan that: (1) In 5 years it had about 2,000 associ-
ates, most of them French; (2) Some persons who work with or have worked
with the Hyperion school became acquainted in 1967-1970 in the Proletarian
Left group and therefore are veterans of 1968. The famous Chiavari confer-
ence was a public meeting and the subjects discussed were all those of the
meetings of 1968; (3) Those of us who later joined in working at the Hyperion
school already at that time shared a common sensitivity to the cultural and
community themes of the 1968 movement rather than to strictly political
aspects. So, when 2 years later the Red Brigades was created, none of us
joined in this political radicalization which grew out of theories advanced
by Renato Cur;ia; (h) The Hyperion school teaches languages, and after 6
years of hard and unceasing work, including Sundays and holidays, often pay-
ing a minimum guaranteed wage, has succeeded in making its pedagogical value

and its cultural studies recognized by public and private institutions which
have profited from our courses; (5) In order to establish this school which

is of a cooperative type, and not having initial capital, each one rolled up

his sleeves: Some became housepainters, some sold magazine subscriptions,
and some did translations....

It is absolutely false that: (l) "The school's accounts do not balance."
Its books are always available to anyone with the appropriate authority and
are perfectly clear. Even the figures which were cited with considerable
sensationaliSm can be reconciled as between expenditures and outlays [as
published], and are sufficient to figure out the total: 180 x 30 francs x a
minimum of 10 hours per month--this already adds up to 54,000 francs against
30,000 francs in expenditures; (2) We are supposed to be "submerged in
gold." Unfortunately that is not true; (3) 'The offices are furnished
luxuriously"; all the furniture was built by associates; (6) "Hyperion has
branches abroad"; Hyperion has never had any other branch but the one in

Paris; (5) Horetti "was supposed to have come to Hyperion"; we explicitly
deny that this person has ever set foot in our offices, and he has not even

26
FOR OFFVCIAI.USE(IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

telephoned; (6) Hyperion has never publicized Italian police magazines; I
think it would be enough to ask for confirmation of this from the editor of
the magazine.

It is also false in reference to Vanni Hulinaris: (1) 'That on 3 December
he was in Paris." EVeryone knows him in Udine and it would be easy for
anyone who wants to establish the truth to verify that on the day he was in
Udine. Thus he could not have met anyone in Paris on 3 December, and much
less that certain Pace, or that certain Ippoliti; (2) 'What Pia Serafin

was in Udine on 2 December"; in effect she was in Paris from November, hav-
ing returned from medical care in Italy; (3) "That Hyperion was put on trial

11 the charges against Hulinaris," and still less for traffic in arms.

0n the other hand the following are unfounded insinuations: (1) To cite as
a "serious" fact and the sole prosecution evidence, the "suspicion" born in
the mind of a Brigade member when he heard the Hyperion school mentioned on
the radio when Hyperion had been cited by the press in 1979; (2) To create
the idea that the Hyperion school, targeted by newspapers for 3 years,
could calmly continue its subversive activity behind the "protection" of
half the world: Italian, French and British police; secret services; the
French Government which earlier was center-Right and now Left; the Church,
the French upper bourgeoisie; the Theater Festival; etc.; (3) Using accu-
sations that the Italian police themselves had immediately recognized as
false,for example, the alleged "participation" by Innocente Salvoni in the
Moro kidnapping.

It is therefore ridiculous as well as despicable that a newspaperwomnn should
once again stir up this witch hunt which does an irreparable wrong to inno-

cent persons, and whose final effect would be to sully the 1968 movement in

its aspects of cultural-existential renewal, of what here in France is called
"changer la vie."

[Signed] Francois Tuscher, President of the Hyperion Association, Paris.

Andreoli, NUOVA POLIZIA Replies
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 10 May 82 pp 150-151
[Marcella Andreoli Reply to Hyperion Letter]

He owe Hyperion a reply. It will be brief, but necessary in order to clear

up its thinking. In one regard above all: Hyperion wrongly addressed its
replies and even its insults ("ridiculous,"'Hespicable") in every case.

In any case, we hope they will be able to recognize at all times to whom
those words belong.

Regarding the rest. Which after all is what counts most, Hyperion dumps upon
us a series of denials that should have been addressed to the Italian police
from whose reports were deduced the subjects upon which the contested arti-
cle was based. Or, it should unload them on the terrorists who, when they

27
INDIIOFF!CIAI.lEIE(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were arrested, spoke of Ilyperion. 0r, upon the facts, if that ever were pos-
sible.

Or is it not a fact that Vanni Malinaris, founding member of Hyperion, is
today in jail charged with belonging to an armed gang and trafficking in
arms? it is expected, perhaps, that this should not be discussed? In any
cASe. it is the carabinieri who charged Hulinaris with the meeting of

3 December 1981 with Lanfranco Pace and a certain Ippoliti at the Popular

Culture Club in Rue de Nanteuil, and asserting that it was able to get onto
his trial thanks to Pia Serafin.

And it is Michele Galati, a repentant terrorist, who sustained that Mario

Horetti, Brigade leader, met Hulinaris at the Hyperion offices when he went
to Paris.

And it is the idea of the Italian police that "the figures don't add up" in
the llyperion budget: The report of the Rome police dated 3 January 1980
published in EUROPEO 13, says so clearly on the basis of cooperation with

the French police, Incidenmlly, (and in addition to the contested stories),
where does Corra-io Simioni, another founding member of Hyperion, "who at

one time rented two apartments in Paris," (as that report says) get his money

since he now lives in the luxurious dwelling of the Dukes of Gramont, 50
kilometers from Paris?

It is denied that Hyperion has branches abroad: in London, Brussels and in
Italy. According to Italian records, the men of Hyperion Opened two in Rome

and Milan, and precisely during the kidnapping of Aldo Moro. Records also
Show that they had another in London in 1978 where the students of the school

could be housed, enjoying mess facilities where there was much discussion.

Finally, records show that the Hyperion men had a lodging at Brusscls, in
Rue de Tervueren 66.

Hyperion, finally, confesses that it has certainly forgotten some of its

protectors. Yes, it is really true. When last sunlner the theater group
"the Scalzacani" directed by Duccio Berio, another founding member of
llyperion, was given several tens of millions for a performance. but not the
kind of stage required, it won: over everyone's head to the French Ministry

of Culture and obtained nothing less than the Palais Royale. The show
opened on 22 August l98l.

Police and Magnsines [NUOVA POLIZIA Comnt]

Regarding the article entitled "It Is Spelled Hyperion and It Manna Grand Old

Man," we state that none of the persons you indicated on Page 8 collaborate
in the distribution of the magazine NUOVA POLIZIA. Instead, we believe it

is useful to inform you that in August l979 we reported to the Savona At-
torney General that a certain "Dr Gallil" as is shown by our proven docu-

ments, was selling subscriptions for a carpeting magazine while claiming that
he was working for the NUOVA POLIZIA circulation department.

The Management of NUOVA POLIZIA
Rome

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L88 ONLY

[Marcella Andreoli Replies of NUOVA POLIZTA]

I don't know whether Dr Galli is the same person, that is, Attilio Gelli,
who in the report of 3 January 1980 by the Rome police (published in
3&0on 13, on the Hyperion investigations) is indicated as one of the

numbers of the Paris school and founding member of the holetarian Left
group.

I can, however, affirm that in order to check on the facts in my possession
before writing the article in question, on Thursday ll lurch, I telephoned
the French headquarters of Hyperion and asked to speak with Drum Ropelato.
He was investigated in the early 1970's for the Superclam (the so-called
super-clandestine workers of Red terrorism). Hr Ropelato called me back
the next day and in the course of the conversatiOn he confirmed that he had
carried out a promotion campaign for the magazine NUOVA POLIZIA.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Rizzoli Editore.

603:3
080: 6 L3 1/518

29
FOR OFFICIAL MONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

TERRORISM IN SPAIN--CHAPTBR I

Barcelona BL TERRORISMO EN ESPANA in Spanish 1982 pp 9-67

[Text] Chapter l—-The Shadow of Cain

"These are lands for the eagle, a bit of the planet crossed by the roving
shadow of Cain." (Antonio Machado, "Through Spanish Lands")

Contents

The Concept and Meaning of Terrorisn

Terrorism in Modern Spain

Terrorisn at the End of the Franco Era

The Burgos Trial

The Origins of the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group]

From the Assassination of Carrero Blanco to the Correo Street Attack
Other Kinds of Terrorism

Extrene Right-Hing Terrorism

Terrorism in the Last Months of the Franco Era

The Concept and Meaning of Terrorism

It is very often stressed that the democratic regimes in Spain have always had
to deal with adverse socioeconomic circumstances. In this connection, a paral-
lel is frequently drawn between the experience of the failure of the Second
Republic--burdened from the very first by the consequences of the so-called
Great Depression which overwhelled the West beginning in 1929-1930, and the
democratic regime established on the death of Franco by the monarchy of Juan
Carlos I and, from many points of view, the victim of the crisis which began in
1973 due to the oil problem and the subsequent escalation of the price of this
strategic raw material.

There is obviously some truth in this description of the hardly favorable but
historic record of our democratic experience. But some distinctions are needed,
because the economic problems were not the cause of the failure of the Second
Republic. since that economic crisis did not have the effect on our country it

30 '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
did elsewhere. Nor, although the problems of unemployment are very serious,
has the economic situation been the main problem to be dealt with by our
present effort to consolidate a pluralistic and democratic regime in Spain
capable of ensuring the coexistence of all Spaniards in peace and liberty.

It has become a cliche in our country in recent times to speak of three major
problems: one indeed is unemployment, inflation and the resulting impoverish-
ment; the other two are terrorism and the autonomy issue, which on the slopes
of the Basque territory have occurred together and even interdependently in
many sections of the historical and political path covered since 1975.

In this book we will deal with this problem of terrorism, and what it has
meant to the collective life of Spaniards.

With its drama and its heart—tending obviousness, terrorism has been at many
times in this decisive 5-year period the main problem with which Spain has had
to deal. On many occasions, it has been the most overwhelming concern of our
government leaders. It has too often preoccupied the most notable personalities
in our mass media. And, since democracy dawned here, it has been the favorite

weapon and pretext of those who have tried to bring about the failure of this
latest effort at pluralistic coexistence in freedom.

However, it should be made clear at the outset that terrorism did not develop
here with democracy, nor has it been exclusive to our country. Political
violence is a historical constant which has been manifested in widely different
forms. One trait precisely which has been common to different doctrines and
philosophies has been the definition of the state or the legitimate political
authority as the "monopolizer of violence." Thus this subtle link appears very
soon relating politics to violence and justifying, that is to say attributing

a just nature to, the violence in which a legitimate authority engages. Also
quick to appear is the idea that political power may be illegitimately exer-
cised, leading to tyranny. Its violence, then, is not just and may be resisted.
And then this old idea emerges, justifying a certain violence "pursued from
below," when resistance to authority exercised without legitimacy, that is to
say a tyrannical regime, is presumed. And it is here that a whole series of
subspecies of political violence seek to find their legitimacy--revolution,
tyrannicide, coups d'etat, active opposition, guerrilla warfare, resistance
fighters and terrorism in its various manifestations.

Therefore, despite the fact that many authors stress the concept of regarding
terrorism as a phenomenon typical of modern society, others have sought to find
precedents for it. They often cite two ancient examples, the first being the
Sicarii, the religious sect referred to by Flavius Josephus in his "History of
Judea," and also Tacitus, who were active in Palestine in the last third of the

first century. They were ultranationalists and anti-Roman. and in particular
they attacked the Jews who were advocates of peace and compromise with the
Romans.

The other terrorist organization often cited is the Hashishin (from which the
word assassin comes), who in the era of the crusades (llth to 13th centuries)
fought against the established regime by means of personal assassination,

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
operating in strict secrecy. This sect, part secret society and part terrorist
organization, has been the subject of many analyses. Its members were known as
"fedayeen," a term, as is known, now used to designate the Palestinians fighting
for a state of their own.

In this scheme of the early history of terrorism, another important era must be
added: the French Revolution. There we find the term "terror" used for the
first time to define the political period of the Convention, of which the most
representative figure is Robespierre. It is no accident, therefore, that in
the 1798 supplement to the "Dictionary of the Academie Francaise" the term
"terrorism" is already to be found, defined as a "system or regime of terror."
As can be seen, it is a question here of "terrorism carried out from above,"
that which is commonly called now "institutionalized violence," rather than
"terrorism against the regime." to which we will basically be referring here.

Since we are dealing with a semantic question. let us make two specifications.
The first is that there is no agreement as to what should be termed terrorism.
T. Perry Thornton has defined it as "a symbolic act designed to influence poli-
tical conduct through extranormal methods implying the use or the threat of
violence." But as C. Leiden and K. H. Schmitt note, this is a narrow concept,
and they prefer to describe it as "a whole series of actions...which contribute
to creating an atmosphere of fear and desperation: deaths, assassinations,
sabotage, subversion. destruction of public records, spreading of rumors, per-
secution of churches, seizure of property, interference with the normal appli-
cation of criminal laws, prostitution of the courts, poisoning of the
press...."

In any case, it does not seem that an agreement will be reached soon on what
terrorism is. we have, for example, the discussions of this subject at the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Madrid (1980-1981),
at which the Soviets insisted on excluding the "struggles for national
liberation" from the consideration of terrorism. In this shifting political
terrain, it seems impossible to find and acceptable and certain standard for
differentiating "terrorism" from "national liberation struggles." The same
deeds could be called one or the other, depending on the trench in which one
is located and the political position one adopts.

From what we have just said it is evident-and this is the second specification-
that terrorism is burdened with a pejorative implication. It is a word which
evokes and implies a negative evaluation, and has done so since it was first
used, as early as 1795. when the famous British thinker Edmond Burke, the

father of conservative thinking, referred to "these thousands of monstrous in-
fernal terrorist appeals."

Therefore, those who sympathize with the terrorists or with thcir causes prefer
to give them other names such as "guerrilla fighters" or "strugglers," which
seem to imply an element of nobility. A group of terrorists will not be called
a "gang" but a "commando unit," and its activity will be termed "armed or
military actions." not "criminal or terrorist acts." The death of an indivi-
dual will be described as an ”execution." not an "assassination," and the
"theft" of an automobile, for example, will be termed simply a "confiscation."

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It should be remembered that the criticisms aroused by the pastoral letter
which the Basque bishops published on 1 April 1981 were based precisely on the
terms used in describing the terrorists and their activities, which were seen
as revealing a latent sympathy and a comparison with the "repressive" actions
of the state.

Terrorism in Modern Spain

Terrorism did not appear in Spain suddenly; rather, there is evidence enough
to state that it has been an endemic phenomenon in our modern history. The
”hands" into which the Carlist forces, the "blusterers," the "matiners" promi-
nent in Catalonia at the middle of the last century, the typical banditry in
which often political motivations were not lacking, can be regarded as the
direct antecedents of the modern terrorist connand units. Therefore, it is no
surprise that many of them have seen in the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty
Group] the 20th-century manifestation of Carlism, and in the situation created
by that terrorist organization, a new "war of the north," like the fourth or
fifth--depending on the method of calculation-~Carlist war.

Later, beginning in the last third of the 19th century, a new form of terrorism
inspired by certain anarchist considerations appeared in Spain, and if it was
sometimes of an organized nature, as in the famous Andalusian Mano Negra
action, it was often seen in the form of the isolated terrorist, represented
graphically in the newspapers of the era as "the man with the burning torch."
Another well-known manifestation of terrorism is the so-called "gangsterism,"
involving gangs in the pay of certain trade unions, the owners' organisations
for the public authorities themselves, who "intervened" in that fierce class
struggle, in operating what we know today as the "dirty war." Hhat gangster-
ism meant in Barcelona, especially in the years following World War I, is well
known. When those paid gunmen ceased to receive "commissions," they began to
act on their own, becoming common armed bandits. Here we have another problem
in modern terrorism: the difficulty of social reintegration of those who have
made a way of life of violence.

Terrorism experienced a new period of resurgence in Spain in the period be-
tween the "Popular Front elections" in February of 1936 and the military up-
rising of 18 July in that year. This was like a dramatic prelude to the civil
war which foretold the continuation of political violence as a constant on a
large scale. We believe that not only on the battle fronts but in the rear
guard areas too, tragic records of violence were surpassed.é

The Franco regime had to deal with terrorist manifestations from the very
first.3 The underground, made up of the remains of the units defeated in the
Civil war and individuals who returned from France, took a long time to be
eradicated, and not only the Civil Guard, but also the army itself, had to be
used against it.3b Later. although it lacked any special virulence, due to
the rigor of the repressive measures, terrorism never disappeared entirely, as
the persistence of special legislation to penalize this type of crimes demon-
strates.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is not our purpose here to undertake the history of terrorism during the
Franco regime. It suffices to note that after some efforts to invade via the
Pyrenees or the Cantabrian region in 1966-1946 by anti-Franco troops who on
occasion eliminated some thousands of men, a certain stabilization was achieved
in this area. Sporadically there were terrorist attacks, almost always perpe-
trated by anarchists, and clandestine armed groups occasionally clashed with
police or Civil Guard forces. what the republicans in exile called the "resis-
tance" has been long drawn out in time. As late as January of 1960, the famous
anarchist Francisco Sabater, heading a commando unit which came from France,
clashed with the Civil Guard in the Bsnolas (Gerona) zone. Pour anarchists and
a lieutenant from Benemerita were killed there. Sabater, who was wounded,
escaped, but he was found the following day and killed. That same year the
Iberian Revolutionary Liberation Directorate (DRIL) appeared and carried out
various activities involving the placement of bombs. In March, a bomb ex-
ploded in the Madrid town hall, and another exploded in the hands of a terror—
ist, who was killed. In June, several typical terrorist attacks designed to
sow terror among the population occurred, with the explosion of artifacts in
railroad stations or trains. A young woman died in San Sebastian from the
wounds caused by a bomb which exploded in the station.

In 1961, a year later, the ETA terrorist organization was to make it appearance.
Although it was founded in 1959, as we will see later on, it did not begin
"armed struggle" until 1961. Its first act was the placement of a bomb on a
railroad line on 18 July, the main holiday of the Franco regime. The bomb was
discovered shortly before the scheduled passage of a train carrying veterans
bound for a ceremony to be held in San Sebastian. On that same day and in

that same city the national flags were burned. Thus emerged what was to become
the most dangerous terrorist organization in our country, that which was to
cause Spanish government leaders the most worry, that which would prove most
difficult to eliminate, and finally, that which would come to be the most
serious challenge to the democracy which would be inaugurated 14 years later.

But Franco's state was speedy and harsh in its response. In connection with
those criminal attempts. a number of persons were arrested, 23 of them being
tried in a drumhead court-martial at which they were sentenced to 5 to 10 years
imprisonment, except for 2 of the defendants, who received sentences of 15 and
20 years, respectively.

The placement of bombs continued to occur in the years which followed. In 1962
a number of anarchists belonging to the Libertarian Youth Movement were ar-
rested on charges of placing explosive artifacts. At the court-martial, the
prosecutor asked for the death penalty for one of them, Jorge Conill. This
trial gave rise to a wave of protests abroad and some much publicized petitions
for clemency, such as that made by Cardinal Hontini, then archbishop of Milan,
who was to be the future Pope Paul VI. The anarchist Conill was sentenced to

30 years in prison, and the other outlaws were given lesser penalties. Simul-
taneously, another court-martial was held in Madrid, and the defendants, charged
with terrorist deeds, were sentenced to prison terms. In all, in only 2 months,
five courts-martial were held, involving mainly anarchists.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At about that same time (29 September 1962), the Spanish vice consul in Milan,
Mr lsu Elias, was kidnaped. His kidnapers, young anarchists, also asked for
clemency for the defendants in the court-martial. Two or three days later, the
consular representative was freed. This was the first kidnaping carried out by
terrorists in connection with Spain. The kidnapers were arrested and their
trial in Varese had all the characteristics of a trial of the Spanish regime.

This series of events, so closely interrelated, developed the awareness of
Spaniards concerning the problem of terrorism, perhaps for the first time. It
must be remembered, however, that the strict press censorship which existed
filtered information and commentaries such as to show exclusively the version
and the approach serving the government's interests. In these circumstances,
the regime made use once again of the idea of internal conspiracy, indicating
that the terrorists who placed the bombs had received training in a presumed
terrorist school located in Toulouse, said to be located 40 rue Point. The
bulletin which the Basque Press Office in Paris put out denied the existence of
any such school, although it said: "There are hard—line factions among the
exiles, especially in the CRT [National Confederation of Labor], and the
terrorist outrages committed in Spain cannot be denied. But there is no proof,"
it added, "that they are not isolated actions or actions by isolated groups."

To judge from the newspaper reports, it was also at the end of 1962 that another
of the protagonists in terrorist action made its appearance: the plastic bomb,
which had played such an important role in the Algerian war as a terrorist
weapon of the FLN [National Liberation Front] and, later, the OAS [Secret Army
Organization]. Between 2 and 5 December, plastic bombs exploded in the resi-
dence of the military governor of San Sebastian, in the Valencia Palace of
Justice. the Royal Currency Comptroller's Office in Madrid and the Spanish
consulate in Amsterdam. The fact that these explosions were simultaneous (two
more artifacts had exploded in Lisbon) led the ABC to conclude that "the
terrorists are marching to the same beat and are synchronizing their offensive
actions."

Terrorism at the End of the Franco Era

The final years of the Franco era were already marked by the existence of
terrorism, and specifically ETA terrorism. The Basque organization, to the
historical development of which we will refer later on, had already overcome its
initial hesitation and had clearly opted for "armed struggle." In June of 1964
the ETA published a pamphlet bearing the title "The Rebellion in Basque

Territory." The governing concept of this outline was that against the repres-
sion of the Franco regime, there was no other option. Consistent with the
ideas set forth by Federico Krutwig in "Vasconia" (The Basque Land), a book to
which we will also refer later, the ETA adopted a "third world" line which had
as its axis a "revolutionary war" viewed as "a complex of actions of all kinds
(political, social, economic, psychological, armed, etc) oriented toward the
defeat of the established regime in the country and its replacement by another
regime, order or system."4

The turning point would have to be placed in 1968, a year which was so impor-

tant in the political and social development of the whole Western world. As
has been so often said, that year produced a crisis in revolutionary utopianism

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which had Inspired such hopes throughout the decade of the sixties. The events
of May I968 in Paris marked both the zenith and the beginning of the end of the
hopes of those who aspired to overcome the limitations of the consumer society
denounced by Harcuse. The invasion of Czechoslovakia by the USSR and its
Warsaw Pact allies in August of that same year marked the end. on the one hand.
of the illusion of a "communism with a human face" embodied by Cubcek and his
famous "Prague springtime." In the limited field of terrorism, 1968 was also a
key year. In that year. in typical terrorist actions. Robert Kennedy and Martin
Luther King were assassinated; the extremist Palestinian leader Habash sent a
commando unit to Rome. where they hijacked an aircraft, thus "exporting" their
terrorism to Europe for the first time; the terrorist Carlos. who was to become
famous. began his "studies" at Patrice Lumumba University in Moscow; the first
IRA contingent began training in a Palestinian camp; the Japanese Red Army be-
gan its activities; a Frenchwoman traveled to Guatemala using the false name
Isabelle chaunet. and shortly afterward the 0.5. ambassador was assassinated.
Also in 1968. the thesis of "world guerrilla warfare" developed by Che Guevara
and Debray failed in Latin America and the "urban guerrilla warfare" of the
Tupamaros and the Hontoncros began. Finally. the ETA committed its first two
assassinations in l968: the victims were the civil guard Jose Pardines Arcay
(7 June) and police commissioner Heliton Hanzanas (2 August).

in Spain. 1968 was a typical year of "developmentalism." Tourism and the re-
mittances of emigrants led to substantial reductions in the balance of payments
deficit. and foreign trade increased by very considerable percentages. It was
announced that a nuclear plant would be built in Lemoniz. Biscay. with an annual
production of 7 million kilowatts. At the end of the year, the total reserves
in gold and foreign exchange reached 81.151.500.000 and. according to National
Statistics Institute figures, national income was up 6.6 percent and the cost

of living had gone up by 2.93 percent.

However. there was a harsh political counterpart to this picture of prosperity.
Those who had naively thought that the constitution approved by a referendum

in December [966 marked the beginning of a liberalizing and even democratizing
stage had had to yield to the evidence. Carrero Blanco. the man who enjoyed
the confidence of the already aged Franco. was the key figure in this situation.
Persecution of all political opposition intensified and the Court of Public
Order worked tirelessly. The press was under rigid controls. despite the fact
that that the 1966 "Frags law" had created the possibility of freedom of expres-
sion previously unimaginable. Seizures of publications became more frequent.
an Official Secrets Law was approved and the daily newspaper HADRID-—which was
at that time the standard bearer of "liberalization," as the effort to get the
regime to move forward in a more open and democratizing direction was called--
was shut down for a months.

Terrorism put in an appearance against this background. And it can be said
that since then. it has constituted a basic element in political life. since
that time also. the actions of the ETA. which prior to that time was a prac-
tically unknown organization, became something usual. lts struggle against

the forces of law and order continued. and the speed with which it rallied from
the blows dealt it and the arrest of its members proceeded to create a certain
mythical aura about this organization. Many democrats saw in ETA terrorism

the most gallant way of opposing a dictatorship which was proving itself

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
increasingly incapable of evolving. The care seemingly taken by the members

of the ETA to ensure that their attacks affected only representatives of the
"repressive" bodies of the regime created an attitude favorable to it in certain
sectors of the population. and not Basques alone. Their violence was forgiven
because it was directed only against the representatives of the dictatorship.

A legend similar to that of the traditional "good guy bandits" was almost woven
about the ETA. Thus a dangerous step was taken. because with democracy already
established. the campaign against ETA terrorism was to enc0unter serious prob-
lems of a psychological nature. The ETA terrorists who had experience tacit
and almost overt approval during the long final stage of the Franco regime seemed
not to understand why they were suddenly condemned. since they had not changed
and were continuing to do the same things as before. The democrats. non-Basque
Spaniards in particular. who had more or less openly approved of the ETA ac-
tions. believed that once the Franco era was over, there was no longer any
justification for any form of violence. But the ETA saw things in another way,
because its campaign against Franco was only incidental. since its primary goal
was to combat "Spanish domination." The official magazine of the organization.
ZUTIK (September 1966). said the following: "The struggle against Franco was
pursued as if there had been no Spanish oppression of the Basque territory.

we are combatiIgSpanish oppression in the Basque Country as if there had been
no Franco."

Although during 1968 various attacks were carried out by the ETA and there were
some clashes between the terrorists in this organization and the forces of law
and order. the most important, both in terms of the political and news impact

it had and in terms of its later repercussions. was the assassination of In-
spector Hanzanas. 0n 2 August in that year of 1968. the chief inspector of

the San Sebastian Political Social Police Brigade, Don Heliton Hanzanas. was
shor and killed as he was entering his home. The inspector's wife, who was

just then opening the door. struggled with the assassin, who managed to flee.
and whom she was to identify later. during the Burgos trial. as Francisco Javier
lzco de la Iglesia.

A few days later. on 5 August. the state authorities promulgated a decree law.
declaring a state of emergency in the province of Guipuzcoa. "in order to avoid
recurring violations of public order and deeds of a criminal nature." The state
of emergency was declared for 3 months. but at the end of October it was ex-
tended for 3 more. On 24 January 1969 a state of emergency, also for 3 months,
was established for the whole of Spain. in view of the "minority but systematic-
ally directed activities designed to disturb the peace of Spain and public order
Lhorein...clvar1y related to an international strategy which has spread to
numerous countries."

11m state of emergency was then extended in Guipuecoa until. on 22 March 1969,
it was raised for the whole of the national territory. Based on the emergency
measures involving the suspension of certain rights guaranteed by the Spanish
code of law and. specifically, the possibility of extended detention of persons
arrested. the police made a number of arrests and this, moreover, continued
after the state of emergency was lifted.

The harshness of the repression was such that the city council of San Sebastian
itself (in the hands. obviously, of individuals supporting the Franco regime)

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agreed on 27 November to send a written appeal signed by the mayor and all of
the council members "to the higher authorities" asking for mitigation of the
status of the citizens of San Sebastian being held because of the state of
emergency. A broad sector of the Basque clergy supported the cause of those
suffering reprisals and a group of Bilbao priests. ignoring the appeals of
Honsignor Guroide, the bishop of the diocese, who supported the regime in power,
locked themselves in the seat of the bishopate. 0n the other hand, a few days
later, the bishop of San Sebastian. Monsignor Bereciartua, ordered that a docu-
ment denouncing the abuses committed by the civil authorities in connection
with the state of emergency and describing them as violations of the Concordat
be read in all the churches of the diocese. That same prelate refused to
authorize 66 priests in his diocese to appear before the court of public order.
Elsewhere, incidents developed in certain Biscay localities in view of the re-
fusal of a parish priest to allow the display of the national flag in the church,
despite the exhortations of the bishop, the pro-Franco Monsignor Gurpide, who
died on 18 November. As of that date, a group of 40 priests had already been

locked in the Derio seminary for 12 days in protest against the pastoral line
of the bishop.

The above events reveal the profound links between a substantial portion of

the Basque clergy and Basque nationalism. The problem was not a new one, because
the theocratic and clerical nature given to his doctrine by Sabino Arana, the
father of Basque nationalism, is well known. This explains the confessional
nature of the early PNV [Basque Nationalist Party] and the large number of
priests and others with a religious calling in its ranks. It is true that the
ETA was to abandon this clerical aspect, but despite everything, priests, monks
and former seminarians are numerous in its membership.

The Burgos Trial

The Burgos trial, which continued throughout almost all of the month of December
1970, was another great landmark in the history of terrorism in the final phase
of the Franco era. Its tremendous national and international repercussions
contributed decisively to this mythicization of the ETA to which we referred
above. From many points of view, what was being judged there was not 16 ETA
activists. but the Franco regime. No one viewed the defendants as separatists
fighting against Spain, but rather as heroic fighters against the brutal dic-
tatorship which, after torturing them cruelly, subjected them to a farcical
court-martial.5

Among those tried in Burgos were two priests, a fact which gave rise, still

in the month of November, to a polemic between the authorities who wanted the
trial held behind closed doors, in accordance with the Concordat, and the de-
fendants and their sympathizers who wanted it public. This also was the pretext
for a joint pastoral letter from the bishop of San Sebastian, Monsignor Argnya,
and the apostolic administrator of the Bilbao diocese, Hinsignor Cirarda, in
which, after justifying a public trial "to avoid prejudice to the other lay
defendants," reiterated their desire to have the trial held in the regular court,
and asking in advance for the conunﬂation of any possible death sentences and
condemning "any kind of violence--structura1. subversive or repressive." This
pastoral letter provoked a harsh response from the minister of justice,

Hr Oriol. Distant as it is, one cannot help but see in this document an early

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use we I even.- vou VIII-A

precedent for the joint pastoral letter published by the Basque bishops in
I981. On 26 Novumber of that year, 1970, ABC said: "Sadly, disconsolately,
we regret that we cannot recall appeals similar to those which are the reason
for this commentary when the taxi driver. the police inspector and the traf-
fic policeman died. all of them very certainly baptized and members of the
church in the two dioceses where the document was signed."

A few days prior to the beginning of the trial, scheduled for 2 December 1970,
19 members of the opposition who had met to draft a letter of protest were
arrested in Madrid. In response to this, 100 lawyers took over a hall in the
Madrid Palace of Justice. which they refused to leave until those arrested
were released. The universities of Madrid and Barcelona decided to join in
the strike. and, again in Madrid, 500 women tried to demonstrate. carrying

a placard bearing the inscription "long live the young Basque patriots." The
agitation continued during the following days with demonstrations and strikes
in various cities. There was also a demonstration in Paris.

0n the very eve of the trial, it was learned that ETA members had abducted
(the press at that time called it kidnaping) tle honorary consul of Germany
in San Sebastian. Mr Beihl. LE MONDB concluded that this action was designed
to block death penalties, but "activist circles in the province of Cuipuzcoa"
reiterated that the purpose of the kidnaping was "to point up the irreducible
nature of the battle and to inform international opinion. believed to have
previously been insufficiently informed, of the profound reasons underlying
their cause."

It is not our intention here to describe the development of the court-martial
which began on 3 December to the accompaniment of great tension and which was
plagued by incidents involving members of the court. the accused and their
defenders. The protest movements in the Basque provinces and elsewhere in
the national territory increased as the trial went on. The Spanish Episcopal
Conference held in Madrid sent a note to the government asking for clemency
fur the defendants.. Another state of emergency in the province of Guipuzcoa
was declared by the government on the 4th of the month for a 3-month period.

The culminating moment in the trial occurred on 9 December, when in the course
of the interroyltion of defendant Mario Onnindia, he claimed status as a pri-
soner of war and invoked the application of the Geneva Convention. He shouted
"Cora Buskadi Askatutn." which was echoed by the other defendants. who then
broke into the Basque anthem, "Eusko Gudariak." Two of the members of the
council unsheathed their swords. and in the midst of a tremendous disturbance,
the president ordered the defendants removed from the courtroom. The defendants
then turned to their lawyers and rejected their defense. The president also
ordered the audience cleared from the courtroom, and the council continued

its proceedings behind closed doors.

The council suspended public hearings from 10 to 27 December, but the agita-
tion and protests did not die away. A movement which was international in
scope was spreading to large and smaller cities in Europe and elsewhere in
the world where Basque colonies were to be found, for example in Argentina
and Venezuela. On 14 December. the government suspended article 17 of the
Spanish Code of Law for 6 months for the whole-of the national territory.

39
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This was a state of "mini-emergency" which made it possible to hold those ar-
rested beyond the 72-hour limit.

On 18 December. a huge demonstration was held in Oriente Square in Madrid in
support of the regime and against terrorism. Similar gatherings were held

in other cities. This reaction on the part of the sectors supporting the Franco
regime did not suffice to conceal the discrepancies to be found among its vari-
ous "political families." The Palangists, who had been ousted from the govern-
ment in October of the preceding year (1969) following the so-called Hatesa
affair, profited from the opportunity to voice their criticisms of the techno-
cratic sector of Opus Day, which controlled the key posts. Carrero Blanco,

the patron of this faction, did not escape the attacks of the critics who demon-
strated within the sphere of the Spanish Cortes itself. Prince Juan Carlos,

who had been declared the "rightful successor to the king" in July of 1969.

was also the target of the anger of those who saw no other solution to the
situation but a return to the source and a harder line. In the army itself
indications of unease could be detected, since many of the military, in addi-
tion to complaining of the lack of authority they saw in the Burgos trial and

in the other events which had occurred, felt bothered by the "dirty work" which
had been entrusted to the army by the courts-martial.

On Christmas Day. Consul Beihl was released "without asking absolutely anything
in exchange, as Telesforo Honzon, president of the Anai-Artea, a society to

aid Basque refugees with headquarters in San Juan de Luz and close affiliation
with the ETA, made a point of stressing. The kidnap victim himself attributed
his release to "humanitarian reasons." and the ETA published a statement in
which it said that its purposes in kidnaping the consul had been "to save the
lives of our compatriots who are defendants in the Burgos trial" and "to see
that the whole world knows of the existence of our people and our indestructible
desire to fight for its full liberation, national independence, reunification
of the Basque north and south and establishment of a modern, democratic and
socialist Basque nation. They said that "we have sought to demonstrate, to

our people first of all, and then to the whole world, that the ETA is not an
irresponsible, fanatic or bloodthirsty gang the main pleasure of which is kill—
ing anyone falling into its hands, whether or not a direct opponent of our
cause." There could be no doubt that these goals had been achieved and that
tlw kidnaping, like the whole of the Burgos trial, had as its result an impres-
sive propaganda and psychological victory for the terrorist organization. In
later years, even after the establishment of democracy, the ETA was to derive
enormous profit from the Burgos trial. The most notable aspect of this triumph
is that it occurred at a time when the ETA had for all practical purposes been
dismantled, not only by the repressive actions of the Franco regime, but as

we will see fartlnr on, due to its own internal dissension as well. The Burgos
trial thus became something like a phenomenal oxygen tank which saved the life
of an almost moribund ETA. Paradoxically, the Franco regime became against

its will the great savior of the terrorist organization.

The last incident in the trial began when the sentencing was pronounced on

the afternoon of 28 December. The sentences even exceeded what the prosecutor
had asked. Six of the defendants were sentenced to death, three of them with

two death sentences each. An atmosphere of great tension continued for the
following 2 days and incidents occurred. Various European and Western Hemisphere

“0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV!‘ \’l| swans- vuu vuul

governments and the Vatican urged clemency. Colleges of lawyers and other
Spanish institutions added their voices to these appeals. Even the conserva—
tive archbishop of Barcelona. Monsignor Marcelo Gonzalez. sent a telegram to
the chief of state asking for "a generOus and Christian pardon." 0n the

30th of the month. after the pertinent meeting of the conncil of ministers.
Franco exercised his right to grant clemency. commuting the death sentences
"to less harsh penalties." i.e., long-term imprisonment. The sympathizers
with the regime saw this as a proof of his strength. The sectors close to

tlk: ETA and international public opinion saw Franco's clemency as a triumph
won "thanks to the activity of the people's masses...an international mobili-
zation," as a French weekly which often served as a spokesman for the ETA stated.
It should not be forgotten that up mtil that time. the ETA had only emitted
three assassinations: the traffic policeman Pardines, Inspector Hanzanas and
the taxi driver Monasterio. killed in January of 1969. The ETA was, then,

far from bathed in the blood of the subsequent years.

We have analyzed the Burgos trial in some detail because it was not only an
important landmark in the development of the last years of the Franco regime.
but also the dividing line marking the beginning of what we might call the
"adulthood" of the ETA. and as we said before. its greatest propaganda success
and its real ticket to salvation. Thanks to the Burgos trial, the ETA gained
a certain respectability which was to prove very advantageous to it in the
years to come. Many misunderstandings which developed in the early days of
democracy with regard to the ETA and even certain government decisions which
later proved erroneous had their roots. their reason for being and their explana-
tion in the Burgos trial. it would be no exaggeration to term that even an
authentic triumph for terrorism. In it the ETA feund itself legitimized and
was given a kind of letters of marque for continuing its "armed actions," the
organizational slang for its terrorist activities.

The Burgos trial was also of importance because it was the first time that

the Spanish state revealed that it had become aware of the terrorist phenomenon,
and specifically. of the meaning and importance of the ETA. The Burgos trial
indictment contains what we believe was the first official definition of the
ETA: "For more than [5 years. the secret ETA (Euzkadi ta Azkatasuna, or Free
Basque Fatherland) organization. a clandestine group of a separatist-terrorist-
comnmnist sort, has been operating in the provinces of Biscay, Guipuzeoa.
Navarre and Alava. By means of its armed grOups, surreptitiously established

in urban and rural centers, it has held a multitude of illegal meetings and
unlawful demonstrations, distributing subversive propaganda and placing inscrip-
tions on walls and engaging in thefts of weapons and explosives. armed attacks--
nine in the ecurse of these last 3 years, assassinations--three in number,

the placement and activation of explosive artifacts--in 46 officially recorded
instances. also in the course of these last few years. all with a view to al-
tering the domestic order. public safety, social peace and national unity.
attacking the prestige of the goVernment, our institutions and authorities

and effecting reprisais of a political—social nature. In these activities.
carried out most assertively between the spring of 1968 and the month of May
1969. the defendants present in the courtroom have played the following role...."
The final judgment also described the ETA as an "illegal and clandestine organi-
zation seeking to disturb the domestic public order. discredit the Spanish

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nation and its basic historic institutions. effect the violent destruction

or the state organization and dismember a part of the national territory through
subversive actions of various sorts. terrorism. armed struggle and social revo—
lution....As methods of implementing this separatist revolutionary program,
the ETA has been using all of the modern procedures of subversive warfare...."
The authorities of the Franco regime realized with concern that the terrorism
with which they had to deal was no longer made up of sporadic actions by iso-
lated individuals or those belonging to ill-structured organizations. Note
that reference was made to "modern procedures" and to "subversive warfare."

The same concern and identical terminology can be seen in the speech which

the No 2 man in the regime. Admiral Carrero Blanco. delivered to the Spanish
Cortes on 21 December, in the midst of the tension caused by the Burgos trial.
The main part of his speech dealt with subversive warfare. "The Hestern world."
Carrero said. "is becoming the victim of the progressive escalation of the
subversive action of communism. which affects us to an even greater extent

if we remember its defeat on our soil in 1939." within the framework of this
activity. "communism recruits gangs of merciless, paid mercenaries who engage

in sabotage, crime, piracy in the air and the kidnaping of diplomatic repre-
sentatives. And the frequent pretext for all of these criminal activities."

he went on. "is often, in a tragic paradox. a demand for freedom." Farther

on. he spoke of the ETA. "which beneath its apparent political affiliation

with Basque separatism. conceals the reality of its real function as a terrorist
agent in the service of communism." Those who saw the hand of the Soviet KSB
behind all of the terrorist demonstrations 10 years later were not to differ
very much from this view expressed by the power behind the throne and strongman
of the Franco regime.

The Origins of the ETA

But what is the ETA? How did it originate? Hhat were its initial goals? How
did it develop?

In the introduction to an interesting recent book on the early days of the

ETA (Curutz Jauregui Bereciartu. "The Ideology and Political Strategy of the
ETA: An Analysis of Its Development Between 1959 and 1968," let Century Pub-
lishing House. Madrid. 1981), the author. after expressing the view that the
ETA "is one of the phenomena provoking the greatest concern and interest not
only within the scope of the Spanish state. but even. although to a lesser
extent. beyond our frontiers." says that this is "one of tie least known aspects
of the recent history of the Franco and post-Franco eras." In fact. the very
clandestine and the illegal nature of this organization has been the reason
that cliches and ignorance concerning the ETA have been more abundant than

has responsible information. This is the reason for the importance of books
such as that mentioned above. which we will follow for the basic purpose of
tracing the main lines in the development of the ETA in these early years.5b

Basque nationalism. nurtured basically by the PNV. had entered into a weakened

period when, with the crisis experienced by the Franco regime at the end of
world Bar [1 dealt with. the various ideological sectors which had opposed
Franco from exile realized that the western allies would never go beyond mere

vorbnlism in opposition to the dictatorship.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u U»: nun-u. in”. nuns

Despite this disordered situation, some organizations Survived and others were
established. One of these was the yOuth organization of the PNV. the Eusko
Gaztedi (EGI), which began to operate in the Basque territory of Spain begin-
ning in 1952. in that same year, another group, the ERIN, made up of young
university students who decided to hold weekly meetings on Basque issues, was
established. The EKIN established a relationship with the 38!, i.e.. with
the PNV. which helped it in its activities, and the two organizations merged
in 1956. A disciplinary problem in 1958 was to lead to the schism of a group
made up of the former EKlN [action and some former members of the E61. In
1959 this group created a new organization. the ETA. which did not. however,
break entirely with the PNV.

The ETA, in this first stage. was basically engaged in information work, offer-
ing short courses and publishing pamphlets and leaflets. Its program coincided
with the traditional nationalism of Sabino Arana. although it rejected confes-
sionalism and adopted a more nondenominational approach apparently derived

from the Basque Nationalist Action group. Despite everything, the religious
influence, references to pontifical doctrine and a certain mysticism clearly
rooted in the beliefs of Sabine Axana are perceptible in its early texts. It

is not difficult to find here the influence of the training of many of the
members of the ETA in religious institutions, and more concretely, the weight

of the Jesuit alma mater in Deusto. This provided the basis for the saying
which developed to tin effect that "the ETA was born in the sacristy." We

have also referred above to the number of priests and monks in its ranks. This
entire problem can be placed within the framework of the link, also previously
mentioned. between broad sectors of the Basque clergy and nationalism. This
early ETA showed absolute unawareness of the problems of the workers. and within
it. the same primary anticommunism which has always characterized Basque na-
tionalism could be perceived in it. In these early formulations, there was
however already present the ideal of absolute independence for the Basque nation,
although autonomy was accepted as a possible first step. The ETA in fact was
the incarnation of the line of intransigent nationalism, opposed to intervention
in "Spanish" politics and hypothetical alliances with non-Basque forces, repre-
sented previously by the Aberri and Jagi-Jagi groups.

Beginning with the first ETA attack on 18 July 1961, to which we have already
referred. that organization moved ever farther apart from the other Basque
political forces and in particular from the PNV. whose leaders, Leizaola above
all, were harshly criticized. At about that time, "the references to armed
struggle began." but as Jaurcgui says. "this was seen as a very distant possi-
bility...because the number of its members was still very small, and the majority
of them were better prepared for giving lectures than striking physical blows."6

In May or 1962. tlu ETA held its first assembly. at which some principles were
set forth, serving as its first complete self—definition. The ETA defined
itself as the "revolutionary Basque national liberation movement created in

the patriotic resistance." He cannot go into an analysis of its ideology here,
nor into the foundation established for Basque nationalism, which was moving
ever farther away from the nationalism of Sabina Arana, but without entirely
breaking with it. Along with the absence of confessionalism mentioned above.
it should be stressed that the role attributed by Sabina Areas to race was
attributed by the ETA to the ethnic group. a more flexible concept. In this

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and other respects the ETA owed a great deal to the previously mentioned book
by Federico Krutwig entitled "The Basque Land—A Dialectical Study of a Nation-
ality." This work was published in Argentina in 1963 under the pseudonym

F. Sarrailh de lhartza. often cited in quotations of it. It should be noted
that Krutwig (born in Guecho in 1921 of a German father and a mother who was
born in Biscay. but who came of an old Venetian family) was not at that time

a member of the organization, despite which his work "was to become the true
ideological framework of the ETA for a number of years." as Jauregui states.7
In another place this author says that "The Basque Lands" served as a real

tool of deliverance for the undisciplined and disoriented ETA of 1963.8

Immediately after the first assembly. a discussion began within the ETA about
violence. Against those who, taking their inspiration from Gandhi, urged non-
violent resistance, Julen K. Madariaga. one of the faunders, in charge of the
sixth, or military, branch, adopted an attitude in favor of violence. There
was. however, no final decision, and Hadariaga returned to the attack early

in 1963, profiting from the arrests of ETA militants which occurred in October
1962. In an article published in issue No 17 of ZUTII, entitled "Dialogue

or Violence," he said that "we Basques have not ourselves chosen violence:

it has been iaposed on us." and he went on to say that the Basque cOuntry was
in a state of war against Spain and France "which will not end until the last
inch of our national territory has been liberated."

As we have already said elsewhere. a pauphlet entitled "Rebellion in the Basque
Territory." which marked a change in the attitude of the ETA and its decision
in favor of armed struggle, was published in June of 1966. The most serious
terrorist problea in modern Spain was about to come into being. This pamhlet,
the true bible of the ETA activist. described the ideal activist as "impossible
to follow or catch, slippery as an eel in water, moving like a butterfly in
space (sudden and unexpected shifts to the left and right, to the north and
south) and fast as a hungry tiger." And it even provided combat instructions
with meticulous precision:

“The march toward our objective is begun at dusk, and our forces approach it
in small groups and by different paths.

"The best hour for. attack is usually midnight (12 or 1 o'clock) when the enemy
is sleeping. Darkness is our best friend.

"After the attack. we have the entire night to move speedily away from the
zone in which it took place.

"He can attack with great cries paralyzing the enemy with fear, or in absolute
silence. like cats, as the case dictates.

"It is necessary to advance silently. without speaking, without smoking and
without light."

As another historian of the ETA said} "these instructions had that same imaginary
and unreal character in the specific conditions of the Basque territory. from

the geographic as well as the geopolitical, military, social or economic points

of view."

’04
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kurtwig. in his book. also provided argments in favor of armd struggle. and
his influence on the ETA was to be decisive. "The Basque people." he wrote.
"not only have a right to rise up in arms to oppose denationalization by Spain
and France. but have a moral duty to oppose the dehunanization carried out

by the oppreasor state. It is an obligation for every son of the Basque nation
to oppose denationalization. even though revolution, terrorism and war must

be employed to do 30.":lo Krutwig quoted not only Clausewitz. the great theore—
ticiau of modern warfare, but also the theoreticians of revolutionary warfare.
Hao chung and Ho Chi Hinh and the professionals in counterguerrilla tactics
such as the French Colonel Trinquler. Krutwig leaned toward urban rather than
rural guerrilla tactics. since the Basque territory is heavily industrialized.
and he pointed out some of the objectives on which guerrilla action should
focus. such as communications. electric lines, the administrative facilities
of the oppressing power, the courts and the executive bodies of the civilian
or military authority.

Krutwig already accepted the principle of spiraling violence. in other words.
"the response in every case to any enemy action should be a stronger counter-
measure. in order to force him to accept our will." This gave rise to the

theory of action-repression-action which the ETA has retained throughout its
whole history.

The second assembly was held in 1963 but was of no importance. because it
brought about no change in the ideological structure. Nor was the third assembly
(1961.). held as Garmendia says "under the hegemony of the old guard," decisive.
although it did produce the institutionalization of "108 liberados" and the
pamphlet "Rebellion in the Basque Country" to which we just referred was of-
ficially approved. it was also in this period (mid-1966) that the definitive
break with the PNV came about. with rejection of its "bourgeois nationalism."
since "the Basque bourgeoisie is incapable of achieving the aspirations of

the Basque people" (ZUTIK. No 21). "And in asking that the oppressive mental
dictatorship cease in the Basque territory. we are asking for the disappearance
of all of these capitalist myths and fetishes which have developed in our fa-
therland through bourgeois domination" (ZUTIK. No 23). In other issues of
ZUTIK in that period. more or less similar texts are found. showing the develop-
ment of the "socialist nationalism or nationalist socialism" which was to be-
come the clearest definition of the ETA.

At the beginning of 1965. a Navarrese terrorist organization called Irache.
which the preceding December had attacked the Pamplona Honument to the Fallen,
merged with the ETA. That same year the fourth asseubly was held, a very im-
portant one because although "it did not innediately produce any break. it
nonetheless contained implicit within it the germ of later schisms."n At
that assembly also. one of the most important ETA docunents. the "Letter to
the lntellectuais." was approved. as well as the famous theory. basic to its
terrorist activity. of the spiral. It was necessary to wait. however. until
1968-69 before this theory was deepened. It was Zalbide. one of the most im-
portant leaders of that era. who published his work '“roward a Basque Revolu-
tionary Strategy" in iRAULTZA. under the pseudonym K. de Zumbeltz.

The decisions of the fourth assembly. and especially the "letter to the In-
tellectuals," faithfully reflected the balance of forces existing in the

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
organization, Jauregui says,12 revealed specifically in two dominant lines,

the Third Horld faction, whose main representative was Zalbide, and the labor
faction, represented by lturrioz. A third trend, the ethnolinguistic, had
Alvarez Emparanza, better known by the pseudonym Txillardegi, as its most typi-
cal exponent.

Shortly after the fourth assembly ended, the executive comittee decided to
initiate a series of armed actions for the purpose of collecting funds. Before
launching into this activity, a statement, published in issue No 32 of ZUTIK,
was addressed to the Basque people, explaining the need to undertake what in
the ETA slang was called "the confiscation of the means necessary for the revo-
lutionary struggle. It is curious that since the ETA was not certain that

its followers would understand these procedures, which represented an iuportant
step in the conversion of the ETA into a simple terrorist organization. it
reasoned out this move carefully, because as Garmendia writes. "this decision
presmned that the doubt as to whether the people were prepared to mderstand
and undertake armed actions could be eliminated." The first attack took place
on 24 September 1965. when a collector for the Bank of San Sebastian was inter-
Cepted in Vergara.

A few days later, as a result of the police action undertaken because of this
robbery, Zalhido was arrested. Other leaders were therefore forced to go into
exile, among them Bscubi, one of the most outstanding individuals in the leading
cadres. The result of this was that Francisco (Patxi) Iturrioz remained in
charge of the political office. A grow which was to place its imprint,
typically prolabor and hardly nationalist at all, on the subsequent issues

of ZUTIK, formed around him. During this period the organization moved closer
to the Union of Basque Socialists, or Busko Sozialisten Batasuna (ESPA), the
Basque section of the People's Liberation Front (FLY), commonly known as
"Felipe." as well as the Workers Oomissions. This sector, as Garmendia himself
says, "began to draft the general lines of what was called the new revolutionary
socialist strategy." This same author goes on to say: "There was much talk
about the fact that it (the line) was 'eliminating' the national effort, by
basing the whole of the policy on the contradiction between the bourgeoisie

and the proletariat."

This faction, which was promptly labeled "pro-Spanish," and "liquidationist,"

by the discontented militants, who called its members "l-‘elipes." only accepted
"the use of limited violence as a consciousness-raising factor and a demon-
stration of force to the established authorities." On the other hand, "un-
limited violence (that directed toward the destruction of human life) is only
justified in the first phase of the armed rebellion." It was insisted. moreov: r,
that "this violence does not alienate or polariae the organization, and is

one activity among many."

'32.. reaction of the nationalist sectors to this "pro-Spanish deviation" was

not long in coming, and it was to be Txillardegi who led this movement opposing
the theses of the political office, which was headed by Iturrioz. Prom Brussels.
where he was living in exile, Txillardegi sent the executive comittee three
reports (26 November 1965, 19 December and 6 March 1966). In these reports,

the leader of the ethnolinguistic faction, which had joined with Krutwig's

Third Horld group. harshly criticized the Iturrioz line reflected in the issues

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(buninulng with No 35. and Nos 40 thrOugh 44 in particular) of ZUTIK. In
Txillardegi's view. "our national liberation struggle cannot in any case be
presented as a struggle for purely social emancipation." Instead of the class
front suggested by Iturrioz, Txillardegi proposed a national front. calling

for the expulsion of the pro-Spanish faction who had made the ETA into a "not-
thern communist organization." To counteract the influence of ZUTIK, the ethno-
linguistic and Third World factions launched a new magazine called BRANKA (Prow).
in the pages of which the battle against the political office headed by Iturrioz
and the proworker faction was continued. Many militants, such as Escubi, who
returned secretly from exile, and the Behevarrieta brothers, joined in this
battle against the political office. It ended with the expulsion of Iturrioz
and his "pro-Spanish" supporters.

The fifth assembly. certainly the most important in the development of the

ETA, held its first session in December of 1966 to ratify the expulsion of

the members of the labor faction after the reading of a report entitled "Analy-
sis and Criticism of the Social—Chauvinist Pro-Spanish Deviation."

lturrioz and the others expelled established a group called ETA Berri (New

ETA) and continued to public ZUTIK, such that from then until August 1969 there
were two magazines called ZUTIK. At that same time, the ETA Berri took the
name Kommunistak. and some years later it joined the Communist Movement of
Spain.

This important schism confirmed Carmendia's statement to the effect that in
the ETA crises, "it was the group which urged and put into practice armed action
which in the end gained control of the organization."13

Until the second session of the fifth assembly was held (March 1967), new ten-
sion developed, new between the ethnolinguistic and Third World factions. Once
the common enemy had been defeated, the two factions vied for hegemony. Victory
was clearly won by the Third World supporters of revolutionary nationalism

and revolutionary war. Although they were not expelled, Txillardegi, Benito

del Valle and Javier Imaz submitted a document in April of 1967 announcing

their decision to leave the organization. In this way, after the holding of

the second session of the fifth assembly, "the Third World group became the
legitimate heir of the ETA," as Jauregui says. The ethnolinguistic faction.

now outside the ETA, rallied around the magazine BRANKA and was therefore to

be called the Branka CrOup. Like Garmendia, Jauregui too says that "the victory
of the nationalist wing within the ETA, and within that group, the faction
Supporting armed struggle, represented a development which from that time on

was to become a constant in each and every one of the successive crises which
would occur within the movement."“‘

At the filth assembly, the ETA decided to organize itself in terms of four
fronts: political, economic, military and cultural. Kurtwig had defined two
different types of guerrilla warfare, with three or four fronts, depending

on whether or not a cultural front was included. The need or lack of it for

a cultural front depended on whether the struggle sought national liberation,

in addition to social liberation. or had only the latter as its goal. In three-
lront guerrilla warfare, the military would be subordinate to the political,

but in four-front guerrilla warfare, the cultural front would be supreme. It
goes without saying that in Krutwig's view, the Basque situation demanded four
fronts.

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the terrorist action began on a regular basis in 1967, and was to come to the
foregrOund of public attention in 1968, the year in which the ETA committed

the first assassinations. It was in that year also that the state action against
ETA terrorism began. with a court-martial at which lnaki Sarasketa was given

a long prison sentence (15 June), but the eonander in chief of the Sixth Mili-
tary Region (Barges). which includes the Basque territory. disagreed with the
verdict, and a new court-martial (28 June) sentenced him to death. "An inten-
sive popular mobilization developed ,” Jauregui writes, “and appeals were made

to states and political and trade union forces abroad. mder this pressure,"

he goes on to say. "the chief of state found himself forced to grant a pardon."

shortly afterward. as we know. the assassination of Inspector Manzanas occurred
(2 August). The action-repression-action spiral began to operate. Throughout
1968. the activities of the state againsc the ETA produced 1:34 arrests, 189
prison sentences, 75 deportations and 38 banislnents. Torture also began to
become a regular method of repression used by the Franco regime. "hen the

time came for the Burgos trial (December 1970). the ETA was to be practically
dismantled. But that trial was to win the organization real recognition and

to constitute the culminating moment of its prestige. as we have already said.

But even earlier. another important internal event occurred, the outcome of
which proved to be another schism. Early in 1970, after a period of internal
peace following the fifth assembly, there could be distinguished at least four
factions in the ETA. First of all. there was the new leadership. unrecognized
by a mnber of sectors in the organization. which wanted to make of the ETA

a party of the workers class which would be the leader of the Basque revolution.
One of the first decisions of this new provisional leadership was to halt all
armed activity or that related to activism. Secondly. mention must be made

of the so-called Red Cells, also pursuing a very prolabor line and the product.
in large part, of the study groups formed in exile (Paris, Louvain. Brussels)
"in the leftist intellectual environment following Hay 1968." 1“ and concerned
with the application of Marxism to the Basque problem. This group did not

view armed struggle sympathetically either. A third group was made up of the
supporters of the colonialist theses (Krutwig. Hadariaga. Beltza). who were
also divided internally. Finally, in fourth place. there were the "mills,"
whose best known leaders were Hadariaga and Juan Jose Echave. This group.
which supported radical nationalism, did not recognize the leadership as such
and "waged war on its own account.”

To these four groups, Jauregui adds that there were the Branlw Group. "ideo-
logically nligned with the 'milis,‘ and acting as the guerrilla force defending
Basque purism. with Txillurdegi as its most notable leader, and the Anai-Artea
association, devoted to aid to Basque refugees. headed by Telesforo Manson.

and with views very similar to those of the Branlta Group."15

The sixth assembly was scheduled by the leadership for the manner of 1970.

By a majority vote. and at the urging of the Red Cells. the "milis" were ex—
pelled. They and the colonialists challenged the validity of that sixth assembly,
and thus a schism came about, resulting in an ETA-Fifth Assembly. known as

the ETA-V. and ETA-Sixth Assembly, or ETA-V1, which insisted that the assembly

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
avn VII swans; var. Vl‘hl

in dispute was valid. Thus the ETA had come to one of its most critical mo-
ments. but as Jauregui writes in discussing the Burgos trial, "the Franco
regime was to come, involuntarily. of course. to the aid of the ETA."

The ETA-V was to be the "legitimate" ETA which succeeded in merging with the
861 Batasuna organization, made up of an inportant sector of the PIN youth.
which was to give it new impetus. There was a certain adoption of labor pro-
grams, and with regard to act ivism. some kidnapings of industrialists, such
as Zabala (1972) and lluarte (1973), were carried out.

The ETA-VI, for its part. began its independent life in an internal atmosphere
of intense polemics as well, in search of its own identity. In this internal
debate. the partisans of Trotskyiam won out, with the result that this organi-
zation joined the Revolutionary Communist league (LCR). For some time, the
organization called itself the ETA-VI-LCR. But later it was called simply
LKI. The "minority" groups in the ETA-VI ended q) by joining the CRT [Revolu-
tionary Organization of Workers] or the Basque Comunist Party. Thus the ETA
was the quarry which produced a number of cadres for various workers parties.
These individuals. in their personal development or the collective development
of the groups of which they were members, when faced with the nationalist-
socialist choice. opted clearly for the latter. We have already seen that

the "armed struggle" element also played a basic role: In the dilemma opposing
armed action to mass action, the workers faction always inclined toward the
latter, while the nationalists chose the former. It is not difficult to see

n confirmation here of the aggressive nature which nationalism always has.

The great nationalist movements have usually led to inerialism, while those
of a minor nature have not infrequently led to terrorism.

From the Assassination of Carrero Blanco to the Correo Street Attack

The ETA-V, or simply ETA. as it has come to be called, continued to have serious
problems in cohesion. Txikia, one of the key leaders at that time, succeeded
in keeping the organization united thanks to his leadership capacity. when

he died in a clash with the police forces in Algorta (19 April 1973), the strug-
gle between the two sectors in the organization. the military front and the
workers front, broke out once again. The debate was not between armed struggle
or mass action as such. but on the subject of the proper means and times for

the former. The sixth assembly was held in the midst of this atmosphere of
tension (since the validity of the other sixth assembly. held in 1970, was

not recognized). The crisis was obvious and a split seemed inevitable. How-
ever. before the umpteenth schism occurred. the ETA was to carry out one of

its most important deeds. and one of those which had the greatest influence

on Spanish politics. We are referring to the assassination of the prime minister,
Admiral Carrero Blanco. on 20 December 1973.

It is not our purpose here to describe how that crime was comitted, nor even
to analyze its influence on the development of the last months of the Franco
regime. The very complete "success" of the spectacular attack which resulted
in the death of Carrero, a driver and a police guard gave rise at the very

outset to consideration of the hypothesis that the ETA had received some type
of aid in carrying out its plan. In this context. the intelligence agencies
of the major powers, the CIA and the KGB, appeared on the scene. Some years

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

later news reports were still referring to this possibility. No conclusive
proof, however, was ever offered.

The ETA, for its part, produced its own version of the attack, code named
Operation Ogre. The terrorist organization published a book by that name
(Julen Aguirre, "Operation Ogre-«ﬂow and Why We Executed Carrero Blanco,"
edited by Hugalde, Ruedo Iberico Publishing House, Paris, Ibndaye. 1976).

This terrorist act was without a doubt the most accurate blow struck against
the Franco regime by the ETA, since it destroyed the keystone of its continuity
after the death of the general, which, in view of his age, could be expected
within the next few years. On the other hand, it put an end to the concept

of an ETA which was about to disappear. the victim of its own contradict ions
and police pursuit. The assassination of Carrero Blanco was the first impor-
tant action carried out by the ETA outside the Basque territory. It had been
necessary to establish an entire intelligence system and a minimal infrastruc-
ture in a foreign environment in which it was not easy to find sympathy. The
ETA members themselves admitted that "the people outside the Basque territory
do not generally understand the Basque problem....They are not at all clear
about the problem of armed struggle, for example....There is a great inability
to see that the Basques are a people and that as such they have a right to
their national freedom." 0n the other hand, "the organization does not extend
to the rest of the Spanish state, nor do we have people in Spanish organizations
prepared to help us in armed activities."16

These difficulties made it necessary for the ETA terrorists to engage in lengthy
preparat ions. which began a year before the attack was mounted. Specifically,
in December of 1972, a commando unit sent to Madrid began collecting data for
the planning of the operation, which in an initial phase was planned as a kid-
naping to "get the militants out of the prisons of the Spanish state." Ac-
cording to ETA estimates. there were more than 150 members of the organization
being held, although their purpose was to demand the release of all political
prisoners.

The ETA was at a crucial point in its opposition to the Franco regime. "The
regime does not want more 'Borgos' cases, and it prefers to eliminate the of-
ficials of the ETA one by one, rather than capturing them alive and taking
them to trial." This was the reason for the importance of the goal and even
for the decision to assassinate Carrero Blanco instead of kidnaping him, since
"execution in itself also has very clear scope and certain political objec-
tives."17

The death of Carrero initiated the final stage of the Franco Bra, with Arias
Navarro heading the government. A few weeks after the assassination, the new
prime miniswr gave an address of a clearly liberal nature to the Cortes. Thus.
on the date of that speech, the so-called "spirit of 12 February" was launched.
The movement toward liberalization had many ups and downs, and those who had
hoped for democratization of the regime were soon disillusioned, particularly
when, at the end of October 1971., Minister of Information and Tourism Pio
Cabanillas, regarded as one of the most determined defenders of the more open
approach, was dismissed. This led to the imaediate resignation, out of soli-
darity with him, of Minister of Finance Barrera de Irimo and many other offi-
cials on various levels, all of them known for their liberal inclinations.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
But before this end to hopes of democratization came about, the most important
terrorist attack. not only in all of 1974, but at any tile in the history of

the regime. occurred.

A little before 2:30 on the afternoon of 13 September, an explosive device
went off in the Rolando cafeteria located on Correo Street. opposite one of
the side doors of the General Directorate of Security. Among those killed
were a female government employee. while 13 others were among thoae wounded.
There was no doubt that what had been attempted was to strike a blow against
the police. CAHBIO 16 reported that "this incident...was the bloodiest and
most spectacular to occur in the country since the end of the Civil War." On
the other hand. this was "mass terrorism, traditionally ultraright-wing."

the same weekly magazine said, making mention of the bomb which exploded at
the Bank of Agriculture in Milan in Decenber of 1969. (In this last incident,
which was first attributed to some anarchists. neofaseist groups later seemed
to be involved. It was the beginning of a series of incidents in Italy in
which the so-called "black plots" and "red plots," in other words extreme right-
wing groups along with extreme left-wing groups, seemed both to be involved.)

The police attributed responsibility at the outset to the ETA, and specifically
to one member. Juan Manuel Calarraga Hendizabal, alias "Zaldivi" or "Pocholo."
Ills photograph was widely publicized. and a million pesetas was offered to
anyone providing information leading to his capture. The press reported that
this was the first time that a reward of this type had been offered.

Another reason for blaming the ETA was that a notebook found in the possession
of ETA member Arruabarrena. alias "El Tanque," who was arrested on 28 August
along with another member of the organization, Garmendia. contained a note
which read ”Rolando 2:15-2:65." This evidence persuaded almost no one, and
people saw the attack rather as an act of provocation on the part of the ex—
treme right wing. irritated by the moderate liberalism of the Arias government.
It was also so viewed by various French media agencies, such as 1.8 FIGARO.
L'AURORE and the ORTF [office of French Radio Broadcasting and Television].

It was also hard for some Spanish periodicals to point to the ETA. They pre-
ferred to attribute this deed to the RAP [Anti-Fascist and Patriotic Revo-
lutionary Front], which on Saturday. the lloth, published a statement in Paris
denying any connection with the incident. The Madrid chief of pol ice, Federico
Quintero. insisted that "everything points to the ETA," although the doubts
were not dissipated.

in fact. the Basque terrorist organization had accumulated "prestige" from
the Burgos trial and the assassination of Carrero Blmco, and had developed

:1 wry favorable image. as a result of which the ETA terrorism was regarded
as "selective," having as its target specific persons in the police apparatus
or the state administration, but incapable of an act of "mass terrorism" lack-
ing discrimination as to the victims. "The ETA has broken out of its pattern,
destroyed its image in the eyes of the people. It has comitted an atrocity,"
wrote CAMBIO 16. And the head of the political-social brigade himself. Jose
Sainz. who until a short time before than had been contender in chief of the
police in the Basque territory, and was one of those who knew the ETA best.
seemed hesitant. saying: "This is the most unfortunate act of any the ETA
has carried out. and it speaks very poorly for it." Nonplussed, he added that

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"perhaps this was not ordered by the organization. but by a commando unit."
in the eyes of this expert on the ETA, who had said on leaving his post in
the Basque country that the police resources for eliminating it were lacking,
this incident did not fit with what the ETA had been up to that moment.

In the subsequent days, a large number of individuals were arrested, including
Eva Forest, the wife of the writer Alfonso Sastre, who seemed to be the ETA
link in Madrid. Another of the persons arrested, Lidia Falcon, who spent
several months in jail, as did her husband, Eliseo Bayo, recently wrote a book
entitled "Friday the 13th on Correo Street" (Planet Publishing House. Barce-
lona. 1981) in which she accuses Forest of informing on the others arrested.
In the homes of almost all of them, secret compartments of the kind called
"people's prisons," some of them very tiny, were found. In some of the houses
members of the ETA had been hidden on various occasions, specifically a pair
of young people, a Basque-French girl and a young man from Alicante, who accord-
ing to police investigations seemed to be possible perpetrators of the crime.

Only after some years did it come to be obvious to all that the ETA was respon-
sible for the Correo Street crime. But at that time, the extreme right wing
was being accused by democratic circles, and the police were even thought to
be involved, since it was known that a few days previously. 008 [General Direc-
torntc of Security] officials had been warned to stay away from the Rolando
cafeteria. The police explained that this was due to the suspicions aroused
by the notation in Arruabarrena's notebook. to which we referred above.

These d0ubts were still further confirmed when on 29 October the ETA issued

a statement denying its participation in the attack, and accusing "ultrafascist
cells closely linked with certain policy and political circles in the Spanish
state," whose goal they said was "to provoke a crisis within the regime in
order to strengthen their internal unity in support of the hardest and most
intransigent sectors." It would seem that there was a bitter argument within
the ETA concerning the incident, about whether or not to acknowledge author—
ship of it. Persuaded that it had been a mistake, the members decided to deny
responsibility specifically in an attempt to rescue the very positive image
they had enjoyed up until them.

However, the internal differences within the ETA led some to think that "the
future of this illegal organization is in question."18 Within the organiza-
tion. the dominance of the military front, which advocated extremist activism,
was evident, while the other groups made different analyses of the situation.
Moreover, the continuing police pursuit, which culminated in a nuaber of
shootings (three killed and several wounded in the year 1974 alone, and more
than [00 arrested within the same period) had "upset and short-circuited some
of the elements in the organization, which seem to be disturbed and nude ner-
vous by the police harassment."19

This difficult situation within the ETA led to schism once again. The workers
front, irritated by the domination of the so-called "milis." withdrew from
the organization, and the majority of its members established the Laugile
Abertzale irnultzaillen Alderia, or Revolutionary Party of Patriotic Workers
(LAlA).

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'rhu withdrawal of tlm workers front was consummated at the third meeting of

the biltzar Txlkia (BT), or the small assembly of the organization, which was
held in June of 1974. when the fourth meeting of the BT was held in October

of that same year, the last ETA schism thus far occurred. The majority of

the factions in the 31‘ agreed to eliminate the structure based on fronts, estab-
lishing instead a separation between political and military activities. In

the political sphere, the establishment of a Basque leftist front with a pro-
gram based on national independence and reunification, a Basque orientation

and the establishment of socialism and proletarian internationalism was sup-
posed. In the military sphere (separated at the base but linked with the
political sphere at the summit by having the same officials responsible for

the various geographic zones), the special commando units (Bereziak) responsible
for broad-scale actions were created. This majority sector is that which we
know today as the ETA Political and Military Assembly (p-m).

The minority sector did not agree to this plan, and in its statement (Agiria)
published in November 1974, it chose to leave political action to other organi-
zations. As a result, it separated and formed the present ETA Military (m).

These two organizations are separate both in terms of strategic guidelines
and ideological concepts. while the ETA (p-m) tries to reconcile the mass
struggle and the political and military struggle. assigning the workers class
a protagonistic role, the ETA (m) limits its role to serving as a clandestine
group dedicated exclusively to armed struggle. and it does not participate

in the struggle of the workers class, which in its view should be separately
organized. In the view of this sector which created the ETA (m), an armed
group cannot intervene. without breaking the established rules. in the inter-
play of bourgeois democracy. the regime it regards as the most probable imme-
diate alternative in Spain. That role should be left to a front made up of
patriotic and antioligarchic forces which does not engage in armed Struggle.2°

The two ETA organizations propose and engage in armed struggle, but while this
is the exclusive method for the ETA (m), for the ETA (p-m), although it is
a priority method, it is combined with other types of action.

This dual ETA existence was not to change throughout the early years of demo-
cracy. The position of tie twe branches with regard to the various problems
which developed—-autonomy, statutes, referendum, etc--were to be as different
as the political organizations which served in one way or another as their
support.

Other Kinds of Terrorism

It is sometimes forgotten that the last years of Franco's regime were marked
by the imprint of terrorism. Naturally, this was the era of the Italian Red
Brigades, of the Red Army Faction in Germany-—an almost worldwide spread of
terrorism. It was not without reason that Claire Sterling, in her now classic
book "The Terror Network," referred to 1968 as the year in which the universal
spread of the phenomenon began.

Terrorism in Spain. on the other hand, was not limited to the ETA. Various
groups appeared during the final phase of the Franco regime, both on the left
and on the right. some of them destined to continue pursuing their activities
under the democratic system.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Most frequently. leftist terrorism has had an anarchistic connotation. In

the Who's. however. terrorism proceeded to rely on Harxist-leninist concepts.
Within the ETA itself. Harxlsm-Leninism frequently appeared as an ideology at
the end of the 1960's, and at the Burgos trial itself, a umber of the defen-
dants declared themselves to be Harxist-Leninists. The curious thing is that
the sectors of the ETA which have. one after the other, claimed to be Marxist-
beninists. from the ETA Berri headed by Iturrioz to the founders of the LAIA.
have always come into conflict with the nationalist sectors and those advocating
armed struggle. Within the ETA, in short. terrorism and Harxism-beninism have
not always coexisted happily.

However, in those final years of the Franco era, we will find some groups which
combined Harxism-leniniam and armed struggle, a phrase which as we already

know is the euphemistic term given to terrorism both by those who theorize
about it and those who practice it.

The remote origins of many of these groups lie in the Sine-Soviet conflict.
After the break between the USSR and People's China. schisms and splits occurred
in the communist parties of the western countries. with the emergence of the
"Maoist" groups claiming to be adherents of liarxism-Leninism and opposed to

the pro-Soviet communists they regard as revisionists.

In Spain, the "national reconciliation" policy initiated by Santiago Carrillo-—
which can be interpreted as the first step toward what has come to be called
"Burocouunism"--also provoked rejection on the part of the ultraleftist sectors
which on occasion had. at least verbally, urged armed struggle.

One of the groups which regarded itself as Maoist was the Spanish Communist
Party (Marxist-beninist), which was formed in 1961.. Some years later it decided
to organize a "mass front" which would include other related ideological sec-
tors. In January of 1970. a coordination committee was created. and in 1974

the Anti-Fascist and Patriotic Revolutionary Front (FRAP) announced its exis-
tence. It was made up of a number of Harxist-beninist grows and others which
were not, such as the Spanish Democratic Republican Action (ARDE).

The first armed action of the PRAP was undertaken in Madrid in connection with
the unauthorized 1 May 1973 demonstration. A deputy inspector of police. Juan
Antonio Fernandez Gutierrez, was attacked by a group of demonstrators, who
stabbed him to death. In the days that followed more than 100 persons were
arrested and many of them were charged with membership in the M.

In the fol lowing months, arrests continued to be made, and on a number of oc-
casions various weapons. as well as propaganda material, were confiscated.

In November of the following year. FRAP groups distributed leaflets and threw
Molotov cocktails at various locations in Barcelona. to demonstrate their soli-
darity with the SEAT [Spanish Passenger Car Company, Inc.] workers. A few
weeks earlier. the FRAP. as we have already said, had denied any role in the
Correo Street crime.

During 1975, the terrorist activity of the RAP increased. During the stnmer
of that year, it assassinated an armed police agent (Lucio Rodriguez Martin)
on Mensa Street (Iberia Computer Center) in Madrid (14 July); 3 civil guard.

51.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(:uslmiru Sunelrz. in the Curabanchel neighborhood of Madrid (2 August); and

a lieutenant in the Civil Guard named Antonio Pose Rodriguez. in the El Satan
neighborhood (16 August). Those presmed responsible for this last assassina-
tion. the first involving an officer of the forces of public order, were arrested
early in September. During that summer other criminal attacks were made. in-
cluding two stabbings also attributed to the RAP. which claimed responsibility
for some of the incidents. The police undertook a very intensive campaign
against the FRAP. which "seems to have escalated indiscriminate attacks upon

the police and. unlike the other armed group operating in the country. the

ETA (military front). its actims are neither carefully planned nor do they
involve certain individuals in the forces of public order. but instead are
directed against any uniformed individual in the service of the Spanish state."21

As this quotation shows. the terrorism of the ETA was still in the middle of
1975 regarded as "selective" as compared to that of the PRAP. which was much
more crude and elementary when it came to choosing its victims. Soon the ETA
(m) would also pursue the line of indiscriminate or "systematic" terrorism.

us Quintero. the then comander in chief of police in Madrid. termed it. In

a statement made by Quintero to explain the actions undertaken against the

PRAP, he spoke of the tremendous importance the mass media had for the terrorist
phenomenon. and he said that they could have a multiplying effect. or the oppo-
site. on the goal of dividing the people and the authorities, which. he said.
terrorism was seeking to achieve.

In these final months of the Franco era. other organizations of anarchist in-
spiration made their appearance. One of them was the Iberian Liberation Hove-
ment (MIL). which became active in the early months of 1971 and operated above
all in Catalonia. engaging in robberies at credit institutions. In September
of 1973. its key leaders, including Oriol Sugranyes. who had previously been
arrested 2 years earlier, and Puig Antich, were arrested in Barcelona. The
latter was sentenced to death by a court-martial and was executed in March

of 1971.. In the view of the police. the MIL was nothing but an organization
of common criminals who used political motives as a cover.

Also. the Armed Struggle Organization (Organitzacio de Lluita Armada--OLLA).
formed on the basis of the Solidarity with Puig Antich Committee (Comite de

Sol iduritnt con Puig Antich). had a brief life. This group carried out certain
terrorist actions, such as blowing up the monuaent to the fallen in Hataro.

the theft of explosives from the Santa Creu d'olorde quarry. the theft of wigs

in Barcelona, the hold-up of a telegraph office for 2.6 million pesetas. the
placement of explosives in various places. and other crimes. The police arrested
I0 presumed members of the OLLA. who were tried at a court-martial held in
Barcelona in September of 1975;.22

in passing. we have mentioned the Catalan Liberation Front (Front d'Alliberament
Catala--FAC), regarded as a kind of Catalan ETA because of its separatist
ideology and its use of armed struggle. According to the police. its members
committed a total of 41 crimes and subversive actions in 1971 and 1972. and

the death of a civil guard was attributed to them.

The some police sources confirmed that the PAC maintained permanent relations
with the ETA and the IRA. The PAC ceased to exist in June of 1972.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Also at about that time. fleeting notice was taken of other organizations.
generally of a more or less specifically anarchist nature. which were active
from time to time. above all in France. This category includes the Inter-
nationalist Revolutionary Action (h'oup (CARI), which operated beginning in

1976 and came to be a kind of liaison conittee for other grows of an anarchist

sort. such as the Autonomous Internationalist Grows (CAI). the Autonomous
Combat Groups (GAC) and the Anarchist Revolutionary Organization (ORA). in
all of which the exeeution of Puig Antich served as a catalyst.

During 1974. the CARI pursued extensive activities in France. including rob-
beries, sabotage of the railroads and communications with Spain in general.
attacks won and robberies of Spanish institutions in France. and most widely
publicized of all. the kidnaping of the director of the Paris office of the
Bank of Bilbao, Hr Suarez.

Extreme Right -win g Terrorism

The existence of extreme right-wing terrorist groups under a regime termed
fascist as often as that of France was may seem paradoxical. The fact is

that throughout the lengthy life of the Franco regime there were always sectors
which. in the name of a certain doctrinal purity said to have been "betrayed."
maintained a critical attitude. one of real opposition. The history of the
variOus Falanges beginning as early as 1937 offers good evidence that there
were "those more Francoist than Franco."

when the regime began its long and zigzag process of liberalization. these
grOups developed and began to make their presence felt. The first extreme
right-wing group which undertook the use of violence as a political argument
was University Defense. which was created in 1963 on the basis of other small
pre-existing groups. This was an effort to slow the domination which leftist
sectors were gaining in the universities. and which it had been impossible
to halt since the events in 1956. Falangists, Carlists, certain sectors of
the Catholic integrist movement and some monarchists joined in the Lhiversity
Defense organization and began to erploy the famous "dialecties of fists and
pistols" which Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera had urged.23

The University Defense group disappeared in 1969. According to some reports,
what happened then was that a certain Official Intelligence Service took the
group under its wing and reorganized it, giving a new name which was also

to become famous: the Guerrillas of Christ the King (OCR). This grOup began
its activities in 1969 during the trial of a well-known "leftist" priest,
Father Gamo. From then on its activities were constant. being focused above
all on attacks against and robberies of bookstores and art galleries regarded
as "progressive," the tossing of molotov cocktails or attacks on persons re-
garded as "red."24 Later it turned to attacks on demonstrations by democratic
movements or parties, especially those of the left wing. In addition to its
tax upon priests involved in the defense of labor interests, or who provided
parish premises for trade mion meetings. it also appears that its members
carried out actions against churches and centers of non-Catholic religiOus
groups. such as the Jehovah's Witnesses.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The OCR had as its most outstanding leader Mariano Sanchez Covisa, an indivi-
dual who was constantly involved in the secret activities of the ultralight
wing. Sanchez Covisa has denied in statements to the newspapers that the

OCR were an organization, properly speaking, representing them as "a group

of patriots ready to defend the Spanish tradition against progressive factions."
It seems that these activities were also pursued Outside Spain, for example

in Rome, in October of 1969, in connection with the Assembly of Protesting
European Priests. and that this group maintained relations with similar groups
in other European countries, with the Triple A in Argentina and extreme right-
wing elements in Lebanon.

On 30 March 1973 the Atlantic Bank of Madrid was attacked, and it developed

that a number of members of the Association for the Defense of Hispanic Thinking
were responsible. This organization had been legally inscribed on the General
Register of Associations since the preceding year, and was better known as

the Iberian Cross. The director of the association, Fernando Alcazar de
Velasco, was convicted and sentenced for this crime.

Shortly afterward, the Friends of Europe Club (CBDADE), also well known in
the extreme right-wing sphere. appeared in Madrid, although it had been in
legal existence since 30 September 1966. The CEDADE had been active mainly
in Barcelona, where its leader, Jorge Meta, lived. It was closely related
on the international level with groups of a neo-Nazi nature.

The Trade Union Action Groups (GAS), which engaged mainly in attacks on book-
stores. publishing establishments and parish centers, were mainly active in
Barcelona as well. The Spanish National Trade Union Party (PENS) also operated
in that city. although it carried out one of the most widely publicized actions
in Madrid--the attack on the home of the singer Hassiel, in August of 1975.

The repertory of the activism of the extreme right wing does not end here,
since the list is much longer.26 What was called "white terrorism" by some,
and "black terrorism" by others, more accurately consistent with international
usage. remained until Franco's death within the limits of threats, beatings

and attacks on cultural or religious establishments. just as we have indicated.
As of that time there was a hardening and "they began to use truncheons, chains
and baseball bats, pistols and knives."27

The history of the international links among the ultraright-wing groups to
which we have briefly referred remains to be written. Claire Sterling referred
to the Black International. also known as the New European Order, and she
includes Francoist elements in it. She discusses the contacts between the
European Black International and the Red International through the Palestinians.
with whom the Nazis and fnscists shared nntisemitism.

Claire Sterling says that the First Sunni: Meeting of the Black International
in support of the Palestinians was held in Barcelona on 2 April 1969, and

she states that "Franco...gave it his blessing." Farther on, she speaks of

the presence of Palestinians in the (training) camps of the Black International
in the Spanish Pyrenees.28 It is possible that certain reports which appeared
in Spain in 1977, referring to firing practice in that area, have something

to do with this. "The Italian press has repeatedly insisted," CAHBIO 16 wrote

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2..

a

-. .5’ '-.

in March of 1977. "on the inortance of Barcelona as the center of the black
web functioning in Italy and Spain. The majority of the Italian fascists
in fact went to Ciudad Condal (Barcelona). where Alberto Royuela, national
secretary of the Brotherhood of the Franco Guard, and in particular, Luis
Antonio Garcia Rodriguez, a notorious activist tried in Turin in May of 1976
as one of the officials of the Black International, and also a ringleader

" in the Franco Guard in Barcelona, were the hosts." Farther on there is refer-
ence to an estate located in the swampy zone of Canarasa and called "Castell
del Remei," where "dangerous firing practice was held," beginning in January
of 1976, and it is stated that the civil governor of the province, Luis
Hardsnes, "sent trusted police officials to the site, where they could see
how Italians and Spaniards were engaging in daily training with machine guns
and hand grenades."29

Some months later, BL PAIS took up the subject again, even providing a map

of the area. Reference was mace there to an estate, presumably the same as
in the earlier report, owned by (e then mayor of Camarasa, Jose Ramon Urcola
Diez de Unzurrum. El. PAIS said tha' "Camaraaa is surrounded by a series of
villages.. .in which a nuuber of extnae right-wing organizations have operated
in recent years." Mr Urcola denied to EL PAIS that "groups of young people
with extremist ideology stayed at his es.'ate. and said he had never been a
sponsor of extreme right-wing action groups.“30

It is iupossible to discuss the ultrarightiats and their violent actions withOut
mention of the New Force, the organization founded by Blas Pinar with the
periodical of the same name as its focus. A legal organization, which was
converted into a party as soon as possible after the death of Franco, it theo-
retically had nothing to do with "direct action," but members of it or its
youth branch, Young Force, were often arrested for aggressive acts or involve—
ment in altercations of various kinds.

Terrorism in the Last Months of the Franco Era

The. Correo Street crime marked the beginning of a period of several months
in which terrorism. especially that of the ETA. faded away. The two branches

‘ aﬁwvdtganization devoted themselves to organizational tasks and ideological

clarification. The BTA (p-m), which came into existence as such in October
1971., held the second session of its sixth assembly in January of 1975. Where
2 ,truggle was concerned. it definitively rejected the Third World program
‘ '-’_..A"'~th’a intention and determination to win a military victory over the
ough a prolonged confrontation. Instead, the choice of a war of

A 4 ' '7“ "was made. in order to force political negotiations the terms of
which would be determined by the balance of forces.

    

Beginning in April 1975. however. the situation with regard to public order
bécam worsened. It is true that since the end of 1974 there had been in-
iimerable labor clashes, such as the famous Navarre Potash strike, and that
the ETA was much involved in some of these conflicts. as it was in the acti-
vities carried out in December of 1974 to express solidarity with Basque
prisoners, almost all of them ETA members. who had begun a hunger strike at
the and of November. But terrorism did not become notoriOus again until the
eve of Aberri Eguna, when a policeman named Diaz Linares was assassinated in

4-: ‘5
:.. 3.1.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
San Sebastian.“ This last Aberri Eguna of the Franco era was to have been
celebrated in Cucrnica, but the police prohibited access to that locality.
Beginning at that time, the action-repression spiral began again.

On 22 April a policeman, Juan Ramon Moran Gonzalez, was assassinated in Algorta.
0n 2!. April the police arrested an ETA leader, Goiburu, and killed his com-
panion, Gardoqui. On 25 April, the government declared a state of emergency
for the provinces of Biscay and Guipuzcoa for 3 months. Beginning then, police
repression hardened. According to Letsmendia's estimates. some 3,000 persons
were processed through the Civil Guard and police stations over a period of

3 months.

The ETA response was to step up the incidents. 0n 6 May, civil guard Andres
Segovia Peralta was assassinated in Guernica, and on 8 May. Inspector Llorente
was murdered in Bilbao. According to betamendia,31 "beginning at that moment.
repress ion became a general phenomenon. Innumerable Basques were arrested,
beaten and tortured, and the whole of the Basque people became conscious of
their identity.” In fact, the repressive brutality to which the Guerrillas
of Christ the King were subjected had repercussions in the rest of Spain.
Among other outrages. they attempted to kidnap Pedro Ibarra Guell, a lawyer
who had defended ETA members on various occasions, and who was, specifically,
one of the defense attorneys at the Burgos trial. Shortly afterward an attack
was made on his office.

At the same time, these uncontrolled ultrarightist comando units carried

their action into French territory. where they placed boias in certain book-
stores, such as the Hugalde bookstore in lhndaye and the Nafaroa bookstore

in Blarritz. or in homes occupied or connected with Spanish Basque refugees.
The Anti-ETA Terrorism Group (ATE), a shadowy organization Letamendia defined
as ".1 body of paid mercenaries, recruited above all in the international under-
world and from the colony of Pieds Noirs living in Spain,"32 usually claimed
credit for these actions.

The concern about this Outbreak of political violence began to be visible.
CAHBIO 16. a periodical representing the anti-Franco opposit ion. wrote: "Vari-
ous press organs in which the criminal attacks have been condemedna condem-
nation shared by all those who want a more democratic, just and free country--
have called attention to the looming danger that armed individuals, whatever
their affiliation. may take just ice into their own hands.33

In the middle of June, a Civil Guard lieutenant, Domingo Sanchez, was shot
and killed in a clash with the ETA. The Augustinian priest Father Erquicia
was tortured almost to death by the police. A sensation of terror overwhelmed
certain sectors of the Basque population, and it is estimated that in the
first month the state of emergency was in effect, some 150 young people fled
to France out of fear of being arrested or becoming the victims of ultra-
rightist activities.

The controversial bishop of Bilbao, Monsignor Anoveros, met in lhdrid with
the apostolic nuncio in Spain, Honsignor Dadagl 10, to whom he reported the
violence occurring in his diocese, "violence sheet which I have written for
publication on more than 25 occasions, and concerning which I have spoken
hundreds of other times."

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
But the Franco regime did not want discussion of violence, and on 22 June,
the official secrets law went into effect for all information pertaining to
the activities of the ETA in Biscay and Guipuzeoa. and the actions carried
out by the forces of law and order.

That which was not yet called "the war in the north" continued. however. despite
the news blackout. 0n 5 June. an ETA commando unit failed in its attelpt

to machine-gun a pair of civil guards who were on duty on a Basque Railroad
train traveling between San Sebastian and Bilbao. One of them, Mariano Roman
Mayoral, was killed when he fell from the train. lie was the 33d member of

the forces of law and order to be killed by the ETA or in clashes with com-
mando units of that organization.“

When the state of emergency ended on 25 July. the ETA launched a new phase

of its terrorist activity. Until that time its main targets had been members
of the forces of law and order. whereas beginning then, the ETA would also
assassinate or "execute ." in its terminology, civilians, whether holding public
office or not, whom tley accused of "collaborating with the occupier."
Letamendia35 explains it as follows: "During the state of emergency, a handful
of informers had become known to the people....Three of them were killed by
the ETA: Arguimberri, a council member of the movement and mayor of Itziar-
Deva; the taxi driver Exposito in Usurbil; and the guard at the Orbegozo fac-
tory in llernani, Demetrio Lesmes."

But also, at the end of July, the police were to register one of their most
lmortunt victories over the ETA. specifically the ETA (p-m). The success

was apparently due to police infiltration, which was to be the first and perhaps
the only one in its history. On 29 July. after an exchange of fire in Barcelona
in which a number of passersby were also wounded. Jose Ignacio Perez Eeotegui.
alias Wilson. and Juan Paredes Manotas. alias 'Dtilti, both key leaders of the
organization, were arrested. The former was accused of having taken part

in the attack which cost Carrero Blanco his life.

On the following day, the police clashed in Madrid with another ETA commando
unit. resulting in the death of ETA member Jesus Hugica Ayestaran and the
arrest of Felix Eguia', alias Papi, and Jose Maria Lara Fernandez. It would
seem that this commando mit had the task of organizing the escape of the

ETA matters being held in the prison in Segovia, of whom there were about

40. The escape was planned for a days later, and the escape route through
the sewer pipes had not only been perfected, but had also been "tested." since
some of the prisoners had emerged and then returned to await the scheduled

moment.

But yet other incidents were to occur in that sun-tar characterized by terror-
ism. On 27 August, the Decree Law on the Prevention of Terrorism was promul-
gated. The provisions of this law extended the period during which those
suspected of terrorism could be held and made house searches easier. 0n the
other hand. the procedural methods were made more flexible. giving them an
emergency nature in the ordinary courts and calling for drumhead courts-
martial in the military sector. Other norms increased the harshness of the
penalties and reiterated the criminal classification of matership in the

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
grOups defined therein. Special emphasis was placed on certain journalistic
practices for which penalties were imposed. including criticism attempting
to minimize the responsibility for the deeds listed in the decree law. This
was a warning to the mass media, to the legal advisers of press organs as
well as the authors of the texts involved.

The following day, 28 August. the courtdmartial of ETA members Garmendia and
Otaegui. charged with the murder of the corporal first class in the Civil

Guard and head of the information bureau at the Azpeitia station, Manuel
Pasadas Zurron, began in Burgos. The prosecution asked for the death penalty
for both. and the tension increased moment by moment in the Basque country.
Garmendia's lawyer, Juan Maria Bandres, asked for his acquittal since he showed
signs of mental deterioration after a long period of illness due to the head
wounds he suffered at the time of his arrest a year earlier. The military
doctor himself said he suffered from "personality decline." A few days later,
after the court-martial ended, the two defendants were sentenced to death.

The military supreme court decided to hear the appeal filed by the defense.
Meanwhile, the strikes and street disturbances in the Basque country continued.
0n 3! August, a number of people were wounded in San Sebastian. and one young
man, Jesus Garcia, died. Bombs were also placed and certain establishments
were fired upon. the incidents being attributed to the Guerrillas of Christ
meng.

Also in the first half of September, two other courts-martial in Madrid and

yet another in Barcelona were held. In the Madrid courts-martial, the defen-
dants were three members of the ERA? in one case and five in the other, charged
with the murder of a national policeman on 14 July and Civil Guard Lieutenant
Antonio Pose Rodriguez on 16 August. In the Barcelona court-martial, tin

death penalty was also asked for ETA member Paredes Manotas. alias Txiki.
charged with the murder of a corporal first class in the armed police in an
exchange of gunfire after a robbery on 6 June of that year.

in all, 11 death penalties were awaiting completion of the final court
procedures and, specifically, the possibility of a pardon, which the chief
of state could decree, on recommendation of the Council of Ministers. This
highest government body was to meet on Friday. 26 September.

Meanwhile. there was no interruption in the pursuit of terrorism. On 14 Sep-
tember. armed policeman Juan Ruiz Monoz. the barber for his unit, was assassi-
nated in Barcelona.

Throughout Europe. a very broad movement against the 11 probable executions
developed. Petitions for clemency multiplied and Spanish offices and establish-
ments in various countries were the object of attacks and attempted robberies.
1n Llw view of CAMBlO ‘6, this was "one of the most worrisome international
sliu1tlon5 in recent years," and there was "a climate of greater expectation
than during the Burgos trial in 1970." This review noted that "a wave of
concern is sweeping over Europe and foreign press organs are devoting pages

and pages to the study of the Spanish situation."36

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in addition to the ETA matters Carmendia, Otaegui and Parades. alias Txiki,
mentioned above, the prosecution in the Madrid courts-martial asked for the
death penalty for the eight FRAP members: Blanco Chivite, Fernandez Tovar.
Baena Alonso, Canaveras de Gracia. Maria Jesus Dasca Penelas. Ramon Garcia
Sana. Jose Luis Sanchez-Bravo Callas and Concepcion Tristan Lopez.

Following the court-martial on 26 Septeuber. pardon was granted to ETA medaer
Carmendia, because of his deteriorated mental condition. the two women members
of the FRAP (Concepcion Tristan and Maria Jesus Dasca). who were. moreover.
pregnant, and also FRAP members Blanco Chivite. Fernandez Tovar and Canaveras
de Gracia. Six of the 11 sentenced to death were pardoned. But five others
remained under death sentence. and after the mandatory Council of Ministers
"report." they were executed in the early morning of 27 Septenber: Paredes,
alias mild, in Barcelona; Otaegui, in Burgos; and Francisco Baena Alonso,
Ramon Garcia San: and Jose Luis Sanchez-Bravo in the outskirts of Madrid.

The shots fired by the five execution squads had broad international repercus-
sions. Not even during the "siege" in 1946 had the Franco regime had to deal
with such wrath in international public opinion. The president of Mexico,

Luis Echeverria, asked for LN sanctions against Spain and for its expulsion
from that international organization. Fifteen ambassadors from as many European
countries were withdrawn from Madrid, anti—Franco demonstrations intensified

in many countries, the Spanish Eutassy in Lisbon was practically destroyed,

and various Spanish establishments in other countries. such as the tourist
office in Paris, suffered a fate almost as bad.

The Franco regime reacted to the "foreign interference" with a monstrous demon-
stration held in Oriente Square. Franco emerged on the main balcony of the
Palacio Real to express his thanks for the support and to speak of "amends

for the actions of which a number of our Spanish offices and establistnents

in Europe have been the victims." No one could imagine that only 50 days

of life, of which more than 30 would be a long agony, remained for that man.

But on that same day, 1 October 1975, when the Franco regime celebrated its
last mass rite, terrorism made its diabolical presence felt again with the
murder of three armed policemen in Madrid (Antonio Fernandez, Agustin Gines
and Joaquin Alonso) and the serious wOunding of another (Miguel Castilla),

who died on 8 October. Initially the FRAP was blamed, that terrorist organi-
zation being responsible. as we already know, for the recent attacks on mmbers
of the forces of law and order in Madrid. But some months later. it was learned
that those assassinations represented the baptism of terror for a new organi-
zation, the GRAPO [First of October Armed Revolutionary Group], which along
with the ETA was to be one of the most dangerous terrorist groups in the tran-
sition to and the first years of the democratic regime.

in those last weeks of the Franco era, many other crimes of lesser importance
were comittcd. Toward the end of August, on the let, an FRAP commando unit
wnring lnnd army uniforms. after taking the guard by surprise, entered the
Engineers Electronics Center. They were certainly searching for weapons and.
finding none, they left the military premises. The following day, the FRAP
also claimed responsibility for the shots fired at a u.s. sailor in the Valencia
maritime district.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-.. 0.. -v...’ we.- v"...

In addition to the Guerrillas of Christ the King, other extreme rightist grOups
such as the GAS. which claimed responsibility for various attacks on Barcelona
bookstores. such as Documents. and newspapers. such as the DIARIO DE BARCELONA.

were also active.

Our country was also the scene of activities by foreign terrorist groups.

One such was the kidnaping of the Egyptian ambassador, Malnud Abdel Ghaffar,
who was seized on 15 September by members of a Palestinian group in the diplo-
matic headquarters in the Spanish capital itself. Mediation by the ambassadors
of Iraq and Kuwait made possible the uneventful settlement of the incident,
which led to an impressive deployment of Spanish police. with the release

of the kidnaped diplomat. The Palestinians. as the comromise specified,

left thdrid by air.

But if terrorism did not slacken. the police did continue to register notable
successes. On 18 September. in a joint operation undertaken simultaneously

in Madrid and Barcelona. the ETA (m) was dealt a harsh blow by the death or
arrest of its most outstanding members. In Madrid three "safe houses" were
located and raided by the police, and the most notorious ETA (m) leader. Mugica
Arregui. alias Ezquerra. and three other ETA members, Uzurrunzaga,
Cabicagogeascoa and Ibagurren, were arrested. Also, Jose Ramon Martinez Andie,
alias Honcho, died, apparently a suicide. No other ETA hideouts were also
raided by the police in Barcelona. resulting in the arrests of three ETA mem-
bers. Jose Ramon Martinez de la l-‘uente Inchaurregui. Antonio Gonzalez Terran.
alias Caizka. and Francisco Javier Ruiz de Apodaca. alias Apolonio. The last
mentioned was w0unded. In the exchange of fire, another ETA neuter. Antonio
Campillo Alcorta. alias Andoni, was killed.

The police successes were not limited to the ETA alone. In the week of 15-

21 September. 75 persons were arrested in variOus Spanish cities. In great
part. these were members of the RAP which was from that time on practically
nonfunctional. In the course of this antiterrorist operation. other individuals
belonging to extreme leftist organizations, which in some cases showed terrorist
inclinations. were also arrested. These organizations included the Catalan
Liberation Front (seven arrested) and the Murcia Workers Commando of Revolu-
tionary Action (four arrested), which was Marxist-leninist in its ideology

and, according to the police, had planned to engage in activities of a terrorist
nature. But other extremist organizations without any clear penchant for
terrorism were also affected by these steps taken pursuant to the Decree Law

on the l’rewntion of Terrorism. This was the case with the Revolutionary
Organization of Workers (ORT), the Spanish Labor Party (RTE), the Spanish
Libertarian Movement. the Revolutionary Party of Spain and the Communist Move-
mnt of Spain (MCE).

October we was a month filled with terrorist activities. 0n the 5th. a Civil
Cunrd vehicle. a Land Rover returning from the Aranzazu sanctuary. near Onate
in (:uipuzcou. was attacked. When it passed a certain point on the read. an
explosive charge went off, scattering parts of the vehicle over several hundred
meters. killing three guardsmen (Esteban Maldonado Llorente. Juan Moreno
chumarro and Jesus Pascual Martin Lozano) and wounding two others (Corporal
Jose Gomez Castillo and Juan Garcia Lorente). who died later. A few hours

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hours afterward. Ignacio Echave, the brother of Juan Jose Behave, one of the
historic leaders of the ETA who went into exile in France along with his brother,
Joaquin, was assassinated in the bar he owned, the Echavenea Inn, near Hondragon.
The fourth brother, Luis. who had left the family bar that night, miraculously
mnaged to escape with his life by hiding in another part of the premises.

This incident was attributed to the extreme right-wing organization known

as the ATE, to which we have already referred. A war of vengeance. of cows

and countercoups. which to last for many years, covering the Basque territory
with blood, then began.

The terrorism which had affected Spain in one way or another mde itself felt
even beyond our frontiers. 0n 8 October. a Spanish captain, Bartolome Garcia-
Piata Valle, who was assigned to the Spanish Embassy in Paris, was the victim
of an attack in which he was seriously injured while entering his home in
Bouloyte-Billancourt. very near the French capital. It was initially though
that the authors of the deed were members of some Spanish terrorist group.

but this hypothesis had to be discarded. The Spanish opposition sectors in
Paris heartily condemed the attack, "especially since it was comitted against
a military officer;" the ETA denied any role "because we have never committed
nor will we commit attacks in the countries which give asylun to our political
refugees. The FRAP also denied any responsibility, and the French police
themselves excluded the CARI anarchist groups, which had been for all practical
purposes dissolved.

Despite everything, it was evident that the Spanish terrorist groups had their
most solid and secure bases outside Spain. The fact that France, and in particu-
lar the departments on the Spanish frontier (Pyrenees-Orientales, in particular).
provided a sanctuary for the ETA, which maintained its most outstanding ranks
and the headquarters of the organization there, was well known.

The FRAP was also firmly established outside of Spain, and specifically, it
was said that Geneva was the city where its Iain headquarters were located.

It was believed to be no accident that the former president of the FRAP, Julio
Alvarez del Vayo, lived in Switzerland. a country which, mreover. offered
all kinds of conveniences for the transfer of the funds which nurtured the
coffers of the terrorist organizations. It was also pointed out that Swiss
television, in connection with the cmaign against the Franco regime in that
era, interviewed numbers of the PM? and the ETA.

All of these factors led to the suspicion that terrorism had major international
connections. The location of the "networks of terror" was still far off,

but the people were already wondering, as CAMBIO 16 said. if the "Iberian
Peninsula is not currently becoming the testing ground for European urban
guerrilla warfare."37

Meanwhile, the ETA continued its terrorist activities. which c0uld no longer
be regarded as sporadic. but were systematic and constant.

Not a week passed but that the Basque terrorist organization served q) its
quota of blood. On 12 October, the taxi driver German Aguirre Izauregui was
found dead in Villarreal Alava. near a Civil Guard barracks. On 18 October,
a civil gu-Ird. Manuel Lopez Trivino. was assassinated in Zarauz as he was
returning home for the night.

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The extreme right wing. particularly in Catalonia and the Baleares Islands,
continued its attacks on newspapers and newsman. Molotov cocktails were thrown
at the premises of the DIARIO DB MALLORCA. and jOurnalists of the Logos agency,
CORREO CATALAN and MUNDO DIARIO were threatened. In all cases responsibility
scared to lie with the GAS, which had earlier attacked the DIARIO DE BARCELONA.
This newspaper, through its editors. again became the victim of attacks. The
GAS made it known that it had a list of professionals in the field of journalism
that it intended. through threats and attacks, to prevent from attending to
their work for some months.

On 21 October, the final agony of the Franco era began when the chief of state
fell ill. Terrorism was also a factor during these dramatic days, but it

was above all extreme right-wing terrorism which seemed to be preparing for

the long-awaited "Francoism without Franco." During the afternoon and evening
of 25 October, a self-styled "death squad" made threatening telephone calls

to 21 Catalan leaders in the political and cultural spheres, ordering them

to “leave the country within 2a hours of the death of the chief of state."
Those first weeks of the term and the last of the Franco era were filled with
incidents in the university sector, with incidents perpetrated by the Guerrillas
of Christ the King and other extreme right-wing groups at various universities.
including those in Zaragoza. Valencia and Seville. Some of these groups identi-
fied themselves as "nat ional trade mion" or "national revolutionary" organi-
zations. in Calic la. a Calician Regional Cmittee Against Terrorism made
itself known and threatened a number of journalists. Some appeals were also
made in the name of the Iberian Cross organization. In Catalonia. "unidentified
groups" made a number of attacks on neighborhood associations.

0n 5 November, an extreme right-swing comando unit burst into the office of
lawyer Jose Manuel Munoz Salvadores, at No 40 Claudio Coello Street, and savagely
attacked the people gathered there to hold a political meting concerning

the future of Spain.

The irritation of the extreme rightdwing sectors and their aggressive actions
were explained by the fact that it was indeed obvious that the future of Spain
was about to begin. And that in one way or another, the past, of which the
extreme right wing was the emanation and representative force, was coming

to an end.

After a prolonged final stage, marked by all kinds of clinical developments
which made of Franco's illness the longest news story of that autumn, the
aged dictator died in the early morning hours of 20 November. With him, a
long chapter in the history of Spain. which had begun with the drama of the
Civil Hat and ended among the outbursts of terrorism. which seemed to auger
violent days ahead. came to an end.

As the legislation of the regime provided. the prince of Spain swore allegiance
to the constitution before the Cortes on the 22d of the month, and became

king, taking the name Juan Carlos I. A broad national clamor demanded freedom
and democracy. But it also called for peace. "hat the young monarch wanted
to or c0uld do was in doubt. But from the very first, the fine instinct of
the people had confidence in Juan Carlos. Thanks to his definite ability.
Spain wOuld be capable of carrying off the historic feat of transition from

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
dictatorship to democracy with far fewer incidents than had been feared. But
along the complicated path of transition, the noat cruel and stdaborn enemy
of Spanish peace and democracy was to be terrorism. It was to become the
story of how the people of Spain learned to live their daily lives with this
monster. like Ulysses with Polyphenus.

1.

3.

3b .

Sb.

FOOTNOTES

For these questions of a general nature, one can consult Carl Leiden and
Karl H. Sclnidt, "The Politics of Violence: Revolution in the lbdern
World." Prentice—Hall Inc.. Englewood cliffs, New Jersey. 1968, and Walter
Laquez, "Terrorism," Bspasa Calpe, Madrid, 1980.

The subject of the deaths which can be attributed to the Civil War has
been dealt with by Gabriel Jackson in his "The wanish Republic and the
Civil Har." Grijalbo Publishing House. Hexico. 1967. p 433 et seq.

A salutary of the main terrorist activities during the Franco era up until
1962 can be found in the work by Ignacio Fernandez de Castro and Jose
Martinez (presentation and compilation). "Spain Today," Ruedo Iberico
Publishing House, Paris, 1963.

While the book mentioned in the preceding note is an assess-ant iron the
"republican in exile" viewpoint. the books by Lt Col Francisco Aguado
Sanchez. "The Underground in Spain" (San Martin Publishing House, Madrid.
1975) and "The Underground in Some Docmnts" (San Martin Publishing House.
Madrid. 1976). are of interest from the "pro-Pranco-nationalist" point

of View.

See Curutz Jauregui Bereciartu. "Ideology and Political Strategy of the
ETA (Analysis of Its Development Between 1959 and 1968) ." let-Century
Publishing House. Madrid. 1981. In particular, the chapter devoted to
"The Debate on Violence." p 206 et seq. may be of interest.

Concerning the Burgos trial. see Kepa Salaberri, suwusmo. 31/69, "The
Basque Trial in Burgos," Ruedo Iber ico Publishing Ibuse. Paris, 1971,
and also Gisele Halimi, "The Burgos Trial." Callinard Publishing House,
Paris. 1971.

The study of the history and ideological development of the ETA is at

any rate much easier now thanks to the publication by the Hordago Publish-
ing House in San Sebastian of "Doctnents." a work which is "an exhaustive
compilation of the publications and internal docuents of the ETA organi-
zation since its early days." To date 12 volumes have been published.
covering the development of the Basque organization up to 1974. The Hordago
t. III. moreover. has written some explanatory notes which contribute to

a better interpretation of "Documents." For the purposes of this book,
which is absolutely not designed to be a history of the ETA. we have only
referred incidentally to "Docments." above all for the purpose of com-
paring references.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
b. Jnurvnul, up cit. p 128.

7. Ibid, p 154, note 6.

8. 0n the subject of Basque nationalism, see Antonio Elorza. "The Ideology
of Basque Nationalism (1876-1937)," Haranburu Publishing House, San
Sebastian. 1968.

9. Jose Jaria Garmendia, "History of the ETA." Haranburu Publishing House.
San Sebastian, 1980, Vol 1. p 115.

10. Quoted in Garmendia, op cit. p 30.
11. Ibid, p 165.

12. Jauregui, op cit, p 295.

13. Carmendia. op cit. p 190.

la. Jauregui. op cit, p 310.

Mb. The Bordago team described the Red Cells in these terms in the prologue
to Vol 9 of "Docments." They add that its organ of expression was the
magazine SAIOAK.

15. Ibid, p (.69.

16. Julen Aguirre, op cit, p 11.

17. Ibid. pp 20 and 2].

l8. CAHBIO 16, No 150. 30 September 1974.
19. Ibid.

20. See Francisco Letamendia (Ortzi), "A Brief History of the Basque Country,"
Iberico-Iberica Publishing House. 1980. p 328 et seq.

21. CAMBIO 16, No 160. 28 July 1975. p 10.

22. "Terrorism and Justice in Spain." Madrid, 1975. book publist by the
government but not distributed.

23. See CUADIANA, 10 February 1977, p 22.

21.. Among their crimes were the fires at the Alberti and Hachado bookstores,
in Madrid, Tres i Cuatre in Valencia. and the Theo galleries in Madrid.
The also made an attack on the life of a bishop. Monsignor Iniesta, in
Madrid.

25. See CAHBIO 16, No 76, 30 April 1973, "The Return of the Nazis. p 11.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
26.

27.

28.

29.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

37.

See "A Guide to Spanish-Style Extremism." in CUADERNOS PARA El. DIALOGO,
19 February 1977. pp 23-27.

See EL SOCIALISTA. 13-19 May 1980. "The Names of the Blue Terrorists."

pp 12-14. This sane article goes on to say: "In the most recent attacks
individuals have been observed carrying subnachine guns similar to those
used by the army or police force." It also contains a list of "fascist
assassinations." the first victim being Arturo Ruiz. on 23 January 1977.
with the total coming to 21 as of the date of the article. A report on
the attacks on bookstores between 1971 and 1976 is found in CAMBIO 16.
No 256. 18 October 1976. p 38.

Claire Sterling. "The Terror Network (The Secret war of International
Terrorism)," Holt. Rinehart and Winston. Reader's Digest Press, New York.
1981. pp 115-116.

CAHBIO 16. No 276. 27 March 1977. "The Sharpshooters," pp 12-15.

EL PAIS. 18 October 1977. "Important Fascist Connection in Various Lerida
Towns."

Leta-endia, op cit. p 332.

Ibid.

CAMBIO 16. No 180, 19 Hay 1975. p 20.

CAHBIO 16. No 181.. 16 June 1975. p 18.
Letancndla. op cit. p 333.

CAMBIO 16. No 199. 29 September 1975. pp 6-7.

CAHBIO 16. No 201. 13 October 1.975. P 27.

COPYKIGHI: Ale jando Munoz Alonso. 1982

5157
080: 6000/0018

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TERRORISM IN SPAIN--CHAPTBR 4
Barcelona EL TERRORISHO EN ESPANAinSpanish I982 pp 145-2I3
[Text] Chapter IV: The Response

"You do not use a tank to hunt down a field mouse. A cat can do the job

better." General Grivas, head of the terrorist organization EOKA, Cyprus,
I956.

Contents

The Major Maneuvers Against Terrorism

The Struggle for the Statute

The French Front

Second General Elections

New Government, Old Problems

General Terrorist Offensive

A Bloody Heek in May

The Guernica Statute

ETA (p-m) [Pasque Fatherland and Liberty (Political and Hilitary)l
A Blow to CRAPO [First of October Armed Revolutionary Group]
ETA and the Basque Referendum

Violence After the Statute. The Autonomous Commands

ETA (p-m) Strategy. The Kidnaping of Ruperez

ETA Against Basque Autonomy

The Major Maneuvers Against Terrorism

In this chapter we are going to discuss the developments in terrorism
from the approval of the constitution in December I978 to the middle
months of I980. Throughout this period terrorism, by spilling blood,
became the major factor in public life. The number of terrorist attacks,
which had reached a chilling record in I978, increased even further

in I979, declining slightly afterwards until I98I, when with two or

three spectacular attacks the terrorists maintained their high profile
even though they were not launching as many assaults. As we pointed

out at the close of the previous chapter, it was not until I98l that

we could state that in one way or another terrorism was yielding its
deminant role to the coup movement. Together, they were likeapincers against

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
democracy, seriously endangering the continuity of the system, which
was being subjected to the shocks of the two antidemocratic forces
that were enemies of the freedom that the Spanish people were just
then trying out.

What could be termed the "objective complicity" of terrorism and the
coup movement had been suggested much earlier, however. 0n the eve

of the constitutional referendum, the editorial writer of CAHBIO I6,
Juan Tomas de Salas, wrote: "ETA has ceased to be a spearhead in the
struggle against the dictatorship and has become a spearhead in bringing
back the dictatorship."l

The government was also perceiving with growing clarity the dangers

posed to the stability and continuity of democracy by a terrorism that
ranged about as it pleased without being dealt an appropriate response

by the police, which had lost the initiative and seemed incapable of
developing a minimally effective strategy against an increasingly aggressive
terrorism, especially ETA'a.2

In early November I978, General Gutierrez Hellado made public a report
that broached "the impact of terrorism on the Armed Forces." This
report, which was distributed in all barracks, asserted, voicing an
optimism that did not coincide with actual developments for quite some
time, that ETA was also in a bind. "In order to halt the democratic
avalanche, it must engage in clear-cut, sufficiently intense terrorist
eiforts.however,ifit does so without achieving its objective, it will
heighten its isolation to a degree that could mean total failure."
These words turned out to be prophetic, because over the 2 long years
that followed ETA made the "efforts" that the report spoke of and,

by means of the coup, was on the verge of achieving one of its indirect
objectives: the establishment of a military dictatorship that would
once again lend credibility to its arguments, based on the idea of
"national liberation" and the "struggle against the occupation."

The danger posed by terrorism, which had become a destabilizing factor
for the democratic system, had been worrying the government for some
time. It seemed increasingly necessary to implement a strategy that
could, by making use of the required resources, achieve success in

the struggle against terrorism.

The first step in these "major maneuvers against terrorism" had been
taken during the summer when on 28 June the government approved the
decree-law on emergency measures against terrorist activity, which

later became a law after debate in the General Cortes. In the previous
chapter we discussed this law and Martin Villa's trip to Germany to

study how the antiterrorist struggle was organized there. He also

talked about the appointment of the famous and controversial “superagent”
Cenesa as the supreme head or police action against ETA.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
av-s one AVA-IA- Unla- VIUI-l

If as we pointed out, Conesa's performance was initially criticized
because he seemed to be restricting himselftobattling CRAPO, he clearly
intensified his activities in the Basque Country during the final 4
months of 1978. About 50 specialized police agents thoroughly familiar
with ETA were stationed in the Basque provinces and Navarre, at
thedisposalof Conesa, who visited the "theater of operations" frequently.
These men were under the direct command of Manuel Gomez Sandoval.

One of the tactics that Conesa and his men employed was to methodically
examine the much overlooked files from 2 and 3 years back. They
systematically monitored and studied the members of the Herri Batasuna
coalition, especially the ones who belonged to the illegal parties

HAS! [Revolutionary People's Socialist party] and LAIA [Basque workers
Revolutionary Party], as well as the members of the pro-amnesty groups.
Many of these activists were detained and interrogated, though in many
instances no contacts with ETA were uncovered. Thus, much of this
activity was inevitably futile, largely because the files were not

kept up to date. This was the reason why former members of ETA were
interrogated, individuals who had left the terrorist organization long
before and were active in other totally legal parties whose stands

were far removed from ETA's.

One of the most important arrests was Jose Antonio Torre Altunaga,

alias "El Medics." who was regarded as the head of the special action
commandos and the right arm "in the interior“ of Domingo Iturbe Abasolo,
alias "Txomin," who in turn was considered the supreme leader of the ETA
(m) armed commands.

when Torre Altunaga was arrested on IS December, the police found in
his possession a large amount of weapons and explosives and 48 million
pesetas from the robbery of Altos Hornos de Vizcaya. He was charged
by the police with being the organizer of the attack on the Lemoniz
nuclear powerplant, which caused two deaths. His arrest provided the
police with valuable information, which led to the identification of
the commando group that assassinated Judge Mateu and to very important
data on other attacks such as the one on Basauri and the slaying of
Araluce.

In late I978 the police made public a message listing the results of
its action against ETA from I September to 25 December.

Estimates were that at the beginning of this period the two branches
of ETA comprised some 70 armed commands, each consisting of 4 or 5
persons, and as many information and support commands.

Forty-six of these commands were broken up, 38 of them "legal" (25

action and I] information) and 8 illegal, all of them, logically, engaged
in the "armed struggle." of these commands, 30 belonged to ETA (m)

and 6 to ETA (p-m), 7 were autonomous commands and 3 belonged to other
organizations. Some 200 persons were arrested, l32 of whom were placed
in judicial custody before the end of the year. The police message

gave a lengthy list of the weapons, explosives and other items that were
seized.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In this connection, Jose Oneto spoke of a "major offensive." "As we know,"
he wrote, "in addition to requesting information on ETA from President
Carter and the counterespionage services of Germany, France and Italy,
Suarez has personally pushed the program under which Spanish police
agents would take special intensive intelligenceand training courses

in several European countries. he has also reportedly been a strong
supporter of the creation of special Armed Police and Civil Guard brigades.
which are reportedly already receiving training on the outskirts of
Madrid. All of these programs are designed to effectively combat a
terrorism that current government intelligence services are totally
incapable of coping with..."b

The Struggle for the Statute

Once the constitution was in force, having been signed by the king

on 27 December and published in the Official State Gazette on the 29th,

the struggle began for the objective that embodied all of the aspirations
for home rule among Basques and Catalans. In one way or another, terrorism
influenced the process leading up to the Basque Statute.

The first problem was finding out what stand ETA was going to take,

or rather, each of its two branches, ETA (m) and ETA (p-m). The Basque
pre-autonomy institution, the Basque General Council, published a
statement in Vitoria on 18 December in which it "categorically condemned
all violence, demanded that the right to life be respected" and offered
"to meet with ETA (m) and ETA (p-m) to analyze the political situation,
violence andtheconditions for normalizing life in the Basque Country,
as well as questions relating to law and order."

Once again, then, there arose the is5ue of negotiations with ETA, which
we have already broached and which had so far always failed. There
were still many who felt that even proposing talks was useless. The
PCE's mouthpiece, MUNDO OBRERO, wrote: "Either serious thought is being
given to this possibility, which we would call a major mistake, or

else it is a pose so that they can say later: 'See, they're the ones
who are unwilling.‘ If the latter is the case, it will only have been
a waste of time, helping to prolong the disarray." It also spoke of
"the Basque friend who told us yesterday morning: 'Sure yOu can negotiate
with one ETA, but there will always be another popping up on you with
fresh machine-gun fire." The response it advocated was "political
isolation, the common front of the majority."5

Hedging to the point of ambiguity, EL PAlS felt that "the General Council's
proposal to meet with ETA is something less than negotiations and something
more than n more exchange of opinions," adding that "contacts with

the terrorist organization carry the political risk (other risks are

taken for granted) of manipulation by ETA to continue its criminal
offensive in a better situation and with an enhanced image." After

going on to say that "the government's refusal to negotiate with a

group that tries to imitate two basic attributes of State sovereignty

(the army and the treasury) is reasonable,‘ it concluded by stating

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-.. -a. .s..~ 'u- van--

that "it would, however, be unwise to reject any path that could increase
the chance of a peaceful solution to the Basque conflict, without strength-
ening ETA's position and without undermining the authority of democratic
institutions."6

ETA's stand was not clear, and according to reliable sources, there

were profound differences of opinion within it. "It is hard to predict."
these sources asserted, "whether the approach of halting armed action

at least for a while is going to prevail or whether some factions will
not abide by such a decision and continue carrying out attacks."7

That things were not at all clear in the terrorist organization was
confirmed by the continuation of the attacks. 0n 9 December, ETA (m)
killed Vicente Rubio Ereno, a retired member of Franco's Guard. Vitoria
industrialist Saturnino Sota Argaiz and Pasajes (Guipuzcoa) municipal
police chief Juan Jimenez Gomez were hit on the lath, and on the 17th
retired Colonel Fernandez Hontes was slain in San Sebastian.

0n the 19th in Guecho (Vizcaya) ETA (m) killed Joaquin Maria Azaola
Martinez, alias "Jokin," a former ETA member who in 1974 had divulged
a plan to kidnap Juan Carlos de Borbon, then Prince of Spain.

The so-called "dirty war" against ETA dealt its most telling blow on
2| December in the French town of Anglet. Early that morning, Jose
Miguel Benaran Ordenana, alias "Argala" ("El Place"), one of ETA (m)'s
top leaders, was killed when a bomb planted in his car went off as

he turned the ignition key. Argala, who was also regarded as an ideologist
of the military branch and open to "political" solutions, had played 8

a major role in "Operation Ogre," which took the life of Carrero Blanco.

A few days later, on 13 January, another major ETA leader, Jose Maria
Pagoaga Gallastegui, alias "Peixoto," was also the target of an attack.
Seriously wounded. he almost miraculously managed to survive. Peixoto
was ETA's "minister" of finance, and it was up to him to collect the
so-called "revolutionary tax."

On a strictly political level there were several hopeful signs. The
Herri Batasuna coalition, which had been set up in April I978 by several
of the parties that had signed the KAS [Patriotic Socialist Coordination]
alternative, organized a demonstration that, among other demands, called
for negotiations with the government. This coalition, which eventually
acquired legal status even though some of its components (BASI and

LAIA) had not. was regarded as ETA (m)'s "political arm." Hence the
interest in its positions. The most important piece of information

was that in calling for "the start of negotiations with the government,"
it added "on some of the points in the KAS alternative." This was

the first time that this major change had been included, which indicated
greater flexibility, because until then the K58 alternative had been
presented as a whole.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For its part, the PNV [Basque Nationalist Party], which regarded the
statute as the priority objective, took advantage of the police offensive
that we have been talking about to stress the need for "political measures"
as an indispensable complesnnt to police action. To the PNV "political
measures” meant a statute that would not be far removed from the extremist
first draftthathad just been drawn up and that was beginning to be

known as the "Guernica Statute." To get an idea of the nature of this
version, we could point out that the PSOE [Spanish Socialist workers

Partyl termed it "too nationalistic" and refused to sign the preliminary
draft. Surprisingly, the UCD [Democratic Center Union] did accept it.

Many months passed before the text of the draft statute was finally
approved by the Constitutional Commission of the Congress of Deputies

on l8 July I978. Throughout this period there was a curious correlation
between terrorism and statute negotiations. Every time that a stumbling
block arose in the negotiations, a terrorist attack would "remind"

the negotiators not to get bogged down. The most striking thing about
this strange relationship was that ETA (m) never accepted the statute,
unl ike ETA (p-m), but with its attacks it contributed to a "terror
blackmail" that all nationalists, beginning with the PNV, benefited
from.

Carlos Garaieoeehea, the chairman of the BBB [Basque Executive Committee],
the PNV's top body, declared in December I978: "The approval of the
statute could do away with the ETA problem...but unfortunately I don't
know whether it is going to or not. I think that if the statute is
unsatisfactory, it could stiffen their stands, or if the Navarre problem
is not resolved..." As we can see, there was a not so subtle threat

that terrorism would continue if the statute were not "satisfactory."

But to whom? To the pm? To ETA?9

The antithesis of this position was argued by CAHBIO l6 editorial writer
Juan Tomas de Salas, who wrote shortly thereafter: "There can be no
neutral people in this war. The neutral people are the angelic little
fellows who say that the response to terrorism must be political measures.
Unfortunately, the response to terrorism must be to fight fire with firel...
Political measures will have absolutely no effect on the terror experts.
There is no appropriate policy for this plague; the only cure for this
plague is rat killer." After noting how successive political measures
(two amnesties, free elections, the constitution, autonomy) had not
prevented a continuation of terrorism, he warned about the possibility

of a political regression by again underscoring the objective common
ground between terrorism and pressures for a coup: "Don't fool yourselves,
gentlemen, if democracy does not respond implacably to ETA violence,

there are more than enou h forces in this country to implacably destroy
both democracy and ETA." 0

Au awareness was growing of the danger that rampant terrorism posed

to the future of democracy and its consolidation. And with good reason,
because in late I978 and early I979 ETA had given the lie, by spilling
blood, to its hypothetical willingness to dialogue or seek political

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
solutions. From 27 December to 3 January, a toll of six dead bore
witness to ETA's decision to continue its escalating violence."

A striking development was that as the new year began, ETA was again
aiming its provocations at the Armed Forces, in an attempt to trigger
a military intervention, as we analyzed in the previous chapter. For
example, on 2 January Commander Jose Maria Herrera Hernandez, an aide
to the military governor of Guipuzcoa, was slain in San Sebastian.

On that same day, Armed Police agent Francisco Berlanga Robles was
killed in Pamplona as he was trying to defuse a bomb.

But the early I979 attack that brought tensions to a peak took place

on 3 January and took the life of Maj Gen Constantino Ortin Gil, the
military governor of Madrid, who was shot down at the door to his house
as he was returning home for lunch.

This slaying confirmed the intelligance gathered by police, which for
several days had suspected that an ETA (m) command was in Madrid. ETA

thus confirmed its ability to operate in Madrid, which it had already
demonstrated in the summer of I978 when it attacked two other ranking

army commanders. Thus, far from its natural bases, BTA (m) possessed

an effective intelligence network, which was needed to prepare and

carry out this kind of selective attack, a proven logistic capacity

and an infrastructure sufficient to perform its mission with perfect
precision. The police checkpoints that were set up on routes into

Madrid in the wake of the slaying and that would be repeated on many

other occasions yielded no tangible results. They served only to highlight
a certain degree of citizen cooperation. Little by little Spaniards

were beginning to realize that the struggle against terrorism was everyone's
business and at least tolerated the nuisance of the checkpoints in

good spirits.

Amid the tensions throughout the country because of the latest violence,
the interior minister appeared on television on the night of 3 January.

In a plodding, far from brilliant speech, Martin Villa spoke an unfortunate
sentence that was much criticized: "If we do not do away with ETA,

ETA will do away with us." The effect of his speech was very negative

in the highly charged atmosphere in Spain at the time. "his words,"

Jose Miguel de Azaola wrote, "have given the impression that Spain

is without a government, and when a country has that feeling, it can

be neither confident nor calm, nor can it feel secure."'2

Cvnvrnl Ortin's funeral was capitalized on by the Far Right to provoke
incidents at which "Government by the Military!" was shouted. The uneasiness

of extremist sectors was visible. The headline of BL ALCAZAR read:
"Marxist ETA, Responsible; the Government, to Blame." After stating

that General Ortin's slaying "is the last straw," it called for "the

ouster of this administration and the establishment of a neutral administra-
tion that could right the ship's course and give a minimum of hope

to a tormented nation that they are trying to distract by the ploy

of ballot boxes and elections."'3 Let us not forget that on 29 December

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
President Suarez went on television to announce his decision to dissolve
the Cortes and call general elections to be held on I March. Clearly,
by calling for a neutral government and belittling elections, EL ALCAZAR
was already dreaming about the coup caper of which it would be the
leading defender 2 years later. The mouthpiece of the National Confederation
of Combatants (the "former" had disappeared a few years before to show
their resolutely aggressive determination) said in another editorial

the same day: "[The government] must be replaced with the utmost urgency
by/anothergovernment that can take the emergency measures consistent
with an emergency I...I The problem must be resolved peremptorily be
those whose ultimate institutional duty is to defend Spain from the
enemies who are attacking and assaulting the State and from those who
become de facto collaborators of the enemy by showing that they are
incapable of defending the nation whose integrity has been entrusted

to them."/ (author's emphasis)

After this clear-cut call for a military uprising and a crackdown on
democratic politicians, EL ALCAZAR repeated its appeals, in case it
had not made itself clear, by once again demanding "emergency measures
that would give back to the State the only resources and means that
are effective against terrorism" and by stressing its thinly veiled
pleas to the army: "The institutions that have not yet been affected
by the political degradation that prevails throughout Spain have a
duty to confront an extremely grave situation through the emergency
resources that are inherent to them."'“

The blind interrelationship between terrorism and a coup movement could
not be expressed better. Like a scavenger hyena, the latter feeds

on the blood spilled by the former. The president of the PNV, Carlos
Caraicoechea, put is thus: "He can clearly see now that the aim is

to force a destabilization of and military action against the Basque
Country at all cost."'5 In a lengthy editorial, EL PAIS said, among
other things: "But there is indeed a political mind in the ETA leadership,
and an extraordinarily capable one too. It is this mind that is fueling
the desire to push the Armed Forces into another Operation Calaxia,
albeit limited in terms of responsibilities in the Basque Country,

or into a lasting 'Ulsterization' of the Basque Country.“6 The next
day, referring to General Ortin's funeral, the same paper mentioned

"the actions yesterday by a handful of men in uniform, applauded in

the street by fascist agitators." Although it pointed out that "what
happened yesterday does not reflect the general feeling among officers"
and that "the very spirit of the army is bruised the most in its own
eyes by actions such as the one we reported on," it concluded by noting
the danger that such actions pose: "But the government must, once again,
not downplay these worrisome signs of pockets of insubordination, and
the military command must act accordingly."'6bi9

A few days later, on 6 January, came the celebration of the traditional
Military Epiphany IPascua Hilitar], at which high-ranking Armed Forces
delegations were received by the king. In his address, the vice president

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nvn van Luann Us". unut

for defense, Lieutenant General Gutierrez Mellado, talked about "the
legal privilege, granted by the rest of the citizenry, to use force.

But let us remember," he continued, "that the force of the military

is delegated, not its own. It is something that we are entrusted with
and that we can make use of only in obedience to the desire and will

of those who entrusted it, in other words, the rest of the nation,

as expressed through the leadership and authority of a legitimate govern-
ment." This democratic theory of the military was the antithesis of

the coup-advocating doctrine that EL ALCAZAR voiced daily.

At the same ceremony, Juan Carlos spoke directly about the incident
#8 hours before at General Ortin's funeral, stating: "The spectacle
of indiscipline and disrespect prompted by momentary hotheadedness,
when one's nerves snap in disregard of the serenity that every member
of the military must possess, is frankly disgraceful. A military man,
an Armed Forces that has lost discipline cannot be saved. He is no
longer a military man, and it is no longer an Armed Forces."

In light of the developments 2 years later, especially the unsuccessful
coup of 23 February, from late I978 on we were witnessing the prelude
to a coup d'etat. The problem had been identified and diagnosed, but
on the one hand, effective preventive steps were not taken, and on

the other, terrorism, the coup plotters' major pretext, did not let

up in its efforts to blow everything sky high.

0n the early morning of 6 January, Twelfth-day and, as we mentioned,

a day of military celebration, ETA killed Civil Guard member Antonio
Ramirez Gallardo and his girlfriend Hortensia Gonzalez Ruiz in Beasain
(Guipuzcoa). The day before, in Llodio (Alava) ETA had seriously wounded
another Civil Guard member, Ciriaco Sanz Garcia, who died 3 days later.
On the 8th an ETA command attacked the Civil Guard barracks in Renteria,
hurling a Molotov cocktail and letting loose a burst of machine-gun

fire. In addition, for several weeks it had been engaged in a new

sort of activity: warnings that bombs had been placed along railways

in Greater Bilbao. Thus, in the already tense Basque atmosphere, these
threats, like the ones also conveyed to numerous schools, helped to
create a collective psychosis and to terrorize the populace, the frequent
initial aim of terrorist groups.

nut ETA was not the only active group. On 9 January GRAPO reappeared,
slaying Judge Miguel Cruz Cuenca, the chief justice of Division IV

of the Supreme Court, as he was leaving his house in Madrid. It was

less than 2 months before that ETA had murdered Judge Hateu in Madrid

also. It seemed as if the two terrorist organizations had made the State's
major institutions the targets of their criminal activities. The military
and the system of justice were being systematically attacked. The resurgence
of the odd Harxist-Leninist organization thus forced the police and

the government. which had just begun developing a strategy to strike

back at terrorism, to open up a new front. To EL PAIS, we were being

hit by "the Italian strategy of Spanish terrorism, operating day after

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
day with precision and rapidity that are as astonishing as they are

cruel. Continuing their escalating campaign of indiscriminate attacks,
the terrorists are now striking repeated blows at our institutions.

The military and the system of justice are the first victims of this
qualitative intensification, and as has been the case in Italy, other
components of society will be targets as well unless the government

can curb this phenomenon and unless the emotional response of the military
is as elemental as the one that we have envisioned."l

Meanwhile, various political parties and, at times, union and employer
organizations continued issuing public denunciations every time a terrorist
attack went beyond its regular, evil routine of what someone called

"our daily dead person." when the victim was a prominent individual,

as in the case of General Ortin or Judge Cruz Cuenca, the papers were

filled with summaries of these denunciations, which were almost always
identical.

One especially significant denunciation was approved by the Basque
General Council after a 2-day session. The document, which was regarded
as "courageous" and was felt "would create an opinion trend favorable

to the struggle against ETA," specifically referred to "the situation
prompted by the recent spiral of terrorist violence by ETA (m)" and
asserted that "this declaration is not just another condemnation of
terrorism." The document agreed fully with the aforementioned idea

that terrorism and pressures for a coup were objectively interrelated,
by pointing out "the manifest aim on the part of the perpetrators of
violence to trigger a coup d'etet, which would mean the cutting off

of the democratic process and the thwarting of the aspirations of the
Basque people." The declaration also stressed that "all of this political
action must lead to a Statute of Autonomy as the sole framework for

the development and consolidation of peaceful coexistence and for the
economic recovery and social progress of our people."

Stirred by the insane upswing in terrorism, the PNV gradually took
firmer stands. Andoni Honforte, one of the PNV's representatives on
the Basque General Council, did not hesitate to assert, for example:
"Regrettably, the objectives of the coup forces and ETA (m) are the
same, though the motivations are different." He was also opposed to
the continually reenerging idea of negotiations, stating that "ETA

(m) had rejected dialogue, and thus a solution along these lines seemed
impossible."

To CAMBIO l6, this stand represented a major shift. "Accused up to

now of maintaining an ambiguous posture and of not wanting to break

its sentimental ties to ETA, the PNV now seems to be trying to permanently
distance itself from the ETA organization."'9

EVen more categorical, if that is possible, was the position of Roberto
Lerchundi, the secretary general of the Basque Communist Party, who
voiced the need to "raise the consciousness of the people" to show

that "ETA is not what it says it is, nor does it pursue the objectives

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lhnl it says it does." Lerehundi added: "We must shatter BTA's ties
with [hr Basque people as a whole and remove it from politics in our
cuuntry."20

In spite of all this, a rejection of terrorism was not a spontaneous,
normal position in the Basque Country. In an extremely harsh editorial,
EL PAlS asserted that "the indifference with which certain segments

of the nationalistic Basque population, in spite of their obvious political
differences with ETA, look upon the murders committed by the terrorists,
is. in any event, terrifying. But if to this we add that a good many
of the rank-and-file nationalists regularly attend church and receive
the sacraments, confession included, and that, in striking contrast,
they always seem prepared to protest angrily when the victim has several
Basque family names, we can only begin to think that this emotional
illness is indeed serious and that at least some of its viruses have
their origin in racism." The editorial also referred to a document

from the bishops of Bilbao and San Sebastian in response to another

note from the Interior Board of the Basque General Council asking the
Church to take a clear-cut stand on the issue of violence. The bishops
denied that their mission could "be reduced to condemnations," inasmuch
as they were endeavoring above all "to create convictions, to educate
individuals and groups and to change the hearts of men." The bishops
therefore asserted that they would rather not "denounce specific acronyms
or groups." EL PAIS called on the two bishops "to leave the fantasy
kingdom of self-complacency and empty words so that they could confront
the concrete problems of the kingdom of this world and pluck up the
courage to mention ETA by name." The paper concluded by saying that

in order to make "violence impossible, it does not seem as if the best
way is for the bishops of Bilbao and San Sebastian [...] to engage

in an exercise of moral metamorphosis and join the party that Pontius
Pilate founded 2,000 years ago."21

ETA's attacks continued to focus on the members of State Security Agencies.
On I] January, two civil guards, Francisco Gomez Jimenez and Miguel

:areia Payo, were killed on the stretch between Azpeitia and Azcoita
(Cuipuzcoa). 0n the l5th, another civil guard, Francisco Hots Calvo,

was slain in San Sebastian. 0n the 27th and 30th, respectively, two
civilians, Jesus Uleyar Lizeaga, a former mayor of Echarri-Arauaz (Naverrc),
and Anzuela (Guipuzcoa) businessman Jose Artola Goicoechea were murdered.
January's tragic toll was rounded out by Felix de Diego Martinez, a

retired civil guard who was killed on the 3|st in lrun.

The French Front

The role played by France has emerged repeatedly during the lengthy
struggle against ETA. The French suthorities' tolerance towards the
ETA's Basque activist "refugees," which was explained in Franco's day

as a form of political exile, had become, oncedemocracywas established
in Spain. a resounding political scandal that no arguments could justify.
The Spanish Government's irritation occasionally reached the level

ol indignation over the stubborn hypocrisy that French government leaders

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were displaying. Clearly, without the French "sanctuary" the battle
against ETA would have been much easier, but the French hardly moved
a finger to rectify this scandalous situation.

Early January I979 provided an example of this stubbornness, leading

to a series of minor incidents. In a bid to resolve the problem, Spanish
Foreign Minister Marcelino Oreja made an unscheduled trip on l2 January
to Paris, where he met for an hour with his French counterpart Jean
Francois Poncet. Oreja was carrying a list of l27 presumed ETA members
who enjoyed political refugee status in flagrant violation of the Convention
on the Refugees Statute, under which individuals responsible for certain
types of crimes (against peace, war crimes or crimes against mankind)

and the perpetrators of felonies cannot benefit from this status. It

also stipulates that refugee status will no longer apply when the circum-
stances that gave rise to it no longer exist.

At the same time, Marcelino Oreja gave Poncet a dossier specifying

the activities that Basque "refugees" were engaged in on French territory.
It pointed out how the terrorist organization's staff and its incipient
administration had a comfortable base in the department of the Pyrenees-
Atlantiques, specifically in a few square kilometer area between Bayonne,
Biarritz, Saint Jean de Luz, Hendaye and Guetary.

It was in France, which the ETA people entered and left with great
ease, that new members were brought in, ideological instruction given,
training in the use of weapons and explosives provided, propaganda
distributed, information analyzed [...l etc. As CAMBIO I6 pointed

out, the French "sanctuary" was "a permanent center for refuge, retreat
and reorganization."22

In this squabble between France and Spain the semiofficial LE MONDE

threw all of its weight behind the French position without making the
slightest effort to analyze Spain's arguments. After describing the
situation in Spain in the bleakest of tones, referring to the practically
en masse insubordination of the Spanish Armed Forces, LE HONDE devoted

a third editorial to our country in a little over 2 weeks. It accused
Spanish authorities (in connection with the attacks on Argala and Peixoto,
who were not expressly mentioned) of "lapsing into the Francoist error

of looking beyond the country's borders for a satisfactory response

to a tragic situation a political solution to which depends exclusively
on the Spanish Government." As far as the French paper was concerned,

the solution was not to send more policemen to the Basque Country.

but to hasten the home rule process as much as possible. This piece

of advice, coming as it did from the semiofficial mouthpiece of a highly
centralist country, though not without its own autonomy problems (Corsica,
Brittany and the French Basques themselves), was an example of the
monumental hypocrisy that LE MONDE has so often wallowed in. At the

same time it termed Oreja's talk with Poncet "routine."23

‘0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
av - van-vhlw was. vuua

Tu EL PAlS this editorial resulted from "a simplistic analysis of complex
issues" in a bid to “relieve the Quai d'Orsay" of "the slightest responsi-
bility for the explosive situation in the Basque Country.“ The Madrid
daily underscored that "the members of ETA [...] looked beyond the

border not only for asylum for themselves but also offices for their
headquarters, depots for their weapons and banks for their money."

and it asserted that "the desire [of the French authorities] to export
the entire Basque problem to Spain and not to seek out complications

in the so-called 'northern Basque Country' is one of the causes of

a highly complex and strongly divisive situation. France's move to

let itself off the hook in the Basque affair," it concluded. "is not

only far from credible but also and above all, immoral."24

Spaniards were not the only ones who saw the hypocrisy of France's

stand. IL CORRIERE DELLA SERA wrote: "It is a fact that if ETA did

not have sanctuaries beyond the Pyrenees, it could not operate with

such impunity. Oreja is going to remind Paris that the friendship

between the two countries cannot be limited to what is written in treaties.
A Basque Government in exile still has its headquarters in France [...I
What would France and the French people say if Madrid harbored a Breton
Government in exile?"25

The attacks on Argala and Peixoto, moreover, served as a pretext for
several protest demonstrations in Saint Jean de Luz, which prompted
closings of the border and a number of incidents.

As far as the Spanish police were concerned, the fact that ETA's "master-
minds" were in France prevented a successful conclusion to the extremely
intense struggle that was being waged against the terrorist organization.
In the view of Manuel Ballesteros. the Bilbao police chief, the struggle
was "at its zenith, at its high point." During the first 50 days of

the year, 3| arrests had been made. 3 information commands, several
support commands and one armed command had been broken up, and 3 "people's
jails" had been uncovered. But the police had been unable to get to

the group's leadership, which had taken refuge in France, even though

the French Government had temporarily deported several ETA leaders

to the town of Valensole in the department of the French Alps.

Second General Elections

February was a month of intense political campaigning, leading up to
the general elections scheduled for l March.

In a way, the terrorists were running in the elections, because the

two Basque "abertzale" [patriotic] coalitions supported, respectively,

the views of ETA's two branches. Officially, the organizational ties

were lacking, but the platforms were identical. Euskadiko Eskerra

(EE) [Basque Left] represented the stands of ETA (p-m), which was completely
logical because we know that its main component, EIA [Basque Revolutionary
Party], was a product of the Seventh Assembly of ETA (p-m). For its

part, Herri Batasuna represented the positions of ETA(m). The famous

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Telesforo Monzon, a former minister of the Basque Government, who was
Herri Batasuna's number one congressional candidate from Guipuzcoa,
was jailed on charges of "justifying terrorism" in Nanclares de Oca.
Many thought that he was being given free campaign propaganda. But
could the government let a barefaced, insane defense of violence go
unpunished?

In any event, the terrorists did not declare an election truce. ETA
continued its killings throughout February,27 including a victim in
uniform, in this case a lieutenant colonel, Sergio Burrajo Palacios,

in Vitoria. For its part, ETA (p-m) got involved in the labor conflict
at the Michelin plant in Vitoria by kidnaping its manager Mr Abaitua

on l9 February. Although the union federations initially denounced

the kidnaping because “it harmed the interests of the workers." dissent
later arose within the Shop Committee. A week later, on the 27th,

the PNV, P308 and PCB issued a joint declaration opposing "the existence
of supermen who set themselves up as representatives of the workers."
Mr Abaitua was finally freed on I March, election day.

His kidnaping was a good example of ETA (p-m)'s tactics of direct and
coercive pressure to assert labor grievances. Abaitua, who was regarded
as a sympathizer of the PNV, was interrogated to ascertain his involvement
in certain employer actions, in the style of the Tupamaros. Photographs
of these interrogation sessions, along with several shots of Abaitua

in the "people's jail" where he was being held, were sent by ETA(p-m)

to the Basque media.28

For its part, ETA (m) stressed in statements to the Paris daily LE

MATIN that it was going to continue the struggle, "regardless of the
outcome of the elections," but at the same time it asserted that the

vote for Herri Batasuna "will give us an idea of how many strong supporters
we have." They also emphasized that they did not believe that their
actions would trigger a coup by the Far Right and they asserted that 29
they regarded themselves as "an example for the other peoples of Spain."
But the two branches of ETA were not the only active groups during

the election campaign. GRAPO also gave indications that it was alive

and well: On l5 February a civil traffic guard was killed in Madrid,

and on the l9th another civil guard was slain in Hospitalet (Barcelona).

The Far Right also boasted of its own violence. A few days before the
general elections, on 26 February, the secretary general of the Young

Red Guard, the youth organization of the Spanish Workers Party (PTE).
Pina Lopez Gay. was attacked and injured by a group of extremists.

But this was by no means the only thing that the Far Right did during

the campaign. Assaults on people putting up posters, Molotov cocktails
hurled at the headquarters of leftist parties and many other typical
extremist actions caused the UCD, PSOE, PCB and PTE to issue a communique
denouncing the National Union (a coalition grou ed around New Force)

“for the aggressive activities of its members." 0

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-.. u.. .u.-—. have. vasua

Thv rlerlinu results were in many ways surprising. We are especially
interested here in the outcome in the Basque Country, which put the
parties of the abertzale Left in a magnificent position. The two coalitions
covering this segment of the political spectrum garnered l7 percent

of the registered voters in the Basque Country. Berri Batasuna, the
political "face" of ETA (m), got I37,000 votes, which was much more

than expected. EL PAIS acknowledged that "this kind of election result
invalidated the de facto assumptions on which several of our assessments
of the Basque issue rested. Ous repeated assertions that ETA terrorism
had less and less grassroots support have now, unfortunately, been
proven wrong, and our prediction [...] that radical nationalism could
not garner more than l0 percent of the total vote in the four provinces
has also been refuted by the facts." To EL PAIS, the results "call

for further thought as to the significance of a populist movement and

as to the conditions that have prompted not only organized murder but
also the social support that it is getting." After stressing its well-
known stand of rounding out the required police measures with political
steps, which meant that "the Basque Country Autonomy Statute must be
taken up on an urgent and priority basis by the new Cortes," it concluded
by asserting that "we refuse to acknowledge the possibility that the
irrationality, emotionalism and doctrinal rigidity of that movement
(Herri Batasuna) could not be rechanneled, for the benefit of democracy

and a peaceful solution, by a true system of self-government for the
Basque Country."3|

The outcome of the elections in the Basque Country continued to cause
worries in the ensuing days, especially when it was learned that the
ﬂerri Batasuna legislators, three deputies (Telesforo Monzon, Pedro
Solabarria and Francisco Letamendia) and a senator (Miguel Castells),
were prepared to use their status as members of Parliament as a sounding
board to "speak out against the situation in the Basque Country, even

in international forums such as the International Court of The Hague."

A spokesman for the coalition declared proudly that "we are the most
important national liberation movement in Europe and other regions
of the world," underscoring that "the Basque Country is, of course,
completely unique and has a movement that can in no way be compared
with other national revolutionary movements [...] We have here," he
concluded, "more revolutionary possibilities than anywhere else in

the world."

To others, Herri Batasuna's relative but important and significant
victory meant that ETA was going to be in Parliament, no more and no
less, even though the coalition's legislators were not going to take
their seats in the Spanish Cortes "because we are not Spanish.“

The concern was perceptible both in the two major nationwide parties,
UCD and PSOE, and in the PNV itself, which felt that "the solutions

being sought by Herri Batasuna are not at all realistic and frankly
demagogic."32

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
These so-called solutions were simply the KAS demands, which we have
discussed in previous chapters and which consisted of a six-point election
platform:

I) Democratic freedoms, with recognition of thg right to self-determination
and the legalization of all political parties. 3

2) Recognition of the full-fledged sovereignty of the Basque nation
and of its territorial integrity (including Navarre) in an autonomy
statute.

3) lnstitutionalization of and priority for the Basque language.
4) The prompt democratization of local government.
5) Improvements in the living conditions of the working class.

6) Total amnesty, with the gradual withdrawal of the forces of public
order.

The concern of political circles was also reflected in the press, which
returned again and again to the issue. Through its editorial writer
Juan Tomas de Salas, CAHBIO l6 voiced the view that Herri Batasuna's
sole objective was to provoke "a civil war situation in the northern
part of the country." It talked about the "sad spectacle of freedom
and democracy turned into rubbish by a minority of visionaries" and
proposed that "the government's objective in the Basque question should
be to isolate the extremist Basque visionaries and to lessen the number
of desperate people who have given them their votes out of sheer irritation
over what they regard as the extremely slow process of autonomy for

the Basque Country. The only way to achieve this is by coming to terms
with Basque moderates on a wideranging autonomy."3a

EL PAIS kept raising the problem of the "remarkable emergence of Herri
Batasuna on the Basque election scene." After pointing out that "the
conjecture that a minority of immigrant workers supported one or another
factions of the abertzale Left seems plausible" and that "Herri Batasuna
benefited greatly from the newly enfranchised 18-year old voters,"

it stressed "Herri Batasuna's unequivocally populist nature." It also
wondered why such a major segment of the electorate supported a coalition
"that endorsed the objectives of ETA (m) and regarded its violent methods
as justifiable. We have no answer to this question," it conceded,

"but we do know that the answers given to this question before I March,
including the ones voiced by this paper, are inadequate."

EL PAIS gave a positive assessment of the role of moderate nationalism

as represented by the PNV, stating: "The hypothesis that the PNV was
playing a 'two-faced game' by straddling the fence in order to turn

ETA’s actions to its own account, is false l...| It erred in its campaign
tactics, because its silence and caution did it no good. But it did

not engage in double-dealing."

84
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
svn vba Luna“- v05. VAIUI

With regard to the Basque Left, it asserted: "Its reluctance to denounce
ETA (m) and its ideological links to ETA (p-m) did not do it much good
either. " It concluded solemnly. "Something very serious and grave

is happening in the Basque Country, something that neither the government
nor the opposition have yet succeeded in understanding."

LA VANGUARDIA felt that the outcome on I March "has confirmed a desire

for peaceful coexistence," which the Barcelona paper explained thus:

"The fact is that public opinion, no doubt deeply pained by the series

of crimes perpetrated by the agents of terror, has realized that we

are witnessing a struggle by extremist, antidemocratic organizations

that cannot be eradicated easily in the near term." With regard to

the attacks that occurred right after the election, it stated that

"the vote of indignity and bloodstained gangsterism has once again 36
been cast [...l The murderers have reappeared with their deadly onslaught."

0n 6 March, Brig Gen Agustin Munoz Vazquez was murdered in Madrid,
and GRAPO claimed responsibility. 0n the same day, ETA (p-m) stole
l,000 kilograms of "goma-Z" from an explosives depot in Pamplona.
Two armed commands with submachine guns and pistols carried out the
raid after storming the home of the depot guard. At the same time,
at the other end of the country, in Ceuta, a bomb went off, wounding
l6 persons. The Moroccan Patriotic Front, a group that was unknown
before, claimed responsibility. Because of the incident the border
with Morocco was closed for several hours.

The terrorists were making themselves felt everywhere, and the successive
steps in the process of democratic normalization (such as the l March
elections) seemed to be of no use in swaying them from their daily
mission of hatred and destruction.

Tiis grave situation was not altered by the municipal elections on

3 April, I month after the legislative balloting. Although the U00

was victorious (30,2l4 councilmen versus l2,l9h for the 9505). the
municipal vote had to be interpreted as a triumph for the Left, because
in provincial capitals and towns with more than 50,000 inhabitants

it was the clear winner, especially the P803 (906 councilmen for the
PSOE, 802 for UCD, 622 for the PCB and 74 for CD).

In the Basque Country, the municipal elections confirmed the consolidation
of herri Batasuna, which won 260 council seats. Jose Oneto wrote that
"although the abertzale victory that has made Herri Batasuna the arbiter
of the Basque political situation has inspired true terror in certain
government circles in Madrid, we cannot overlook the positive side

of the fact that men who used to be in the underground and have supported
an armed struggle now hold positions of responsibility at the local

level " The editor of CAMBIO l6 felt that “the very mechanics of politics
will force the abertzales to make realistic political proposals that

will gradually move them away from ETA's extremist stands. "37

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The evolution of events did, in fact, moderate the stands of the Basque
Left (85 councilman) but achieved nothing with Herri Batasuna, whose
representatives continued to engage in the most insane radicalism.

Meanwhile, ETA (m) demonstrated with deeds that it still intended to
continue the armed struggle. On 9 March in Beasain (Guipuzcoa) it
killed Municipal Police Sargeant Miguel Chavsrri lsasi, on the I6th
lberduero employee Jose Maria Madoral Olegaga in Bilbao and on the
23rd in Vitoria police inspector Antonio Recio Claver. On 6 April

two civilians were slain: Pedro Fernandez Serrano in Pamplona and Juan
Diez Roman in Tolosa (Guipuzcoa).

The fear of a terrorism that seemed to be everywhere mounted still
further when on IS March, the police published a lengthy note in which

it reported the arrest of the alleged murderers of Catalan industrialist
Jose Maria Bulto and Mr and Mrs Viola. The police indicated that the
group's creator and ideologue was an old separatist, Josep Batista

i Roca, who had died a few months before. He had lived in exile in
Great Britain for many years and from the time of the European war

had been involved in paramilitary groups working for Catalan independence.
The charge leveled at this strange but well-known figure caused an
enormous stir in Catalonia, but no one was able to convincingly refute
the police version. Their report mentioned the existence of a Catalan
People's Army, seen as an attempt to create an ETA in Catalonia. Other
reports also mentioned three small groups, People's Alert, Catalonia

and Liberty and the Catalan Red Brigades, that were prepared to undertake
an "armed struggle" to further separatist nationalism. 8 Fortunately,
none of these groups gave later evidence of its existence. A little

less than 2 years later Terra Lliure appeared, showing signs of activity
though not, for the moment, doing any killing.

New Government, Old Problems

Three days before the municipal elections, on 30 March, Suarez was
selected as government president, thanks to the votes of Democratic
Coalition and the Andalusian Socialist Party, in a heated session in
which debate on the program that had been presented was voted down.
The makeup of the new government was announced on the 5th. There were
no major changes; it was another Suarez administration that had to
tackle the same old problems.

One of these problems was the Basque Country, to which, in turn, there
were various facets: the statute, replacement of the forces of public
order (FOP), terrorism...etc. It was unquestionably the most serious
issue facing the government that emerged from the I March elections,
and it was only very slowly that the administration was able to develop
a suitable strategy in the struggle against terrorism.

Martin Villa was replaced as interior minister by a military officer,

Gen Antonio lbanez Freire. The thinking was that the presence of a
military man would give the struggle against terrorism the momentum

it lacked. But the ensuing months were to prove that the new minister
would be a failure, as he made several very unfortunate public appearances.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR Vl'l'l.hll\h Us."— Ul‘h‘

In May there was another major m-rsonnel change in the battle against
terrorism when Conesa, the famous and controversial "superagent," was
replaced as the head of the extremely important General Headquarters

of Information by Manuel Ballesteros, who until then had been chief

of police in Bilbao and a leading expert on ETA, which he had been
studying at least since I974, when he was stationed in San Sebastian.
Two years later, Ballesteros became the head of the Single Antiterrorist
Command.

The persistence of the same old problems was borne out when on 8 April
in Bilbao a demonstration attended by more than l00,000 persons was
staged by all the Basque political parties except UCD and AP [Popular
Alliancel. Its purpose was to protest not terrorism but, as its banner
proclaimed, "Errepresioaren Anorka" (against repression). The specific
demands were a return of Basque prisoners to the Basque Country and

the withdrawal of the FOP from the Soris jail, where many convicted

or alleged ETA members were being held. At the same time, France's
half-hearted measures against the "Basque refugees" were protested.

A few hours before this demonstration "against repression," National
Police Sargeant Gines Pujante Garcia and National Police First Lieutenants
Miguel Orense Villamon and Juan Bautista Peralta Montoya were shot

and killed as they were returning to the Loyala barracks in San Sebastian.
At the same time, a number of French establishments, such as the consulate
in San Sebastian or businesses, were being bombed. This was a way

to pressure the French authorities into not agreeing to the extradition

of two ETA members, Miguel Coicoechea and Martin Apaolaza, who were

to he tried a few days later. As was to be expected they were not
extradited, though they were kept in preventive custody.

The Basques were getting ready for "Aberri Eguna" (the Day of the Basque
Fatherland) on Easter Sunday the 15th. As part of its bloodthirsty
preparation, ETA (m) killed Dionisio lmaz Corostiza, the owner of a

small machine shop, on Monday the 9th in Villafranca de Ordizia (Guipuzcoa).

The situation was tremendously confused, and the confusion was reflected
in the press, whose analyses ranged from ambiguity to blind lashing

out. Such was an editorial in EL PAIS entitled "The Basque Country:

Only Negotiations Remain." In it the paper asserted that "frustration

is becoming widespread in the Basque Country, where the people feel

that they were singled out for punishment by Franco and are misunderstood
by the democratic government." After this peculiar diagnosis in which
terrorism did not seem to count, EL PAlS placed all the blame on the
Madrid government, which "unforgivably kept falling into all of the

traps laid for it by ETA terrorism, the equivocation of the PNV and

the thunderous shouts from the Far Right, which considers negotiations
with Basque political forces synonymous with the crime of treason.

It also talked about "the stupidity [of successive Suarez administrations]
of trying to arrange secret truces with ETA (m) for specific periods

of Spanish politics" and asserted that "Mr Bandres has become a stabilizing

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

element, more or less, vis-a-vis the general situation in the Basque
Country." After solemnly proclaiming that "as far as the Basque Country

is concerned, the time for playing politics has passed, and the opportunity
is there for those who would and can make history," it wrote: "ﬂaking

up for lost time in the Basque Country necessarily hinges on the government's
vigorously retaking the initiative, to which the only backdrop is negotia-
tions, but negotiations viewed 'historically' and undertaken without

fear [...I. All of this obviously carries a risk, but an even greater

risk is entailed in the inhibition, silence and paralysis in which

the government is wallowing."39

Aberri Bguna was celebrated in Bilbao with a demonstration attended
by some 200,000 persons grouped by political party. They called for
"autonomy today" but "independence tomorrow" as well. There were also
some shouts of support for ETA, and a national flag was even burned.

Gerardo Gomez Chaos, a Falangist, was murdered on Monday morning in
San Sebastian, and the following day a civil guard, Juan Bautista Garcia,
was found dead near lkastelliete (Guipuzcoa).

An incident that took place on 20 April in Madrid prompted a controversy
regarding the police methods in the struggle against terrorism. GRAPO
leader Juan Carlos Delgado de Codex was killed during a confrontation

with police, which apparently had information on his movements. He

was well-known to the police, inasmuch as he had been arrested in mid-I976,
but "inexplicably," due to an unforgivable mistake by judicial authorities,
according to the General Directorate of Security (DGS), he had been
granted amnesty and released in I977. No one understood how he could

have lived in the underground, and as an exiled leader of Colombia's

H-Zl told CAHBIO l6, "it's even harder to believe that he was able

to continue engaging in armed struggle, and it was absolutely absurd

for them to give him total control of the military apparatus. That's

like putting the entire organization in the hands of the police, unless
the police was interested in keeping the organization going."

Thus, doubts arose once again in connection with the real nature of

GRAPO, whose alleged revolutionary chracter was not consistent with

its actual deeds. The Colombian revolutionary leader mentioned in

the paragraph above could not understand, for example, "why a judge

with such a democratic track record as Cruz Cuenca Iwho had voted to
legalize the PCB] or a liberal military officer like Gen Agustin Munoz 40
Vazquez had been selected as targets by an armed leftwing organization."

Delgado de Codex's death could only be viewed as the typical elimination
of someone who "knew too much," and as a friend of his stated, "there
are people who would like to keep a lot of things quiet."

EL PAIS said something similar in its edition of 22 April, the same
day that the slain terrorist was buried in a private family 7 remony
in Segovia. In an editorial entitled "A Man, A Terrorist, A Witness,"
it cited "the cloudly circumstances" surrounding Delgado de Codex's

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR UI'EILIN. Ubl‘. URL!

death, which it termed "untimely for the justice system and for the
increasingly difficult unraveling of the terrorist networks developed
in our country during the years of the political transition." EL PAIS
also brought up the question marks regarding CRAPO and stressed that
the struggle against terrorism "requires, in contrast to suspect approaches,
large amounts of information and public trials to throw some light

on who is pulling the strings (or having them pulled) behind the kind
of terrorism that CRAPO practices." It concluded by asserting: "Police
chief Conesa's men lConesa was replaced less than a month later] have
shot down a terrorist. An enemy of society is dead; so is a valuable
witness.""l

But this blow was not fatal to GRAPO. Two days after Delgado de Codex

was buried, it announced that it was planning an unprecedented upsurge

in violence. At least l5 CRAPO terrorists were at large, which made

any precautions impossible. Once again the police had to play "wait

and see" without being able to take any precautionary measures except

to protect the individuals who were on the “hit lists" found in GRAPO

"safe apartments" that had been uncovered and searcehd in March in Valencia.
Nevertheless, in a little over a month, GRAPO was to undertake one

of its most famous actions: the bombing at 67 California.

The defenselessness of our democracy was again brought to light when

it was learned that one of the individuals implicated in the murders

in Atocha. Fernando Lerdo de Tejada, had not returned to Ciudad Real
Prison after he was given a pass for Holy Week. The man who had granted
the leave, and to an inmate with serious charges pending against him,
was Judge Rafael Gomez Chaparro, the former head of Courtroom Number

I of the Francoist Court of Public Order, who was the presiding judge

at the trial in connection with the multiple slaying in Atocha.

Irritation over this barefaced mockery of democratic institutions became
even greater when shortly thereafter the magazine BLANCO Y NEGRO published
an interview that the fugitive had granted in France to journalist

Alfredo Semprun, who claimed "to have found him by chance." The Audiencis
Nacional, in conjunction with the chief justice of the Supreme Court,
decided to replace Judge Gomez Chaparro as trial judge and even began
proceedings against him to ascertain contingent liabilities."2

We should stress here that in spite of the endemic nature of terrorism
on the Far Right and the erratic nature of CRAPO terrorism, the number
one worry for the government. for political circles and for public
opinion was ETA terrorism, because it was systematic and persistent
and, above all, because of the social support that it unquestionably
continued to enjoy.

There were still many who strongly believed that "political measures"

were needed to do away with ETA violence, although in contrast to 1976-1977
and almost all of I978, more and more people felt that the “political
measures" ought to be accompanied by "police measures."

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The political measure par excellence was supposed to be the statute

on which home rule for the Basque Country was to be based. The draft
statute, the so-called Guernica Statute, was encountering serious diffi-
culties, however, which suggested that its final approval would inevitably
de delayed.

As a stopgap measure that would enable the Basques to enjoy real autonomy

as soon as possible, a plan emerged in late April to immediately reestablish
the I936 Statute, with the necessary minimum of reworking. The administra-
tion had a dossier on this plan that was warmly supported by the minister

of territorial administration. Antonio Fontan. It was felt that this

move would get the Basque issue out of the dead-end to which it had

come. Moreover, this quickening of the pace in dealing with the most
serious problem in Spanish politics would enable the king to visit

the Basque provinces, which, as we knew, was one of his fondest ambitions.
Such a visit could be an opportunity for what CAHBIO I6 called "the 43
Cuernica embrace" that would make peace a reality in the Basque Country.

The return to the former statute was backed by the president of the

PNV, Carlos Garaiceochea. "A reestablishment of the I936 Statute would

be much less controversial among the Basque people than the proposed

new statute, which contains contradictions...[inasmuch as] the I936
Statute, as a purely provisional arrangement, could command broader a“
support as a result of the weight of history and all of the fond memories."
Even though, as the PNV leader also said, "the situation is deteriorating
fast" and "radicalization is more obvious every day" and many were

becoming "convinced that there was no basis for a political solution,"

the I936 Statute was never reestablished as planned, and the country

had to wait until late July for the new Guernica Statute to overcome

the final stumbling blocks.

General Terrorist Offensive

There was a general terrorist offensive from late April I979 practically
to the end of that summer. The two branches of ETA, as well as GRAPO

and the Far Right, carried out a series of activities that made these
middle months of I979 one of the most trying periods in the brief history
of democratic Spain.

GRAPO immediately launched its announced offensive on 26 April in Esplugas
de Llobregat by killing independent Councilman Manuel Florentin Perez,

who although not affiliated with any party, was acknowledged as a New
Force sympathixer by the party's delegate.

On 28 April, while ETA (m) was slaying Municipal Police officer Pedro
Ruiz Rodriguez in Durango (Vizcaya), GRAPO was murdering a national
police officer in Barcelona.

The following day, 29 April, a young communist, Andres Garcia, was
knifed to death on Goya Street in Madrid by a young man belonging to
one of the many Far Right groups that operated with impunity in the

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a a... «n . .asss- anu- slate-D

Madrid district that Nazis and fascists considered a "national zone."

A few days later, l7-year old Jose Luis Martinez Merino was arrested

and charged with the crime. According to Martinez Merino's statement,
the only reason for the slaying was the "brazen look" on the face of

the victim, who had seen the young rightwing extremist pound on and
destroy a briefcase with a sticker of "Che" Guevara that another student
was carrying.

The murderer turned out to be a member of the Youth Front, a group

that had split from Young Force, New Force's youth branch. This was

a highly radical, national syndicalist group that had been legalized

in September I978. Its 800 members (400 in Madrid and 400 elsewhere

in Spain, approximately) were organized on a paramilitary basis and
carried out many actions in the ensuing months. Its leader, Juan Ignacio
Gonzalez Ramirez, was killed on 12 December I980 on the doorstep to

his home, and the group's activities have waned considerably since then.

This incident showed that terrorism from the Far Right was deadly too,
giving the lie to those who thought that the fascist youth were just
a bunch of troublemakers.

It was a known fact that the members of these fascist groups could

be detected quite easily, as was shown by the prompt arrest of Jose
Luis Martinez Merino. What no one could understand was why these individuals
were allowed to move around practically without restraints. Government
circles felt that these rightwing extremist organizations were the
breeding ground for the individuals who in the months to come "would
organize armed gangs and begin what could turn out to be a real upsurge
in fascist terrorism if action were not taken against them." The
same circles called for "the implementation of a plan to prevent a
fascist uprising, which threatens [...l the complete consolidation

of Spanish democracy.“5

But the crackdown against the fascists always fell short of the mark.
"It's odd. We all know who they are, except those whose duty it is
to know," said the humorist "Forges" in his cartoon on page 2 of
INFORMACIONES on 2 May. After underscoring the upswing in Far Right
terrorism over the past months, the same paper asserted: "The fascist
gangs do exist; we can see them wearing their armbands. The fascist
gangs enjoy a true dispensation, an immunity 'granted' by precisely
the individuals who are supposed to be battling them.""6

The next step inthis springtime upsurge in terrorism was taken by ETA,
which on 30 April killed Civil GuardofficerJuan Diez Roman in Onate
(Guipuzcoa). The following day, it slew another two members of the
Guard, Jose Maestro Rodriguez and Antonio Pena Solia, in Villafranca
de Ordieia (Guipuzcoa).

A few days later, on S May, a well-known ETA leader, Chomin Iturbe,
survived an attack on his life in the French city of Bayonne. The Basque-
Spanish Battalion was presumably back in action.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GRAPO once again proved that its announced escalation was for real.

On the 8th it attacked and seriously wounded the former director general
of security, Rodriguez Roman. Two days later, as the king was opening
the legislative session of the Cortes, it attacked a pair of National
Police officers, killing one and wounding the other.

A Bloody Week in May

This sort of terrorism, which could almost be termed trivial were it
not so tragic Ion the l7th ETA (I) killed Antonio Perez Garcia, a bar
owner, in Lemons], continued until the last week in May, which marked
one of the bloodiest periods in the ongoing terrorism, to the extent
that London's DAILY TELEGRAPH wrote that "Spain is facing its most
serious times since the Civil War."

This critical wear, which could without exaggeration also be called tragic,
began like the last week in January I977, with a plenary session of

the Congress of Deputies on "citizen security," a session that would

be dealing primarily with terrorism. We should recall that just 6
months before, in November I978, the Lower Chamber had held another
session on terrorism. The fact that the Parliament was putting so

much emphasis on this issue bespoke how heavily terrorism weighed on
public life in Spain, to the point that it conditioned all other factors.
It would not be going too far to speak of a genuine obsession with
terrorism.

Furthermore, the dangerous notion that terrorism was unstoppable and
invincible was becoming increasingly widespread. No matter what it
did, the State seemed powerless to counter it. Neither police nor
political measures seemed capable of coping with the forces that by
dint of violence were trying to achieve their nonnegotiable objectives.

The session that we mentioned began on the 23rd with a report from

the interior minister, lbanez Freire, reiterating the government's
standard views. He placed special emphasis on the need for cooperation
from the courts, the citizenry, political parties and associations

in general. The government was giving the impression that it was being
overwhelmed by terrorist persistence. The measures he proposed, in
what was considered a plan of action against terrorism, were threefold:
legislative (consisting of amendments to laws relating to terrorist
crimes), encouraging citizen cooperation and police operations. The
minister, who defined terrorism as "a frontal attack on society in
total disregard of the most elementary individual and community rights,"
felt that unlike common crime, this piercing assault on the social
fabric had to halted through short-term measures.

The representatives of the various parliamentary groups then nad the
floor. Fraga, the leader of AP, called for a ruthless four-point attack
on terrorism: I) No more revolutionary war in the Basque Country; 2)

The country is fed up with those who are promoting or tolerating terrorism
from outside Spain; 3) Changes in general legal provisions, rules of

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'Ul\ Url‘lblﬂla UDI UNI-7

procedure and prison regulations; and A) support and funding for the
forces protecting society. He talked about "the criminal pressure

of ETA, complemented by an intolerable hodge-podge of parallel activities,
Pro-Amnesty Advocates, investigations committees, municipal action

groups, marches for freedom and political fronts that have wound up

in Herri Batasuna." This coalition was the target of particularly

harsh attacks by Frags. "The war against ETA," he said, "is going

to be won or lost, like other wars. To win it, we have to take it
seriously, and that means using all of the means at our disposal, as

Italy is doing right now by resorting to the army itself."

On the other extreme there was the speech by Basque Left Deputy Juan

Maria Bandres, who referred to the constitution as "institutional violence
against the Basque people." Once again, this was a direct way of legitimiz-
ing ETA's political crimes.

This lack of understanding of the problem facing Spanish democracy

was also reflected, albeit at a different level, in the address by

the spokesman of the PNV, ﬂarcos Vizcaya. He complained that the traditional
concept of law and order as order in the streets was still in force

and gave a rundown of the violence in the Basque Country in 1978: 92
armed political holdups, 6| attacks by the Far Right and 255 by the

Far Left, with a toll of 87 dead and 87 wounded. In patent contradiction
to these terrifying statistics, he described "the objective reality

in the towns and cities in the Basque Country today" in terms of the
following five features: I) The oppressive presence of police forces,

with more than l0,000 agents on the streets "with weapons cocked and
ready"; 2) A network of stringent police checkpoints that cause enormous
bottlenecks, annoyance and irritation; 3) the psychosis of a country

in a state of emergency and occupation, on the one hand, and being

used as a testing ground for revolutionary war,onthe other. 4) The
belief that the situation in which the Basque people find themselves

is hopeless as long as the government persists in using police methods
exclusively while the revolutionary violence continues; and 5) The
radicalization and hardening of the majority segments of the population

in view of the absence of real political solutions.
As we can see, the PNV harped on "political measures," meaning "the
statute, immediately, with all its consequences," and in fact rejected
police action to an extent that seems incredible. Underlying its epokesman's
speech is the notion that the "revolutionary" activities are just a
response to "police methods" and that, as a result, when the statute

is enacted, (hr revolutionary violence will disappear. The course

of events would demonstrate quite soon that the situation was much

more complex.“7

To LA VANGUARDIA, the debate was "a dialogue of the deaf," although

it added this qualification: "The responsibility is not only the administra-
tion's; it must be shared by the various bodies, as well as by all

political forces. Remedying the situation, however, is above all a

matter for the State."l‘8

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On Friday 25 May, just a few short hours after the aforementioned debate
concluded, an attack for which ETA (m) claimed responsibility took

place in Madrid and claimed the lives of Lt Gen Luis Gomez Hortiguela,
Culs Agustin Laso Corral and Jesus Avalos Gomariz, who were with him

in the car, and the driver of the car, Lorenzo Gomez Borrero. News

of the slaying caused tension so great that it could be felt in the

air.

0n the same day in Seville, a police inspector, Damian Seco Fernandez,
was killed during a shootout with a CRAPO command. A stray bullet

also took the life of young Antonio Civico Mendoza. The terrorists

fled but were sighted the following day in Ademuz (Valencia) by police.
CRAPO members Maria del Carmen Lopez and Raul Calero were killed in

the confrontation, and the other two members of the command were arrested.
This took place on Saturday the 26th shortly after noon.

As we mentioned, the slayings of the military officers had an enormous
impact. The atmosphere in military circles was described as an "uneasy
calm," and several members of a theoretically defunct extremist military
organization, the Patriotic Military Union, were placed under discreet
surVeillance. Furloughs were canceled, and the troops were put on alert.

"Armed Forces Day" was to be celebrated on Sunday the 27th in Seville,
the seat of the Second Military Region, and homage was supposed to

be paid to the flag in the same city the previous Saturday. ETA (m)
and CRAPO had apparently planned a joint operation to provoke the Armed
Forces by attacking them in their most sensitive spot and at a time
when the entire country had directed its attention to the military.

The funeral of the slain officers was held on Saturday the 26th at
Army General Headquarters, and as in July of the previous year and
January that year, rightwing extremist groups provoked incidents and
shouts of "Government to the military!:'"Long live Franco!" and other

similar ones were heard.

On that same Saturday, however, the citizenry, whose nerves had already
reached the breaking point, was dealt another terrible blow. A little
before I900 hours a bomb went off in the crowded downtown cafeteria

at 67 California in Madrid. Leaving a toll of 8 dead and some 50 wounded,
the attack prompted disbelief, terror and a feeling of total powerlessness
among residents of Madrid. The terrorists seemed to own the country,
moving around as they pleased, escaping and hiding out without the

police being able to cope with them. Many remembered the words of
Minister lbanez Freire 2 days before in the Cortes: "The forces of

public order are more than capable of putting an end to terrorism."

The bombing at 47 California heightened tensions to an unprecedented
level. The cafe, located close to the main headquarters of New Force.
was quickly surrounded by groups of rightwing extremists shouting slogans
like the ones that morning, adding "We want another 36," as well as
others denouncing the king. These groups then tried to attack the
headquarters of leftwing organizations.

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rvn tIh-num. you. inn.)

with the news of the bombing already out, the king and queen and members of
the administration attended the ceremonies honoring the flag in Seville.
The tension could be seen on everyone's face; it was one of the most
serious moments in the history of terrorism in Spain.

That night, Suarez and his ministers held a meeting in Honcloa after
returning from Seville. It was a Saturday night, but neither in Madrid
nor in many other cities around Spain were there people in the streets.
Terrorism was achieving its objective of terrorizing the populace.

it was initially thought that ETA members were responsible for the
bombing of the cafe at a7 California. Others saw major signs pointing 49
to the Far Right. Only later was it learned that GRAPO was the culprit.

All political parties denounced these attacks without qualifications.
Only the abertzale Basques in Berri batasuna maintained a suggestive
silence.

For the first time since he became president, Suarez was being held
responsible by the press. There was talk of the “Suarez paralysis,"
and he was criticized for his isolation in Honcloa. A CAMBIO I6 editorial
entitled "Mr President," signed by Juan Tomas de Salas, harshly rebuked
Suarez. "Mr President," it said, "either you lose your fear of the
Chamber, of public opinion and of the country or, frankly, the next
wave of terrorism will do away with you. The sizable political capital
that you accumulated during the recent difficult years l...l is on

the verge of disappearing during these bleak days of terror and the
silent days afterwards, in which the only thing we know about you is
that you have once again stopped sleeping."so

EL PAIS, under the headline "The Strategy of Tension," wrote: "Spain,
like Italy, seems to have begun the diabolical chess game of the strategy
of tension, which is being played by utopian revolutionaries, renegades
from industrial society, mercenaries and international agents. The
thread running through this confused medley will for a long time, if

not forever, be an unfathomable mystery in which at best we can glimpse
shadowy interests centered on the perpetuation of weak regimes on the
Iberian PeninSula and, in general, in the western Mediterranean basin."

"The fact is," it continued, ”that with this bloodthirsty terrorist
strategv, the democratic philosophy has not, for its part, developed

any strategy of containment, aside from the elementary refusal to 'take

the bait' of provocation that the terrorists now routinely offer."

Further on it talked about the "irritating political enertia [of the
administration], which is particularly damaging to the search for an
autonomy solution for the Basque Country." It concluded by asserting

that the continuation of Our democratic system "is conditioned by the
efforts of a political team that can wrest the country from its bewilderment
and incipient despair."5'

95
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we analyze it carefully, we will see that this is a symptomatic
editorial that has completely abandoned the former idea that democracy
would put an end to terrorism. It also concedes a certain degree of
powerlessness in dealing with a phenomenon that it labels an "unfathomable
mystery," while stressing the need for progress on the Basque home

rule problem. It also rebukes government leaders suffering from an
"irritating political inertia."

Bntitling its editorial "Democracy Is Not the Culprit," DIARIO l6 referred
to the recent debate on terrorism, saying: "Not even the most conservative
political leaders attributed this state of affairs to democracy. This
must be made clear: Democracy is not the culprit. Parliament is battling
terrorism with the only weapons it has. It must be supported."52

Under the title "Before Democracy,” ABC wrote: "Democracy has arrived,
and terrorism has not waned l...] Meanwhile, in one way or another

our executive and legislative leaders continue to assert imperturbably
that they will not fall into the trap that terrorism has set for Spanish
democracy."

"We do not want to make this commentary a forum of charges against
democratic freedoms, but we do not want it to be an exoneration either

l...l Nevertheless, we Spaniards must not endorse or accept imperturbability
as a guiding principle, as a watchword, as the key to responding to

the terrorist assault on our peace and on our lives.

"What democracy in the Free western World would have tolerated and

not immediately done something about the bizarre and immoral spectacle
of political parties that say they want democracy but that ahirk their
commitment to defend it in the war against terrorism." It then termed
terrorism a "State problem," accusing the "leadership class," however,
of not being of the "mind and spirit" to see it that way. It concluded
by stating that "democracy exists for freedom and security; security
and lives do not exist for democracy. He demand courage and order
because we want democracy, security and freedom."53

As we can see, the tone in ABC is different. It categorically rejects
the traditional assertion that "we will not fall victim to provocation,"
which EL PAIS seems to still accept. In coaparison to DIARIO I6, which
sees democracy as an untouchable premise, it places the freedom and
security threatened by terrorism "before democracy."

LA VANCUARDIA wrote the following: "Something is going wrong deep down
in the system, because careful, vigorous and reasoned action must be
taken before disaster strikes l...l Peace is not a blessing that comes
free." It concluded by making an appeal for harmony.

As we can see, all of these commentaries, written under the impact
and amid the emotion of the awful bombings, are highly dramatic. Never
before had the country felt so strongly about terrorism, and the authorities

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR Ufllklﬂh uar. UNI-l

were being called on to do away with it at all costs. The phrase "at
any price" was almost, but not quite being uttered. Terrorism was
thus paving the way for a coup.

INFORHACIONES, speaking out against the rightwing extremists who were
declaring the administration unfit to rule, noted that: "Democracy

is being put to a harsh test, but there is no reason for democracy

to be weak. He must dispel the false but all too often repeated notion

that freedom and authority are incompatible." However, it also spoke

out against the administration, stating that "even at the risk of sounding
monotonous, we must reiterate that it is giving the impression of paralysis,
of being swamped, which is, frankly speaking, worrisome."

Another EL PAIS editorial 2 days later graphically described the gravity

of the situation that had arisen. "Irresponsible jokes are being made
about the possibility of a coup d'etat; the slightest move by the sleeping
military lion is carefully watched; there is talk of war among Spaniards
and of a return to the past. In a word, the country is giving in to

fear, provocation, dejection l...l The far rightwing papers are, as

always, stirring up passions and are being unexpectedly echoed by the
spokesmen of 'civilized conservatism' [...] This is the just the atmosphere
for some sort of coup. The government remains silent."

It went on to say: "But the temptation to combat terrorism with State
terrorism is the most dangerous trap into which public opinion cc ld
fall. We cannot exchange one kind of violence for another, one kind

of fear for another, one kind of insecurity for another l...l There

is only one possible response to the kind of situation we find ourselves
in: a political response."

Then came harsh criticism of the governrwnt. "This is not a political
team," it said; “this is a group of self-willed friends [...] who have

taken hold of power but do not know how to use it except for their

own self-satisfaction." It then asked: "What hope can thus be held

out to the Basques who do not agree either with ETA or the abertzale

groups or the PNV? Is their any cause for optimism among these Spaniards?"

The Madrid paper returned to the obsession with a coup: "At worst,
another Operation Galaxia is in the works. But even if it were to
succeed, which we doubt, would it really be a valid solution?" It
closed with a grave warning: "The fact is that a cloud of skepticism,
if not despair, is enveloping this society and that the government

is mainly to blame for it. There are even those who theorize that
Suarez has consciously engaged in crisis politics to strengthen his
grip on power. We would rather not believe that [...I The UCD, with
its president in the lead, ought to offer Spaniards some sort of solution.
The only other possible alternative entails the destruction of the
government itself. The terrorists have unquestionably picked the right
time to act."56

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ron orrrcrn. use any

l

The French press also evinced concern.i "Even the president regarded

the new Spain of Juan Carlos and his pfime minister, Adolfo Suarez,

as an amazingly sound entity suffering from a superficial localized

ill that could not, therefore, undermine the rest of the country [...I
Unfortunately, things have not turned but as logic and reason would
indicate. Logic and reason are not the only components of Basque psychology
[...I" It mentioned, in conclusion, the danger that "a fascist right

wing will rear its head, gsirring all of the lovers of law and order,
especially the military."

After assessing the situation and accusing the Suarez administration
of do-nothingism, LE HOhDE said: "But what seems certain is that Saturday's
bombing will take Spain into the unknown."5

The Congress of Deputies met again in plenary session on 30 May to
discuss the issue of terrorism. In the course of the session, during
which Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez delivered a speech, a Congressional
Declaration on terrorism was passed.

The declaration was signed by all of the parliamentary groups except
Democratic Coalition and the Mixed Group. It contained six points,
denouncing the recent bombings, pledging aid in the antiterrorist struggle
and condemning the attempts to prompt a lack of confidence among the
citizenry in democratic institutions.

For his part, Suarez stressed that the recent terrorist attacks coincided
with the start of preliminary studies on the first autonomy statutes,

a few hours after Congress passed the security plan submitted by Ibanez
Freire, and with the beginning of work on the constitution.

The spokesmen of the various parliamentary groups took the floor after
Suarez, and particular mention should be made of the categorical denunciation
of terrorism by the PNV's representative, Javier Arzallus. "All killing,
whether in a war or in an isolated attack, is barbaric," he said, stressing
the need to have the total support of the people in the struggle against
terrorism and noting, in this regard, that "the Chamber has perhaps

not been equal to the occasion." The latter reservation notwithstanding,

PNV had never before been so unqualified in its condemnation of terrorism.

The speech by the spokesman of CD, Manuel Frags, was particularly harsh.
He criticized the prime minister's speech, terming it "a pious address
of fine-sounding words." He went on to say: "The Spanish people have
been told something that infuriates them: that this and only this is
the way it is."

The bottom lino on this tragic last week of May was politically very
significant. For now we can say that Suarez's political standing began
to decline at this point. From then on, the prime minister's performance
was marked by awkwardness, paralysis and confusion. The country got

the feeling that the top echelon of government was not in control and
losing its way. Suarez holed himself up in Honcloa and lost his ability

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VI\ Ul'l LVAM VJL Ul‘hl

to take the initiative. His former capacity to rise to the occasion
when he was against the ropes was vanishing, and "Suarez's silences"
became almost proverbial. It is true that Suarez also seemed powerless
to deal with the other major problems plaguing the country (the economic
situation, autonomies, etc), but it was terrorism that knocked him

out of the ring.

The second consequence was the emboldening of the rightwing extremist
groups and newspapers, which brazenly kept calling for a coup d'etat
that finally came on 23 February I981. The combination of the two
elements could not have been more negative and worrisome. In fact,
nothing could be more ill-suited to stem the mounting pressures for

a coup than a government and a president that gave continual evidence
of being overwhelmed by events.

The Guernica Statute

The major political issue that the government had to tackle during

the spring of I979 was the Basque statute. The draft version, called
the Guernica Statute, had finally been signed and accepted by all of
the Basque political parties except UCD. But doubts about the possible
unconstitutionality of the draft persisted, doubts that were underscored
at the meeting of the joint Congress of Deputies-Basque legislators
committee. The difficulties between Madrid and the Basque Country
were, in fact, heightened by a decree that declared that there was

a conflict of interest involved in being president of a pre-sutonomy
body and a member of another such entity. This was a direct attack

on Carlos Garaicoechea, who had just been elected president of the
Basque General Council and was, at the same time, a member of the Poral
Parliament of Navarre. In any case, Garaicoechea did not resign from
either post.

These misunderstandings between the central government and the Basque
pre-autonomy institutions were heightened by a seriously worsening
law and order situation in the Basque provinces and Navarre and by
the persistence of terrorism.

The starting point of this deteriorating situation was an antinuclear
demonstration on 3 June in Tudela (Navarre) during which a Venezuelan
woman, Gladys de Estal, died as a result of gunshot wounds caused by
the forces of public order. From that point on, in what ABC called

the "terrorist logic," there were numerous incidents, barricades were
erected and strikes were staged first in Navarre and then in the Basque
Country as well. The FOP became the target of a campaign calling for
their withdrawal ("Get them out!") and replacement by an autonomous
police force.

For several days terrorist actions were interspersed with FOP crackdowns,
both leading to deaths. On 6 June in Vergara (Guipuzcoa), ETA (m)

killed Luis Berasategui Mendizabal because he Was thought tobe a police
informer and an extreme rightwinger. 0n the 7th, ETA (m) murdered

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a retired infantry commander who worked in the San Sebastian city hall,
in Tnlnsn (Navarre). 0n the 8th in Renteria, a plainclothes policeman,
firing at pointblank range, killed a transvestite, Antonio Badillo.

The Far Right waded into the deadly chaos too. and on the same day

the ANS [Spanish National Action] planted a bomb in a bar in Zarauz
(Gcipuzcoa). The incidents continued in Renteria. and the police entered
city hall. There were further incidents and strikes, and in response,
more crackdowns with smokebomba and rubber bullets. A few days later,
on the 13th, ETA (I) managed to get into the Lemoniz nuclear powerplant
and plant a bomb in the turbine room that killed blue-collar worker
Angel Banos. Meanwhile, bombs continued exploding all over the Basque
Country, sometimes causing very serious damage.

Banos's death did not trigger any protest campaign, which showed that

the abertzale groups were against violence only when it came from the
POP. LA VANGUARDIA pointed this out in an editorial entitled "Second-
Class Deaths [...l": "To judge by the examples, the dead do not warrant
consideration in and of themselves, but rather by virtue of who killed
them. When in an unfortunate incident that has not been suitably explained,
an antinuclear demonstrator lost her life as a result of a gunshot

in Tudela, enormous protest demonstrations were organized, culminating

in a general strike, and simply because the bullet had come from the
weapon of a policeman. However, when shrapnel tore apart the body

of a man whose only crime was that he was working, there was no visible
mourning or protests, or strikes or demonstrations, nothing, because

his murderers were terrorists, the people who are trying to impose 60
their ideas by scorching the earth and bathing it in blood and hatred."

ETA (p-m), which had been engaged in minor activities until that time,
set in motion in the summer of I979 a battle plan along several fronts
that had all the earmarks of pressure tactics in connection with the
statute negotiations that were under way in Madrid.

The first move was to level threats at all central government officials
stationed in the Basque Country. They were being asked "to resign

or leave the Basque national territory immediately." Otherwise, they
should consider themselves "condemned to death by the organization,
regardless of their degree of responsibility and independently of the
field in which they performed their functions."

Weighing the extent of this threat, the editor of CAHBIO I6, Jose Oneto,
wrote in his column: "ETA is winning the psychological battle against
the State. The first victims of the Basque terrorist organization

were, so they say, well-known torturers under Franco. Subsequent victims
were mere policemen or civil guards, then individuals with links to

the Far Right. After that, citizens without any specific political

ties and even worker activists have been biting the dust. Now, all
central government officials who do not leave the Basque Country have
been sentenced to die. Even so and even if the Cuernica Statute is
approved as is, the ETA offensive will continue until the complete
independence of the Basque Country and the establishment of a socialist
regime . "6'

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Perhaps never before had a democratic mass medium stated so categorically
that terrorism would not be halted or eradicated by means of any "political
measure," regardless of what it was. There would be no reason for
terrorism to cease before achieving its ultimate goal: an independent,
socialist Basque Country. It was becoming evident that the policy

of continual concessions was not going to achieve anything in return.

0n.the opposite extreme there were those like Mario Onaindia (who was
reelected secretary general of EIA at its First Congress from lb to

I7 June) who thought that "with the statute will come peace." Some

days before the press had published a item according to which the BIA
would return to the armed struggle if the Guernica Statute did not

get through. Onaindia asserted that "the EIA's process of birth is
irreversible. BIA will continue to exist and is not going to return

to ETA (p-m)." He stressed that "ETA (p-m) operates with complete
independence. Our only common ideological thread has to do with how

the revolutionary process must be brought about." Hith regard to the
statute, Onaindia was categorical: "The punctuation or terminology

can be changed. but the substance cannot be altered in the least."

The statute meant democratization. he saw the alternative this way:
"This is degenerating into something like Algeria, albeit with all

of the differences, but with the added danger that certain Basque forces
lean towards a kind of fascism that regards everything Spanish as bad."62

In the meantime, the statute negotiations were running into serious
stumbling blocks. On 25 June UCD presented a thick document containing
"its reasons for disagreement" with the Basque Statute. A few members
of the party (Ministers Joaquin Garrigues and Antonio Fontan and Miguel
R. Herrero de Hinon) recommended a more flexible "political reading"

to overcome the obstacles. Gabriel Cisneros, a member of the Constitutional
Committee, responded on behalf of the majority faction: "To set politics
against the law is tantamount, in the last analysis, to accepting the
Supremacy of the jungle over a state of law." Certain political circles
predicted a permanent breakoff of the negotiations and then some sort

of military intervention. This gives an idea of the gravity of the
situation.63

The Basque parties launched a pro-statute campaign beginning on 27 June
with a massive demonstration in Bilbao. But ETA did not let up. For
example, during a sniper attack on the National Police barracks in
Basauri, ETA (m) killed a commercial agent, Diego Alfaro Orihuela,

and ETA bullets took the life of a CCOO [Workers Commissions] member,
Francisco Medina Alhala, in San Sebastian.

At the same time, the purely political pressure reached an extremely
high level., DEIA, the semiofiicial mouthpiece of the PNV, said in

a 26 June editorial entitled "The Last Car in the Last Train" that

if Madrid whittled down the draft statute, "the collective frustration
of a people would reach its limit, and the Basque Country could become
another Ulster." If this should come to pass," it continued, "there
will be those of us who would defend civil disobedience to its ultimate

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conclusion. Others will have even more reasons than they have so far

had to reaffirm their choice of a grassroots armed struggle. The Basque
people l...l are prepared to once again stand up to those who are bent

on denying them their rights as a national canmunity." To DEIA, "direct
responsibility for our 'Ulsterization' will lie with those whose emphasis
on what is Spanish ignores the reality of a multinational State of
nationalities, peoples and regions that have joined together in solidarity
of their own free wiIl." Further on, the PNV mouthpiece mentioned

those who "as a pretext" allude to the "possibility of military inter-
vention in the Basque Country." This rumor, which has been "disproved

as on other occasions, always crops up on the eve of events connected
with the Basque Country. If this were to happen, the 'Ulsterization'
would be caused not by the Basque people's reacgzon to unjust measures
but by the application of a military solution."

This ultimatum-like tone, which makes it so hard to tell exactly what
mere civil disobedience would consist of and how it would be different
from armed struggle, was partially toned down the following day, when
the Guernica Statute was described as "the watchword of the Basques
who are wagering on a free, peaceful Basque Country" and as a "rational
offer of peace by the Basque people to the rest of Spain. The Basque
Country has spoken; Madrid now has the floor."

ETA (p-m) Against Tourism

As July drew near, ETA (p-m) began activities on a new front, tourism,
making the summer of I979 a bloody one.

The ETA (p-m)'s summer campaign began on 26 June when the police set

off a bomb_containing l5 kilograms of gunpowder in Torremolinos, right

on the Costa del Sol. Another bomb went off before the police were

able to intervene, though it claimed no victims. The following day,
another explosion in Fuengirola interrupted electric service. In Harbella
on the 28th, there were three explosions in just 3 hours. ETA (p-m),
which claimed responsibility for these bombings, provided leads in

some cases so that the police could detect the hembs before they went
off. It claimed that it did not want to cause any deaths.

This campaign against tourism, which continued through early July,

had been announced for some time and, according to the British weekly
NEWS OF THE HORLD, was part of a plan that had been prepared by the

IRA and the Baader-Hcinhof gang in addition to ETA. The German police
denied any such links. There was also speculation, albeit without

proof, that German terrorists who had entered Spain as tourists were
involved in these attacks. Later on, it was learned that several French
women were acting as ETA agents. Inasmuch as amonal (compressed powder)
was the explosive used in almost every case, instead of ETA's traditional
"gems-2," the Spanish police did not rule out the possibility that

ETA (p-m) was making use of "action groups that might be close to anarchistic
communist views."66

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On 30 June, a bomb that went off at a beach near the Nueva Andalucia
Casino in Marbella's Puerto Banus, seriously burned a Belgian tourist
couple. The following day, the headline in the German Sunday paper

BlLD AH SORTAC read: "Tourists Bathed in Blood." Monday's BILD ZEITUNG,
with an almost five million copy edition. bore the headline "Spain

uuf" and these two subheads: "Vacation train amid a hail of bullets"

and "Gas attack, 80 Germans robbed at camp site." Another giant headline
read: "Mallorca: Five Slain at Hotel," referring to an accidential

fire at a Palms hotel. The ETA (p-m) campaign was begining to achieve
its goals.

0n 3 July in Madrid, Gabriel Cisneros, a 000 deputy and a member of

the Constitutional Committee was the object of a attempted kidnaping

as he got out of his car. As he fought free and fled, he was hit by
several rounds of bullets that left him gravely wounded. ABC spoke

of the "all-out war" by ETA and stated: "If the presence of Gabriel
Cisneros on this committee [the one working on the Basque Statute]

was the sole reason or one of the reasons for this attack, then the
terorists are also trying to influence the content of the autonomy
statutes. To put it another way, violence such as this could raise 67
doubts as to how uncoercedly and cleanly the statutes are being approved."
HUNDO OBRERO, which is still the PCE's daily mouthpiece, concluded:

"They wanted to kill Gabriel Cisneros so that the Guernica Statute

would not be passed, so that no statute would be passed."68

Meanwhile, the bombs kept going off on the Costa del Sol, the Costa

Brava, in Castellon and in Benidorm. The ETA (p-m)'s goals were spelled

out in one of its communiques: "If in the 24 hours following this communique
the FOP are not withdrawn from the Soria jail and the decision not

made to return all prisoners to the Basque Country, this organization

will continue planting bombs throughout the tourist areas of the Spanish
State." Clearly, ETA (p-m) had shifted from the publicity and propaganda
coups that had characterized it so far to patently terrorist activities.

The connection between this campaign by ETA (p-m) and the debate on
the statute was obvious, moreover, because another communique in June
said: "ETA (p-m) is prepared to attack Spain's entire setup in the
Basque Country until such time as the Guernica Statute is approved
...lwhich| along with the incorporation of Navarre and a decree of
amnesty for all Basque prisoners and exiles, will be what will halt
its armed struggle."

In the meantime, debate continued in Madrid on the Guernica Statute.
The discussions were taking place on two levels, inasmuch as the Cortes
was hashing over the joint working document while at Moncloa the real
negotiations were going on between the administration and UCD, on the
one hand, and the PNV on the other.

An agreement was finally reached on I7 July, and early the next morning
the committee put the final touches on its report, the news being made
public on the morning of the l8th. "We now have a statute," was the

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lull-page bundlinr in DEIA. It also published a front-page editorial

in Basque ("Egon gogoangarri bat") and in Spanish ("La primers piedra

de la pas" lThe Cornerstone of Peace!) in which it stated in a joyful,
hopeful tone: "All indications are that the spirit of the Guernica
Statute has not only been maintained in the text of the agreement (including
mention of Navarre) but in some instances has also been enhanced. The
Basque people are on the verge of regaining their national rights."
Then, after pondering the virtues of dialogue, it asserted that "Now

Is the time to bury 'goma-Z' and killings as a method of dissuasion,"
adding immediately thereafter, however, that "though we can never forget
that institutional violence is still at times present in our land."

It also went on to say: "At this happy hour it would not be fair to
forget those who died without having seen this day or those who are
still in exile or in prison." lt concluded by warning that "no one,
under any pretext, should try to frustrate our people's hope for peace."
Any comment would be unnecessary.

But these ambiguous words of peace were obviously not meant for ETA.

Once agreement on the statute had been reached, the military branch,

which had let up for almost a month, murdered Jesus Maria Colomo Rodriguez,
a waiter that it accused of being an informer, on 2| July in Villafranca
de Ordicia (Guipuzcoa) and on the 28th fired machine guns at a National
Police vehicle in Bilbao, killing lst Lt Miguel Saro Perez and police
officer Emilio Lopez de la Pena. The following day in San Sebastian,

two civil guards, Sgt Maj Moises Cordero Lopez and recruit Antonio

Pastor Martin, were victims of another attack.

These actions were proof that, as suspected, ETA (m) did not accept

the statute. Herri Batasuna, ETA (m)'s political voice, also expressed
its rejection of the statute through several prominent members. Miguel
Castells declared: "This statute has been signed behind the people's
hacks. we cannot understand how forces that consider themselves leftist
could have signed a rightwing pact." Telesforo Monzon told EGIN: "You
will see happier faces on the Boards of Directors in Vizcaya and in

the ministries in Madrid than in the factories in Buskalherria and at
the modest gatherings of true Basque patriots." Nothing had changed

in the eyes of Herri Batasuna, which unlike other Basque parties, had
still not condemned the latest ETA (m) attacks.

DElA had this to say about the most recent assaults: "People in large
working class areas had the impression that the agreement on the Guernica
Statute could spell the end of armed violence or at least the start

of a long truce. Others who are more realistic about politics were

not only not expecting a cease-fire but even felt that the armed violence
was going to increase. Unfortunately, realism has asserted itself.

The police officers who were machined-gunned to death yesterday are

the first victims of the statute." It later wondered: "Is there any

way to understand violence and murder at this particular moment in

time? What justification is there for a tiny group to arrogate represen-
tation of an entire people and to impose the law of death just a few
wveks before the referendum? Are they afraid of losing the battle

at the ballot box? How effectively can one struggle and call for amnesty
when death is claiming new victims?"69

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
svu vaaova-w ova vnua

0n the ery same day, ABC came out against any new amnesties: "All

possible amnesties or all amnesties with potential political grounds

have already been granted. The time has past when we can ignore the
shedding of blood and the commission of crimes. To grant the new amnesty
that Leizaola and Monzon are calling for would be tantamount to proclaiming
[...] that the future of Spain and its democracy is going to be determined
not by the law but by the dictates of violence and terror. It would

be the same as [...i handing the country over to the atrocious and
abominable dictatorship of extremist groups."70

Dashed once again was the hope that a "political measure" (and the
statute was a compendium of all desirable political measures) would

put anend to terrorism. Signing with its bloodstained initials, ETA (m)
was communicating its decision to continue along the path of violence.

In contrast, things seemed to be on a better track with ETA (p-m).

In a document the organization stated that the statute "is an important
step towards the independence of the Basque Country." adding: "He denounce
the irrational, sectarian stand by Herri Batasune and certain so-called
Pro-Amnesty Groups, which are denying the Basque working people one

of the most important gains in their history."

The shift from the summer campaign of terror to this constructive attitude
was due to negotiations between ETA (p-m) and the government. The
terrorist organization was said to have promised the government to
halt its violence if the FOP were withdrawn from Soria Prison and if
Basque prisoners were transferred to the Basque Country. Apparently
involved in the negotiations was Mario Onaindia, the secretary general
of ElA, a party whose ties with ETA (p-m) we are already familiar with.
Around that time Onaindia was in Hadrid,wherehe entered the Congress
of Deputies and made a comment that stirred up controversy: "ETA is
waging a holy war with Madrid." He was accompanied on this trip by
another member of EIA, Carayalde, alias "Herreka," who, it was said,
might have been the person who actually negotiated with the government.
"Onaindia misleads and Herreka negotiates," went the saying.

Although the government later denied, tt ~ugh its official spokesman,
that negotiations took place, something a : have happened because
on 9 July the National Police left Soria P.ison, and in the wake of
rumors, it was announced on the 24th that the ETA members being held

there would be transferred to Nanclares de Oca Prison in Alava beginning
in early I980.

'nlvrv was a harsh confrontation on lb July in Soria Prison between

the 30 or so political-military branch members and the more than 80
military branch members. The bone of contention was the statute, and
this outbreak of violence among ETA personnel forced the National Police
to enter the jail once again to separate the two sides and restore
order.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was also learned that a dozen political-military branch members
movvd over to the military wing because they disagreed with their former
branch's acceptance of the statute. Outside the jail as well certain
(p-m) people, such as the I4 members of the so-called "zone team,"
joined ETA (m). ETA was once again being torn apart.

At the same time, a war of words that occasionally became physical
was going on between the political eeuivalents of ETA's two branches,
Rerri Batasuna and the Basque Left.7

But just when it seemed as if some progress had been made in neutralizing
terrorism through the pact with ETA (p-m), the unexpected happened.

On Sunday 29 July in Madrid, three ETA (p-m) [l] bombs went off at
Barajas Airport and at the Atocha and Chamartin railway stations, causing
5 deaths and more than |00 wounded.72 A genuine climate of terror

spread throughout the country, which was taken aback by criminal acts
whose targets were railway stations and airports at a time when millions
of people were going on vacation. This was indiscriminate, widespread
terrorism, the most odious version of a blind violence that seeks only

to terrorize the masses and cause the collapse of life in society.

As could be imagined, the press and political parties reacted strongly.
ABC set forth five principles: "When a group of people, be it large

or small, finds that another group has declared all-out war on it,

it has to realize the following facts:

I) It is of no use to engage in the rhetoric that almost nothing is
happening I...I

2) Campaigns of verbal dissuasion are of no use [...I
3) Condemnstions and rebukes are of no use [...I
a) Political concessions are of no use in dealing with terrorism l...l

5) In a word, in dealing with an all-out aggressor, the only choice
is between total political victory or total physical defeat. It concluded
by calling on everyone to mobilize.

LA VANGUARDIA was just as forceful, attributing ETA's latest moves

to its isolation. It commented on the remark by the old Basque socialist
Ramon Rubial, who had recalled the "dirty war" tactics that De Gaulle
used to do away with the OAS. "He went on to say," LA VANGUARDIA
continued, "that 'Of course a democract shouldn't say this.‘ This

moving comment reminds us that democracy is something fragile and delicate
that must be defended tooth and nail. The provocation of all-out war

that now seems obvious demands radical surgery if an assessment of 7b
the situation shows that there is no other way to regain our health."

CAHBIO 16's editorial writer, Juan Tomas de Salas, wrote: "There are
no political measures against ETA, only police measures. No statute

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Uh Vl‘l'LhAMa UDI'. Ul‘hl

will ever satisfy these apprentices of crime, and the high-minded or
fearful should not fool themselves because independence would not put
an end to ETA either."7S

DElA reiterated its well-known line: "We are in favor of all the noble
objectives of our people (amnesty is one of them), but we cannot accept
that these banners be monopolized by those who believe that the only
valid language is machine-gun fire or bombings, with or without telephone
warnings."76

The following day, ABC came out strongly against this call for amnesty,
which was also voiced by EGIN, terming it an "undermining l...] of

the principle of State authority." It went on to say that "unfortunately,
the PNV mouthpiece is providing evidence that the agreement on the
statute was not even of any use in mitigating the moral equivocation

of the Basque nationalist Right. lhe irresponsible call for a new
amnesty when Spain is being bled by ETA madness is a very dangerous
complement to the terrorist aim of cutting the Basque people off, on

a gut level. from the rest of their countrymen." lt concluded with:77
"Amnesty, yes, for the future victims of the grim terrorist reaper."

ETA (p-m), represented by three hooded individuals, called a meeting

with newsmen In early August "somewhere" in the Basque Country to try

and explain its stunning and lethal moves on 29 July in Madrid. In

a communique read to the newsmen, ETA (p-m) "deeply regretted the deaths
in Madrid" and asserted that the campaign of attacks was resumed "after
the breakdown of negotiations with the government." It was on that

very day that the administration's official spokesman, Josep Melia,
roundly denied the existence of such negotiations. At the same time,

ETA (p-m) announced that even if the statute went into effect, it would
not halt its armed struggle, "which will be tailored to the new political
conditions." "There will be no spectacular moves," the ETA communique
said. "but there will be incisive involvement in factories, the citizen
movement, neighborhoods and culture, for example." It was the political-
military b:ench's some old doctrine, the only change being the acknowledg-
ment of the statute."78

For its part, ETA (m) kept up the trickle of slayings throughout August;
eight murders showed that it was continuing along the same path of
terror.79

A “law To CRAPO

GRAPH. the other terrorist group battering the democratic regime, was
dealt a harsh hlnw in late July I979.

As we have mentioned, the police attributed the bombing of the cafe
at 47 California to GRAPO even though it denied in an issue of GACETA
ROJA. a mouthpiece of the PCB (r), that it was involved. Many of the
mass media had been emphasizing, moreover, that the Far Right could
have been responsible for the attack, which killed 8 and wounded 40.

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The police had mounted the appropriate surveillance and learned that
GRAPO members frequented the National Periodicals Library on Zurbaran
Street in Madrid. On 26 July the Antiterrorist Brigade of Madrid Police
Headquarters succeeded in arresting two of CRAPO's most wanted members,
Alfonso Rodriguez Garcia and Maria del Carmen Lopez,Anguita, as they
were leaving the library They were identified as the pair that has
planted the bomb at 67 California on 29 May.

This was a major police success. Nevertheless, law enforcement agencies
were unable to capitalize on it fully because the news leaked out pre-
maturely and thus prevenetd the arrest of Jose Maria Sanchez-Casas,

a to; CRAPO leader whom Alfonso Rodriguez was supposed to meet in Barcelona
the day after his arrest. According to the police, Sanchez-Casas had

given the orders to plant the bomb at 67 California. Remaining at

large with him were Pedro Tabanera Perez and Manuel Parodi Munoz, who

also managed to escape because of the same leak.

The brains behind this police operation was Francisco de Asia Pastor,

the Madrid police chief, whose success contrasted with the ineffectiveness
of the Operational Brigade, which was specifically in charge of combating
terrorism. The new commander of the brigade, Manuel Ballesteros, Conesa's
successor, "does not yet seem to have gotten control of his crew of

at least l00 men, who have all sorts of equipment but who must look

on helplessly at the successes scored by others with less equipment

and using different methods." This was the criticism leveled at the
brigade by the Jose Oneto, the editor of CAMBIO 16, on the cover of

whose bOlst issue appeared Francisco de Asia Pastor, with the caption
"This would be the man to do away with ETA and GRAPO." "He would be

the ideal man," Oneto emphasized, "to take charge of the battle against
terrorism."80

The arrests of GRAPO members provided the police with important information.
it learned, for example, that Alfonso Rodriguez and Maria del Carmen

Lopez had planned to attack, 2 days after their arrest, the director

of State Security, Luis Alberto Salazar Simpson, and Maribel Lorenzo,

Miss Europe I979 and a member of New Force whose picture had appeared

on the rightwing extremist group's posters advertising its l8 July

rally. They had also planned to attack a general on I7 August and

a National Police vehicle the following day.8|

The police continued their search for the CRAPO people at large. On

In August, the police managed to capture Manuel Parudi as he was waiting
to meet with a PC (r) liaison. Thanks to his arrest, police agents
headed the next day for Escorial to apprehend Tabanera, who was waiting
for his comrade. Tabanera was killed during the ensuing shootout.
CRAPO's “Madrid" command was thus broken up, and in the opinion of

police, its major figures were out of the way. Only Sanchez-Casas
remained at large.

Parodi's arrest enabled the police to round out its information on
GRAPO's plans. Not one but three generals, residing on Alenza, San

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK urn-11.1111. Uhl‘. UNL!

Bernardo and Glorieta Ruiz de Aida streets, as well as Angel Escudero

dvl Corral, chief justice of the Supreme Court, Juan Manuel Fanjul
Scduno the nation' 5 attorney general and Francisco Ruiz Jarabo, a
former minister of justize, were going to be the terrorist organization's
next victims. 82

As we have already mentioned, the drive against CRAPO provided quite

a bit of information on this strange terrorist group, and some of it
appeared in the press. For example, commando pairs, even including
children, were very common. After these arrests, however, no one dared
claim, as on other occasions, that GRAPO had been broken up for good.
People feared that it was going to reappear. CAMBIO 16 clearly stated
this: "Nevertheless, GRAPO is going to be on the loose again within

a few months. The police know it. After they are arrested, they are
inexplicably released, and after the police says that it has dealt
them a severe blow, they manage to reappear. As the Madrid Regional
lntellagence Brigade says, we would like to know who is behind all
this.

Officially, the PC (r) was behind GRAPO, providing the terrorist group
with personnel when others were arrested or "informed on," the police
claiuwd. The PCE (r) denied that this this kind of systematic organized
link existed. The police also pointed to two other organizations,
People and Culture and ODEA [Organization of Antifascist Students],

as breeding grounds for GRAPO. .

Based on these theories, the police continued its drive against GRAPO
by investigating the Pc (r) and related groups and on l2 September
arrested 14 individuals in Madrid, Zaragoza and Barcelona, 7 of whom
were members of the PCB (r) Central Committee.

Separately, issue SI of BANDERA ROJA, the organ of the PCB (r)' 3 Central
Committee, which appeared in September, contained an interview with
GRAPO members in which they reaffirmed that they were not involved

in the bombing at 47 California and claimed that their actions were

not directed against the Armed Forces as an institution.

In the interview the CRAPO people said that they were very pleased
with their armed action, which has succeeded in "shattering the siege
that the regime was trying to impose on the Basque Country." Among
their goals they cited "the overthrow of the regime" and "gaining the
sympathy of the masses. " "He can state," they continued, "that in
spite of the disinformation activities of the press and other mass
media,we have fully achieved this goal."

At the same time they brought up their "Cease-Fire Program," stating
that their laying down of arms was conditional on compliance with it.
1he program contained these five points: I) A complete general amnesty;
2) A purge of high- ranking officers; 3) unrestricted political and
union freedoms; A) rejection of NATO membership, and 5) dissolution

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ul lhv current Parliament and the holding of genuinely free elections.
This was lhr "GRAPO alternative," parallel to the "KAS alternative"
that ETA supported.

Moreover, they denied that "formal relations" existed with ETA, in

spite of the coincidences of dates and even of hours in a number of
"armed actions." They acknowledged only "a current of mutual sympathy."
though they did not rule out such relations in the future.

They stated that GRAPO was part of a Liaison Committee that also included
People and Culture, Red Assistance [Socorro Rojo], PCB (r) and ODEA,

all of which backed the same program: "Self-determination for the Basque,
Catalan and Galicisn peoples, as well as [...l independence for the
African colony of the Canaries."

The police drive against GRAPO was brilliantly capped off on l2 October
when Jose Maria Sanchez-Casas, "the most wanted GRAPO member," was
arrested in Valencia. The police knew that he and his wife were still
very close and by keeping her under surveillance succeeded in nabbing
Sanchez-Casas at a cafe rendezvous with her and their two children
(ages a years and I6 months).

Sanchez-Casas's arrest led to the capture of I9 other persons, as a
result of which GRAPO could well have been considered finished. However,
two well-known members of the group, Isabel Llaquet and Rafael Alvarez
Fernandez, were still at large.

Moreover, the police learned that for the first time in its history
GRAPO had managed to get hold of weapons oversﬁas, though most of them
did not make it across the border into Spain.".6

ETA and the Basque Referendum

Now that the Guernica Statute, which had kindled such hopes, had been
hammered out, the mandatory referendum was called so that citizens

in the three Basque provinces could express their approval, which everyone
took for granted.

He already know that whereas ETA (p-m) and the Basque Left were for

the Guernica Statute, ETA (m) and Herri Batasuna were against it. This
disagreement between the two branches of the terrorist organization

and their political counterparts raised fears that the campaign leading
up to the referendum, which was scheduled for 25 October, could turn into
another npportunityfor"nrmed action by the military faction."

We have already seen that ETA does not really need "opportunities"
to launch its attacks. Specifically, we have already talked about
the slayings that ETA (m) was responsible for in August. Except for
one killing in I968, another in I975 and three in I978, ETA did not
usually do any killing in August, until I979, of course, after the
Guernica Statute had been drawn up.

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lVI‘ VIII-9515.1 Villa Ul‘kl

Dvmnnsrrations in support of the Basque refugees, which the civilian
gnvvrnmcnts had expressly banned, were staged during the last weeks
of summer in the Basque capitals.

During one of these demonstrations, in San Sebastian on I September,
young lnaki Quijera was killed. This triggered the usual protests
against the POP, fresh demonstrations. a heavier crackdown, people
wounded or perhaps killed, general strike. People were protesting
because the law enforcement agencies used firearms, unlike in other
countries. "They're not up against ETA there," responded the civilian
governor of Guipuzcoa, Joaquin Argote. All parties except UCD and

the PCB were calling for the governor's resignation.

Lerchundi, the secretary general of the Basque Communist Party, felt
this way: "Terrorism and police action are creating a dialectic of
violence. This climate of violence could inhibit people and lead to
a psychosis of fear vis-a-vis the referendum."

Incidents took place all over the Basque Country, creating an extremely
grave situation. The Far Right made the situation even worse by continuing
its attacks on democracy. The entire front page of EL ALCAZAR on

3 September was filled with the headline "Choas in the Basque Country"
and the following subheads: "Victory Without Judges," "Barricades,

Fire and Terror in San Sebastian and Bilbao," and "General Strike Today
in the Three Provinces." Its headline the following day again took

up the whole front page, "Anti-Spanish Rage," above which it put "Grave
Developments in the Basque Provinces." For different reasons, the

Far Right seemed to be pursuing the same goal as ETA (m): cancel the
referendum on the statute.

The confrontations continued to divide the Basque parties. Herri Batasuna
organized a press conference in Madrid on 4 September. Miguel Castells

and Francisco Letamendia spoke on behalf of the abertzale coalition

with ties to ETA (m). To them, the responsibility for what was happened

lay with the PNV, which "keepstrying to straddle the fence, because

although it has now denounced the action taken by government authorities,

we must bear in mind that it never supported the grievances that have

given rise to the demonstrations l...) Its stand continues to be equivocal."85

In the midst of these confrontations between differing conceptions

of Basque nationalism and against the peaceful institutionalization

of Basque autonomy under a statute that went far beyond the I936 version,
the abortzalo radicals resorted to an expedient that had yielded them

such fine results up to then: terror. ETA (m) decided to once again
attack the State at one of its sensitive spots, the Armed Forces, no

doubt reckoning that by so doing it would be putting the PNV in an awkward
position, since it had taken a permanent seat on the fence.

If in fact the slayings of military personnel on 25 Hay in Madrid had
contributed to the success of the Basque cause by paving the way for

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
negotiations on the statute that were ultimately very successful, then
there was every reason to believe that fresh attacks on the same spot
could further the abertzale cause. This seemed to be the thinking

of the terrorists.

Therefore, ETA (m) decided to renew its attacks on the Armed Forces.

0n I9 September in Bilbao, Cavalry Col Aurelio Perez Zamora and Staff
Comdr Julian Ezquerro Serrano were machined-gunned down as they were
riding in a military jeep. A few days later, on the_23rd, the military
governor of Guipuzcoa, Brig Gen Lorenzo Gonzalez-Valles Sanchez, was
killed in San Sebastian as he was strolling with his wife on La (oncha.
That same evening, Suarez met for 8 hours with the most prominent figures
in the military, officially to study the seCurity measures needed to
prevent these attacks, but no doubt also to check on the mood of the
Armed Forces, which were being so persistently provoked. Garaicoechea,
the president of the Basque General Council and of the PNV, spoke of

a coup d'etat and asserted that ETA wanted a military occupation of

the Basque Country. he also talked about the danger that terrorism
posed to democracy.

HUNDO DIARIO of Barcelona saw things differently, however, and this
makes for an interesting analysis because it shows the seemingly incon-
ceivable link between terrorism and the push for a coup. ”Its [BTA'sI
actions do not pose a direct threat to democracy. Terrorists have

been on the loose in Northern Ireland for even longer, but democracy

in Britain is not thought to be in danger; on the contrary [...l The
threat to democracy comes when certain individuals who are apparently
respectful of the law and free of any blame attempt to take ideological
and political advantage of the actions of the extremist groups. Here
lies the real danger to democracy: not the actions themselves, regard-
less of how serious they are, but the fact that they are capitalized

on to serve certain very specific and well-known interests [...I There
are individuals who are prepared to launch the strategy of destabilization
[...l BTA‘s actions can be as dangerous and criminal as it chooses

and will warrant the unanimous condemnation of the citizenry, but they
are an attack on democracy and represent a real threat to the new regime
only to the extent that the opponents of democracy situated in key

posts choose to exploit them '0 undermine democracy and mislead the
public, which wants peace in the streets above all and has unequivocall

indicated at the ballot box what its preferences and aspirations are."8

Hith the hindsight provided by the events of 23 February I981, we can
clearly perceive here the threat posed by the advocates of a caup,
who were ready, like vampires, to suck all the blood shed by ETA and
the other terrorists groups and turn it to their advantage.

These warnings were all the more important because the restless uneasiness
of several ranking Armed Forces officers had become quite evident by

this time. In statements to ABC, Hilans del Bosch, the field marshal

of Valencia, drew a very negative picture of the 3 years of democracy.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Vh UA‘A‘LbAnh UDI. UNI-l

Milnns had bvvn called to Madrid by his superiors. During a ceremony
honoring the legion, another field marshal, Gonzalez del Yerro, serving
in the Canary Islands, had delivered, in the presence of Gabeiras,

the army chief of staff, a disturbing speech complaining about the
impunity of the attacks on military personnel and other "public attacks
on institutions that are sacred to them and that they have sworn to
defend." "It seems as if Spain is dying on us," said Gonzalez del
Yerro. And Gabeiras himself talked about the "remedies that are not
yielding the wholly satisfactory results that we would like." The
field marshal of Seville, Merry Gordon, also delivered a tough public
speech in Ceuta.

With a highly controversial timing that triggered a lengthy debate

on his "Third world" leanings, on 13 September Suarez received the

leader of the PLO, Yasser Arafat, whom many considered a terrorist,

a leader of terrorists. At the same time, Palestinians and Arabs in
general were assumed to have aided ETA by accepting its activists at

its training camps and by providing them financial assistance and weapons.
A photograph of Suarez embracing the Palestinian leader was seen around
the world and prompted much commentary. It was being said that Suarez
had reached an agreement with Arafat that ETA activity would be halted

in exchange for recognition of the PLO.

As Claire Sterling says, the British had also made a similar offer
to Arafat in connection with the Provisional IRA, "but Arafat is

man to respond in either case." The reason allegedly is
that aid to both ETA and :85 IRA was coming basically from Habash,
Arafat's leadership rival.

The Basque abertzales took advantage of Arafat's visit to criticize

the PNV, which was starting to state openly that it could not accept

a Basque "terrorism" that they, the abertzales, put in quotation marks.
The abertzales felt that the PNV's opposition to the "terrorism" of
"their own brothers" concealed its fear of "the socioeconomic liberation
of the ETA program." “Obvious proof of this," read an article in ECIN,
"came recently with the official arrival in Madrid of Yasser Arafat,
who is universally recognized as the number one terrorist. The UCD
administration invited him and received him officially. Its protege,
the PNV, which was certainly informed of this, shut its eyes. They

are both whispering: "Terrorism is not terrorism if it smells like
oil." And Suarez told Garaicoechea: "Let's all shout: Arafat, yes;
ETA, no L...I Arafat, yes; ETA, no I...I Let the Basque people be the
judge."8

Meanwhile, the attacks continued in the Basque Country, this time against
civilians. On 22 September in Renteria taxcab driver Sixto Holgado
Agudo was found dead, killed by a shot in the back of the neck. 0n

the same day, a police station in Baracaldo was machine-gunned, with

one officer wounded. 0n the 30th, ETA (m) murdered the municipal police
chief of Amrebieta, Alfonso Vilarino Doce.

113
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
Other groups, presumably on the Far Right, kept at it too. On 28 September
in Astigarraga, an Berri Batasuna city councilman from San Sebastian,
Tomas Alba, was killed. The organization "Spanish Armed Groups" claimed
responsibility for the slaying over the phone. Tomas Alba had some
differernces with the Herri Batasuna coalition, and thus certain circles
questioned the above group's claim and eventually thought his death

was part of a settling of accounts. ECIN, which is close to the abertaale
coalition, denounced the manipulation (so did ETA [m]) and referred

to the aforementioned differences as "a factor to be explained in depth
in the ceremony of confusion." In spite of everything, ﬂerri Batasuna
councilmen from several towns refused to sign documents from all the
parties condemning Alba's murder.

In the meantime, the Madrid government was trying to avoid being over-
whelmed by the situation. The attacks on military personnel had hardly
been a surprise, because according to information gathered by intelligence
services, it was known that ETA, supplied with new weaponry from Belgium,
was going to launch a broad offensive in September and October against
both military figures and units and barracks. It was even thought

that the offensive might begin in Madrid, and therefore certain security
measures had been implemented.

At this juncture, Jose Oneto wrote, "the government does not want to
go it alone against ETA (m) and needs the cover of total support from
the Basque Nationalist Party." The editor of CAHBIO 16 thought he saw
a more cooperative, determined attitude in the PNV leader Carlos Garai-
coechea.89

The murder of Tomas Alba had thrown Herri Batasuna into confusion.
The coalition was on the defensive and showed little enthusiasm in
its campaign of "active abstention" for the referendum. Meanwhile,
euphoria reigned in the PNV, which celebrated Alderdi Eguna (The Day
of the Party) on 30 September.

ETA (m) made itself felt in its usual way during the referendum campaign.
It killed Luis Haria Uriarte Alzaga, the former mayor of Bedia, on

the 5th in Bilbao and police inspector Carlos San: Biurrun on the 8th

in Pamplona. 0n the same day, in San Sebastian, it machine-gunned

a restaurant, wounding ll customers, 8 of whom were members of the
National Police, the other 3 being workers.

The hasque and Catalan statutes were thus both put to a vote of the
people on 25 October. Abstention in the Basque Country averaged 60.23
percent (Alava, 36.77; Cuipuzcoa, 40.18, and Vizcaya, 60.98), almost
the same as in Catalonia (40.52 percent). "Yes” votes totaled 89.|4
percent, and "no" votes, 5.76 percent, representing, respectively,
53.96 and 3.08 percent of registered voters. The Basques had thus
achieved one of the objectives for which they had struggled so hard.

But peace was not to return. 0n the very eve of the referendum, ETA (m)
held a news conference in San Sebastian with Spanish and foreign journalists

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
at which it reaffirmed its intention to "continue the armed struggle"
as long as there was one Spanish policeman in the Basque Country, until
a total amnesty was granted and until there was a chance of reuniting
the two Basque Countries.90

The call for an amnesty was voiced again and again in the weeks following
the passage of the statute, and not only by ETA. The permanent pacification
of the Basque Country, s thoroughgoing solution to its political problems,
seemed to be drifting further and further away, as if it were part

of a tragic game in which the bar over which the government had to

jump was placed higher and higher. The Hadrid government was continually
being called upon to make greater concessions, which frustrated those

who were most receptive.

At a press conference, Suarez denied any possibility of new amnesties.
Now then, Jose Oneto wrote, "in all probability the alternative will

be to grant partial pardons, which would mean releasing individuals

who have refused to respect the democratic order and who have continued
their killing under democracy."9‘

Violence After the Statute. The Autonomous Commands

Events were to demonstrate right away that when groups supported by
certain segments of society and encouraged by certain irresponsible
courses of conduct get used to "resolving" problems with weapons and
coercion, it is highly unlikely that they will change their methods.
The case of the Basque Country, viewed in the perspective of 5 years
of democracy, shows conclusively that terrorism and everything that
revolves around terrorism and capitalizes directly and indirectly on
it, causes such corruption in a society that straightening out people's
attitudes becomes difficult, costly and slow. "hen all social and
political life turns into a monstruous machine based on blackmail,
it is almost impossible to escape such a hell.

On 27 October, 2 days after the referendum on the statute, German Gonzalez
Lopez, a photographer affiliated with P803 and UGT [General Union of
workers], was shot and killed in Villarreal de Urrechua (Guipuzcoa).

While Spaniards in general viewed it as just another death, though

all the more incomprehensible because there no longer seemed to be

any pretext for killing now that the Basques had gotten "their" statute,
discussion began in the Basque Country as to who might have been responsible.
The Autonomous Commands, one of the haziest facets of Basque terrorism,
claimed responsibility for the deplorable incident. These murderers
considered German Gonzalez "a collaborator with the forces of repression,"
and given his membership in the Socialist Party, which reacted immediately,
they mentioned that this and other parties were collaborating "with

State terrorism."

The UGT and CCOO called a general strike. It was the first antiterrorist
general strike. Socialist leaders reacted strongly. Chiqui Benegas

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
spoke of the "new terrorist fascism" and asserted: "We are not going

tn sit idly by." Enrique Mugica stated that "ETA is going to shudder
when it remembers the day it killed a socialist in the Basque Country"
and used the word accomplices to refer to "the individuals and groups
that remain silent about or share in the results in terrorism." Nicolas
Redondo said that there was going to be no alternative other than
"fighting violence with violence."92

ABC referred to "several statements by leaders of Basque parties, which
we would rather not comment on" and which. together with the "overwhelming
response of the general strike I...I have baffled us to the extent

that we feel ashamed as human beings and as Spaniasds. Businessmen

and workers, generals and chairmen of delegations, policemen and civil
guards, mayors and taxicab drivers have been killed in the Basque Country,
and the reactions (How can we forget the savage cries of 'Kill them,

ETA' or 'Hore machine guns, ETA'?) were never as stirringly and harshly
condemnatory. The storehouse of cynical journalistic phrases," it
continued, "has given everyday language the expression 'third-class
deaths' I...I Can anyone, personally or as a member of a union or party,
consider deaths, murders as being of different classes?" In conclusion,
it commented on the pacifying impact that some felt the statute would
have: "But this new slaying is not an encouraging sign. Nor is it

an encouraging sign for our national coexistence when the murder of

some Spaniards is regarded as more unjust than of others."93

But the Basques continued hedging. Garaicoechea found it hard to believe
that "this kind of political stupidity could come from ETA (m)," as

if the terrorist group had been distinguished by its peace-loving,
instructional or academic activities. With the murder of the UGT photo"
grapher, the untainted image that the PNV president and future "lendakari"
of the Basque Government apparently had of ETA until then seemed to

be falling to pieces.

ECIN, the paper with ties to Berri Batasuna and, hence, to ETA (m),
published a front-page insert that same day (30 October) under the

title "The Autonomous Commands Are Not ETA." It mentioned separate
communiques from ETA (m) and ETA (p-m) "in which they denounced the
political and media manipulation of German Gonzales's death and disclosed
that they had no organizational ties with the autonomous commands."

ETA (m) specified that "the PSOE-UGT's and Pcs-ccoo's identification

of our organization with the so-called 'autonomous' group is clearly

part of a policy to confuse the Basque people and the working class."

As far as ETA (p-m) was concerned, "the perpetrators of this indiscriminate
terrorist act have not been and are not members of ETA." It also attacked
the union federations and reformist parties "that are trying to take
advantage of this regrettable incident to launch a campaign against

ETA and the revolutionary 'armed struggle.'"9h

As we can see, practically all nationalists in the Basque Country,
regardless of their degree of radicalism, had what we could call a

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TU“ Ul‘l‘ l\.ll\l- \I‘VI‘. UNI-l

"rose-colored" view of ETA. The nationalists, from the PNV to N3,
described ETA as a likable, heroic and even glorious (as Bandres once
said) organization that they claimed had rendered a priceless service:
having roused Basque nationalism from its slumber. This is why their
condemnations were aimed at terrorism in general, almost never referring
to ETA, and their accusations often had an air of justification about
them. This explains why ETA was always on the prowl.

Speaking out against the aforementioned comment by Nicolas Redondo,

DEIA wrote that "Fighting violence with violence, in addition to placing
its advocates at the same level as the killers, means heightening the
spiral of violence [...] It would be infantile and tragic to copy the
anti-OAS methods." And incredibly it went on to say: "Now more than
ever we need a political solution rather than a police solution."

what additional political measures could the PNV mouthpiece want?

The rest of Spain definitely did not understand what was going on.

Barcelona's HUNDO DIARIO, like ABC, urged that "we not distinguish

between classes of deaths," adding: "Nor should we make a distinction

when the perpetrators of a crime belong to an 'autonomous command,‘

to 'crazy groups' or to more radicalized factions. Such a drawing

of distinctions would mean giving our blessing to what perfectly controlled
and ideologically homogeneous groups do."95

The controversy prompted by German Gonzalez's death continued. Through
its Standing Committee, Nerri Batasuna itself expressed "its frank
condemnation" of the P808 member's murder. But it also took the opportunity
to lash out at parties and unions, denouncing "the foul opportunism

of the PSOE and PCB." 553 [Basque Socialist Convergence], one of the
groups in the coalition, accused leaders of these parties and of their
union federations of having adopted "a fascist attitude by blaming

ETA (m) and the entire abertzale Left for German Gonzalez's death,

in spite of all the contrary evidence." To 388, his death was "another
link in the 'dirty war' strategy being pursued by Spanish special para-
military services starting with the unsuccessful attacks in Renteria,
Nernani and Amorbieta and with the murder of Tomas Alba." It also
accused Ramon Rubial, the old socialist leader, of having "called several
times" for this strategy, which consists of using "uncontrolled groups"
or "autonomous commands."

As we can see, the radical Basque patriots, by carrying their cynicism to
incredible lengths and bandying about lies with inconceivable brazenness,
managed to turn the tables so that the 9505, of which the slain man

was a member, was transformed from the accuser into the accused. Needless
to say, EGIN. the daily paper that represented these raving patriots.
published all these views on front-page inserts, thus effectively contri-
buting to a propaganda campaign modeled exactly after the Nazi methods
advocated by Goebbels.96

The true nature of the Autonomous Commands was another issue that came
up around that time. We have already seen the comments by the two

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
branches of ETA. At a press conference in Madrid, Chiqui Benegas,
advocating an Antiterrorist Democratic Front, asserted that his party
"does not have enough information to ascertain exactly what the Autonomous
Commands are." He also recalled that "the first group that claimed
responsibility was an autonomous command 'of' ETA, which proved that

it came under and belonged to the organisation. Jaime San Sebastian,

the secretary general of the UCT in the the Basque Country, had similar
thoughts. He asserted that "ETA hides itself behind the Autonomous
Comamnda to do its dirty work, like this recent slaying." For their
part, the mysterious Autonomous Commands published a communique in

which they confirmed their responsibility for "the action taken against
German Gonzalez," whom they once again termed "a collaborator with

the forces of repression." In the cammunique they stressed "our organi-
zational independence from the various armed groups in the Basque Country
(ETA m and the 'liquis' known as the p-m's)." The front page of EGIN
read: "Autonomous Commands: He Are Not ETA."97

In other ideological circles, including, of course, factions of the

Left in Parliament, the Autonomous Commands were merely ETA (m) in

disguise. Thus, a few days later, when civil guard Manuel Fuentes

Fontan was killed and ETA (m) claimed responsibility, MUNDO OBRERO,

the mouthpiece of the PCB, published an editorial entitled "ETA (m)

Without lts Ski Mask," in which it said: "It [ETA (m)! is claiming responsi-
bility openly, without putting on the ski mask of the 'autonomous

comands. "'9

According to sources consulted by CAMBIO l6, the "Autonomous Commands
I...I, like the 'Berezis' in the times of 'Apala' [...I could come

from a new splinter group in the organization." Regarding this possible
crisis the magazine also said that "it was recently learned that some

of ETA (m)'s historic leaders had been removed from their posts and

that several of them, who are now refugees in France, intended to

seek exile in Venezuela soon." "The autonomous commands," it continued,
"which the leadership has trouble controlling, seem to be acting on

their own lately [...I Organized as small independent groups, consisting
mostly of very young people, the autonomous commands are ideally trained
to carry out any sort of terrorist activity. Many political observers,“
CAMBIO l6 said, "felt, nevertheless, that a new permanent split had

not yet taken place within ETA and that the struggle for power or
strategic approaches, as in the times of Argala, was between the advocates
of negotiation and the supporters of armed struggle at all costs."99

Josep Melia, the secretary of state for intelligence, felt that the
Autonomous Commands were getting logistical support from ETA (m) and

that, therefore, "the Ba-que organization is not cleared of responsibility,
inasmuch as autonomy is part of ETA's strategic operations.”

According to a controversial report from military intelligence services
that was apparently drawn up in April I979 and published some months
later by DlARlO l6, the Autonomous Commands were part of the "ETA Complex,"

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR Ul'l'lblﬂl. UDL UNI-I

in other words, the network of terrorist groups, political parties,
labor unions and mass media that were pursuing the same goals as ETA
and collaborating with it.

The report said that the Autonomous Commands claim to be nationalistic,
pro-assembly, antiparty and anticapitalist. They say they are prepared
to take action in the future against members of the Basque autonomous
police. Their origins go back to I976, when members of the ETA worker
front who did not join LAIA joined with people from ETA (p-m), berezis,
ETA (m) and other independents.

Each command is free to select and explain its actions, but some coordination
does exist. They claim to have no links with Berri Batasuna and the

KAS alternative and regard the "armed struggle" as one of many elements

in their battle. They are critical of ETA (m) and ETA (p-m) stands

and feel that such actions have to be "made comprehensive."

The report concludes by stating that the members of these commands
have not been identified by name.

Later on, in I980, after the elections for the Basque Parliament, CAMBIO
16 published an account "from a reliable source” claiming that "ETA (m)
has begun a wideranging investigation into the autonomous commands,

which on occasion have taken action independently of the terrorist
organization. A certain ETA faction is worried about the lack of coordi-
nation in the armed groups, especially in light of the new political
situation in the Basque Country."'00

ETA (p-m) Strategy. The Kidnaping of Ruperez

ETA (p-m) continued to base its strategy on the same principles, though
what it actually did was marked by incomprehensibly wide swings. In
this connection, we are already familiar with its "summer campaign,"

in which it strangely alternated negotiations with murder.

As far as the Basque political situation was concerned, its stand was
quite clearly in favor of the statute.

Three "high-level representatives of the Basque organization ETA (p-m)"
explained their stand in an interview with CAHBIO 16 shortly before

the 25 October referendum. As far as they were concerned, the stage

of interclass struggle against the central governmetn was over, and

the time had come to "clarify who is serving the interests of the
bourgeoisie and who is serving the interests of the working classes

of the Basque Country." It so happened, however, that the leftwing

Basque political forces "have not been able to plug into the new situation
and are maintaining the same old methods and policies as under fascism."

In contrast, ETA (p-m) has begun "to get involved in the new situation,
because it is also revolutionary to coordinate our struggle with the
struggle inside bourgeois institutions. Thus, we have supported forces

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that are taking advantage of all the mechanisms and loopholes in this
'dvuxmracy.'" The allusion to Basque Left is obvious.

They then explained their reasons for supporting the statute, which

"has established a national framework." "If we want to arrive at socialism
and independence," they said later on, "we will have to wring the statute
for all it’s worth, because it represents a broader framework of freedoms."
within this framework they saw the possibility of "forging unity [on

the Left] in the form of a single party for revolution, as well as

a powerful armed organization under this party." In light of these

ideas, we can readily understand the subsequent course of action on

the part of Basque Left and especially BIA, the main party in the coalition.
Two years later began the process of merging the already greatly thinned
out Basque Communist Party with BIA, an operation that was portrayed

as a step on the road to leftwing unity.

This political strategy did not mean that BTA (p-m) was going to abandon
terrorism, which made its approach somewhat irrational and, therefore,
inconsistent. "The Basque armed struggle is going to continue," they
said. "The Seventh Assembly anticipated that under bourgeois democracy
the forms of domination were going to change and that the forms of
political and armed struggle had to change too, but this does not mean
their abandonment. Within the context of the mass struggle," they
explained, l...] "there might be cases in which [...I just grievances
cannot be fulfilled. At this point the armed organization steps in

to guarantee their fulfillment and to teach the masses, to show them

in practice the usefulness and necessity of armed struggle as one more
element in the class struggle."

They then went on to say: "We feel that there will be no revolution
without an armed uprising, and since we do not believe in the tooth
fairy, we realize that we have to begin right now to train our military
personnel and get our equipment and supplies ready so that when the
masses decide to make the leap, they have the means to do so."

ETA (p-m) stressed the need to "exhaust the statute," raised the possibility
of military intervention and asserted that although they did not think
it would happen, in the event that it did, "we would not hesitate to
attack the government where it might hurt the most, and not necessarily
in the Basque Country." They accused ETA (m) of taking an approach
that "could trigger such an intervention," which "would take place

in a context totally unfavorable to the Basque revolutionary forces,
inasmuch as there is no armed organization prepared for victory, nor

an organized working class. Blowing up Parliament," they added, "or
killing the king would turn the clock back 40 years, and we would have
to begin from square one again. If there are factions in the military
branch that are after this, we want to tell them that it is totally

counterrevolutionary."

They then talked about the issue of negotiations with the government,
reiterating that "sure there have been; the transfer of several prisoners,

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the withdrawal of the repressive forces from Soria Prison and the content
of the statute itself are the fruit of these negotiations and of the
armed struggle." When asked about who did the negotiating for the
government, they replied: "We would rather not say, but the fact is

that President Suarez himself was directly involved in them after the
campaign on the Mediterranean coast [...l and the attack on Gabriel
Cisneros, whom we initially wanted to detain and get information from."

They also asserted that they had not negotiated with the French Government
but that ETA (m) was, in fact, "negotiating residence papers." Their
comment was: "And people say that they are the 'hardlinera,‘ the ones

who refuse to negotiate." It also became clear that relations with

the "milis" were not exactly cordial. "At the moment, some people

are interested in opposing us," and they talked about the use of their
customary munitions in attacks such as the one on Tomas Alba or the
munitions used by the military branch (Geco) in the attack on Emilio
Guitia from Basque Left. "For our part, we are not oing to engage

in provocation and we hope that they do not either." 0‘

In the above interview ETA (p-m) demonstrated that it, much more so
than ETA (m), was a model of Harxist-Leninist orthodoxy, filtered through
the experience of guerrilla warfare in Latin America, especially that

of the Tupamaros in Uruguay.

In this context, the "armed struggle" is nothing more than the class
struggle carried to its ultimate consequences. This principle had
already been clearly expressed by Mao Tse-Tung, who wrote the following
in I938 in ”Problems of Mar and Strategy": "The central task and highest
form of the revolution is the conquest of power through armed struggle,
resolving the problem of war. This revolutionary principle of Marxism-
Leninism is valid everywhere, both in China and in other countries."'02

The Tupamaros, who have had unquestionable influence on ETA, fully
accept this principle, which appears in their best-known texts. "In
order to preserve its character at the culmination of the struggle,
every vanguard movement must take part in it and be able to technically
channel grassroots violence against oppression so that the objective

is achieved with the fewest sacrifices possible."'°3

nut terrorist acts must not be divorced from the political approach.
Herc iSVhOrOUP find a more marked difference between ETA (p-m) and

ETA (m). Whereas the military faction engages in a sort of spontaneous
armed activity, the political-military group, probably thanks to the
theoretical work of "Pertur," which we will take up in another chapter,
incorporates Uu~"armed struggle" in a broader political strategy. This
is what the Tupamaros had been talking about: "I think that every armed
apparatus must be part of a mass political apparatus at a certain point
in the revolutionary process, and in the event that such an apparatus
does not exist, it should help create it." This Tupamaro text could
well have been written by Pertur, and after reading it we can understand

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
whyEIAwas created at the Seventh ETA (p-m) Assembly hithe fall of

I976. The aboVe quote is followed almost immediately by another that
could help us to understand the smooth and much-debated relations between
ETA (p-m) and EIA or Basque Left: "He must combat the petty idea in

Vogue in the party that identifies it with a headquarters meetings,

a newspaper and rules concerning everything around it." 0‘

We find similar statements being made by Brazilian terrorist groups.
Hoss states that the controversy that divided the various groups as
of I967 could be boiled down to this question: "Was revolutionary war
possible without a 'vanguard party' to whip up the support of the masses
and coordinate military operations?" Whereas the famous Harighella
(one of the best-known theoreticians of modern terrorism) advocated
initiating the "armed struggle" with the hope that things could then
be played be ear (this is more or less the approach of ETA-m), "the
leaders of Revolutionary Armed Vanguard-Palmares (VAR-Palmares) I...)
and the Leninist school considered it suicidal to return to isolated
terrorist assaults without trying to build a revolutionary party at
the same time ."

A little later on, commenting on the kidnaping of the 0.8. ambassador

to Brazil, Burke Elbrick, in September I969 by Harighella's National
Liberation Action (ALN) group, Moss cites the observation of communist
loader Luis Carlos Prestes: "A dictatorship cannot be done away with
through spectacular actions, without the participation of the masses.
Violence makes no sense in the revolutionary process if it does not '05
help to enhance the political awareness and organization of the masses."

The same problem of different terrorist approaches exists in the Irish
Republican Army. Whereas the Provisionals, who are the equivalent

of ETA (m), "firmly believe in the use of force to achieve their objectives,"
the Officials, who are more like ETA (p-m), "have tried to infiltrate

civil rights groups to form an alliance with the entire Left," regarding

the "support of the people" as their indispensable premise because

"as long as they have [this support], guerrillas will be able to defeat

any army, no matter how large." 06

He can see that some other ETA (p-m) positions, such as the "armed
struggle" to further "just grievances," have also come from the Tupamaros,
who in one of their basic documents, the "document found on ll January
I967," talk about the revolutionaryarmy'slﬁssion of "providing armed
cover for strikes."

Pursuing this line, which could theoretically be defined as "soft,
qualified terrorism," ETA (p-m) kidnaped Deputy Ruperez in November I979.
an action that had wideranging repercussions.

Javier Ruperez, a UCD deputy and its secretary of international relations,
was kidnaped on Sunday II November by ETA (p-m) as he was leaving his

home on the way to the closing session of the First Ibero-American

Round Table of Democratic Parties.

122
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI\ urrnum. "DI. Ul‘lal

After the initial hours of confusion, when it was even thought, as

DIARIO 16 reported, that the kidnapera could be "Latin American groups"
such as the Argentine Montoneros, Algerians, members of the Polisario
Front or the HPAIAC [Movement for the Self-Determination and Independence
of the Canary Islands], a conmmnique claiming responsibility was received
from ETA (p-m). The ETA's action was part of its "Estatutoarekin presoak
kalera" (Under the statute, the prisoners in the street) campaign,

and specifically it marked the beginning of the "third phase" of the
campaign. The first phase, the bombings along the Mediterranean coast.
had ended, according to them, with partial success: the withdrawal

of the FOP from Soria Prison. The second phase had been the bombings

at Barajas, Atocha and Chamartin. The third stage was now beginning

with Ruperez's kidnaping. "It is not by chance," they said, "that we have
decided to attack the ruling party once again (an allusion to the attack
on Gabriel Cisneros), inasmuch as it is most to blame for the recent
crackdown in the Basque Country [...I [where] the government is responding
with torture and murder to the people's demand for amnesty under the
statute."

lndeed, 3 weeks prior to this, Basque Left and, specifically, its deputy,
Juan Maria Bandres, had begun a protest campaign against torture, which
they claimed was still practiced in the Basque Country. Bandres had
submitted a dossier on torture to the interior minister on 23 October,
kicking off a controversy marked by charges and denials

The suspicion was that there was a connection between the kidnaping

and the torture, to which the first ETA (p-m) communique referred.

As a result, Bandres was subjected to harsh criticism. and in the Basque
General Council itself, the UCD's Viana and the PSOE's Benegas asked

him to "clarify his links with ETA (p-m)." The abertzale deputy repeated
his well-known answers that his only link with ETA p-m) was that he

had defended some of its activists in court.

But the press was not about to believe Bandres. The cover of issue

4|6 of CAHBIO l6 read "ETA, Heads and Tails" with pictures of Bandres
under "heads" and of Ruperez under "tails." In the editorial, Juan
Tomas de Salas talked about "the campaign [...I by Deputy Bandres and
his followers in connection with alleged torture in the Basque Country,"
stating that "no one believes that first they learned of the torture

and then decided to kidnap Javier Ruperez in protest. Everything points
to the reverse. First they decided to kidnap Javier Ruperez and then
they kicked off a short and noisy antitorture campaign to heat up the
atmosphere." Further on he asserted that apparently "in certain frenzied
sectors of Basque opinion, he who does not kill does not make the grade,
and ETA (p-m) was in a hurry to commit its shocking crime to atone

in terrorist circles for its pacifist crime of having voted yes on

the Autonomy Statute." He also attacked Bandres, stating: "A person
cannot be a member of Parliament and at the same time of a 'political-
military' front with the terrorists. Parliament should get involved,
set up an invostigatory committee respected by all and dissolve and
prosecute the political parties and figures that are involved in the
institutional s stem, on the one hand, and play along with barbarians,
on the other."l 7

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mention was also made of the case of the three Herri Batasuna legislators,
Hanson and Letamendia (deputies) and Castells (senator). Some time

ago, the courts had asked Parliament for permission to begin proceedings
against them, but the government wanted any decision postponed so that
they would not be made "heroes" on the eve of the statute referendum.

Concern over Ruperez's possible death became very intense after a few
initial days of optimism. As it had announced, ETA (p-m) issued a
second communique on the ISth setting forth two specific conditions

for Ruperez's release: the release of five ETA prisoners who, according

to them, were ill and an investigation by the Basque General Council
into torture.

Hopes were rudely dashed when, on the l7th, a third communique ruled
out negotiations of any sort: "Don't get your hopes up. Javier Ruperez
will not be released unless our two demands are met." It concluded:
”we hope that the government gives in soon, at least before our possi-
bilities for holding the prisoner longer run out."

We must bear in mind that ETA (p-m) had carried out two types of kidnapings:
brief ones, in which the individual was held for a short while, just

a few hours even, and freed unharmed, except in several cases when

they were shot in the legs, and long-term ones, of which there were
essentially three instances (Arrasate, Berazadi and lbarra). As we

know, the kidnapings of the latter two ended in their death.

Moreover, when the kidnaping of Ruperez took place, the Basque Country
had been experiencing a practically uninterrupted surge of terrorism
since the murder of socialist German Gonzalez on 27 October. As we
have already mentioned, ETA (m) killed civil guard Manuel Fuentes Fontan
in Portugalete on 3| October and police chief Antonio Hess Portillo

on 2 November in Bilbao. 0n the 7th, ETA (p-m) kidnaped industrialist
Jose Luis Calvo and wounded him in the leg, apparently for not paying
the revolutionary tax. 0n the 8th, the "milis" machine-gunned the
Civil Guard Barracks in Portugalete, wounding two civilians and a guard.
0n the IOth, two more civil guards were gravely wounded in Salvatierra
(Alava). 0n the l2th, a day after the kidnaping of Ruperez, ETA (m)
assaulted a factory doing repair work on the generator for the Lemoniz
powerplant, blew up one section of the building, briefly kidnaped ll
individuals and robbed 3 cars. The "milis" killed an ICONA [National
Institute for the Preservation of Nature) forest ranger in Oyarzun
(Guipuzcoa) that same day too.

As was to be expected, this terrorist onslaught heightened fears for
the fate of the UCD deputy, even though a harassed Bandres publicly
expressed his confidence about Ruperez's personal safety since, in
his opinion, ETA (p-m) was in charge of the kidnaping, which meant
that the hostage was not in the hands of any "crazy command."

Because Ruperes was a well-known figure in international forums, an
extremely broad-based movement arose denouncing his kidnaping and calling

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VA UEILMLM llbb UNI-1

for his immediate release. From the 0.8. State Department to Radio
Moscow and the Palestine Liberation Organization, voices throughout

the world spoke up for Ruperez. Of particular significance were the
appeal for his release from Amnesty International and the plea of

Pope John Paul II during one of his regular homilies to the public
audiences on Wednesdays. In Madrid, moreover, a Solidarity Committee
for the release of Javier Ruperez was formed; it was chaired by Joaquin
Ruiz-Gimenez and attempted to contact ETA (p-m).

The strong worldwide reaction and the fact that individuals and organiza-
tions of consequence were calling for Ruperez's release were a harsh

blow to the the terrorist group. On the 19th ETA (p-m) issued a fourth
communique that was much more moderate in tone than the previous one

and that expressed indirect acceptance of a negotiated solution.lo

Logicslly, the press also reacted to the kidnaping. BL PAIS wrote:

"As has always been said, it is impossible to choose between the plague
and cholera. Both are fatal diseases. It is also impossible to choose
between ETA (m), ETA (p-m) and the autonomous commands. They are all
criminal. He can only analyze the different attitudes that are behind
the pulling of triggers and the kidnaping operations. In this regard,
the violence of ETA (p-m) stands out as the sinister result of a confused
assimilation of the manuals that combine Leninism with adventurism.

In a recent editorial we indicated that ETA (p-m) is futilely striving
with its bloodshed to reconcile in practice the struggle of the masses
with the armed struggle, [...l the complementarity of which is an enormous
fraud.“ It went on to say: "Furthermore, the terrorists have placed
Onaindia, Bandres and their fellow members of Basque Left in their

most ethical political light. Thus, Hr Bandres has acknowledged that

Mr Ruperez has his previous democratic efforts in his favor and has
called for his release. This highlights what has seemed obvious for

some time now: that Basque Left is as powerless to control ETA (p-m)

and Kerri Batasuna is to influence ETA (m)."‘°9

A few days later the same paper returned to the issue of ETA (p-m)'s
inconsistencies and pointed out that "it is locked into a vicious, blood-
stained, hellish circle. On the one hand, it disapproves of the 'foolish
acts' of the 'autonomous commands' or the 'milis,‘ points out that

their actions are irresponsible, provocative and prejudicial to possible
amnestics and tries to place its own armed struggle in a political
perspective. 0n the other hand. however, its grim-faced competition

with its terrorist rivals, the fear of losing its leading role and

the uncontrollable internal logic of resorting to violence to attain
political objectives, leads it inexorably to the savage bloodletting

at Barsjns, Atocha and Chamartin, to the apparent dead-end of Javier
Rupcrez's kidnaping and to the boomeranging of their own harsh description
of German Gonzalez Lopez's murderers."

After noting that ETA (p-m) had been influenced by "the Leninist practices
subsequent to the revolution of I905," it continued: ”But we should
not overlook another factor, its revolutionary infantiliam,

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
which has two facets. One has to do with an immature single-mindedneas,
and the other involves reading all of the comic books and seeing all

of the movies with avenging heroes (from Juan Centella to Superman,

the Coyote. the Masked Warrior and Captain Thunder). This legacy of

the youthful Lenin, on the one hand, and of Roberto Alcazar, on the
other, explains the inconsistency with which the 'poli-milia' advocate
the 'unity of the Left' and, at the same time, hurl into the rubbish
heapofhistory the socialist and communist workers who denounce their
crimes and assaults."llo

Ruperez's kidnaping dragged on, and his jailers allowed him to write

to his family and sent photographs of him that were published by the
press. Most likely in an attempt to take a firm stand against terrorism
and its accomplices, at its plenary session on the 27th Congress approved
four petitions paving the way for the long-delayed prosecution of Telesforo
Honzon and Francisco Letamendia on crarges of justifying terrorism

and resisting arrest. The PNV and Bandres, from Basque Left, voted
against the motion, even though, acrording to Basque communist Lerchundi,
"a short while ago they called Hanson and Letamendia fascists. I think,"
he added, "that they were afraid of the campaign leading up to the
elections for the [Basque] Parliament."

The very day before, Bandres had sent a letter to the president of
Congress in which he complained about the "public slander" directed
against him ("while no authorized voice spoke up in my defense in the
chamber"), about other attacks on Basque Left and about police conduct

in the Basque Country, and declared that "the time has come for me

I...) to take a break from my activities in Parliament and again become
what I have always been: a defense attorney." To Bandres, the approval
of the petitions for prosecution was a "disaster" and represented "a

harsh blow" to those of us who still believe in the Parliament, while
it will heighten the distrust of the sectors that no longer believe
in it, such as the ones represented by Letamendia and Henson." The
deputy-defense attorney's interpretation of the law and of a State
law is incomprehensible.

The issue of negotiations was up in the air during the entire time
that Ruperez was being held hostage. Official spokesmen always denied
that any were under way, while on other occasions sources that seemed
reliable confirmed them. Professor Ruiz-Cimenez, the chairman of the
committee for Ruperez's release, said afterwards that there had not
been negotiations but there had been dialogue. ETA (p-m) itself said
something similar. There were unquestionably contacts, and Ruiz-Gimenez
himself was a key participant. Others were involved as well, such

an attorney Ruiz Balerdi, who was to become famous some months later,
in I98l, as a result of his role in securing the release of another
ETA (p-m) hostage, industrialist Luis Suner.

There was also talk of negotiations in a letter that Ruperez sent to
President Suarez and that was made public only after Ruperez was freed
on I2 December. This is what Ruperez wrote: "The choice is a very

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \Irl‘lhlllla liar. umu

simple one: my life versus the government's refusal to negotiate. "hat
ETA wants, deep down, is just to hold negotiations, and it would not
be the first time this happened." He says later that his death "would
not help to calm down the mood in a region without whose peace we will
never have peaceiarharnony in the rest of Spain." Ruperez also told
Suarez: "Your decision making negotiations possible, negotiations that
in no event will entail impossible or heavy demands, will, I am sure,
pave the way for rational apprsaches in the grave situation that has
us all paralyzed."

The fruits of this negotiation or dialogue soon came to light. In its
I2 December session Parliament established, by acclamation, as did
the Basque General Council, a committee to investigate allegations

of torture, and once Ruperez was freed, several ETA prisoners were
discreetly released from jail.

EL ALCAZAR angrily raised its voice over what it regarded as the "kidnaping"
of Spain. "Not a single voiced was raised against the investigation
begun into allegations of 'torture' by the police and Civil Cusrd,’

and in an insert entitled "EL ALCAZAR Backs Forces of Public Order,"

it said that "in the face of the submissive assent of the Congress

of Deputies and the profound silence of the so-called representatives

of the Spanish people, we join with the unsullied honor of the Civil
Guard, the General Police Corps and the National Police and we repudiate
all of the vile attitudes that have made Our people the saddest and

most distressed people in Europe." In another insert the paper pondered
"the price of IRuperez'sI freedom" and ended up by stating: "He demand
the immediate resignation of this administration and the formation

of a Cabinet of National Salvation."H3 Once again EL ALCAZAR was calling
for a coup d'etat.

Pressure from the Far Right was also felt, as they took advantage of

the situation to secure the release of Civil Guard Lt Col Antonio Tejero
Molina and Infantry Capt Ricardo Saenz de Ynestrillas from the prison

in which they were awaiting trial for their involvement in "Operation
Calaxia." The coup plotters were out on the street on 8 December and
were thus able to begin planning the next coup on 23 February I981,
which had such repercussions on national political life."'14

A few days later, ETA (p-n) granted one of its customary interviews,

in which it asserted that the "execution" of Ruperez would not have

created any trauma [or them. They stressed that negotiations had not

taken place and expressed satisfaction with the results of their operation.
”We can say that we know the inner workings of the ruling party better

than wv used to, and this enables us to combat it more effectively."

They reaffirmed their determination to continue the "armed struggle."

"As long as there is a single prisoner in jail, regardless of his political
beliefs, we will continue to engage in armed intervention." Furthermore,
they did not feel guilty of coercion: "We think that Ruperez has spoken
out quite freely, much more freely than our activists held at police

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
stations, much more freely. Ruperez has not been subjected to any
sort of physical or mental torture." Ruperes saw things differently:
"The feeling that you might lose your life is a truly anguishing
experience," he declared shortly after his release.I 5

Many questions and doubts remained; ABC summarized them thus: "The

word that has been brushed aside, especially in the hours following

the kidnaped deputy‘s release, has been 'negotiation.’ The government
has officially denied that there wwas any sort of negotiation, a quid
pro quo clearly involving blackmail. He would like to think so,

even though people around us keep pointing to signs that might prove

the opposite [...I President Suarez himself has expressed his conviction
that this outcome has preserved the dignity of the State. He would

like to think so.""6

EL PAIS addressed the issue in a much more complex and ambiguous manner.
After having questioned the timing of the prosecution requests ("Let us
hope that that yesterday's vote is not remembered as an irrevocable
political mistake," it said on 28 November after the requests were
granted. in an editorial opposing the campaign against Bandres) and
having opposed the extension of the Antiterrorist Law of a December I978
(its 5 December editorial), it commented on Ruperez's release, noting
several "pessimistic signs" such as "the persistence of a bloodthirsty,
absurd terrorism in the Basque Country [...I the authoritarian regression
reflected in the offensive against Deputy Bandres, the unconstitutional
Decree-Law to extend the Antiterrorist Law and the requests to prosecute
Messrs Manson and Letamendia [...l" It also remarked that "why not

come out and say it [...l the decision to release a hostage safe and
sound without a police encirclement that would have made it inevitable,
gives us some small, though not trifling, hope that some day ETA (p-m)
might (a remote possibility that we cannot, however, rule out) abandon
the insane premises of its terrorism, violence and armed struggle and
accept the ground rules of negotiations, pacification and democratic
freedoms." Showing an enormous understanding for the terrorists and
sounding almost like Saint Francis, the Madrid daily went on to say:

"We know that it is very difficult to dismount from a tiger and that

an attempt to do so probably exposes the rider to the risk of being
devoured by the beast or shot down by the hunter." Further on, applying
the old saying that every cloud has a silver lining, it asserted: "In
his hazardous, involuntary and reprehensible voyage, Ruperez has probably
seen not the true face of the moon, but the sincerity, which is no

less real by being warped, with which a few desperate boys experience,
from their own peculiar and errant angle, some of the effects on the
Basque Country of a government policy that has all too often bqen
irrelevant, timid and simply following in the wake of events." 7

He could say that as far as 8L PAIS is concerned, the only one to blame
is the government, while the terrorists are the result of "the force

of events" and, therefore, condemnable but, however, pardonable and
even understandable.

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Meanwhile, ETA (m) kept remining people of its existence through its
usual method». 0n l5 November it seriously wounded a lieutenant colonel
in Sun Svhnslinn. On 28 November, three civil guards (Pedro Sanchez
Hurfil, Angel Garcia Peres and Antonio Ales Hartinez)wereuurdered

in Azpeitia (Guipuzcoa), and on 18 December the janitor at a school

in Vitoria, Juan Cruz Montoya Ortueta. became another victim of the
military faction's machine guns.

But terrorism was not alone in charging the atmosphere in the country.

On I3 December, two youths were killed in Madrid, apparently by police
gunfire, during a demonstration against the Horkers Statute that Congress
passed that day, a demonstration that was joined by groups of students
protesting against the university autonomy bill.

Furthermore, on l7 December five of GRAPO's most dangerous activists
(Cerdan Calixto, hierro Chomon, Collazo Araujo, Brotons Beneyto and
Martin Luna) escaped from Zamora jail in one of the most spectacular
and inexplicable breakouts ever attempted from a Spanish prison. EL
PAlS took the opportunity to again refer to "the continuing suspicions
that "the CRAPO activists are the cover for a more than elaborate setup
subject to all sorts of manipulation and infiltration [...] All of

the efforts by official agencies," it added, "to convince the public
that CRAPO was indeed just a leftwing terrorist group not susceptible
to the sinister manipulation that certain parallel intelligence agencies
are striving to engage in in this country, have been fruibless, perhaps
unreasonably or unfairly, but in any event, fruitless."

Their escape shattered the tranquility that GRAPO's breakup had brought
and raised fears that the strange and mysterious terrorist group would
rise up again like a sinister phoenix . It was, in fact, difficult

to understand how a 25-meter tunnel could have been dug over a period
of 6 months without raising suspicions. Moreover, all indications
were that they had gotten outside help. CRAPO continued to prompt

many unanswered questions.

ETA Against Basque Autonomy

When the Guernica Statute took effect (as well as the Sau Statute in
Catalonia), it set in motion the process of establishing Basque home
rule institutions. The elections for the Basque Parliament represented
the major landmark for which Basque political parties began to prepare.
Th0 future Basque Government would be formed on the basis of the outcome
of these elections, which were scheduled for March.

The terrorists got involved in the process too, demonstrating for the
nth time that progress towards autonomy did not mitigate BTA's deter-
mination to engage in violence. ETA (m), which unlike ETA (p-m), had
not accepted the statute, began I980 with a new upsurge in violence

that took 8 lives in January, l0 in February, 5 in March and 6 in April.
Of particular significance was the murder on Io January in Vitoria

of Comdr Jesus Maria Velasco Zuazola, the head of the Alava "border

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
guards," a kind of feral police that prefigured the future home rule
police force. Commander Velasco had, in fact, been considered a candidate
for the chief of this police force, which was one of the Basques' most
persistent demands. His murder was interpreted as an attack on the

future Basque institutions.

He was the third person killed that year. On the 5th, Jesus Garcia
Garcia was slain in Bsracaldo. He was a rightwing extremist who owned

a bar that had been the subject of an article in the magazine INTERVIU

a few weeks before that, based on the statements of a former national
police officer, implicated him in the activities of the "uncontrolled"
rightwing extremist commandos. Three days later, on the 8th, a former
civil guard, Sebastian Arroyo Gonzalez, became another victim of ETA (m)'s
machine guns in Alsasua. On 23 January, another Baracaldo bar owner,
Alfredo Ramos Vazquez, whom an article in IRTERVIU mengioned as another
rightwing extremist, was killed after being kidnaped.I 0

All of these incidents brought the atmosphere in the Basque Country

to the flash point. ETA (p-m) announced that it would go on the counter-
offensive, and the Far Right, which had already killed Berri Batasuna
activist Carlos Saldiza in Lezo (Guipuzcoa) on 15 January, announced

that it would respond to any killing with more killing. GAE [Spanish
Armed Groups] claimed responsibility for the above murder. The same
group also claimed responsibility for the attack on the Aldama Bar

in the Baracaldo district of Alonsotegui, where 4 persons died and

IO were wounded. This was on 20 January. The same rightwing extremist
organization carried out a series of attacks on and burnings of newspaper
stands that sold the magazine INTERVIU.

On I February, the same day that six civil guards were slain in Bilbao,

the Council of Ministers appointed Haj Gen Jose Saenz de Santamaria,

who was also a National Police inspector, the government's special

delegate in the Basque Country for the battle against terrorism. This
renowned military officer was being relied upon to boost morale in

law enforcement agencies that were showing signs of discouragement

in the protracted and tough battle against terror. Commenting on his
appointment the next day, ABC called for a "plan for the Basque Country,
which we believe is indispensable, including emergency measures commensurate

with the emergency situation."'2'

After so much wavering in its editorial line on terrorism, EL PAIS
returned to one of its original approaches by stressing the qualified
need for political measures, thus agreeing with the PNV and other Basque
parties that "lending substance to the statute" was a prerequisite

for and would even suffice to put an end to terrorism. It expressed

its trust in the PNV and was confident that Basque Left would "detach
itself" from ETA (p-m). "The PNV's denunciations of violence in general
and of ETA violence in particular are so numerous and clear-cut now

that its former equivocation in this regard has been left far behind,"
it said on 2 February. "The Basque nationalists' rejection of the
criminal and counterproductive 'dirty war' operations carried out by

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sun v. s AUII|II Uh}.- “uh!

vizhlwing extremist groups on either side of the Pyrenees does not

unly nul invalidate their condemnation of ETA murders but legitimizes

ll morally, politically and historically l...] Furthermore, although

it is true that Basque Left's break with ETA (p-m) is open to misinter-
pretations and cannot yet be regarded as irreversible, the prospect

that violence might be put to an unequivocal and definitive end should
be encouraged by all those who desire democracy and peace in the Basque
Country. Terrorism," it went on to say, can be eradicated by police
action only when it is an exclusively police-related problem, but terrorism
will continue to be immune to such action as long as certain sectors

of the population, for whatever reason, support it, remain neutral

or simply do not combat it." In this vein, it had the following to

say about the appointment of Saenz de Santamaria: "Let us hope that

this new post helps to bring about the difficult combination of a police

struggle against terrorism and the loss of the terrorists’ political
bases.“22

The "dirty war" being waged by various rightwing extremist groups was

once again causing concern. On Saturday 2 February, the Basque-Spanish
Battalion killed Basque Left activist Jesus Maria Zubikarai, and the
body of a leftwing activist who was born in Bilbao, Yolanda Gonzalez
Martin, was found in Madrid. Thus ended another bloody weekend; in
addition to the six civil guards and these two slayings, two ETA members

were killed in the attack on the civil guards: l0 deaths in less than
48 hours.

The dread of an interminable war between gangs of varying political
persuasions spread throughout political circles, and there was talk

of Spain turning into another Argentina or El Salvador. Some observers,
whom we could almost call optimistic, saw this upsurge in ETA (m) terrorism
as a last-ditch offensive because it realized that when the Basque

autonomy institutions started up in the near future, it would be out

in the cold. ETA (m)'s latest attacks, which the old "berezis" apparently
pushed the hardest for, were viewed as an attempt to force negotiations
that would enable them to secure a spot on the new Basque political

scene.

The ETA (m) communique claiming responsibility for the death of the

six civil guards stressed, in fact, that "ETA, as well as the overwhelming
majority of the Basque people, is not motivated by a desire for war,

but rather by a desire for a peace l...| that will give the Basque

people back the sovereign framework of democratic freedoms that was
forcibl taken away from us." They then stated that a cease-fire was
possible if the government accepted the "KAS alternative."

With the 9 March elections for the Basque Parliament drawing near,

the situation was very precarious. "hat was regarded as a "shutdown"

by Madrid of the autonomy process, especially with regard to transferring
powers, had caused people to lose confidence in politicians, which,

in the opinion of many, encouraged the violent solutions advocated

by ETA.

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hnrvuvvf, lhv luct that the elections for the Basque Parliament were
lhv fifth in just 2 years seemed to promote voter abstention.

None of this, however, was beneficial to the Merri Batasuna coalition,
which was experiencing internal strife. ﬂhile the majority faction
represented by MAS! was arguing against running in the election,

the other three members of the coalition (BSB, ARV and LAIA) wanted

to compete.

A poll taken by the Abaco Institute on the Berri Batasuna constituency
came out around this time, and the numbers it showed were cause for
concern. Some 65 percent of the coalition's voters were in favor of
independence, and if independence were not granted, 69.2 percent (some
ll9,|00 of the 172 000 people who voted for MB) said they would back

an armed struggle.‘23 Findings such as these explain the perdurability
of terrorism.

The climate of violence that prevailed in the Basque Country, together
with the opinion polls on voter preferences, which evidenced gains
forthenationalist parties and losses for the federalist parties, caused
profound concern in Madrid in circles close to the administration.

Some even thought that it would be a good idea not to hold the elections,
and in fact the leader of Popular Alliance, Manuel Frags Iribarne,

had been calling for just such a postponement.

In addition to the individuals slain by ETA, as listed in footnote

I20, which shows how army officers continued to be targets of ETA terrorism,
there were other killings that evidenced the gravity of the situation.
During confrontations in the Madrid district of Vallecas between law
enforcement agencies and rightwing extremist groups that were protesting
the Civil Government's calling off a demonstration organized by the
rightist National Labor Force, one young man, Vicente Cuervo Calvo,

was killed, apparently by rightwing extremists. A municipal police
officer was slain in Hospitalet de Llobregat. Moreover, the fact that
the alleged murderers of Yolanda Gonzalez had close ties to New Force
prompted a loud outcry against the party, which various political groups
wanted declared illegal. EL PAIS had this to say: "New Force must
clarify its background and state clearly where it stands, in light

of the latest murders by the For Right. [t can then define its M81
[Italian Social MovementI-like approach without being the object of
justified suspicions that it has gotten one foot in Congress to secure
parliamentary respectability while keeping the other mixed up in shady
European machinations. Otherwise, it will continue to be an abhorrent
party."'24

A member of the National Police was found to be tied in with the murder
of young Yolanda Gonzalez, which triggered even louder protests by

the leftwing parties, which were calling for investigations into the
roots of rightwing terrorism in certain institutions in which Francoist
elements had taken refuge. Interior Minister Ibanez Freire told the
Congress of Deputies that the country could not make a distinction

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n was us A eunu- uua. vnun

between offensive, "evil" terrorism (ETA) and defensive, "good" terrorism
(the Far Right). He denounced "without qualifications or exceptions,
those who preach or practice terrorism, even if they claim that it

is merely in response," because "terrorism against terrorism is just

more terrorism."

ETA (p-m) made itself felt in the Basque election campaign with a daring
stroke in Madrid: 0n 2| February, the "poli-milis" hurled a grenade

at Honcloa Palace, the residence of the government president, and although
it caused no major damage, it showed the terrorist organization's capabi-
lities. A few days later, in an unusual press conference "somewhere

in the Basque Country," ETA (p-m) claimed responsibility. As was to

be expected, once again the issue arose of how to defend against terrorists
who seemed to have total freedom of movement and action.

One of the most talked-about terrorism-related trials in Spanish history

also took place during the second half of February, and the defendants

in the so-called "Atocha case" were sentenced to lengthy jail terms

totaling some 500 years. The judges did not accept the motive of "patriotism"
that the defense attorneys tried to establish, ruling that "they acted out

of hatred and a desire for vengeance." Oddly enough, from a legal

standpoint, the verdict rejected the charges of terrorism that the

Attorney general's office had argued for but accepted the claim that

crimes of murder were involved.

The political situation grew precarious in February not only because

of the climate of violence but also because the lack of firm, resolute
political leadership on the part of President Suarez was becoming increasing-
ly obvious. The referendum on home rule for Andalusia was held on

the last day of the month, and it proved to be one of Suarez's and

the 000's most flagrant mistakes. It was becoming more and more evident
that the government was not governing and that Suarez was proving sadly
inadequate. "First failure," cried CAMBIO I6 on the cover of issue

452. Thus began an ll-month period that would conclude with the president's
resignation and during which Suarez was totally unable to react. The
administration underwent several overhauls, but none of the teams was

equal to the occasion. It was the president who was lacking.

Voting took place for the Basque Parliament on 9 March, as scheduled.
Abstontion ran high (40.7 percent in Alava, 00.6 in Vizcaya and 62.]

in Cuipuzcoa), and as expected, the big winner was the PNV with 25
deputies, followed by as with II, 9505 with 9, 060 with 6, 83 with

6, AP with 2 and PCB with I. It was obvious that the nationwide parties
had slipped and that the nationalists, whether moderate or radical,

had won. The outlook was not exactly bright.

The election results did not hold out much hope that terrorism would

cease. EL PAIS commented on "the unstoppable rise of abertzale nationalism"
and came to the conclusion that "grassroots support (probably largely

from the youngest segments of the electorate) for the professional

killers, thieves and machine-gun toters is not on the wane, quite the

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opposite." 0n the other hand, it felt that "the voter abstention at

this election shows dramatically that enormous segments of the Basque
population are fed up with the guagmire of daily violence and civil strife
in which they are caught up."'2

According to some reports, the PNV wanted a "cease-fire" at all costs
and to secure one was willing to hold talks with ETA (m) and ETA (p-m).
but the military faction in particular continued its "armed actions."

The Honorable Taradellas, who is still president of the Catalan Legislative
Assembly, went much farther. In statements to the Portuguese paper

0 TEMPO, he said that he was convinced of the inevitability of a fearsome,
violentmilitary intervention in the Basque Country, and he advocated

as a solution "the sort of negotiations that General de Caulle held

with the Algerians." A short while later, he partially recanted in

EL PERIODICO, saying that that was not exactly how he had put it and

voicing confidence that a Suarez-Caraicoechea pact could resolve the
ETA problem.

"hat some newspapers were calling an ETA (m) truce, starting on 20 February
and extending through the Basque elections, was shattered on I8 March

in Madrid, when the terrorist group tried to kill General Esquivias.
Although the general emerged unharmed, Military Police soldier Jose

Luis Ramirez Villa was slain.

Shortly thereafter, from 24 to 29 March, ETA (m) murdered four persons
in the Basque Country, including the Count of Aresti and lh-year old
Jose Maria Piris Carballo, who innocently picked up a gym bag containing
an ETA bomb.

Around the same time (25 March), the police culminated a major operation
with the arrest of 22 ETA(p-m) activists,oneof the heaviest blows

dealt to the organization. These arrests helped to clear up many of

the ETA attacks in recent months, such as the attack on Deputy Cisneros
and the kidnaping of Deputy Ruperez, and the police also discovered

the house in Hoyo de Pinares where Ruperez had been held. The bombings
during ETA (p-m)'s I979 sunner campaign were also explained. Amon

those arrested were several women, some of them French citizens.‘2

FOOTNOTES
I. CAMBIO I6, No 363, I9 November I978, editorial, "ETA Assassins," p I9.

2. In the same issue of CAHBIO l6 cited in the above footnote, Jose
Oneto, in his column "The Major Offensive" (p 21), talked about
President Suarez being "promptly informed about everything relating
to the Basque Country and obsessed with a terrorism that could wreck

all political plans, including his own continued residence at Moncloa
Palace."

3. Concerning this police action, see CAHBIO I6, No 370, "The Big Dragnet.
Conesa Against ETA," pp I8 and ff.

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l0

II.

I2.
I3.
lb.
IS.

I6.

I6

I?

I9.

avn VAA LVLIW U-DI- Vl‘ul

. va CAHBIO l6, issuv cited in [ootnopc 2; also see in that same

issue the article "The CIA Against ETA. Madrid Asks Washington for
Help," p 25. This article did not go over well in Washington and
even prompted a diplomatic protest, submitted by the 0.8. Embassy
in Madrid, expressing the Carter administration's displeasure "over
the leak." See CAMBIO I6, No 368, 24 December I978, "The CIA is
Furious with the Spanish Government," p 3I.

. HUNDO OBRERO,ZODecember I980, editorial,"The Vitoria Declaration,"

p S.

. EL PAIS, 26 December I978, editorial, "The Basque General Council's

Pacification Program," p 6.

. CANDID I6, No 368, 24 December I978, "Basque Country: Steps Towards

Peace ETA Seeks Political Solutions," pp 22 and ff.

. CAMBIO I6, No 369, 3| December I978, "The Death of Argala. Five

Years Later," p #0.

. Sce article cited in footnote 7.

CAHBIO I6. No 37l, lb January I979, editorial, “Don't Lament."
Those killed in late December were Jose Maria Arrizabalaga Arcocha,
head of Carlist Traditional Youth of Vizcaya, slain on the 27th

in 0ndarroa; Lisardo Sampil, a taxicab driver in Yurre (Vizcaya),
killed on the 30th, and Jose Luis Vicente Canton, retired, murdered
in Llodio (Alava) on the last day of the year.

EL PAIS, I0 January I979, Open Forum, "Regrettable Reply," p I3.

EL ALCAZAR, 4 January I979, p I.

lbid., editorial, "Guarantees for Spain," p 3.

EL PAIS, a January I979, p 9.

[bid , editorial, "The Lights of Provocation," pp I, 6.

bis. EL PAIS, 5 January I979, editorial, "The Traps of Provocation,"
p 6.

EL PALS, IO January I979, editorial, "Brigade Against Terrorism,".
p 8

DEIA, IO January I979, p I2.

CAHBIO I6, No 372, 2| January I979, "The Basques Against ETA,"
pp I8 and ff.

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
20.

2|

22.

23.

2h

25

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

3|

32.

33.

34.

35.

BL PAIS, I2 January I979, editorial, "The Church of Fontius Pilate,"
p 6.

CAHBIO I6, No 373, 28 January I979, "ETA Members in France. All
Names," pp I6 and ff. Also see Jose Oneto'a colunn "Storm Over
France,“ p I5.

LE HONDB, I6 January I979, "Overseas Bulletin," p I.
EL PAIS, I7 January I979, editorial, "A False Alibi," p 8.
[L CORRIERE DELLA SBRA, editorial, "Spain's Anguish," p I.

CAHBIO I6, No 377, 25 February I979, "The Basque Country: Policies
Even in Soup," pp 26 and ff.

The following were the ETA murders in February I979:

Jose Diez Perez, civil guard, 3 February, Andoain (Guipuzcoa)

Esteban Saez Gomez, civil guard, b February (Tolosa (Guipuzcoa)

Jose Antonio Vivo Undabarrena, uayor of Olaberria, 6 February, Olaberria
(Guipuzcoa)

Vicente lrusta Altamira, civilian, 8 February, lbarruri (Guipuzcoa)

Cesar Pinilla Sanz, municipal policeman, 12 February, Hunguia (Vizcaya)

Sergio Burrajo Falacios, lieutenant colonel, lb February, Vitoria

Benito Arroyo Gutierrez, civil guard, 23 February, Deva (Guipuzcoa)

CAHBIO I6, No 379, II March I979, "Kidnaping With a Happy Ending.
Abaitua Returns Home," pp 36, 37.

lbid.
CAHBIO I6, No 379, ll March I979, "A Clean Slash," pp 23, 24.

BL PAIS, a March I979, editorial, "The Elections in the Basque
Country."

Hith regard to all these positions, see CAHBIO I6, No 38I, 25 March I979,
"Hhat the Basque Radicals Want," pp I6 and ff.

He should recall that of the four components of Herri Batasuna,
two are legal parties, Basque Nationalist Action (ARV) and the
Basque Socialist party (E83), and the other two are not, HASI and
LAlA.

CAHBIO I6, No 38!, 25 March I979, editorial, "The Ayatollahs of
Spain.“

EL PAIS, I7 March I979, editorial, "Some Questions About the Basque
Country," p 8.

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
36.

37.

38

39.

40.

LI

£2.

43

64.

45.

#6.

b7

48.

49

50.

SI

52.

53

54.

run or: ”sank not. mud

LA VANGUARDIA, 6 March I979. editorial, "The Vote of Violence,“
p S.

CAHBIO I6, No 386, I5 April I979, "The Left's Triumph," by Jose
Oneto, p 13.

CAHBIO 16, No 382, I April I979, "Bombs in Catalonia," pp 16 and ff.

EL PAIS, ll April I979, editorial. "The Basque Country: Only Negotiations
Remain," p 6

CAHBIO I6, No 387, 6 May I979, "The Buried Secrets of GRAPO," pp
31, 32.

BL PAIS, 22 April I979, editorial, "A Man, a Terrorist, a witness,"
p I0.

CAMBlO l6, No 387, 6 May I979, "Lerdo de Tejada: Prison Leave and Flight,"
p 29.

CAMBlO I6, No 388, I3 Hay I979, "The Guernica Embrace," pp I6 and
it; also see Juan Tomas dc Salas's editorial with the same title,
p 3; Jose Oneto's column "A Peace Plan," p IS, and the statements
by the PNV president, Carlos Garaicoechca, "Peace Hinges on the
Statute," pp 30, 3|

Ibid.

CAHBIO l6, No 389, 20 Hay I979, "Children Who Kill. Nazi Outbreak
in Spain," pp I8 and ff.

INFORHACIONES, a May I979, editorial, "Halting the Fascists," p 2.
with regard to the debate, see EL PAIS, 26 Hay I979, pp IA and IS.

LA VANGUARDIA, 25 Hay I979, editorial, "Law and Order: Premise
for Freedom," p 5.

CAHBIO l6, No 392, IO June I979, "Days of horror," pp 22 and ff.
lbid., editorial, "Mr President," p 3.

EL PAlS, 27 Hay I979, editorial, ”The Strategy of Tension," pp I, 6.
DlARlO l6, editorial, "Democracy Is Not to Blame," 26 Hay I979, p 6.
ABC, 27 May I979, editorial, "Before Democracy," p 2.

LA VANGUARDIA, 27 Hay I979, editorial, "Words Are No Longer of
Any Use," p 7.

137
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
55.

56

S7.
58.

S9

60.

6I

62

63.

6h

65

66.

67

68.

69

70

7|.

72.

73.

7b.

75.

INFORHACIONES, 28 Hay I979, editorial, "Democracy Put to the Test."

EL PAls, 29 Hay I979, editorial, "The Governuent Renaina Silent,"
pp I, I0.

LB FIGARO, 28 Hay I979, editorial, "Antidenocratic Terrorism."

LB HORDB, 29 Hay I979, editorial, "Spain's Anguish."

ABC, 5 June I979, editorial, "The Terrorist Logic," p 2.

LA VANGUARDIA, IS June I979, editorial, "Second-Class Deaths..."
CAHBIO I6, No 395, I July I979, "The Big Pact," by Jose Oneto, p I9.

CAHBIO I6, No 396, 8 July I979, "With the Statute Will Come Peace,"
interview uith Mario Onaindia, p 25.

CAHBIO I6, No 396, 8 July I979, "Here Cone the Federals!" pp 20 and ff.

DEIA, 26 June I979, editorial, "The Last Car on the Last Train,"
p 2

DBIA, 27 June I979, editorial, "A Meeting for History," p 2.
CAHBIO I6, No 397, I5 July I979, "ETA Goes to the Beach," pp Ia and ff.
ABC, 5 July I979, editorial, "Hith Pained Indignation," p 2.

HUNDO 0BR£R0, 5 July I979, editorial, "Against UCD and Against
the Basque Country."

DBIA, 29 July I979, editorial, "For the Guernica Statute, for Peace
and Against Violence."

ABC, 29 July I979, editorial, "An Impossible Amnesty," p 2.

CAHBIO l6, No 600, 5 August I979, "ETA Negotiate: with the Government,"
pp lb and ff.

Those killed were Jose Amaya at Barajas, Dorotea Ferdig (German)
at Cha-artin, Guadalupe Redondo Villa. Jeaua Emilio Perez Palmaat the
Atocha station.

ABC, 3I July I979, editorial, "It's a 3.811 All-Out War," p 2.

LA VANGUARDIA, 3| July I979, editorial, "Counterattack in Every
Hay," p S.

CAHBIO I6, No AOI, I2 August I979, editorial, "A Blow to ETA," p 3.

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70

77.

78

79

80.

8|

82

83.

8h.

85.

86.

87

88.

89.

awn vs I spun. 091:. um.“

DEIA, 3| July I979, editorial, "Amnesty Without Bombs or Innocent
Victims," p 2.

ABC, I August I979, editorial, "Amnesty, Yes: For the Victims,“ p 2.

DEIA, 3 August I979, "ETA (p-n) Suspends Bo-b Campaign," p I, and
CAHBIO I6, No 402, I9 August I979, "ETA: There Will Be More Cons-2,"
p 22.

ETA (m) killed the following persons in August:

Juan Tauste Sanchez, civil guard, 4 August, Bibar (Guipuzcoa)
Antonio Nieves Canuelo, civil guard, 8 August. Sondica (Bilbao)
Manuel Perreiras Simois, municipal policeman, 13 August, Portugslate

(Viscaya)
Antonio Lopez Carreras, l6 August, Sondica (Bilbao)

Jose Manuel Boix, athlete, l8 August, Madrid
Jose Maria Perez Rodriguez, national policeman, 30 August, lunarraga

(Guipuzcoa)
Aurelio Calvo Valls, national policeman, 30 August, San Sebastian

CAHBIO I6, No 40l, "The Inoperative Brigade," by Jose Oneto, p l3;
alos see the interview with Francisco de Asia Pastor, "This Would

Be the Man," pp 14 and ff, and the article "GRAPO Wanted a Bloody
Summer. Terrorists for Hire," pp I7 and ff.

See the articles cited in the previous footnote and CAHBIO l6,
No 402, I9 August I979, "From a Reliable Source," p 5.

CAHBIO I6, No 405, 9 September I979, "From a Reliable Source," p 5.

CAHBIO l6, No 405, 9 September I979, "GRAPO at Home. Direct Reports
and Testimony," pp I2 and ff.

CAHBIO I6, No 612, 28 October I979, "How Sanchez-Cases Has Caught,"
pp SI and ff

INFORHACIONES, 5 September I979, "Herri Batasuna Blames PNV for
Latest Developments," p 4.

MUNDO DIARIO, 25 September I979, editorial, "A Threat to Democracy,"
p 3.

See Claire Sterling, "The Terror Network," Holt, Rinehart and Rinston,
New York, l98l, pp I99. 200.

HGIN, 29 September I979, "The PNV and Terrorism," by A. Zupide, p I3.

CAMBIO I6, No 608, 30 September I979, "Black September," by Jose Oneto.

139
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9|

92.

93
96.
95
96.
97.

98.

99

I00.

IOI.

I02.

I03.

I04.

IOS.

I06.

I07.

l08.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CANBIO I6, No #13, 6 November I979, "A Tunnel Against the Statutes."
p 30.

CANBIO I6, No hi4, II November I979, "Amnesty," by Jose Oneto, p 2|.

INFOINACIONBS, 29 October I979, "Strong Socialist Reaction Against
ETA," pp I, A.

ABC, 30 October I979, editorial, "Denouncing Another Crime,” 9 2.
BGIN, 30 October I979, p I.

HUNDO DIARIO, 30 October I979, editorial, "Another Murder," p 3.
EGIN, 3| October I979, p I.

Ibid.

NUNDO OBRBRO, 3 November I979, editorial, "ETA (m) Without Its
Ski Mask."

CANBIO I6, No Ala, II November I979, "ETA Against the P803," pp 35 and ff.

See CAHBIO I6, No bI9, "The ETA Complex," pp 27 and ff, and DIARIO
I6. "From a Reliable Source" was published in CAHBIO I6, No 636,

p 5.
CANBIO I6, No all, 2| October I979, "ETA (p-m) Speaks," pp I6 and ff.

The quote is from Volume II of "Obras escogidas de Mao Tse-Tung";
also see "citations du president Mao Tse-Tung," Seuil Publishing,
Paris, I967, p bl.

Antonio Nercader and Jorge de Vera, "Los Tupamaros (Bstrstegia
y accion)," Anagrams Publishing, Barcelona, I970, p 7|.

Ibid., p 72.

Robert Moss, "The Urban Guerrilla,"EditoraNacionsl, Madrid, I972,
pp 253 and ff.

Ibid., pp 129. I30.

CANBIO l6, No hl6, 25 November I979, editorial, "Ruperez in Chains,"
p 3.

Concerning the kidnsping of Ruperez, see the following issues

of CAHBlO I6: No hi6, 25 November I979, "ETA, Heads and Tails,"

pp 22 and ff; "The Third Phase Is Here," p 26 and "Torture: Someone
ls Lying," pp 27 and ft; No 617, 2 December I979, editorial, "In
Ayatollah Style," by Juan Tomas de Salas, p 3, "A Lengthy Kidnaping,"
pp 25, 26.

140
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I09

IIO.

Ill.

II2.
II3.

Ilh.

IIS.

II6.

II7.

II8.

II9.

I20.

EL PAlS, I3 November I979, editorial, "The Kidnaping of a Deputy,"
p l0.

EL PAIS, I8 November I979, editorial, "The ETA (p-m) Labyrinth,"
p 8.

CAMBIO I6, No AIS, 9 December I979, "Three Basques Out of Commission,"
pp 22 and ff.

EL PAIS, 27 November I979, complete text of the long letter, p I5.
EL ALCAZAR, l3 December I979, p I.

GAMBIO 16, No 420, 23 December I979, "The Man who Returned From
Hell," pp 22 and ff.

CAMBIO I6, No “2|, 30 December I979, "th Re Did Not Kill Ruperez,"
pp I6, I7.

ABC, I3 December I979, "The Release of Javier Ruperez," p 2.

EL PAIS, l3 December I979, editorial, "Javier Ruperez, Through
the Looking Glass," p I0.

EL PAIS, l9 December I979, editorial, "The Escape of Zamora,"

p 8; EL PAIS, 20 December I979, "Hazy Points in the History of
This Armed Group. GRAPO on the Verge of a Return After the Escape
of the Five Leaders," p I4, and EL PAIS, I3 January I980, "The
Big GRAPO Jail Breakout," pp I6, 17.

CAMBIO I6, No b22, 6 January I980, "New Year, Old GRAPO," pp I6
and ff.

The following is the list of ETA murder victims over the first
A months of I980:

Jesus Garcia Garcia, civilian, 5 January, Baracaldo

Sebastian Arroyo Gonzalez, retired civil guard, 8 January, Alsasua

Jesus Maria Velasco Zuazola, army commander and head of the Alava
border guards, I0 January, Vitoria

Francisco Moya Jimenez, civil guard, lb January, Elorrio

Jose Manuel Palacios Dominguez, commercial agent, l9 January, Guecho

Alfredo Ramos Vazquez, civilian, 23 January, Baracaldo

Luis Dominguez Jimenez, sexton, 25 January, Vergara

Juan Manuel Roman Moreno, national policeman, 27 January, Basauri

Jose Martin Perez Castillo, civil guard, I February, Bilbao

Antonio Marin Gamero, civil guard, I February, Bilbao

Jose Gomez Martinan, civil guard, I February, Bilbao

Jose Gomez Trillo, civil guard, I February, Bilbao

Victorino Villamor Gonzalez, civil guard, I February, Bilbao

Alfredo Diaz Marcos, civil guard, I February, Bilbao

Miguel Rodriguez Fuentes, infantry commander, 8 February, San Sebastian

Angel Astuy Rodriguez, municipal policeman, 8 February, Onate

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I2I.

I22.

I23

I24.
I25.

I26.

Ignacio Arocena Arlageli, civilian, l6 February, Oyarzun (Guipuzcos)
Eugenio Sarasibsr Gonzalez de Durana, retired infantry colonel,

20 February, San Sebastian

Jose Luis Ramirez Villa, military policeman, I8 March, Madrid
Da-aso Sanchez Soto, civilian, 2b March, Bilbao
Jose Artero Quiles, civilian, 25 March, Bscoriaza (Guipuzcoa)
Enrique Aresti Urien, count of Aresti, 25 March, Bilbao
Jose Mario Piris Carballo, 14-year old student, 29 March, Azcoitia

(Guipuzcoa)
Francisco Pascual Andreu, civil guard, 6 April, Orio (Guipuzcoa)
Florentino Lopetegui Barjacoba, civilian, 6 April, Orio (Guipuzcoa)
Eugenio Lazaro valle, arny con-under on special duty and head
of the Municipal Police, I3 April, Vitoria
Jose Torralba Lopez, civil guard, I6 April, Irun
Luis Martos Garcia, civil guard, l6 April, lrun
Rufino Munoa Alcalde, civil guard, 28 April, San Sebastian

ABC, 2 February I980, editorial, "A Plan for the Basque Country,"
p 2.

BL PAIS, 2 February I980, editorial, "The Gallows of Violence," p 8.

CAMBIO l6, No #27, IO February I980, "This Is What the Merri Batasuna
Voters Are Like," pp 27, 28.

BL PAIS, I2 February I980, editorial, "Abhorrent Force," p 8.
BL PAIS, II March I980, editorial, "The Basque Labyrinth," pp I, 8.

CAMBIO I6, No #35, 6 April I980, "The Spring Strike," pp 26 and ff.

COPYRIGHT: Alejandro Munoz Alonso, I982.

8743
080:

6000/00IS

142
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'I'l ‘IPI'NJAI. UM. Ill‘l.‘

SPAIN

ASSASSINATIONS BY ETA-M HAY SLO" WORK AT LEMONIZ
Madrid CANDID 16 in Spanish 17 Hay 82 pp 22-26
[Article by Ander Lanaburu: "Either Lenoniz or BIA")

[Text] The fear of finding death the way that engineer Angel
Pascual found it last week has caused his colleagues at the
Lenoniz nuclear plant to hide beneath the rocks. Altost
literally the 90 Iberduero engineers will live, they announced.
clandestinely, in pernanent evasion of ETA terror.

The fear, that fear that the ETA is so fond of provoking,
will continue in force and the attacks against Lenoniz and
its enployees will continue, according to persons in that
terrorist organization. In the face of the fear, the Madrid
government and the enterprise Iberduero faced the consequences,
announcing that they are ready to hire foreign technical
personnel, at whatever the cost. so that the plant does not
remain paralyzed. In the early morning of Uedneaday.
terrorists again exploded the "gona-Z" and blew up the
distribution tower of the Brrondo substation in the proximity
of Ayete, leaving 60,000 San Sebastian inhabitants without
light.

Despite the tough words against ETA by the lendakari [president] Caraicoechea,
the firm proposals of the PNV [Basque National Front] through its National
Assembly, and the support of thousands of people who denonstrated in the
streets of Bilbao, for the tine being the Lenoniz technicians will not return
to their work places.

Insecurity and uncertainty. fear and at times panic have clearly taken hold
of these 90 workers. The conditions in which they have lived these past

2 years have created an intolerable family, personal and professional
situation for then. forcing them to make that drastic decision.

After long hours of discussion, last Monday afternoon the technicians assigned
to the Lenoniz project went to the lberduero director with "the firm decision
to no longer participate in the said project."

163
FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(HULY
FOR 0F1WC1ALIJSEIDNLN

The assassination a few days earlier of the engineer Angel Pascual was an
enormous step backward in a possible solution to the controversial subject
of Lemoniz, and, dangerously, returns to a previous situation. Fifteen
months after the death of the engineer Ryan, the ETA has carried out what
seemed impossible for many: assassinate another Iberduero technician, this
time the director of the Lemoniz works.

Numerous politicians, as well as some observers. were mistaken in their
somewhat optimistic analyses, believing that the general rejection of the
assassination of Ryan and the creation of a "Lemoniz management society."

an organization under the Basque government, would prevent the ETA terrorists
from striking again and killing another technician.

This analytic error was also recognized by the PNV, which, through its daily
newspaper DEIA and in its editorial "With ETA or Against ETA" last 6 May.
indicated: "We were not mistaken. In an editorial on Hednesday, 28 April
we pointed out that as things now stand at Lemoniz (new management formulas,
an offer to negotiate. the moral guardianship of the plant by the Basque
government). a new case like that of Ryan seemed unthinkable. Lemoniz has
already cost too much blood--we wrote at the time-~for the Basque Country

to tolerate another victim. The Lemoniz technicians are not alone. There
are thousands and thousands of persons who support them and their families.
Let no one forget it."

The hundred technicians assigned to the project seemed to be convinced of
that. In effect. most of them had managed, within their personal drama,

to get used to the nightmare of the thought of Ryan or of the threatening
letters by the ETA. Thus, in responding to the call of their company on
Monday, 26 April, they decided to return to their places of work, but not
without a certain fear of attack and also of losing their jobs. All, with

the exception of six. believed in a political protection and in the guarantees
offered by the tripartite agreement. In effect, "ETA members had still
attacked neither the government nor the PNV."

Nevertheless, once again the ETA took it upon itself to repudiate any rational
hypothesis. A few hours after the assassination of Pascual, a technician
friend of the victim declared to CAHBIO 16, "In the face of this new attack
we feel that we are toys of fate, without really knowing what we can do.

He believed that we had political protection, and even in the possibility

of negotiations with the ETA."

After 15 months of forced absence, he, as well as his colleagues, had begun
work in Lemoniz last 26 April. It lasted only 1 week. Involved in a true
family drama during recent days, on Monday our anonymous speaker met with

his enterprise colleagues, many of them definitely disenchanted with their
profession. A few hours later in his house in Algorta, and together with
another enterprise technician, he talked about that life full of anguish that
he has been suffering the last couple of years. Fear and incertitude are
reflected in his face and in that of his colleague. Both confessed to this
journal that many of them have a progressive ideology and that their election
choice would shock more than one commentator: "Certainly, some of us favor

164
INJR‘OIIWCJAI.IISEL(HUIJV
I'D“ Ul-HLIAL USE UNLY

independence and Herri Batasuna [Popular Unity], but they recognize that it
was a mistake for the ETA to become involved with Lemoniz."

Middle—aged. most married with children, the Lemoniz technicians who have
been with the enterprise long are now again terrified. In these long months
they have not dared to widen their circle of friends. They feel that the
population is treating them with suspicion. They have gone from a situation

of social prestige with a high standard of living to increasing isolation
from their environment with a loss of social influence.

During recent months the two engineers from Algorta have covered the 15 km
that separate then from Lemoniz almost on a daily basis. following a very
fixed route. and almost always dressed in a carefree and even slovenly
manner. One of them, with the heavy beard of a "progressive," is far from
appearing to be a serious company representative.

“He are obsessed by this subject. and we talk about it day and night. At
home with our families, in the bars or restaurants where we come only with
our most intimate friends or our relatives, always, of course, with an eye
on our surroundings."

in the last 2 years they have become taciturn. uneasy and nervous. They live
almost hidden in a sort of forced clandestineness. This abnormal life forces
them to keep their names in total secrecy outside of the enterprise. A
recent report published in the San Sebastian DIARIO VASCO reveals that the
list of technicians that the ETA has was obtained by the terrorist
organization using a list of telephone numbers within the enterprise.

One fact verifies the credibility of that information. Indeed. in that list.
together with several dozen technicians, are found the names of three persons
not part of this group. Nevertheless. they also received the macabre threat.

Some even received a photograph of Ryan's dead body.

The fear associated with Lemoniz has also had a tragic effect on the wives
of these technicians. Tense and preoccupied. the wives "drug themselves"
daily with tranquilizers so as not to succumb to depression or a nervous
breakdown. A good many of these engineers. feeling the need to be among
familiar people. have come to the plant daily. or in the Bilbao offices they
involve themselves in studies or in taking courses or even in playing cards.

"Nevertheless." they admit. "we have not read a novel in these last months.
We cannot."

This unaccustomed and abnormal life style has caused serious stomach disorders

in the two with whom we spoke. They too. in the same way as their wives,
are addicted to pills or medication.

"We do not believe that we committed a crime in choosing our career. One can

discuss the location of the plant, its reconversion. the referendum or stopping
it, but what we are asking is that the matter be cleared up once and for all.
We do not want to he toyed with. The politicians do not understand that

145
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂi(MNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however much they may insist on our not submitting to ETA blackmail, we
cannot work under these conditions. He fear for our lives and we are
frightened."

In fact, what they have wanted up to now is a political umbrella to give

them permanent protection, that will return them to a normal professional

and family life in society. that will allow them to abandon this secrecy

that threatens them with the specter of paranoia and family problems. They
do not want to move again, send their families away for a time, hide at

home behind double locks, suspect strangers or tremble whenever the telephone
rings.

What they all want, including these two technicians from Algorta, is to
return to their hobbies, such as chess, mineralogy and excursions to the
mountains on the weekends, after 5 days of normal work in Lemoniz.

Some of the colleagues with whom we spoke, caught in an understandable panic,
have fled again after the last assassination. Others will seek work outside
of the enterprise or abroad, and most are again hoping that the authorities
can solve this grave problem.

The ETA thrust, with this execrable assassination, was interpreted as a
direct challenge to the Basque government and the PNV. This ETA attack,
again paralyzing Lemoniz, contradicted the rumors of an infamous alliance
between the ETA and Garaicoechea's party on the subject of the nuclear plant.
Also. until then some ingenuous nationalists preferred to believe that when
the Lemoniz plant, a key energy resource in the Basque Country, was in
nationalist hands the ETA would not dare to attack the lives and homes of
those responsible for it. The new ETA crime repudiated all of these
hypotheses and confirmed that even in the case of a referendum the ETA would
not respect even the will of the people.

Nevertheless. in this dramatic dispute the Basques not only have the future
of the nuclear plant and their energy resources at stake, but also the
continuity of their autonomous government.

It was in this sense that the political chronicler of the nationalist daily
DBIA, Eugenio Iberzabal, asked himself if an autonomous government, after the
last ETA attack, can subsist in this manner. "It is evident that it cannot,"
affirmed lberzabal. "Lemoniz, in this sense, is a symbol. If the Basque
parliament in its majority has decided to put it into effect under certain
circumstances--those of the agreements--then the institution that has opted
for a solution without being able to carry it out is playing with its own
survival."

Indeed, today it is Lemoniz. Tomorrow it can be any enterprise, entity or

institution. In the face of this danger, nationalist Representative Marcos
Vizcaya asked for the Basque people to oppose the closing of Lemoniz, which,
in his opinion, "would be the ETA's greatest triumph in its entire history."

166
FOI‘OFI!(JAI.IIHE(HULY
I V” v. | I‘..l‘Io Us!" ‘1'“. U

The enormous political danger that this triumph wOuld cause was immediately
understood by Basque political leaders. For Txiki Benegas, secretary general

of the PSE-PSOE, "we face a new form of fascism, fascism by Basque terrorists,
which must be erradicated before it des:.oys us all."

For his part, the lendakari Garaicoechea accepted the ETA challenge: “Today,"

he said, "whar began as a struggle against dictatorship is a direct conflict
with democracy and authentic self-government. It is clear that the

assassination of Angel Pascual had some clear connotations for our energy
problem. since it was on that same day that the entity Basque Energy was put

into effect, along with the public gas companies and the management of
Lemoniz."

The disgust was immense and the PNV could tolerate no more. It definitely
was intransigent with Herri Batasuna and was eager to confront the ETA.
"Evidently," indicated Xabier Arzallus, PNV president, "this ETA action is a

very clear threat to the Basque executive and autonomous institutions, and we
accept the challenge with all its consequences."

Saturday morning the PNV had an urgent meeting in extraordinary national
assembly (the first meeting of this sort since its foundation) with the
purpose of undertaking a forceful repudiation of ETA terrorism.

PNV leaders considered the last transgression to be a direct frontal attack
on their government's policy. The PNV, which up to now on several occasions

had worked for an approach, dialog or negotiations with the ETA, th'ew in the
towel.

Their leaders, headed by Arzallus, no longer believe that the terrorists want

to negotiate. They are prepared for a confrontation and they are on the brink
of war with the ETA organization.

At 10:37 am last Saturday, the 65 members of the PNV National Assembly locked
themselves in the first floor of the sad gray Artea Building in Castillo
Elejabeitia, a Basque locality situated 35 km from Bilbao.

After 6 solid hours of talks in this old house used as a seminary and retreat,
the nationalist burukides (leaders) approved important resolutions.

During the meeting more than one participant shouted for "dirty war" against
the ETA. Others asked what means the party had at its disposal. For this
reason leaders had to make an effort to calm the very heated tempers.

The meeting, which lasted until 4:00 pm, approved, among others, the
resolutions to exclude from the party all militants who yield to ETA blackmail
with the revolutionary tax. It was also resolved to demand from Madrid police
authority and to ask for the resignation of Robles Piquer. Although the
measures to be taken in the struggle against the ETA were not made public,
sources in this party assured CAMBIO 16 that the PNV will seek to proceed

with this confrontation in an isolated manner, without counting on the rest of

the political forces. On this occasion the PNV decided to throw itself into
battle alone.

147
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In one of the rare breaks during the 6-hour meeting, two PNV leaders confirmed
the government crisis with a change in posts within the Basque executive. A
PNV spokesman indicated a possible formula for fighting against the ETA: "It
is easy,” he said, "if they kill someone for not paying the tax, we will do
the same with one of their leaders or of the Berri Batasuna coalition."

This affirmation, possibly due more to a moment of tension than to a formal
decision, nevertheless demonstrated the new orientation of the majority party
in regard to the ETA. and the emotional state of many of their militants.

In the face of the last ETA assassination and the later resolutions adopted
by the PNV, Onaindia fears that "inexorably the existing dynamics of events
may lead to a Basque civil war, and every effort should be made to avoid this.
Now more than ever it is necessary to seek democratic, negotiated. public and
open solutions. And the Basque Parliament is the most appropriate framework."

Once again, the absence of Berri Batasuna in this institution and the ETA
provocations take away from the efficacy of Onaindia's proposal.

At this time. when the assassination of the Lemoniz nuclear plant project
director isolates the ETA even more by causing a strong feeling of rejection
among the Basques, it is also clear that any person who does not agree with
the terrorists runs the risk of being killed.

Faced with this situation, PNV leaders have finally become convinced that
police and political measures within a constitutional framework, along with
the collaboration of responsible citizens, are the best antidotes to ETA
terrorism.

"Not to go any further," commented a Basque socialist delegate to CAHBIO 16,
"would perhaps have been sufficient a year ago when Juan Alcorta decided to
act alone, without obtaining satisfactory PNV support."

More somber and preoccupied than usual last Saturday afternoon following his
party's national assembly, PNV President Xabier Arzallus assured that "either
the ETA comes to reason, or it would have to be erradicated. There is a
growing 'church register' in our bases against its actions."

These assertions provoked a surprising and rapid ETA response. As if to guard
against all dangers, 26 hours later the terrorist organization announced that
it would again attack the plant, while it sought to avoid any direct
confrontation with the government and the PNV. Meanwhile, the Basque
Government as well as the government in Madrid and the Iberduero company have
met numerous times in order to avoid the dramatic paralyzation of the Lemoniz
nuclear plant.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, lnformacion y Revistas, s.A.

9746
CSO: 6131/517 3"“

168
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(IULY