FDR "Fl-“1,“. IISF UNIX

JPRS L/10242
7 January 1982

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 1/82)

Cameras

CZECHOSLDVAKIA

Energy, Fuel Conservation Measures Recommended
(mcmxn, No 9, 1981) .I. ....... 1

Recomendetions of ME Engineers, by Marie Krbeckova, Zdenek Zorkler
Contest Entries

Minister Urges More Efficient Use of Chemicals in Agriculture -
(Miroslav Tana; AGROClEMIA, 9 Sep 81) ...... .... 18

-a- [III-EE-64 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H ’R OFF“ 1 -\ l . I '51" ON I .\

CZECEOSIDVAKIA

ENERGY. FUEL CONSERVATION MEASURES WHEN!)-
Recommendations of PHPB Engineers
Prague ENERGBTIKA in Czech No 9, 1981 p; 410-615

[Article by Eng Marie Krbeckova end Eng Zdenek Zorkler, Federal Ministry of FUels
and Power. Prague: "Increasing the Efficiency of Fuel and Energy Use in the Seventh
and Eighth Five-Year Plans"]

[Text] For us, as for all industrially developed countries of the world, solving the
fuel and power problen has become a critical question for further development. The
difficulty in obtaining fuels and energy both from domestic sources and through
import, and especially the continuing rise in their prices on world markets, whose
results cannot be avoided, compels us to concern ourselves very seriously with using
the efficiently.

Our possibilities for further import of fuels and energy are linited, thus satis-
faction of our economy's growing demands will require further expansion of domestic
extraction, particularly of brown coal; but this must be accompanied by increased
efficiency and strict conservation in the use of all fuel and energy resources avail-
able to our society. In particular, we must considerably speed up our improvement

of the efficiency of fuel and energy use and establish strict conservation in their

consumption in all sectors of our society.

One of the most important purchasers and consumers of solid and liquid fuels. both
donestic and imported, is the power industry. Accordingly, the requirement of
decreasing the energy intensiveness of electric power production and heat supply is
in the forefront of our interest. In addition, the power industry faces the prob-
len of using all available types of fuel, including low caloric value brown coal.

In accordance with the conclusions of the 14th and 15th CPCZ congresses and the
special program adopteu at the 32d CEHA session, the Ministry of Fuels and Power
[FHPE] based its preparations for the Seventh Five-Year Plan on the premise of max-
imum use of domestic fuel and energy resources and on steady decreases in the energy
intensiveness of the national economy.

One of the key programs on which the power industry will rely is the State Special
Progran for Increasing the Efficiency of Fuel and Energy Use, which is of critical
importance to the fuel and energy balance.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Essentially, we must proceed on the assumption that increases in the fuels and
energy during the Seventh Five-Year Plan will be nade available only through con-
servation.

In Decree No 240/79. the CSSR Government Presidium approved the concept of the State
Special Program for Increasing the Efficiency of Puel and Energy Use developed by
the Federal Ministry of Technical and Investment Development [PHTIR], specifying
that the program should be developed in accordance with CSSR Government Decree

No 103/79 regarding procedures for developing state special programs for the
Seventh Five-Year Plan.

in accordance with the set of measures for achieving fuel and energy savings in the
first years of the Seventh Five-Year Plan. the PM?! has developed, in cooperation
with the Federal Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering [FHHRS] and the Federal
Ministry of General Engineering [HWVS], a set of technical and organizational mea-
sures aimed at decreasing specific fuel consumption in the production of electricity
by condensation units in the 100-200 H" range by at least 8 grams of standard fuel
[GHP] per kilowatt-hour in 1985 and by 12 GNP per kilowatt-hour in 1990 compared
with the 1980 figure.

This set of technical and organizational measures contains the following steps:

--a program of modernizing the flow sections of ZOO-MN and llO-MH turbines, to be
carried out on at least 10 ZOO-NH unite and 9 110-!" units by 1985 in accordance with
the program of general overhaul of the units;

~~assuring proper operation of condensers by introducing progressive methods of
cleaning them. so as to achieve a decrease of at least 1 percent in specific fuel
consumption for electric power production;

-a performance program for the commissioning and incorporation of new equipment
:4? automating and optimizing combustion regulation. particularly using oxygen sen-
sors and microprocessor devices, to result in a saving of at least 2 percent on
specific fuel consumption;

--intensifying the operation of cooling towers and achieving the desired degree of
cooling of water by modifications of the towers, to yield a drop of at least 0.5
percent in specific fuel consumption;

-~development of a program for modification and reconstruction of other selected

groups of electric power station equipment (other than that covered above) so as

to improve the operating characteristics of llO-MH and ZOO-NH units and bring the
specific fuel consumption into line with design figures;

-~development of a set of measures to speed up the beginning of operation of the
units in the Prunerov II power station in order to achieve the planned specific
fuel consumption values not later than 6 years from the commissioning of the units.

In addition. modifications will be made on process equipment and a program for man-
aging fuel deliveries and operation of coal equipment aimed at eliminating decreases
in the caloric value of coal and the harm done by changes in fuel qualities and
discrepancies with the planned values must be developed.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (Pl-TIC! \l I'SF ()Nl \

Based on the degree of understanding of technical approaches and on supplier per-
fronnnce to date, the program of efficiency-inprovenent neesures for loo-aw end
ZOO-h" units may be carried out in the areas mentioned.

Improvements on Flow Sections of Turbines

As a result of operatﬂmtunder condensation conditions which depart from design
specification, 1oo-Hw, llO-HH and ZOO-HM turbines are showing worsening specific
fuel consumption figures.

Reconstruction of the flow sections of llO-HH turbines in accordance with the pro-
posal of Skoda Concern in Plzen is planned. The proposal has now been made more
specific, specifying two variants for modification of the flow sections of ZOO-NH
turbines and three variants for the llO-MU turbines.

In the 200~HH units, it is pnoposed to replace four diaphragms in the lowbpressure
section and to shorten the last set of buckets (variant I) or to replace four
diephregns and replace the last set of buckets.

In the llo-HH units, all of the improvements will be Iade on the final stages of
the lowbpressure sections of the turbines.

The following types of inprovenents are involved:

--overhaul of the low-pressure secrions. leading to a decrease in specific fuel
consmption without the possibility of wi thdrawel of heat;

--nodification of the low-pressure sections, leading to a decrease in specific fuel
consumption and allowing unregulated withdrawal of up to 334 GJ/hr [gigajovlcs per
hour] of heat for heat supply; .

-modification of the low-pressure sections, resulting in a decrease in specific
fuel consulption and allowing regulated withdrawal of up to 585-627 GJ/hr of heat
between the medium-pressure and low-pressure sections for heat-supply purposes.

It will be possible at the same time to replace wornout interior castings with welded
steel conponents.

For withdrawal of higher-pressure steen, it is proposed to add an outlet after the
ninth stage of the medium-pressure section of the turbines, with a throat diameter
of up to 800 u.

The PHPE requires that the modifications on the 100-200 HM turbines be done by 1983
and that overhaul of 9 llO—MW units and 10 ZOO-NH units be carried out during the
Seventh Five-Year Plan. During the Eighth Five-Year Plan, the ministry proposes to
carry out improve-ants on 15 100-110 M" turbines and S zoo-aw turbines.

The improvements on the flow sections of the turbines will be carried out as part
of planned, standard general overhaul, i.e.. with an average of 10-14 weeks' stop-

P389-

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHFIAI. USE ONLY

Since the contractor has not yet determined the expenditures required or calculated
the resulting decrease in fuel consumption, the PHPR has used rough technical esti-
mates to arrive at these figures:

--expenditures of about Kcs 15 million for the ZOO-HM units and a decrease of 0.6
percent in specific fuel consumption (for each unit);

--a cost of about Res 10 million for the loo-nu units and a decrease of 1 percent
in specific fuel consumption (for each unit).

On this basis, we may estimate that the overall effect of improving the flow sec-
tions of 100-200 H" turbines during the seventh and eighth five-year plans will re-
sult in a saving of about 110,000 tons of standard fuel [time] in 1990 compared with
1980. The improvements made during the Seventh Five-Year Plan will yield a saving
of about 35,000 TM? in 1985. Overall expenditures on improvement of the flow sec-
tions of the turbines proposed for the seventh and eighth five-year plans are pre-
liminarily estimated at half a billion korunas.

Continuous Cleaning of Condensers

At present, the imported continuous condenser cleaning system has been installed
on three ZOO-MU units in the Chvaletice power station and on one ZOO-MU unit in

the Pocersdy I station. Experience and operating results have been favorable, and
in particular the Chvaletice station has continuously maintained the condensers

in their planned operating conditions. Compared with the previous state of affairs
(involving periodic cleaning of condensers with the units stopped), there has been
improvement in specific fuel consumption, with the overall effect currently in the
vicinity of 2 percent.

This type of condenser cleaning in the ZOO-MU units in the Jalovske Bohunice nuclear
power station, all of whost units had been_equipped with this system by the end of
the year, has received a particularly positive evaluation.

The equipping of almost all 100-200 NH blocks with continuous condenser cleaning dur-
ing the Seventh Five-Year Plan is being considered. The Polish contractor for the
Prunerov II station which is under construction is considering a different conden-
ser system. During the Seventh Five-Year Plan it is proposed to install the de-
vices on a total of 15 ZOO-NH units, which is expected to yield an annual saving

of about 120,000 TIP in 1985 as compared with 1980, and to install them on 33 loo-HM
and llO-HH units, which is expected to yield an annual saving of about 130,000 TM?

in 1985 compared with 1980.

Because of the quality of the cooling water in the Novaky II and Vojany I power
stations, installation of continuous condenrer cleaning and realization of the de-
sired effect depend on additional investment in pressure filters to remove coarse
mechanical impurities'from the water.

The total effect from the introduction of continuous condenser cleaning and pressure
filter during the Seventh Five-Year Plan will be an annual saving of about 250,000
TM? in the last year, 1985, as compared with 1980.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SI' ()NI.\

Because of the considerable benefit to be realized from tube cleaning and filtration
of the cooling water, it is unquestionably economically expedient to have this
equipment produced in Czechoslovakia within the PHHTS, and to cooperate with the
rubber industry in seeing that rubber pellets are produced or imported. The bene-
fits and economic effect from production of our own continuous condenser cleaning
equipment will be particularly increased through their use in the nuclear program.

Moreover, it is proposed to introduce this equipment in units with smaller individual
capacities, in addition to which our foreign trade sector is interested in includ-
ing this equipment as part of the capital items which it already exports. Our ma-
chine building and chemical industries will have to see that the continuous conden-
ser cleaning equipment is produced and complete sets made available as soon as pos-
sible so that the equipment can be made available to the power industry during the
Seventh Five-Year Plan.

Combustion Management and Increased Efficiency: Oxygen Sensors

Optimization of the combustion process in the boilers of electric power stations
depends on continuous monitoring, which is the basic precondition for automatic
regulation.

The low technical standards of the flue gas analyzers currently in used to monitor
the combustion process result from their constant shortcomings, such as considerable
down time, time-consuming maintenance, and unreliable operation. These shortcomings,
together with the considerable time delay in transmission of measurements, limits
their potential for use as sensors for automatic combustion control in power station
boilers.

Currently it is not realistic to keep combustion regulation in constant operation
on any coal-fired unit. The main reason is the design of oxygen sensors for regu-
lating combustion which have been imported by the VHJ ZAVT [Data-Processing Equip-
ment Research and Development Base] as part of a cooperative agreement with East
Germany.

The current unsatisfactory oxygen sensors could be replaced, for example, by equip-
ment from Hastinghouse, which uses the principle of an electric cell in a solid elec-
trolyte in the form of a ceramic insert which is located in the flow gas itself, thus
making it unnecessary to withdraw flue-gas samples through a gas duct. The prod-

uct manufactures domestically, under Dr Kohler's patent, by Elektroporcelan Louny,
has not yet had automation equipment developed for it.

The Westinghouse sensor has been tested on boiler No K22 in the Tusemice II power
plant. and according to specialists from CEZ [Czechoslovak Power Plants] Concern
and ORCREZ [Organization for Improvement of Electric Power Plant Efficiency] it
has given an excellent account of itself.

It is expected that priority installation of oxygen sensors on 12 ZOO-MU units dur-
ing the Seventh Five-Year Plan would yield an annual saving of about 30,000 THP
in 1985 compared with 1980.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he l-‘MN: proposes equipping the other ZOO-W and 100-110 MR units with oxygen sen-
sors during the Eighth Five-Year Plan and expects an annual saving of about 50,000
1MP. Overall. it is planned to equip boiler units with 52 oxygen probes during the
seventh and eight five-year plans; the annual saving is expected to be about 80,000
TRIP in 1990 and compared with 1980.

Currently, East Ger-any has finished the development and has begun producing a pilot
series of URSALYT RC flue-gas analyzers using a ceramic sensor, electronics and
accessories with similar characteristics to those of the Heatinynouse sensor de-
scribed above. In early 1981, as part of specialisation arrangements, the first
model of the East German sensor will be tested at ZPA DP [Machinery and Auto-tion
Plants] in Czechoslovakia. Depending on the test results, the product will be in-
cluded in specialization agreenents, with deliveries expected to begin by 1983, and
possibly as early as 1982.

Modification of Cooling Towers To Increase Cooling Efficiency

Owing to an overestimate of heat transfer in the drip sections and failure to achieve
the required sir draft. the colling efficiency of natural-draft cooling towers in

the Detmrovice. Chvaletice, Novelty 3 (units 3 and lo) and Vojsny II pmerstations
has been considerably lessened.

The corrective measures involve an increase in the heat exchange surface, improve-
ment of the water distribution function, and a nore uniform flow of cooling air.

After the changeover to AVIA blowers, an inadequate air throughput was found in
blower-type cooling town No 905; the blowers were modified using bypass edges.
Although these improvements made it possible to achieve the design capacities, sons
shortcomings in equipment reliability remain.

As part of the state assignment for development of science and technology (VBJ
Prumyslove stavby [Industrial Construction] Brno, desiper and performer, with co-
operation of csvz [’l Czechoslovak Air Engineering Plantsl), the new AP}! 8000 blower
has been developed and is gradually replacing the existing tenporary arrangement.

The FHPB proposes carrying out reconstruction and modernization of seven cooling
towers (one at Detmarovice, four at Chvaletice, two at Novelty 3) during the Seventh .
Five-Year Plan in order to increase the cooling efficiency, with an expected annual
saving of 13,000 THP in 1985 compared with 1980.

For the Eighth Five-Year Plan, modification, reconstruction and construction of a
total of 21 cooling towers is being discussed, but their planned annual saving of
about 30,000 TMP is not yet cormensurete with the expected cost of the work: the
plan will be further refined, and a decision will be node with reference to addi-
tional circumstances such as achievenent of full output by the units and the like.

Stabilizing Operation of the Prunerov II Power Station

To speed up the startup of the five 210-10! units in the Prunerov II power station
so as to achieve the planned specific fuel consumption values within 6 years of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFlﬂ-U. I'Sl" ONLY

the run—laminating at each unit, pursuant to a cuuu'url between slwdaexpur! loreign

trade enterprise and the Budimex-Elektrim Consortium of Polish Central Foreign Trade
Organizations regarding the construction of Prunerov II, KPS [expansion unknown] in
Poland and 361 [expansion unknown] have developed a "Program of Guarantee Tests" and

requirements for guarantee measurements, including an indication of fuel consmption
achieved.

Depending on the results of these tests. a further program for speeding up the full
operation of the units and achievement of the planned operating parameters may be
developed.

Achievement of the design parameters within 6 years of couissioning would yield a
saving of about 150,000 TM? in 1985 compared with 1980. For the Eighth Five-Year Plan,

an additional annual saving of about 66,000 m in 1990 compared with the expected
1985 values is being discussed.

Other Efficiency-Improvement Measures Aimed at Improving the Operation of 100-200
NH Units

These involve primarily increased efficiency of turbine and boiler operation, imple-
mentation of Soviet experts' suggestions for new-generation ZOO-HR units, improve-
ment of the operation of heat regeneration systems, and other mcdeifications to
mitigate the negative effect of worsening fuel quality.

The programs in question involve the following main subject areas:
a. Modifying combustion regimes

«reconstruction of powder burners,

«improved control of secondary combustion air flow,

«recirculation of cool combustion gases,

«more efficient management of conbustion regimes,

«cleaning the pressure pump air heaters (WM),

«reconstruction of flue-gas blowers,

«reconstruction of boiler accessories, dryers, milling units and classifiers.
«thyristor control of stocker speed;

b. Hodiiication of turbines and equipment

«reconstruction and replacement of high-pressure heaters,
«installation of subcoolers with high-pressure heaters,
«modification of heaters,

«replacement of feed pump bypass valves,

«increasing the temperature of HP [expansion unknown] steam by lS'c,
--reconstruction of injectors,

«reconstruction of vacuum system,

«increasing the tightness of valves;

c. Other
«homogenization of fuel dumps,

«optimization of cooling water treatment.
«stabilization of operation, with decreased number of startups.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I58}? ONLY

If all of these projects were carried out. ms estintes that the annual saving in
1990 compared with 1980 would total “0,000 111?.

Overall Effect of Efficiency Inprovenent-Keasurss

The proposed leasures for decreasing specific fuel eonsu-ption for 100-200 I” units
represent the smation of all currently-known technical neasures and expert esti-
mates and their contributions to decreasing specific fuel consumption.

Following evaluation of all available data, the total effect of the set of proposed
neasures was calculated; it amunted to about 613,000 119 in 1985 colpared with
1980, and 830,000 m in 1990 conpared with 1980.

Long-tern monitoring of trends in the quality levels of fuel indicates that the
quality of coal, particularly brown coal, has been steadily decreasing. Since 1972
the average annual drop in caloric content has been 0.75 percent.

The discrepancy between the quality ratings of coal suppliedand the design values
for which the facilities wre built is producing important negative consequences as
regards downtime, reliability and production econony.

“To eliminate or mitigate the resulting hat-II, 022 and SE? [expansion Imknown],
“together with $88 [exransion unknown] Tlnace and W228 [expamion unknown] Brno
have worked out modifications for production equip-eat, especially boilers.

After allowance for the negative effects of fuel anticipated for the Eighth Five-

Year Plan, the assigmlent for annual conservation of 620,000 IMP in 1990 is fulfilled

at the level of $30,000 m. Table 1 shows the expected trend of specific fuel
consumption in 100-200 m units.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFIHM. l'SE ONI)

Table 1. Estimated trend of specific fuel consumption in 100-200 M" units in the

Seventh and Eigth Five-Year Plans if proposed efficiency improvement measures are
implemented.

1" I ore-um, quiz-1:: “her some no -00 at 100nm noon 1 7. s a. 50 w. mama muss.» mound-mm. spelled

 
 

 
 
    

   

 

     

 

 

 

 

        
         
    
   
   

      

     
       
       

   
     
    

 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
 

 

  

a ' “"“W‘ I 1. m d ' «.41.? ‘
| rot-119305 . _
"-‘Mm '- c ILm-mlt-E 8' ”NM h ItJ-umuh-f 3 .ur-mh
"hum“ mun ulni i umvhvm ! min. rum-1m
”"6"" and!!!“ i opstknt :- \'lu- uulh's : I-Aln'.‘ np-zh'm i \‘lh mllvn puma
mum Mun- IutrI-j : \‘)‘Wlu- :7unw.--.Iavul._ \ Haul...
3 ﬂy cit-k; - ; nn— ms - u)‘ «A: _ o. — the
«am. ' .u um. m. m ; m. a: § 01 um. - m. m u. u: 01 um.
- ‘ I
H
‘ I
i :w 3m“ hlnhy - _ .
Mme-r341 I J um I I'LSIIII 7 7"‘J3 I I HTJ I “"3“.
Pith-fully H .' 3"" . H.931” ‘II'J I'la.’ : I'D-.969
‘J‘l'\'" I l lulu V H.701? HI.‘ 7 3”." i 19.0‘io
. . . . .. . ..
l'1-umn- II I u: i ll 2w: l .-.'.... 31...: - I taxi
u _ '. Will I H.393? l a::|.1 : | [NJ II :..n
'u'-lm.-h-uv-- 0 HA u..'L-I :--:I.: - 115.1 Mar-u:
. ' —- . .'.
l‘ruu-i-n H mm Ilel'rI I in“ . I I- "9; I
1 In u-- \m' tun-I.) , , i
' :ml u'u: 2mm . H.561 JlLIi
LN)? '3! '2 ‘..'. nu, . . :uu ' ||.l‘."| 984.3.
lNl;:I::--\ l .' :w M7,: i 2-14.: “men : Ms '.
huh-r- ” I MI! I HH.‘ . .‘-'J?.| _ “£1315 _ :QJ 'I
\u-Im: n ' -: um- I : uﬂ.‘ - an; ; ".9199 . .-.~:.« _
'x-m- an I: : ----- use : um ; ".st - m."
hum-l .n... | i 5:1: I -— i 1:33 . $1.!“-
- . -_0 pm _ _. i -— I I , —
' \nlnn) II I I I I I
" t‘ - I'“!.’ :n" M“: - . . . . _ . .4.
k .311." I u-ul . tum I'- 15.: nun mm: 1 mm I: £9103 . nun.)

 

a. Electrical energy output*

b. Actual, 1980

c. Specific fuel consumption

d. Seventh Five-Year Plan

e. Eighth Five-Year Plan

f. Expected effect of efficiency-improvement measures. thousand 6.1
3. Contribution by fuel. thousand OJ

h. Expected specific fuel consumption. 6.1/th
i. ZOO-MU units

j. 100-110 H" units
It. Total for 100-200 “H units

*Expected output of electrical energy in concluding years, 1985 and 1990.

Estimates of the Contribution To Be Made by the Program of Efficiency-Improvement
Measures

To assure Implementation of the proposed efficiency-improvement measures in the
Seventh Five-Year Plan, it will be necessary to provide for expenditures amounting
to almost Res 1 billion, including 135 million foreign-exchange korunas.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inports fro. capitalist countries are proposed only for the Seventh Five-Year Plan,
for equipment which is not yet produced in this country or other socialist countries
and which is not expected to be procurhble in other ways. No inports fro: capital-
ist countries are contemplated for the Bigth Five-Year Plan, because we expect that
the necessary equipment will be provided by domestic access as a result of thd
necessary organizational measures in the mars, ms, m. and the CSR and 883
ministers of industry, or by i-port from socialist countries.

The set of efficuncy-isproveaent nessures creates the conditions for accosplishing
the task of decreasing specific fuel consumption for electric power production in
100-200 H" units by 8 GHP per kWh in 1985 and by 12 GNP per kﬂh in 1990 as cornered
with 1980. The neasures described will result in a drop of 7.2 W per kﬂh in 1985
and 11.2 GNP per km; in 1990. In accordance'with the program of technical and
organizational measures for 100-200 m power station units in the seventh and eighth
five-year plans. and in connection with the progra- of nessures for lower power units,
a model for optimizing the use of all power station capacities has been worked out
with the sin of making use of available fuel and decreasing specific fuel constip-
tion in electric power production of 373 GNP per kWh by 1985, equivalent to 10.9317
GJ/Hﬂh as specified in the guidelines for the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

The trend of specific fuel consumption in 109-200 MI! units in 1970-1980 and the
expected develop-eat through 1985 are shown in Figs 1 and 2 and Table 2.

Fig 1. Specific fuel consuption
for electric power production in
1970-1980, and expected develop-
ment in the Seventh Five-Year
plan, 1981-1985

     

e10 ms w as
--- 1* year

0hr. !. Vin) mime sooth” saliva no vflobu shim!“ entry's

v km» 1970—1930 0 pwgzgny vyvoi v 7. plumes 1901 or
I

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA

 

Pig 2. Specific fuel consumption for
electric power production and delivery
by 100-11" and -200 Ml! units in 1970- f

1980. and expected development in the

Seventh Five-Year Plan. "a 100-254 ungr-
’A .- .

v” Jul. 1: w.‘904:~“*

  
   
 
    

————— .o‘

Combustion. power delivery,

J’s-Lacie? :x-en 200 m units

100-»: mcr‘xi-

’ s-
_____ «v’jp' or a'r: 3.: ”a V

  

J”. 7. 5-7. :09“--

ZOO-W units

 

i —————-——I ' u 0
mo 19?: . as
,. ‘iear

_—.

..V' Mme: pollvauIOOOZOOMwuokdno
9;»: a My“! luv summit v loath "70—1900 0 etc“-
may viva] v 7. pullout

Table 2. Specific fuel consumption in 100-200 m units in 1970-1985.

[(3 1.. 2. Vin. mom ”Mr Hm . but too at no MW 1 km- "Io-1”!
y:

         
 

um mum mm mum b
nun no rm“ palm no douvku

a. Specific fuel consumption for ”mm...“ “mm“ mm

electric power production

I). Specific fuel consulption for
electric power delivery

    

, . 'Maieu , .mm;
510.: mun. hm [alumni "“"c

   

         

   
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
 
  

 

c. Base index :00 mum; d | I I
d. ZOO-MU units mu 11.1.15. x 1mm.
:. ._ . e um: 0.qu
e- 100'“ "“1“ m;- 3.31: 33¢ I 1mm I MI-
f. CSSR electric power systen )ﬂ’h—pﬂo') . 1mm : MI: I 1mm . mu
ul ’blol - I I
Notes: 1. The 1985 plan is based “:3: ’ e I mm I 3 um, I ..
on implementation of the progran m; I ".3713 I 7.3: I :amo . 2:3.
I . ,5 n . 3. ‘ . .
01: proposed efficiency-improvement I::'._..u..'. E “4;:- I um um: , mm
measures for 100-200 to: units. _ - I
2. The 1985 plan is based on 5‘ "3“" f 1‘ is" , , :- 1.1.5.34»-
the directive of the draft Seventh 1:?" 13;“: . ”5, = ”J“,
Five-Year Plan. u... ' 1mm «.on 12.3.2" i
II-.'.--|-Kn‘| I mm: mm mm: I

 

run-mun: '1 — pm. I") 1110!”. x mluecr [mm-um .Mrmf-
um. minnnlluhdcu :ch 100 u :00 it“ Muku.
'y— ”1‘“ In: \Tply‘v-A u Mule:- Mwluu :. 51.0.

11
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
run Uta-u ml. sun. unsu

The proposed efficiency-improvement measures were discussed at the end of 1980 by
the 0883 Governaent Presidium: the MB, in cooperation with other interested min-
istries, is carrying out the proposed program.

The power industry is fully responsible for the implementation of the progra- for
increasing efficiency of fuel use in electric power production which has been
adopted. Accordingly, concrete, specifically targeted assignments which elbody

the efficiency-imrovement measures imposed on the power industry by cssn Government
Decrees Nos 260/ 79 and 290/81 are an inseparable part of the work program of all
power industry organizations which will create the conditions for fulfillment of
the tasks of the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

Even today, however, we must be aware that without close cooperation between the
power industry and all affected departments, it is impossible to accomplish the
task completely. But considerably increasing the efficiency of fuel and energy
use is a task which must be accomplished throughout the national economy.

It is literally today's task. Accordingly, we call for the cooperation of all who
are responsible for partial assignments in the program of efficiency-improvement
neasures aimed at decreasing specific fuel consumption in electric power production
by 100-200 m units, and especially the cooperation of those who will be directly
responsible for the assignment in the area of supplier-purchaser relations and will
be making deliveries to the power industry.

The proposed set of efficiency-improvement measures is still open: it will be neces-
sary to return to it constantly and refinc it as new scientific and technical find-
ings make it possible to solve the problem in question in even better and note
progressive ways.

Accordingly, in addition to being a sun-Ions to the ministries involved to take part,
our call must also be understood as a stallions to all workers and technicians in
power-production facilities to cooperate, to take an active part in the accomplish-
ment of this efficiency improvement program, and thus to help with the complete
fulfillment of the proposed measures.

By their attitude, power industry personnel give great help in showing the way to
solve the problems of improving the efficiency of fuel use. He want them to be
in the forefront on this road, but not by themselves, for the equalizing of both
today's and tomorrow's fuel and energy balance is a matter for us all.

Contest Entries
Prague ENERGETIKA in Czech No 9, 1981 p 1015

[Article: "Selected Entries in the Nationwide Contest 'For Efficient Utilization
of Fuel and Bnergy"']

[Text] Stoppages of zoo-m Power Station Units with sliding Parameters—Brief
Technical Description

The essence of this entry is the introduction of shutdowns of power station units.
i.e., boilers, turbines and other equipment, on the basis of so-called "sliding

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parameters. The principle is progressive, preplanned lowering of steam tempera-
ture and pressure. This will lead to faster cooling of steam piping to the turbine
and of the steam turbine itself; the result will be a shortening of the time re-
quired for free cooling after which it is possible to begin disassembly and repair
work, especially when maintenance work in the turbine is involved. This method is
advantageous when work requiring cooling down of this equipment must be performed
in a power-production unit.

Since such work frequently limits the total amount of time during which the unit is
out of operation, the method will lead to a shortening of stoppages for repair and
maintenance, which will increase the available power in the electrical system. "hen
a ZOO—MW unit is shut down, the lost electric power must always be compensated by
other power stations which operate less economically. Thus implementation of this
proposal will yield a considerable saving of fuel. There will be other savings

in operating expenditures as a result of shorter stoppages.

During the competition period, this measure has already resulted in a demonstrable
saving of 8,734 tons of standard fuel [THP].

More detailed information is available from Eng Jiri Harek, CSE [Czechoslovak
Energetics], Skoda o. p., 300 00 Plzen.

Utilization of Petroleum Fractions and Subsurface Hater During Hydraulic Protection
of Subsurface Hater—-Brief Technical Description

Leakages of raw materials, intermediates and finished products from the Slovnaft
[Slovak Petroleum] national enterprise have polluted the subsurface waters in
Bratislava (in the area of Zitny Island).

Among the alternatives for dealing with the situation, priority was given to the
active aspects of total elimination of the pollution. The solution consists of
development and implementation of a system for protection of the subsurface waters
by means of wells, making it possible to trop the pollutants.

When subsurface waters are pumped from the system of wells, waste oil fractions are
obtained. These are separated and refined in the enterprise's refining facility.
Cold water is used for process cleaning and other purposes, primarily in the hero-
metric condenser for atmospheric-vacuum distillation of petroleum, making possible
a higher vacuum.

This method will yield the following savings:

--a benefit from the use of refined waste petroleum fractions;

--the possibility of ceasing the pumping of surface water from the Danube;

-a decrease in total process water consumption at the AVD VI [atmospheric-vacuum
distillation facility];

-the increased vacuum will decrease the consumption of heating oil in atmospheric-
vacuum distillation of petroleum in the AVD VI.

Actual savings during the competition period have amounted to 11,159 THP, 110 kw of
electric power, Kcs 9.36 million and additional savings of Res 540,000.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()H’K'IAI. NSF. ONLY

More detailed infatuation is available from Eng Mikulas Juscik, Slovnsft national
enterprise, 800 00 Bratislava.

Introduction of Termovit Refractory Fiber in Production-Brief Technical Description

Following successful accomplishment of state research task 8-55-322/006 for Rezistsx,
the production of a new refractory fiber insulating material, Termovit, was begun.
The Eng Harcola's group developed the preparatory, planning and production docunen-
tation, while Eng Prostejovsky's group built the line for producing Termovit fiber
at the Vitkovice enterprise, Plant 1, facility 110.

Before this product was introduced for insulation of metallurgical units, Czecho-
slovakia was dependent on import of refractory cermaics. The production of the
fiber was prepared for in a short time, with maxiaun utilization of existing equip-
ment from the Vistemat line in the production and auxiliary equipment area.

The application of Termovit refractory fiber and products made from it will result
in:

-saving of fuel and energy,

-conservation of steel used for furnace construction,

-saving of conventional types of metallurgical refractory aaterial,
--creation of the conditions for comprehensive automation of furnaces.

The overall social inportance consists of:

-—pioneering development and introduction of a new industrial sector in Czechoslo-
vakia,

-creation of the conditions for ending dependency on import of refractory ceramic
fibers using foreign exchange,

-creation of the conditions for modernizing furnaces in netallurgy, glass produc-
tion, power production. materials heating and the like.

During the competition period, this measure has led to demonstrable savings of
15,000 tons of standard fuel, assumed savings of 3,000 tons of standard fuel, and
savings of Res 3 million of foreign exchange.

More detailed information is available fron Eng Pavel Prostejovsky, Vitkovice, o.p.
703 00 Ostrava.

Limiting Energy Losses in Distribution Piping by Blininating leakage During Opera-
tion-Brief Technical Description

In manifolds for steam, makeup water, synthetic gas, natural gas and other sub-
stances, leaks generally continue until the next possible stoppage of the production
line, unit or entire production facility.

Use of the new Furmanite technology makes it possible to eliminate leakage from
distribution piping during operation. An invaluable benefit is use of this method
in the case of leakage emergencies at high pressures and temperatures.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H": U! Hi I \l Isl ”\l \

This method or eliminating losses can be applied in heavy chemistry, petrochemistry
and power-production enterprises. The design collective has created the conditions
for more extensive utilization of this new sealing method, and it has been effective-
ly put into use in a number of other enterprises.

The resulting savings during the competition period has amounted to 19,861 TIP, worth
Kcs 6,150,710.

More detailed information is available from Stefan Senkar, Duslo national enter-
prise, 927 00 Sale.

Modernization of Steel Purnaces~-Brief Technical Description

Steel production in earlier H3 furnaces Nos 2 and 3 consumed large amounts of energy
because this type of steel furnace has to be heated by imported low-sulfur heating
oil and by coking gas. In addition, even when these units operated in a good heat
regime and were worked at full intensity, the percentage of usable heat remained
relatively low.

The essence of the measures described was replacement of the previous method of pro-
ducing steel in two MB furnaces with capacities of 47 tons per hour each by a tandem
process in one P furnace with a capacity of 170 tons per hour. The expediency of
this solution consists, among other things, in the fact that expanded use of the
already mastered new oxygen process for steel production in hearth furnaces st

NHKG [Klement Gottwald New Metallurgical works] makes it possible to save energy,
and especially fuel.

During the competitionperiod, the measure described has led to s;saving of 15,000
THP and further savings of 15,000 TM? are expected.

More detailed information is available from Eng Frantisek Sotola, “EKG n.p., 700 00
Ostrava.

Modernization of Equipment for Air Separation for Central Oxygen Shop in 0strava--
Brief Technical Description

The essence of this solution is the design modification of certain parts of separator
unit No 35. resulting in greater heat transfer and increased rectification effi-
ciency, and leading to a decrease in the required intake air pressure. Specifically,
this involved modification of the main condenser and regenerator. For this tech-
nology, a new automatic computer control system was developed, making it possible

to optimize oxygen production and thus decrease specific energy consumption, and to
eliminate the danger of icing of the regenerators by excellent stabilisation of their
operation.

Demonstrable savings during the competition period have amounted to 1,804 TIP,
1,120 k", and Kcs 1,456,000 while expected savings amount to 5.615 THP.

More detailed information is available from Eng Jiri Sykora, CSc, FEROX n.p.,
605 00 Decin.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OI-‘I-‘Ii 1“. USE ONLY

Decreasing the Energy Intensiveness of an Opencut Operation-Brief Technical De-
scription

for a nunber of years, the Uranove doly [Uranium Hines] concern in Pribram has
experienced difficulty with a decreasing power factor in the drawing of electric
power fron 110/22 RV switchgear. The usual design for coapensating reactive
energy requires considerable investnent expenditures and a long waiting period for
equip-cut delivery.

A collective of power engineers made use of the findings of certain Czechoslovak
and Hungarian experts and proposed decreasing the voltage in the feed network to
the nominal figure, which decreased the power factor of the electrical energy
drawn for operation of the mine without installation of compensating equipment.

Measurements by 831 [State Power Inspectorate] Prague have confirmed the correct-
ness of the approach taken. It was confirmed that when the voltage was decreased by
1 percent on the switchgear buses from which most of the electricity was drawn for
the uraniua nine, there was a decrease of 10.6 percent in reactive power withdrawn
and a decrease of 0.6 percent in the active electric power. The increased active
component of current results from the considerable decrease in the reactive com-
ponent. In this instance, of industrial consunption of electrical evergy, a de-
crease in the high transformer voltage to the rate value led to an improvement in
the power factor of electricity drawn from the llO-kV line to the switchgear, while
the decrease in the voltageinthe high-voltage circuit did not result in a panne-
tionate increase in current.

The saving resulting from this efficiency-iaproveaent proposal was drawn from the
finding described above. Demonstrable savings of electrical energy compared with
the initial situation have-amounted to 6,050 1!? a year, and 1,388 k“ of electric
power. There is now no need to install the proposed compensation equip-ant, which
would have cost Kcs 2,125,000.

More detailed information is available from Eng Frantiseh Hrudka. Uranove doly.
k.p., 261 00 Pribran.

Use of Leftover Fraction from Butadiene thraction--Brief Technical Description

The national enterprise Slovnaft in Bratislava supplies the national enterprise
Kauchuk [Rubber] Kralupy with BB fractions. from which the latter obtains butadicne.
The leftover fraction, for which there was no market, was burned in field burners.
The competition measure consists of the fact that part of the fraction is sent

back to Slovnaft, which has developed a process for using it in a mixture with
propane; its process produces a propane-butane mixture.

The saving during the competition period has amounted to 5,130 THP and Kca 2,634,000.

More detailed infatuation is available from Eng Ludovit Brezula, N.p. Slovnaft.
800 00 Bratislava.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
J FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Decreasing the Switchgear Voltage at ZANP, Hlada Boleslav-Brief Technical Descrip-
tion

The essence of this competition entry consists of replacing V22 undervoltage pro-
tection devices by type VUZ Devices on 6-kv synchronous electric tutors which drive
turbocompressors for the production of compressed air at AZ“? [Automobile works '
National Enterprise] in Hlada Boleslav.

To prevent compressor stoppages as a result of undervoltsge, the voltage was pre-
viously maintained in the upper part of the permitced range. at about 22.9 kV. The
installation of the new V22 [as published] undervoltsge protection equipment. which
is time-dependent, made it possible to increase the operating safety of the turbo-
conpressors, allowing the operating voltage in the power system to be powered to

22 kV.

More detailed information is available from Jaronir Hrobnik, AZNP n.p., 293 01,
Mlads Boleslave.

COPYRIGHT: SN'l'L. 1981

8480
cso: 2600/76

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I-‘K‘ML USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

MINISTER URGES MORE EFFICIENT USE OF CHEMICALS IN AGRICULTURE
Bratislava AGROCHEHIA in Czech No 9 Sep 81 pp 257-260

[Article by Eng Hiroslav Toman, Scc, minister of agriculture and nutrition of the
C88 in Prague: "Intensificstion of Agricultural Production with the Development
and More Efficient Chemicalization in the Seventh Five-Year Plan")

[Text] The standard volume and quality of food consumption clearly indicate the
level of the economic development in individual countries. In the process of its
building of a developed socialist society, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has
distinctly increased its food consumption and by its current standard ranks among
the foremost countries in the world. Like countries with the most advanced economy
in the world, its consumption of foods of animal original has also increased drama-
tically.

Agriculture represents the leading and most vital branch in food production. This
branch which had been developing over centuries in relative independence from
development in other branches of the national economy is becoming more and more an
organic, integral part of our entire economy. Other branches of the national
economy are participating to an increasingly greater extent in agricultural produc-
tion and the volume-and quality of their deliveries of means and needs of production
are growing. Sciences and technology as sell as an intensive development of the
means of production implemented in step with the economic progress of our entire
national economy are intrinsically changing the character of agricultural production
and development.

According to the program safeguarding the living standard of our population as
stipulated by the 16th CPCZ Congress, the main task of our agriculture at present

is to supply food and raw materials for its production in order to maintain the
already achieved high level of consumption, to continue upgrading its quality and

to achieve self-sufficiency. This most demanding and crucial task must be fulfilled
not only in our agriculture and food production proper but also in branches supplying
the means of production and in the service sector, especially in all fields of
sciences and research dealing with agricultural production and providing material

prerequisites for an efficient growth of its intensity and for higher social pro-
ductivity of labor.

We have at present 0.45 hectares of agricultural and 0.32 hectares of arable lands
per citizen. In every one of the recent five-year plans the acreage per citizen

18
FOR 0F11C1AI.US£!ONL¥
mu ()II'N IAI. IZSI- "All

was reduced by 3 to 4 percent. This loss must be restricted and stopped by all
means available. Uncultivated, barren lands and old, obsolete building lots must
be used for new construction projects and land must be returned to food production
and recultivated at any cost.

The acreage per citizen of agricultural lands in our republic is limited and the
only solution to the program for higher agricultural production is stimulation of
its intensity by more thorough exploitation of all agricultural lands while observ-
ing the principles of environmental protection in individual areas, particularly by
continuously improving the quality and productivity of all means of production and
labor of agricultural workers in every capacity. Scientific-technological develop-
ment focused on higher productivity and efficiency of means of production plays an
extraordinarily important role in achieving more abundant agricultural production.
More productive and efficient means of production (biological, chemical, technical
and other ) help substitute qualitative standards for a higher volume of social
labor inputs.

The Scope and complexity of the tasks aimed at more efficient agriculture, character-
ized in the present stage by the growth and consolidation of centralized and inten-
sified specialization based on cooperation between enterprises, by agricultural

and industrial integration and by industrialization of agricultural production,

make increasingly higher demands on sciences. particularly on accelerated scientific-
:echnological progress in this branch of economy. The growth of intensity in agri-
Cuitural production is predicated on specification. testing and prudent introduction
of comprehensive programs (not merely individual recommendations) in production. all
of which will facilitate the achievement of a qualitatively new, substantially

more productive level of technical methods, technology and organization in plant

and animal production, and thus, also fundamentally better results of the production.

Chemicalization of the processes of production which holds a foremost place in pro—
grams for intensified agricultural production contributes significantly to better
food production, to changes in the technological processes of production, to better
returns of production as well as to comprehensive industrialization and moderniza-
tion of agriculture. In accordance with basic documentation adopted by the leader-
ship of the CPCZ and of the government of chemicalization and for its scientifically
warranted introduction in eVery sector of agricultural production.

Our socialist state has built up an extensive base of production for agricultural
chemicalization; it augments its supplies with imports and at the same time offers
economic advantages for the development of chemicalization in our economy by the
system of investments compensated from state funds.

The supplies of fertilizers per hectare of agricultural lands increased in our
country over the past 20 years from 70 kg of pure nutrients per hectare of agri-
culturul lands in l960 to 255 kg in 1980. i.e.. by 265 percent, and thus, we reached
the level or the most advanced countries in the world which are now experiencing
stagnation and some of them even declining in the sales of fertilizers.

In the CSSR, we provide our agricultural enterprises with more than 30 types of
fertilizers, most of them solid. Although the share of our domestic production in

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deliveries of fertilizers to Czechoslovak agriculture is 84 percent for nitrogenous,
70 percent for phosphatic, and 33 percent for potassic fertilizers. we are importing
raw materials for the production of fertilizers in amounts nearly equal to their
consumption. The prices of imported fertilizers and raw materials for their produc-
tion have skyrocketed and it is, therefore, absolutely necessary to apply fertilizers
in our scientifically managed agrotechnology as efficiently as possible and to
further increase the deliveries of fertilizers as warranted by our production and
economy.

Highly efficient application of fertilizers for superior yields and high quality of
all crops is contingent on agrotechnology in every enterprise and on the whole
technology of production which will reduce losses of such very costly means of pro-
duction to an absolute minimum. Above all, it is necessary to preserve the nutrients
and ample organic matters in stable manure and to improve soil with the aid of tech-
nology in order to render it more fruitful. It is unconscionable to request higher.
socially costly deliveries of fertilizers without utilizing our domestic resources
of stable manure. By the same token, fertilizers must be applied so as to avoid
overfertilization of certain crops and underfertilization of others in some enter-
prises. In addition to wasted fertilizers and higher financial outlays. this is
detrimental to the desirable quality of production and compounds the losses.

The report on the main directions for economic and social development of the C853
in 1981-1985 submitted to the 16th CPCZ Congress envisages that in the Seventh
Five-Year Plan ”the supplies of fertilizers will be up 8 to 10 percent." Soils will
be saturated with potassium (K 0), deliveries of nitrogenous and phosphatic fer-
tilizers will be increased to 50 to 25 kg of pure nutrients per hectare of agri-
cultural 1ands. and in 1985 the amount of delivered fertilizers will be 275 to 280

kg of pure nutrients.

The preconditions and methods for achieving the above-mentioned volume of supplies
are now being specified. Due to considerable demands on energy and raw materials,
it is anticipated that the Seventh Five-Year Plan the increment in fertilizer sup-
plies will be covered exclusively by imports of nitrogenous fertilizers from the
USSR and of phosphatic fertilizers from the nonsocialist states. This solution

is expensive in terms of social costs and foreign exchange and therefore, it must be
balanced by the production in other branches; again, this calls unequivocally for
the most efficient utilization of those means of production.

Supplies of fertilizers are the highest in the Netherlands (about 310 kg of pure
nutrients per hectare of agricultural lands), in Belgium (about 280 kg. although

as early as 1974 they had amounted to more than 350 kg), in the GDR (280 kg) and

in the PRC (approximately 260 kg). The consumption of fertilizers in other countries
is considerably lower (Denmark about 220 kg of pure nutrients, France about 160.
Austria 100 and Italy 80).

The standard yields of grain crops per hectare in the above—named countries are
higher than in the CSSR, particularly in the Netherlands (about 4.8 tons) which has,
however, more temperate climate. In Belgium. Denmark, the FRG, France and Austria
grain crops yield approximately 4.0 tons, which is basically comparable with the
CSSR. The yields of other crops, especially sugar beets and potatoes as well as of
hay are higher and stabler in the above-mentioned countries than in the CSSR. For
instance, sugar beets yield over 40.0 to 45.0 tons, potatoes over 20.0 tons (in the

20

FOR OFHﬂAL USE ONLY
um uI-Ht In. I 5| "\I \

FRO more than 25.0 tons and in the Netherlands over 30.0 tons) and bay of multi-
annual fodder crops over 10.0 to 12.0 tons. The average yield in the 0588 during
the Sixth Five-Year Plan was in the range from 33.0 to 36.0 tons of sugar beets,
about 16.0 to 17.0 tons of potatoes, and 7.0 to 7.5 tons of multiannual fodder crops.

Because fertilizers are vitally important for the growth of intensity in the pro-
duction of agricultural crops, for their best possible utilization it is absolutely
necessary to apply in the future other stimulating factors and elements of agro-
technology, especially more prolific seeds and seedlings; work in the fields and
harvesting must be completed according to the agrotechnical schedule and with
minimum losses. Proper storage is essential and products aade from crops must be
efficiently utilized. Our foremost economic enterprises-united agricultural cooper-
atives and state farms-are spending under similar conditions of production 10 to 10
[sic] percent more for fertilizers per hectare of grain crops than below-average
enterprises. yet their yields are 25 to 60 percent higher. The outlays per hectare
for sugar beets and potatoes are roughly identical in the most progressive enterprises
and in the below-average enterprises (even slightly lower) and yet their yields are
25 to 30 percent higher. Thus. the advanced enterprises apply substantially less
fertilizers per unit of production. due in part to the high standard of their agro-
technology throughout the process of production.

In the course of the Seventh Five-Year Plan. the volume of fertilizers must be in-
creased and moreOVer, manufacturers must also improve their quality for their more
effective application. In particular, they must deal with the problems of the in-
convenient flow rate and granulometric consistency of aanonium nitrate and lime.
with the low nutritional value of simple superphosphate, with the lumping of urea,
and in general. with appropriate packaging, too. Thus. the costs of transport,
storage and application may be cut, and both direct and indirect losses in the
application of fertilizers may be reduced.

Because of insufficient liming of soils, the share of lands with highly acidic re-
action has risen to over 34 percent of our entire acreage. At present about 2
million tons of calcareous materials are used annually for soil liming; before 1985
this amount must be increased to more than 2.9 million tons, of which about 700,000
tons must be covered by blast-furnace slag. Supplies of calcareous fertilizers must
be increased to a required volume by negotiations between ministries, guarantees by
the Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering and by the Ministry of Construction
of both national republics, and by exploitation of local resources. At the same
time. agricultural enterprises must systematically use available local resources

of calcareous materials.

In the Seventh Five—Year Plan. chemical protection of crops demands better, more
extensive and more efficient application which in efficient modern mass production
helps reduce and prevent losses in crop yields, replaces manual labor and facilitates
mechanization and rationalization of harvesting operation and introduction of highly
efficient technology in crop cultivation. The selection of means for crop protection
approved and used at present includes more than 400 products amounting to approxi-
mately 14,000 tons of effective agents. More than 70 percent of the currently con-
sumed pesticides are covered by their supplies. Domestic production covers 59 per-
cent of their total amount, imports and cooperation with the socialist countries
supply 7 percent, and 36 percent are imported from the nonsocialist states.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M Di! (WI-"1.“. USE ONLY

For the Seventh Five-Year Plan, preconditions are set for upgrading the quality of
chemical agents for crop protection supplied in the total amount of about 21 percent,
of which approximately 16 percent is to be from our domestic production, about 88
percent from deliveries based on our cooperation with the socialist countries. and

15 to 16 percent from imports from the nonsocialist states. Average annual deliveries
of those substances will amount to Kcs 2.13 billion. Such material and financial
Outlays are quite substantial; they represent the amount of Res 310 per hectare of
agricultural lands and Res 465 per hectare of arable lands.

It is, therefore, imperative to introduce systematic and conceptual programs which
will deal in the most economical and efficient way with comprehensive crop protection
within the framework of scientifically warranted and determined agrorechnology. Every
principle of environmental protection must be heeded and every operation must be ex-
pertly organized not only to avoid depreciation of the production and to prevent

other losses. but. on the contrary, to prevent all possible losses in quantity and
quality of production. It is of utmost importance that this sector stimulate
scientific research to develop new products and methods of technical application

and to specify comprehensive long-range concepts for crop protection.

Special service enterprises (agrochemical enterprises) are being organized under the
auspices of the 028 [district agricultural administration] as joint agricultural
enterprises for the purpose of introducing chemication in the form of scientific-
ally planned systems of nutrition and crop protection based on the concept for the
development of the production base for socialist mass production. Those enterprises
must markedly expand their own production base during the Seventh FivecYear Plan

and at the same time, increase substantially the scope of agrochemicai services for
basic production enterprises. Agricultural enterprises themselves are now applying
most of the fertilizers and stable manure and conducting about 50 percent of plant
protection operations. About 11 to 20 percent of operations related to crop pro-
tection are performed by STS [state tractor stations]. Agricultural supply and
producement enterprises are the sector in charge of chemical pesticides and lime
fertilizers. These programs are being gradually transferred to agrochemical enter-
prises which used to render them in the past requires skill, efficiency and appropri-
ate investment of all material funds in the form of fixed assets and currency.

The most substantive task agrochemical enterprises face in the Seventh Five-Year
Plan is extensive practical application of the achievement of scientific research
in the sector of crop protection and nutrition, in laboratory research of agricul-
tural primary processing, storage, loading and unloading, manipulation, application
of-fertilizers and calcareous substances, comprehensive protection of agricultural
crips, including storage of agrochemical agents, organization of c.rial operations
performed by the Slovair specialized enterprise, and organization, application and
supervision of better utilization of stable manure.

During the current five-year plan period all the above-mentioned programs cannot be
implemented in their full scope and meet the standards of high quality. Individual
okreses. however, must provide comprehensive preconditions so that these enterprises
may render increasingly more agrochemical services and upgrade the efficiency and
intensity of our agricultural production so as to achieve higher stability of de-
velopment and efficient applicatiOn of chemicals in agricultural production while
observing the principles of environmental protection.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI-‘K'IAI. USE ()Nl.\

improvement of such programs is contingent on the completion of the organization
and upgrading of the central management of crop nutrition and protection, espe-
cially on an efficient systematic management of botanical medical services and on
the development of programs for agrochemical enterprises through regional agricul-
tural administrations and district agricultural administrations. Furthermore,
cooperation with the branches of the Central Control and Testing Agricultural
Institute and the branches of the Institute for the Scientific Management System
must be intensified on every level in order to benefit from the achievements of
chemicnlization and to implement division of labor in the most efficient way.

During the Seventh Five-Year Plan, chemicalization and biological agents must be
throduced in animal production with due perseverance. In this period we shall
oatain new resources of industrially produced fodder supplements, particularly
dried fodder yeast, dicalcium phosphate, lysine, pharmaceutical products, agents
controlling physiological functions of the organism, etc. Sciences and research
are working diligently in this sector according to their research plan outlined
in the state goal-oriented program for biochemicalization and chemicalization of
animal production in the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

During this five-year plan period the available sources of dried fodder yeast
amounting to about 18,000 tons will be augmented before 1985 by 10,000 tons im-
ported from the USSR, where a large enterprise is now under construction in co-
operation with the timber-processing enterprise in Paskov will be increased by
30,000 tons. In addition, the Fosfa national enterprise under construction in
Postorna will supply sources of dicalcium phosphate in the amount of 40,000 tons
before 1985 and in the amount of 50,000 thereafter. During this five-year plan
the production of L-lysine will be gradually increased by 1,000 tons to 4,000 tons.

The hr; task for the Seventh Five-Year Plan, however, is to build new capacities
for the manufacture of those supplements and biofactors for which we have appropri-
ate preconditions. By the same token we must distinctly expand our cooperation
with the USSR and other socialist states for an advantageous division of labor.

Part of the state goal-oriented program for biochemicalization and chemicalization
of animal production involves its guaranteed investment of financial resources and
material requirements. During this five-year plan the manufacture of tylosine (an
antibiotic for mass-scale cattle raising) will receive priority with investments
amounting to Kcs 50 million. Part of the goal-oriented program concerns gradual
supplies of fermenting coceidiostatics, growth stimulators (especially Carbadox),
vitamins C, Bz, 02 and 03, medicated fodder products and highly concentrated bio-
factor supplements. or particular importance is the production of Oeatrophan, which
regulates the reproductive cycle in heifers and cows and gestation in sows according
to the needs of the mass technological production. It is necessary to introduce
chemicalization and biochemicalization in animal production and scientifically con-
trolled animal nutrition and to maintain the required volume and quality of fodders
in order to intensify animal production by the most rational methods.

The program for agricultural development in the Seventh Five-Year Plan, which is ex-
tremely demanding, requires that our food production be expanded from our own re-

sources under the conditions of material and nonmaterial implementation of this pro—
gram. The resources for the development of chemicalization and biologization of our

23

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY
FOR ()I-'I-'I(‘I,\I. I'SF 0V!)

agricultural production. including scientific and technological development, are
among the most vital means for the implementation of this program. It is, therefore,
imperative to use the above-lentioned resources comprehensively and intensively in
order to accomplish in this sector the objectives of the five—year plan.

COPYRIGHT: ALI-‘A, Bratislava, 1981

9004
(:50: 2600/52 DID

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY