FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10484

28 April 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 18/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPO"T

(rouo 18/82)

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS
Klibi Comments on Divisions in Arab "brld
(Chedli Klibi Interview; 13 NOUVBL OBSERVATBUR,
13-19 “at 82) asoseessoasoass-easeasaaaseseesoaseasssess

Arab League's Klibi on Fahd Plan, Sinai Pullout
(Chedli Klibi Interview; LA STAHPA, 23 Mar 82) .........

ALGERIA

Aftermath of Legislative Elections Analyzed
(Al-“WAT” Ale-'MI, 12.18 “If 82) auaaassaaasssossososs

Rabah Bitst Heads APN Again
(AFRIQUE’ASIE, 29 “If-ll Apr 82) cases‘esaaaosssssoseoasl

IRAN
Popularity, Fragility of Revolution Contrasted
(Anal Naccache; JBUNE AFRIQUE, 10 Feb 82) ............n
Regime' s Faults Explained, Understanding Asked
(Hausa Kaidi; JEUNB AFRIQUE, 10 Feb 82) ...............
ISRAEL
Anonymous Palestinian Offers Peace Proposal
(NEH ommx. “.r 82) OOOOOOOCOOOO0.00....IO0.0DIOIOOCOO
MOROCCO

Marathon Chess Game Pits King Against USP?
("RIM-“IE. 29 mt 82) asoeosooolsoooavoosoooooee-sa-
9
Article Outlines 1982 General Budget
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBBNS, 5 Mar 82) ......h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

Schools Reopen But Social Situation Remains Tense
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS, 19 Feb 82) . . . . . . . . . .

Decline in Oilseed Exports Ancribed to Quality
(“ROSES TROPICAUX ET MIMI“, 19 Feb 82) . . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Improved Cement Production
Port Sudan Generetora

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KLIBI COMMENTS ON DIVISIONS IN ARAB WORLD
PH191503 Paris LB NOWBL OBSERVATEUR in French 13-19 hr 82 p 38

[Interview with Arab League Secretary General Chedli ﬂihi by Guy Sitbon:

"The Arab world's Divisions? They Disappear When It Cones to Israel..."
date and place not given]

[Text] LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Is it true that a najor war operation is
being planned in Lebanon? This tine the Israeli Army is apparently aiming
to finally destroy the Palestinian military apparatus by occupying its
west Beirut bases on behalf of the Christian Phalangiats.

Chedli Klibi: We have received intonation on that eventuality from several
sources. It would be a large-scale action which would enable the Israelis
to permanently occupy southern Lebanon. In the short term they would gain
control over the source of the Litani River and they intend to exert more
direct pressure on Lebanon. Will the United States allow them to do that?

Hill the great states watch this new violation of international law without
reacting?

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: How could you resist? The Middle East countries
have never been so divided?

Chedli Klibi: It is necessary to look beyond that appearance. The Arab
world may be divided on the path to follow but it is united on the objectives.
There is no doubt about that. Moreover, every time we have faced a serious
test, we have regained our unity and our cohesion. The ferment you mention
is. of course, worrisome. All the Arab leaders are anxiously wondering

what must be done to unite our states in the face of Israel. But it should
not be concluded that the Arab world is incapable of reacting. That would

be an erroneous judgment and hence would be dangerous for peace. I think

we are moving toward a period of serious tension in the region. Unless

the countries concerned are sufficiently vigilant and take the necessary
measures, we are heading for war.

LE NOUVH. OBSERVATEUR: Morocco is using vast resources against the POLISARIO,

an Arab movement. Algeria and Libya are sinking fortunes into helping the
POLISARIO. Libya is channeling all its energies into fighting other Arabs,

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as in Cafsa. Egypt and Libya have waged war on each other and each is on
guard against the other. In Syria a whole any is fighting the Muslim
Brotherhood. Iraq and Iran are continuing hostilities and are wasting
their strength in them. Those are the facts. The words, however, remain
the same: Israel is the enemy. Will you not eventually have to admit
that is a demagogic slogan?

Chedli Klibi: Allow me to think that it is rather an exaggeration to say
the Arab countries are waging war on each other. Algeria and Morocco are
not at war. In fighting the POLISARIO, Morocco does not feel it is facing
a state. Tunisia and Libya are not at war. The Gafsa operation did not
bring a direct clash between Tunisia and Libya. These are incidents.
dramatic episodes, of course, but their equivalent can be found almost
anywhere in the world. Care must be taken not to make generalizations.

0n the contrary, I think these troubles are now being allayed in some
instances. The awareness of a higher stake is prevailing over state agoisn.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Nonetheless does not that higher stake. Palestine's
fate, strike you as secondary to the very different challenge of the Arab
world's accession to modernity? The Arabs have been using their energies
in a fruitless enterprise for almost 40 years. Will it be necessary to
fight for decades more; will our great-grandchildren see the end of it?

Chedli Klibi: The Arab world, too, is being constantly modernized. The
Palestinian cause is our central concern. It cannot drag on much longer.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: More than 4 years have elapsed since the visit to
Jerusalem and al-Sadat has been killed. Are you revising your verdict?

Docs Arab opinion not realize that Egypt has indeed recovered the Sinai
by diplomacy where no war had restored it?

Chedli Klibi: If we were to generalize that argument, Syria would have to
follow Egypt's example and do the same to win back the Golan Heights....

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: of course, why not, since it wrks?

Chedli Klibi: If they did that, what would remain of the Palestinian cause?
If everybody takes back his stake, how can the battle be continued? That
is the significance of the Arab front against Zionist aggression and
expansion. The Palestinian problem was the cause of the occupation of

the Sinai and the Golan Heights. So I do not think President al-Sadat's
approach was correct. What he should have done was tackle the central
problem. And if you want to avoid serious disturbances. you in the West
should also have a clear view and intervene in the right direction.

Real solutions exist.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Is Francois Hitterrand's approach the right one?

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chcdli Klibi: His speech to the Knesset struck me as ambiguous. It is
remarkable that your president has recognized that peace and justice
cannot be handled by proxy. Camp David was a violation of that rule.

But I am disappointed that there was no full and complete recognition
of the PLO and that Hitterrand kept silent on the problems of Jerusalem,
the Golan Heights and so forth.

LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR: Are the Palestinians now prepared to resign them-
selves to partition?

Chedli Klibi: I think they have decided to accept it. For them the most

important thing is a homeland, a state, a flag. They have had enough of
humil iations, they would really like a home.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: So what guarantees will there be for Israel?

Chcdli Klibi: That is the wrong way of posing the question. There is no
question of begging the Palestinian state from Israel. We have a UN
decision which recognizes that they have that right. It just has to be
implemented. On what territories? 0n the West Bank, in the Gaza Strip
and in the Arab part of Jerusalem, Palestine's capital. Contacts between
the two peoples will begin in Jerusalem and then there will be cooperation.
The Palestinians will then have no desire to wage war on Israel. may will
be totally absorbed in their development. They will work niraclea with
their cadres and Arab capital, as the Israelis have done in the Negev.
What about security? All the mcessary provisions can be made. Initially

an international force would guarantee the two states, pending a better
solution.

LE KOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Is Egypt's return to the Arab League close?
Chedli Klibi: Close is perhaps not the right word. It is possible.
President Mubarak is taking a different tone. He has had the wisdom to

refrain from any attack on the other Arab countries.

LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR: Is Saudi Arabia pressing more for Egypt's return?

Chedli Klibi: Everybody is in favor of it. I do not known single country
which does not want it. The whole problem is how to bring it about.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Le Nouvel Observateur"

CSO: 4500/168

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVA 031'].th 031'. URL]

Inn-ARAB AFFAIRS

ARAB LEAGUE'S KLIBI ON FAHD PLAN, SINAI PULLOUT
”1140851 ‘l‘urin LA STAMPA in Italian 23 Mar 82 p 5

[Interview with Arab League Secretary General Chedli Klibi by Igor Man in
Tunis: "On Behalf of 130 Million Arabs": date not given]

[Excerpt] [Question] I believe that the first point on the agenda for
the next Arab League Council meeting is the "conflict" between the
United States and Libya....

[Answer] I believe that the present line pursued by Washington is not
exactly the best, since it is based on erroneous options, the United States
is mistaken if it believes that it can have no friend in the region.other
than Israel. All the Arab peoples, all of them, would ask for nothing better
than to cooperate with the United States, within full trust and dignity,

as long as the United States remains consistent with its principles of
freedom and justice. Washington condemns the invasion of Afghanistan. Very
good. But what is happening on the West Bank and in Arab Jerusalem? And
what about the suffering of the Arabs living under Israel?

[Question] But there is a problem, Mr Secretary: Israel feels threatened
with destruction....

[Answer] Nobody wants to destroy Israel. It is a ruse for influencing world
public opinion, particularly in Europe. Israel does not intend to accept a
Palestinian state--not because it fears its own disappearance but purely

and simply because it wants to [as printed] west Bank and Gaza and more

than that. so as to realize Begin's biblical dream of a greater Israel. You
cannot trample a people because Mr Begin wants to realize a biblical dream
that is vaguer than anything. Politics does not consist of dreams. Peace

is built under the banner of realism and historical honesty.

[Question] Hhat are the prospects for the Arab peace plan. known as the
"Fahd plan," following the failure at Pes?

[Answer] The adjournment of that meeting was a wise decision taken by the
king of Morocco. Since that day the dialogue among the various Arab countries
has continued and gradual progress is being made toward an agreement. This

is my belief, rather than a definite fact, but if the inter-Arab dialogue
continues on the recent wavelength I believe that we could see a resumption
of the Fes sumit before the summer.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Nevertheless there are countries that cannot swallow point
seven of the Fahd plan, which implies the recognition of Israel.

[Answer] Neither Syria nor the PLO nor Iraq rejects point seven, which
ratifies the right of all peoples of the region to live in peace and
security. In any case this is consistent with UN Resolution 242, which
is accepted by all the Arab countries. Some problems do arise with
regard to implementing this principle in a fairly flexible plan. This is
why Syria, for instance. says that it is not enough to suggest. But
that it is necessary to negotiate.

[Questan One final question: 25 April is approaching. It is a date
to mark, a historic turning point....

[Answer] For us Arabs it will not be a fateful day. For Egypt, if all goes
we11--and we would like to be optimistic--25 April will lead to the libera-
tion of the final portion of its national territory. This is undoubtedly
an important factor. But for all other Arabs it is different: Egypt's
recovery of territory that belongs to it will take place at the cost of a
policy that has weighed heavily, and weighs heavily, on the future of the
Arab nation. Al-Sadat, who is now in a better world, paid with expulsion
from the Arab family for having agreed to negotiate on behalf of the
Palestinians-who did not authorize him to do so-the so-called autonomy,
which is an outrage, a swindle, a tragic fraud. It is not for that that
the Palestinians have been fighting and suffering for years.

The date 25 April reminds us of disappointments and very profound suffering.
Al-Sadat's big mistake was to pay with his dignity. Now that he is at

rest, above, we are suffering the consequences of his policy. Egypt and
President Mubarak are bearing the brunt of that policy. A trip of Arab

land is returning to its rightful owners, but what about the Golan,
Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza? And what about the rights of the
Palestinian people, deprived of their land? There is a difficult path ahead
of us, along which we must be able to depend on Europe's help. We trust in
France's return to consistency and trust in Italy's role: I was encouraged
by my latest meeting with [Italian Foreign] Minister Cololnbo, a man who
tackles problems with an open mind, unselfishly.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bditrice LA STAMPA S.p.A.

cs0: 4500/1198

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AFTERNAT“ OF LEGISLATIVE ELECTIONS AﬂALYZED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 265,12-18 Mar 82 pp 22-23

[Articlez "Legislative Elections in Algeria: What Continuity? what Renovation?
The New National Assembly Dedicates a Stage of Doing Business with the Private
Sector That is More Flexible and More Liberal"]

[Text] Legislative elections were held in Algeria under the slogan of "continu-
ity and renovation." The new National Assembly will usher in a new stage in the
course of democratic practice. especially since a large ratio of young people
and university [graduates] are entering the council [or the first time. One

oi the most prominent features of [this] stage is to be the flexible and liberal
way oi doing business with the private sector.

Hundreds oi thousands ol voters went to the polls last week to elect 28] depu-
ties irom among 863 candidates. These elections had several characteristics
among which were [the following]:

I. Preparations for the elections took place under the supervision of the
Algerian Liberation Front party.

2. Candidates were nominated within the party and amidst the ranks of party
lighters. Party structures irom Kasma to the Political Bureau took part in this
process.

J. The process oi evaluating the candidates did not turn out to be in iavor oi
those who are considered political supporters oi Col Mohamed Saleh Yahyawi. for—
mer executive coordinator of the ruling Liberation Front party.

a. The Berber Tizi-Ouzou region responded coolly to the elections to show its
dissatisfaction with the candidates.

The slogan under which Algeria's iourth legislative elections since independence
MOIO hold was "continuity and renovation." independent Algeria had its first
Jurlidmcnt in 1963 during the days oi the provisional government. The parliament
too was a provisional body that was swept by political struggles. with the with-
Irawal oi the provisional government, parliament disappeared from the political
Sccnc- During the administration of President Ahmed Ben Bella parliament was
given a prominent position in political life. At that time Hr al-Haj Ben lla was

FOIiHﬂﬂCIALINﬂEONlY
Ft"l0FFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY

the speaker oi the National Assembly and the second official in the Liberation
Front party. However. this aSsembly was not to last longer than its predecessor.
One year alter it was established. it clashed with the men of 19 June. and the
experiment ended just as the men who had carried it out did: in jail and under
house arrest.

From 19 June 1965 to 5 March l977 the Revolutionary Council which was headed

by houari Boumedienne was the highest power [in the land]: it provided guidance;
it enacted legislation; and it controlled [everything]. After 12 years the late
president realized that the role of a legislative-institution was more than
necessary to ensure the stability of the regime's institutions and to safeguard
the iuture. Algerians then asked Mr Edgar Four. who had been speaker oi the
French parliament for many years. for much advice regarding the restoration of
liie In parliament.

0n 5 March 1977 a new experiment began, and the National People's Assembly was
restored to political life. That body represents the highest of people's assem-
hlies that are elected. in an address to the nation delivered by then President
Houari Boumedienne iron the podium of the National People's Assembly, the presi—
dent said. "The installation of the National People's Assembly is a political
event in a country tiat abounds with political events. it is one day in the life
oi a nation which each one of us feels is a significant moment not because it
was "at expected—-ior it was included in the preamble to the 19 June Declara-
tion--but because it represents within the same course the culmination of the
national eiiort. At the same time it marks the beginning of a new revolutionary
spirit."

The iirst action undertaken by the National People's Assembly in its first preli-
minary session was to organize the assembly and to enact a law that would govern
the operations of its agencies. The second session dealt with the state's mono-
noly oi foreign trade. The 1978 spring seSsion was truly considered the session
ol the general basic law (or workers' rights. while the fall session of the same
year was coniined to [consideration of] the financial law and the budget, which
is considered the subject oi every fall session.

The 1977 [all session was the tirst actual session in which the National
People's Assembly began to pursue its legislative function after having estab-
lished its foundations and devised the legislative framework for its actions in
the iirst session.

The Finance Law was considered the first bill presented to the Assembly. It
sought to achieve these objectives:

1. To light all speculations that affect prices.

2. To double the mobilization oi available resources and especially to increase
savings.

3. To exercise stern control over operations in the nation's various means and
capabilities.

During the same session the Assembly also considered the state's foreign trade

7
FORiOFEKJAl.USI:OPﬂUY
nanopoly law. The Assembly ratiiied the law. thereby establishing two principles:
I. The state's monopoly oi loreign trade; and
2. The elimination oi middlemen in foreign trade operations.

Where Are the SONATRACH Dollars?

urieily the National People's Assembly held nine regular meetings during its
lirst legislative session. These meetings were preceded by a preliminary one.

An emergency meeting was also held at the request oi two thirds of the members
oi the Assembly. it was devoted to the subject oi Algerian emigration to France.
Hhen President Houari Boumedlenne was dying the assembly met in an emergency
session to establish the iact that the president's position was vacant and to
appoint Mr Rabah Bitat. speaker at the National People's Assembly President

ior 60 days as stipulated by the constitution.

During that legislative period--trom 5 March 1977 to 5 March l982--l78 motions
were made in the Assembly by the secretaries of permanent committees; 7,263
motions were made by assembly members; and there were 1,766 roll calls about
various points that the assembly had dealt with. Also 1.798 amendments were
approved: 105 oi them were made by the government; 654 were introduced by
Assembly members: and 939 were introduced by the committees that are responsible
for such matters. This is in addition to the amendments and the motions that
were made at the last session.

During the previous legislative term members of parliament asked members of

the government 128 questions: 103 of these questions were directed to 22 members
ol government. Government responded to 95 of those questions before the deadline
set by the constitution in most cases, and 8 questions remained unanswered.
During the legislative term the assembly formed a committee to investigate the
ﬁnNATRACH Agreement with the U.S. El Paso Company. Serious charges had been

made against Mr Siad Ahmed Chazali, iormer minister of energy who washed his
hands oi the charges against him and of responsibility for the agreement in

a bulletin he distributed to members of the Central Committee. This action pro-
voked President Chadli Benjedid, so he relieved him of his duties as minister
and then suspended him from the Central Committee. He also suspended his "god-
'JLhCI'" Abdessalam Belaid lrom the Central Committee. The Central Committee
asked bnth oi them "to return all party and state property and documents" which
they had in their possession.

During the court investigation astounding information about the agreement. which
was neither equitable nor lair. was revealed. it turned out that scores oi mil-
lions oi dollars had been turned over to numerous Algerian oiiicials so they can
Ipprovc the agreement in 1969. .

_. is known that Mr Abdessalam Belaid was the one in charge ol Algeria's all

policy during that period. He had special ties with the United States of America
with whom Algeria signed the large gas deal tor a period of 23 years.

INMR(“NHCIA1.USE(IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nespite the earnestness oi the investigative committee, which was formed by the
National People's Assembly to investigate the gas deal, those who were impli-
cated in the deal on the highest levels were not unequivocally condemned. At
one oi the Assembly's closed meetings which were held to discuss the deal, Mr
(Boualnm Ben Mamouda), who was then minister of the interior, took out a recor—
ding device irom his pocket and told members of the Assembly, "Everything is
here on tape."

No one yet knows what is on the tape because none oi those present asked to
listen to .t, and this concluded the file.

From Where Did You Get This?

Alter this cmnnittee the National People's assembly brought up the question of
oversight ior discussion. and it presented for consideration the question, "From
where did you get this?"

huiine too 1979 iall session the Assembly submitted three texts for discussion.
rhe Iirsr had to do with the oversight practiced by the National People's
Assembly.

The second had to do with the oversight practiced by the Accounting Council; and
the lhiiﬂ had to do with the oversight practiced by the Financial Inspection
Orlice. However, the latter text was withdrawn at the last minute.

When it was approved the National People's Assembly Oversight Law included 42
articles according to which the purpose of the oversight that was to be prac-
tired hy the Assembly was to ascertain--just like other national institutions-—
that responsibilities were being met; that decisions were being implemented;
that the national economy was being operated soundly; that efforts were being
made to avoid shortages and appearances of neglect; and that manipulation or
embezzlement of the state's funds or infringement upon the economic wealth of
the nation did not take place.

Therelorc. extreme importance was given in 1980 to the Accounting Council, and
its alvdh oi operations in overseeing the iinances oi the state, of the party,
ul local and regional groups and oi all kinds ot socialist organizations were
determined.

The most important question that came up during the discussion oi the issue

ol oversight and embezzlement oi the state's funds was that ol applying the
statement. ”From where did you get this?" Application oi that statement meant
retroactive oversight. Members oi parliament suggested three tormulas lor
(auditing people's records]:

I. niiieiais were to be audited from the beginning of independence until 1970.
2. People were to be audited as ol l954.

3. Eve-yone who has an illegitimate fortune or a fortune whose source was sus-
pect. beginning with the last 7 years, was to be audited.

9
Ftﬂl(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂﬁLY
1L0 government's representative and chairman of the Accounting Council then
41s Hr Ahmed Talib ibrahimi who rejected the three proposals. Addressing the
members oi parliament he said. "The auditing must begin from the reality oi
Algeria in 1980 and not before.“ Actually. people were not asked to account
In! the lantastic tortunes they had "earned." President Chadli Benjedid once
Maid. "it those people had worked day and night, and if they had been assisted

by mortals and demons. they would not have been able to amass those fortunes
which they did amass."

The National People's Assembly records the significant role of the general basic
workers' law. the customs law. the ioreign subjects employment law. the pro-
lessional organizations law. the law for relinquishing the state's property

and the media law.

The Language Problem

About some at the problems that the Assembly is lacing one of the members of
parliament says. "A basic article determines that the language spoken in the
Assembly is the Arabic language. but only two thirds of the members of parlia-
ment speak Arabic fluently. ln some cases the government sends us bills in
French. and we have to spend a certain amount oi time to have them translated.
Speaking oi the time factor. most of the bills that come up in front of the
National People's Assembly are not brought up at the proper time. This is reflec-
ted in the content oi the laws; so don‘t be surprised if you find some weakness
in numerous articles oi the law."

Readiiiuu the written queries that were addressed to the government, there are
some questions that are still unanswered. The laws did not determine the mea-
suirh that must be taken in case answers are delayed or if answers to the Assem-
bly‘s questions 10 not come at all.

At any rate the Assembly's national and international experience has been
positive. Undoubtedly. the new assembly will benefit from the pros and cons
ul the previous stage.

{he legislative elections which took place this March 5 took place under the
blugnn ol "continuity and renovation." Algerians comment on this by saying that
legitimate continuity manifests itself in the fact that freedom fighters are
taking part in the Assembly. it is because oi their lengthy experience of
strucele and their sacrifices for the homeland that they realize full well the
meaning oi independence. sovereignty and siding with the masses (61 percent of
the members oi the assembly [are freedom iighters]).

The renovation lies in the youthlul eiement--under 40 years. The ratio of this
gluup amounts to 55 percent oi the total members of parliament; 53 percent of
them are university graduates.

rulers had to choose from three candidates. This means that there were three
tanlidates lul each parliamentary seat. The observation that one cannot keep out
oi une's mind is that the new assembly has more than 150 new members most oi
whum are young people. Therefore. the assembly may produce a new experience that
is more ilexible and more likely to deal with the exigencies of the new stage.

10
FORiOFFKJA1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One "I the Iirst bills pending in iront oi the new National People's Assembly is
the Private Sector bill which may be one oi the decisive bills oi the new stage.
une oi its iunctions is to reconsider the economic Structure of Algeria in many
uI the vital sectors. Changing the economic structure would necessarily change
the political skeletons. agencies and StruCtures. This would begin with the
introduction of new professional organizations. such as the association of manu-
iacturers. the association oi merchants and Others. into all the structures

ol the Algerian Liberation Front party.

The question remains: to what extent will these associations fit the agency oi
the party. and how inlluential will they be in the making of political deci—
sions? Who will guarantee that they will not turn into political platforms? In
the charter oi the Central committee on whose basis the Private Sector Law will
be based the Central Committee states that:

“it appreciates the real and numerous contributions made by the private sector
in building the homeland. and it affirms the need to correct the negative
aspects that tarnish its development and present condition. Based on its in-
sights and responsibility the Central Committee calls for the creation oi all
IaVorable circumstances so that the real capabilities and significant resources
it owns can be harnessed to serve national development.“

In another paragraph [the Central Committee] "calls upon the agencies oi the
state to prepare and put into application a complete cohesive framework that
would prod. direct and oversee the development oi the private sector under cover
oi taking into account the diiections oi the National Charter. the Constitu-
tion. the provisions oi party congresses and the resolutions oi the Central
Committee. it would do that and honor the objecrives of national development
plans as well.

"The Central Committee accordingly requests that a concrete text of a genuine
model be lormulated ior the conduct oi the private sector. This would be guarded
on the basis oi rights and duties and, at the same time. would allow a purge

ol rhe present situation. lt would allow the creation of an atmosphere that
would encourage initiatives that are socially and economically beneiicial."

Ii is certain that the new National People's Assembly will begin the stage be
being more liberal in Jealing with the private sector. it the early days oi the
assembly under the administration oi the late president Houari Boumedienne paid
attention to the state's monopoly ol foreign trade and to the enactment of the
general basic workeis' law. attention during the administration oi President
Chadli henjedid will focus on reiurbishing the structure [oi the country] irom
the inside by issuing the Family Law and the Private Sector Law so as to estab-
lish the loundations oi the new stage iollowed by that of the emergency congress
next summer .

COPYRIGHT: I981 AL-NATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C50: h50h/2kl

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RABAH BITAT HEADS APR AGAIN
Paris AFRIQUE—ASIE in French 29 Mar-11 Apr 82 p 16

[Text] Officially opening its second session, the Algerian people's national
assembly, elected on 5 March 1982, again chose Rsbah hits: as its speaker.
Bitat, who won reelection in his home district of Bouira, 100 kilometers from
Algiers. now 50, is one of the historic leaders of the PLN who, on 1 November
195A, took part in the opening of the armed liberation struggle of the Algerian
nation. As Minister of State for Transport from 1965 to 1977, he was elected
president of the first people's national assembly in 1977 and, in 1979, made

a member of the PLN’s political bureau by the party's congress.

The Algerian Assembly got right down to work. The five standing committees
of the legislature have been installed, and their respective staffs chosen.

In the course of a visit to the new deputies the day after their official
installation, President Chadli Ben-Djedid spoke at length of the various
aspects of the phase his country is now going through. The APE consists of

281 deputies, all elected on 5 March 1982, in elections that evoked a rela-
tively large voter turnout: 71.76 percent by official count, as opposed to
72.65 percent who voted in the 1977 elections. This is indicative of Algerians'
deep commitment to parliamentary government, hardly surprising in light of the
keen interest they took, particularly in the final months of the last Parlia-
ment, in the democratic debates over issues crucial to the nation's future.

Another remarkable feature of these elections is that they markedly altered
the makeup of the legislature: only 68 percent of deputies of the 136 running
for reelection were returned.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique Aaie

6182
C50: 6519/156

. 12.
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE10NLY
POPULARITY, FRAGILITY OP REVOLUTION WMRASTED
Paris JEWE AFRIQUB in French “0 1101. 10 Feb 82 pp 35-38
[Article by Anal Naccache: "The Imbile Revolution")

[Excerpts] Politically isolated, attacked on its southern borders,
opposed even within its own territory, the foundations of the young
Islamic Republic of Iran are tottering. Some people reproach it
for not having achieved anything substantial; others feel that,

all things considered, this revolution is no more bloodthirsty

than any other. Whatever the case, Khomeyni's Iran is celebrating
its fourth anniversary and still depends on a single man: perhaps
never has a government been both so popular and so fragile.

Three years ago on 1 February 1979. the people of Tehran hysterically welcomed
a 79-year-old man who had returned from exile to take control of their destiny
in the name of God. the Koran and justice.

0n 1 February 1982, revolutionary Iran is running out of steam on the eve of its
fourth year. Some people even have no qualms about saying that it has already
run out of steam. Blood is flowing not only on the front of the war which the
country has been fighting with Iraq for 16 months, but also in the'prisons. from
the victims of firing squads, from prisoners being struck down by an Islamic la!
which cOuntless Moslems reject, and in the streets, from the victims of assassina-
tions, from government officials being killed by the bullets of young militants
who have gone back into hiding and who refuse to allow them a monopoly of power
-..‘nlch they consider to be seriously corrupt.

Esolated from the settling of scores at high levels, the average Iranian is growing
colder and colder. more and more hungry. Isolated from the life of nations, Iran
is confined to an isolation which was meant to be magnificent but which is only. '
strangling the country. And the sinister Savak has itself been replaced by God's
secret police, Sevama, about which no one dares to admit that it has probably

:znrpassed the horrible crimes of the shah's executioners.

The country is believed to be on the brink of civil war, but this does not take

into account two essential factors: the popularity of Khomeyni and the goverment
which he symbolizes among the co-on people of Iran, and the effective repression

of mounafikin (hypocrites) by the judicial apparatus, the police and the Guardians

'13
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Revolution. For the following of the leaders endorsed by the imam is still
undeniably there. Many Iranians, who initially supported Khomeyni, have since
deserted this denatured revolution. But this is not true of the working classes
and moustafizin (underprivileged), among whom feelings of patriotism and revolu-
tionary legitimacy are one and the same. as was apparent when hundreds of thousands
of people swept into the streets following Rajai's assassination and especially

barely touched the masses.

Undeniably popular. the revolution is nevertheless extremely fragile. At 82 years
old, Khoneyni remains its sole personification, the keystone and supporting legend.
No strong institution has emerged despite the existence of the PRI [Islamic Republi-
can Party]. which has more or less survived Beheshti's death but which would not
withstand the supreme leader's disappearance. This disappearance is the major

and the present government, which is now beginning to fear their power. In the
case of the opposition. the savage repression which has rained down since June
on the mojahedin—-4,000 have reportedly been executed and 6,000 inprisoned-even
in their places of refuge in rebel provinces. has put an end to the reaarkable

their leader. Hass'ud Rajavi, who has joined Bani Sadr and his "provisional govern-
ment“ in exile. The guerrilla attack which c1ained'55 lives in the city of Anal
on 26 January was apparently not their doing.

Anaerronistic monarchists and republican laity constitute the remnants of a frag-
mented opposition that will not be able to mobilize many people. Then from where

In the opinion of some experts, the future belongs to Bonapartism: The savior

will likely come from the army or the pasdaran apparatus. Others see nothing

after Khomeyni except chaos and the specter of a hideous civil war. For the time
being, and without speculating about a future that is still not apparent. several
observations may be made. Except for the overthrow of the shah, the Iranian revolu-

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from the former regime, it has become frozen in total immobility. as evidenced
also by the absence of any plan for political reform worthy of the one. This
astounding inability has been more or less offset for 3 years by every denagogic
stratagen. including the affairs of the hostages and naming the "Great Satan"

as well as the insane repression in which the governnent has indulged almost
since its inception and which has had a dual effect of seduction and dissussion

on the people.

It is true that there are only few barriers between this situation and actual
chaos. Yet it is in such a balance, which is unstable by definition. that
the Iranian revolution is celebrating its fourth anniversary, in a country

in which everything still remains to be changed.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11915
CSO: 4619/65

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIHE'S FAULTS EXPLAINED, UNDERSTANDING ASKED
Paris mm AFRIQUE in French No 1101, 10 Feb 82 pp 36-37
[Article by Hamza Kaidi: "The Case for Khomeyni"]

[text] In September 1978, demonstrations in every Iranian city took on the scale
of a popular uprising. The formal diagnosis of experts in the United States:
The shah will weather the storm He has been through others! IGmeyni? Come
now! How could that faraway octagenarian threaten a government which relied on
an army of 450,000 well-equipped men who were superbly trained and advised by
nearly 105,000 Americans? Four months later, a special White House envoy urged
the shah to leave Iran for a "long vacation." And the unbelievable occurred:
Khomeyni made his trimphant entry into Tehran on 1 February 1979.

In that struggle of clay against iron, an essential factor had been overlooked:
an entire people's faith in a religion which orders its followers to accept no
yoke and to believe that dying for the trimph of truth and justice means going
to a better world.

For Moslems the world over, for most of the "accursed of the earth," the February
1979 victory in Iran inediately took on symbolic value. Thanks to that victory,
hope was reborn. Peoples becme aware of their power. Above all. it heralded

a real rebirth of Islam after the failure of imported or imposed ﬂestern and con-
munist doctrines. Three years later, in February 1982, there is talk of disaster.
Experience shows that few revolutions have not been slandered or dragged through
the mud, at least for a while, and the Iranian revolution is no exception to the
rule. It is even one of those which have met with the greatest hostility--a1though
hailed, at the time of its victory, by the very ones who had helped to strengthen
the imperial regime in one way or another. They thought that everything w0u1d
fall back into place and that they could adapt to the situation.

But in Tehran, they had decided otherwise. This was not just a bid for power

in which they would be satisfied with changing governments, without touching the
structures, the causes of all of society's ills. This revolution would not be
based on a Marxist or Western doctrine, but on the principles of authentic Islam,
as defined by the Koran and tradition. Heresy! How is it possible to govern

in the late 20th century according to laws dating back 1,400 years?

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We forget that Islam "is, above all, a religion of life. that the Koran contains
100 times as many verses on social problems as on subjects of devotion; that

of a series of 50 volmes on Hoslem tradition. only 2 or 3 deal with prayer

and man's duty to God. Some are concerned with morals, while all the rest

deal with society. economics, law, politics. Islamic laws and principles

are concerned with every jurisdictional aspect of justice. transactions.
sanctions, even wartime and peacetime procedures and problems of international
law. etc."*

This return to Islamic sources bothers some Iranians and irritates a good
number of foreign powers, both large and small, especially Arab governments,
which fear the spread of the Iranian example-didn't Khomeyni say that all
tyrannies must be combated and that Islam does not recognize royalty? The
Soviets also fear the spread of such an example. because their republics

in central Asia contain more than 40 million Hoslems who have 1,001 reasons
for feeling bullied by a Marxism which restricts or prohibits membership

in the party and bars all religious followers from any promotion.

As for the Americans, they can only resent the Islamic Republic's leaders.
Didn't they huliliate the United States in the worst way and give it the
worst insult in its history when they took its diplomats hostage, when they
made the United States publicly acknowledge its responsibility for the hard-
ships of Iranians under the shah. and when. above all. they jeopardized U.S.
interests? Other western countries resent Khomeyni for his "ingratitude":
Didn't the ayatollah find asylun in their countries at the end of his exile?
Shouldn't he have rewarded them by giving than at least part of the place
formerly occupied by the Americans? Everyone has banded together to isolate
the Islamic revolution and to tarnish its reputation. Some have fomented
unrest by supporting autonomist movements. The Arabs have outdone themselves
in this regard. Forgetting the solidarity which the yomg republic expressed
for the Palestinian cause, they have joined hands to bring down the Khomeyni
regime. Encouraged and supported by its peers. Iraq took action by launching,
in September 1980. a war which, according to its predictions. would reduce
Iran within a few days.

Alas! Such estimates have proven false. The Iranian Arabs whom they were
trying to liberate from the "Persian yoke" welcomed the invader with gunshots.
A good percentage of autonomists turned their backs on the Iraqi sirens to
support the Islmic Republic--to such an extent that the Iraqis could make

no progress and had to retreat. Iran's situation is definitely not bright,
but it is far from being as dark as described by the Western media, whose
sources dried up with the outbreak of the Iranian-Iraqi conflict and which
have had to rely mainly on the regime's opponents for their information.

Blood has certainly been spilled in futile quarrels, which is deplorable.
All opponents are not mounafikin (hypocrites) who think only of destroying
the Islamic Republic. But how is it possible not to condemn those who have
stepped up their assassinations and sabotage without considering the bloody
war against their country or the occupation of Iranian territory.

*Khomeyni: "Pour un gouvernement islamique" [For an Islamic Goverment]
(Course taught at Najaf, Iraq, in 1969). French edition: Fayolle publishing
company, Paris.

17

FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let's not accuse the Iranian officials of vampirisml What country at war

has spared spies. saboteurs and agitators? what penalties have been inflicted
on the perpetrators of such crimes in so-called civilized countries? In
France, communist workers who wanted to express their disapproval prior to

the USSR entering the last world war (1939-45) and who sabotaged military
materiel. were shot. In Tunisia. the allied armies executed natives who

had been accused of collaborating with the enemy because they had sold bread
to German soldiers.

In any case. what foreigner can claim the right to judge the Iranian leaders
or to give them lessons in morality? Less than anyone. the Americans, who
exterminated the redskins, are responsible for numerous genocides in Vietnam

and many crimes committed. with their support, by tyrants in Latin America
and elsewhere.

Have the ayatollahs plunged Iran into a bloodbath? According to the most
credible source (Amnesty International), the number of executions which have
taken place since the shah was overthrown is probably about 3.700, which

is slightly less than the number of "disappearances" caused by General Hassu's
paratroopers during the battle of Algiers alone. And not even one-twentieth
the number of persons executed. with or without due process of law, when
France was liberated in 1944. But let us be done with this macabre accounting.

Let us simply ask ourselves why there is so much uproar over the disappearance
of a few baha'i leaders and so much indifference. if not satisfaction, concern-
ing the death of 72 Iranian leaders in the attack on Islamic Republican Party
headquarters (June 1981) or the death of President Rajai and his prime minister
(August 1981). Isn't the blood of some people the same color as the blood

of others?

But then there is the economy. some people will say. In this regard, Iran's
situation is hardly bright, that's for sure. But was France's situation
bright following the revolution of 1789 or was that of the USSR in the early
1920's? Shouldn't it also be admitted that it takes long years to recover
from a war? So then, how is it possible to judge a country in the midst

of a war?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11915
680: 4619/65

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANONMle PALESTINIAN OFFERS PEACE PROPOSAL
Tel Aviv NEW OUTDOOR 1n Enguoh No 2, Pier 82 pp 39, 69

[Text]

In an attempt to establish peace bet- ' There is little doubt that the proper exit for

ween Arabs and Israelis, the following proposal
was formulated early in 1974, i.e., before
Sadat's historic visit to Jerusalem.

The proposal in itself mayseemimaginary.
But at the time Sadat's visit was also thought of
as an imaginary step. Yet it did happen and it
did release many suppressed ambitions for
peace and pushed them up to the surface. de-
monstrating that there are many people on
both sides who really want to live together in
peace.
This proposal, in my opinion. presents a
fair solution to the main points of difference:
namely. I. Existence, security and recognition
of Israel; 2. Establishment and recognition of
the Palestinian entity; 3. The status of Jeru-
Silent.

As for the Jews, they will have the state
they have dreamed of; it will be theirs to do
with as they wish. however they wish.

This state will be recognized by all
Arabs and, as a part of the Arab League. it will
enioy all facilities in the Arab World without
any threat of destruction or hatred. The corn-
bination of lewish technical skills and Arab
national and human resources will be more
productive than we can now imagine.

The Palestinians will also have their own
state to form in the way they want. This new
state will get all possible support from the rich
Arab countries, from other states such as the
USA or the U.l(., etc., and also from various
U.N. organizations.

Similarly. lordan will have its dream
fulﬁlled, i.e.. access to the Mediterranean.

19

Israel and Palestine to the Arab World is through
Jordan, without which MW can live satis-
factorily. This will be of out benefit to every
member of the confederation of which I

speak. .
Finally, the holy city of Jerusalem, being

the capital for Israel, the capital for Palestine

and the capital for the confederated states, will
bealso opened to theworld forfreeworship.

If you find any value in this proposal,l
suggest that your mqazine adopt it and press
for a national referendum for both Arabs and
Jews to vote on. if the nation decides, then
governments or organizations have to accept.

How nice the dream is! Is there any
chance that it may become a reality? Let us
hope for that.

i. Withdrawal of Israei to its 1967 borders.

2. The establishment of the Palestinian State
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. its
capital to be theArab section of Jerusalem
(Arab Palestine). _

3. The capital of Israel to be the lewish
tion of lerusalem.

4. As new, the capital of Jordan to be
Amman.

5. Establishment between the three states of
a Confederation (The Arab Israeli Confe-
deration) with its capital in a united leru-
salem.

6. Proper legislation to bedrawnup to ensure
free movement, residence. tradim and
proper arrangements for representation,
and to arram diplomatic, military, cul-
tural and economic aspects of all these

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
l0.

matters to establish full equality for all
citizens of the confederation.

The Arab Israeli Confederation to be ac-
cepted as a member of the Arab League,
and to be recogniaed and dealt with by
all Arab states at the same level as othet
member states.

All Palestinian Arab emigrants and lew-
ish emigrants to be allowed to return and
live, it any of them wish to do so. asa
cititen of the new Palestinian state or of
the other Arab countries.

Arab Palestinian emigrants and Jewish
emigrants to be compensated for all their
losses.

The United Nations to be responsible,
by suitable means and for the proper
period of time, for the implementation
of this agreement. With the backing of its
members, the U.N. will give necessary
ﬁnancial, economic and cultural support
to the Arab-Israeli Confederation, par-
ticularly the State of Arab Palestine, in
order that the new entities may be self-

supporting,

COPYRIGHT: 1981 by New Outlook

CSO:

MOO/218
MARATHON cusss GAME PITS KING AGAINST USFP
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French No 262, 29 m;- 82 pp 15-16

[Part 2 of political analysis by an unnamed political prisoner in 7
Morocco]

[Text] The Saharan war strongl) influences the economic
and political situation in Morocco. The Socialist
Union of Popular Forces (USP?) has been engaged
for years in a chess game, and it is losing:

King Hassan II has always maintained that any op-
position to his policies must be contained within
limits drawn by him, and by him alone. This se-
cond part of an analysis by a Moroccan political
prisoner takes the machinery of the Palace-Opposi-
tion game apart to show how it works.

The USFP will continue to play its role as parliamentary opposition
until it emerges as the only possible solution for change. It had
reorganized itself as a function of this parlamentarist strategy
after its representatives in Parliament voted for it in 1975 and
again in 1977.

The USFP's ranks swelled very considerably in approval of this stra-
tegy, which did not displease the government at all, since M Bouabid'a
party thereby withdrew from the strategy of violent change which had
pervaded the left since 1962. It organized the labor unions it con-
trolled into a democratic labor confederation (CDT).

This meant that opposition to the government was no longer confined
to statements by USFP parliamentarians or to articles in the party
press. It expanded to embrace the CDT which, once it was formed,
organized a strike that effectively put an end to the I'social peace.‘
What happened was that the USPP board of directors, meeting at the
end of 1972, had drawn a distinction between the struggle for terri-
tory and the workers' struggle to improve their living conditions.
The CDT gave the coup de grace to the sacred cow of "social peace"
that had prevailed ever since the beginning of the war in the Sahara.
The strike it mounted was considered a threat to national unity. In
the wake of an ultimatum from the prime minister to the CDT, all the

21
FOR¢HFK1ALLSE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strikers, most of them government officials, were either suspended or
fired outright. Several dozen of them were jailed. It was a severe
blow to the infant labor union. The USPP thereupon returned to the
opposition ranks in Parliament. In May 1980 the two-issue referendum
called to lower the age of majority of the crown prince to 18, and to
extend the terms of members of Parliament by 2 years was a new bone
of contention between the palace and the USPP opposition.

The ballotting on the referendum issues went in favor of the govern-
ment. Hassan II, who wanted to strengthen his ties with the USP? --
whose support he needed for his new approach to Saharan policy ~-
made the conciliatory gesture of freeing its jailed members and re-
hiring the civil servants who had been fired.or suspended.

The USP? lent him its support with a will by playing a very active
role in "controling" the members of the Moroccan Student Union (UNEM).
However, the government's desire to implement the constitutional
amendments stemming from the referendum immediately again touched off
hostilities with the UNPF, which spread the word in the corridors

of Parliament that its members would leave at the expiration of their
terms, in October 1981. Meanwhile, the debate over the 1981 budget
was a chance for the USE? to launch a full-scale criticism of the
government. That campaign culminated with the demand from the
Ittihadia (USFP's members of Parliament) benches for the resignation
of Maati Bouabid's government when the first signs of the dry season
should appear.

The CDT, which had barely recovered from the blow it had sustained

in 1979, fell into step with the USP? and shortly thereafter the
other major labor organization, the Moroccan Labor Union (UMT) joined
the party.

The campaign against the government was at its height when the gov-
ernment announced its decision to increase all staple food prices by
45 percent. The CDT and UMT delivered an ultimatum to the government
demanding that it rescind its decision, which it did, but only by
half. The UMT then called a one-day warning strike in Casablanca

for 18 June. The CDT raised the stakes when it called for a nation-
wide general strike on 20 June.

The government responded by arresting all the CDT's leaders and by
shutting down all its offices. It then arrested several USPF cadres,
following that up on the eve of the riots that broke out on 20, 21,
and 22 June by shutting down all its offices as well as its newspaper.
Bloody but unbowed, the USFP apparatus stayed in operation through
its executive committee. .The political bureau, playing from strength
derived from the great popularity it had regained during the events
in Casablanca, to which it was perceived as principal midwife not
only by the government, but by the masses of the people, and knowing
too that it had the backing of the French Socialist Party, stood up
to Hassan II in his decision to allow a referendum for the Saharan
peoples' self-determination. The political bureau felt that it was

22.
FOR(HWKJALUSEONLY
the height of political naivete to think that the outcome of a refer-
endum carried out along the lines and under the conditions called for
in OAU decisions would automatically be in Morocco's favor. As a
consequence, the USP? called for a referendum asking Moroccan: their
Opinion of the OAU decisions. That was encroaching on the preroga-
tives the constitution vests in the kin.. The USFP was summarily
beheaded, and the members of its political bureau were arrested and
sentenced to prison.

The USPF's people in Parliament had no choice but tanobey the or-

ders of their board of directors and leave Parliament when their terms
expired. At one blow, that was the end of any real opposition in
Parliament and, basically, the end of the "democratic process."

Hassan II had warned that he would deal severely with the USFP members
should they withdraw from Parliament. When they did, he declared them
outlaws under Islamic law, which put their lives in imminent danger.

The battle of Guelta Zemmour providentially came just in time for them
to stand for and win back their seats in Parliament, without forming

a party caucus and without losing face in the eyes of their constitu—
cnts.

At the conclusion of this chess game with the Moroccan government,
the USP? was gravely weakened. Hassan II had carte blanch from then
on to pursue his Saharan olicy without risk of encountering any
serious opposition. (E... ) His sole concern was to win total sup-
port at home: the press campaigns he mounted came on the heels of
what seem to be the most important battles between the army and the
Polisnrio, and they were fought in a very special Arab and interna-
tional context.

"We have lost more men than anyone expected," said Hassan II in his
speech on the anniversary of the "green march" on 6 November 1981,
relerring to the battle of Guelta Zemmour. If the Moroccan authori-
ties admit to heavy losses in men and materiel, but without giving
any figures, it means that the battle was nothing short of total ca-
tastrophe for Morocco

Against that background, Hassan II's reaction is understandable. The
Fact that Morocco made such an issue of the Polisario's use of soph-
isticated weaponry is no chance coincidence.

U.$. Intervention to Topple the Balance of Forces in the Sahara...

The fact of the matter is that Morocco's officers have always com-
plained about their obsolete equipment. We know how much of the
Moroccan budget has been earmarked for national defense since 1975.
The Moroccan army has replaced and diversified its equipment, but
orders for certain sophisticated weaponry from the United States,
including M-60 tanks and V—lO reconnaissance planes, were a long
time being delivered: Carter did not give the green light until
1980. Even so, the Moroccan general Staff plans to buy more arms,

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

including electronic detection systems. When the United States was
considering sending two fully equipped AWACS planes to Egypt, to be
used for monitoring Libyan troop movements along the Libyan-Egyptian-
Sudanese borders, Moroccan officers were dreaming of persuading the

United States to let the Royal Armed Forces (FAR) take advantage of
them .

Since Reagan moved into the White House, the United States has been
moving fast to reinforce its military presence in the Mediterranean,
in the Indian Ocean, and on the African continent. In the context
of this new policy of redeployment of American forces, the Reagan
administration is gradually increasing military aid to its principal
African allies. In order to get a piece of that action, Moroccan
leaders had to convince the Pentagon that North Africa, too, was "a
probable area of penetration for the Soviet Union.” For the first
time, the Moroccan sovereign explicitly implicated the USSR in the
Saharan conflict. From now on, "Soviet penetrationn is the thing to
fight. The "communist threat" hangs over Morocco, not to mention the
rest of North Africa: that is the telling bell Rabat wanted to make
Washingtonhear to persuade Ronald Reagan to step up deliveries of
arms on order and to increase military aid to his ally.

New Opposition to His Majesty

With the investiture of the new Haati Bouabid government, the National
Rally of Independents (RHI) shifted into the opposition. Hassan II
has created the unique opposition of which he spoke on the day after
the abortive putsch of 10 July 1971.

"Had there been no opposition in Morocco then," he said, "I should
have created one. Now it is a fait accompli. Officially, the RNI
is going to play the part of "loyal opposition to His Majesty's gov-
ernment." That is the role Hassan II assigned it when he welcomed
the RNI's parliamentary delegation early in November 1980.

The USFP would seem to be barred from the legal political scene, at
least for the 2 years remaining of the extended terms of members of
Parliament. With some 03 members, the RNI holds the largest number
of seats in the present Parliament. It commands a relative majority,
but the Independent Democrats, Istiqlal, and the People's Movement,
which are allies in the present government, command the absolute ma-

jority. ([...])

Well aware that the present members of the cabinet have a lot of re-
servations about going along with Hassan II in his Saharan policy,
the RNI could play a major role by asking the government to hasten
the peacemaking process in the Sahara once the king decides that

the balance of forces on the ground allows him to open negotiations
with the Polisario. For Hassan II, though, the top priority is to
strengthen the positions of his royal army in the Sahara.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(caponry, hence constitutes -- and it becomes more understandable

so -- one of the goals of the diplomatic push launched immediately
after the battle of Guelta Zemmour: [the king] had to get outside
support, not only at the diplomatic level, but also and above all at
the military level. Yet even though Hassan II would stand to profit
by the aid he was seeking, it would not stop the domestic situation
in Morocco's deteriorating at every level. The government would
prepare to increase prices of staple foods very gradually, even
while unemployment was steadily climbing.

On top of the other stricter disciplinary measures imposed on the
people of Casablanca, specially uniformed police were sent onto

all university campuses to snuff out any spark of resurgent mass
movement. ([...])

0n the morrow of Sadat's execution, hundreds of graffiti appeared

on Casablanca's walls. Wherever one looked, they said over and over
again: "Your turn is coming soon, Moroccan tyrant!“ The allusion
could not be clearer. The Moroccan government has in fact left its
young subjects, who constitute the overwhelming majority of the peo-
ple, only one possible way to achieve their legitimate aspirations
to jobs, a decent standard of living, and freedom: rebellion in
all its forms, including violence. It would surprise almost nobody
if Casablanca's young people were to find a way of their own to
celebrate the first anniversary of the events of June 1981. And it
is altogether possible that next June's festivities will not be
confined to the nation's economic capital alone.

COPYRIGHT:1932 AErique-Asie

om
cso: 4519/156

25
FOR(MWK]ALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mnocco

ARTICLE OUTLINBS 1982 GENERAL BUDGET

Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 pp 674-675
[Article: “1982 Moroccan Budget“)

[Text] The Moroccan general budget for fiscal year 1982 has been set at 33.1
billion dirhams of resources and 39.4 billion of expenditures. the estimated
deficit amounting to 6.3 billion dirhams.

The breakdown of resources is as follows, in millions of dirhams:

Direct taxes 5,475
Customs duties 5,142
Indirect taxes 7,806
Stamp duties 1,724
Government revenues 50
Department revenues 1,718
Different products 474
Direct budget transfers 156
Loan resources 10,460
Revenues derived from orders 50

Dual 33.045

The professional profits tax will provide 3,118 million dirhams in direct
taxation; the tax on public and private salaries will account for 1,350 million.
Revenue of 350 million is expected from the national solidarity contribution.
and the agricultural tax will bring in 60 million.

Import duties and taxes will produce 4,883 million dirhams in customs duties:
export duties are calculated at 259 million, including 230 million on minerals.

with respect to indirect taxes. the turnover tax and the tax on services are
listed at 5,594 million dirhams: the tobacco tax will provide 1,055 million, and
the petroleum products tax will amount to 569 million.

In terms of department revenues. 800 dirhams are expected in the form of the
Moroccan Phosphates Office (OCP) dividend; 400 million are expected from the
Bank of Morocco profits assigned to the state, and 100 million are listed as

\

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coming from the Exchange Office. Seventy-five million are expected from Depot
and Management Office profits; 50 million will be furnished by the National
Transport Office: another 50 million from the National Tea and Sugar Office, and
10 million represent part of the profits of the Tobacco Administration.

The 1982 general budget is 31.70 percent sustained by loan funds, including 9
billion dirhams of exchange value for foreign loans and 1.3 billion for long-
term domestic loans, the balance (150 million) being provided by the proceeds
from equipment bonds.

Thus the distribution of the expenditures in the 1982 general budget is as
follows, in millions of dirhams:

Operational expenditures 18,105
Investment expenditures 16,806
Debt service 4,450

Total 39,361

The principal operational appropriations benefit the ministerial departments
listed below, in billions of dirhams: national education (4.7 billion), national
defense (3.8), finance (3.0). interior (2.1), agriculture and agrarian reform
(0.8), public health (0.8), etc.

In investment expenditures, the largest credits are allocated to finance (4.1
billion), equipment (3.5 billion), agriculture and agrarian reform (1.9 billion),
national defense (1.9 billion), national education (1.3 billion), energy and
mines (0.9 billion), housing and national land management (0.5 billion),

health (0.3 billion), etc.

The 1982 appropriations bill includes different fiscal provisions concerning
the professional profits tax (amortization rates for property, equipment and
vehicles and the tax rates for taxable profits of private individuals (20 to
48 percent depending on the bracket) and companies (48 percent above 250,000
dirhams)). customs duties (codification of rulings made during 1981), domestic
consumption taxes (mineral water, beer), the transaction tax (normal rate of
17 percent on imports and domestic sales), the tax on services (normal rate:
12 percent), the vehicle tax, etc.

The appropriations bill further authorizes borrowing from foreign pools and
foreign or international organizations within the limit of the 9 billion dirham
exchange value listed in the chapter of the general budget on loan resources.

The five attached budgets are balanced in revenues and expenditures, in mil-
lions of dirhams:

27
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R0005000500606

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investment Total Ogration
Port of Casablanca 95.5 37.5
Ports 256.4 100.4
Posts and Teleoauunications 1,095.9 781.8
Radio and Television 167.8 103.9
Official Printing House 5.6 4.7

Total 1,621.2 1,032.3

COPYRIGHT: Rene Mozeux et Cie Paris 1982

9380
C80: 4519/145

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600060060-6
SCHOOLS REOPEN BUT SOCIAL SITUATIOﬂ REMAINS TENSE
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEEIS in French No 1893. 19 Feb 82 p 555

1 Text] The University or Marten, which was closed at the beginning of Jan-
uary as a result of violent student demonstrations. will be partly reopened as
of 20 February. On that date. classes will be resuled for students at the end
of their courses or study; resumption of classes for other categories will be
announced later. In addition. the senior classes in all schools in the pro-
vince of Khartoum have just been reopened.

Though the reopening of the university may be considered as the sign of some
detente. though the tension created at the beginning of the year by the removal
of subsidies on certain staples has decreased to acne extent in Khartoum. the
negative mood and scepticisa of the Sudanese are perceptible everywhere. notes
the AFP correspondent. The public, which did not actively participate in the
student demonstrations against the rise in price of sugar and petroleum. has

in fact not stopped protesting on an individual basis.

Despite the government's announcement at the and of January of increased sup-
plies to service stations in the capital. gasoline reserves are insufficient
to most demand for the 52,000 private cars. 10.000 taxis. and 5.000 "boxis"
(tarpaulin-covered pick-up trucks turned into taxis for the masses). to say
nothing of the trucks and buses. etcetera. The rise in gasoline prices. which
atarted by causing a rise in freight carrier prices. is gradually having reper-
cussions on all goods. which often cone from far away.

The austerity measures are also affecting a large number of government and pub-
lic sector employees. who are afraid of losing their jobs as a result of the
reduction of state expenditures called for by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). Since the state is by far the main provider of Jobs. thousands of rank-
and file employees are apprehensively awaiting the government's directives.

The Sudanese are becoming more and lore resigned to eligrating to Arab count-
ries in the Gulf. Libya. and Egypt. and the rate of the skilled worker drain.
which has already been considerable during the last few years. is constantly
increasing.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982
1m49

29
FIN!(NHWCIAI.USIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DECLINE IN OIISEED ms ASCRIBED T0 QUALITY
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEEIIS in Hench N0 1893. 19 Feb 82 p 555

L Text] The Sudan. a traditional exporter of oilseed. has experienced a de-
terioration of the situation in this field the last few years. The Oil Seeds
Company. a state company. which enjoyed a monolpoly of oilseed exports until
last. May, saw its profits drop by 1.0 percent on 1980-1981. This development
is certainly due in part to the fall of world market prices for thse products.
but in particular to the deterioration in quality of the seeds: the loss of
quality is believed to be the consequence of a chronic lack of experimentation
and improvement of species since independence. ' -

The share of oilseed in Sudanese exports clearly declined in 1979. as the fol-
lowing tahle shows: -

Percentage of Oilseed in Sudanese Exports
Type of §eed 1215 1226 1212 1278 1912

Ground nut 21.1 12.1 12.7 21.9 6.7

Sesame 8.3 9.5 9.8 14.5 4.4

Castor . 8 6 0.1 0.2 2
Total 32.2 31.2 22.6 36.7 11.3

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1982
12149

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

IMHiOVED CEMENT PRODUCTION-Jar the first tine since 1970. the Nile Celent Con-
peny in Rebek has been working at full capacity for the past few months. which
means an annual output of 100.000 tons. The improvement is due to the raising
of ce-ent prices by the governnent. and especially to the renovation program

conducted by the Krupp Company of Ger-any since 1977. L Text] Eerie MARGHES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in_French No 1893 19 Feb 82 p 555 L COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1982 _/ 1211.9

PORT SUDAN GENERATORSuInstsllstion of the three new generators needed to run
the Port Sadsn Spinning Factory hes Just been undertaken. and will continue
until May. The factory will consume only 9.000 of the 15.000 kilowatts pro-
duced. 5nd_the rest will be used to reduce electricity shortages in the city.
1 Text _/ 1 Paris MAQCHES TROPICAUX ET MEWS in French_llo 1893

19 Feb 82 p 555] L COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux st 019 Paris 1982_/ 12149

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY