FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

JPRS L/10374
8 March 1982

Translation

MICROWAVE ANTENNAS AND EQUIPMENT:

DESIGN OF PHASED ANTENNA ARRAYS

Ed. by

DJ. V'oskresenskiy

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONILY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIQT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MBRSHIP 0P
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P nus PUBLICATION BB RESTRICT- POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lO374
8 March 1982

MICROWAVE ANTENNAS AND EQUIPMENT;
DESIGN OF PHASED ANTENNA ARRAYS

Moscow ANTENNY I USTROYSTVA SVCB: PROYEKTIROVANIYB PAZIROVANNYKH
ANTENNYKH RESHETOK in Russian 1981 (signed to press 13 Apr 81)
pp 1-431

[Book edited by Professor D.I. Voskresenskiy: “Microwave Antennas
and Equipment (Phased Antenna Array Design): Textbook for the Higher
Educational Institutes", approved by the USSR Ministry of Higher and
Intermediate Special Education as a textbook for students in the
Radioengineering Specialties of the Higher Educational Institutes,
Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", 1981, 431 pages, 15,000 copies]

Coursurs
AnnotationOOCOOODOOOOIOOO0.00000IOOOOIOOIOIAOOCOUO..0.000IOOQIIOOOOOOIOOIOOOO 1
ForewordOOOOOOOIOOOOOO0......0......0000C0000...000......0.0.0....OOOOOCOOOI. 1
*ctmn I. “an" Arrays.OOIOOCOODOQOCC.CCC'OOOOOCOCOOCC.COOOOCCCIIOIC'I... 4
(hapter 1. Microwave Antenna Design. lo

1.1. Intmduction......................................................... 10

1.2. “Inc Main Bequirenents Placed on Microwave Antenna System and
the Possibilities of Using Antenna Arrays............................ 6

1.3. Antennas With Electrical Scanning.................................... 11
1.4. Specific Features of Phased Antenna Array Design..................... 13
1.5. Specific Features of Active Array msign............................. 15
(hapter z. Phased Antenna Arrays............................................ 19

2.1. 111a Determination of the Geomtric Characteristics of Phased
Antenna Arrays...“....a...................u......o..........s...... 19

2.2. Mutual (bupling Effects Among Radiators.............................. 25

- a - [I - USSR - F POUOI

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY _
2.3.

2.1..
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.
2.8.
2.9.

2.10.

2.11.

2.12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhe bhtionahip Between the Direcdvity of a Radiator in an
Array and the Directional Quaracteristics of a Fully Excited

Arrayeeeseoessoeeoeoeeeseeoe'soeeeeseseeeaseseeeeeseeeeeeeeseessee

Radiators of Erased Antenna Arrays................................
Wide Angle lhtching of Phase Antenna Arrays.......................
Structural configuration of Phased Antenna Arrays.................
me Passband of a Phased Antenna Array............................
Switched Scanning.................................................
Switched Phase Shifters".........................................

Discrete Phase Shifters and the Swpression of Switching

“beseeeseeeeeeseseeoeee-sessseseseeseeesseeesseeseesessooeeeeeeee

Dean Jumps in a Switched Array....................................

usiyl Procedure..................................................

Chapter 3. Frequency Scanning Antennas....................................

3.1.

3.2.
3.3.
3.4.

Pundamntal blationships for a Frequency Scanning Linear
mater ArrayOOOIOOOOUOCDODOIOOO0.0.0....000000000.00.00.000......

(hannelizing Systems of Frequency Scanning Antennas...............
'Ibe Frequency Scanning Slotted Haveguide Array....................

me Design Procedure ﬁor a Frequency Sc; :ning Linear Slotted
Hawsu“ AmYOO0.000000000000000DOODOOQ0.0.00.00.00.00....00....

(hapter 4. Highly Directional cylindrical and AK: Antenna Arreys..........

4.1.
‘02.

4.3.
4.4.

4.5.

4.6..

4.7.

aner‘l Infomtioneesoooessesseseeoseeeeosseeeeseeeeeeeoeeseseese

'nze Phase Distribution in Highly Direcdonal cylindrical

Array...assessesssesosoeeoseeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeseeaesseeeeeeeeseeee

me Directional Patterns of cylindrical Pencil Bean Arrays........
Directional Patterns of Arc and cylindrical Arrays................
“nae Directional Gain of cylindrical and Arc Arrays................
Bandwidth Properties of Arc Arrays................................
Sons Structural and Circuit Desip Variants for Arc and

cylindrical Arrays................................................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'nlc maign Procedure for qlindrical Arr-lye.........................

Chapter 5. Slotted Waveguide Aruya.........................................

5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.6.
5.5.
5.6.
5.7.

5.8.

$09.

'lhe Motion and Specific Paaturee of Slotted Waveguide Arrays......
me lhjor Paranatera of a Slot in a Waveguide”.....................
‘lhe lypea of Slotted Waveguide Arrays...............................
Methods of lbaigling Slotted Waveguide Arraya.......................
latching a Slotted Waveguide Array to a Peed Waveguide..............
‘nae Inﬂuence of.a Change in Frequency on Antenna (haracteriatica...
lhe Directional Properties of Slotted Waveguide Arraya..............

Possible Structural Configurations for Slotted Waveguide Art‘aya
md stmctuml “.19 anwluoaooeooooeooeooeoeocoeoooetoaeooooeooo

A Sanle Daaig: Calculation Procedure for Slotted Waveguide

Army‘eeeoaooooeeeoaonenococaoncoateeea...600.00aoeeeoooeeooeeeaeeeo

Chapter 6. Accounting for mm Coupling Effects in Slotted Waveguide

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.

6.10.

6.5.

6.6.

kny...000.0.to....0.00COOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOC
Basic blationahipa.................................................
Planar Slotted Waveguide Array......................................

An Analyaia of hatual Coupling Effect: on the uractional
Patum of .n Arr.y000COOOOOOO'OOOOOOOOO...0....00.00.000.00000000000

A Procedure for Synthesizing a Linear Slotted Waveguide Array
Taking Electrodyna-ic Mutual Coupling Effects Into Accomt..........

A Procedure for Syntheaizing a Planar Slotted Waveguide Array
TM: mt‘ml unplug law “mmtIOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOCOOOOO

“8191 ulc‘nacmn hmmndadou...............................o...

Grapter 7. Phased Antenna Arrays With a hemispherical Scan Space............

7.1.
7.2.

7. 3.

@ner‘l awning m.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.
Ahybrid Phased Antenna Array With a heliapherical 8cm Space.
Opemtional Principle. Specific Structural Mia: Features of
a Phaaed Array With a Dom Shaped lane..............................

mnfoml Med mtenna Arrayseoeoeeeeeoaooeeo'oooooeeeeoeeeaeeooee

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

104
107
107
107
112
115
121
121
122

126

129

1 31
132
135

136

1101

149
1.50
15 1
15 1

156
156
7.6.

I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Polyhedral Phased Antenna Arraye....................................

(hapter 8. Bean Steering System for Phased Antenna Arrays..................

801.
8.2.

8.3.

8.6.
8.5.
8.6.

Phased Antenns Array Control Pmblens...............................
mtml “put-h. . for ma‘ shitunOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0....00......

Algorithm for Generating Directional Patterns of Special

sum.oeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeooeeeseeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeelseeseeeeea

svitdler mtml ”prim.aeeeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeileeoeeeeeeeeee
“puma thl usodMeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoooeeeeeeo

1he basic: of Sean Steering System for a Specified Precision
of the Directional Pattern Orientation in Space........._,...........

Section II. Radiating Bleunts of an Antenna Array...........'...............

map“: 9- PEI-Bud are“: mtmaeeaOeoeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

9.1.
9.2.

9.3.

9.1..
9.5.
9.6.
9.7.

‘ihe Function and Specific Features of Printed Circuit mtennasw...

‘ihe lbjor ”pas of Printed Circuit Antennas and heir Operational

Pmciplueoeeeeebeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeooeeeeeeoeeoooeeeeeeee

“nae Hajor mamcteristics and mug: of Printed Circuit
mmmr “muOIIOOOOOO.I.OOOOOIOOOUO...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

but!!!“ Amy. with mmamr Blemnt...0000000000000.00.00.00.00...
Printed mrcut mwle Mm”0000000.000.000.000...00009000000000.
Antenna Arrays With Printed Circuit Dipole Bhnants.................

Other Printed Circuit Radiating System

atspter 10. Yagi Radiators for Planar Phased Antenna Arrays.................

10.1.
10.2.

10.3.

10.6.
10.5.

Med Array. of Y‘u huamr'eeeeaseeeoeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeoeeoeeeeeeee

Analysis of the Electra-emetic Field of a Phased Antenns Array
of Y‘a bmmeOOOOOOOOOOOOOODO0..OIOOOOOOOOOO...OOOOOOOOOO0,00000

nu: maracterietics of a Yasi Radiator in s Planar Phased
hm myDOOO0.000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO'0...0..0......

‘lhe Optiniaation of a Yagi Radiator in an Array.....................

Deeiping the Input Circuit of a Yagi Bedistor......................

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

163
168
168
171

175
177
179

1810

190
190

190

193
197

200'

204
207
211

211

211

213
216
218
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10.6. A maim Procedure for a Yagi Radiator for Phaaed Antenna

Array.oooeeoaeee-ooootooooeeooeoooeooeoeoooooeoeeooooooeooooeoooeoo

(hapter 11. Approximte maign Calculatione for Phaaed Vaveguide
Antenna Arrays Taking Ritual Coupling Into Aceount.............

11.1. 098318.]. con'iandOMOoeooooooooonot...oo-oeooeooooooooeoooooooooo'

11020 “.1“ Gr‘PMoeoooaeoooooaoeoeeoeoooooeeaooooooooaeooooeeoooooooooo
11030 “I191 hematmn‘ooooaooeooooeoeeooooaaeoeeoooooeoeooooooeoeoo

diapter 12. Hide Ingle lhtching of the Ravaguib Radiators of Planar
m.ed mtm‘ my.0000000'0.0.0.00.00.00.00...Ooldoocolttcoo

12.1. lethoda of batching waveguide Radiators in Planar Phased
Mann. Arny...0000IOOCOOOOOOO...OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOQ0.0.000...

HOZO “twins with a and sums mm...0.000000000000000000000DO...
Chapter 13. Slotted Resonator Radiators for Planer Antenna Arrays..........

13.1. Analysis of the (harnteriadce of a Slotted mediator

”mmreoaoeeooooooeeeoecoo-oneoeoaooooeoooooooooooeeaeoooooeoeoeo

13.2. ‘lha (haracteriatica of a Slotted hemator Radiator aa a
Inumndent Manna...00.0.0.0....0O...OOOOICOOOOOOOOOQQIOOCOOOO...

13.3. ‘me (haracteriatiee of a Slotted Resonator Radiator in a
Plan: manna ”ray...Q.U0.0...0.00.......0...’...............O...

13.4. ‘me Optimization of the ataracteriatice of a Slotted modulator
“disco: 1“ m “tenna AmytooOOOOOCO...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00.0.00...

13.5. Exawlea of the Realization of. Slotted Reaonamr hdiatora.........
1306. me Min PmudureOOOOOOO..00.0..0...0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Chapter 14. Radiating Waveguide lbdulea With Reflective Phaae

shifter...eeoooeoooeeeeoeoooeoooooaoeoaoooeoeatoeoooooeoeaoooee

14.1. 'lhe Ibdular Design of a Phaeed Antenna Array.......................
14.2. Multipoeition Phase Shifter for a undue
14.3. Microwave Bridge lbvioee for Peedthrough Phaee Shifters............
14.4. me Design of e Radiating Ibdule of an Antenna Amy...............

14.5. Revealide nirectional Couplare.....................................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

220

221
221
221

225
228
228

233
237

237
241

242

' 21.1.

246
247

249
249
250
254
255
258
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16.6. An Approximate Basia: Calculation Procedure for a Radiating

bmeeseeeseoeooe-etooooaosese00000000000000oeaeeeeeeosaeeesseoooao

Section III. Active Elements of Antenna Array lbdules.......................

(hapter 15. )bdules of Translitting Phased Antenna Array. thins
Mcmductor deOOO...0..0.0.0.000...OOOOIOOOOOOOQQCOOOOOO

'15.1. The hjor Characteristics of the Active Haunts of lbdules........
15.2. Hajor Structural msign hquiremts...............................

15.3. Actiw Semiconductor Ibvices for Active Phased Antenna Array

wdm‘sseaoeeeaooeaaoeeeoosoooooeosoeeesoseoosoaeaesaoeooaeeesaaas

15.4. 'Ihe Radiation Power of Active Semiconductor Phased Antenna

Army'sunseen-00000000000000...on0000000000.OOaOoeosoeeeaaaaaossaae

15.5. Active Phased Antenna Array Bfficiency.............................

15.6. bcmndations for the Selection of )bdule Circuits and

Parmmmeoaoeoeeeeeeeosoaaeoeaaeaoeeeaoeooosooeeeoooaooeoo0000000

Chapter 16. internally Excited Oscillators and Anplifiers thing
Pm: mumrs.'CUOCCCOOC....'..............................

16-1. @118“). Inﬁ’mdoneeeeeeeoaooeeevsaoecaIsaOnooooaeooeosoooooaooooo

16.2. ‘lhe Equivalent Circuit of a Microwave Trusistor...................

16.3. A Tim and Harmonic Analysis of Transistor Currents and

“lava.osesooo0000.00sooseooaeooeeoeeeeeooaeseeooeoeoeeeeeeeooooe

16.4. ‘lhe Properties of Conan Emitter and col-Ion Base Generator
unftzunuon‘.00.0.0.0.0DO.to.0.0.0.0....00000000OOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOO

16.5. ‘lhe Procedure and Sequence for the mug: Calculations of. the
”Grams lbde of m “Cilhmr/Aﬂpliﬂereeeaoeooeoaaeeeeeoeooaeaao

(hapter l7. Externally Excited Microwave Circuits for Transistor
actuator! md mlifieuciloooob0.0.00.0...0.000000000000000.

17.10 @0011]. Infomtioneescovesooeooooaos00000000000000...eeeseaaeeeeee

17.2. ‘lhe Design of the Microwave Remarks of Ampliﬁers and

mcnl.wuosevvcoooeoooossoseesooaaaaeasseeons-00000000000000.0000

17.3. acillauor/Anplifier Power Supply Circuits.........................

17.4. ‘Ihe maign of Hicrauave lbtching Transfer-er hetworks Using
med mean“OOOOCCQUOOOOOOOO0..0.0.00.0.0....OCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

-f-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

261
264

26/0
265
26 7

268

269
276

276

279

279
279

286
289

293

304
308

310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17.5. 'nne msign of a Microwave Hatching and Transﬁoraing Newark
~ Using Blemts Nith Distributed Paranters.......................

Chapter 18. Frequency Multipliers Using Nonlinear Capacitance Diodes..."

18010 metal InfomtionoessseoeeaseeOooeeso...seesseeeeoeeeeewenoeeeo

18.2. “nae Selection of the mltiplication l'actor for the Frequency
Multiplier of an Active Phased Antenna Array Hodule..............

18.3. nm Selection of Nonlinear Capacitance Diode and In Operating

Mose.eessoasoosooeaeeoteooesessoaesesooeeeeoaeseooeeeaoeesees.

18.4. ‘me Power Design Calculation Procedure for the Operational
b“ of a mo“ in . Pardlal W mdperOOOOOOO0.00.0000...

18.5. be main of the Microwave Input and Output Networks of a

muplursseesso.senoOsoaaeeeeeesooaan.are...looeeeeeeeosseeoeoo

Chapter 19. Hicrowave Mlifiers and Oscillators Using Avalanche
“m1: nu moa.o.09..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOO00.0.0.0...

19010 ”“1: mnemmtic’OODIOO...O00.0090090090000900006000.0.0.090.
19.2. 'nle Parameters of nun modes and Specific Futures of
'nteir Applications in the )bdules of. Active Phased Translitnng
mm‘ Arny...‘00.0.00..to.0.000000..OOOIIOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO'0.
19.3. Microwave Circuits of Oscillators Using MAI? Diodes............
190‘. stmctur‘l “.191 Prmdph’.0.0.0.00000000000000000000000COOUOOO

19.5. Principles of Design Calculations of IBM? Diode Microwave

mum‘aessaeeeeeeeooaoeeeaseassaaeeoveeeeeesaeeeeeeoeeeeeeesseee

Sect-ion IV. mcrwaw aarmnaeeeeeoesOooeeeeoeseoeoeeeeewese000000.000.

Chapter 20. me Structural M191 of Microwave Hybrid Integrated
Circuit Components............................................

20.1. General lnformtion..............................................
20.2. ‘me Any-urinal Transmission Stripline..........................
20.3. Printed Circuit Inductance (bile.................................
20.4. Cepacitors.......................................................
Gtapter 21. Hicrowaw Phasing Devices (Phase Shiftere)...................

21010 sedcmducmt Phase shite".eseeeeeoaoeeasasaseeeeooeeeesoaseeso
- 8 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
21.2.

21.3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Semiconductor Phase Shifters With a mutinuous Phase .Ounge.......

Discretely Switched Seniconductor Phase Shifters..................

(hapter 22. Microwave Pilters.............................................

22.1.
22.2.
22.3.

22.6.

1110 (lanaification of Microwave Pilters...........................
nae main of the luv Frequency Filter Prototype..................
'lhe Structural Execution of Microwave Pilters.....................

A Design Procedure for Microwave Filters..........................

(hapter 23. nirectional Couplers and Directional Filters Using

23.1.

23.2.

23.3
23.6.

23.5.

23.6.

23.7.

23.8.

23.9.

“whd stripnneaosseeeeeseeoooeeooeeonseeeeseoooeeesooesoaoo

'lhe Classification of Directional Couplers and Filters and
Their Operating Guaracteristics...................................

‘lhe Main Dasig: Equations for Bingle Section I Made Coupled
me mmctioml moplem.’OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOICOOO0.0.0.000...0......

Extended Banalidths Directional (buplere Using Coupled Lines.......'

'Ihe Characteristic Imedancee of (bupled Lines in die thee
of m-m“ md Out-Of-Phale Excitation....onu.uo..n..........

The Relationship Between the Structural and Electrical
mucuu.dc.00000000OOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOQOOOOOOOOOOOO

“me Ihjor msign Relationships for Single Loop Directional

.mteu thins stdplme8oseoeoseeseeooseseaseooeeeoo00000090000000

‘me Influence of ‘mlerances on the Pauseters of Directional

“upleuoosooseasasotoeatersoaeeeoeooseesoeooooseseoeoosoosesstsoo

‘nle Structural [23191 of Directional Couplers and Filters Using
(bupled stdpme...000....0.0..00.0...00'OOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

me “81‘! Pmudumseso...esesesceoee00000000000000.0000...osoaoe

Chapter 24. Stripline Microwave Power Distribution System................

26.1.

24.2.

210.3.

‘Ihe Function and Major Gmmcteristics of Microwave Power
mtdbution sy‘te”...DO'OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0DOOOOOOQO'OOO

‘Ihe (ﬁgurative Performance of Various hypes of Microwave
PM: matdbution 5’8“”...00000DOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...0.0.0.0!0.0

Calculating the Electrical Parameters and auracteristics of
M Channel Power Distribuoou....................................

-h-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
24.6. 'lhe Calculation of the metrical Parameters and hmcmtntics
of “ti-01ml POW! mstl’lbtuion sysmooooooooooooooo00.0000

24.5. An Approximate Design Procedure for Power mtdbution

sy‘te‘eoeeooooono...oaooeoooooooooooooeeoocooooooooooeoooooooooo

Bibliosmphy-ooooooonoooo-ooooooocoo-coo...aeooooooeoooouooooooooooeoooooo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotat ion

[Text] Methods of calculating the characteristics of phased antenna arrays (I’M)
and active phased antenna arrays (APM) as well as their conponente are presented.
Arrays with various geometries, types of radiators and control techniques are
treated as well as antennas with frequency scanning, switching, aultislot, planar.
and cylindrical antennas, etc.

The book is intended for students in the radio engineering specialties of the
higher educational institutions in the performance of the diploma and course re-
quired design, as well as for engineers engaged in the design of phased antenna
arrays andactive phased antenna arrays.

D.I. Voskresenskiy, V.L. Gostyukhin, R.A. Granovskaya, LI. Grineva, A.Yu. Grinev,
I.I. Gurova, 11.8. Davydova, G.P., Zentsov. MN. Indenbom, 6.1. Koptev, Yuﬂ. Kotov,
8.1). Kremenetskiy. 3.x. Mikheyev, 3.1a. Hyakisbev, '1'.A. Panina, 8.3. Petrov. L.I.
Ponomrev, v.v. Popov, Adi. Razdolin, P.A. Solovtsov, v.1. Saaoylenko. v.8. Filippov.
V.V. Chebyshev. V.N. Shkalikov, V.Ye. Yaaaykin.

Reviewers: Department of Antenna Equipment and Radio Have Propagation of Moscow
Power Engineering Institute (head of the department, doctor of the engineering
sciences, professor Ye.N. Vasil'yev) and the Department of Co-aunications and Radio
Control of Ryaran' Radio Engineering Institute (head of the department, doctor of
the engineering sciences, winner of the USSR State Prize, professor v.1. Popovkin)

Editorial Staff for Cybernetics and Counter Engineering Literature

PM

Katerial on the planning and design of phased antenna arrays (PAL). active antenna
arrays (APAA) and their coaponents is collected and oyster-tired in this book.
Engineering nethods are given for electrically scanned antenna design to aeet

-1-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

specific technical requirements, as well as the requisite information for design
work based on the parameters of existing equipment and a description of existing
designs. Special attention is devoted to flight systems.

The book "Microwave antennas and equipment. The planning and design of antenna
arrays and their radiating elements" which came out in 1972 under the editorship
of 0.1. Voskresenakiy, to_a known extent generalized the most widespread design
techniques. This book contains materials which are an extension of the indicated
work; the design methods presented in it supplement and refine the methods
treated earlier, taking into account the latest achievements in design automation
using computers. The range of problems considered has been significantly expand;
ed: questions of the design of new types of arrays are set forth, as well as
active and passive elements.

Considerable attention has been devored to the construction of active stripline
modules with semiconductor devices. Bringing the materials on the indicated
topics together in one book, based on the general requirements placed on array
elements, as well as the utilization of uniform criteria for a comparative
evaluation of these and other elements have significantly simplified the pro-
blem of the goal directed design of an array, in particular, the selection of
an acceptable variant for the overall array configuration, as well as the type
of active and control elements.

The book consists of four sections. General questions of phased array design are
treated in the first. Here, questions of antenna design with phase, switching
and frequency scanning techniques are presented. Procedures are given for the
design of planar and cylindrical arrays, phased arrays with a hemispherical
scanning space as well as slotted waveguide arrays. -

Procedures are given in the second section for the engineering design of phased
array radiating elements. taking their interaction into account. Dipole, strip-
line, slotted, director, waveguide and other phased array resistors are treated.

The third section is devoted to the design of active phased arrays and their
modules. Specific features of the construction and calculation of the character-
istics of active phased arrays are presented; structural configurations are given
for active reflective and transmission type phased array modules as well as
methods of signal phasing in the modules. Modules of various types are compared
and possibilities of using various active elements are indicated. Procedures
are given for designing the modules of transmitting active phased arrays around
various semiconductor elements: oscillator stages using microwave transistors
and IHPATT diodes, varsctor multipliers, and hybrid 1c microwave circuits.

Questions of the design of passive elements of phased arrays are treated in the
fourth section. Design procedures are given for directional couplers and coupled

line filters as well as multichannel stripline dividers, microwave phase shifters
and filters.

Widely known material existing in monographs and the periodical press is collected
and systematized in the book, and the published literature of the Problems

- 2 -

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(MﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Laboratory for Microwave Engineering of Moscow Aviation Institute are also used.
Topics from general microwave antenna and equipment theory are not treated; it
is assumed that the reader is already familiar with the general course given in
the radio engineering departments of the higher educational institutes.

It must he underscored that the design procedures incorporated in the book differ
substantially in terms of design precision and complexity. Along with simplified
calculations, which make no pretense of exhaustive completeness, some of the
latest techniques of computer assisted design are included in the book. Simpli-
fied design methods are presented initially, which make it possible to design
phased antenna arrays or elements which meet the major technical requirements,

in the amount necessary for the course required or diploma design work, as well
as in the preliminary developmental work on antenna system designs. Further,
where it has proved possible, the authors provide more precise computational
methods which make it possible to optimize the device being designed with respect
to a particular criterion by means of the programs which have been developed.

A bibliography of the major literature is given at the end of the book, as well
as bibliographies for the chapters, which are recommended in the planning and
design of the given equipment.

The book is intended for students in the radio engineering specialties when doing
their diploma or course required design work, but can also be useful to engineers
engaged in the design of antenna arrays.

The book was written by a collective of authors: D.I. Voskresenskiy (the Fore-
word and Chapter 1); V.S. Fillipov (Chapter 2); R.A. Granovakaya (Chapter 3 and
17); L.l. Pononarev (Chapter A); V.L. Costyukhin (Chapters 5 and 21); 5.0.
Kremenetskiy (Chapter 6); V.Ye. Yamaykin (Chapter 7); v.1. Samoylenko (Chapter
8); V.V. Chebyshev (Chapter 9); H.V. Indenbom (Chapter 10); K.I. Grineva (Chap-
ter 11); A.H. Razdolin (Chapter 12); A.Yu. Grinev and Yu.V. Kotov (Chapter 13);
V.V. Popov and S.H. Mikheyev (Chapter 14); G.P. Zentsov (Chapter 15); G.I.
Koptev and T.A. Panina (Chapter 16); V.N. Shkalikov (Chapter 18); N.s. Davydova
(Chapte: 19); 5.8. Petrov (Chapter 20); B.Ya. Hyakiahev (Chapter 22); A.Yu.
Grinev (Chapter 23); 1.1. Gurova, B.Ya. Myskishev and P.A. Solovtsov (Chapter 24).
The overall editing of the book was done by D.I. Voskresenskiy.

- 3 -

FIHICHﬂHCJAI.lEﬂ!(MVLY
INDI‘OFFIC1A1.USIZ(NVLY

ANTENNA ARRAYS SECTION I

1. Microwave Antenna Design
1.1. Introduction

The antenna and feedline, which provide for the radiation and reception of radio
waves, is an integral part of any radio engineering system. A number of technical
requirements are placed on the antenna, which follow from the function of the
radio system in which it is used. The conditions for the placement and operation
of the antenna influence its characteristics. The feasibility of attaining the
requisite directional properties, frequency, power and other characteristics of
an antenna depend in many respects on the working frequency band. The last two
decades have been marked by the wide scale introduction of radio equipment into
the economy and the use of microwave gear. Antennas in the microwave band pro-
duce pencil beam radiation with a beam width neasured in units and fractions of
degrees and have a gain reaching tens and hundreds of thousands. This makes it
possible to use the antenna not just for radio wave transmission and reception,
but also for direction finding (in radar, navigation and radio astronomy), com-
bating interference, providing for concealed operation of a radio system and for
other purpos:s.

Besides radars, microwave hardware is used in such sectors of electronics as
television, radio control, radio navigation, radio communications, telemetry, and
accelerators. The successful development of radio astronomy and the mastery of
space is related in aany respect to the achievements of microwave engineering.

Pencil-beam scanning microwave antennas have become widespread at the present .
time. The scanning makes it possible to scan the surrounding space, track moving
objects and determine their angular coordinates. The replacement of poorly
directional or omnidirectional antennas (for example, coupled antennas) with
pencil-beam scanning antennas makes it possible to obtain not only a power gain
in the system because of the increase in the antenna gain, but also, in a number
of cases, tosttenuate crosstalk between different radio engineering systems
operating at the same time, i.e.. provide for electromagnetic compatibility of
these systems. In this case, the noise immunity, security and other character-
istics of the system can also be improved. With mechanical scanning, which is
accomplished by means of rotating the entire antenna, the maximum rate of beam
travel in space is limited, and with the presently existing aircraft speeds,
proves to be insufficient. For this reason, it became necessary to develop new
types of antennas.

The application of phased antenna arrays (PAA's) to produce scanning pencil-beam
antennas makes it possible to realize a high space scanning rate and promotes an
improvement in the data obtained on the electromagnetic reflection or radiation
sources in the surrounding space. Modern microwave devices with vacuum tube or
semiconductor devices and electrically controllable media have made it possible
to not only create a controlled phase distribution in an antenna array (i.e.,

FINICNHWCIA1,USI(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

effect electrical scanning), but to accomplish the initial processing of the in-
coming information (summing of the fields, frequency conversion, amplification,
etc.) directly in the radio frequency channel of the antenna.

A further improvement in the characteristics of radio systems with phased arrays
is possible (resolution, speed, carrying capacity, detection range, interference
immunity, etc.) by refining the techniques of processing the signal transmitted
and received by the antenna (space-time processing in the general case). The
antenna in this case is the primary processing unit and to a significant extent
governs the major characteristics of the system as a whole. Usually, far from
all of the information contained in the wave impinging on a pencil-beam receiving
antenna is used, where the fields in the antenna from the individual radiators
are added together in a single radio frequency channel. The most complete infor-
mation can be obtained by processing each received signal in the antenna array
separately, i.e., by processing a series of samples from the spatial distribution
of the incident wave. Antennas with different processing techniques are employed,
depending on the function of the system and the requirements placed on its
characteristics. One of the antenna variants with signal processing is the
adaptive array, which in a radio signal processing system can be treated as a
dynamic self-tuning space-time filter, in which the directional pattern, fre-
quency properties and other parameters are changed automatically. Other signal
processing antennas are also known: self-tuning, artificial aperture, with time
modulation of the parameters, digital processing, analog space-time processing
using coherent optics methods, etc.

Thus, the antennas being used in practice are very complex systems, having up to
tens of thousands and more radiators, active elements and phase shifters, which
are controlled by a special computer. The design of such antennas is extremely
complex and basically determines the size and cost of the entire radio system.

The characteristics of antennas presently predetermine the major parameters of
an entire radio system, for example, in radars. the resolution and precision in
the determination of angular coordinates, the rate of beam travel in space and
the interference immunity.

The rapid development of microelectronics and its achievements have also found
their own place in antenna engineering. Integrated circuit stripline assemblies,
stripline and microstrip transmission lines and various microwave devices de-
signed around them (phase shifters, switchers, rectifiers, amplifiers, etc.) have
cone into widespread use in recent years. However, the potential possibilities
for reducing the weight and volume of microelectronic radio equipment can be
realized with the appropriate design of the antennas, dispensing with traditional
types of them and making a transition to antenna arrays. The fact is that the
reflector antenna with a fairing, the drive mechanism, waveguide channel and
microwave devices of the aircraft radars in operation has considerable size and
weight as compared to the other parts of the radar station. A radar in a micro-
electronic design using semiconductor microwave devices makes it possible to
achieve the greatest reduction in size and weight.

FIMl(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USEIDNLY
Ft!!(lﬂﬂ(1al.USE(NWLY

The increasing complexity of antennas during their development and their increas-
ing role in radio systems have led to the expansion of the group of radio spec-
ialists working directly in the field of antennae and feedlines. Not only the
specialists in these fields must be involved with the calculation of the major
characteristics of antennas and microwave devices, but also the designers of the.
entire radio system and its individual components, which are coupled to the
antenna. Their combined efforts during the preliminary design stage make it pos-
sible to estimate the ultimately attainable characteristics of the entire radio
system, taking into account the feasibility of making the individual components.

The appearance of new types of antennas has led to a substantial expansion and
deepening of antenna theory as well as the development of new design techniques.
Considerable attention has been devoted to these questions in the literature:

a number of monographs have been published [01-013] and a considerable number

of papers have published in journals. However, the use of these materials by
radio engineers as well as students doing their diploma and course design work
also encounters considerable difficulties. Engineering methods of designing
prospective phased and active phased antenna arrays, as well as their elements,
are presented in this textbook. Considerable attention is devoted to the design
of aircraft and mobile antenna systems. The engineering design techniques are
supplemented with descriptions of designs of existing antennas and the requisite
reference material on the parameters of various microwave devices is given for
devices which can be used as the components of phased and active phased antenna
arrays.

The cited design techniques are sufficiently simple, based on approximate micro-
wave antenna theory and suitable in the majority of cases for engineering prac-
tice. These techniques make it possible in the initial design stages to approxi-
mately determine the major parameters and characteristics of the antennas, where
these parameters and characteristics can subsequently be made more precise where
necessary by means of various more rigorous design methods. Also included in
the book are design techniques developed on the basis of mathematical models of
antenna arrays and their components, close to the actual ones. The characteris-
tics of director, waveguide, slotted resonator and slotted waveguide radiators

of a periodic array are studied and optimized by rigorous electrodynamic methods.
The calculated curves and the programs developed in the all-purpose algorithmic
languages of Algol-60 and Portran-IV for the BESM-b and “-6030 computers are pre-
sented. By basing the work on the general procedure for phased antenna array
design and using the materials of this book, one can design the radiating aperture
of a phased array in a rather well reasoned fashion.

The material presented here is intended for a reader already familiar with the
general course on antennas and microwave devices, which is studied in the radio
engineering departments of the higher educational institutes.

1.2. The Main Requirements Placed on Microwave Antenna Systems and the
Possibilities of Using Antenna Arrays

The major requirements placed on an antenna are governed by the volume of infor-
mation to be processed (or extracted) and are linked to the range, resolution,

- 5 -

FOR:0FFK]AL.USE(MVLY
FKIR()FFIC1AL.UEIICMVLY

precision in the determination of coordinates, speed, reliability, interference
immunity and other characteristics of the radio engineering system. Establishing
the interrelationship between the characteristics of various radio engineering
systems and the characteristics of the antenna and feedline is accomplished in
the relevant courses on radar, radio control, etc. without going into the
details of the operation of these systems and establishing the interrelationship
cited above, one can state that in the final analysis, antennas and feedlines
should assure the appropriate: directionality, power, frequency and direction
finding characteristics, control characteristics and other general engineering,
operational and economic characteristics.

The requirements for antenna directionality predetermine the shape and width of
the spatial directional pattern (in the two main planes), the-permissible level
of sidelobes, the direction gain (IND) and the polarization characteristics of
the antenna. Antennas in the microwave band have needle-shaped, cosecant, fan-
shaped, funnel-shaped and other directional pattern shapes. The polarization
characteristic determines the following: the polarization of the transmitted
and received waves, the permissible coefficient of uniformity of the polariza-
tion ellipse when using rotationally polarized waves and the permissible level
of cross-polarization in the case of linear polarization of the radiated field.
when designing an antenna, the shape of the directional pattern, its width, the
sidelobe level, the directional gain and the polarization can be specified. It
must be noted that a relationship exists [01] between these characteristics
which determine the directionality, and during the design work, frequently only
some of them are specified. Thus, in the electrical design, the starting date
can be the width of the directional pattern (beam width) or the directional gain.
It can be stipulated in this case that it is desirable to keep the sidelobe and
cross-polarized radiation levels to a minimum with the given relative antenna
dimensions.

The power characteristics of transmitting and receiving antennas make it possible
to determine: the signal power at the input to the receiver; the maximum permis-
sible transmission power at which the electrical strength and permissible ther-
mal mode are assured; the power needed to control the beam position in space;

the microwave power losses in the antenna and feedline channel as well as the
noise power in the receiving antenna. These powers are characterised by the
following parameters, as is well known [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.6, 0.7]: the antenna
gain, the antenna efficiency and efficiency of the microwave devices which are
used, the noise temperature, the input impedance (the matching in the feed chan-
nel), the antenna Q (02] and the permissible electrical field intensity. In
contrast to mechanically scanned antennas, in which the determination of the
power used to control the beam position in space is related to the electrical
drive design, in electrically scanned antennas, this power is governed by the
losses in the controllable microwave devices, and for this reason can have an
impact on the thermal mode of the antenna. When designing microwave scanning
antennas, only individual values are specified at times which characterize the
power indicators of the antenna. Thus, for example, the power (pulsed and
average) of a radio transmitter or the sensitivity of a radio receiver are speci-
fied.

IMNI(MHNCIA1.USE(NVLY
FOR1OFFHJAI.USE(NNLY

antenna being developed, taking into account the existing possibilities and
specific set requirements. Optimization reduces to bringing the feasibly attain-
able characteristics close to the ultimately attainable theoretical characteris-
tics, found for the specified optimality criteria. For example, such criteria
can be the maximum gain or minimum noise temperature for the specified relative
dimensions and losses in the microwave components being used.

the condition of the simultaneous transmission or reception by the antenna of
a signal with a specified frequency spectrum. The range of frequencies is deter-

frequencies in the working band, i.e., permits a synchronous change in certain
antenna parameters with a change in the working frequency of the radio system.
For example. in an electrically scanned antenna array. the phase distribution
along the array is varied so as to preserve the direction of the beam in space
when the working frequency of the transmitter changes.

In antennas and feedlines. a number of requirements are placed on the spatial
scanning characteristics (such as the scanning sector and time, etc.) as well as

scanning for the performance of the design calculations for the selected type

of antenna are the spatial scanning sector of the beam, the scanning period (pace)
or time needed to set the beam to a specified point in space, method of spatial
scanning, precision of setting the beam to a specified point in space, etc. The
antenna switching time from transmit to receive is also to be included along the
control characteristics, as well as the requirements which arise in a number of

the transmitted field or the shape of the directional pattern. In mechanically
scanned antennas, the beam control characteristics are not related to the elec-
trical design of the antenna and are determined during the design of the rotation
mechanisms.

used in radar, radio direction finding, radio astronomy, etc. The requirements
placed on direction finding characteristics depend substantially on the direction
finding technique employed (monopulse, radio signal. amplitude, phase DP'ing,
etc.).
FOI‘OFFHJA1.USIZONLY

Antenna using a monopulse direction finding method (monopulse antennas) have
become widespread in radar of late, the direction finding characteristics of
which are the slope and linearity of the characteristic, the depth of the "null"
in the difference pattern and the precision of its setting in a specified direc-
tion. The requirements placed on these characteristics, with the exception of
the latter, reduce to the creation of a special shape and symmetry in the direc—
tional patterns, as well as to obtaining the maximum reception antenna gain. The
requisite precision in setting the "null" of the difference pattern in a specified
direction, within the bounds of a scanning sector, is governed by the scanning
technique and the characteristics of the devices which control the antenna beam
position. The realization of the requisite direction finding characteristics is
a most important and difficult task for many antennas.

Overall engineering, operational and economic requirements are placed on an
antenna, just as on any radio engineering unit, such as: minimal size, weight
and cost, high reliability, adaptibility to specified conditions, as well as
control and repair convenience. Setting these requirements on an antenna being
developed is no less important than setting the electrical requirements, and
meeting them is achieved not only through the appropriate structural design
solutions, fabrication technology and the use of the requisite materials, but
also through the selection of the appropriate scanning method, electrical circuit
configuration, operational mode for the system as well as the active elements

and microwave devices which are employed.

With the development of various radio engineering systems and the increased com-
plexity of the design and engineering problems solved by them, the requirements
placed on the antenna characteristics are also increasing, and in a number of
cases, they become contradictory and altogether insoluble when attempting to
develop new antennas on analogy with those previously existing and presently in
operation. For example, the striving to increase the range and precision of the
determination of angular coordinates in radar leads to the requirement of increas-
ing the antennas directionality, which causes an increase in their size and
weight. The increase in the flight velocity of aircraft leads to the necessity
of increasing the rate of beam motion in space. It is not possible to combine

the requirements of increasing the directionality and the rate of beam travel in
mechanically scanned antennas because of the inertia in their structure. Similar
contradictions also arise during attempts to simultaneously provide for high
directionality and the requisite frequency, power and direction finding character-
istics. These circumstances force one to dispense with the traditional type of
antennas for the given class of radio systems and to change over to antenna
arrays.

The use of complex antennas in the form of arrays, consisting of systems of poorly
directional or directional radiators, significantly expands the possibilities
for realizing the requisite characteristics.

A system of radiators with an electrically controlled phase distribution - a
phased antenna array - accomplishes the electrical scanning of the beam in space
at a rate which can be several orders of magnitude greater than the speed of
mechanical scanning antennas. The setting time to a specified point in space for

- 9 -

FI”!(NHH(1A1.IEHB(H§LY
related to the weight or the dimensions of the antenna. With this "inertialless"
scanning, new, previously not used methods of spatial scanning and multitarget
operation are possible (the simultaneous tracking of several targets in space).

Arrays made of narrow beam antennas make it possible to increase the ultimately
realizable resolution, gain and maximum transmitted power. Arrays have been
designed and are being designed using large reflectors for the antennas of radio
telescopes for space communications, having a resolution of down to minutes of
an angle in the centimeter band [0.3]. The arrays make it possible to create
multiple function antennas, in which the shape and width of the directional pat-
tern are changed by means of electrically controlled microwave devices, depending
on the functions being performed by the radio system..

The realization of different kinds of amplitude-phase distributions is signifi-
cantly simpler in an antenna array than in reflector, horn, lens and other micro-
wave antennas, since directional couplers, phase shifters, switchers and other
components can be inserted in the exciting radiators of the device (power dividers
of the antenna array), where these components provide for the requisite distri-
bution or control. Various kinds of amplitude-phase distributions make it possi-
ble to realise so-called optimal directional patterns in practice (with minimal
sidelobe radiation), as well as directional patterns having deep troughs ("nulls")
in the direction of interference near a target outside the main lobe of the

In terns of the structural design, the use of antenna arrays makes it possible

to reduce the longitudinal dimensions (in the direction of the normal to the
plane of the array) of pencil-beam antennas, and consequently, the volumes
occupied by them, and to use the exterior conducting surface of an object for
radiating. A highly directional antenna array made of horns or reflectors has

a smaller longitudinal dimension than one horn or reflector antenna with the same
directivity. An array of slotted radiators on the convex (conical, cylindrical,
spherical, etc.) exterior surface of an aircraft [05], without increasing the
aerodynamic resistance, makes it possible to substantially reduce the occupied
volume as compared to the corresponding aperture antenna placed in a fairing.

active phased antenna arrays, in which a self-excited oscillator, amplifier,
converter, mixer, etc. are connected to each radiator or a group of them. This
new approach to the design of the entire radio system, where it is impossible to
single out such individual devices as a receiver, transmitter, etc., permits a
substantial expansion of systea capabilities when processing the incoming infor-
mation, as well as the construction of adaptive (self-tuning) antennas and
achieving better interfacing of the radio system to a computer.

Prom everything that has been presented here, the role of antenna arrays in
modern radio engineering systems, their possibilities in providing for the
requisite antenna characteristics as well as for the entire radio system be-
comes understandable. For this reason, the design principles and methods of
calculating the major parameters of prospective phased and active phased antenna
IIIICIHWCIALIJSBIMNLY

irrays with various radiators, geosetries and control techniques are set forth
in this book.

1.3. Antennas with Electrical Scanning

we shall deal with the specific features of the construction and design of antenna
arrays with electrical scanning, which that be taken into account during the
planning. It should be noted that up to the present tine, no final terminology
has been worked out in the field of antenna arrays with electrical scanning, and
conclusive engineering techniques for their design are also still lacking. we
shall employ borrowed terns and definitions, as well as the nest widely dissesi-
nated terminology, corresponding to the physics of the processes which take

place.

Electrically scanned antennas can be treated in the general case as arrays with
a controlled phase or anplitude-phase distribution. Various types of radiators
and channeliaing systems are used in such antenna arrays, as well as diverse
ways of exciting the radiators and controlling the amplitude-phase distribution
during scanning. Antenna arrays in this case have the nest diverse structural
design. However, the directional properties of antenna arrays, when they are
correctly designed, can be detersined just as for highly directional antennas
with a continuous radiating aperture, in which the directional properties depend
on the relative dimensions of the aperture (with respect to the wavelength) and
the field distribution in it. In linear and planar arrays, the equivalent radia-
ting aperture changea during scanning, i.e., the projection of the aperture onto
a plane normal to the direction of the bean, and consequently, the directional
properties also change. The changes in the bean width of the array during scan-
r‘—”‘ - .~ '—"' ning should be taken into account in the
electrical design of the antenna. Graphs
which illustrate the.change in the direc—
tional pattern width, 260.5, are shown in
Figure 1.1 as a function of the relative
antenna sire LIA end the direction of the
bean in space, 0.

Linear, planar or axially syanetric

arrays (annular, conical, cylindrical,
spherical), as well as arrays with a more
complex shape (surface antenna arrays)
find application in practice. Arrays

can be both equidistant (with a constant
spacing between the radiators) and non-
equidistant types. The directional pat-
tern width of each radiator, the nuaher

of then and their arrangement in the array
are governed by the requirenents placed

on the directivity of the antenna, the
spatial scanning sector and the conditions
for the placenent and operation of the
antenna.

 

Figure 1.1. Bean width as a function
of array length and scanning angle for
the case of uniforn excitation.

- 11 -

lilitﬂﬂﬂClAl.lEll<lﬁL~
INDI10FFICIAI.IISE2(HULY

Cylindrical antenna arrays and phased arrays with a hemispherical scan space are
also treated in the book. Such arrays can be constructed in the form of convex
polyhedra made of planar arrays and arrays which have been given the name
"conformal" in foreign literature.

Assuring the specified requirements for an array with electrical scanning during
the design work can be achieved with the use of different types of radiators,
different spacings between them, array configurations, etc. One of the nsin tasks
of the design work is to find the optimum array variant for the specified require-
ments, taking into account the existing possibilities for the excitation, place-
ment, fabrication and operating conditions.

The radiators. the number of which in an antenna can reach tens of thousands can
be excited by means of waveguides, coaxial lines and striplines as well as other
types of channelizing systems using parallel, series, branched and other feed
configurations. A spatial excitation technique is also possible which is similar
to the method of exciting lenses and reflectors in which one (the primary) irrad-
iator excites all of the radiators of the array simultaneously. The selection of
the excitation configuration during the design work is determined by the method
of scanning, the permissible losses in the antenna as well as the size and weight.

Beam scanning in a frequency scanning antenna* is achieved by changing the oscil-
lator frequency (in the transmitting antenna) and the receiver (in the receiving
antenna). The electrical spacing between the radiators, excited by the channel-
izing traveling wave systems changes with the change in frequency, and consequent-
ly, the phase distribution in the array also changes. The determination of the
characteristics of these channelizing systems reduces, primarily, to the design

of frequency scanning antennas. Frequency scanning antenna arrays prove to be
significantly simpler in their structure than other antenna arrays with electrical
scanning. since there are no other elements in them besides the channelizing and
radiating devices. The presence of a microwave receiver and generator with a

fast response, for example, with electrical frequency tuning is a necessary con-
dition for the design of electrically scanning radio systems. However, the reali-
zation of frequency scanning in the case of wide angle and two-dimensional scan-
ning encounters considerable difficulties. Moreover, the use of frequency scan-
ning is not possible in all radio systems.

In the case oi a constant working frequency for a radio system, the phase distri-
bution in an antenna with electrical scanning can be controlled by means of phase
shifters. This technique has been given the name of phase beam scanning of an
antenna array. Ferrite, semiconductor, ferroelectric and other phase shifters
have been developed at the present time, in which the phase of the outgoing
electromagnetic wave changes either discretely or continuously from 0 to 360° as
a function of the control voltage or current. The incorporation of a system of
phase shifters in the device exciting the antenna (the power divider) makes it
possible to realize electrical scanning, where the phase distribution control is
discrete in the majority of cases. This occurs because of the discrete change in

*Questions of frequency scanning antenna theory and design were treated most
completely for the first time by L.H. Deryugin [010].

_ 12 -

Fill1)FFIC1Al.lh§l:(HVLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the phase shift in a phase shifter or the control current (or voltage), which in
turn is due to the specific nature of the operation of the electronic device
controlling the beam position. Such an electrical scanning technique, which has
been termed switched scanning (or digitally switched scanning in previously pub-
lished literature), is the most promising at the present time. With the
switching technique, as a result of the discrete change in the phase, the direc-
tional properties of the phased antenna array also change. These changes should
be taken into account when designing switched antennas.

The phase distribution of a scanning antenna array can also be controllod by
means of mechanical phase shifters, in which the phase change is accomplished by
means of mechanically moving or rotating special individual components or parts

of the channelizing system of the phase shifter [03]. With such a scanning tech-
nique, which is termed electromechanical, the maximum rate of beam travel is
governed by the speed of the phase shifter, and because of the low inertia of

the devices being moved, can be significantly greater than in mechanically scanned
antennas. The calculation of the directional characteristics of antenna arrays
with electromechanical scanning is the same as for electrically scanned arrays.

The choice of one scanning technique or the other during antenna design is deter-
mined not only by the requisite characteristics, but also by the existing possi-
bilities, the presence of the appropriate electronic devices, the characteristics
of the phase shifters and channelizing systems, power considerations, etc.

The transition from mechanical scanning to electrical led to increased complexity
in antenna structural design, which was due to the use, for example, of an array

of radiators with phase shifters instead of one dish antenna, as well as to a
sharp increase in the cost of the antenna unit. The use of phase shifters,
channelizing systems and other supplemental devices increases the phase errors

and thermal losses in an antenna and reduces the gain. For this reason, it is
expedient to change over to electrically scanned antenna arrays only in those

cases where the mechanical approach does not assure the requisite beam control
characteristics and a certain degradation of the power characteristics and increase
in the cost are permissible.

1.4. Specific Features of Phased Antenna Array Design

The further development of microwave antennas led to the working out of new

and increased complexity of known methods of computing the main characteristics.
The structural and computational design work on the antennas became significantly
more complicated because of the increase in the number of parameters governing
antenna characteristics. as well as by the striving to optimize the characteris-
tics or compute them more precisely.

The design of scanning antennas with specified characteristics is accomplished
with the condition that these characteristics are assured for all antenna beam
positions. For this reason, the calculation of the directional, frequency and
other properties of arrays must be made for various beam positions in the spatial

scanning sector. In this case, the beam width, sidelobe level, directional gain
and other characteristics are determined not only by the array parameters, but

- 13 -

FINICNHWCIAI.USECﬂVLY
INTI‘OFIICIAI.USEZCMULY

also by the characteristics of the devices which control the phase distribution
(the discrete step for the phase change in a phase shifter, the deviation of the
dispersion characteristics of the channelizing systems from the requisite values,
etc.).

Complex interaction phenomena occur between the radiators in antenna arrays, which
are manifest in a change in the directivity and input impedance of a radiator when
it is inserted in the array. As a result, the directional properties and power
characteristics of an antenna can change substantially in an array as compared to
the characteristics found without taking the interaction into account.

Intense developmental work is under way at the present time on the theory of
accounting for interaction in microwave antenna arrays. Engineering methods of
calculating the interaction are known only for certain types of radiators and

a definite arrangement of them. Taking this interaction into account, which
changes when controlling the phase distribution, makes the design of phased micro-
wave arrays considerably more difficult.

The interaction of the radiators in a phased antenna array depends on the type of
radiators used, their configuration and affects the antenna characteristics in
different ways. Thus, the interaction of resonant poorly directional radiators
(resonant dipoles, resonant slot antennas) in an array leads to a substantial
change in the input impedance and the resonance properties, so that during scan-
ning, the input impedance of each radiator in the system and the matching of the
driving channel depend on the beam direction in space. The change in the dis-
tribution of the radiating current (field) and correspondingly, the directional
pattern of a radiator, is insignificant in this case.

The interaction of radiators in different types of antenna arrays (for example,
of the traveling wave-dielectric rod type, helical antennas, yagi channels or
aperture-waveguide antennas, horns) is manifest in a change in the current dis-
tribution in the radiator and a corresponding change in the directional pattern
of an element. A change in the directional pattern of a radiating element in

an array is manifest in a substantial change in its width and in the appearance
of deep nulls (indented pattern), something which leads to a significant drop in
antenna gain for certain beam positions in space and to the corresponding mis-
matching of the exciting channel. The mutual influence effect of radiators can
be eliminated by means of the appropriate placement of the radiators, a choice of
their type and size as well as the use of dielectric coatings and other special
measures. For this reason, the design of the radiating elements of arrays is
treated in this book along with the general questions of phased array design.

Finding the optimal variant of a scanning antenna for given requirements, taking
into account the characteristics of the radiators, phase shifters, channelising
systems and other microwave devices available to the designer, considerably
increases the volume of all of the calculations to be performed during the
design work.

Individual sections on the theory of microwave antenna arrays and electrical
scanning, which have been published in the literature, are intended primarily

- 15 -

FIIICIHNCJAI.IEHE(HNLY
FOR<OFIﬂClAL.USEINNLY

for specialists in antenna arrays. The study and utilization of this literature
in the designs of antennas for various functions require large expenditures of
time. which creates difficulties during engineering design work. For this reason,
some engineering techniques of designing scanning microwave arrays and their
elements are presented in the book, which make it easier for specialists familiar
only with the general theory and practice of the application of antenna devices

to determine the major characteristics. This has brought about the necessity of
introducing a number of approximations and simplifications, something which has
influenced the precision in calculating the characteristics and led to a limita-
tion of their range of applicability.

Various methods exist for designing the antennas considered here, which differ in
the precision of the results obtained and the degree of complexity of the
calculations. The antenna characteristics found by means of the cited engineering
procedures can be made more precise by means of more rigorous computational tech-
niques known from the literature (see the bibliographies for the relevant chap~
ters).

Along with the simplified design methods, where it has been possible, more rigor-
ous computational methods are included using computers, which make it possible to
optimize the device being developed with respect to one criteria or another by
means of the programs which have been worked out.

The design of phased antenna arrays involves the solution of exterior and interior
electrodynamic problems from antenna theory. When using approximate analysis
methods, the independent solution of the exterior and interior problems can be
permitted. The solution of these problems, taking their mutual relationship

into account, makes it possible to calculate antenna characteristics and search
for the optimum variant of an antenna which best conforms to the 'c' requirements.
Such an approach made it possible to create independent aethot. .or the engineer-
ing design of electrically scanned antenna arrays, arrays of radiators and their
elements.

1.5. Specific Features of Active Array Design

The application of stripline and microstripline hardware makes it possible to

a significant extent to reduce the cost, improve the reliability and decrease

the size and weight of antenna equipment. Stripline and microstripline devices
can be used as channelizing systems, power dividers and directional couplers,
filters and circulators, isolators and phase shifters, etc. Such advantages of
printed circuit technology as repeatability of the parameters during series pro-
duction and the capability of integration have made it possible to also use these
devices in the structural design of microwave antenna, first in the decimeter and
meter bands, and then also in the centimeter band. The yagi (director antenna),
microstripline radiators, arrays of dipole radiators, compact resonator slot
antennas, etc. can be numbered among them. However. a substantial drawback to
stripline devices is the significant losses in the centimeter band and especially
in the short wave portion of this band. The insertion of an active element in
the microwave channel makes it possible to not only reduce the losses, but to
also increase the radiated power, simplify the microwave distribution system and

- 15 -

roe ornan. USE oNLv'
non omcm. USE ONLY

ease the electrical requirements placed on it, as well as to miniaturize the
entire antenna system. The insertion of an active element (or device) in a
radiator or in its excitation channel transforms the antenna array from a passive
reciprocal [sic] device into an active antenna array, and a phased array into an
active phased antenna array. in which different active elements are used during
reception and transmission. In practice, antenna arrays are broken down into
receiving, transmitting and transceiving, depending on the function. The radia-
tor, active elements, phase shifter, lines connecting these microwave elements,
etc. are structurally combined into a single device, which has been given the
name of an active phased antenna array nodule.

The most diverse circuit configurations are known at the present time for receiving
and transmitting modules. for example, in some circuits, the active element is
coupled to each radiator, while in others, it is coupled to a group of radiators.
There is a lack of unified terminology to an even greater extent for phased
antenna arrays for active arrays.

The designing of the transceiving module of an active phased array with the
theoretic and component bases existing at the present time is actually broken
down into the solution of two independent problems: the development of the
transmitting module and the development of the receiving module. As is well
known, modern microelectronics has achieved significant successes; various inte-
grated circuits have been created which are widely used in radio receivers. At
the same time, there is a lack of series produced high power microwave inte-
grated circuits for radio transmitting devices. This circumstance has also led
to the necessity of a more detailed treatment of the questions of the design of
active transmitting modules in this book.

When developing an active phased antenna array module, a solution which provides
for minimum antenna cost while assuring all of the requisite characteristics is
preferable. As studies show, the cost of the power generated in a circuit. where
each radiator is coupled to an individual active element, is higher, however,
this is compensated by the less expensive and lower power generators and phase
shifters, and the possibility of using more convenient power supplies as well

as facilitating the cooling of the elements of an array.

When designing an active transmitting module, one can use either a self-excited
oscillator or an externally excited generator (power amplifier), or a string of
series connected stages, among which there can be frequency multipliers. Because
of frequency multiplication, the distribution system operates at a frequency lower
than the output frequency, and as a rule, at a lower power level, which makes it
possible to substantially reduce the losses in the system.

The major requirements placed on the active elements of modules are assuring the
specified output microwave power, relatively high values of the efficiency (no
less than 20 to 401) and power gain (more than 10 d3), operating mode stability,
comparatively wide passband (more than 51), a small scatter in the parameters of
the individual models, operational stability in a wide range of temperature varia-
tion, low levels of generator noise, filtering of spurious signals and those out-
side the passband, as well as a number of structural design (small size and weight)
and economic requirements.

-l6-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l¢ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USB(NVLY

Semiconductor microwave devices such as bipolar power microwave transistors, mul-
tiplier diodes (varactors and charge storage diodes) as well as microwave diodes
(IMPATT diodes and charge transfer diodes) have been finding increasingly wider
applications in active modules in recent years.

High power microwave transistors are the most sophisticated semiconductor devices
in the microwave band; they have working frequencies which as yet do not exceed
5 to 7 68:. For this reason, when developing active phased array modules for a
working frequency in the 3 centimeter band using these transistors, it is neces-
sary to provide a frequency multiplier, something which leads to the use of an
amplifier and multiplier chain in the module. Diodes with a nonlinear p-n
junction capacitance are used as the nonlinear element in the multiplier, where
these diodes are distinguished by a high input to output signal power conversion
gain, small dimensions and weight and which practically require no power from
the power supply.

Microwave amplifiers designed around avalanche transit time diodes have a higher
output power (by an order of magnitude and a greater efficiency (up to 5 to 15:)
than charge transfer diodes.

Active modules can also be designed around self-excited microwave device oscilla-

tors (transistor or diodes) using a system of synchronization from a special
frequency source.

tied to the development of active modules which assure the requisite characteris-
tics of the antenna array. For this reason, when planning an active phased array,
it is necessary to select the circuit configuration of the active modules, com-
pute the operational modes of the generator stages and the microwave networks
matching them as well as execute the structural design of the generator circuit
components in the form of a hybrid integrated circuit. It should be noted that
calculations of semiconductor microwave generators are made at the present time
using approximate methods, since the devices themselves are complex nonlinear
microwave devices. However, these techniques make it possible to estimate the
major power and structural design characteristics of the stages with a precision
adequate for practice and to design the radiating system of an active phased
antenna array based on them.

The power engineering characteristics (output power, working frequency, efficiency,
gain, etc.) of microwave semiconductor devices are treated in the book for the
purpose of using them in the active modules of active phased arrays and attention
is drawn to the possibility of the appearance of thermal limitations with certain
structural design requirements related to the realization of beam scanning in

the array. Design procedures are given for the operating conditions of high

power microwave transistor oscillators and their matching networks, as well as
frequency multipliers using veractors and charge storage diodes, which make it
possible to design an active module using an amplifier and multiplier chain.

Special attention is devoted to the design of microwave oscillators and amplifiers
around avalanche transit time diodes, which meet many of the major requirements

- 17 -

m 0mm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

placed on the active elements of active phased array nodules in the 3 ca band.
Reference materials are also given for the structural design of the components
of microwave networks.

-13-

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY

2. PHASBD ANTENNA ARRAYS
2.1. The Determination of the Geometric Characteristics of Phased Antenna Arrays

Sons of the most widespread types of phased antenna arrays are linear and planar
arrays. The nsjority of planar phased arrays consist of identical radiators,
positioned at the nodes of a plane coordinate grid with twofold periodicity.
The most useful grids are rectangular and triangular (or hexagonal) (Figure 2.1).

It is assumed in an elementary analysis that the directional pattern of a radiator
in an array does not differ fron the directional pattern of an isolated radiator.

 

Figure 2.1. Methods of radiator layout. Figure 2.2. Systens of coordi-
nates

The excitation phase for the radiators in an array in the case of narrow beam
radiation provides for the in-phase addition of the fields in a specified direc-
tion and depends on the position of the radiator in the array:

we. ("nu Tm) ' ' K (Xe, 003 'Pru l Y... Sill 'Pra) Sin on" (2. 1)

where k - 21/1 is the wave number; an and Tn are the coordinates of the radia-
tors in the array; or" and Orn are the angles n a spherical system of coordinates
which determine the direction of the main lobe (heano in space (Figure 2.2).

The directivity function of an array f(6, a) can he represented in the form of
the product of the directivity function of an isolated radiator 8(6. 6) times an
array factor 32(0, 0), which can be treated as the directivity function of an
array consisting of isotropic radiators:

I (0. Ir) 5(0. '1') I’z(0-. w). (2.2)
where
Mn. q») - 2:" A... c’ (”mm").
ma. Id

In the cited expressions, Ann is the amplitude of the excitation for an array
element; (DE. , Iz'(X,.. (.05., I y" sin ‘1'): ; sine is the spatial phase shift for

the observation direction a, a.

- 19 -

INI!(NNHCIA1.USI(HNLY
FIIICHHNCJA1.USE1MVLY

"henlthe radiators are placed at the nodal points of a coordinate grid with two-
fold periodicity, the in-phase addition of the fields of the individual array
radiators is possible not only in the direction of the main lobe of the direc-
tional pattern, but also in other directions which correspond to the spatial phase
shift, which compensates for the phase shift between the radiators due to the
excitation. Then, in addition to the main lobe of the array, there also exist
diffraction maximaof higher orders. The spatial orientation of the diffraction
maxima depends on the spacing between the radiators. With a reduction in the
,spacing between them, the number of diffraction maxima located in the region of
the real nodes, is reduced. It is essential for normal operation of the array '
that only one main lobe of the array be located in the region of the real nodal
points, while there be no diffraction maxima.

when using a rectangular grid, there are no higher order diffraction maxima if the
spacing between the radiators in the direction of the coordinate axes satisfies
the following conditions:

d,/l g l/(sin 0. .9. ~}- I); d,< l/(sin 0...... + I), (2 . 3)

where A is the wavelength; 9: max and 8, max are the maximum beam deflection
angles in the 20x and ZOY planes (Figure 2.2).

For a triangular grid, the corresponding condition has the form:

is 2 , l
i V7I+ainom’ - (2.4)

where e.,, is the maximum deflection of the beam from the normal to the array.

For example, if 0.3x - ‘5', then we obtain for rectangular and triangular grids

dx - dy - 0.58 A and d - 0.68 A respectively.

Thus, the use of a triangular grid makes it possible to increase the spacing
between the radiators and to reduce the overall number of then. It follows from
expressions (2.3) and (3.4) that this reduction amounts to approximately 132 of
the number of elements in an array with a rectangular grid.

Conditions (2.3) and (2.4) do not take into account the directional properties of
the radiators of an array and determine the ultimate spacings in an array of
isotropic radiators. In the case of a limited scanning sector, the use of direc-
tional radiators makes it possible to increase the spacing between them as com-
pared to the values determined by (2.3) and (2.b). and to correspondingly reduce
'the overall number of them.

In fact, if the directional pattern of one radiator of an array is zero or close
to it outside the scanning sector (Figure 2.3), then one can allow the existence
of higher order diffraction maxima in the region of the res} nodal points, in-
creasing the spacing between the radiators as compared to (2.3) and (2.“), and
requiring in this case that during all movements of the bean, the diffraction
marina do not fall in the scanning sector. Since the directional pattern of an
array is obtained by multiplying the directivity function of a radiator and the
array factor, the diffraction maxima are suppressed. since they will be multiplied
by small or zero values of the radiator directivity function.

- 20 -

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lElB(ﬂVlY
Figure 2.3. Directional patterns of an ideal (1) and a real (2) radiator,
and the lobes of the array multiplying factor (3).

 

Figure 2.6. A phased antenna array with nonscanning "subarrays".

Key: 1. Subarray radiators;
2. The subarrays.

The advantage gained in the number of radiators as compared to an array of iso-
tropic elements for triangular and rectangular grids is defined by the following

expressions:

 

 

Mm, V's— (l'|"'"°-n)'_ ”unoc- (lot-sinO—"y
N ”T m»... ' ~ ' muse,“ ' (2.5)

(“.4301 - “isotro 1c]. For example, when 6", - 60’, the number of radiators is
reduce by 451 an 392 respectively.

However, the design of a directional radiator, the directivity function of which
would fall off rapidly to small values outside the bounds of the scanning sector
is a complex problem. The directivity functions of actual radiators differ from

the ideal. For this reason. the number of radiators in reel scanning arrays is
greater than the minimum possible. If the width of the directional pattern of

a phased array does not exceed 1‘, while the scanning sector in both of the main
planes is less than 10', then the requisite directivity can be obtained by com-
bining conventional poorly directional radiating elements into groups (Figure
2.4). Such groups of radiators will be called subarrays in the following. The
radiators of each subarray are excited in phase and produce a directional pattern,

- 21 -

Itﬂl(lﬂﬂ(141.USE(NNLY
Fill(lﬂﬂ(lAl.lEﬂifﬂVLY

the maximum of which is oriented in the direction of the normal to the plane of

the array. During scanning, the excitation phases of each of the subarrays, which
can be treated as individual antenna radiators. are changed by means of phase
shifters. The relative dimensions of the subarrays are chosen in accordance with
the specified scanning sector and the permissible level of the higher order dif-
fraction maxima. Since the shape of a subarray directional pattern differs from

a rectangular one, when determining the dimensions of subarrays it is necessary

to take into account the permissible level of the higher order diffraction maxi-

ma, which now fall within the-bounds of the main-lobe of the directional pattern .n .
of the subarrays during scanning (Figure 2.3). Design formulas have the form:

L;'.I1=¢/(l+¢) Singing-us. (2.6)

where o is the permissible level of the diffraction maxi-a relative to the main
maximum of the directivity characteristic; L". are the dimensions of the sub-

array along the x and Y axes respectively (Pigu‘e 2.5). The number of lines and
columns formed by the subarrays is determined by the expressions:

 

L
N...:= 1: )iug-sln 0...... (2.7)

where Lu. are the dimensions of the array aperture along the X and Y axes respec-
tively. *he product N - any is equal to the number of phase shifters in the

array.

 

Figure 2.5. The geometry of a plane antenna array with nonscanning
subarraye.

If the subarrays are replaced by aperture radiators (for example, horn antennas),
then when determining the quantities “x and N , it is necessary to multiply one

of them, corresponding to the H-plane of the horn antenna by a factor of 1.5,
since the field distribution in this plane falls off towards the edges of the
aperture, which leads to a widening of the directional pattern of the horn antenna.

The antenna dimensions are determined by the specified directional gain or width
of the directional pattern, the wavelength and the selected amplitude distribution

of the field in the antenna aperture. (The choice of the amplitude distribution
in the antenna depends on the requisite level of the sidelobes.)

- 22 -

liliC“ﬂﬂC1Al.U§EIN‘LY
TABLE 2.1.

(3) Tadaaaa u i

      
 

—l7.l

 

0.910

at .9-2- 40.6 0.833

414.6% 43.4 0.750

—'- am}- ..n 0,310

I 1
nu! 83.27: "£07: ~33 0,“?

3. h
13-3 “AT “3.21" —40

 

l o.m

L

  

Key: 1. Law governing the change in the anplitude of the field

(in—phase aperture), A(x); '

2. For-ulna for the directional pattern without taking the
directional properties of an eleaentsry area into account,

_ P(u);

3. Directional pattern width at the half power level, 206.5;

6. Position of the first null, e ;

5. Level of the first sidelobe. 23;

6. Aperture area utilisation factor. v.

Sons of the radiation characteristics of a rectangular aperture are given in
Table 2.1 for various field distributions in the aperture. The data of the table
are justified for antennas with a continuous distribution of radiators. However,
with a snall spacing between the radiators, they are also justified for antenna
arrays. As can be seen free the table, the level of the first sidelobe and the
nature of the decay in the level of the rensining lobes depend on the specific
features of the field amplitude distribution at the edge of the aperture. In

the case of a uniform distribution, which has a break at the edge of the aperture,

- 23 -

I!IICIHNCIAJ.IEIZ(I!LY
FIHICHHGCIKLIISEilﬂlY

the level of the first sidelobe is -l3.2 d3, while the level of the renaining
lobes falls off in proportion to llu, where u - (kl/2) sine.

In the case of triangular end cosine
distributions, continuous at the edge

of the aperture, but the first deriva-
tive of which has a break, the level of
the first aidelobe is -26.5 dB and -23
dB respectively, while the level of the
remain ng lobes falls off proportionally
to 1/u . "ith a cosine-squared distri-
bution, continuous at the edge of the
aperture along with the first derivative,
the level of the first sidelobe is -32
dB, while the level of the remaining
lobes falls off as l/u3.

 

Figure 2.6. The equivalent length of an .
antenna array. The data cited in Table 2.1 correspond

’ to the antenna beam orientation in the
direction of the normal to the line of position of the radiators in the case of
a linear array or to the plane of the aperture in the case of a plane two dimen- '
sional array. '

To calculate the width of the directional pattern of a linear array with a devia-

tion of the beam from the normal, the concept of equivalent array length is intro-
duced (Figure 2.6): ‘

Law“. -, Ndcoseum Lm‘”‘°°°°--- (2.8)

With an increase in the deviation angle, the equivalent length falls off, while
the width of the directional pattern increases in accordance with the formulas of
Table 2.1.

In a two-dimensional planar array, with a deviation of the main lobe from the
direction of the nornal to the aperture in any plane, one can assume that the
directional pattern also changes only in this plane: this assertion becomes more
precise, the greater the dinensions of the array. For arrays, the length of
which is greater than 10 A, this is well justified.

With a deviation in the main lobe from the normal to the plane of a rectangular
array in the main x02 and roz planes, the concept of an equivalent size and equiva-
lent array area can also be introduced to determine the directional pattern width
and directional gain:

. ' Lsmq~s d35930" (mum X02)- (X02 Plane),
1‘ equ“ L,,,..= N,d,cos 0,, (nmocrs YOZ); (2.9)
Sun-N3 N, d, d,coso,. .

where Nx and N are the number of rows and columns formed by the radiators of
the array, parx11el to the x and U axes of the rectangular system of coordinates
respectively.

- 24 -

son<orruna1.use¢nwtv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is not difficult to note that the equivalent values are equal to the projections
of the actual geometric characteristics on to a plane perpendicular to the direc-
tion of the main lobe. The directional pattern width in the main planes can be
found from the formulas of Table 2.1 when the corresponding equivalent dimensions
are substituted in them.

To estimate the change in the directional gain of a planar array with a deflection
of the directional pattern naxima from the normal to the plane of the array
through an angle emain! one can employ the relationship:

0(9u13) - Docosenin (2.10)

where no is the value of the directional gain in the direction of a perpendicular
to the plane of the array. Formulas (2.8) - (2.10) are approximate, and their
precision is better, the smaller the beam width, i.e., the greater the relative
dimensions of the array.

The directional gain of a planar array with the bean oriented in the direction of
a normal to its plane can be computed from the following formula:

' D.F4ﬂSV/”o (2.11)

where v is the aperture area utilization factor and its value is determined by
the amplitude distribution; S is the aperture area.

2.2. Mutual Coupling Effects Among Radiators

Numerous theoretical and experimental studies have shown that it is impossible to
neglect the mutual influence of array radiators. In accordance with [08], the
interaction between radiating elements in an array is manifest as follows:

-The input impedance of the radiating element in an antenna array differs from
its impedance in free space and is a function of the scanning angle;

-The directional pattern of the element changes:
-The polarization characteristics are distorted.

In a number of cases, the interaction of the elements in an array leads to a sharp
mismatch between the antenna aperture and the feed circuits. Large antenna arrays
at such scanning angles become blinded.

One of the most important characteristics of an antenna array is the directional
pattern of a single radiator with all of the other radiators loaded into matched
loads. In other words, this is the directional pattern of the array when only
one radiator in all is excited in it, while all of the others are connected to
loads which can be either the output impedances of the generators or the input
impedances of the receivers in the case of active arrays, or loads which match
the characteristic impedances of the supply feeders. when one radiating element
is excited. because of the mutual coupling there is excitation of the adjacent
radiators and the directional pattern of this element in the array is produced
as a result of the superimposition of the fields of adjacent elements on the

- 25 -

IN)I10lﬂﬂ(1Al.lISIICMHLY
FOIINHHKIALIEHBONLY

field of the excited radiator. In this case, waves are excited in the feeders of
adjacent elements loaded into passive loads and a portion of the energy is
absorbed in the loads.

For an antenna array of finite dimensions, the radiation resistance and direction-
al pattern of a single radiator depend on its position, since the cross coupling
is manifest in different ways for radiating elements located at different points
in the array. Consequently. the principle of multiplication of the directivity
characteristics can prove to be unacceptable in this case. This applies to arrays
with a relatively small number of radiators. '

In a large planar antenna array, the characteristics of the radiators of the cen-
tral region are practically identical and the most important features of their
behavior can be described with sufficient precision by the behavior of the
radiators of an infinite antenna array. For this reason, an infinite antenna
array can successfully serve as a model for the analysis of large planar antenna
arrays. In this case, the directivity function of the antenna array can nonethe-
less be represented in the form of the product of the array factor and the direc-
tivity function of a single element, which is determined taking an infinite
environment into account.

One of the most important reasons for using an infinite array model consists in
the fact that this model can be treated as a periodic structure, for the study

of which there are various analytical techniques. In the case of uniform excita-
tion, it is sufficient to calculate the field distribution in one of the cells

of this structure. The reflection factor and the radiation characteristics are
determined by this field. The specific features of the various analysis tech-
niques for infinite arrays are treated in [081. Specific features of methods

of analysing other models of phased arrays are also given there.

We shall briefly consider what the effect of phased array blinding consists of.
The concepts of hidden resonance, field suppression, nulls of the directional
pattern of an element in an array and leaky waves. All of these concepts can
be considered valid, but each of then does not exhaust, rather only underscores
the different aspects of the phenomenon. Such a diversity in the interpretations
of the blinding effect is partially explained by the two different approaches

to the study of phased antenna arrays, one of which corresponds to the case of
the excitation of all array elements. where the concept of input impedance of
the radiator and the reflection factor is used to describe the array properties,
while the second involves the excitation of one element with all of the other
elements loaded into the impedance of the generators, receivers or into matched
passive loads. The concepts of hidden resonance and suppression are explained
by the behavior of an array in the case of the first approach to the study of
array properties, while directional pattern nulls and leaky waves explain the
specific features of array characteristics with the second approach.

The blinding effect can be observed for various radiating element structures.
Radiating elements. of which hidden resonance is a characteristic, are shown in
Figure 2.7 a-c. Each structure contains regions in which the propagation of

-26-

l0!‘0?FKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

surface waves is possible. (Besides the indicated structures. hidden resonance is
also possible for director radiators (see Chapter 10)). He shall consider some
of the specific features of the occurrence of this phenomenon.

In accordance with the theory of hidden resonance [0.8], the condition for array
blinding matches the condition for surface wave propagation in an appropriate . _
radiator structure. For example, a slotted array. escited'by‘wiyiguides (Figure
2.7b). contains a dielectric layer Iying on top of the slots. If a surface wave-
guide system is mated to this array, where the system is in the form of a dielec-
tric layer on a solid metal shield, then the blinding of the array of narrow
slots corresponds to the beam direction in which a phase distribution is esta-
blished along the array which matches the phase of the surface wave field at the
points where the slots are located. In this case, the field in the array over
the slots is identical to the surface wave field in the dielectric layer on the
metal shield, while the input admittance of the slots is infinitely high. As

as result. the waves propagating in the waveguides are completely reflected back
to the generators. The array does not radiate anything.

W W 12%
I//, . Z 4 Wé 24' /, :1
(3 (If; (5". m" a)” (25’

Figure 2.7. Radiating structures in which the effect of blinding is
observed.

Space wave

   

0 a! ‘0 ‘7 I'

Figure 2.8. A leaky wave in a periodic Figure 2.9. Directional pattern of a

array with the excitation of a single waveguide array.

element. Key: 1. Layout of the radiators;

Key: 1. Leaky wave radiation; 2. Direction of the diffraction
2. Leaky wave. maximum.

It is essential to note that the comparison of the indicated guide system and a
phased array make sense only for a beam direction in which the blinding of the
array takes place.

- 27 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Examples of radiators for which field suppression is possible are shown in Figure
2.7 d-f. In the region filled with dielectric (Figure 2.7b), the higher modes
either propagate or fall in the supercritical node of the phased array. A
slightly supercriticel mode is presupposed in the radiators depicted in Figure
2.7 e-f for the initial higher nodes, i.e., the dimensions of the waveguides
should be rather large."~Field-anppreaaion occurs as a result of the excitation
of higher modes in the waveguides of'the~array because of the asynnetry of the
external field, which occurs during scanningf' For a certain scanning angle, the
excitation of the higher modes in the waveguide leads to field suppression in
the aperture, complete reflection, and consequently to the blinding of the
array. .

If only one radiating element is excited in an array, while all of the others are
loaded into passive loads, the nulls of the directional pattern of the excited
radiator correspond to the blinding effect. The appearance of nulls in the
directional pattern of the excited element can be related to the excitation of

a leaky wave, which entails the removal of energy in a direction opposite to

the direction of its propagation (Figure 2.8). Besides the leaky wave, an excited
radiator produces a space wave. The interference of the indicated waves in the
space above the array leads to the cancellation of their fields in some directions
and nulls appear in the directional pattern of the array element. where these
nulls are absent in the directional pattern of the same isolated element.

The structure of a waveguide array and the directional pattern of a waveguide
radiator corresponding to it [013], calculated taking into account the influence
of adjacent radiating elements loaded into passive loads and exhibiting a trough
is shown in Figure 2.9.

The phenomenon of blinding is observed when the array beam is oriented within
the bounds of the working scanning sector, and for this reason reduces the
phased array scanning sector.

2.3. The Relationship Between the Directivity of a Radiator in an Array and the
Directional Characteristics of a Fully Excited Array

The convenience and importance of the concept of the directivity characteristic
of an element in an array consists in the fact that, first of all, when all of
the antenna array radiators are excited, the superimposition of these patterns
makes it possible to obtain the true directional pattern of the array, and
secondly. an experinentally measured directional pattern of an element in an
array can he used, as will he demonstrated in the following, to calculate the
reflection factor in the feeders connected to the radiators when all of the
array elements are excited. The latter circumstance is especially important
when, because of the conplexity of the structure of the radiating elements,
their theoretic analysis proves to be difficult.

The directivity function of an element in an array corresponds to the gain of

the element in the array: the directional pattern of the element in terms of
power:

8(0. v) = N0. 0). (2.12)

- zg -

IIHICNHHCIA1.U§E(MVLY
FIMIIHHHCLALIJSEiﬂﬂLY

In the case of equal amplitude excitation of the elements of an array, the gain

of the array is related to the gain of an element in the array by the simple
relationship:

0 0. =-N m .
This relationship determines one of the major advantages of the utilization of the

element directivity characteristic in an array: using this directivity character-
istic, one can determine the gain of a fully excited array.

If the generators which drive the radiators are matched to the feedlinea running
to the radiators and there are no thermal losses, then the difference between

the gain of the antenna array and the directional gain is determined by the
energy reflected from the radiators back to the generators:

G (000 Q) 3 D (or 9) n _ 1V) (0' ‘9”:

where r(e, 9) is the reflection factor in the feeders driving the radiators.

(2.16)

Reflections in feedlines are due to mismatching these lines to the input impe-
dances of the radiators of a fully excited array. Since the excitation phase of
the array elements changes during scanning, the input impedance of the radiators
is a function of o, 9. The coefficient r is related to the input impedance of
a radiator 2, by the following relationship known from transmission line theory:

N0. v) = ll. (0. ¢)—Z.|/IZ.(0. vH- 2.1. (2.15)
where 20 is the characteristic impedance of the feeder to which the radiator is
connected.

If there are no higher order diffraction maxima, then the directional gain of the
array is determined by the expression:

D - (4 all!) AN cos 0. (2.16)

where e is the angle formed by the direction of the main lobe of the directional

pattern and the normal to the plane of the array; A is the area allocated for
one array element.

By comparing (2.13) -- (2.16), we obtain:
g (0, q-) =- (4n'A’) A cos 0 [I -— I‘ (0. (ﬂl. (2.17)

Expression (2.16) ties together two different operational modes of an antenna
array. The gain of an element corresponds to the excitation of just one element
in the array, while all the remaining ones are loaded into matched loads. The

reflection factor characterizes the reflected power when all of the array elements
are excited.

If the value of 2a is found theoretically, then one can determine g(0, 9) by
means of expressions (2.16) and (2.17), and then the gain of the array C(O, 9).

- 29 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI-USE(NNLY
FOI(MWHC1AI.USE‘DNLY

In the case where it is difficult to calculate 2a and r because of the complexity
of the analytical description of these quantities, one can experimentally measure
3(0, ¢) in an array, all of the radiating elements of which with the exception of
one are loaded into a matched load. It is enormously simpler to measure g(0, 0)
than to experimentally determine C(o, 9) and 28(0, 9) in the case where it is
necessary to excite all of the array elements. The difficulties in this case are
obvious. They are determined by the complexity of the excitation feeder system.
Based on the measured g(0, a), one can determine |r| and the sun in the lines
leading to the radiators by means of (2.16).

The ideal directional pattern of an element in an array which provides for array
matching for any beam direction in space can be derived from expression (2.16).
In fact, it follows from (2.16) that r - Q, if:

g (0, t9) =- (4 uA/y‘) cos 0. (2.18)
Thus, the directivity function of an ideal element in an array has the form:

The efficiency and universal nature of the directivity function of an array radia-
tor is due to the fact that all of the effects related to the interaction of
radiating elements are taken into account in it. It must be noted that the intro-
duction of the directivity characteristic of an array radiator is based on the
assumption of the identical nature of the directivity functions of all of the
radiators, which, generally speaking, is most likely the case in finite arrays.
However, in the case of large arrays, the existing differences are insignificant
for all of the radiating elements except those which are located at the edges

of the array.

2.4. Radiators of Phased Antenna Arrays

Dipoles. open ends of waveguides, dielectric rod, helical and slotted radiators,
etc. are used as the radiators of phased antenna arrays. Considerable attention
has been devoted in recent years to printed circuit radiators (also see Chapter
9). The choice of a particular type of radiator is governed by the working fre-
quency band, the requirements placed on the shape of the directional pattern of
an individual element radiating power, as well as the polarization characteristics
and broadband response.

There are three methods used at the present time in the design of radiating
elements: 1) the technique of an array with a small number of elements; 2) the
technique of waveguide models; 3) the technique of mathematical simulation.

The major problem in the design work consists most often in minimizing the reflec-
tion factor in a specified scanning sector and frequency range.

In the first case [013], it is necessary to design an array with a relatively
small number of radiating elements, to determine the coefficients and subsequently
calculate the reflection factor for the center element. Then a matching device

is chosen for each element. after which the entire procedure is repeated to
confirm the results and improve the matching. The method is extremely laborious
and has poor precision for directions close to the angles where the diffraction
marina occur.

- 3o -

FOR‘0F11C1A1.IIHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experimental modeling of the operation conditions of a radiating element as a
component part of an infinite antenna array is used in the method of waveguide
models [0.8] for several values of scanning angles, by means of placing a small
number of radiators in a special waveguide unit. One of the drawbacks to the
technique is the limited number of directions for which one can experimentally
determine the reflection factor. Because of these specific features, the method
does not allow for obtaining complete information on the properties of an array
radiator in a specified scanning sector and frequency range.

The third method, which is based on the study of a mathematical model of the
radiator, is the most promising and has no fundamental limitations on the type
of radiators which can be studied. It is applicable to radiating elements which
can be "calculated", i.e., for which a solution is known for the corresponding
boundary problem as applied to an infinite array. Although the number of types
of such radiators is small. there are extremely interesting ones for practical
applications among them. These are waveguide radiators and their different
variants (waveguide radiators partially and completely filled with a dielectric,
or coated with a dielectric layer), dipole and director radiators over a con-
ducting flat surface, as well as dielectric rod and slotted radiators with
various excitation methods and certain others. A great advantage of the technique
is the fact that mathematical simulation makes it possible to reproduce any
changes both in the model which are possible in principle and in an experiment,
but which may be difficult to realize. The utilization of the technique sub-
stantially curtails the volume of experimental studies related to the development
of the radiators, and in a number of cases. even eliminates them.

When using mathematical modeling, the process of developing a radiator can be
broken down into four steps:

1) The choice of the type of radiating element and the determination of the para-
meters of the layout grid for the radiators in the arrays;

2) The calculation and minimization of the reflection factor by means of varying
the radiator parameters being changed;

3) Selecting a matching device and matching the radiator;

4) Checking the results obtained with the simplest waveguide model.

The first step was partially described in § 2.2.

If an equivalent circuit is known for the selected matching device and its para-
meters can be determined, then the matching device can be completely designed
and optimized along with the radiator. In this case, the second and third steps
are performed simultaneously. It must be kept in mind that in any case. the
matching device should be placed closer to the r'iiator so as not to degrade the
frequency properties of the array.

A distinction is drawn between matching phased array radiators for one direction
and wide angle matching. Hatching for one beam direction is accomplished by
conventional methods adopted in microwave engineering (reactive loops, quarter-

wave transformers, etc.). Some methods of wide angle matching of radiators are
described in § 2.6.

- 31 -

FOR¢NHHCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A description of mathematical models and director, slotted and waveguide radia-
tors is given in Chapter 10.
~ " -. Dipole radiators in a phased antenna array
are usually positioned over a plane conduc-
ting surface, which plays the part of a
shield and prevents back radiation. Theo-
J retical and experimental studies show that
m“\\xm\ _ L.‘““mm“m two factors have the greatest impact on the
. 1 r characteristics of a dipole radiator incor-
porated in an antenna array: the arrange-
“ ment of the radiators in the array and
their postion relative to the conducting
shield. A reduction in the step spacing
of the array leads not only to the suppres-

  
     

      

Pigure 2.10. Structural design of a
dipole radiator.

Key: 1. Dipole arms; sion of higher diffraction maxima. but
2. Balancing unit; also makes it possible to improve matching
3. Conducting shield; in a wide sector of scanning angles.
a. Feedline input. Changing the height of a dipole radiator

over the shield leads to an improvement

in the matching in the extreme positions of
the beam during scanning in the E and 8
planes.

A parameter which has a considerably lesser
impact on matching in the scanning sector
is the dipole length, if the initial match-
ing is accomplished in the direction of a
normal to the plane of the radiators.

A schematic depiction of the structural

. design of a dipole radiator positioned
Figure 2'11' A dipole phased antenna above a conducting shield is shown in

array. Figure 2.10. Included in the structure,

besides the dipole itself, are a balancing unit and a feedline, which perform the
additional functions of mechanical supports holding the arms of the dipole. The
presence of the supports can lead to undesirable resonance phenomena under certain

conditions.

 

An example of dipole radiators with good matching is shown in Figure 2.11. Each
radiator takes the form of a system of mutually orthogonal, separately excited
dipoles, and it can be used to obtain circular polarization, or can be used in
arrays with two independent channels with polarization decoupling.

Design practice for such radiators shows that the nonparallel nature of the dipole
arms makes it possible to eliminate resonance effects which lead to the blinding

of the phased array.

Printed circuit technology can be used to fabricate dipole radiators. Moreover,
when printed circuit technology is used. the radiating elements, RF feed networks
and phase shifters can be fabricated in a single cycle.

- 32 -

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
F!"l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂB(MﬁLY

As studies have shown, the use of directors makes it possible to obtain good
matching of a phased array in a wide sector of angles through the selection of
the length and configuration of the directors.

Waveguide radiators have proved to be one of the most convenient radiators in
the centimeter band for phased antenna arrays, for the following reasons:

1) waveguide radiators are a natural continuation of the waveguide section
where a phase shifter is placed;

2) They are characterized by a high transmission power level;

3) The properties of the radiator can be predicted based on analysis and calcula-
tions which in this case play the main role in the design work;

4) The computed characteristics of a radiator in a large array can be checked by
means of neasurements using a simple waveguide model.

The data obtained as a result of analyzing the properties of arrays of waveguide
radiators show that with an increase in the dimensions of the waveguides, the
influence of the higher harmonics in the aperture of the radiators becomes quite
substantial. In contrast to arrays with radiators of relatively small dimensions,
for example, half-wave dipoles in which a sharp increase in the reflection factor
coincides with the appearance of higher order diffraction asxima in the range of
real angles, when waveguide radiators of sufficiently large size are used, a
sharp mismatching begins at smaller scanning angles. something which degrades

the array properties because of the narrowing of the scanning sector. In this
case, the following law is usually observed: the greater the cross-sectional
dimensions of the waveguide radiator, the smaller the scanning angles for the
onset of sharp mismatching. In important consequence following from this is

the conclusion that the spacing between the elements in an array cannot be chosen
by working solely from the requirement of a lack of higher order diffraction
maxima in the region of real angles. The results of studying waveguide radiators
[09] are summarized in Table 2.2, where the limitations on the placement of
radiators in rectangular and triangular grids are indicated which prevent the
appearance of higher harmonic resonances in the apertures of waveguide radiators.

 

TABLE 2.2.
‘l‘ri‘angular Grid Tpeymaaa can

 

. a '
1':— > 0.75 0.70: i"!- >0.6 o.s>—{->o.4s I Jig-<0»
cl). ,,- 0.7 «A < 0.65 m < 0.0 all < 0.1'5
m ,; 0.0 m < 0.4 m < 0.4 on. < 0.4

 

 

   

Rectangular Gr; Upsmoyroatuﬂ can
ui<mm;wi<m5

 

 

The placement of waveguide radiators in antenna arrays and the designations of
the geometric dimensions cited in Table 2.2 are shown in Pigure 2.12.

Approximate dimensions of a waveguide radiator can be selected using the data of
this table so as to subsequently determine its characteristics and optimize them
by experimental processing or modeling on a computer.

- 33 -

IIHRCHHHCIAI.U881HVLY
INDR 0i1ﬂC]A1.USEZCMQLY

Triangular Grid Rectangular Grid
Wmm 0__,y WWW

 

Figure 2.12. Phased antenna array geometry.

A phased antenna array of waveguide radia-
tors is shown in Figure 2.13. More complex
radiating structures, the basis for which

are waveguide radiators, are treated in
5 2.6.

To obtain circularly polarized radiation or
two independent polarizations. both wave-
guide dimensions should be sufficiently
great to assure wave propagation with mutual-
ly orthogonal polarizations. 0n the other
hand, the maximum dimensions of the radia-
tors are limited by the step spacing of the
array and in the majority of cases. steps
must be taken to reduce the cross—section
dimensions of the waveguide radiators.
Blade inserts (Figure 2.14) are used or a
transition is made to coaxial radiators

_ , using a 811 mode [013] to reduce the dimen-
Frgure 2.13. A phased antenna array aions of such waveguides. With the appro-
°f waveguide radrators. priate choice of dimensions of cylindrical
conductors for a coaxial radiator (Figure 2.15) which assure the propagation of
an H11 mode, the cross-sectional dimensions of the radiator can be made less than
half a wavelength.

 

A coaxial line is used for the feed to the radiator. The transition from the
feedline to the coaxial radiator is positioned at a spacing of 0.5 A0, while the
diameter of the inner conductor is chosen so that this spacing is equal to

A“ 11/b. This provides for all made propagation and the suppression of the T
mode. Moreover. a supplemental filter can be inserted between the radiator
aperture and the transition adapter for T mode suppression. A standing wave
ratio, Ksto of less than 3.5 in a passband of 12 was obtained in a scanning
sector of 150! relative to a normal to the plane of the array for the given radia-
tor.

_ 34 _

FOR OFIHCLAL.USEtoNLY
FOItOFTWC1A1.USE¢3NLY

   

‘ \\‘\\\\\\‘~\\\“\\\§ \ -\\‘\\\\\l

 

«can

 

Figure 2.14. The configuration of ' Figure 2.15. A coaxial radiator.
waveguide radiators with reduced
cross-sections.

Key: 1. Crossbar transition;
2. Feedline;
3. T node filter.

   

Figure 2.16. Radiator with a multimode Figure 2.17. Waveguide-dipole radiator.
waveguide section.

Another type [09] of radiating elenent with circular or double mutual orthogonal
polarization of the field is a radiator (Figure 2.16), the cross-sectional dimen-
sions of which are reduced through the use of an overnoded circular waveguide,
excited by two crossed dipoles. The length of the ovaraoded waveguide section
is made small. After matching, the value of Kat is 5.2.0 within a scanning sec-
tor of i 502 relative to a normal to the plane of the array in a 132 passband.

An example of a radiator with small cross-sectional dimensions having double or
circular field polarization is a waveguide-dipole radiator (Pigure 2.17). The
radiation fields of the printed circuit dipole and the open end of the waveguide
are polarized in mutually perpendicular planes. The feed is delivered to the
dipole radiator by means of a stripline. placed in the waveguide. Since the
dipole radiator is parallel to the wide wall of the waveguide. then in the trans-
verse direction, the size of the waveguide-dipole radiator is determined by the
size of the narrow wall of the waveguide.

Printed Circuit Radiators. In those cases where stringent require-ants concerning
size and weight are placed on a phased antenna array, printed circuit components
can be used as the array radiators [013]. These radiators are arranged a short
height above a plane conducting shield (about A/ZO); a special feature of then

is the possibility of utilizing printed circuit technology in the fabrication of
nultielement subarrays with microwave feed circuits and radiators, arranged on
both sides of the substrate.

_ 35 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FIIICIHWC1A1.USE(N§LY

    

 
   

. -4;--oo-:un~--" --

;-;-3l~.>.=s:=~"=<- om :~-

7U,”
I!

Figure 2.18. Printed circuit radiators.

Key: a. Dish;
b. Two stub strip radiator;
c. Single stub strip radiator.

Different variants of printed circuit radiators exist. In the latest variant
((Figure 2.18s), the printed circuit radiator takes the form of a disk (1),
positioned above a metal shield (2) on a dielectric substrate of small thick-
ness (3). The disk is excited by means of two stubs, to which the energy can
be delivered either by a coaxial feeder or by means of a stripline, placed on
the opposite side of the shield. The stubs are excited out of phase which pro-
vides for maximum radiation in the direction of a normal to the plane of the
shield. The utilization of two pairs of exciting stubs, positioned in perpen-
dicular planes and excited with a phase shift of 90'. makes it possible to
obtain circular polarization of the radiation field. .

Another variant of a printed circuit radiator is shown it Figure 2.18b. The
array takes the form of a system of natal strips (1) each of which is excited by

a definite number of paired stubs (2). The dashed line singles out the individual
radiator (3) in this system. The pair of radiator stubs is excited out of phase.

A single stub printed circuit radiator is shown in Figure 2.18c. To simplify
the excitation device, one of the stubs is removed in each radiator (3), however,
this necessitates the placement of shunting stubs (2) between the individual
radiators which electrically couple the strip conductor (1) to the metallic
plane (4). Such a structural design in extremely close in terms of its proper-
ties to a section of rectangular waveguide with a length of AHIZ filled with a
dielectric, excited by a stub positioned near one of its open ends. The fields
radiated by the open ends of a waveguide lv/Z long in the direction of a normal
to the plane of an array are in phase.

- 36 -

IKHRCMHHCJAI.USE‘DNLY
FORGDFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Changing the input impedance of a printed circuit radiator to match it to the
feeders can be accomplished by virtue of changing the spacing between the stubs
in two stub designs or shifting the stub in single stub structures.

Since the thickness of the dielectric substrate is small, resonance effects which
lead to dips in the directional pattern of the printed circuit radiator are
absent. -

Research has shown that the best matching can be obtained for a disk diameter of
0.6 Ad (Ad is the wavelength in the dielectric) and with a strip width of 0.5 Ad,
where the excitation is realized by means of two stubs. In the case of printed
circuit radiator excitation by one stub, acceptable matching is achieved when it
is placed at the edge of the strip.

Studies show that radiators can be quite well matched.- Thus, for an array of
single stub radiators. a value of Kg: < 1.2 was obtained in a 122 passband.

2.5. Wide Angle Matching of Phase Antenna Arrays

His-etching of an array to a feeder system, which is due to the interaction of
radiators during scanning, reduces the attainable gain, leads to direction pattern
distortions and has a harmful impact on the amplifiers which may be inserted in
the array following the radiators. In contrast to conventional matching for one
beam direction, the utilization of wide angle matching techniques makes it possi-
ble to improve the characteristics of the array throughout the entire scanning
sector. For example, in a conventional antenna array intended for scanning in

a range of one-third of a hemisphere, at a single frequency with conventional
matching, 1‘ g 0.55 (K9: 3 3.5) [0.13]. The maximum gain losses with mismatching
in this case amount to 1.6 dB. The application of wide angle matching techniques
makes it possible to reduce the losses down to 0.8 dB, which is equivalent to
increasing the antenna area by 201.

   

Figure 2.19. The connection of radiators Figure 2.20. An example of radia-
in linear antenna arrays. tor connection in a planar antenna
array.

Methods of wide angle matching of phased antenna arrays can he broken down into
two groups: 1) methods related to modifying the structure of the device exciting
the array; 2) methods, the use of which leads to the placement of additional

- 37 -

liﬂl¢ﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.UEl(NNlY
FIHRCﬂWHCIAI.USE(N§LY

elements in front of the radiating aperture. the reflection from which reduces
the change in the input impedance of the radiators during scanning.

The following methods of wide angle matching for phased arrays belonging to
group 1 have been described in the literature:

1. The utilization of coupling networks between the elements. Sections of trans-
mission lines or reactive elements. which couple the array radiators, are used as
the coupling networks. The methods of coupling the elements can vary. Shawn as
an example in Figure 2.19 are connections of radiators in a linear array. Such
connections are equivalent to the insertion of a reactance in parallel with the
radiator, where the reactance depends on the scanning angle. Selection of the
coupling network parameters makes it possible to reduce the change in the input
impedance during scanning. One of the variants for the insertion of coupling
networks in a two-dimensional array is shown in Figure 2.20. In accordance with
[013]. the use of this configuration in an array of dipole radiators intended for
scanning in a conical region of e 3 60°, makes it possible to reduce the range
of variation in the reflection coefficient down to |r| ; 0.26 (K.t ; 1.7) as
compared to |r| :IO.67 (Rat ; 5.1) in the case of conventional latching.

2. Filling the waveguide radiators with a dielectric. In the case considered
here, the dimensions of the waveguide radiators and the parameters of the filling
medium are chosen so that only one mode propagates.

Such a technique was treated in the study of antenna arrays of plane-parallel
waveguides [0.13], which scan in one plane, as well as circular waveguide arrays
with a rectangular grid for the radiating elements, which scan in the B-plane
[0.13]. An improvement in.the matching is achieved when this method is used by
virtue of filling the waveguides and through a reduction in the dimensions of the
radiating elements, which assures single mode operation of the waveguides. In

the case of very small radiating elements, the difference in the power directional
patterns of an isolated radiator and an ideal radiator (cos a) can serve as a
measure of the mismatching during scanning. In the B-plane, the directional
pattern of a waveguide radiator expands with a decrease in the dimensions of the
waveguide, approaching cosze. Consequently. a reduction in waveguide dimensions
improves the directional pattern of a waveguide radiator in the ﬂ-plane. Contrari-
wise, the directional pattern in the E-plane widens as compared to cos 6. It
follows from this t'at the filling of waveguides with a dielectric and the reduc-
tion in radiator diu=nsions related to this reduce the mismatching during ﬂ-plane
scanning and increase it in the case of scanning in the B-plsne.

3. The use of waveguide radiators with several propagating nodes [09]. In the
case of linear arrays, an improvement is achieved in the matching through the
choice of the relationship between the amplitudes of the two modes, which are

the “10 and H20 modes in the case of scanning in the E-plane. This method makes

it possible to reduce the range of variation in the reflection coefficient in an
angular sector of e - 1§6° down to [r] ;_0.09 (Kat 3,1.2) as compared to |r| g 0.23
(Kat ; 1.6) when using a single mode: H10. It must be kept in mind that in this
case, the directional pattern becomes asymmetrical in the H-plane and a null

- 3g -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE(NVLY
IIIIOFFKJA1.USE(MQLY

appears in one of the directions, which is absent when using only the “10 mode..
The indicated defects in the directional pattern are due to the intense excitation
of a 820 made and field distribution asynmetry in the waweguide aperture.

4; The use of electronically tuned matching devices. Although this technique can
provide for wide angle matching, it requires the insertion of additional control
devices in the array, something which greatly increases the cost and reduces the
reliability of phased antenna arrays.

5. The use of matching devices which absorb reflected waves in the radiator chan-
nels. Circulators and isolatora, inserted between each element and the generator
can be used as matching devices. This nethod makes it possible to improve the
operational conditions for the generators, but does not reduce the gain losses
due to mismatching of the radiators.

The following techniques belong to group ll.

1. Inserting conducting partitions in the B-plane of a dipole array (Figure 2.21).
These partitions reduce the change in the reflection coefficient during E-plane
scanning, without influencing the conditions for matching in the case of H-plane
scanning. when this method of matching is employed, a figure of If] 3'0.23 (Kg: 5
1.58) can be obtained in a conical scanning sector of e §_60°, while in the case
without partitions, [TI 5 0.85 (K t I<_ 2.63) in the same sector. These results

are justified for radiators posit oned at a spacing of less than half a wavelength.
The improvement in the matching in this case is due to the change in the dipole
directional pattern in the B—plane, which makes it more similar to the directional
pattern of a waveguide radiator. The directional pattern of an isolated dipole

is substantially narrower than an ideal radiator pattern, while the directional
pattern of a waveguide radiator in the B-plane can be made extremely close to the
corresponding directional pattern of a ideal radiator. The utilization of this
method for a waveguide array does not lead to a narked improvement in the matching
with the conventional configuration of the elements [0.13]. An improvement in

the matching proves to be possible only with a reduction in the spacing between
the radiators as compared to that defined by expression (2.3) [013].

2. The placing of a thick dielectric
plate in the aperture of the antenna
array. Hhen scanning in the H-plane in

' 1"“I " an angular sector of 0 - 172', a figure
Figure 2.21. dipole antenna array with of Kat < 1.15 was obtained for an

matching baffles. antenna-array of flat waveguides [08]

Key: 1. Dipole; 2. haflle; 3. Conduct- with a dielectric plate, as compared to
ing shield. K5; :_2.2 without the pltte. This meth-
»,_ ad is applicable for rectangular and
’ circular waveguides in a rectangular
; and triangular grid. However, in the
__ . case of E-plane scanning, the dielectric
”—_' " plate increases the reflection, which
Figure 2.22. A thin dielectric sheet leads to the appearance of resonance
over a waveguide array.

dips in the directional pattern of the
radiator.

       

' 'l/

’47. 1/. ' -'.~./ '

 

- 39 -

li)R‘0Fll(1Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂ‘LY
908(IHHC1AI.US£(NVLY

3. The use of a thin dielectric sheet with a high dielectric permittivity, placed
a snnll distance from the waveguide array (Figure 2.22). This sheet sets in a
manner similar to s reactance, which changes during scanning. During waveguide
sinulation, a value of II‘I ; 0.38 (Ru 3 2.2) was obtained without the sheet and
a value of |r| ; 0.2 (I:at ; 1.5) with the dielectric sheet. A drawback to this
technique consists in the fact that there is a tendency towards a reduction in
the scanning sector in the B-plane, as well as in other planes which do not coin-
cide with the h-plane, because of resonance phenomena. however, this can be
avoided when the thickness of the dielectric is reduced, while the dielectric
permittivity is increased.

h. The utilization of a "loaded“ conducting plane. One of the examples of the
use of this method is an array of flat waveguides, between which short circuited
sections of the sane waveguides are placed (Figure 2.23s). A waveguide array
with a triangular grid for the placement of the radiators. separated by short
circuited flat waveguides (Figure 2.23b) can serve as another example. This same
method also includes the use of short circuited rectangular waveguides, placed

in the gaps between waveguide radiators (Figure 2.23c). In the latter case, total
mismatching (IPI - l) is successfully prevented in planes not coinciding with the
3-plane, which is due to the appearance of higher order diffraction maxi-a or
resonance effects, which lead to the blinding of the antenna. The possibility
arises in this case for widening the scanning sector to a certain extent as com-
pared to the sector determined by the appearance of higher order diffraction
mine ‘ ' "'~"‘ ‘ ' ‘ ‘ " ' u U —----”__‘

         
 
  
  

 
 
  

1-!
O

 

e'e
a 0‘

0

e
e

.o

e
e
e

O
C
\\\\\\\\\V

e
e

  
   
 

- e'e'e'e'e‘e
0 O O I
. go‘s...”

'o'.’o‘e'o'/'
.
c

 

Figure 2.23. Examples of a "loaded" flat shield.

5. Close spacing of the radiating elements. when the radiating elements are close .
together, the higher order diffraction maxima move over to the region of imaginary
angles and remain in it for any scanning angles. The change in the reactive con-
ponent of the input admittance of the radiators is reduced in this case and the
mismatching is basically due to the change in the resistive component.

The effectiveness differs for the methods of wide angle matching within the pass-
band enumerated above.

The most broadband techniques can be considered the methods of reducing the spac-
ings between the elements, the use of a thin dielectric sheet with a high dielec-
tric permittivity and baffles between the radiators. Reducing the spacing between
the radiators is unacceptable in the majority of cases. since it leads to an
increase in the number of radiators. The two other methods are applicable both

to waveguide and dipole radiators. arranged in triangular and rectangular grids.

- 40 -

FORllHWCIAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A dielectric plate can be employed when scanning in one plane and for matching over
a band of frequencies. In the case of a waveguide array. matching is achieved in
the H-plane, and in the case of dipoles, is achieved in the B-plane.

2.6. Structural Configuration of Phased Antenna Arrays

Optical type and closed channel power dividers are used to excite phased antenna
array radiators.

There are two kinds of antenna array configurations using optical type dividers.
In the first case, the energy from the feed irradiator impinges on the collector
(Figure 2.25s) array, passes through the RF circuits and phase shifters, and is
then reradiated in the requisite direction by another array. In the second case
(Figure 2.26b), the collector and reradiating array are combined. The power
received from the feed irradiator is reradiated in the requisite direction.

A merit of optical type dividers is simplicity with a large number of radiators.
Feed irradiators of the corresponding reflector antennas can be used as the feeds,
including monopulse feed irradiators to produce sum and difference directional
patterns. An advantage of reflector type arrays is their structural design and
operational convenience. which consists in the accessibility of the radiating
elements during alignment and replacement from the nonradiating side of the array.
An example of the structural realization of a reflective array, intended for
installation in an aircraft, is shown in Figure 2.25. In a transmissive array,
better characteristics can he obtained by optimizing the collector and reradiating
arrays individually.

r<22 ﬂ
.2232.

(I) 49 (b)

 

:22
2222
HE?

Figure 2.24. Configurations of antenna arrays with optical power
dividers.

Energy "spillover" through the edges of an array, similar to what occurs in reflec-
tor antennas, must be numbered among the drawbacks to arrays with an optical
method of exciting the elements. This leads to a reduction in the surface utili-
zation factor and an increase in the sidelobe radiation background.

Dividers in the form of a closed channel are made using series and parallel power
divider circuit configurations (Figure 2.26). In the case of series power divi-

sion, the phase shifters can be inserted in the lateral branches of the feedline.
running to the radiators (Figure 2.26s). In this case, l/Nth part of the power

- 41 -

l!!!()FFIClAI.lISEI(HVLY
FOR 0FF1CJAL.USEI3NLY

flows in each of the N phase shifters, while the power losses are governed by the
losses introduced by a single phase shifter. The drawback to this circuits is
the differing electrical lengths of the path from the antenna input to the
radiators, which can lead to phase distortions at the edge of the frequency band.
To eliminate phase distortion. it is necessary to inset compensating feeder sec-
tions in the lateral branches (see 5 2.8).

with a parallel power division circuit (Figure 2.26b), which also permits the

use of low power phase shifters, the overall power losses are determined by the
losses in a single phase shifter and there is the capability of equalizing the
lengths of the individual channels to assure a broadband response. A drawback

to the parallel configuration is the complexity of matching when dividing the
power among a large number of channels. The double stepped configuration (Figure
2.26s) belongs among parallel division configurations, where in each node of this
circuit the power is divided equally or unequally. In the case of equal division.
the double stepped configuration can be made to have a broadband response because
of the use of feeder sections of equal length from the input to each radiator.

In the case of unequal division. the phase and amplitude distortions within the
passband in the output lines of the branches will be large, while the psasband
will be narrower as compared to the case of equal division.

 

Figure 2.25. A reflector type aircraft phased array.

Hag; M
_.L.§__\_—- ,
‘ a;(a) . ' Mb) ' 0“”

Figure 2.26. Schematics of power dividers in the form of a closed
channel.

Various units can be employed as power dividers: waveguide and coaxial Tees,
waveguide bridges, directional couplers using coupled striplines. as well as
resistive ring power dividers using striplines.

- 42 _
FOR OFFKJAL.USE‘ONLY
Figure 2.27. A double stepped circuit configuration with hybrid
power dividers.

Key: 1. Incident waves;
2. €eflected waves;
3. hybrid power dividers.

As a result of the mismatching of the radiators during scanning, the antenna sys-
tem gain is reduced. and something which is no less important, amplitude and phase
distortions appear which in turn can substantially change the sidelobe radiation
level of the phased array. The latter factor is important for arrays with a
requisite low sidelobe level.

In analyzing the impact of radiator mismatching on the shape of the directional
pattern and the operational mode of the feeder system, reflections in the

radiator feed circuits can be treated as excitation of a plane wave in the
radiators and feeder system, where this wave arrives from a direction which is

the mirror reflection with respect to the direction of the main lobe (Figure 2.27),
as well as subsequent sequential re—reflection of the waves excited in the feeder
system from the radiators and the power divider. For arrays consisting of a large
number of radiating elements, the reflection coefficients can be considered approx-
imately the same and equal to the reflection coefficient of an infinite array.

The reflected waves propagating from the radiators in the feedlines partially

pass through to the input of the antenna, and are partially returned to the
radiators, again passing through the phase shifters. These waves, in turn, are

in part radiated and in part reflected, etc. During the radiation of each repeat
wave, additional sidelobes appear in the directional pattern.

Antenna arrays with various types of power dividers have differing sensitivity to
mismatching. In the simplest case, when each radiator is excited free a separate
generator with a nonreflecting output, the mismatching of the radiators has no
effect on the shape of the directional pattern, since the reflected wave is com-
pletely absorbed. a similar effect occurs in double stepped circuits, where hybrid
connectors are used as the power dividers. For example, resistive ring power
dividers using striplines can be employed as the dividers in double stepped cir-

- a3 -

roe omcm. use out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cuit configurations (Figure 2.27) In such dividers a

. portion of the reflected
waves passes through to the antenna input, while the,remaining part is absorbed
in the resistors. In this case, the reflected waves are not reradiated and the
radiators are decoupled. Double stepped power dividers with resistive ring ele-

223;; can be built using striplinea by means of printed circuit technology (Figure

Another example of a feeder system which
absorbs the reflected wave and provides
for decoupling of the radiators is a

power divider in which directional couplers
are used as the coupling elements (Figure
2.29). The waves reflected from the
radiator pass through to the antenna input
or are absorbed in the loads of the direc-
tional couplers, but are not reradiated by
the radiators.

 

Figure 2.28. A stripline power divider
with resistive ring dividers.

   

Figure 2.29. A power divider with Figure 2.30. A combination power divi-
directional couplers. der circuit using a radial lin .
Key: 1. Radial line;
A radial line (Figure 2.30) excited in 2. Feeders of equal electrical
the center by a circular waveguide .
[013] can be used as a power divider length,
' 3. Radial line exciter.

for a linear antenna array. The mode
propagating in the radial line excites the radiators of the collector array, which

can be the open ends of waveguides or other radiators. The radiating elements of
the linear array are coupled to the radiators of the collector array by feeder
lines of equal length, for which it is convenient to use flexible coaxial cable

sections in the given case.

If a £01 mode propagates in a circular waveguide with an azimuthally symmetrical
field, then all of the array elements are excited in phase with equal amplitude.
However, if a “1 mode is excited in the circular waveguide, then the amplitude
of the electrical field intensity at the output of the radial line will vary in
accordance with a cosinusoidal law. With the simultaneous excitation of H11 and
£01 modes, the resulting field at the output of the radial line is:

E: =££OI+EIII m?“£¢£+£t°“'(‘l’/2)-
- aa -

FOR OFFICIAI.LEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By choosing the ratio of the modal amplitudes excited in the circular waveguide,
one can produce directional patterns with various properties. Beam scanning is
accomplished by means of phase shifters inserted in the feedlines. The electrical
length of these lines is chosen the same so as not to degrade the frequency res-
ponse of the divider.

In the case of small scan angle sectors, it is expedient to combine the great
capacities of electrical scanning systems and the precision of traditional

reflector antennas to reduce the cost of antenna systems [09]. A schematic
depiction of such antenna systems is shown in Figure 2.31. The operational
principle of the antennas considered here can be described by using as the ana-
log for these devices, reflector systems in which the beam scanning is achieved

by shifting the feed radiator from the focal point in a transverse direction. In
the case considexed here, control of the radiator excitation phase (phasing) of
the small feed irradiator arrays is realized so that the field produced by them
corresponds in the sense defined here to the field of a shifted radiator. Using
the system depicted in Figure 2.313, scanning can be realized in an angular sector
not exceeding 10 times the directional pattern width. A twin reflector, excited
by a small phased array (Figure 2.3lb) scans in an angular sector of less than

5° with a beam width of less than 1°. An example of the structural design of

a transmissive type antenna system (Figure 2.3lc) is shown in Figure 2.32. The
given antenna is intended for scanning in an angular sector of 14 x 20'. The feed
radiator array, with dimensions of 22.5 x 30 cm consists of 824 elements. It is
not necessary to use the reflector in the systems described here; a lens antenna

can be used in place of it.

 

*-
§
i
Figure 2.32. A scanning reflector anten- Figure 2_33. A planar spherical trans-
na with an auxiliary phased missive antenna array.

antenna array.

_ 45 _
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An example of the realization of the optical technique of energy distribution in
transmissive arrays is a planar spherical antenna with dual polarization and
separate inputs for each polarization. In such an array (Figure 2.33), the spher-
ical wave irradiated by the feed radiator excites the elements of a spherical
collector array. Coaxial cables of equal length, in which the phase shifters are
inserted, connect the elements of the spherical array to the subarrays of the
planar radiating system. Each subarray is controlled by a single phase shifter,
since its scan sector is small (See 5 2.2).

The spherical shape of the collector array
makes it possible to reduce energy losses
related to reflection, since the wave
incidence angle on the collector array is
the same at any point on it and the radia-
tors of the collector array can be quite
well matched. In this case, a greater
bandwidth is achieved, since the spacings
from the feed to the elements of the
collector array are the same. A general
view of an antenna array and one of the
subarrays is shown in Figures 2.34 and
2.35. The radiators of the subarray are
symmetrical dipoles. The radiators in
each subarray are split into two indepen-
dent groups, having mutually orthogonal
polarization. Each group is controlled by

a separate phase shifter. There are two
Figure 2'34° General view °f a planar mutually perpendicular dipoles in the

spherical antenna array collector array corresponding to the indi-
from the radiating array cated groups of radiators. The overall
side. electrical length of the microwave circuits
from these dipoles of the collector array
to the subarray is the same. Such a sys—
tem, which takes the form of a controlled
lens, is capable of reradiating a wave of
any polarization. If the feed radiator
radiates two waves with orthogonal polari-
zation, then the field radiated by the
antenna system can have either linear or
circular polarization, depending on the
phase and amplitude relationships between
the orthogonal components.

 

 

Figure 2.35. General view of a dipole
subarray.

The considerable spacing between identically oriented dipoles in the subarrays
leads to the appearance of high level diffraction maxima in their directional
patterns. However, the sidelobe level of the directional pattern of the entire
antenna is substantially less, because of the annular arrangement of the

subarrays (Figure 2.34).

_ A6 _

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE13NLY
FOIIOFFGC1A1.U8310NLX

'2.7. The Passband of a Phased Antenna Array

The major factors which influence the frequency properties of phased arrays are
the frequency properties of the radiating aperture, the phase control technique
employed (using phase shifters or delay lines), the type of power divider as
well as the nature of the received or transmitted signal. Formulas are given
in this section for the estimation of the frequency characteristics of a phased
antenna array for signals inlhe form of short and long pulses with a frequency
which changes within the bounds of a pulse.

It is assumed in the following in the estimation of the frequency properties of
phased arrays that the working bandwidth of some of its devices, such as phase
shifters, radiators and directional couplers, for example, is no narrower than
the bandwidth of the array, determined by the major factors which are indicated.

In the majority of cases of practical interest, a slight change is permitted in
the phased antenna array characteristics within the working passband. For this
reason, the affect of each of the indicated factors can be treated separately,

and the overall effect_datermined as the sun of the corresponding contributions.

Frequency Properties of the Radiating Aperture. If the phase distribution remains
constant with a change in the frequency, than the beam produced by the aperture
is shifted through an angle of [013]:

A0~--hl t a“. .
( If) 8 (2.20)

It follows from formula (2.20) that the size of the aperture and the beam width
do not influence the shift. With the same frequency change, the displacement
depends on the direction of the beam and it is greater, the more the beam is
deflected from the normal to the aperture. The passband, within which the beam
displacement does not exceed half of its width, is defined by the relationship:

All/N N21. sin 0... (2.21)

where L is the dimension of the aperture in the plane running through the normal
to the aperture and the direction of the main lobe of the directional pattern.

Frequency shifting of the beam leads to a gain reduction in the original direction.
A graph of the change in the gain of a phased array as a function of the argument:

“-0.236AI(ts0..)/20. s. (2 22)

where Af is the bandwidth (in percent);0 0.5 - S7A/L ' °°°°nain is the directional
pattern width (in degrees). is shown in Figure 2. 36.

By using this graph, one can determine the passband of an aperture for a specified
permissible change in the gain and for a known bean width and its maximum deflec-
tion from the normal to the plane of the array:

Alz3,3u,..20o.gllg 0...; (2.23)

- 57 -

INJR‘OIIICIAI.IISIICHULY
FINI¢HHHCJAI.USIEC”‘LY

where u n [“pe .1 is the argument of the function considered here, corresponding
to the garnissihre reduction in the gain of the phased antenna array. In particu-
lar, if the gain reduction should not exceed 1 d3, then for an array with a scan-
ning sector of I00] 3 60°:

5’8 200.3- (2 2‘)

The results cited here are justified for a signal in the for. of a long pulse with
'a frequency which changes within the liaits of a pulse. -

In the case where the signal takes the form of a short pulse of width t, which
corresponds to a passhand of of - l/r, the reduction in the phased array gain
occurs because of the fact that for various spectral components, the shaping bean
is shifted through different angles, so that the directional pattern of the phased
array for a pulsed signal is wider than the directional pattern for the center
frequency.

We shall make use of the concept of "aperture filling tine", which is defined as
the time during which the wave front propagating at the angle 0.,13 passes through
the entire aperture:

r - L (sin (5.31}. (2.25)

where c is the speed of light. Then condition (2.24) is equivalent to the condi-
tion:

T . r (2.26)
The change in antenna gain is plotted in Figure 2.37 as a function of the ratio:
a - Tlr - 0.57 A] (lg 0.)/2 0.... (2.27)
It follows froe this relationship that in the case of short pulses:
Nl‘lol- 1.15:2... 20...ng 0...... ' (2.28)

If a gain reduction of no more that 1 dB is chosen as the criterion for determining
the passband, then in a scanning sector of eﬂax - 60‘, the passband for a pulsed
signal is [013]:

2:40 .
A, "' (2.29)
Just as in the preceding case, the aperture bandwidth depends on the bean width.
i.e., on the size of the aperture referenced to the wavelength. Increasing the
directivity of the aperture leads to a narrowing of the passband.

The Paesband and Phase Shifters. Phase shifters used for bean control in phased
antenna arrays can be broken down into phase shifters and controlled delay lines.
Although this division is arbitrary and a signal delay also occurs in phase
shifters, this delay is usually such less than the aperture filling tine for

any value of the phase at the output. This is due to the fact that the naxinun
change in the electrical "length" of a phase shifter does not usually exceed 360°.
Moreover, the change in the phase at the output of a phase shifter is small within

- ag -

INJR‘OFFICLAL [EHE(MVLY
FOR1OFIIC1AI.USEIDNLY

    

(A) .4 x
0 «tuna:

Figure 2.36. The change in aperture gain Figure 2.37. The change in the aper-

(—) and level of the ture gain (—) and level
diffraction'maxina (--) of the diffraction maxi-
for long pulses. on (---) for signals in

Key: A. Gain losses, dB; the forn of short pulses.

B. Relative level of the Key: A. Gain losses, dB;
diffraction maxi-a, dB. 3. Relative level of the
diffraction naxima, dB

the working passband and it can be disregarded in a first approximation.

Controlled delay lines used for scanning serve to change the cignal delay tine in
the channel of the corresponding radiator, which in the final analysis. as it
stands to reason, is equivalent to chan ing the phase. The maximum signal delay
during scanning in angular sector of le ;_90' is equal to the aperture filling
time. However, despite the seeaing equivalence of phase shifters and controlled
delay lines, the properties of the phased arrays within the passband differ
substantially depending on the type of phase shifters employed.

let the phase change be accomplished with phase shifters. If the phase relation-
ships at the output of the power divider rennin constant, then one can assume that
the phase is also constant at the output of the phase shifters. Then the pass-
band of the phased antenna array is governed by the frequency properties of the
radiating aperture, something which has already been noted.

If delay lines are used as the phase shifters, then the signal delay time in the
channel for each radiator is chosen so that the signals fro. all of the radiators
at the antenna output are added in phase, i.e., so that the spatial delay is
cancelled out:

rn - Ln/c (2.30)

where Ln is the distance from the n-th radiator to a plane perpendicular to the

direction of arrival of the wave passing through the edge radiator (Figure 2.38).
The spatial delay does not depend on the frequency. For this reason. if the

signal propagation velocity in the delay lines is also independent of the fre-
quency, then the frequency properties of the aperture do not limit the array
passband and it is necessary to take other factors into account. Delay lines
which possess the indicated properties can he designed around T node guide sys-
tems, the phase velocity of which does not depend on the frequency. Such a delay

- 49 -

FOI‘OIIICIAI.lEHE(HVLY
FOR<0FHKJAL.USI(HVLY

line takes the fore of a set of
switched coaxial cables of different
lengths. However, during wide angle
‘ scanning, the use of controlled delay

"‘ lines in the channel of each radiator
does not prove to be possible because
of the impermissible increase in
antenna coat and structural design in
conveniences related to the considera-
ble overall length of the switched .
cables. For example, when scanning in

 

Figure 2.38. Configuration of a phased an angular sector of Gas: - 60', the
antenna array with controlled laximun length of the switched cables
delay lines. differs only slightly from the aper-

ture size. A widening of a phased

_ array bandwidth can nonetheless be
attained through delay line control of not individual radiators, but rather groups
of radiators (Figure 2.38), while the phase control of individual radiators is
acco-plished in a group by phase shifters. Even when the aperture is broken down
into two subarrays, the passband of a linear array is more than doubled. Doubling
the passband of a planar antenna array is accosplished when the array is broken
down into four parts. In the general case, to increase the passband by a factor"
of N times, it is necessary to break a linear antenna array down into N subarrays.
and a planar array down into N subarrays, controlled by means of delay lines. By
eaploying the property of array symmetry, the number of delay lines with long

The directional pattern of an antenna system, the subarrays of which are controlled
by means of changing the signal delay tine, can be represented in the fore:

no. ¢)~ moi» we. w); (2.31)

where F (a, e) is the directional pattern of the subarray; F2“ is the nultiplying
factor for the array. the elements of which are the subarrays.

With a change in the frequency (Figure 2.39), the aain lobe of the array factor
(1) remains in a constant position, since the phases of the subarray signals are
controlled by means of changing the delay time, while the directional pattern of
the subarray (2) is moved, just as in the case of a radiating aperture. since the
radiators of the subarrays are controlled by phase shifters. For this reason.
the frequency properties of the antennas considered here are determined by the
frequency properties of the radiating aperture of the subarray. A significant
circumstance in the given case is the increase in the level of the sidelobes of
the directional pattern for the entire array at frequencies other than the center
frequency. This increase is due to the fact that when the main lobe of a subarray
directional pattern is shifted relative to the array factor, spurious maria (3)
of the array factor (Figure 2.39) fall in the region of the maxima, where these
spurious naxina coincide at the center frequency in terms of direction with the
direction of the nulls of the subarray directional pattern. Therefore, the

level of sidelobe radiation in the direction of the spurious series of the array
factor increases. The sidelobe level for various signals is shown as a function

- 50 -

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USB(MNLY
Figure 2.39. The relative shift in the

directional pattern of a

subarray with phase shifters

and the naxins

systen with delay lines.

the antenna input to each radiator are the

change in frequency.
within the passband
Other feed circuits
displacesent of the been of

introduce

The Series Circuit Configuration.
2.40),

gates in the main trunk feeder,

phase error occurring with the change .

expression [013]:

where A. is the wavelength in the feeder trunk.
of the series feed circuit

due to the properties

to the displacement related to the
or cancels it:

at the output of power

shown in Figures 2.37 and
2.38 also characterize the change in
the gain of an antenna array with sub-
arrays controlled by delay lines, where
L in formulas (2.20) - (2.29) is under-
etood to be the corresponding diaension
of the subarray.

The Frequency Properties of Power
Divider Circuits. The Parallel Circuit
Configuration. The various power
divider circuits differ substantially

in their frequency properties. Parallel
and double stepped circuit configura-
tions with equal power division in each
branch possess the best frequency pro-
perties.‘ This is due to the fact that
the electrical length of the paths from

additional phase shifts,

the array.

coco... ' (2.32)

The bean displace-cut which is
for the radiators, either adds

frequency properties of the radiating aperture,
if the bean is deflected in the direction of the array input, then

the bean displacenents add; if the bean is deflected in the direction of the load,

then they subtract.

The paesband, within which the array gain falls

off no more
, is defined by the relationships

(2.33)

- 51 -

MOI OFFICIAI.IISEGNVLY
FOI1OFFEJAI.USEINVLY

in the case of a long pulse with a changing frequency. and:

Alzi. (2.31.)

'l-
in the case of a short pulse. b1.“

I

Figure 2.60. A series power division circuit configuration.

,rgﬁﬂé when the main trunk feeder is fed in the
,,” ,iEF; center (Figure 2.60b), the systen can be
’,- ’iiFi treated as two antennas with series power
,-'“ division. If the bean is oriented with
T"‘E:: ------ -"i§F& respect to the normal to the line of posi-
‘\\\ ; tion of the radiators at the center fre-
. ' quency, then when the frequency changes,
\\\‘% _ the beans of each of the halves of the
’5EF3 array will move in opposite directions

and the overall directional pattern will
Figure 2.61. An optical power division expand, without changing the direction.
circuit configuration. As a result. the directivity of the
antenna array will be reduced. when the
array bean is deflected from the nor-a1, the angular notion of the been due to
the specific features of series power division, adds to the notion of the bean
due to the frequency properties of the radiating aperture. For the different
halves of the array, these notions are in opposition: for one half, the aperture
motion is cancelled by the displacement due to the properties of the power divider,
and for the other, the notions add together with the same sign.

In the case of radiation along a normal. the series dividers are worse than paral-
lel dividers, but with s deflection fro. the normal through an angle of :_60°,

the degradation of the characteristics is approximately the sane and does not
exceed 0.25 dB for the series circuit.

If the trunk feeder is a dispersion system, then:

Af 3 20... 1/1. (2 s 35)
in the case of a long pulse with a changing frequency; and:
Af 2: 40... m, (2.36)

in the case of a short pulse, i.e., the characteristics of the array are degraded.

- 52 -

PO!‘0FFKJA1.USE(N'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Optical Circuit Configurations. When using an optical power division configura-
tion. the frequency properties of an antenna array depend on the relative focal
distance. If the focal distance is large (Figure 2.61). then the properties of
an optical power divider approach the properties of a parallel circuit with feeders
of equal length, though if the focal distance is small, the properties of the
optical power divider approach those of a series configuration with center
excitation. Since with a bean deflection through a maximua angle of 1_60° from

a normal to the array aperture. the parallel circuit properties differ insigni-
ficantly from the properties of a series, center fed configuration, the frequency
properties of optical power dividers in the case of wide angle scanning are prac-
tically the sane as the properties of a parallel feed circuit with feeders of
equal length.

TABLE 2.3.

Bandwidth "W w. % . \
Ila-sens ways-ca I I [soon-s Ive-nun

. ng u aes_ or: u ses

' llama mun-mu:- 20._. . 40...

1 DH. 1 .

i Macao-anemia“: - 20... 40...
natawwe c :0qu (2)

iype of Power Divider
- ‘Tas mu smarts

 

 

 

 

 

..Cl-

mum c «pull-a

 

 

Gunman op-ncAL ”0.5 ‘00..

Key: 1. Parallel double stepped divider;
2. Series: end fed;
center fed.

The indicated results are smrized in Table 2.3. They correspond to a scan
sector of i 60’ with a permissible drop in the directivity of no nore than 1 dB.

2 . 8 . Switched Scanning

The beam position of a pencil bean antenna array is controlled by changing the
phase relationships between the currents in the radiating elements. A system
of phase shifters, inserted in the feeder system exciting the radiators can be
used for this purpose.

The major drawbacks to electrically controlled antennas with phase shifters, which
provide for a continuous phase change in the electromagnetic oscillations (ferrite,
semiconductor, ferroelectric phase shifters, etc.) are the instability (especially
the temperature instability), the complexity of the control circuits and the high
requirements placed on the stability of the phase shifter power supplies. These
deficiencies also exist in digital control systems, when individual operating
points on the characteristic of a continuous phase shifter are employed.

The indicated drawbacks are eliminated to a considerable extent with the switched
technique of directional pattern control proposed by I..N. Deryusin in 1960. The

- 53 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI‘OFIWCIAI.I£§EZ(NNLY

essence of the switching method consists in dispensing with phase shifters having
a continuous phase change and using switchers and switched phase shifters, at the
‘output of which the phase of the electromagnetic oscillations takes on definite
fixed values. The antenna beam control in this case reduces to the simplest opera-
tions of switching radiators or feeder system branches on and off.

The stability of switched antennas is due to the fact that the phase control ele-
ments (semiconductors, ferrites, ferroelectrics) operate in a mode in which only
the extreme portions of their characteristics are used. Horeover. switched anten-
nas can have a simpler controller than a conventional antenna with a parallel
circuit configuration for the continuous phase shifters. The latter is related
to the fact that the position of the beam in space is not governed by the control
voltage, which is different for different antenna phase shifters, but only by its
presence at particular switchers.

However, switched antennas also have a number of deficiencies. the most important
of which is the presence of phase errors which arise because of the fact that the
radiator excitation phases change in steps and can assume only definite values.
This entails a reduction in antenna efficiency. an increase in the sidelobe radia-
tion level and a junp-like motion of the beam.

Ansng the various methods of constructing switched antennas, one can single out-
the two most characteristic approaches. In the first, each radiator has a
definite set of phases, from which the selection of the requisite phase is made

by means of switching the switched phase shifter. with the second method, several
radiators are placed in each section of the antenna with a length of 1/2, where
these radiators are excited with different phases, and they are selectively turned
on. Some of the aspects of designing switched antennas based on the first approach
will be presented in S 2.10, since the realisation of antennas with switched
radiators encounters serious difficulties related to the necessity of placing a
large number of radiating elements in a small portion of an antenna and consider-
ably retarding the phase velocity of the electromagnetic waves in the feeder

which excites the radiators.
2.9. Switched Phase Shifters

Switched phase shifters are the major component of phased antenna arrays. They
can number up to several tens of thousands in highly directional scanning arrays.
In this case, the spacing between the phase shifters usually falls in a range

of 0.5 A to A.

Switched phase shifters should have a high efficiency, sufficient electrical
strength, stability of the characteristics and consume the minimum power needed
for controlling their operation.

Moreover, the following requirements are placed on the structural design of phase
shifters: structural simplicity and suitability for production; small size and
weight; high reliability.

- 54 -

FORIHHHCJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR‘0FIIC1A1.[ENE(NVLY

So-called digital phase shifters are used in the majority of cases to control

the excitation phase of the radiators in a phased array. A feed-through digital
phase shifter is broken down into p stages, each of which can be in one of two
states, characterized by the phase shift being introduced: 0 or s/2"1, where

m is the number of the stage. It is sufficient to employ p control signals which
take on values of 0 or 1 to select any of H - 21’ possible states of the phase
shifter. Then, for example, in a two place phase shifter, a signal of 00 corres-
ponds to a zero phase shift, a phase shift of 90' has a control signal of 01,
etc. A reflective phase shifter for reflecting arrays can be derived from a
transmissive type by means of shorting the output. To preserve the phase shifts,
it is obviously necessary to cut the phase shift realised by each stage in half,
since the wave in a reflective phase shifter passes through each stage twice.

In ferrite phase shifters, the phase shift is due to the change in the magnetic
permeability of the ferrite with the action of an external magnetic field. The
switched elements of the majority of semiconductor phase shifters are PIN diodes.
Since the diodes usually operate in the ultimate modes, the tolerances for the
amplitude of the control signals are not stringent.

Merits of semiconductor phase shifters are the small size and weight, the fast
switching speed, the simplicity of the control devices. their reciprocity and
thermal stability. Semiconductor phase shifters are manufactured in stripline
and microstripline variants to reduce the size and weight, and improve the sta-
-bility, which makes it possible to use printed circuit technology. Advantages

of ferrite phase shifters are the relatively high microwave power level, since

a bulk ferrite medium is used to control the phase; lower losses, since waveguides
are usually employed in making ferrite phase shifters, the losses in which are
less than in lines using a T-mode, as well as a lower sun. The switching speed
of diode and ferrite phase shifters amounts to 0.1 psec-10 usec and 0.1-30 usec
respectively.

None of the indicated types of phase shifters has an absolute advantage over the
others and the use of a particular type depends on many factors: the power level,
range of working temperatures, and requirements placed on switching speed and
stability. It must be noted that the high cost of phased antenna arrays, as a
consequency of the large number of microwave components used in them, limits the
wide scale application of phased array systems. Information of phase shifters
for phased antenna arrays is given in [2].

Semiconductor phase shifters have been developed at the present time which operate
at a transmitted power level in a CH mode on the order of hundreds of watts and
on the order of tens of kilowatts in a pulsed mode. In this case, the losses in
a three place phase shifter in the ten cm band, for example, do not exceed 1 dB

[2].

Ferrite phase shifters at wavelengths shorter than 5 cm have lower losses than
semiconductor types. The losses per place amount to about 0.3 dB in the 3‘cm
hand, while the pulsed and average transmitted powers are about 500 KB and 1,000
N respectively [2]. The advantage of ferrite phase shifters of some types is

an internal memory, which makes it possible to control the phase by means of

- 55 -

FOR omcm. use our
FIHICIWHCIAI.USI(NNLY

feeding in short pulses. In the intervals between pulses, the phase shifter
remembers the phase shift, and no energy is expended to maintain it.

In contrast to ferrite phase shifters, semiconductor types using PIN diodes do

not have such a property, and this is a drawback to them. To preserve the requi-
site phase shifts, it is necessary to expend considerable power: up to several
kilowatts with a large number of phase shifters. In fact. according to [013].

the control power for a diode phase shifter is 0.1 to 5 H, while the energy needed
to switch a ferrite phase shifter is 20 to 2,000 microjoules.

Phase shifters using field effect diodes and resistive gates are being developed
at the present time [2], the utilization of which will make it possible to reduce
the control power for phase shifters from several kilowatts down to a few watts.
The voltage provided by standard logic gates is altogether sufficient for the
switching of these elements.

2.10. Discrete Phase Shifters and the Suppression of Switching Lobes

In the case of digital phasing. the phase distribution which can be realized in
an array can be represented in the following form:
‘°real " ’initial + VA Ono-1’ u"+"A' (2-37)

where °initia1 is the initial phase distribution corresponding to the case where
all of the array phase shifters are in the same position, taken as the starting
position; v is the number of sequential switchings of a phase shifter with the
minimal discrete step of a phase change; A is the minimal phase jump (discrete
step) which can be realized by a phase shifter.

0n the other hand, the feasible phase distribution differs from the requisite
distribution because of the discrete nature of the phase shifter by the amount
of the so-called switching phase errors:

°real ' .req "' 5° 0"" " "661350 (2.38)

In the majority of cases, the phasing is accomplished so that the phase errors
are minimal. Hith such phasing, the maximum value of the phase errors does not
exceed 6/2.

In accordance with the indicated phasing principle:
V n E “4’99“ — “Md/A 'l ‘ 0.51» (2 . 39)
where SIX] is the integer part of x.

In the case of digital phasing, the directional pattern of an antenna array having

N radiators is: '
x Q mo «hym+QL44°hd

l
0. «F0, ‘.A.
I( m) ( 103,“ .e (2.40)

where an is the excitation amplitude of the nq-th radiator; an is the spatial
phase a ft.

- S6 -

POI.0IIIC1AI.U§E¢DNL¥
FOI40FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

He shall ““308“ of the Poisson sunning fornula and the Fourier expansion for
the factor e , treating it as a function of u - or - .initial' which as it is
easy to convince oneself, is periodic. If the pbas antenna array takes the
form of a system of radiators positioned at the nodes of a coordinate grid of

a system of coordinates x. Y, then the directional pattern is [1]:

 

 

. +- ."‘" "” 10 a (2 41)
1(0.v)- “A" F(0.q~) '9 ﬂi- " ' 4,4,. . '
"2 “11‘... m“ XS" "5, 4:4:

where —~ m- -..__ . _ _ .__ _______
xu) -_xm _ VJJQY‘" -u-Y‘I” $04.12: I
0,".= °M+ 0" + Mk (GM—0aas)+2up(x'~x'yd8+
' + 2“! (Y—Yoldsi

A(x,Y) is a continuous function which satisfies the condition A(anq) - Aug, where
Xn and Yq are the coordinates of the nq-th radiator; M - 21/6.

The sum of the terns of series (2.61) having a subscript of h - 0 defines the
directional pattern of an equivalent array: an array without switching phase
errors. The sum of the terms in (2.61) having a subscript of p - t - 0 represents
the directional pattern of a switched antenna array with a continuous distribution
of the radiators. The terms in the series having subscripts of p - t - h - 0
apply to the directional pattern of a continuously excited antenna without switch-
ing phase errors. The terms in the series with subscripts of t i 0, p f 0 and

h - 0 correspond to the diffraction maxima of the directional pattern of an array
without switching phase errors. The terms of the series with subscripts of h f 0
and p - t - 0 define the additional lobes which arise in the directional pattern
of the array because of the presence of switching errors. He shall call these
lobes switching lobes in the following. Terns in the series having subscripts

of h I 0, p i 0 or t i 0 define the supplemental lobes in the directional pattern
of the array due to both the discrete nature of the operation of the phase shifters
as well as the discrete nature of the layout of the radiators. He shall call

the indicated lobes combination lobes in the following. Because of the presence
of switching phase errors, the directional gain of a switched antenna array is

reduced:
DmD("nA/2)
' m ' (2.62)

where D0 is the directional gain of an equivalent antenna array without switching
phase errors (2.11).

 

One of the drawbacks to phased arrays with discrete phase shifters is the presence
of switching and combination lobes. which in the case of discrete phase change
steps of A - n/Z - n/b can be of a rather high level. For this reason, one of

the problems of practical interest is the suppression of the indicated lobes.

The concept of switching and combination lobe suppression consists in the follow-
ing. The configuration of these lobes, in accordance with (2.41). depends on

oinitial' where °initia1o as can be seen from the given formulas, does not
influence the directional pattern of an array without switching phase errors.

- 57 -

FINICIHNCIAI.USB¢NVLY
INDR‘OFFICIAI.IXSEZ(NVLY

defined by the sum of the terms of series (2. 41) having a subscript of h - 0.
Therefore, it is necessary to choose 01““ Risk so that the switching and combina-
tion lobes have a minimal level. This is so loved with the uniform "erosion" of
the indicated lobes in space, i.e., the optimal shape for lobe suppression is
rectangular. In this case, the extent of the suppressed lobes should be such
that they do not overlap one another, since when the lobes are superimposed in
space, their total level is increased. It can be demonstrated that with such
deformation of the combination lobes, their extent is proportional to the subscript
h. Therefore, such a value of O “1:131 cannot be chosen so that the indicated
condition is met simultaneously or all h. As a result, optimal suppression can
be provided only for lobes with a definite value of the subscript h. Estimates
of the level of additional sidelobe radiation, due to switched phase errors, show
that with optimal suppression of the switching lobes with h -‘i l, the level of
the overall sidelobe radiation due to the switched phase errors will be minimal.

If it is required that the absolute value of the integrals of (2.61) not depend
on the angular coordinates, then in the case of a linear array, one of the equa-
tions for the determination of oinitial assumes the form [1]:

d‘ 0,...,/dx’-2n A’l— jf} d3Mh, (2.63)

where féh is the level of the uniformly washed-out lobe.

As has been demonstrated, maximum suppression of switching and combination lobes
occurs in the case where the washed-out lobes are not superimposed on each other
in space. By employing this condition, one can derive a second equation for the
determination of the minimum value of fab and the optimal function 'iniria1 [l]:

' Itév....(x“’) _do...(x“’) _E'

Mh ax ax 'T ' (2.1.1.)

Equation (2. ha) in conjunction with (2. 63) completely defines the optimal initial
phase distribution which assures the maximum suppression of the switching and

combination lobes, as well as the level of the suppressed lobes.

 

Solving the system of equations (2.b3) and (2.4a), we derive the following for
a uniform amplitude distribution (h - i_l):

(bun-1'” KY”; qh-tlnr': ”(M :t "VN—J ' (2-45)
where

= ll2d Ad:
1' ( 3N ) (2.1.6)

qh-+l is the level of the suppressed switching and combination lobes.

The overall sidelobe radiation level which is due to switching phase errors is:
qr: 2/MVN—. (2.1.7)

In the case of a cosine amplitude distribution:

- 53 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE¢MVLY
2a [£_(L4.)'mﬂ ..

 

 

°ses- ””4: 2 2:: N4: . (2.68)
a l
42" __ .
V 2 M V N

The results obtained for a linear array are easily extrapolated to two dimensional

planar arrays. For example, for a planar rectangular array with the radiators
arranged at the nodes of an orthogonal coordinate grid, with a uniform amplitude
distribution:

buss" " (73 XL?” Y'). ' (2.59)

where Y: - llZdiNH; 7i - Al26§QHg N and Q are the number of rows and columns in
the planar array respectively.

The level of the suppressed combination and switching lobes of the directional
pattern of a planar array is:

02-2/1" VrTQ‘. (2.50)

Quite substantial suppression of the lobes due to the discrete change in the phase
can be obtained in arrays with a large number of radiating elements. This makes
it possible in some cases to employ coarser, and consequently, simpler and less.
expensive phase shifters with lower losses. The optimal initial phase distribu-
tion can be produced either by means of phase shifters with a fixed phase value,
inserted at the output of the power divider, or by means of phase shifters for

an array using a particular change in the phasing algorithm.

2.11. Beam Jumps in a Switched Array

The main lobe of the directional pattern of an equivalent array without switching
phase errors is oriented precisely in a specified direction, emain. When switch-
ing lobes are present in the immediate vicinity of the main lobe, the maximum of
their sum, i.e., the maximum of the array directional pattern, is slightly
shifted relative to the direction en‘1n. This shift, which is due to the switch-
ing phase errors, determines the error in setting the array beam in a specified
direction. The error depends on the level of the switched beams, and consequently,
on the discrete phase change step, A. Moreover, the position of the initial phase
readout has an impact on the precision in setting the beam. Thus, if one of the
end radiators of a linear array is chosen as the initial coordinate point, the
beam steering precision proves to be four times higher than the precision with
phase readout from the center of the array.

Beam steering precision is directly related to its jump-like motion, which is due
to the discrete change in the phase. The average value of a jump change, when
the readout origin is positioned in the center of the array, is:

so = mus/21V, (2.51)

- 59 -

FOR(HﬂﬂChULlﬂiE(MVLY
l!!!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USB¢DNLN

It is also necessary to note that with the same beam travel speed, the switching
frequency of the end phase shifters will be different, depending on the position
of the phase readout origin. This must be taken into account when assessing the
operational speed of a phase shifter.

2.12. Design Procedure

The directional gain or directional pattern width, the scan sector, the aidalobe
level and the beam steering precision are usually specified.

The specified sidelobe level and the requisite beam steering precision govern the
discrete phase change step, i.e., the number of phase shifter positions and the
amplitude distribution in an array.

The antenna dimensions are determined from the specified values of the directional
gain or directional pattern width, the selected amplitude distribution, as well

as the scan sector using the formulas of Table 2.1, as well as formulas (2.8) and
(2.9). The spacing tetwsen the radiators and the number of phase shifters is
found based on the specified scan sector by means of formulas (2.3)'- (2.6).

It is expedient when determining the number of positions of the discretely switched
phase shifters with respect to the maximum level of the sidelobes to represent

the specified sidelobe level in the form of the sum of two terms, one of which

is taken as the maximum switching lobe level, while the other is taken as the
antenna sidelobe level without switching phase errors. Then one can determine

A from the value of the first term of formulas (2.47) and (2.50) and the nature

of the amplitude distribution in the array in accordance with the data of Table
2.1, based on the value of the second term.

The maximum level of the switching lobes is chosen so that the number of requisite
positions of the phase shifter, 2n/A, is the least. This makes it possible to

use phase shifters of the simplest structural designs. 0n the other hand, one
cannot choose a second term which is too small, i.e., the level of the sidelobes
of an ideal antenna, since this necessitates the use of amplitude distributions
which fall off sharply towards the edges, something which leads to the necessity
of increasing array dimensions to assure the specified directional pattern width
or specified directional gain. A compromise solution is found, depending on the
specific requirements based on the antenna array in each case.

Then the scheme is chosen for the energy distribution and the configuration of
the phase shifters. the type of phase shifters, radiators, coupling elements, etc.

and these assemblies are designed; the directional pattern is calculated and
then the structural design is worked out.

- 50 -

FtﬂltﬂﬂﬂC1A1.UGE(NVLY
FORIOFFKJALIEﬁEONLY

3. “£me SCANNING Amms*

3.1. Fundamental Relationships for a Frequency Scanning Linear Radiator Array
[07, 010, l, 2]

Frequency control of an antenna beam is one of the techniques of electrical
control and is based on changing the electrical spacing between radiators excited
by a traveling wave with a change in the generator frequency. With this been
eteeringtechnique,. generator which is electrically tuned in a wide range of
frequencies is needed to scan space in a rather large sector.

In microwave antennae with frequency beam control, the radiators are, as a rule,
positioned directly in the exciting system. Linear arrays of radiators formed

by slits cut in one of the walls of a rectangular waveguide are shown in Figure 3.1.
A two-dimensional array of radiators is needed to obtain a controlled narrow direc-
tional pattern. Such an array can be created from linear arrays, arranged in a

definite manner on a specified surface. Some of the possible variants of such
antennas are shown in Figure 3.2.

Figure 3.1. Slitted waveguide
radiator arrays.

Key: 1. Direction of
excitation;
2. Matching load.

 

In antennas which take the form of linear radiator arrays, the excitation is lost
often accomplished using series or parallel configurations (Figure 3.3). The
direction of radiation of a linear array with an equally spaced arrangement of the
radiators is determined by the equation:

sin 0 n via/d _ pUd, 3'1

where e is the bean deflection angle from the nornal to the axis of the array of
radiators; y -~c/v is the phase velocity retardation in the channelizing system

exciting the radiators; c - 3 - 108 m/sec; l'is the generator wavelength; p - n +
o 0/2s, n - 0, :1, +2, .;.,is the bean number; Oxis the fixedrphase-shift between

adjacent radiators, due to.the insertion of the supple-ental phase shifters

 

*Questions of frequency scanning antenna design and theory were most completely

treated for the first time by L.N. Deryugin [010].

- 61 -

FOR‘0FFHJA1.USE(NVLY
FtHICIHHC1A1.USE(NQLY

(Figure 3.3c); la is the geonetric difference in the lengthsofthe channelizing
systems of two adjacent radiators; d is the spacing between the radiators; t is
the period of the retarding interaction systen.

     

I) (b)

Pigure 3.2. Antennas formed by linear tuo-dinensional arrays of
radiators.

Key: a. Planar; b. Arranged on a cylindrical surface;
c. Planar "fan-shaped"; d. Arranged on a conical
surface.

1. Bean direction;
2. Direction of excitation.

0

W“ ' 5’“?- MW .
W. M- *r.

(5)” [£b) ' . ’I (C)

Figure 3.3. The excitation of a linear radiator array.

Key: a. Using a parallel configuration;
b. Using a series configuration;
c. with a periodic retarding interaction systen.

when the generator frequency changes, because of the dependence of y and AM on
the frequency f, the radiation angle changes and the antenna bean moves in space.

- 62 -

F031lﬂﬂCLULlEIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The angular frequency sensitivity of
the antenna is the teen for the rate

of change in the antenna bean position
in space with a change in the frequency
(the unvelength):

...-.——.——______——— --- -

N 0.573 I; '
= —ﬂ/X - ———c°’o (—7 Y" +sin 0).

 

(3.2)

Figure 3.6. The dispersion
characteristic y(l) of
a periodic interaction
systea.

where yrp I [78?] - CIVgr is the retard-
ation of the group velocity of the wave
propagating in the channelizing systea;
the coefficient of 0.573 is introduced
when converting the angular frequency
sensitivity fron dimensionless units to
degrees for the percentage change in
frequency.

If follows from expression (3.2) that the angular frequency sensitivity depends
on the bean direction, the dispersion properties of the system and the ratio la/d.
me greater 0 and (Id/ﬂy“, the greater the angular frequency sensitivity.

The retarding of the group and phase velocities are related by the expression:

Kr' vnniiuma. (1”

If the dispersion characteristic of the channelizing systen is known, 7 0 7(1)
(tigure 3.b). then 73: is deter-ined graphically by the segment on the ordinate .
axis, intercepted by the tangent to the curve 7(1), run through the point corres-
,ponding to the value of Y in the systen. '

The slow-down in the group velocity 7‘, is also related to the power P flowing
through the system and the per unit length electrolagnetic energy R accumulated
in the systen:

vs, - cwIP - (3.4)

where P I v31".

To improve the angular frequency sensitivity of an antenna, it is necessary to
employ channelizing systems with a large value of 78" something which in turn can
be achieved by increasing the ratio HIP.

- 63 -

IKIICHﬁﬂCIAI.UBE(NULY
momcmuscouiv

The ultimate value of the power flowing along the channelizing system is:

/ - Pnnn .Mon-cvudyn. (3.3)

Pult. . uult.vgr - c"ult. Ygr

where "ult. is the ultinate value of the per unit length electromagnetic energy
of the system, which is liaited by the effective cross-section of the system and
the electrical strength.

Expression (3.5) sakes it possible to establish the relationship of the power
Put, to the angular frequency sensitivity A, since both of these quantities
depend on 78" and to draw the conclusion that with an increase in A, the ulti-
mate power always falls off. For a specified value of A, the increase in the
ultimate power for any system can be achieved only by increasing "ult. However,
it must be stipulated that in a number of cases, the ultimate which can be passed
is limited by the electrical strength of the radiators.

The thermal losses in the walls of the channeliting system are due to the attenu-
ation of the wave propagating in it. The attenuation coefficient is:

o - rum/29 - a = Peel/2P. (3.6)

where P1°.. is the power of the losses per unit length of the system.

The attenuation in the channelicing systea at the distance of a wavelength taking
expression (3.5) into account, is defined as:

_' a; = "ﬂaw " (3.7)

where Q . 0“]? is the quality factor of the channelizing system (u - 21f).

For retardive periodic structure type channelizing systems with a period of t,

the Q does not exceed Qnax - t/d (6 is the depth of field penetration into the
metal). In actual structures, Q - 0-3Qmax. which makes it possible to estiaate

the anticipated losses in a systen.

It is also not difficult to draw the conclusion from expressions (3.2) and (3.7)
that an increase in the angular frequency sensitivity is always acconpanied by a
rise in the system losses. The presence of losses in a channelizing system places
a limitation on the length of a radiator array, since with an increase in the
length, its efficiency falls off, which in turn limits the generation of narrow
directional patterns by an array of radiators.

The directional pattern width and the efficiency also depend on the distribution
of the power radiated along the array. The exponential distribution has become
widespread in practice (each element of the array radiates an identical fraction

- 6b -

IIHICHHHK1A1.USE(HVLY
of the traveling wave power fed to it), as well as a uniform distribution (each
element radiates the sane power) and other special kinds of distributions (for

exanple, sy—etrical relative to the array center and falling off towards it edges).

In the case of uniforu distribution, the efficiency of a radiator array is governed

by an expression which is justified when ox << 1 (which is usually observed in
practice):

I '1. w.
m-[uM—hu—T l—exp(-—w ' (3.8)

where P0 is the power at the antenna input; PL is the power at the end of the
antenna; 1. is the antenna length.

The half power level directional pattern width for the case of radiation close to
the normal to the axis of the array is deternined iron the formula:

260.5 [degrees] - 50.7X/L 29... [mu] ‘3 “'71,!" (3.9)

Taking expressions (3.8) and (3.9) into account, we derive the relationship
between 2005, n and "A:

 

d

".7—
m-[cxp(—ll.7 3" )_.ﬂ]———”M—.. (3.10)

100.5 Po at
1—H], THJT.
In the case of an exponential distribution:
PL m

m-(l—TXI + lll("L/Po) ) (3.11)-

The directional patttern width depends on the relative power getting through to

the end of the antenna. When PL/Po - 0.05 (the aperture utilisation coefficient
is 0.83 in this case):

290.5 [degrees] - 56.61/1. (3.12)
20... [rpaal - 54.4HL.

Taking expressions (3.11) and (3.l2) into account, we obtain the following when
PL/Po - 0.05: -
m r= 0.95 (l — 4.l7¢ll20u). (3.13)
FINI¢MﬂﬂC1A1.lEﬂB(ﬂHLY

(3.13)

“hen determining directional pattern width using formulas (3.9) and (3.12), the
quantities 1 and L have identical units of measurement.

 

n

“M70” W4” 4” ”If; g dB/deg

Figure 3.5. The antenna efficiency as a function of the

ratio of attenuation tines wavelength to the
directional pattern width.

Curves for nA(uA/200,5), plotted using formulas (3.10) and (3.13), are shown in
Figure 3.5. Curves l and 2 were obtained for radiator arrays with a uniform
distribution where PL/Po - 0.05 and PL/Po - 0 respectively. Curve 3 was plotted
for an exponential distribution where PLlPo I 0.05. As follows from the graph,

an array with an exponential distribution has a higher efficiency: from 0.9 to 0.“.
Horeovsr, such an array permits switching the direction of excitation, something
which makes it possible to increase the bean steering sector with the same fre-
quency change and efficiency.

The working sector of space scanned by the beam of a radiator array can fall only
within the bounds of the transmittance ector of the periodic structure used as
the channelizing system (Figure 3.3c). All periodic structures used in frequency
controlled antennas are bandpass filters, having frequency transmittance bands, to
which the angular transmittance sectors correspond. The width and orientation of
these sectors depend on the type of periodic structure, the specific features of
the radiators and the number of cells in the interaction structure between the
radiators.

As foIlows from expression (3.1), the beam direction for a radiator array in
space depends on the supplemental fixed phase shift 0 in the exciter unit between

- 66 -

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
INHRCHHHCJA1.USE(NNLY

the adjacent radiators. Phase shifts of the same angle when naking the transition
to each subsequent radiator are accomplished by fixed phase shifters. For example,
in the forn of line sections of equal length running to the radiators (see Figure
3.3a). An additional phase shift n can be realized rather simply. For example,
when a rectangular “10 mode waveguide is used as the channelizing system, a phase
shift of r can be obtained by using radiating slots, which are coupled in an alter-
nating phase fashion to the waveguide field.

The shape of the main lobe of the directional pattern changes when the beam moves
in space. As it approaches the axis of the array, the main lobe widens and becomes
asymmetrical with respect to the direction 8. The change in the width of the main
lobe will be small when scanning in an angular sector close to a normal to the

axis of the array and increases sharply as it approaches the axis of the array. It
is theoretically possible, but difficult in practice to preserve a constant width
of the main lobe during wide angle scanning.

The half power level width of the main lobe, taking its asymmetry into account, for
an array of length L >> A, with a uniforn distribution of the radiated power, can
be estimated from the expression:

20., = arcsin (0.44311. + sin e) + min (0.44am. — sin 0). (3-1“)

In the case of axial radiation, the width of the main lobe proves to be 2.16/57)
times greater than the width of the main lobe in the case of radiation along a

normal.

The change in the width of the main lobe during its travel can be explained by the
change in the effective 1ength*, Leff. of an array of radiators and the amplitude
distribution along it. In a first approximation, for angles of e < 70-75 degrees
(depending the length of the array L), Leg; can be determined as the projection

of the array length L onto a direction perpendicular to the main lobe of the
diredtional pattern:

Leff = L cose (3.15)

When L/l 3,10, this assumption is quite well justified. Thus, the error in the
determination of Leff using fornula (3.14) when L/l - 10 and 0 - 70 degrees amounts
to about 1.5 percent with respect to the value of Lgff determined fro. a more

rigorous formula (see [07, p. 354]). In some cases, the scan sector can be limited
by the pernissible widening of the main lobe.

*
The effective length is understood to be the length of a uniform in-phase linear
array which yields a directional pattern at the half-power level of the same width
as the array under consideration.

_ 67 -

FOR1OFFNJAI.USI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An integral part of a frequency scaming antenna is a frequency-tunable generator.
The precision in determining the bean position in space depends on the stability
and precision in setting the generator frequency. There are centimter and deci-
Ineter band generators at the present tin, which can be electrically tuned in a
rather wide range of frequencies (fron 110 percent up to an octave). The frequency
tuning range of a generator depends to a considerable extent on its power and work-

ing frequency. Correspondingly, there are also wideband amplifiers which can be
used in the receiving equipment.

In a masher of cases, one can use exciters to excite an antenna which are designed
in a complex circuit configuration and contain a coapsratively low :power generator
with a wide frequency tuning range and broadband power mlifiers. "hen the re-
quisite range of working frequencies is wider than the passband of a single anili-
fier, several anplifiers are employed; in this case, each of then operate in a
band of working frequencies set--aside for it. Such an approach can be used where
it is necessary to change the bean direction in space while preserving its scanning
sector.

However, when designing a frequency scanning antenna, one last rennet-her that the
use of a wide band of frequencies requires the use of radiators, transition and
decoupling elements, etc. , having a wide passband and possessing a low attenmtion
in this band. Otherwise, considerable changes nay be observed in the power redir-
ated by the antenna and the shape of the directional pattern when the frequency
changes.

-68-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
M 0mm]. USE ONLY

3.2. Channelieing Systems of Frequency Scanning Antennas [010]

In the structural designs of centineter band frequency scanning antennas, the
radiators, as a rule, are placed directly in the exciting channelising syste-s
(for emple, a linear array of slotted radiators, with the slits cut in one of
the walls of a rectangular waveguide), which can be designed around waveguides,
coaxial lines, etc. The electrical properties of these channelizing systems are
evaluated by the slow-down in the phase velocity Y . the dispersion characteristic
7 - 1(1) and the attenuation factor a.

The major requirements placed on channelising systems are as follows:

1. The retardation of the phase velocity 7 should not be large, since with an
increase in y, the losses in the channelising system increase, and greater
accuracy is required in the manufacture of the system. The latter is related to
the fact that minor relative changes can lead to the disruption of normal antenna
operation in a number of cases.

2. The attenuation factor a should be as low as possible, since the antenna effici-
ency depends on its value, as well as the possible directional pattern width (for
a specified efficiency).

3. The channelizing system should allow for the arrangement of radiators at a
spacing of d I 1/2 in an axial direction to avoid a multiple lobed directional
pattern when the main lobe is deflected towards the axis of the array.

to. In a two-dimensional array, the transverse diuensions of the channelizing system
should be such that the spacing between the radiators of adjacent linear arrays
does not exceed . ptherwise, the directional pattern will have multiple lobes.

5. The channelizing systas should have as small a size and weight as possible.
This is especially important for aircraft antennas.

waveguide Channeliring Systems (Figure 3-.6).

H10 Mode Rectangular waveguide. The retardation 1 falls in a range of from 0 to 1.
In practice, Y - 0.36--0.86. The angular frequency sensitivity of the waveguide is
low and fluctuates on the average from tenths to units of degrees per percent
change in frequency. The attenuation factor in the 3 cm band anounts to about 0.5
dB/n. which with an efficiency of n - 90 percent makes it possible to obtain a
directional pattern width of about 1'.

Rectangular Waveguide Partially Filled with a Dielectric. The retardation Y can be
regulated by changing the thickness of the dielectric and its dielectric permitti-
vity c. The slowdown usually falls in a range of 0.7 to 1.5. The attenuation
factor is several times greater than for a regular waveguide (a is about 1.2 dB/m
in the 3 cm band), and depends on the loss angle of the dielectric and its thick-

ness h. A drawback to the system is the requirement that the dielectric proper-
ties of the dielectric employed be homogeneous.

-69-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHCIALlISEONLY

waveguide with a Pinned Structure. The retardation is y > 1, and can in practice
be made close to unity and even considerably higher. The system has considerable
dispersion and high angular frequency sensitivity. The attenuation factor in the
3 cm band for small values of y (y - l--2) is about 2 dB/n. The systa has a high
weight as compared to a regular waveguide and requires a high fabrication precision.

Serpentine Waveguide. The retardation is y > 1 and can be regulated in a consider-
able'range by changing the length (I. + Abequiv). and in this case, the angular
fremenoy sensitivity is also adjusted in a wide range. The attenuation factor in
this systa in the 3 cm band is less than in systems with the same angular sensi-
tivity, for example, in waveguide with an internal finned structure) and amounts to
about 0.7 dB/a when 7 = 2.5. The considerable weight, great length (l. + ALequiv)
and fabrication complexity must be numbered among the drawbacks to the system.

Helical Haveguide. The retardation is y > 1 and is regulated by changing its geo-
metric dinensions. The dispersion of the systaa is low. The attenuation factor

in the 3 cm band is about 2.5 dB/m when 7 I lo. A rectangular waveguide R plane
bend is east frequently used, since this sakes it possible to reduce the spacing
between radiators.

Coaxial Channeliring Systems (Figure 3.7).

These are of interest in those cases where systems are needed having a poor dis-
persion and relatively simple control of the retardation. However. considerable
attenuation is inherent in coaxial systems. Only a coaxial line partially filled
with a dielectric (Figure 3.71:) represents an enception. A coaxial line with a
finned structure on the inner conductor (Figure 3.7c) is distinguished from the
remaining systems by the presence of sharply pronounced dispersion properties. The
geometric dimensions of coaxial systems when they are used in the centimer band are
mall, which substantially limits the power they can carry.

when using periodic structures as channelizing syst-s, for example, a waveguide
with a finned structure, a coaxial line with a disk-on-rod structure on the inner
conductor, and serpentine and helical waveguides, one can obtain a high angular
frequency sensitivity for an antenna. However, the considerable losses in such
systas do not make it possible to design an antenna with a high efficiency and a
narrow directional pattern. Moreover, these system, as a rule, have considerable
weight and are complex to manufacture, which limits the possibilities for their
applications in a number of cases, especially in aircraft antennas.

A rectangular H10 mode waveguide channelizing system has a number of valuable
qualities: low losses, relatively mall size and weight, and a well mastered produc-
tion technology. For this reason, linear arrays of radiators excited by this kind
of channelizing systen have become widespread in antenna engineering. The maxim-I
theoretical scan sector of a waveguide antenna with radiators coupled to the wave-
guide field in an alternating phase fashion, without taking into account the fre-
quency properties of the radiators and the elaents used to couple to then, runs
from -90' to +16' with a change in the retardation from 0.22 to 0.867 and a ratio

of x/Za from 0.975 to 0.5. An average angular frequency sensitivity of -l.6l’ per
percent and a change in the wavelength by a factor of 1.95 times correspond to

- 7o -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT-1C1“. USE ONLY

the indicated scan sector. Switching the direction of the

traveling wave in such

an antenna nakes it possible to cover a scan sector of 180'.

Key: a.

b.

d.

Key: a.
b.
‘ C.

d.

channeliz ing systen.

 

be somewhat different,

-71-

l-‘OROFFIGALUSEONLY

Figure 3.6. Waveguide channelizing systa
for frequency scanning
antennas.

Rectangular waveguide
with slots, coupled to
the 310 node of the
waveguide in an alter-
nating phase fashion;
Rectangular waveguide,
partially filled with
a dielectric;
Rectangular waveguide
with a finned structure
placed in it;
Serpentine rectangular
waveguide;

Helical rectangular
waveguide.

Figure 3.7. Coaxial channelizing systems
for frequency scanning
antennas.

Filled with a dielectric
Hith dielectric disks;
with a finned structure
on the inner conductor;
Coaxial line with the
inner conductor uade

in the form of a spiral

we shall give the najor relationships and
design procedure for a frequency scanning
slotted waveguide array, in which a regular
rectangular H10 node waveguide is used as the
when other channelizing
systens are enployed, the design procedure wili

since the expressions
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which characterize the relationship of the dispersion properties of systens to
their geometric dimensions, as a rule, are rather coupler. Moreover, the retarda-
tion in these system is greater than unity, which, it goes without saying, is
reflected in the reco-endations for the choice of the antenna radiation zone.

3.3. The Frequency Scanning Slotted Waveguide Array [010, 2]

A slotted waveguide array (VShchR) is shown in Figure 3.1. A regular rectangular
310 node waveguide is used as the channelizing systa for such an antenna. The
array radiators are slots cut in one of the waveguide walls. This antenna is
excited fron one end by a generator, and a matching load is connected to the other
end to provide for antenna operation in a traveling wave node.

We stall give the major characteristics of a regular waveguide with a H10 node
(see Figure 3.6a) as well as those which determine their relationship.

1. The phase velocity retardation is:

]W 3.16

where x is the generator wavelength in cm; a is the cross-sectional dimension of
the waveguide in the H plane in en. The dispersion characteristic 7 - 1(1/2a) is
shown in Figure 3.8, plotted using formula (3.16).

2. The group velocity delay:

Y8, - 1/7 (3.17)

This follows from the well Imown relationship for a waveguide: vsrv - c2 or
YgrY ' 1.

3. The ultimate transmitted power is:

P»... [luau-w lg" Vl—(%)'. (3.18)

ultimate

 

 

where b is the cross-sectional dimension of the waveguide in the B plane in
cm; [Bult] is the ultimately permissible electrical field intensity in the
wavegtTEE‘el for the specified taperature, pressure and lunidity, in KV/cn; a and
X are chosen in centimeters.

a. The attenuation factor is:

.[.s/...-7931.-2_ 7:.)1/0 nip—(2‘ (-_)'.]

[dB/m] (3.19)

-72-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here 6 is the conductance of the material of the nveguide walls in mhos/m; a, h
and A are chosen in centimeters.

5. The angular frequency sensitivity is:

-LJﬂ’l _ gm _.'_ (3.20)
A M m( v..+an0) M( ’44:“).

In accordance with formla (3.16), the retardation of the phase velocity can vary
from 0 to l, and it would seem that the angular frequency sensitivity can he made
as great as desired. However, the range of change in 1 which can be realised is
considerably narrower. This is explained by the fact tint when x + A“ - 2a(y + 0),
the losses increase sharply and the power Pun falls off. The lower limit of y can
hr found, if one asmnes tint the losses approximately double as compared to a
conventional waveguide. In this case, A = 1.9a or 1/24! ' 0.95 and 7min - 0.36.

The upper limit of x is related to the require-ant for 1120 mode suppression, where
this mode occurs when X - a or 1/2a - 0.5. Under these conditions, Ymax - 0.867.
Thus. the retardation of the phase velocity v is limited to values of 0.867 g 7 g
g 0.36, while the retardation of the group velocity is limited to 2.77 g 781' 3 1.15.

The direction of radiation of a linear radiator array excited by a wave traveling

along it is determined in accordance with equation (3.1) when 14 - d using the
formula:

nae-1-..)“ ' (3.21)

for radiators coupled in phase to the waveguide field (0 - 0) and using the formula:

sin 0 = v — (n + 0.5) Nd (3.22)

for radiators with alternate phase coupling to the waveguide field (6 - n).

The beam scanning with a change in frequency will occur by virtue of the change in
y and A.

The curves for Md as a function of y (the solid lines) are shown for convenience
in smlyzing and solving equations (3.21) and (3.22) in Figures 3.9 and 3.10 for
various values'of the parameter 2a/d, plotted from the relationship derived from
the expression (3.16):

Md- ViTrza/d. (3.23)

The grid of lines for A/d is a function of y is also shown in Figure 3.9 for various
values of the bean inclination angle 6 for n - 0 (the dashed lines). The values of

-73..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A/d were calculated for y - 0.5 and values of the paraneter 2a/d, corresponding to
angles 9 from 0 to 90‘ in steps of 5° and the slope of these lines was determined

assuning trust 6 - const., since this function is represented by a straight line
[sec (3.22)], to construct the grid of lines.

In Figures 3.9 and 3.10, the radiation coverage zone for the corresponding nunbers
of beans are bounded by lines with different values of n. In Figure 3.10, a
radiation zone to the left of the line n - 0, running vertically, corresponds to

the bun with the nunber n - 0. The radiation regions for n - 0 (Figure 3.9) and

n - 1, 2 (Figures 3.9 and 3.10) fall below the sloped lines corresponding to each n.

The choice of the spacing between adjacent radiators d, which should be such that
during been scanning in a specified sector, the possibility of the appearance of
major sidelobes is precluded, is of considerable importance in an antenna design.
This condition will be net if the spacing d satisfies the relationship:

_ l—l/N (3.21.)
d<d"“ AH-lslnﬂ’

 

where N is the nunber of radiators in the array.

When the condition d - dun is net, the null of the nearest sidelobe mime will

coincide with the plane of the array, and consequently, the directional pattern will
have only the nain lobe.

A graph of dm/X is given in Figure 3.11 as

as a function of the scan angle 0 for 10 and 100
radiators, plotted using formla (3.24). It
follows iron the graph that the minus spacing
between adjacent radiators of an array with
tansverse radiation without bean scanning should
be approximately equal to A. If the bean scans
in a range of 390°, then dux = 1/2.

     

Thus, the condition for the existence of one
nain lobe of the direction pattern of a linear
array of radiators during scanning requires that

III I‘

0 42 4‘ 46' “1/2! the spacing between the radiators be less than
1. (h the other hand, in order for the direc-
Figure 3.8. The dispersion tion of the nain lobe to be close to the nornal

to the axis of the array, the excitation of the
radiators should be close to in-phase. The
latter is achieved in slotted waveguide arrays
where d - 13 (13 is the wuwelength in the
waveguide, A3 > X). Alternating plnse excita-
tion of adjacent radiators is used to reduce the spacing between the radiators in
slotted waveguide arrays. In this case, d 2 Av/Z. However, when all of the radia-
tors are spaced at a distance of d - 13/2 from each other (so that the main lobe is
directed along the nornal to the axis of the array), the waves reflected fron all

characteristic of
a regular 310 node
waveguide.

-71.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9 .
“9% ’é-‘M’i '

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

  

   

1/, .v s ’ 0’ ‘
‘ I
"' ‘\WII
l k k\ Iva-U.
I I ‘ ‘W 1%
‘1‘“? .-
. ‘ . -"‘.‘ \‘
‘ ﬁ\<§! . ‘9‘: ‘4' ‘ ‘

1‘ =75b$§$ (Adah Figure 3.9. The radiation
=;£':~E’>.$§§‘ 2‘ _ coverage zones
:5 'm~&§'~q&$:\\\‘h‘ and scan angles
I 1312:" an ,b‘we. <“‘\\‘~ ' in the case of
:ggrngﬁﬁgﬁﬁ radiators with
Mmﬂﬂqh§5s=§ﬁy alternate phase

magaﬂmz§§§ coupling to the
"@mngghi}; waveguide field.
%%%u%nw
0 y b -
W *nmﬁ%;«vi§z
4’ a
/
“i
/ I
0
at 41 43 434‘ 4-7 I! 47 404“"! f
1/!
II l"'0
5 "In I
I'- Figure 3.10. The radiation coverage zones ans scan
I I... '_ angles in the case of radiators which
"' i. are coupled in pluse to the waveguide

   

  
   

 
 

I
“I!
M.
E

 

Z! M w l’.‘

field.

Figure 3.11. Curves for emu/x as a function of the
scan angle 0. [sic]

of the radiators add in phase at the antenna input, something which sharply degrades

its matching (the so-called "normal" effect is observed).

In the case of beam

deflection frou the normal, values of d other than Xg/Z and when the saves re-
flected fro: the radiators are autually cancelling to a greater extent, kvm e l.

-75-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To determine the nininuln spacing between radiators, d, which differs froa 13/2
and for which the latching will be good throughout the entire working band of
frequencies, one can aploy the expression: '

d<(l—IIN)1....I2. (3.25)

To realize antenna radiation along the nornal to its plane, it is necessary to
latch each slot radiator to the waveguide. The use of natched slots nakes it pos-
sible to reduce the actual effect, i.e.. avoid the sharp increase in kn“- when
the main lobe direction coincides with the noraal to the plane of the antenna.

A slotted waveguide array with alternatre phase eacitation of the radiators can

be designed with longitudinal slots in the wide wall of the waveguide (see Pigure
3.1) on different sides of the center line or with the slots inclined in opposite
directions in the narrow wall. The spacing between the slots d depends on the
requisite direction of the main lobe of the directional pattern. 0, and the scan
sector. when choosing the spacing, one can get a rough idea fro. expression (3.25).
In actual antenna designs, d/l is usually 0.3 to 0.7.

An analysis of equation (3.22) (see Figure 3.9) shows that when y - 0.36—0.867
and when l/d > 1, equation (3.22) makes sense only when n - 0, i.e., when the
antenna operates with a null beam (n - 0), in which case, the bean was scanned
primarily in the region of negative angles 9 when the frequency changes (see
Figure 3.3c). '

3.6. The Design Procedure for a Frequency Scanning Linear slotted waveguide Array

It is assuaed in the design procedure cited here that the retardation of the phase
velocity in an excited waveguide slot is equal to the retardation in a regular
waveguide in which there are no radiators. In an actual slotted waveguide array,
because of the internal and external mutual coupling of the radiators. the retarda-
tion in the waveguide will differ saaewhat from y. In this case, the deviation in
the delay from 7 depends on the number of radiators, the spacing between then, and
on the degree of their coupling to the waveguide field. etc.

Accounting for the influence of radiator autual coupling on the operation of a
slotted waveguide array is complicated and requires long and labor intensive calcu-
lations (see Chapter 6). Because of this, it is expedient in an approximate engin-
eering calculation to neglect the mutual coupling of the radiators,‘ assuaing that
the retardation is constant and equal to 7. In a nunber of practical problems,

one can be limited to just such a design. However, when designing a pencil bean
(280,5 3 1') slotted waveguide array with high precision in the determination of
its parameters and characteristics, following the preliminary approximate design of
the antenna. a repeat design calculation is to be perforaed, using a more precisely
specified value of the delay in the exciting waveguide slot, taking the mtual
coupling of the radiators into account.

-75-

FOROFFIQALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The design of a frequency scanning slotted waveguide array consists in determining
the parameters of the waveguide which excite the slot radiators, as well as the
spacing between the radiators, d, taking the bean scanning in the specified angu-
lar sector into account and the design of the radiators and their coupling to the
waveguide to assure the requisite distribution of the radiated power along the
array and then the calculation of the array directional pattern.

A specific future of the deternination of the waveguide parameters and the spacing
d is the fact that the waveguide parameters 1 and d for a specified scan sector
AG and working wavelength A are related together by a single equation (3.21) or
(3.22). For this reason, to find one of the desired quantities, it is necessary
to specify beforehand the remaining quantities incorporated in this equation. For
example, in order to determine y, the values of 0 and d mat be specified. By
changing the values of 6 and d, one can obtain several variants of the possible
waveguide excitation system, and then choose tint one of them which makes it pos-
sible to best satisfy the main requirenents of the technical specifications (for
exanple, minimal frequency variation during scanning, low attenuation factor in
the waveguide, high angular frequency sensitivity of the array).

He shall introduce the following symbols: P is the power radiated by the antenna
in K"; Xmim Acp “"81 and Am are the minim, average and maximum wavelengths
of the generator respectively, in en:

a 'M...-A... ‘
-—--=2—— «[00
ks Maidens ,‘

is the relative change in the generator wavelength, in percent; 9.1m ecp [Bays]
and a...“ are the direction of the main lobe of the directional pattern for 1.1,"
A”: and “max respectively, in degrees; 2905 is the width of the main lobe of
the directional pattern at the half power level when A - 1.“, in degrees.

Equation (3.22) at the limits of the scan sector, which is bounded by the angles
9m and Dam, has the form:

 

sin 9,“: :- y...—0,51.“/d; (3 . 26)
3'” onh=7mes“°05xnhld' ‘ (3.27)

Different variants of the problem can be encountered in design work. He shall
cite a few of then.

Variant l: P, Aug, Al/Aavg, 260.5 and e": are specified. Determine the possible
scan sector M.

Variant 2: P, "avgo (ix/Awe, 200.5 and A9 are specified. Determine the possible
beam direction eavg'

Variant 3: P, “avg, MIXW8 and 2605 are specified. Determine the beam direction
eavg for which the scan sector A9 will be the greatest.

-77-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the specified scan

and A0 are specified. Assure
length ulkavso

nriant 4: P, lug, 290.5, a,
actor with as mall ss possime a relative change in the wave
it is recon-ended that one use

:1 doing the design calculations for any variant,
3.9--3.ll and the naterials given in i3.l--3.3.

he graphs of Figures

le shall consider an example of a procedur
here P, Xavg, Mll‘vs. a,“ and 200,5 are spec

In the case at
sary to deter-inc the possible scan s

l. we choose the type of radiators a
account the considerations presented in 53.3, we choose s

phase coupling to the waveguide field as the radiate
heal nunber of n - 0.

e curves of Figures 3

working fro- the specif
and him we start the calculation with

corresponding to lug. Considering the fact that the angular

the value of v”

frequency sensit vity A (3.20) is larger for saallsr values of v,

to choose 1“ less than 0.5, however. it must be renenbersd in this case that with

a change in t can prove to be less than 0.36 and the losses wi
it is not expedient to choose Ynin close

rise in the waveguide. For this reason,

to 0.36. Using the graphs of Figure 3.12, we approxinete v“; for M > 1 to

obtain the requisite been direction a“ . Based on the curves of Figure 3.9, we
find the value of 2ald for the know vs ues of v“: and 6.“; The value of 2a/d in
a structural design nned, and consequently, will
stay constant during frequency scanning.

inarily determining the waveguide dimension a
1' and the slow-down factors Yen: and
' .16) or the graphs

3.8.

.9 and 3.12, we roughly calc

2. By using th
ied values of A“; a

bean directions ens.
find the wavelengths A.”

  

'50 To deternine the angles 0”,; and 6.1m we find
' the intersection points in the graphs of
' Figure 3.9 of the vertical lines corresponding
with the line :for lld - lldh)

to min and 1...:
(the value of the paraneter

. " wh7n 2a/d - const.
2a d has already been found). If the inter-

“ [Eggs ”Thi‘sgn‘faﬁefe section point lies above the line n - 0, then
gu ' ' ‘ functign of such an operating node is not feasible and the

firaf ixed values Y calculation is to be repeated, specifying

of Aid M the another value of Yavg° It is usually desir-

antenna 0 er ates able to obtain the greatest scan sector be

p for the specified relative change in the wave-
erefore, one nay specify

two to three values of v“: in the calcula-
tions and find the naxinun possible sector.

-13-
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering the approximate nature of the performed calculations, related to the
error in the determination of the design values from the graphs, we shall further
specify these quantities precisely (paragraphs 3-6).

3. we specify the spacing between the radiators more precisely for the specified
value of Yavg based on equation (3.22):

d B 0'51", (Va. “h d”)-

nere, one suat check to see that the condition d ad.“ is met when A - lain
[sec (3.26)] to aboid the appearance of major aidelobss.

lo. He determine the size of the wide wall of the waeeguida sore precisely from
the formla (3.16):

a-A.,/2 VI—ygi'
5. We determine:

Vula‘vi"o‘maalﬁiv Yux=Vi-(Wﬁ)‘-
6. Pros equations (3.26) and (3.27), we find:

out = am" Wain—0.519u/J).
‘ onla " am." (me’oo§xnle)'

7. He determine the possible scanning sector:
59 ' AIla): ' Amin-

8. He find the angular frequency sensitivity at the average wavelength:

 

A- 0.513

we” (-t+sln0,,).

9. Using formula (3.22), we calculate the function 6 I 0(1) in the working band
and plot the graph.

10. We select the waveguide dimension: b, being governed by considerations of
electrical strength, the essence of higher modes and the possibility of cutting
slots of widths 1.10: 9 Aug/2.

11. We determine the ultimate transmission power Pult from formula (3.18).
- 79 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. We choose the material for the uveguids walls and find the attenuation
factor a fraa formula (3.19).

We select the distribution for the radiated power along the array of radiators.
working from the requirements placed on the directional pattern and the gain of

the slotted waveguide array. He deter-ins the length of the antenna array Lg, its
efficiency '1‘, and the number of radiators in the array N. In the case where the
sinplest distributions are selected for the radiated power (uniforn or exponential).
the quantities 1.5, In and N can be determined as indicated in paragraphs 13--15.

13. He select a uniform or exponential distribution for the radiated power along
the array, and working from the specified width of the main lobe, 2005, we find
the approximate length of the antenna array from formula (3.15):

L . Leff/coaew

A 8

Leff is determined forn formula (3.9) or (3.12) aasuning that 1.1 Leﬁ when

He shall deter-isle LA more precisely, checking to see that the condition

26' = 260 5 is net, where 20' is the width of the main lobe determined. from
0.5 - 0.5

fornula (3.16).

16. We determine the efficiency of the slotted waveguide array using formla (3.8)
or (3.11) at the boundaries of the working frequency band.

15. we find the nuaber of radiators in the antenna array:

1! - LA/d+1

16? We choose the dimensions of the slotted radiators and their arrangenent in the
waveguide wall, taking into account the selected distribution for the radiated
power along the array of radiators.

17. We calculate the directional pattern when l - lam, A.“ and RM. we deter-
mine the coformity of the width of the main directional pattern lobe to the re-
quisite width and the change in it during scanning.

18. We find the directional gain of the antenna array.

19. He draw the electrical scholastic of the slotted waveguide array.

 

*
Points 16 through 18 are perforned using the procedure set forth in Chapter 5.

-80-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

20. We design the feeder channel coupling the trmnitter to the slotted waveguide
aray. ’

The structural design of the slotted waveguide array is accaapliahed taking its
application into account.

The procedure is basically retained when doing the design calculations for variants
2-4; only paragraph 2 changes.

For variant 2, the rough calculation (paragraph 2) to determine the beam direction
ens. for which the requisite scan sector 68 can be obtained, is carried out by
means of the graphsof Figure 3.9. Since the angular frequency sensitivity is
greater at small values of y, then by specifying 7.13 close to 0.36, we determine
7.“ by the method indicated in paragraph 2. Drawing two vertical lines correspond—
ing to the values of 7.1“ and Ymax and a horizontal line for l/d - l, we obtain a
region in the graph for the choice of a“: in which the requisite scanning sector
can be obtained. The calculation reduces to the determination the spacing between
the radiators, d, which assures the requisite dB for the selected values of 1,“
and Ymin- By using the curves x/d(y) when Zall - const., we find a curve on the
graph in the resulting regions, which when we move along the curve from y“? to

Ym we obtain the requisite value of 49. Then, having determined 7“: -
‘ 31 - (‘72:; , We fix“ 9.V8.

For variant 3, the approximate calculations are performed in a runner similar to
the calculations for variant 2. with the difference that a“: is determined for
which A6 will be a maximum.

Yor variant 6, the rough calculation reduces to obtaining the specified scan sector
A6 with a wall a change as possible in the wavelength, i.e.. it is desirable that
MIA“; be snail. For this purpose, we find the region of slow-down factors from
the graph of Figure 3.12 for which one can obtain the specified direction ens. We
select two to three values of 7": corresponding to °avg- Based on the specified
values of A0 and ens, we find the limits of the scan sector em and 8,1... For
each of the selected values of Y"? we perform the following calculations. Based
on Yavg and Aavgv we find the waveguide dimension a and determine the parameter
2a/x. Then using the graphs of Figure 3.9, to determine the values of Ymin and
Ymax corresponding to the intersection points of the straight lines 0 - 8 not - const.
and 0 - 6mm - const.. with the curve (x/d) (1') for the found value of 2a d. The
wavelengths x.“ and in”, are determined from the formulas:

ham '32“ V l "vallv Lalo: “VI—’th

while the range of change in the wavelengths is found using the formula Ax - Xmax -
- Main. By repeating the same calculation for other values of 7. also, we will
find new values of AA. As a result of the calculations, we determ e the value of
1“: corresponding to the least change in Al, which provides for the requisite
sector AB.

-31-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
In doing the design calculations for variant lo, it can turn out that s considerable
. scan sector A0 is requind (for uanple, As > 30‘). In this case, to reduce the
requisite value of MIA”: during scanning, a systen of parallel waveguides can be
used which have different spacings between the radiators. Bach waveguide, with the
sane change in Alli"; will provide for scanning in the corresponding sector, while
the sun of these sectors should be equal to the total sector. The structural '
design of such an antenna will be more coupler; it should consist of several wave-
guides, switched when seizing the transition iron one scen sector to another. The
design procedure for such an antenna is somewhat different then for a single
slotted waveguide array, however, one can employ the procedure already considered
in the design calculations for each waveguide. Breaking the total scan sector down
into component parts and deternining the number of requisite waveguides can be
ecconplished by using the graphs of Figure 3.9, as well as the book [010].

-82-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l(ﬂﬂﬂ[1A1.USE(ﬂVLY

a. HIGHLY DIRECTIONAL CYLINDRICAL AND ARC ANTENNA ARNASS
6.1. General Information

Cylindrical antenna arrays take the form of a system of radiators arranged on a
cylindrical surface. A special case of cylindrical arrays is arc and ring antenna
arrays. the radiators in which are arranged along an arc or circle of a particular
radius.

Hire and slotted dipoles, open waveguide ends and horns, helical and dielectric
rod antennas as well as director radiators can be used as the radiators in cylin-
drical arrays. The choice of the type of radiator depends on the working wave-
length and the requisite passband, on the operational conditions and function,

as well as on the structural design requirements placed on the array as a whole.
In the cenrineter band, the most convenient type of radiator for cylindrical
arrays is so-called diffraction type radiators, which take the form of openings
cut directly in the metal surface of a cylinder: a half-wave slot, an open wave-
guide end or a small horn.

A merit of such radiators is also the fact that they almost do not disrupt the
aerodynamic properties of the cylindrical surface, something which is especially
important when they are placed in aircraft. One of the important properties of
pencil beam cylindrical arrays is the capability of electrical control of the beam
position in a wide sector of space without changing its width and shape. For
example, ring antenna arrays make it possible to have undistorted electrical
beam scanning in the azimuthal plane. Cylindrical antenna arrays, as compared
to linear ones, possess yet a series of useful properties. Numbered among them
are a lower level of sidelobes (which are due to the discrete nature of the
radiator arrangement and switching phase errors in the case of switched beam
scanning), the possibility of expanding the working bandwidth, etc.

however, cylindrical antenna arrays also have a number of drawbacks as compared
to linear and planar arrays, the chief of which is the increased complexity of
the structural design of the antenna and its beam control system.

The Major Requirements Placed onCylindrical Scanning Arrays. The main parameters
of cylindrical antenna arrays are determined by working from their function,
installation site and operating conditions. For pencil beam cylindrical scanning
arrays, the main parameters specified during the design work are: the directional
pattern width, level of the sidelobes, directional gain, scan sector and beam
scanning rate, bandwidth properties, polarization of the radiated field, maximum
radiated power, efficiency, reliability, climatic operating conditions and cost.

The optimal configuration for the cylindrical array and type of radiator should
be selected during the planning process, the array dimensions should be determined
(radius, length, angular sector) as well as the amplitude-phase distribution of
the current in the radiators and the law governing the current change during
scanning should be found, the directional pattern of the array calculated along
with its directional gain, overall gain, bandwidth properties; the method of

- 33 -

FOI<NHNC1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USBGDNLM

scanning is determined and a device is chosen to realize the scanning, and the
structural design of the antenna array is worked out as a whole.

Structural Configurations of Cylindrical Arrays. Cylindrical antenna arrays can
be broken down into three groups according to the method of microwave energy
distribution among the individual radiators: arrays with series and parallel
excitation, and arrays with a mixed feed circuit. Moreover, the array configura-
tions in each of these groups can differ according to the method of energizing
the phase shifters.

We shall treat the main features of the indicated circuit configurations using
the example of ring and arc arrays [06, 09, 013, 1, 2]. A ring array with a
parallel circuit for energy distribution between the radiators is shown in Figure
4.1a. A merit of this circuit is the fact that the antenna beam direction is
only a slight function of the frequency and there is the possibility of control-
ling the amplitude distribution in the array by means of switching the inputs of
the feeder lines in a switcher (s). A drawback to the parallel excitation
configuration is the cumbersome feed system for energy distribution.

The variant of a ring array with spatial excitation (Figure 6.1b) is free of this
deficiency. The operational principle of such an array consists in the following.
The energy from the feed radiator is fed via a radial line to the receiving
radiators, and then to the phase shifters and is radiated by the ring array in
the requisite direction. The control of the antenna beam is accomplished within
small sectors by means of phase shifters. In the case of wide angle scanning,

it is necessary to change the amplitude distribution over the ring array, for
example, by means of rotating the feed radiator or installing several feed
radiators and switching them in turn.

One of the circuits for a series excited ring array is shown in Figure 6.1c. A
merit of the circuit is the simplicity, as well as the fact that the volume
inside the array remains free and can be occupied by other devices. something
which is especially important when placing a ring array on the surface of an
aircraft. However, arc arrays, designed in a series excitation configuration,
also have a number of drawbacks, the main ones of which are the fact that the
array beam direction is a function of frequency and it is difficult to control
the amplitude distribution in the case of wide angle scanning.

A ring array formed from several arc arrays with a mixed circuit configuration for
power distribution among the radiators is free of this latter drawback (Figure
4.1d). The use of mixed excitation makes it possible, on one hand, to preserve
the advantages of parallel excited ring arrays, and on the other, to simplify the
energy distribution system, especially for arrays with a large electrical radius.

The most promising structural configurations for cylindrical arrays are the mixed

(Figure 4.2) and those with spatial excitation. The major properties of these
cylindrical array configurations are the same as for the corresponding ring arrays.

When selecting the circuit configuration for the phase shifters, it is expedient
to be governed by the following considerations. In the case of a series confi-

-31...

FOIICMHHCIA1.1ENE(H§LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY

 

Figure 6.1. Structural configurations of ring antenna arrays.
Key: 1. From the generator.

 

Figure b.2. The structural configuration of a cylindrical antenna
‘ array.

guration of the phase shifters. the maximum carrying capacity and the efficiency
are reduced, the dependence of the antenna directional pattern on the phase
setting errors is increased and the bandwidth properties of the antenna are
degraded. For this reason, the series configuration of the phase shifters is

used rather rarely. primarily in linear antenna arrays. where such a circuit makes
it possible to simplify the controller for the phase shifters. In cylindrical
arrays, a series phase shifter circuit can be used in those portions of the feed-
line which are arranged along the generatrix of the cylindrical surface, since

-85-

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this makes it possible to sirplify the beam control unit in planes running
through the axis of the cylindrical array. In the remaining cases. parallel
phase shifter configurations are to be employed.

4.2. The Phase Distribution in Highly Directional Cylindrical Arrays

The amplitude distribution in cylindrical pencil bean arrays exerts a substantial
influence on the shape of the directional pattern and is chosen depending on

the requirements placed on the directional gain, the level of sidelobes and the
bandwidth properties of the array. This question is treated in more detail in

the following sections.

The phase distribution in cylindrical arrays is chosen by working from the
requirement for beam formation in a specified direction. In this case. the phase
distribution in the radiators placed on the surface of a cylinder is usually
chosen so that the fields radiated by each radiator add together in phase in the
direction 00, 90 for highly directional arrays when generating a beam in the

direction 00, 00.

We shall number the radiators of a cylin-
drical array with a double subscript. mm.
In this case, the phase center* of the
OO-th radiator has cylindrical coordinates
of z - 0 and a - 0, while for the mn-th
radiator, it has coordinates of z - 2n
and a - on (Figure 5.3). The requisite
phase distribution in this case onn(eo,

¢ ) of the current in the mn-th radiator
09 the cylindrical array has the form:

0'0“,“ W)“ —[m dn00m(W—al)+uucosoo+2ﬂk‘o (“‘1')
Iz-O. 3:1. 3:2,...

In the special case of an arc array.
~ arranged in the z - 0 plane. the requi-
Figure k.3. The coordinate system and site phase distribution is:

scheme for the arrangement 03400-15)”

of radiators in a cylindri-
cal array. -= --lKa $10.0“ (m—mHWl-

k =0. :t l.‘ j: 2....

 

(4.2)

The requisite law governing the phase control of the mn-th phase shifter, o¢a3 mn
[0 hase mnlo depends on the circuit configuration of the antenna feeder channel
ans on the circuit configuration of the phase shifters themselves, and for a

cylindrical array. can be found from the relationship:

00-. m (0- 1’0)-' —[Ka sin 0.cos (1'0~¢.)+K1..oos 9.__
“‘“i‘w'w‘("°‘“-')“"‘-'°°5°o-°m "+0... .v.-+2xa. (4.3)
I"-0. :tl. 21:2»... -

 

*The proposal of the presence of a phase center for the mn-th radiator is justified
for radiators arranged on a cylindrical surface of considerable radius: a >> A.

- as -

FOR‘OFFKJAJ.lﬂiE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where °¢HA an [ofeed an] designates the electrical length of the feedline from

the generator to the input terminals of the mn-th radiator (without taking into
account the electrical length of the phase shifter 0m inserted in the feed channel
for the nn-th radiator), while the subscripts n'n' designates the phase shifter,
the phase of which is taken as zero.

Correspondingly. for an arc array: _
0.....(0.. v.) - -lmain 0.1m:(¢.—a,)_m(9,_¢..l_
-0u...+o,.,..'+2ukl. Ie-o. :1. $2..-. (M)

we shall cite the expressions for O h for several specific configurations
p see an
of cylindrical and arc arrays.

l. A parallel excited arc array (Figure 6.1a). The electrical length of all of
the feeder lines is the same, and the phase of the phase shifter of the radiator
with the coordinate no - 0 is taken as the zero phase (n' - 0):

0.....(owa-—mm0.teos(v.—a.)-oos§.l+9a}2 (4,5,

Iz-ao. :t l. :1; 2....

Expression (4.5) is also justified for an arc array with spatial excitation (Figure
b.1b), if the phase center of the feed irradistor is placed in the geometric
center of the arc array and n' - 0. '

2. A series excited arc array. The phase shifters are inserted in a parallel cir-
cuit configuration (Figure 4.1c). The generator_output is_connected to the -v-th

"um" “' ' 'N‘ 0.....(8o.w)=—min0.lun(v.—a.)—eos(vo—a.u)l+
+KW(¢I—a.n)+28k, kdoo :12]! $23.0" ((0.6)

where y is the retardation in the supply feedline.

3. A series excited arc array. The phase shifters are connected in a series cir-
cuit configuration. The generator output is connected to the -N-th radiator, n'
-N:

¢oas Os (9.. 1’0- — K58"!6.1005(ﬂ—a');m('._¢.u)i+
—l
+K¢?(¢.— -~)+ «XNO‘"°"+2“&' 1,-0. :hl. $2.". (4.7)

p-—
a. A cylindrical array with nixed excitation (Figure b.2), n' - 0, n' - 0:
CD... 1.. (9o. o.) = —xa'sln (yeah—m):-
—u.eos0o+mm0.eow.+m..+2nk. Iz=0. a: l. 12.... “-8)
where y is the retardation of the wave in the feeders. arranged along the genera—
trix of the cylinder.

The value of the integer k in the expressions cited here depends on the type of
phase shifter. Thus, if the phase shifter can change the phase continuously in

a large range of phase values*, then k - 0 in expressions (6.3) - (6.8). However,
so-called resetting phase shifters are used in electrically scanned antenna arrays,

*The requisite range of continuous control of the phase of the wave in the phase
shifters depends on the size of the cylindrical array and the scan sector, and
for pencil bean arrays can reach several tens and even hundreds of thousands of

degrees.

-37-
FOR¢HHNC1A1.USE(NVLY
INDR 0F1ﬂ€1AI.lEﬂE(MVLY

where the phase control range in such shifters is kept within a range of 0 to 21
radians. The advantage of such phase shifters consists in the smaller dimensions
and losses, as well as in the greater precision in setting the phase as compared
to phase shifters with large phase control ranges. when using resetting phase
shifters, the value of k in the expressions cited here should be selected so that
the following inequality is observed:

0<0......<2u. (4.9)

The choice of the number of controlled phase shifters depends on the requisite
scan sector, the directional pattern width and the amplitude distribution in

the array. The minimum possible number of controlled phase shifters in the case
of wide angle scanning is chosen equal to the number of radiators.

b.3. The Directional Patterns of Cylindrical Pencil Beam Arrays

The normalized complex vector directional pattern, f(e, o), of a cylindrical
array when generating a beam in the direction 90, 00. can be written in the

form: ' - M. N. a) "' ‘ ._...— .———-—‘-
F(°.9)=-A 2. i: II..IF..(o.v)W—r—FF_IT‘. ...(— .. x
DO—M. ln-II. (I) (h . 10)
xexpl-ilmsln°.°°6(9o—¢.)+a.oosoo—
—xasanoos(¢—a.)—n.oos9|}.
where II I is the amplitude of the incident current (or voltage) waves in the

feeder ofnthe mn-th radiator; Pun(e, o) - 8.n(e, ¢)r.n(e. o); an(°' 9), an“

(e. 6) are the normalized amplitude and polarization patterns respectively of
the mn-th radiator; Gun is its gain; run is the reflection factor from the input
of the mn-th radiator; -H1, H2, ~N1(m) and N2(I0 are the numbers of the end
radiators of the cylindrical array; ‘ ,

an ant.) I” I _ "'"
“"T‘ 2 2 I’manmst-Wvamnunli‘msli (10-11)
is the normalizing faggghn-MW

In the following, we shall assume that the quantities Gun and run do not depend
on the number of a radiator. i.e. GInn - Goo, lrunl - [foo].

Expression (4.10) can be represented as the directional pattern of an equivalent
linear radiator: '

F(ooV)"A E I’mOlmeo Q)¢_XPl-I"zn(¢03°r*¢059)l.

lI—M. (5.12)
. No I)
rate mom-W 22 Ilulﬁo. v) x
"' nun—Nd.)
(4.13)

x exp l— jxa [sin 0. cos (v.-a,)—sln 0 cos («p—m)"
is the complex vector directional pattern of the m-th arc array.

In a rather typical, although special case of a cylindrical array, formed by a
set of identical arc arrays, and where the current amplitude distribution divided

-88-

FMMICMHﬂC1A1.lEiE(MULY
FOR¢MﬂﬂClALIRﬂIONLY

along the coordinates «and z is IImnI - |1&||lonl, the directional pattern of the
cylindrical,array is determined by the pro net of the directional pattern of the
arc array, ’0 (e, e), lying in the plane a - 0, times the factor for the linear

system of radiators, £H(e):

Fm. ¢)-=Fo(9. 9m (0). (4.11.)

M
2‘. II..Iupt—1u.(mo.-eao)l

me ’”~(°)‘-—-.£L"—u-—— . (4.15)

2} lhnl

~-—.|
F0 (0- 0)='
N.
2. ”tel no. 9m»{-120lliﬂocos(Qo-¢a)-Il00m(9-u.)l}

-..L-_—g.___________, (6.16)
”m '

ll- -N.

Thus, the study of the directional pattern of a cylindrical antenna reduces
basically to the study of the directional pattern of the corresponding arc array.
Moreover, the directional pattern of the arc array is poorly directional in the
plane passing through the direction of the beam and the z axis. For this reason,
when generating a pencil beam, the shape of the directional'pattern of a cylin-
drical array in the indicated plane in the region of the main lobe and the first
sidelobes is governed primarily by the factor for the linear system of radiators,
(“(0). however, the directional pattern completely matches the directional
pattern of the arc array (6.16) in the orthogonal plane.

b.b. Directional Patterns of Arc and Cylindrical Arrays

when calculating the directional pattern of an arc array using expression (5.16),
it is first of all necessary to determine the directional pattern of an individual
radiator in the array, which is a rather complex and independent problem. The
complexity of the problem consists in the necessity of taking into account both
diffraction phenomena at the surface of the antenna and effects of radiator
interaction in the arc and cylindrical arrays. The techniques for solving this
problem can be partially found in the literature [1]. However, in the initial
design stage, it is expedient to determine the directional pattern of an indivi-
dual radiator by means of simpler approximation methods, without taking inter-
action into account and with an approximate accounting for diffraction phenomena.
The essence of the approximation consists in the fact that the amplitude direct-
ional pattern of a radiator, F0 (9, ¢). in an array in a range of angles of a -
1/2 < O < “n + a/2 is computed gust as for a single radiator in free space, while
it is equated to zero in the range “a + s/2 < O < 2! - “n'

when determining the polarization pattern of a radiator, 3bn(e, 9), one can make
use of the following recommendations: the polarization pattern of linear radia-
tors (dipole, slot, yagi type radiator) matches the polarisation pattern of an

-89-

IMMICIWIC1A1.UBEGINLY
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

elementary dipole sufficiently well, while the polarization pattern of aperture
radiators (the open end of a waveguide, horn). matches the polarization pattern
of a Huygens source.

For longitudinal linear radiators, arranged along the z axis on a cylindrical
surface. at a point with an aziauth coordinate of on:

°".' (0’ ”" 0.. (a. 17)

For similar transverse linear radiators:

.—

Mug—a.) _ "Wag-c.) , - '
“‘(°")=—vr::m°' VW" (4:18)

For aperture radiators with an azimuth coordinate of the phase center, “n' and
with an electrical field vector parallel to the 301 playgi_

" _ caOdﬂQ—M) san+sos(!-—¢n) (“19
“'(0'9) l+sln0m(Q-¢s)_ 0”- '+I'n°°°|(9-¢-) w ( )

For similar aperture radiators with an electrical field vector parallel to the
z axis:

‘ _ lino+m(g—an) _ coo-aura.) .
“"0"” l+a|n0tos(9—a.) 0. Hannah—6:.) '. (4.20)

In expressions (4.17) - (4.20). so and .0 are used to designated unit vectors in
a spherical system of coordinates.

Taking the polarisation patterns of individual radiators into account shows that
in the general case, the directional patterns of arc arrays, besides the main
polarization component of the radiated field, also have a parasitic (or cross
polarization) component. The cross polarized component is absent only in arrays
formed from longitudinal linear radiators, as well as in the case where the
directional pattern of_an array is considered in the plane of the are (90 . n/2),

. when: - -- - -— _ _-_. __.._ . “_-_; _._
F°i(%'°);'r'(%") {:1} ° - . (4.21)

where: rag
F. 5:" 9)- (4.22)

N
2" l ’n We (% . 9) up (—Iulcomo—w-mu—nm
= —'—-:—l—_——._____—_

”2 llulfu(—;'cv)

I- -N.

Further design calculations of the directional pattern of an arc array can be
performed in accordance with the following scheme:

90 means that either the unit vector 60 or the unit vector

*Hriting the symbol .0

$0 is chosen.

- 90.-

FOR‘OFFRJAI.USI¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Direct calculation of the directional pattern of an individual radiator using
formulas (4.16) - (6.16) and (6.22), taking into account the polarization patterns
(4.17) - (5.20) and the calculated amplitude pattern. This computational work

is cumbersome, absolutely requires the use of a computer and it is expedient in
the concluding stage of the design work when specifying the characteristics more
precisely for the selected array variant.

2. The introduction of reasonable assumptions, which make it possible to simplify
the computational process intheinitial design stage without substantial losses
of precision. The essence of these assumptions consists in the following:

a) The directional pattern of the arc array is calculated only for the main
planes, 0 - 1/2 and O - ‘0’ and in the region of the main lobe and the first
sidelobe;

b) The directional pattern of an individual radiator and the current distribution
function in the arc array are approximated by elementary functions;

c) An arc radiator with a continuous current distribution, equal in value to the

actual distribution at the points where the radiators are placed and with a
sufficiently smooth current distribution among them is substituted for the dis-

crete arc array 0

Taking the assumptions enumerated above into account, the directional pattern of
the array in the plane of the arc when generating a beam in the direction n/2,

0, with a precision of down to the normalizing factor A, is represented in the
form:

(4% . 9) -A “More. '9. a) exp (—Ixalcosa—eom—anl dc. (1.33)

where the term P(r/2, 0, n) designates the directional pattern of an individual
radiator having an azimuthal coordinate a. The equivalent linear radiator
technique is the most convenient method for the approximate calculation of the
directional pattern using expression (6.23). The essence of it consists in the
fact that the directional pattern of an arc antenna is computed as the direction-
al pattern of an in-phase linear antenna, the amplitude distribution in which
corresponds to the projection of the amplitude distribution along the arc onto
a linear antenna, positioned perpendicularly to the direction of the beam being
generated. The amplitude distribution,1u1v(y) in the equivalent linear
antenna can be determined from the expressim.

I

Inc!) '3 1(8miﬂ-E)F(%v 0- "‘3‘“ “Hi/ﬂ - (4.21.)

and the directional pattern of the arc antenna from the following formula:

Fo(—.9)- Ail... (y)exv(Ixysln9)dy. (5.25)
where
madame 4.: yg=aainaur

-91-

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MQLY
FIHICIWNCJAI.USE¢N§LY

Th0 range of permissible angles 9. within which one can use (4.25} for the calcu-
lations with an error not exceeding a few percent. is determined by the inequal-
ity:

 

I2
”temp-Wm»): I

Based on the equivalent linear radiator technique, one can find (depending on

the kind of amplitude distribution along the arc array and the directional

pattern of an individual radiator) the relationships between the width and shape
of the directional pattern of the array, the level of the first sidelobe and

the projection l u v . yz - yi of the arc array onto the y axis. These functions
are given in Tobi: 4.1 for Y2 - -y16n.nl . a": - 8). Values of the surface
utilization coefficient for an arc antenna, v, determined by the ratio of the
directional gain of the arc antenna to the directional gain for the case of uni-
form amplitude distribution in the equivalent radiator, are given in the last
column of Table 4.1.

(4.26)

During the design process, the requisite amplitude distribution in the equivalent
linear radiator, l q 1v(y) and its length are chosen from Table 4.1 based on the
specified width and level of the first sidelobe. Then, the requisite amplitude
distribution in the radiators of the arc array is determined from expression
(4.24): .

I(a,.) = I," (a sin a...)acos ¢.IF (Ia/270.— a.).

 

(4.27)

The directional pattern of an arc array in the region of the main lobe and the
first sidelobes. which is governed by inequality (4.26), is calculated fron the '
relevant expressions of Table 4.1.

when calculating the directional pattern of a scanning arc array with the main
lobe deflected from the direction 9 - 0, one can rotate the arc array through
the angle ".0 and employ the equivagent radiator technique. In this case, one
must keep in mind the fact that an arc array, and consequently, the amplitude
distribution and the equivalent radiator itself will no longer be symmetrical
relative to the direction of the beam being generated, something which does not
make it possible to fully utilize the results of Table 4.1. However, one can
always choose an approximating amplitude distribution in the equivalent radiator
from a set of functions which make it possible to calculate the integral in
(4.25) in closed form.

It must be remembered when more precisely specifying the equivalent radiator
technique that when the spacing between the radiators of the arc array, d, exceeds
1/2, additional parasitic lobes (higher order interference maxima) can appear in
the pattern of the arc array, just as in the directional pattern of a linear
array. Their level depends on he and B, and falls off with an increase in ha and

Be
The position of the interference maxima is practically independent of the dimen-
sions of the arc array, and is determined primarily by the step of the antenna

array. The individual radiator directional pattern and the form of the amplitude
distribution in due array have a slight impact on the position of the interference

-92-

FINICNNHCIAI.USE{I‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.5. .3303» you: on» no .73 .n

”ensue—v .3032— Hdaouuoouwv 12825 on» on» no .333 .c

“3 .25.; .2335 0.5 on» «0 Bonus.— Hacowuuouwa .n

“an: .333:- ouo 25 a.“ noun—.3392» aunt—nu wag—383:3 05. .N
23>“:qu .9393: 281330 on» 5 33:33.3 2.3.50 2— K8—

 

.«zoc: 3.3!. 7

 

 

 

 

  

 
 
 

 

 

8... ol. 53:3.8 gVUVaI I". § cm 5:
206 .3... .ol. .9328 . .«
_ . 'v.ol~ .ﬂozdu. 0 ”9|_ 8 0 II- t ~§N
. 2 . s .- u : 4|..sz «NI 233$-
$36 2| .ol~ 9323 .38 cl...m.laav. a $5395
3| 6|. .9859 Xmas. Mysoclclé 3.5
.2I .I. 5313.3 85* a.
oVUVaI
3.... .8I on.» 6:58 — .a l Augih m
861: 31. 6.5.8.8 :85 . a 38x
.36 .2.- .alo 3:338 I .a T¢I=+ a lllluu
_ .21 .Io. 5.38.8 3.3%.)“. 3.: x_Hl.?s. I;
5.5.61:

 

 

Quasi-Ili- a 2: 0:2,... Ban-8.3 I...» cog:
.89.»: E g A. .ﬂw cl III-ru- -32R :1 Largo-n cog-55500 gnu-no u 3.2. plan-gnu:—

“ a
. .I . a 3.0 .IK
. _ 2 93:38 :2... avava... .A L SI
. 889. «39.3 .
., m
.u

 

-93-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MULY

maxima. Thus, in the case of a uniform amplitude distribution and with isorropic
radiators, the coordinate e of the p-th order interference maximum when .0 - 0,
is approximately defined by the relationship:

sz2arcsin01m. p- I. 2. (4.28)

with an amplitude distribution in an arc array. corresponding to the maximum of
the directional gain, the position of the first order interference maxima is
shifted in the direction of an increase in the coordinate o by approximately 0.5
to 1.0 times the directional pattern width of 29° . By knowing the direction
of the interference naxima, their level Fo(s/2, 0;; can be determined from
expression (4.22). This same expression can be employed, if it is necessary to
more precisely specify the directional pattern of the arc array in the requisite
angular sector.

The directional pattern of a highly directional cylindrical array, 9(6, 0). con-
sisting of a system of identical arc arrays in a plane perpendicular to the axis
of a cylinder, matches the directional pattern of a single arc array, and in the
plane running through the axis of the cylinder and the direction of the array
beam, it is represented in the form of the product of the arc array directional
pattern (4.14) times the directivity factor for a linear antenna (4.15).

If the spacing between arc arrays along the z axis does not exceed A/2, then
in expression (4.15) the sun can be replaced by the integral:
LI: ' "
h=A I(¢)¢XpliIa(us0—oosoo)ldz.
- I:
where L is the length of the cylindrical antenna along the z axis.

(4.29)

The expression for fL(9), depending on the amplitude distribution, can be found
in Table 4.1, if Isquiv(Y) is understood to be 1(a) and zequiv is understood to
be the quantity L.

If should be noted that when 1 >> l and Z >> a, the following relationship obtains
in the region of the main lobe and first_sidelobes:

no. 9.) .~.h(0). (a. 30)

4.5. The Directional Gain of Cylindrical and Arc Arrays

The value of the directional gain of arc and cylindrical arrays depends on a
number of factors, in particular, on the radiator directional pattern, the form
of the amplitude-phase distribution over the radiators and the number of them.

The optimal phase distribution which assures a directional gain maximum in pencil
beam cylindrical arrays is close to the distribution described by equation (4.1).
The optimal amplitude distribution along the z coordinate is uniform, and along
the n coordinate, depends substantially on the step of the array. The general
governing laws in the case where he >> 10 are as follows: for a step of d/A s

0.5, the optimal amplitude distribution approaches that distribution which, in

- 94 -

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USI(N‘LY
FINICHHHCJAI.[LA£CNVLV

being designed for an equivalent linear radiator in accordance with the distri-
bution of (6.25), yields a uniform distribution in it:

can.
on! a .
I Han. 0. a.) (4.31)

Hith an increase in the spacing between the radiators, the optimal amplitude
distribution in the radiators approaches a function proportional to the amplitude
pattern of the corresponding radiator in the direction of the beam being formed
by the array: '

 

I F 2.0.4..
”'3 W ) (4.32)

Although expression (6.32) is justified only when the spacing between the radia-
tors significantly exceeds the wavelength. it can be used as soon as d > A.

The following relationships can be employed in estimating the maximum directional
gain. For an arc array formed by a system of longitudinal half-wave slots,
arranged in a cylinder,

' —ﬂ 4 3.2.
Dana ldl—T n3 npu >/

when
2.86msinp npu n.d<ll2 (5.33)

where the angular sector occupied by the array is 23. falls in a range of from
50 to 180°.

For a cylindrical array formed by a system of similar slots. which generates
a pencil beam, directed perpendicular to the axis:

 

“f: .01»! tip-’4. d.>—;‘-._
Data:= l when ' ,, ((00310)

1—2- ....mm dn<—. d.<—.

where sequ v is the equivalent aperture area; d1 and d2 are the spacings between
adjacent s ate in the plane passing through the axis of the cylinder and in the
plane perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder respectively.

For the m-th arc array. the maximum directional gain can be approximated using

the expression:
Dm‘g "z Dmnfn(':— 9%). (g 35)

a--N.

where I).n is the directional gain of the nn-th radiator in the direction of the
radiation maximum axis.

The sum-dug in expression (4.35) can be approximately replaced by integration.
In this case, for a system of identical radiators with D00, we have:

IN
‘ I" (ll/2.
Dnmraol I "die 90)

0,”.

as
u ‘ (6.36)
am I Mat/2.9040...

 

dot..—

-D.

 

-h

-95..

INMICHWﬂC1A1.USEGMVLY
FIIIC”HWCJAI.USE(MULY

Expressions are given for D, ngx in Table b.2 for a few directional patterns,
given the condition that ‘“-N1 - «“2 - B.

l “mods-a.)
Fahd” «(v—m) I 5+:

3; M at I+w+4A E + El!
0. ‘ {1+ 2’ ] D. d [ (I+A)' ]

mm: 4.2..

D... on

 

 

 

The maximum directional gain of a cylindrical antenna formed fron radiators of
any type can be determined by sunning the maximum directional gains of the
corresponding arc arrays fron which the cylindrical antenna is formed.

when the amplitude distribution differs from the optimal the array directional
gain is reduced by a factor of v tines (v is the surface utilization factor).
For a cylindrical array with a shared current distribution of IInnl - Il§| IIOnI’

v - vlvz (6.37)

where v1 is the antenna surface utilization factor for the z coordinate; v2 is
the arc array surface utilization factor.

For an arc array with a spacing between the radiators of about 1/2, the coeffi-
cient v2 can be determined from Table 6.1 for the appropriate distribution in
the equivalent linear radiator.

If the spacing between the radiators is approximately l or more, then the coeffi-
cient v2 must be determined from the more complex formula:

 

V: - 11(1 -I- be). (me)
N. I
a-—N. 2': [3.09. III-N.

7"- u

N. (6.39)
2 ’0' For _n_.
73.41“ (2 )r..(% 9.).
D.%N.|F.'(%' )r

llél IIon optl is the current amplitude in the nn~th radiator. having the maximum

directional gain; Ilél IIOnI is the actual current amplitude in the mn-th radia-
tor.

-96-

IIMR(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(MULY
FIHI()FIlClAl.lEﬂE(MVLY

The coefficient v1 depends on the form of the amplitude distribution ll’ l.l with
respect to the coordinate z and can be found as in the case of linear antennas.

5

7 He will note that in the case of electrical

scanning in azimuth. it is necessary in the
general case to control not just the phase,
but also the amplitude distribution. The
most effective method of amplitude distri-
0 z bution control is that of "shifting" it in

‘ f" I" 5 azimuth through the scan angle without
changing the shape. This technique is
feasible in cylindrical and are arrays
with spatial excitation with electrically
or mechanically driven motion of the array
feed irradiator directional pattern.

Figure 4.4. The surface utilization
coefficient v; as a func-
tion of the direction of
the beam of a ring array.

However, it is frequently undesirable to control the amplitude distribution in
cylindrical arrays during scanning for a number of reasons, in particular,
because of the increased complexity of the circuitry and structural design of
the antenna. With beam scanning of a cylindrical array in the azimuthal plane
solely through the control of the phase distribution, the directional gain of
the array changes. when the spacing between the radiatorsi is about 1/2, the
reduction in the directional gain during scanning can be determined from
expression (4. 38), where: " '
I Imm— I Im(x)dr/lmrdx
pg- £24.. ,

;. 7—.'..| I ’-""'f ‘ """°)

v(x) is the amplitude distribution in the equivalent radiator, perpendicular
toq t e direction of the beam. This expr~'aion is to be used if the actual ampli-
tude distribution in the equivalent radiator cannot successfully approximated by
one of the functions in Table 4.1. Otherwise, it is simpler to choose the
coefficient v2 from Table 4.1.

 

If the spacing between the radiators is approximately equal to A. then the
change in the directional gain during scanning is to be computed from formulas
(4.38) and (4.39), taking into account the fact that:

1.. 0N x-F' “,(8/2 9.). I... — F' “(ﬂ/2. 0)..

In two cases (radiators which are omnidirectional in azimuth and placed at a
spacing of approximately A or more, and radiators with a directional pattern of
Pmn(a/2. O) - coa(e - °n)’ positioned at a spacing of about A/Z), the change

in the directional gain during scanning and with a constant amplitude distribution
is determined simply and shown graphically in Figure 4.4.

In both cases, the optimal amplitude distribution is uniform. So that the direc-
tional gain does not change during scanning. the beam direction ‘0 should not
exceed an angle of 1/2 - 8.

- 97 -

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(NWLY
FtHICHﬂﬂC1A1.USE<0NIX

The efficiency, n, of cylindrical (ring) antennas depends on the losses in the
feeder channel and phase shifters, as well as the antenna circuit configuration.
For this reason, the gain of cylindrical arrays should be computed in each
specific case following the choice of the antenna circuit, the type of feedline
and phase shifter. During the preliminary calculation of the gain of cylindrical
scanning antennas, the efficiency of these antennas can be taken as 50 to 602.

6.6. Bandwidth Properties of Arc Arrays

Arc antennas make it possible under certain conditions to obtain a poor depen-
dence of the major directivity characteristics of the antennas on frequency
(bean direction and width, sidelobe level, directional gain) in a wide band

of frequencies. The bandwidth properties of arc arrays depend substantially on
their circuit configuration, the type of radiators and control element.

Thus, in an arc array with spatial (or parallel) excitation (Figure 6.5), where
broadband phase shifters are used [A], with a deviation of the frequency f from
the center frequency £0, with which the phasing is accomplished, a sysnatrical
phase error occurs in the aperture CD:

AQW)-K."STI'“[‘-‘/'-(':')’ Jz'l?h‘“-A/.L(%)" (4.41)
' when npu -¢'L<0.5.

where of - f - f ;_ - 21/10. _.p
0 1 k0 now/Jame)

  

Figure 6.5. Configuration of a parallel
excited arc array.

 

The presence of a symnetrical'phase
error in the aperture CD leads to a
reduction in the directional gain of
an arc array, however, the direction
of the pattern maxi-um remains as
before, with a slight error.

Figure 6.6. The reduction in the direc-
tional gain of an arc anten-
na as a function of the
permissible phase error in
the equivalent linear

radiator.
The reduction in the arc array direc- Key: 1. Amplitude distribution:
tional gain as a function of the value uniform, cosine.

AOAon [cover] in the general case *

depends on the amplitude distribution in the equivalent aperture. In particular.
graphs showing the drop in the directional gain for uniform and cosine auplitude
distributions are presented in Figure 6.6 as a function of A°per°

-98-

I1)!!0IHHC1AI.USILCHVLY
INIR4OI1HC1A1.IEEB(M‘LY

By using relationship (4.61) and the graph of Figure 4.6, one can always select
the radius of an arc array .1 and the excitation sector, determined by the ratio
Zequ v/2a, for which the reduction in the array directional gain in the specified
pass and will not exceed the permissible value. If the ratio is zequiv/2" then
the requisite radius of the arc array, for which the phase error at the edges of
the equivalent aperture does not exceed the permissible value nope, in a frequency
range of 2Af/fo. can be found from the approximate expression: ’

am-mﬁL(‘——';')’. (4.42)

It should not be forgotten that the graphs of Figure 4.6 do not take into account
the drop in the directional gain related to the frequency response of the phase
shifters. For this reason, the phase shifters and radiators of the array should
be chosen so that their working bandwidth is at least no less than the requisite
bandwidth of the entire arc array as a whole, and the reduction in the array
directional gain related to the phase shifter errors are insignificant within

the requisite passbend.

we shall consider the bandwidth properties of a series excited arc array. In
this case, when the frequency changes, the phase error in the equivalent aperture
will be composed of the error (4.41) and the error related to the frequency
dependence of the phase change between the radiators in the feeder line. For
this reason, the overall error is:

A¢(q)=-K.au[l—l/l——( (—) ]+x.ar.—‘°arain(-L). (5.43)

where AA IA is the relative change in the wavelength A. in the feedline; Y0 - 10/
1.0 is the retardation in the feedline at the center frequency.

Expanding A0(y) in a Taylor's series in the vicinity of the point y - 0, and
limiting ourselves to the first terms, we obtain [3]:

A¢(y)~x.ay.——- 0" —---“L +-x,a-‘L(-"—) +—'—x.av. —:°-(-§- ) (4.1.1.)

The first term in (4.44) leads to the deflection of the beam of the arc array
from the initial position by the amount:
__e_K?o £2)

5 L

The second term in (4.44) leads to a reduction in the directional gain of the
array according to the governing law defined by expression (4.41) and the graphs
of Figure 4.6. The third term leads to beam asymetry.

Aq5~arcsin(—— (4.45)

Thus, in a series excited arc array, the azimuthal plane position of the beam is
frequency dependent. For this reason, such arrays can be used only in relatively
narrow band systems. The displacement of the beam of an arc array in a small
range (up to half of the width of the directional pattern, 2¢°_5) is equivalent
to an additional reduction in its directional gain.

During the preliminary calculations, when the law governing the amplitude distri-
bution in the arrays has not yet been determined, the reduction in the direction
0, so when the beam position changes can be estimated from the formula:

- 99 -

F0!:0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFICLALIISEIDNLY

 

sln‘ Ks‘m am 3.3.12
”(0. l. )u 2 R I - (4.56)
(x 3%)......(L.}a);

which is justified for a uniforn amplitude distribution in the equivalent aper-
ture. ‘

The bandwidth properties of a cylindrical array in azimuth are governed by the
bandwidth properties of the corresponding arc arrays of which the cylindrical
antenna is composed. In the 0 - do plane though, the bandwidth properties of
the cylindrical array directional pattern are governed by the bandwidth proper-
ties of the equivalent linear antenna array.

4.7. Some Structural and Circuit Design Variants for Art and Cylindrical Arrays

A variant of an annular array with mechanical beam scanning in azimuth fron 0
to 360’ is shown schematically in Figure 4.7. The annular array is formed by
two parallel metal disks (1) between which radiators are installed along the
perineter in the form of open rectangular waveguide ends (2) using a working
H 0 node. Ferrite phase shifters (3) are installed in the waveguides, the
phase in which changes as a result of the change in the bias magnetization
current in winding (b) [S]. The length of a waveguide radiator should be the
ninimun possible, but such that the phase shifter installed in it is capable
of assuring control of the electromagnetic field phase in a range of 0 to 2!
radians»

A ring-array is excited through a radial line from the feed radiator in the fore
of an open rectangular waveguide end or a horn (5). The aperture of this horn
is chosen from the condition that the shape of its directional pattern corres-
ponds to the shape of the requisite amplitude distribution in the ring array.

To control the amplitude distribution during bean scanning, the feed horn is
connected to a rotating coupling (6). The ring choke groove (7) serves for
matching the feed radiator to the radial line and eliminating radiation through
the slot between the rotating coupling and the radiating line.

The naxinun electrical scan frequency in the given structural design is governed
by the inertia of the rotating coupling, and in a circular scanning mode. can
reach several tens of revolutions per second.

A drawback to the structural design considered here is the relatively low bean
control speed, which is related to the presence of nechanical rotation of the
feed radiator. A variant of an annular array is shown in Figure 6.8, which
corresponds to the schematic of Figure 6.1a, with electrical bean scanning in

a range of 0 to 360°. The energy is guided from the coaxial stub exciter (1)
through the electrically controlled switch (2) to the requisite sector of the
radial line (3), along the perimeter of which are the radiators in the fern of
waveguide sections with electrically controlled phase shifters installed in then.
The beam scanning within the angular range determined by the angular spacing
between two adjacent switcher channels is accomplished solely by virtue of the

- 100 -

FINItlﬂﬂCIAI.lEﬂ£(HVLY
F0l(lﬂﬂ(1AI.USB(N§LY

  
   
 

I‘EE’I ‘

ET.

   
  

Figure 4.7. A ring array with mechanical beam scanning.

Key: A. Rotation angle sensor;
3. Phase shifter control unit;
C. Bean control unit.

phase control at the output of the radiators. The nunber of switcher channels
is chosen in accordance with the requirements placed on the permissible bean
distortion during scanning (a six position switch is-ahown in Figure b.8).

A nultiposition switch can be designed around a reflective type isolator switch,
which is depicted schematically in Figure 6.9. The operational principle of the
switch is based on the dependence of the reflection factor on the magnetic

field intensity. In such a switch, a thin natal partition (1), placed close

to the ferrite (2). is soldered to the narrow wall of the waveguide perpendicular
to the dominant mode electrical field lines of force. With a comparatively
small bias magnetization field, the wave is alnoet completely reflected from

the ferrite and energy does not float through the device. This occurs as a
consequence of the conversion of the H10 mode to an 3 wave, which cannot propa-
gate in a waveguide with metallic plates.

- 101 -

F0.MOI1ﬂ(1hl.ll§ltohﬂUY
l---I
F" ->|
’Mdm
III - I

Figure b.8. A ring array with electrical bean scanning by leans
of switching the feed irradiator.

   

Figure 6.9. Schematic drawing of an
isolator switch. Figure 6.10. Peed radiator for a ring
array with switched outputs.

Key: A. To the control unit;
3. Circular 801 node wave-

In the absence of s nagnetic field,
the ferrite behaves like an isotropic
dielectric and the microwave energy guide;
passes through to the device output with

few losses. Such switches have a rather c' Ciisular 301 node wave-
high K,t [SHE]. For this reason. when 8“ e.

such switches are conbined in an n-position switch, it is essential to provide
matching elements. The speed of the switches aneunts to tens of aicroseconds.

Other types of switchers designed around ferrites are also possible [5]. A
systen of resonant slots cut in a circular B 0 or 1 node waveguide (Pigure 6.10)
and switched with PIN diodes can also he use as tches. A drawback to such

a systen is the poor working bandwidth 1ﬂ2r3) z and the relatively small trans-
nitted power (about 10 watts).

- 102 -

FKHRCHﬂﬂKIAl.USB(NVLY
Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂC1Al.USI10NlN

iééﬁ‘?‘ '

Figure 0.11. A series excited arc array.

   

An example of an annular array Tigure 6.12. A series excited arc array
design in a series excitation confi- with phase shifters using
gurstion is shown in Figure 4.11. ﬂalf- waveguide bridges.

wave slots (1) are cut along the center

of the wide wall of the waveguide. Pour diodes (2) inserted in the center of
the metal stubs (3), installed between the wide walls of the waveguide, each on
different sides of each slot, are used for independent control of the anplitude
and phase of the field radiated through a slot. By changing the voltage applied
to the diodes, one can change the phase of the field radiated through a slot
from 0 to 360'. The amplitude control range is 35 dB [6] (the coupling of the
field radiated by the slot to the waveguide field can vary from -50 to -15 dB).
In particular, with a balanced circuit configuration for all four diodes, the
slotted radiator treated here theorczically does not radiate (the coupling to
the waveguide field is practically about -50 dB).

Another variant of the structural design of an arc array with series excitation
and discretely switched phase shifters is shown in Tigure 4.12. The electro-
magnetic wave energy from the feed waveguide A which is bent in an arc is fed
through the coupling holes (3) sequentially to the input arns of the slotted
waveguide bridges joined to the waveguide and passes through the coupling holes
(2) to the two other area of the bridge, each of which is loaded into slotted
stops (1) which are switched by means of PIN diodes. In being reflected fro-
the "turned-on" stops, i.e., from the stops to the PIN diodes of which a voltage
is applied, the wave is then fed to the output channels of the bridges and

the energy is radiated.through the open ends of the waveguides. With a change

in the position of "turned-on" stops, the phase of the field radiated by the
waveguides 5 will change.

One of the bean scanning lethods frequently used in practice in cylindrical
antennas is the technique of phase-frequency scanning. The essence of it
consists in the fact that the cylindrical array is built up using frequency
scanning slotted waveguide antennas. The individual slotted waveguide antennas
are joined together by leans of a parallel excitation circuit, in the branches

of which phase shifters are installed. The antenna bean is controlled in azimuth

by means of these phase shifters, while the bean scanning is accomplished in
the neridianal plane by changing the generator frequency.

- 103 -

IIIICNHHKIAI.USB(N‘LY
FIHICIWHCJA1.USEGMNLY

Other circuits and structural designs are also possible for ring and cylindrical
arrays [013, 1, 7].

4.8. The Design Procedure for Cylindrical Arrays
we shall consider a few variants for the design of cylindrical arrays.

Variant 1. Design an arc array with electrical beam scanning in the azimuthal
plane in an angular sector of (00 + 9max’ 90 - fsax)'

-The main parameters are specified: the polarization of the radiated field, the
width of the directional pattern in azimuth 240.5, the working bandwidth 2Af/fo
and the permissible reduction in the directional gain at the edges of the band,
the permissible level q of the first sidelobes, and the radiated power P. The
additional parameters are: the precision in beam steering. the ultimate dimen-
sions cf the array. the scanning rate, etc.

The design calculation consists of the following steps.

1. Determine the amplitude distribution in the equivalent aperture and the
length of the equivalent aperture lequiv with the condition that the array beam
is generated along the axis 0 - 90 using the data of Table 4.1, based on a
specified q and 200.5.

2. Select the circuit configuration for the arc array. For this purpose, if

the precision in array beam steering is stipulated in the specifications, then
ascertain by means of relationship (4.45) whether the requisite precision is
realized in a series excited arc array. In this case, naturally, it is necessary
to specify the type of feedline. If the answer is negative, then a parallel
excitation configuration is chosen, and if it is positive, then by using expres-
sions (4.41), (4.42) or (4.41), (4.45) and (4.46) and the graph in Figure 4.6,
then based on the permissible reduction in the directional gain, it is necessary
to find the minimum radius of the arc array for the case of parallel and series
excitation respectively. If the radius found for the series excited arc array
is not much greater than the radius of the same array with parallel excitation,
and the array falls within permissible dimensional limits, then a series

excited arc array is to be selected. Otherwise, it is necessary to choose a
parallel excited array.

3. The angular size of the arc array is determined from the values found for a
and lequiv as well as the specified value of .max:

2MB2@+'M).' ‘ (4.47)

where 8 - arcsin(lequ1v/2a).
4. The type of radiator is chosen and using expressions (4.17) - (4.20), its
polarization and amplitude patterns are calculated. The mininal spacing between

the radiators and the overall number of radiators is determined (from structural
design considerations).

-104-

FIHI49FFICIAI.UGI:(MVLY
FCHICHHHCJAI.[HHE(MVLY

5. Using the working frequency and the requisite bandwidth, as well as the
specified power, the type of feedline and the type of phase shifter are chosen.

6. The requisite electrical length of a phase shifter and the law governing the
change in this length in the scan sector is found from formulas (4.3) - (4.7).

7. By means of expression (4.27) based on the chosen amplitude distribution
quuiv(y) in the equivalent aperture and the calculated directional pattern of
an individual radiator, the amplitude distribution is found in the array In -

1(on).

8. The feed system for energy distribution among the radiators is designed using
the amplitude distribution which has been found. The circuit configuration of
the phase shifters is specified more precisely. If necessary, a device control-
ling the amplitude distribution during scanning is selected. For this purpose,
the reduction in the directional gain in the scan sector with a constant anpli-
tude distribution is determined beforehand from formulas (4.38), (4.40) or from
the graphs of Eigure 4.4. If this reduction exceeds the permissible value.

then a provision is made for a device to control the amplitude distribution
during scanning.

9. The shape of the main and first sidelobes of the directional pattern is
computed using formula (4.25) or by means of Table 4.1. when using Table 4.1,
it must be remembered that the design calculations can be carried out within
limits governed by expression (4.26).

10. The level of the diffraction sidelobes is specified more precisely by means
of formulas (4.22) and (4.28).

11. The directional gain of the array is determined from expressions (4.33).
(4.35), (4.36), (4.37) - (4.39) or the data of Table 4.1 and 4.2.

12. The efficiency of the array and then the gain of the array is determined
based on the known losses in the feedline, the switchers and in the phase
shifters.

13. Taking into account the finally selected circuit. type of radiator and phase
shifter feed system, the bandwidth properties of the arc array are found more
precisely.

14. Hhere necessary, the shape of the directional pattern is found more precisely
from formula (4.22) using a computer.

Variant 2. Design an arc array with electrical scanning in an angular sector of
(00 + ’max' 60 - 6-,“)-

The main parameters are specified: the polarisation of the radiated field, the
directional gain, the working bandwidth. the radiated power and the level of the
first sidelobes.

- 105 -

FlilCﬂﬂﬂClAl.USE¢DNLY
FCHICMHHCJAI.USEIDNLY

The design calculations consist of the following steps:

1. The amplitude distribution in the equivalent aperture is found from the
specified level of the first sidelobes using Table 4.1.

2. In accordance with the specified bandwidth and installation site of the
antenna array, the type of radiator is determined and its directional pattern
is found. The minimum spacing d between adjacent radiators is determined based
on structural design considerations.

3. The requisite number of radiators is determined based on the specified direc-
tional gain in the direction so, using relationships (6.32) and (4.35) - (6.39).

The design calculations are then performed in accordance with the scheme for
variant I in the following sequence: paragraph 2 is done, the angular size

of the array zslax is determined and then paragraphs 5 - 10 and 12 - 1a are

carried out.

Variant 3. Design an electrically scanning arc array for an angular sector of
(90 + O..x. Oo ' 0.8,)-

The main parameters are specified: the structural configuration of the array,
its radius (or permissible boundaries, within the limits of which it can be
chosen), the polarisation of the radiated field, the directional gain (or beam
width), the level of the first sidelobes, the radiated power and the average
working frequency.

The design calculations are carried out in accordance with the scheme for
variant 2 in the following sequence: paragraphs 1 - 3 are carried out, the
angular dimension ZBn‘X and the radius of the array (if its permissible range
of values is specified) are determined, and then paragraphs 5 — 10, 12 and 1a
of variant 1 are carried, and finally, the working range of frequencies of
the antenna is computed.

Variant 4. Design a cylindrical array with electrical scanning in azimuth in an
angular sector of (00 + 0.8x, ‘0 - .max)'

The main parameters of the array in the azimuthal plane are specified just as

in variants l - 3; the width of the directional pattern and the level of the
aidelobea in the plane 0 - do are specified in addition, and the directional
gain of the cylindrical array is specified instead of the directional gain of
an arc array. The design calculations are performed in accordance with the
procedure for variants l - 3, with the difference that the directional gain

of the cylindrical array is determined using expressions (6.36), (6.37) - (6.39).
The structural configuration of the cylindrical array is additional determined,
as well as its dimension along the z axis and the amplitude distribution along
the a coordinate in the cylindrical array in accordance with the procedures for
the design calculations for linear antenna arrays (the results of Table 6.1 can
be used for this purpose, keeping in mind the note placed after formula (h.29)).

- 106 -

IIII(HﬂﬂC1A1.U8E(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. SLOTTED HAVBGUIDB ARRAYS
5.1. The Function and Specific Features of Slotted Waveguide Arrays

Slota are widely used in eicrowave engineering as radiating ale-eats or as
independent antennas. In this case, primarily slots in waveguides are used.
although slots in metal plates or foil excited by means of striplines can also
be enployed [01].

Slotted waveguide linear arrays (VShchr) provide for a narrowing of the direc-
tional pattern in a plane running through the axis of the waveguide.

Slotted waveguide arrays with mechanical. electromechanical and electrical scan-
ning are used along with slotted waveguide arrays having directional patterns
which are stationary in space [01].

we will note the major merits of slotted waveguide arrays:

1) Because of the absence of protruding parts. the radiating surface of a slotted
waveguide array can be co-located with the external surface of an aircraft
fuselage, without introducing additional aerodynamic resistance in this case

(an on-board antenna);

2) Optimal directional patterns can be realised in them, since the field distri-
butions in the aperture can differ by virtue of changing the coupling of the
radiators to the waveguide; '

3) They have comparatively simple excitation and are simple to operate.

A drawback to slotted waveguide arrays is the linited bandwidth. with a change
in frequency, there is a deviation of the beam in space from the specified
position in a nonscanning slotted waveguide array, where this deviation is
accompanied by a change in the width of the directional pattern as well as in
the matching of the antenna to the feedline.

5.2. The Major Parameters of a Slot in a waveguide

A slot in a waveguide is excited if it intersects the surface currents flowing
through the inside walls with its own wide side.

Hhen a slotted waveguide array is designed, for example, around a rectangular
waveguide with a dominant “10 mode, it is necessary to take into account the

fact that there are longitudinaland transverse surface currents in the waveguide
in the wide wells and a transverse current in the narrow walls.

The four main types of radiating slots in a rectangular waveguide are shown in
Figure 5.1. Slots 1-11! are located in the wide wall of the waveguide; slot
Nis in the narrow wall. Longitudinal slot intersects the transverse current.
if it is shifted relative to the center line of the wide wall of the waveguide.
There is no radiation when x1 - 0 and the radiation increases with an increase
in the displacement x1. Transverse slot II 19 excited by the longitudinal

-107-

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

currents. The intensity of the excitation decreases with increasing displace-
ment from the center line. when x1 - 0, the radiation is a saximum. The
oblique displaced slot III intersects both the longitudinal and the transverse
currents. When x1 . 0 and the inclination angle of the slot is 6 - 0. there
is no radiation. Slot IV, which is cut in the side wall, is not excited when
6 - 0. when 6 - 90'. the radiation is a maximum. By means of combining slots
1 and II, one can obtain a cross-shaped slot. With a certain positioning of
the center of the cross-shaped slot, it radiates a circularly polarized field

As has already been indicated, a
longitudinal slot running along the
center line of the waveguide (x1 -
0) and an oblique slot in the side
wall (when 6 = 0) do not radiate.
However. currents flowing in the
waveguide walls close to these
slots can produce such changes
that radiation takes place. So-
called reactive dipoles are used
Figure 5.1. The main types of slots used in for this: metallic rods, screwed

slotted waveguide arrays. into the waveguide alongside the
slot. which disrupt the symmetry
of the current in the waveguide
wall.

 

Oblique slots in the narrow wall usually stick a little bit into the wide walls
of the waveguide. Hhen such slots are cut in a waveguide, it turns out that
susceptance of the slot is low and has an insignificant influence on the pro-
pagation constant of the waveguide [01], practically regardless of the inclina-
tion angle of the slot 6 (if 6 g 15‘) for a fixed value of the cutout depth

10. Moreover, the slot susceptance changes considerably less with a change in
the frequency than in the case of slots cut in the wide wall of a waveguide.
For this reason. oblique slots in the narrow wall of a waveguide are preferable
(both from electrical and structural viewpoints), especially in large antenna
systems.

External and Internal Radiation Adsittances of a Slot. The Equivalent Nornalized
Admittance of a Slot in a Haveguide. "hen a slot in a waveguide is excited by
the currents flowing through its interior walls. it radiates electromagnetic
energy both into the external space and into the waveguide. The slot radiation
admittance, which is determined by the externa radiation, is called the

external radiation admittance: Y(e) - Gt + 38 ' . The radiation admittance
determined by the radiation of energy into the waveguide is called the internal .
radiation admittance of the slot: Y 1 - G + 38 1 .

It can be demonstrated by means of the duality principle [1], that the external
radiation admittance of a resonant slot, cut in the wall of a waveguide, and

h 1 1 £1 1 f1 1= - ‘
av ng an n n te ange s y(o)_a,-0.5er(5°$)'o

-103-

FI”ICHHHK1A1.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where R; is the radiation resistance of an equivalent symmetrical dipole.

The radiation admittance of actual slot antennas, cut in a shield of finite
dimensions, is always 10 to 152 less [2] than the admittance of a slot in an
infinite shield. Consequently, one can assume that the external radiation
admittance of a slot in a waveguide is:

G: 2 0,9123 I2 (6010'. (S . 1)

Knowledge of the internal admittances of the slots, 1(1), along with the external
values, makes it possible to determine the resonant frequency of slots of

different lengths and to trace this as a function of the position in the wall
of the waveguide [3].

As is well known, a slot cut in a waveguide disrupts the operational conditions
of the waveguide, causing the reflection of electromagnetic energy: a portion
of the energy is radiated, while the remainder travels further along the wave-
guide. Thus, a slot is a load for the waveguide, in which a portion of the
power is dissipated, equivalent to the radiation power.

For this reason, an idea of the influence of a slot on the field in a waveguide,
and correspondingly, of the equivalent circuit of a slot, can be obtained by
replacing the waveguide with an equivalent two wire line, in which impedances
are inserted in parallel (g + jb) or in series (r + 3x) depending on the type
of slot. Thus, a longitudinal slot is equivalent to an impedance inserted in
parallel with the line. while a transverse one corresponds to a series connected
impedance [07]. When doing design calculations for slotted waveguide arrays,

a series resistance r, normalized for the characteristic impedance of the wave-
guide, is usually employed, as well as a parallel conductance, normalized with
respect to the characteristic conductance of the waveguide. Both r and g are
uniquely related to the external and internal radiation admittances of a slot
and can be found from the power balance condition in the slot cross-section

in the waveguide [2, 07].

An equivalent circuit of a resonant slot (Tigure 5.8a), cut arbitrarily in a
waveguide (III in Figure 5.1) can be represented by two sections of a two wire
line with an electrical length of A1 and A2 with a shunting conductance g [a].
The equality A1 - -A2 is justified in this case, i.e.. an arbitrary resonant
slot in a waveguide does not change the phase of the wave passing through.

The major types of slots which can be cut in waveguides and their equivalent
circuits are shown in Table 5.1; relations are also given for the equivalent
normalized resistances and conductances of half-wave slots in a waveguide. The
following symbols are introduced in Table 5.1: A is the generator wavelength;
AB is the wavelength in the waveguide; a and b are the internal dimensions of
the waveguide.

The Resonant Length of a Slot. The formulas given in Table 5.1 for the equiva-
lent conductances and equivalent resistances of slots in a waveguide were
derived for half-wave slots. This length is close to the resonant length of a

- 109 -

FIN!(MHH(1A1.IEHE(HULY
FOIINHﬂCJAl.USEIMQLY

IABLE 5.1.

1-0.0».(41-5- 1,3,5,-

b
_.n _‘.
‘3 lg.

 

Key: 1. Arrangenent of the slot;
2. Equivalent circuit;
3. Equivalent conductance or resistance.

slot for which the equivalent suaceptance h and the equivalent reactance x are
zero. Since g and r change little close to resonance. the expressions for

g and r can also he used for resonant slots. The resonant length of a slot

is slightly less than 1/2, and is snaller, the wider the slot is. Moreover,
the resonant length of a slot depends on the displacement of the slot relative
to the center of the wide wall of the waveguide.

One can employ the calculated curves [07] shown in Figure 5.2 in a fora conve-
nient for direct deter-ination of the resonant length of slots, 21, to deternine
the resonant length of a.longitudinal slot in the wide wall of a waveguide. The
data are given for a waveguide with a retardation factor of y - All . 0.67 for
three values of the slot width d1. It can be seen that the wider t a slot is,
the greater the resonant length of the slot differs from 1/2. For a fixed

slot width and a slight increase in the displacenent XI of a longitudinal slot
relative to the center of the wide wall of a waveguide, the resonance length
increases, approaching l/2. With a further increase in the displacenent of

the slot, its resonant length decreases.

The resonant length of a transverse slot in the wide wall of a rectangular 3 cm
band waveguide when :1 - 0 is equal to 21 - 0.488 x [3]. i.e., differs insigni-

- 110 -

momuseomv
FOR4OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

   

Figure 5.2. The resonant length of a Figure 5.3. The Q of a slot as a
longitudinal slot as a function of its rela-
function of its displace- tive width dllx.
sent :1.

-ficant1y from a generator half-wavelength. Inclined slots in the narrow wall
have a resonant length equal to approximately half of the wavelength in free
space [01] (its precise value is usually chosen experiaentally).

In design calculations for slotted waveguide arrays, it is inportant to know
the slot passband, which is characterized by the quality factor Q. The Q of
a longitudinal slot is shown in Figure 5.3 as a function of its relative width
dllx for a waveguide with a phase velocity retardation of y - 0.67 when the
center of the slot is shifted relative to the center line of the wide wall of
the waveguide by xlll - 0.185. It follows from the figure that with a slot
width of dllx - 0.05 - 0.1, its Q changes insignificantly and does not exceed
10. which with a high carrier frequency in the Idcrowave band corresponds to

a considerable bandwidth (ZAf/f : 102).

The graph for the Q of a longitudinal slot as a function of its relative width
can also be used for a transverse slot in a roughly estimating its bandwidth.

The slot width in a slotted waveguide array is chosen by working from the
conditions for assuring the requisite electrical strength and the necessary
passband. when a slotted antenna operates only in a receive node, the major
factor in the selection of the slot width is the bandwidth of the signals
being received.

When selecting the slot width d1, a safety margin of two or three tines with
respect to the breakdown field intensity for the center of the slot should be
provided, where the field intensity, leot0 is a maximum (21 - A/Z). This
safety nargin is chosen by working from the structural design requirenents and
the operational conditions of the slotted antenna:

3310‘ - gn=UTT <(j';"—';_)Espv (5.2)

- 111 -

It”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1kl.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
INJI‘DITICLAL USiiCMVLY

where U is the voltage amplitude at the antinode; [Bult] is the ultimate
value of the field intensity at which electrical br own begins (for air under
normal atmospheric conditions. Bult - 30 lV/cm).

In the case of a uniform amplitude distribution over the antenna aperture, when
the power radiated by the antenna is divided equally among the slots:

 

u n ’11:.

" N a, ' (5.3)
where P is the power delivered to the antenna; G8 is the radiation conductance
of the slot; N is the number of slots.

If the amplitude distribution over the aperture differs from a uniform distri-
bution, the slot which radiates the greatest power is to be determined for the
specified amplitude distribution. Knowing the distribution of the radiated
power over the antenna slots and the delivered power. it is not difficult to
calculate what fraction of the total power goes for a given slot. Substituting
the value found in formula (5.3) in place of PIN, one can find 0..

Finally. the slot width is determined from (5.2):

a..>(2—-3) wenmm. (5.4)

If the slot is filled with a dielectric or covered with a dielectric plate, its
electrical strength is increased [9].

5.3. The Types of Slotted Waveguide Arrays

Distinctions are drawn between resonant antennas, nonresonant ones and antennas
with matched slots.

 

Figure 5.6. A resonant antenna with transverse (a) and longitudinal
(b) slots.

In resonant antennas, the spacing between adjacent slots is equal to ‘3 (Figure
5.6a: the slots are coupled in-phase to the waveguide field), or 13/2 (Figure
5.4b: the slots are coupled in an alternating phase fashion to the waveguide

- 112 -

FOR¢OFFKJA1.U§E(NVLY
INJR 0dﬂﬂ€1hl.lﬁﬂ£(NQLY

field). Thus, resonant antennas are in-phase antennas. and consequently, the
direction of maximun radiation coincides with a nor-a1 to the longitudinal
axis of the antenna. In-phase excitation of longitudinal slots placed on
different sides of the center line at a spacing of ABIZ is assured by virtue
of an additional phase shift of 180', due to transverse currents in opposite
directions on both sides of the center line of the wide wall of the waveguide.
In the case of inclined slots in the side wall, the additional 180' shift is
obtained by virtue of changing the direction of slot inclination (:5). Conse-
quently, the resulting phase shift for adjacent radiators in both cases proves
to be 360‘ or 0°. regardless of the type of load at the end of the antenna.

A resonant antenna can be quite well matched to the feedline in an extremely
narrow band of frequencies. In fact, since each slot is not individually
matched to the waveguide, all of the waves reflected from the slots are added
together in-phase at the antenna input and the reflection factor of the system
becomes large. It is obvious that this mismatching can be compensated at the
antenna input by means of any tuning element, but since the matching is dis-
rupted with even small changes in the frequency, the antenna remains a very
narrow band type. For this reason, in the majority of cases one dispenses with
in-phase excitation of individual slots and the spacing between them is chosen

as d 2 A312.

A characteristic feature of the nonresonant antenna obtained in this fashion
is the greater bandwidth within which there is good matching, since individual
reflections are almost completely cancelled with the large number of radiators.

1
21";- da 2!

d .

       
 

.1 <1“

      

61(9) e) (d)

Figure 5.5. Configurations of nonresonant slotted waveguide antennas
with longitudinal (a, b), and transverse (c) slots in
the wide wall of a waveguide, as well as with oblique (d)
slots in the narrow wall of a waveguide.

However, when the spacing between the slots differs from AB/Z, this leads to
out—of—phase excitation of the slots by the incident wave and the direction

- 113 -

FI“!(HHN(1A1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the main radiation lobe is deflected from the normal to the antenna axis.
This deflection is most often small (with the exception of special cases) and
changes in the shape of the main lobe and the level of the sidelobes caused by
the deflection of the beam are still not noticeable. For this reason, the
directional properties of such an antenna can also be determined as in the

case of in-phase excitation, with subsequent accounting for the beam inclination
angle.

A terminal absorbing load is usually installed to eliminate reflections from the
end of a waveguide. Circuits of nonresonant antennas with in-phase coupling

of the slots are shown in Figure 5.5 (Figure 5.5a, c) as well as with alternate
phase coupling (Figure 5.5b, d) to the waveguide field, where the slots are cut
in both the wide and in the narrow walls of the waveguide. In all cases, the
phase distribution in the antenna can be considered linear if the mutual coupling
of the radiators via both the internal and external space is not taken into
account.

II-lg/l

  

Hhile the slotted waveguide arrays
shown in Figure 5.5s-c have a radiation
field with only the dominant polariza-
tion, antennas with oblique slots in
the narrow wall (Figure 5.5d) also have
a field with parasitic polarization.

 

The direction of the transverse currents
in the narrow wall of a waveguide and
the field intensity vectors for the
electrical field excited in two oppo-
sitely inclined slots (i§) where the
spacing between them is x3/2 is shown
in Figure 5.6a with the arrows. The radiation of such slots is determined by
the horizontal components of the field intensity vector of the slots (Figure
5.6b). The vertical components produce a parasitically polarized field. To
reduce the parasitic component of the radiation field, the inclination angles
of the slots must be made 6 5 15°, for which the power lost to parasitic
polarization amounts to less than 11. However. this limits the possibility of
obtaining the requisite normalized conductances of the slots, 3. For this
reason, special steps are taken in practice [01] to suppress the parasitic
polarization field.

Figure 5.7. A slotted antenna with
obliquely displaced matched
slots.

In antennas with matched slots, each slot (longitudinal, transverse or obliquely
displaced) is matched to the waveguide by means of a reactive dipole or a stop

- 116 -

F!”R(JFFICIAI.II§E§(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and does not produce any reflections. Consequently, a traveling wave mode is
established in such antennas with a terminal absorbing load. A schematic of
an antenna with obliquely displaced matched slots is shown as an example in
Figure 5.7. In such antennas, good matching to the feed waveguide is obtained
in a wide passband (5 to 102). In the case of obliquely displaced slots in
the wide wall of a waveguide, through the choice of the inclination angle 6
and the displacement x , the normalized conductance of the waveguide in the
cross-section of the slot is made equal to unity and the susceptance existing
in this cross-section is cancelled out by means of a reactive stub. Since the
stub is installed in the waveguide section, passing through the center of the
slot, with a change in the frequency there is a simultaneous change in the
susceptances of the stub and the slot and their mutual compensation takes place
in a certain range of frequencies. With a substantial change in frequency,
the antenna likewise remains matched to the feed waveguide, since it becomes

a nonresonant one.

The spacing between matched radiators in an array with alternate phase coupling
of the slots is usually taken equal to A [2 at the nominal frequency. The
direction of the maximum radiation in this case is perpendicular to the axis of
the waveguide.

5.4. Methods of Designing Slotted Waveguide Arrays

There are several methods of designing slotted waveguide arrays. Strict design
techniques entail considerable mathematical difficulties, and for this reason
they are not used in engineering calculations and in synthesis problems.
Approximate methods are usually employed in engineering calculations.

Approximate design calculations can be performed for slotted waveguide arrays

by means of the energy technique of [07], which does not take into account the
mutual coupling of the slots via the internal and external spaces. It is
assumed that the phase shift between adjacent radiators through the feed wave-
guide is equal to the electrical spacing between them of ZId/AB, while the phase
distribution in the antenna aperture is linear. However, because of the external
and internal mutual coupling of the slots in the waveguide, there is a substan-
tial deviation of the amplitude-phase distribution from the requisite distribu-
tion, while the attainable directional pattern deviates from the specified one,
which is primarily due to the cross coupling of the slots via the dominant mode

[5].

The method of recurrent relationships of [6] takes mutual coupling of the slots
via the dominant mode in the feed waveguide into account and provides for a
better approximation of the specified distribution in the antenna aperture by
the feasible distribution as compared to the energy technique.

The most precise design calculations for slotted waveguide arrays can be
perforaed using the method of successive approximations of [07], which takes
into account both external and internal interaction of the slots in the wave-
guide (via the dominant and higher modes). However, the design calculations
are more complicated in this case.

- 115 -

INNIOFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
Fill(lﬂﬂ(JAl.US£‘0NLV

We shall consider the method of recurrent relationships and the energy technique
for design calculations of slotted waveguide arrays.

 

Figure 5.8. The equivalent circuits ofla resonant slot, arbitrarily
cut in the wall of a waveguide (a), and a slotted
waveguide array (b).

The Method of Recurrent Relationships [6]. The equivalent circuit of a slotted
waveguide array with arbitrary resonant slots in the form of a two wire line
with shunting conductances is shown in Figure 5.8b. The spacing between adja-
cent conductances is cosposed of the distance between the slots and the two
wire line sections incorporated in the equivalent circuit of the slots. He
designate the complex amplitudes of the incident and reflected wave voltages at
the input as “n-1 and un-1, and use the symbols un and un for the complex
amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves at the output of the n-th four-
pole network, into which the equivalent circuit of the antenna is broken down:

“+_ "-‘ An—l +1 Bn-loﬂ-Aa +1 BM
“I-lan—l ‘i'lDl-lo “s=ca+’ Da-' (5.5)

By using four-pole network theory, one can establish the fact that the real
components%M_1and Cn and the imaginary component In-1 and Dh-1 of the
coaplex amplitudes of nthe incident and reflected voltages at the input of the
n-th four-pole network are expressed as follows in terms of the real A“. Cn
and imaginary an and Dn components of the complex amplitudes of the incident
and reflected voltagesn at the output of the same four-pole network:

A... r. (I + %)("- cos Aﬂ—s. sin A.)+-’2—'(C.cos A. —D.. 31:315.).

3.... - (I l- {sh/1. sin A. + B.cosA.)+-‘;-(C.$in4.+0.oow.).‘.
' (5-6)
6... = (I — 32:)zc.cosA. +1). sin A.)—%(A.COSA. +B.slnA.).1

Dn—l a (1 — %)(D.oosd. -—C,.sinA,.)+ -;—'(A.sina__s.cosa.). (5'6)

- 116 -

FORtOFiﬂC1A1.USEibNLY
FOB10FFKJAI.USE(HVLY

here, gn is the normalized conductance of the n-th slot; An 'Ad + A!“ 1)+ Afn)
is the electrical spacing between the (n-l)th and the n-thn conductances in the
equivalent ctr guit; Adn (is lghe electrical spacing between the slots along the
waveguide;A and A2('1 are the electrical lengths which are due to the
equivalent circuit of the n-th and (n-1)th slots.

Taking into account the symbols which have been introduced, the radiation power
and phase of the field radiated by the n-th slot are as follows respectively:

P. - Int-rum. -uA.+c )'+(B- + D r: e.,: (5.7)
0 .. arg(u+- Hr)? arctg 2'13: :tlm, (5'8)

 

where k - 0, l, 2, ...

Using formulas (5.6) - (5.8), one can perform the design calculations for a
slotted waveguide array taking into account the mutual coupling of the slots
via the dominant mode and without taking their interaction into account via
the external space or via higher order modes.

The distributions of the radiated powers Pn or the amplitudes P(sn) (an is the
coordinate of the n-th radiator) as well as the phases on of the fields radiated
by each slot are usually specified in the design of slotted waveguide arrays.
The distribution of the radiated powers should be normalized so that:

N
21f. -l—x. (5.9)

where the power at the input to the antenna is taken equal to unity (Po - l);
r - PL/PO is the ratio of the power absorbed in the load PL to the power at
the antenna input Po.

Since the amplitude distribution f(zn) is related to the distribution of the
powers Pn by a certain normalizing factor a:

P. -0P(z.). (5.10)

then by substituting the value of Pn from (5.10) in formula (5.9) instead of
P“, we obtain:

0‘0"") ﬁlm.)- (5.11)

N
After determining Era.) from the specified distribution and the known
.-

relative value of the power absorbed in the load (usually, K - 0.05 - 0.1 to
obtain the maximum antenna gain), the normalizing factor a is found, and conse-
quently also the power radiated by any slot Pn [formula (5.10)], given the
condition that the power at the antenna input is taken equal to unity.

The design of an antenna in the case of a specified amplitude distribution
(antenna synthesis) is managed using an equivalent circuit (Figure 5.8) fro:
the antenna end, i. e., from the last N-th four-pole network. The electrical
spacing between the slots is considered to be specified and constant in this
case.

- 117 -

IIHICHHWCIAI.USE(HVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If there is a matched load (g3 - [g1 ad] - l, uﬁ - 0) following the last N-th
slot in a nonresonant antenna, then in expressions (5.6) 3N - cu - - 0 and
- Jr. Then we obtain for the normalized conductance of the last -th slot

from formula (5.7):

' '=l’ /.

L" " x (5.12)
The phase of the field radiated by the last slot is taken equal to zero (see
equation (5.8)). The quantities P“ and x included in formula (5.12) are known:

the power P“ is determined by expression (5.10) while r - 0.05 - 0.1 in the
usually employed antennas of the type considered here.

Then, by using expressions (5.5) - (5.7), the real and imaginary components of
the complex amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves are calculated: AN-l'
B“_1, c“_1 and DN-l at the input to the N-th four-pole network, and consequently
also the conductance of the (N-1)th slot:
PN‘ I
“N“.....nu”-."r.__:_________u.___., 5.13
(AN-l "('N--l)"l'("u.-| l‘”~..|)’ ( )

By sequentially applying formulas (5.6) and (5.13) with the preliminary substi-
tution of the current subscript n in the last formula for the subscript N-l,
we determine the parameters of the equivalent circuit of the antenna.

- l

The quantity an - A§"'l)+ Ada + Af“) takes on a simpler form, An Ad , if

lo gitudinal slots are used in the wide wall of the waveguide for whigh A n) -

- 3" - 0 ( i ure 5.8a) [4] or transverse slots in the wide wall, for which din)
. n/2 and A3“ . -s/2. In the case of more complex slots (for e, obltauely
displaced slots in the wide wall of a waveguide), the quantities A n and A2

are determined by the expressions given in [a].

The deviation of the phase distribution in the antenna aperture from a linear
distribution, which is caused by the mutual coupling of the slots via the
dominant mode in the waveguide, is calculated from the formulas:

”"14: d‘”"‘"“’n (5.14)
in the case of slots coupled in phase to the waveguide field, and
2x
64>:(zd l—u)(N—I:)—¢1’,| (5.10s)

in the case of alternate phase coupled slots, where on is the phase of the field
radiated by the n-th slot [formula (5.8)].

In calculations using formulas (5.14) and (5.16s), the number k in expression
(5.8) is chosen so that the difference between the quantities appearing on the
right sides of formulas (5.1b) and (5.16s) will be the least.

One can correct the phase distribution in the aperture by changing the spacing
between the radiators d or by using more complex slots, but there no need for

this, since in the given design method, the external mutual coupling of the
slots and mutual coupling via higher modes have not been taken into account.

- 118 -

F!“R()FII(1AI.INSII(HULY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(N‘LY

The method of designing slotted waveguide antennas using the recurrent relation-

ships (5.6) is applicable for any number of radiators in nonresonant antennas
and for any amplitude distribution over the aperture.

However, with a large number of radiators in an antenna, i.e., in a long* anten-
na, its design is simplified. In fact, with a large number of slots, their
coupling to the waveguide proves to be rather weak and the reflections from the
slots are neglectably small. Moreover, since in a nonresonant antenna, the
adjacent radiators are excited with-a slight phase shift, then at the antenna
input, practically all of the waves reflected from the slots cancel each other
out and the input impedance of the antenna remains close to the characteristic
impedance of the feed waveguide in which a mode is established which is close

to the traveling wave mode.

In this case, one can use the energy technique to calculate the parameters of
the antenna. We shall indicate the approximate limit of applicability of this
technique for nonresonant antennas.

The design calculations for a slotted waveguide array where N - 12 for a speci-
fied amplitude distribution [6] using the energy technique and the method of
recurrent relationships have shown that in the case of short antennas (N - 12),
the energy technique yields too rough an estimate: the error in the feasible
distribution of the powers relative to the specified value in some radiators
reaches 130:. Moreover. the amplitude distribution proves to be asymmetrical.
for this reason, in an approximate design of an antenna for a specified ampli-
tude-phase distribution using the energy technique, one should roughly take

the number of radiators as R ;_15, if the power absorbed in the matched load

is x - PL/Po - 0.05 - 0.1. In the case of a greater power dissipated in the
load, the number of radiators N is correspondingly reduced.

The Energy Method for Design Calculations.

Nonresonant Antennas. Formula (5.10) determines the relative radiation power
of any n-th slot (i.e., the radiation power P“ referenced to the power delivered
to the antenna Po, which is taken as unity):

P. -oP(z.)=—,1:"—r(z.).

E ”(1-)

. n-l
The factor 1-K in the numerator of this expression, without taking into account
the losses in the walls of the waveguide, is the antenna efficiency nA: there-

fore: n
P. - 7“—r(z.).
2: PG.) (5‘15)

In]

Considering the relationship [07] between the relative radiation power P“. the
slot coupling factor to the waveguide, on, and the slot conductance gn:

*we will conditionally understand a long antenna to be one in which the per
unit length radiation power is low.

- 119 -

ltllfﬂﬂﬂClAl.USE|M§Lﬂ
INDR¢0I11C1A1.lEﬂE(HVLY

l' n
(11-, I." (‘3 .' .3'; 0"" (‘. a————_!....
I

 

"“(PI H’s l'- ...P._.'—)" (5'16)

Rab-{an I“ “a”. (5.17)

One can initially determine the relative radiation powers Pn of all of the slots
based on the specified anplitude distribution as well as the antenna efficiency
by neans of iterative conversion calculations fron the last h-th slot to the
first, and then the coupling factors on, and finally, the equivalent normalized
slot conductances, gn (5.17). Based on the known slot conductances, the coupling
elements are determined, i.e., the displacements of the slots relative to the
waveguide axis, :1, or their inclination angle, 6 [see I 5.2, Table 5.1].

In the case of identical slot radiators (an exponential distribution of the
field amplitudes over the antenna), when the equivalent conductances (or
resistances) of all of the slots are equal, formula (5.11) can be used to deter-
mine then from the specified nA, where: ‘

 

N
a'-'l —V l—nA . (5018)

Resonant Antennas, A resonant antenna with arbitrary resonant slots and a
spacing of d - x3/2 between them (or d - AB) is designed by the energy technique,
which consists in the following. If the amplitude distribution is designated,
as f(an). just as before, and one takes into account the fact that all of the
slots are resonant, then the equivalent normalised conductance of the n-th slot

is [0513 I N
g" B gasp (za)/§l"(zl)' (5.19)

The antenna conductance gnx [Bin] incorporated in the formula is chosen so as
to assure good matching of the antenna to the feed waveguide. Thus, the value
g1“ can be chosen equal to unity.

Antennas with Hatched Slots. As was indicated in i 5.3, obliquely displaced
slots in the wide wall of a waveguide are used along with'sinple slots, where
the former slots are characterized by two geometric parameters: the displace-
ment :1 and the rotation angle 6, by scans of which one can independently

adjust the amplitude and phase of the field radiated by the slot. Hatched
obliquely displaced slots for which there is no mutual coupling of the radiators
via the dominant mode are of the greatest practical interest, since there are

no reflections free the radiators and a traveling wave mode is established in
the antenna, the designing of the antenna for a specified distribution is
accomplished by the energy technique using the formulas for nonresonant antennas.

The sethoda set forth for designing slotted waveguide arrays with slots equiva-
lent to parallel conductances, gn, inserted in a line equivalent to the wave-
guide, also remain valid for slots equivalent to resistances r“, which are
inserted in series in the line. For this reason, the design calculations for
an antenna are performed in a similar manner, with the condition that the
normalised resistances rn are substituted for the normalized conductances 3D

in the appropriate expressions.

- 120 -

IKIICIHHCIAJ.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.5. Hatching a Slotted waveguide Array to a Feed Waveguide

The matching of a slotted waveguide array to the waveguide feeder is usually
Judged based on the value of the reflection factor fro: the antenna input.

In the case of a nonresonant antenna with a terninal matched load, the reflec-
tion factor from the antenna input is [05]:

N‘L 2g -

N
1 I
.. ’+%l 2 mm.)
where gn + jbn is the total equivalent normalized admittance of the n-th_slot.

In the case of identical slot radiators, where the admittances of all of the
slots are identical, this expression assumes the form:

1;. (1+ 1 1,) exp [_ j if (N+ 0d] sln(2:‘Nd)

P== (5.21)

|+-;- arm-m NainGﬁd)

It follows from formula (5.21) that the reflection factor takes on a value of
zero (xat - [SHR] - 1) when ZrNd/XB - r(N i l). The spacing between the slots,
d, is deternined from this so that throughout the entire range of change in

A, there is no resonant excitation of the antenna and higher order major lobes
do not appear in the directional pattern:

d<(N—l)lum I2”. (5.22)

Formula (5.22) was derived for the special case where the sdmittances of all of
the slots are equal. If the admittancee of the slots in the slotted waveguide
array are not equal, then the formula cited here can nonetheless be used for

a rough determination of the spacing between the radiators.

In the case of a multiple slot resonant antenna, a short circuiting piston

at its end is frequently employed to assure its matching to the feed waveguide
(SHR - 1) for any amplitude distribution in the aperture. When the spacing
between the radiators is ABIZ (or an) and the spacing from the center of the
last slot to the piston is l3(2p - l)/6 in the case of longitudinal slots and
Asp/2 in the case of transverse slots (p - l. 2. ...). the reflection factor

at the antenna input is zero, if the sum of the adnittansee of all of the slots

N
u§M+m~L
5.6. The Influence of a Change in Frequency on Antenna Characteristics
A consideration of the expression for the reflection factor (5.20) from the
antenna input shows that when the frequency changes, both the quantity (Zn/A3)
2nd and the total admittance of each slot gn + jbn also change.

Calculations and experiments show that with slight changes in the frequency,
the deviations of the slot admittances fro: the nominal values are small and

.. 121. -

IIHl11FIIC1AI.lEIE(MNLY
FIHICNWHCJA1.USE(M‘LY

a change in the electrical spacing between them (stlxn) exerts the main

influence on the change in the reflection factor, and consequently also on the
sun. The SHR of a slotted waveguide array [05] is shown in Figure 5.9 as a
function of the change in the electrical spacing between the radiators when the
frequency changes. "hen selecting the spacing between slots using formula (5.22).
the working band of the antenna falls outside the "main lobe" of the SUR, defined
by the value It.t . [SHR] - l, and the matching is good. The working band of
resonant antennas falls in the region of the "main lobe" of the sun (Figure 5.9),
something which determines the sharp change in the reflection factor when the
frequency changes.

A frequency change has an impact not only on the antenna matching, but also on
the directional characteristics. Hhen estimating the influence of a frequency
change on the radiation, the radiative properties of individual elements can

be considered to be independent of frequency in a first approximation [01], just
as when investigating questions of matching. In this case, a frequency change
leads to beam rotation in space, because of the change in the phase change along
the waveguide, and this deflection of the bean can be calculated fron formula

(5.26).

 

Figure 5.9. The standing wave ratio in the waveguide feeder for
a slotted waveguide array as a function of the
electrical spacing between the slots.

5.7. The Directional Properties of Slotted waveguide Arrays

The same nethods are used to calculate the directional patterns of slotted wave-
guide arrays as for the calculation of the directional patterns of nultiple
dipole antennas. In this case, the shape of the directional pattern is governed
by the amplitude-phase distribution in the antenna aperture.

The following kinds of amplitude distributions are the ones most frequently used
in practice: uniform, symmetrically decaying relative to the antenna center and
exponential. The phase distribution is most often linear.

The normalized directional pattern of a linear array of radiators can be written
in the form:

r (0. «1-) =1 I’. (0." q») F. (0. q»).
(5.23)

-122 -

F0R10FFKJAI.U§EIMVLY
INlIOFFKJALlEﬂZONLY

where f1(e, 9) is the directional pattern of a single radiator; Pn(e, 0) is the
antenna array factor, which depends on the number of slots in the antenna.

He shall give expressions for the antenna factor for various amplitude distribu-
tions in the antenna. In the case of a uniform amplitude and linear phase
distribution over the length of the array:

F 0 I: sir-(N912)
'() ”slaw/2) ’

where o - kod sin 0"W1 is the phase shift between the fields produced at the
observation point by adjacent radiators; k0 - 21/1 is the phase constant of
free space: 0 is the angle read out from the normal to the line of position of

the slots (Figure 5.10); #1 is the phase difference between adjacent radiators
along the feed system; N is the number of slots. In an in-phase antenna. 01 -

0; in a nonresonant antenna with in-phase coupling of the slots to the waveguide,
pl - 2nd/AB; and in the case of alternate phase coupling. pl - 2sd/A3 - u.

(5.26)

If the field distribution in the aperture of a discrete linear array of radiators
is exponential, then:

_,______
. gt. (HM) shes-[‘WL
r - (0” "iu: siu’(~IN)-|-£h_a(£IN) ' (5'25”

where 5 - oL/Z is a quantity which
characterizes the nonuniformity of the
amplitude distribution in the aperture;
0 - a; + o is the attenuation constant,
due to rad ation losses as well as losses
in the waveguide walls, Np/I; in a wave-
guide with low losses, a51- << “I: and
o - “I; L I Nd is the length of the
antenna array; u - 0.5 koL(sin e - sin
Figure 5.10. The readout of the angles emain) is the generalized coordinate;
in calculating the direc- 0,513 is the direction of the main lobe
tional pattern of slotted of the antenna directional pattern.
waveguide arrays.

 

The deflection of the main lobe of the
directional pattern from the normal to the line of position of the radiators
is determined from the formula:

sin 0 -- y — 171/41.
gin (5.26)

where 1 - l/AB is the retardation of the phase velocity in the waveguide; p - 0

applies to slots coupled to the waveguide field in phase, and p - 0.5 is for
alternate phase coupled slots.

The following obvious relationship can be employed to determine the attenuation
constant e :

*The formula was derived by G.A. Yavstropov and G.K. Pridman.

- 123 -

FIHRCIWHCJA1.USE|NNLY
FOIIOIWNC1A1.USIICNNLY

l
as.“ 2mm hn-FZ . .

In the case of antennas with a symmetrical amplitude distribution relative to
the center which falls off towards the edges (for example, a cosine distribution),
the calculation of the directional pattern in the case of a large number of
radiators involves labor intensive computations. In this case. one can use the
factor for an antenna with a continuous distribution of omnidirectional radiators.
PL(6) [7], since the directional pattern of a discrete array and a continuous
one practically coincide when Fl I>_ 6 (d - l/2)_: _

_'__ m" +A' M4-
A..+2A.lu [ n 2 ui—xl2

_' .dn (u 1.5/2) }
uq-alz ’

where do is the amplitude of the field at the edges of the antenna.

 

F.(0).'§—'FL(0)=
(5.27)

when the amplitude distribution over the antenna is referenced to unity: A -
l - A0. The directional pattern of a single slot F1(0) in the YOZ plane, which
passes through the line of position of the radiators (Pigure 5.10), can be
determined from the formulas for the directional pattern of a slot in an infinite
shield in the case of engineering calculations: for a longitudinal slot. P1(e)

- [cos ((1/2) ‘ sin 0)]/Cos o, and for a transverse slot, r1(e) I 1, since the
antenna length is usually great (several wavelengths), and moreover, the direc-
tional properties of an antenna in this plane are deter-ined primarily by the
array factor Pn(0).

when determining the directional pattern in the transverse plane (rox in Figure
5.10) for an antenna with longitudinal slots in the wide wall of a waveguide.
one must consider the fact that the finite dimensions of the shield (the trans-
verse dimensions of the waveguide) have a substantial impact on the shape of
the directional pattern [07]: the limited nature of the shield imparts a _
directional nature to the radiation: the field in the direction of the shield
is reduced to approximately 60 to 501 relative to the value of the field in the
direction of the directional pattern maximum.

In order to simplify the determination of the directional pattern of a slot in
the plane normal to its longitudinal axis (the 10x plane), it is convenient to
replace the waveguide with a flat strip of the same width [06]. It then turns
out that for a waveguide width of a I (0.7 - 0.8)A, the directional pattern will
be close to any of the patterns depicted in Figure 5.11.

In the case of transverse slots in the wide wall of a waveguide or slots which
are inclined in the narrow wall, the directional pattern in the var plane can

be approximated from the formulas for the directional pattern of a slot in an

infinite shield. since the shield dimensions in the direction of the slot axis
have little influence on the directional pattern in either the B-plsne or the

H-plane of the slot [07].

Formulas are given in Table 5.2 for the determination of the width of the
directional pattern of in-phase slotted waveguide arrays and the levels of the

— 126 -

FOI1OFFKJA1.USIIN‘LY
POROFHCIALUSEONLY

   

ﬂ '1 [Int It '1 25-451

Figure 5.11. Calculated directional patterns of a half-wave slot

in the B-plane for various dimensions of the rectangular
shield.

first sidelobes are indicated for various anplitude distributions in the antenna.
One can also use the indicated fornulas in the case of nonresonant antennas.
since the spacing between the radiators in such antennas ($.22) differs insigni-
ficantly fro. the spacing in in-phase arrays and the angle of been deflection
from the aerial to the array is snail.

TABLE 5.2.

 
     

 

Vpsaena
Ase-nuns sesame-I'm ’ “.5 W‘JI)
Amplitude Distribution m"

   

Paunouepaoe Uniform | SIM)“ .—|.'|.3

     
  
 
    

Smonnuasanoc n .. FLIP.“ 0.5)
B onential (

Ramayana-sane; snnaaryu none us xpnx an-
reams:

H05 A :—o.5 2
humid!) ’ U

Key: 1. Level of the first aidelobe, d3;
2. Cosine; the awlitude of the field at the antenna edges.

In those special cases where it is necessary to deflect the been considerably
from the normal to the array, the effective length of the aperture Leff - Ndcos
6.31“ is to be substituted in the fornulas for the directional pattern width.
200.5, in place of the antenna length I. I Nd.

The directional gain of an antenna with alternate phase slots in the wide or
narrow walls of a waveguide when 7 - All, < l and d - 13/2 I (0.6 - 0.9” is
determined by the approximate formla: ’

D. 3g. (3 -l- vN/A), (5.28)

-125-

“WWWLY
FtﬂlCHNHCJAl.USE(NHLY

where v - 2 for longitudinal slots in the wide wall and v - b for oblique slots
in the narrow wall of a waveguide (when 6 g 15').

The aperture utilization coefficient, go, incorporated in formula (5.28) depends

on the amplitude distribution in the antenna: in the case of a uniforn distri-

bution,” - P1; with an exponential distribution go I 0.85 and 0.92 respectively

for r - Pl - 51 and 10!; with a cosine distribution, go - 0.81 and 0.965 for
. 0 andPo A0 - 0.5 respectively.

The directional gain of an antenna can be estimated using formula (5. 28) during
scanning, if the beam deflection angle on n- 602. d/A < 0.6 and the antenna
length is L - Nd >> 1, since a change in the- antenna directional gain during
scanning in the indicated range, because of the change in the effective length
of the aperture, is compensated in that a linear antenna becones directional

in two planes when can,“ + 90', while for 83.1“ - 0, the antenna is directional
in one plane [03].

In contrast to a linear array, a planar array of radiators is directional in both .
main planes, and for this reason, its directional gain during scanning begins

to fall off immediately because of the reduction in the effective aperture of

the array.

The efficiency of a nonresonant slotted waveguide radiator, "A. can be computed
from formulas (3.8) or (3.11).

Since a short-circuiting piston is usually installed in a resonant antenna instead
of an absorbing load, its efficiency is higher than the efficiency of a nonreso-
nant antenna of the same dinenaions. with known values for the efficiency and
directional gain of an antenna, the overall gain is G - DonA.

5.8. Possible Structural Configurations for Slotted Waveguide Arrays and Struc-
tural Design Examples

Depending on the function of an antenna,
it can be constructed in the form of a
linear or planar slotted waveguide array
or consist of a set of linear slotted
arrays, arranged along the generstrices
of the surface of an aircraft (Figures
5.12 - 5.16). A schematic depiction of
a portion of a linear antenna with
oblique slots in the narrow wall of the
- waveguide, which is used in marine radars,
Figure 5.12. Inclined slots in the is shown in Figure 5.12. To attenuate
narrow wall of a waveguide the parasitic component of the radiation
with isolating metal pro- field of such an antenna, which is polar-
Jections between the ized perpendicular to the axis of the
radiators. waveguide, metal isolation projections
[01] are installed between adjacent slots.

By utilizing the basic concepts of wave

 

- 126 -

IIIICNHHCIAI.USB(NVLY
POM.0ITNC1AI.USEGMVLY

 

to» (mow the generator

Figure 5.13. A nonresonant slotted waveguide array with slots in
the side wall of the waveguide.

 
 
  
  
    

Short—circuitin8
piston

naunmnumwwmuami
lawman

”In." R! connector

 
 
 

B
‘ From the transmitter
{ardenntwnwwv

Figure 5.14. A nonresonant slotted waveguide array with longitudinal
slots in the wide wall of the waveguide.

attenuation in an overnoded waveguide in the caae of propagation between para-

llel netal plates [8] and knowing the spacing between the slots, one can deter-
mine the spacing between the projections do (Figure 5.12), their length 11 and

thickness t.

Examples of the structural design of nonresonant slotted waveguide antennas with
oblique slots in the narrow wall of the waveguide when they are excited from

a rectangular waveguide (Figure 5.13) as well as with longitudinal slots in the
wide wall when fed by a coaxial cable (Figure 5.14) are shown in Figures 5.13
and 5.16.

An example of the structural design of a slotted waveguide array with electro-
mechanical scanning (with a removable upper slotted wall) is shown in Figure 5.15.

One of the variants of a two dimensional slotted waveguide array [9] consisting
of eight parallel waveguides, in each of which ten dumb-bell slots are cut is

shown in Figure 5.16s. As compared to conventional rectangulars slots, dumb-bell
slots have a greater bandwidth [07]. .A specific feature of the antenna is the

- 127 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE¢MHLY
4. Absorbing
Cover for t
6. can;

- "base"-
load;

 

he been ateeting unchanicn;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.9. A Sample Design Calculation Procedure for Slotted Waveguide Arrays

When developing or planning slotted waveguide arrays, the starting data, for
example. can be the width of the directional pattern in the two main planes
or in one of them (290.5) and the level of the sidslobes; and the directional
gain Do.

We shall deal with the design procedure for the following variant: the direc-
tional pattern width is specified in one or two main planes as well as the
sidelobe radiation level.

The type of slotted waveguide antenna is chosen at the outset. If the angular
position of the main lobe of the directional pattern. emainv is specified and

the antenna should provide for operation in a band of frequencies, a nonresonant
antenna is chosen. However, if according to the design specifications, the
antenna is a narrow band one, but should have a high efficiency, a resonant
antenna is preferable. Then the spacing between the radiators is found in the
waveguide selected for the construction of the antenna and the specified band

of frequencies. In a resonant antenna with alternating phase slots, d - l3/2.

In a nonresonant antenna, the quantity d can be chosen in two ways. If the
position of the main lobe of the directional pattern in space, euain is specified,
then the requisite value of d is found from formula (5.26). If the angle omain
is not specified though, then the spacing between the radiators is chosen from
the condition that d < 13/2, as well as to assure that there is no resonant
excitation of the antenna at the edge frequencies of the specified band (5.22).
Then, the amplitude distribution for the antenna is selected which assures a
directional pattern with a specified sidelobe level. Based on the now known
amplitude distribution, the length of the antenna is found (and correspondingly,
the number of radiators), which assures the requisite half- er level directional
pattern width (see the formulas in Table 5.2).

Then the design calculations are carried out in the following order:

1. Based on the overall equivalent circuit for the antenna (Figure 5.8b), the
equivalent normalized conductances, gn (or resistances rn), are computed for
all N slots of the antenna (see 5 5.“);

2. Knowing gn or tn, the displacement of the center of the slots relative to the
center of the wide wall of the waveguide, 31, or their inclination angle in the
side wall, 5, is determined from the formulas of Table 5.1.

3. Having calculated the radiation conductance of the slot in the waveguide, G2
(i.e., the external conductance), the voltage at the antinode Um (5.3), and
consequently also the slot width d1 (5.4) are determined from the known value
of the power at the input (in the case of a transmitting antenna).

a. With a known position of the slots in the waveguide wall and their width,
the resonant length of the slots in the waveguide is found from the data of 5 5.2.

5. The directional pattern (sec 5 5.7), the directional gain and overall gain of
the antenna are calculated.

4

/

- 129 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FtHICHWﬂCLALlhﬂECMﬂLY

Besides the electrical design of the antenna itself, design calculations are ”also
performed for the feedline and exciter; when called for by the design specifica-
tions, the requisite type of rotating Joint is selected and its Iain characteris-
tics are determined.

- 13o -

FOI10FFKJALIEIEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. ACCOUNTING FOR MAI. CGIPLING EFFECTS IN 5m WAVEGUIDE ARRAYS

As has already been noted in Chapter 5. the energy and recurrent techniques of
design calculations for slotted waveguide arrays (VShchR) do not assure the
practical veasibility of antennas with the anticipated parameters in any cases.
This applies primarily to arrays with a low sidelobe level in the directional
pattern and is explained by the fact that in the indicated techniques, many electro-
dynanic factors are not taken into account which occur in the actual antenna
structure; It has been determined as a result of specific calculations and experi-
aents that the limit of applicability of these methods for arrays with s cot-para-
tively mall umber of radiators (up to 30) in each waveguide [1, 2] can be con-
sidered a directional pattern level of roughly* -15 dB.

To illustrate this fact, experimentally measured directional patterns and direc-
tional patterns calculated by the energy and recurrent techniques for typical

nonresonant alternating phase slotted waveguide arrays with different numbers N1
of longitudinal slots in the wide wall of the waveguide are shown in Figure 6.1.

In these antennas, the identical amplitude-phase distribution of the field in the
aperture of the arrays, V“. was specified as:

n—I
Ng'-l

 

V. “[1 _o,95coa(2a )1cx|v|—-jrd(n—l)sin0.-ul. I (n < IV“ (6.!)

where em [emain] is the angular direction of the main bean of the directional
pattern; d - 0.5751 is the step of the array: in - 21th is the wave number.

An analysis of the calculated and experimental results makes it possible to con-
clude that it is necessary to study and take into account electrodynamic factors

which are significant in the practical realization of directional patterns with a
low sidelobe level.

The work which has been done at the present tine shows tint such factors include
[1-5] nonresonance of the slots, internal mutual coupling of the slots via higher
nodes. finite thickness of the waveguide walls, and external mutual coupling of
the radiators. It is apparent that all of these factors influence the directional
pattern in different ways. For this reason, before working out an engineering
procedure for taking than into account. it makes sense to conduct a differential

analysis of these effects and to compare the results obtained with the aperinental
data.

It is procedurally expedient for the further presentation of the material to
adduce the example of antennas with slots in the wide wall of the waveguide, which
are widely used in practice.

.Roughly, because it depends on the form of the amplitude distribution of the
field in the array aperture.

-131-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we WI. US! ONLY

    

'M-II'WAI mr-w-za-m I 0 Ml‘

Figure 6.1. The directional patterns of slotted waveguide arrays.

Key: The solid curves are for experimental dsts;
The dashed curves were celculsted using the recurrent nethod;
The dotted curves were conputed using the energy techique;
The dsshed-end-dotted curves were conputed taking into
account the nonresonence of the slots and their nutual

coupling via higher nodes.

6. l . Basic Relationships

Initial Btpatione. bet a systen of N1 arbitrarily oriented narrow slots he cut in
the wide wall of a rectangular waveguide, excited by sources located inside it.

As shown in figure 6.2, we shall introduce in each of th- a local syste- of
certesian coordinstes with the on. axis directed along the none]. to the surface
of the wide wall of the waveguide. Then the cmln amplitudes of the voltsgee
VI, in the slots, for the case of known distributions of these voltsges 'n (an) can
be found iron the following systen of linesr equations, which tske into account
elsctrodynsnic effects of externsl mtuel coupling [6]:

(6.2)

N.
2: VeYn-“Fnu 15:”. (”u
POI

where Y“ - Y8) + Y3); Y8) and 1&9 ere the external and internal nutusl
sdnittances of the s-th and n-th slots respectively; P. is the int eco-
active force, applied to the n-th slot. The general formulas for Y , Y.) and

F. are known [6]:
‘.

Y‘s.~ ‘ .( “Mona;
.J. ' "‘ " " (6.3)

ﬂ
‘-
yggn -..-_ I: ”(no "EMU“:

(6.6)

-132-

mmmomx
FOROFII‘ICIALUSEONLY

l
5.: I 0-9») «2mm... (6.5)

_"'

where 21. is the length of the n-th slot; 3‘0) (2.), Eli“) (8.) and 1131) (1.) are
the tangents no this slot of the caaponents of the magnetic 'vectors of the
unperturbed field of the sources and the fields radiated into the external space
and into the waveguide of the n-th slot respectively, where these have a unit
amplitude.

 

Figure 6.2. An array with obliquely displaced slots in the
wide wall of a waveguide.

The major difficulty in practical calculations of Va consist in determining the
matrices for the external and internal edmittances for a specific arrangement of
the slots.

The Internal and External Admittances. The external admittances Y‘s) are, as a
rule, determined approximately, but with sufficient precision for practical
purposes by means of the duality princi le [01]. It is enormously more complicated
to calculate the internal admittances Y 1). -As can be seen from formula (6.1.),
for this it is primarily necessary to fgd the electromagnetic field vector I! in
the waveguide, whibh is excited by the arbitrarily oriented n-th slot. To solve
this problu, one can nploy the concept of vector potential, given in the liter-
ature [7]. Substituting in it the distrihntion of the magnetic current in the
slot, using generally known foraulas, we find the components of the magnetic field
and consequently, the component list) (2-) tangential to the slot. Substituting it
in expression (6.6), following integration in explicit form, we derive the foraula
for calculating the internal mutual adnittance of the slot, Y“).

Resonant or slightly mietuned slots are most frequently used in practice. where
the voltage distribution in the slots is described by the function:

-133 -

MOWUSBONLY
“WISCONLY

. (6.6)
'nkd-‘m(unﬂlu). -'~-( 3- --<‘n

be the calculations perfoned using the scheme described here, taking (6.6) into

eccount, the tolloving expression is derived for the deter-instion of the intensl
edlittsnces [l]:

 

xnv» (—w u.(:;{)1<a~~=:3=»+s~wea»)+
1(a-.(:.)w.(:.~..)1x _
x (“MM 77w)- --Anun3;na" )] m (6.7)

at
501"“. l y“')s‘"su’cotd.1‘,,.-+1,,s‘"sln(6.%)ﬂhi

s~-{-—.(-':-)1a»«arm—yu-ww-an";

( 0) is the dieplscenent of the center of the n-th slot relative to the center

line of the wide all of the waveguide; dm is the distance along the z exis
betveen the centers of the n-th end n-th s_lote:

1‘3",“ LymeW-S! “(if no))[yu.(.«'n)+yu.(¢t.n)]+
|sln(__’:_ Mun,” (0(1))+."..(‘:'))]};

’ M 0W [—.’=.,- saws: <°S“"~)'

N

|(d ‘73)). d1 *0" 3.) “ll m(_‘(a )3 33y]

m ,,_ﬂ’7_ ._ a "
a. a slll5.|( I) 2‘“

7w Wupi—b)’ I WM’M’
’DII' lﬂmm;

 

. u ”,2;

‘ ' l t'). p 0. a] 0. u 0, q. 0, p no.
r ' - . p 0 950, 3 ’~ { l, q..-0. ”>0
N 2. med: " 2. q>0. '

-131...

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By using the procedure for calculating the mutual inpedsncss of electrical dipoles
[01], following a series of culbersome mathaatical derivations from expression
(6. 3). we obtain the following formls for the calculation of the external autual
sdsittances of the slot:

II
)'(c).-,_..‘l)j 2- {m(a..'--a.) [ S (°—'"_,£-"'"'5—" +°——"""‘""" —
-I

 

_ Inn: has

 

...2msx,."p- 1‘"’“" )sin 1x. (I rt)”; |. .

’ssm

. "(up I'm? "In | car—'1‘- 'mn —2cosK..“P— ’K'r'”)!ina..(l _§),m.|.
I,‘ f- nun Inn has

a
¢_§_P_"‘ "‘_I_K__u' “II.“ I-

“use

Islam... —6.)[ john-- l)

 

 

. u x, I 3h“! (I I'D
Nu... | i) 99- ,iIZZI—‘L ”2",“ cos n. __ l:__:_;:_ Im- )._, GILT—ﬁl-

(0 U..—-I) —_ |(°nua'l") "

I "I" 'I“na’ -mn rip—l mgr..."
"S( - um- ’1'"
I

r_x_p_____- --I Kn 'snl 3'“ ‘N u" '8 )———d§]} (5-8) (6-8)

—2o,... man.-
’00.:

I’m‘
”Ht/8;" |.(o,..- l-a)’. a -v--I; 0: I;

ya: .0”! l.

.='——""—|esln(6.—6.)-,-.

I". n

'4‘; Ky .31. (tr m. n).

6.2. Planar Slotted Waveguide Array

He shall now consider a planar array composed of N2 waveguides, in each of which
N1 slots are cut. It is apparent that with a known excitation of the waveguides,
the complex voltage amplitudes in the slots can be theoretically determined from
system (6.2). But when the overal number of slots N1N2 > 100 (this is the most
real case in practice), the solution of systu (6.2) is problematical, even using
modern computers. An analysis which has been nade [1, 3] shows that to solve this
problen, it is expedient to eaploy the technique of iterative approxinstions, in

each step of which the voltage amplitudes in the slots cut only in one unveguide
are determined.

-135-

POI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FORMUSEONLY

we rewrite syste- (6.2) ss follows for a planar array:

(V: d: , . . (6-9)
ndlnﬂl‘mulv yin-Inn" 'l-.’..|.l9 I‘m' ('N“ |<ni<Nh

where all of the syabols are clear from a comparison with expressions (6.2) - (6.5).

we shall consider an arbitrary waveguide with the number é”; than it is not
difficult to transfore (6.9) as follows:

Nu

‘ l

.2). V“. "a” [Ygzngn a.sv('l)+ YLI ”4.0) n. M..)] ‘ .
. N. N.

, . _ v v M
rm. "'3” .13. «1| V“ " Y"' "a” "' "" (6.10)
"a V ”0

since when n2 9‘ “1(0), the internal adaittances Yiﬂcpﬁmz - 0.

System (6. 8} can be solved by iterative approximations. In fact, for a fixed
value of a and known values of Vn1n from the preceding step in the calculations,
by solving the Nl-th (and not Nlﬂz) order system of (6.10), we find the amplitudes
V3140). By successively varying n2(°) from 1 to “2, we determine the distribu-
tion of the couples: voltag 0rplitudes over the entire aperture of the array. One
can take ‘7!!an - 0 (n2 'I I ) as the initial approximation of the uplitude
values, which as can be seen froa (6.10), is equivalent in this set to dispensing
with 8: accounting for the external mutual coupling of the array waveguides for
the waveguide. It is clear fron physical considerations tint the computa-
tional method considered here converges. This is also confined by the large
nuabsr of specific calculations perforaed on conputers.

The external shittances Y‘e n n are determined fro- forauh (6.8) when the
geometric parameters which 1 2 1 2 characterize the mutual arrangaent of the
slots in the planar array are subtituted in than.

6.3. An Analysis of Mutual Coupling Effects on the Directional Pattern of an Array

It is obvious that it is difficult to theoretically study in general form the
influence of introducing the electrodynanic factors elm-erated above on the direc-
tional pattern of an array because of the coaplexity of forauls (6.7)-(6.10).
Therefore, the only possible approach is the utilization of conputera. The degree
of influence of each factor on the directional pattern can be illustrated with an
example of analyzing a specific slotted waveguide array.

For the sake of simplicity, we shall consider a slotted waveguide array for-ed by
slots cut in the wide wall. The directional pattern of this array in the vertical
plane is:

-136-

FOIOHIOALUSIONLY
FOIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY

(6.11)
N
No) - )3, I..(ow..exmc:."slaol.
I

where fn(0) is the individual directional patter of a slot in this plane; 6 is
the angle read out frm a normal to the array; 830) is the coordinate of the
center of the n-th slot.

The experimentally seamed directional pattern of an equally spaced, alternate
phase coupled traveling wave slotted waveguide array, as well as the patterns
casputed using fornlla (6.11) with the recurrent technique are shown in Figure 6.3
for the following parueters: N1 - 20, ln - 0.681, d I 0.665“, a - 0.78}, b -

- 0.3661, 1’" - [Plead] - 0.1 and values of Va deterained fro- (6.1).

Re shall perforn a differential analysis of the impact of the various electro-
dynanic factors on the directional pattern. For this, we first of all deternine
the external and internal autual edaittances. Since 6 It 0.51 in this example,
then, as follows fron fornulas (6.8) and [01], one can «sue in s first approxi-
nat ion* that the nutual external adnittances are:

(.028-10" 0n". ,
’12: [1-11. (0.”) (6.12)
0, m +91.

 

The inherent internal sdaittances Y3) were deternined in the literature [5],
while the autusl adaittances 1‘10 are conputed fron fornula (6.7) when an - 6., - 0
is substituted in then, since the slot in th_e_ slotted wageguide array ere longi-

tudinal: es
4/: . 212,—th x
x'ab|(u/2Kl)’+ 9;,1

 

 

”sun-o
“um—er (1': m)
{_— «133%: 41“) -l <.:—.)J}
Y‘Q‘L' .., m ammo. L1)
V 2:1,; 2..;.: 1-1:) m—vn «(a )
xwe-M—mﬂ". mm. (6.13)

(RIM-P -I- I5}.

 

a
Hhere necessary, the mutual aduittances can be computed precisely fraa fora-11a
(6.8).

-137-

FOIOFHCIAIJJSEONLY
MWUSEONLY

Figure 6.3. The influence of various
factors on the shape of the
directional pattern of a
slotted waveguide array.

Key: The dotted curve is for
the aethod of recurrent
relationships; The curve
with two dots between
dashes takes nonresonant
slots into account; The
curve with a single dot
between dashes takes
nonresonance of the slot
and autual coupling via
higher nodes into account;
The dashd curve accounts
for the thickness, of the
waveguide all; The solid .
curve is the experiaental
directional pattern.

 

where d1 is the slot width; 9N-|(u¢m)!+ (xp/‘br— no.0; ; t and u are the dielectric
peraittivity and nagnetic permeability of the anbient space.

As can be seen free (6.13), the slot width d1 is included in the expression for
the inherent admittance. It has been shown in the literature [8] that a slot in
a real waveguide with a wall thickness t is equivalent in terns of its electro-
dynaaic paraneters to a slot of width dz, cut in an infinitely thin wall. The
relationship between d1 and d1 is shown in Figure 6.4. It follows fren wlnt has
been presented here that in order to take the wsveguide wall thickness into
account, it is necessary to substitute df for d1 in formula (6.13).

Thus, systea (6.2) with the astrix of mutual adnittances, determined by expressions
(6.12) and (6.13), nkesit possible to find the anplitudee Va, taking into account
both all and individual electrodynanic factors. An analysis of the directional
patterns calculated from these values of Va makes it possible to more precisely
specify which factors are the aost significant.

a. Slot Nonresonance. He shall note two special features of formla (6.13) for
the calculation of the internal adnittance of a slot T“): 1) Each ten- in (6.13),
which is assigned the subscripts p, q, is a partial internal adaittance of the
for a qu node; 2) The partial sdaittances depend on three geometric paraneters
of a slot (the length, 21“; the width d1 and the displacement x801). Consequently,

-138-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the resonant length of a slot also depends on the number of modes sq, taken into
account (6.13), the slot width and its dieplacuent relative to the edge line of
the wide wall of t a waveguide. The nature of the resonant slot length as a func-
tion of (11 and xéo is the same as that shown in Figure 5.2.

It is apparent that when just slot nonresonance ie'taken into account. the upli-
tudea v" are determined from a system of equations (6.2;. in which it is necessary
to set the internal and external mutual admittances Y& and Y“) equal to zero.
A computer was used to study the influence of higher modes on the shaping of the
directional pattern. Calculations duonstrsted that for a relative error in de-
tel-mining the active and reactive components of the internal admittance of no more
than one percent, it is sufficient to take only the first seven modes: H10. 1101,

Roz, H20, H21, R12 and H22 [1, 3].

The directional pattern of an array calculated under these conditions is shown in
Figure 6.3. A comparison of the curves shows that accounting for just slot non-
resonance, although it is important, does not lead to satisfactory results. Con-
sequently, it is also necessary to take other electrodynemic factors into account.

1:. Internal Hatual Coupling of slots Via Higher Modes. In order to also take this
into account. it is necessary to take into account the mutual admittances ﬁg),
which are calculated frcn formula (6.13), in the matrix of system (6.2).

The directional pattern which takes into account slot nonresonance and internal
mutual coupling via higher modes ia-zshown in Figure 6.3, from which the rather
good correlation between the experimental and theoretical results can he seen.

   

._—l__.-..l..—L_ _g_L_._
0 (2.7 I.” 6% -.w -20 -V 0 M M I’
Figure 6.6. The equivalent slot Figure 6.5. The influence of the
width as a‘function modal composition of the
of the thickness of higher modes on the
the waveguide wall. shaping of the directional

pattern of a slotte".
waveguide array.

~139-

FOROFII'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1.8! ONLY

 

ym _ y

:1 Figure 6.6. The mutual adnittance of slots due to
higher nodes as a function of the

spacing between then (280) is the part

of the nutual audnittsnce 1%), which is

due to interaction‘via the duinant n10

node).

 

a: 40 z: 4,.
70

The data of nathenatical modeling of the influence of higher nodes (up to p - q I-
- (.0) on the shape of the directional pattern [1, 3] are shown in Figure 6.5, free
which it follows that the najor contribution is nade by the B10. 801, n02, 320,
H21, an and 322 nodes. Figure 6.6 illustrates the rapid decrease in the mutual
coupling of slots via higher nodes when the spacing between then increases: in
particular when d > 1.513, the contribution of higher nodes to the mutual ad-
nittance Y is less than 0.1 perccut. and for this reason, one can assuune that
under these conditions, mutual coupling is due only to the doninant H10 node. -

c. Finite Thickness of waveguide Walls. In order to take into account the depend-
ence of the equivalent slot width d; on the thickness of the waveguide wall t,
it is sufficient to introduce in place of the actual width d1 of the slot, its
equivalent width d; in fornula (6.13) for the calculation of the inherent internal
admittance Y“). It follows fronPigure 6.4 that with an increase in t, the
equivalent wﬂtb of the slot dec‘rases, by virtue of which the value of the factor-

luiu(_’_‘_r!)'/"%§r increases. This leads to the fact that to obtain a specified
2a

precision in the deternination of ‘13), it is necessary to take into account a
larger nunber of nodes than in paragraphs a and h. Conputer calculations have
shown that with the sane relative error of one percent as in paragraph a for the

calculation of 13), u: is sufficient to use the mu 1:. higher nodes.

The directional patterns of an array calculated for the cases of the actual slot
width 61 and the equivalent width d1 are sbwn in ﬁgure-6.3. A conparison of the
dashed-and-dotted and the dashed curves attests to the necessity of taking the
finite thickness of waveguide walls into account.

d. External Mutual Coupling of Radiators. The necessity of taking this factor
into account in planar slotted waveguide arrays is obvious, since at least the
nearest slots of adjacent waveguides have a substantial influence on each radiator.
The conductance and susceptance conponents of the external nutual adnittances

13) can anount to up to 60 percent of the inherent external adeittances Y‘s) of
the slot. In order to take the external nutual coupling into account, it is
sufficient to substitute the values of Y“), computed fron fornula (6.8), in the
natrix for the mutual adnittances of thengysten of equations (6.2).

-140-

FOR OFFICIAL [SB ONLY
FOR Ol-TKJAL USE ONLY

In those cases where the spacing between the slots, dm, is no less than 0.51, one
can use the following formla to calculate the external autual adnittances [01]:

L ' . .1 u
y") ”m cos( 2 m0”) cos( 2 m0.) c-JTJ," ' (5.14)
M I . um...l sin 0.. “110.

where 9. and 6,, are the angles between the radius vector fras one slot to another
and the longitudinal axes of the n-th and n-th slots respectively. In this case,
since the slots are longintudinal, an - e... - o, and therefore Y‘s) . 0.

Similar results are also obtained for other amplitude-phase distributions of the
field in the aperture of the array.

11118, when synthesizing planar slotted waveguide arrays, it is necessary to take
into account all four electrodynanic factors. and when calculating the internal
admittances. to consider only the first 16 higher nodes. For this reason, the
superscripts in the twin emanation signs of (6.13) are to be set equal to p - q -
- 3:

 

/Z{' \3‘ ---.'»1__ slum-£2). 'm.(_n_n_ ., ,
I u ptio 'ﬁ' ahs‘ [(ul’lsl)’ ”If“ mull/2a a y: )‘I
42-15
Il-c M ”'5' a ' a ,} (6 15a)
X { 9'", (“l-2‘01 rﬂgn (2“ ) +K'[ l—( 2“ )l , 03-.-
“ (6.15:)
7.5.“ — 3 3 tutu) , ,
,l/L 2 \~___on_[(1).l(£)]m(ﬂ m) x
[I '_o.ﬂ'_2alnsﬂm so so a "
_ M II», cal. 9" + o-IIN’PO
X (08 (T #2)) —-—4‘. I” In _(ﬂ/2Klm)"|'ﬂ;q- X
MI.“M|-c"‘xl.ﬂm *""'"'"“n, ”'7‘“. (El-"lo (6,151))

' walla" I- n.1, °

6.6. A Procedure for Synthesizing a Linear Slotted Waveguide Array Taking
Blectrodynanic Mutual Coupling Effects Into Account

The General Scheme. In order to design a slotted waveguide array, taking mutual
coupling effects into account, it is necessary, as follows frua equations (6.2),
to find the' internal and external admittances of the slots for a specified umber
and type of array radiators, as well as the geaaetry for their arrangement, which
realize the requisite distribution of the coaplex Voltage anplitudes Vn. Since
this is a rather complicated nonlinear natheastical problem, it is expedient to
approach its solution from physical considerations.

-llol-

MWWONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

He shall first treat the case of a linear slotted waveguide array. It is obvious
that the nagnetomotive force in an arbitrary n-th slot can he represented as:

12,...v2’ (vggwgg). ' “'16)

where V3” is the voltage in the slot without taking the nutual coupling effect
into account.

Then we rewrite system (6.2) in the following nnner:

3*, V. (Yﬂi-Yﬂ)—v2’(vg’,+vg}_). l'<n<N,. (6.17)
on!

It can be solved by an iteration technique, by employing certain physical consid-
erations. It has been shown in paper [3] that for this, it is sufficient to
employ the following procedures:

1- Based on the known values of Va (the requisite distribution) using one of the
known methods, which do not take into account all of the autual coupling factors,
the array geometry is determined (the displaceaent of the slots :5," and the
spacing between then).

2. Using formulas (6.8) and (6.7) (or (6.16)) the satrix of the internal Y3) and
external “0 admittances is calculated, where these adaittances are due to
factors nogntaken into account in paragraph 1.

3. The complex voltage amplitudes (1) are deterained free the known values of
V“, Y“) and Ya) fron expression .17).

6. Based on the computed values of V31), just as in paragraph '1, the next approx-
imation of the array geoaetry is deterained, and then paragraph 2, 3, etc. are
carried out.

It is clear from physical considerations that this iterative process converges.
As a result of the calculation, that array geometry will he found which assures
the realization of the requisite distribution in the antenna aperture, taking all
of the electrodynamic mtual coupling factors into account.

The Initial Approximation. As can be seen from the synthesis scheme proposed here,
the east complex procedure in a computational sense is procedure 1, all the more
since the known coaputat ional methods cannot be used (the energy or recurrent
methods), since the complex distribution of ‘19-) in the general case he a non-
linear plmse characteristic. To carry out the procedure, a special method has
been proposed in a number of papers [2, 9-11], which is based on the representa-
tion of the slotted waveguide radiator in the fora of a long line of four-pole
networks, which are characterized by the equivalent circuits of the 310:3.

-162-

FOIOFHGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equivalent circuits of various slots of length 1., I 0.5x, cut in the wide wall
of a waveguide and their equivalent normlized adnittances (or inpedances) are
presented in Table 6.1, in which the some symbols are used as in Chapter 5. All
of the parzngten of these circuits are uniquely related to the external Y5? and
internal Y“:- adnittances and are found from the balance condition for the conplex
powers in the waveguide slot cross-section [12].

This, a dominant node slotted waveguide array can be represented in the fora: of
series comected four-pole networks.

It can shown by uploying four—pole network theory tint the noraalized incident and
reflected voltage waves, U3 and (1;, at the input and output of the n-th four-pole
network are interrelated by the following expressions:

a‘.—...... u.

(0.7-: ) (a.c"‘-I-a.c“" ”39"" l and") (1,: (6.18)
u;_| MA" {-m‘“ IacA“ u. c"~ u; '
"hem .. -=u non-redeﬁned: aa-blh—tz new;

43‘4“ 'l‘h) I£!_E1_2£lid3 90" -¢§: I. ‘5'- EI'IWEI Elli

bl" 0E1“ lirl-ia-l-ﬁdd: be.“ “0“ —§:’ [Er—BI 255:]:

5:“ hlél‘gl-2gltilz bo-(i—NU—tt‘ta'l’naisl'.

5- am‘h" 0" ‘- E. ”Ufamv iamzm {II-5'2" for the equivalent circuit of
Figure 6.7a: q . -1. £1 - 2‘“), £2 - yn. £3 - zén'l) for the equivalent circuit of
Figure 6.7b; (In is the spacing between the n-th and (n-l)-th radiators.

All of the equivalent conductances n - Re £2, bn - In 52 and cln can be found based
on the specified an litude fn - IV“? and phase on . erg Vn distributions, with the
initial values of d 0) and the fractions of the power absorbed in the load PH

specified froa physical considerations.

For this, the auxiliary normalized coefficient is determined initially:

y mg (6.19)

 

If the incident volta e wave to the slotted waveguide array load is normalized to
unity, i.e.. we set D's - 1, then the reflected wave anplitude will be Uﬁl - qI‘,
where r is the reflection factor, while q - :1 for the equivalent circuits of
Figures 6.7a and 6.71: respectively. Then, as shown in the literature [10, 11], the

-143-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.8 6.1

 

. .___.. .__._...——- --- --- ---- v.|

.—.—————
——\.

 

 

(1)‘.*:“..::':.:..”.:: I“, Waummr “"- 3%:
——-—_—-- ( 3 ) ~
Emj‘ m
(n 151) y 26
a Y 2 _‘ . l 50)
IW’

 

 

2an ' ' 20‘"
L 21' "" 2a) Z"‘._"
a . ‘ x :

 

Y _) _ _ y +iuﬂ)
2".” (ml. I _ (gang):
o————o -- l -
M ——
x""’( b "M."
x[ml. - _ '_' "N " ﬂL-q'ulll 1
5M

 

 

 

 

“5’ (6.7) Y " "W"
[A
E? 7. . I n.‘
z,-.-1%;-

llpnuown u no. Bean'umu I). n D. cum-«menu I [I2].

 

Note: The quantities 01 and D2 are dcternined in [12].

Key: 1. Position and equivalent circuit of the 512v
2. Internal admittance of the slot, 1(1) - G 1’ + 13(1);
3. Equivalent admittance or impedance.

 

-166-

FOR omau. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conductance (or resistance) of the slots is computed free the formula:

5-7'lvnpl’u.'U:-W;P. .

(6.20)
free upression [l3]:
_ _-.'3:.lY5-’~’ 09”” -
ﬂ. ..?R° [3'31 "Ely—513055)] (6.21)

We determine the displacnmt (0) of the n-th slot relative to the center line of
the wide wall of the waveguide

y any gradient technique, in particular in the
following nanner:

(6.22)
n‘v? H “‘3"?— I + 6v 'i‘" (1“ —u")'
where

 

zn-umel Rel”£’2(x.‘.?)l .
raw-m Irma?»

5 _{6v—l3 V" Ill 3'm‘8n_8w—|)""ﬂ@a—lay_z)v
' 6.-../2. ucﬁia.-a-.-.)+-Icmu—g.._.).

It is natural to take the following [2] as the initial value of x513):

c l 0 "__£'——-
1"("' “i __ .'
3 Y1, at n‘/’¢ 1. 209w(_1;__:f) J (6.23)

which realizes the requisite value of 3,, given the condition of slot resonance.
The initial step 60 is chosen in a range of a/20 - a/lO.

We determine the equivalent suaceptance of the slot free the value found for (0)

xn :
b.u2|m[_k°.[79(’$”)l I (6.24)
Y}: +1qu [mem] '

The amplitude and phase of the field radiated by the n-th slot are:

ml ~ng IU-‘--vv«' I: (6'25)
ml“ (U: - - Ull‘)‘
. mg q (6.25)

-1105-

MOMMUSEONLY
Figure 6.7. Equivalent circuits of slotted waveguide arrays.

Key: 1. The n-th four-pole network;
2. The h-th four-pole network.

To realize the specified phsse_distrihution for each n, the following conditions
should obviously be net: In - 0,14 - on - 03.1. Taking (6.26) into account. we
have: '

O -
Ou-G’u—a" eta—U. - Wu"

5 - ' (6.27)
Un—h-VUn—t

kprcssion (6.27) can be the starting one when selecting the spacing (In between
the slots for the realization of the specified phase distribution. We transforn
the right side of (6.27):

U’—I—oU'-I (6.28)
Wr- cIIA.-| €.elnA.,
where
l(a.- 4:... I)": | (a. -oh.)u;lc“--I-
. . tin-w; ~l-I(a.-qb,)U: I-(I---a.+vb.)u;le"'
g.-. ...,5_..—_ __._..__
' 03—00: +_. (u:—qu:)sha. ' (6‘29)

Taking these symbol designations into account, folloving some uncomplicated trans-
fornations, expression (6.29) reduces to the fern:

-166-

FOIOFFIOALUSEONLY
l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY

6. 1.

W'WQM . de‘ T:
a.- i+imuom o.>0. lanai:
2 2,; 4 4
l. y l- )“ 1 (6.30)
h+gﬂdu0m Q.<o. 7<4u<a-,—:d>‘7x..
where: the
Q _ Ewan—o.) _ d .. 1.1. .
" a.+o.tc(m._.—o..)' ' Nit—Mao”) '
0m [enain] is the direction of the main lobe of the directional pattern.

By sequentially applying relationships (6.18) and (6.20), we find all of the
values gn, b“ and dn. He will note that the calculations using these formlas
yield the sane results for the equivalent circuits of Figures 6.7a and 6.7b [11].

Taking equalities (6.20) and (6.25) into account, we obtain IVnI - IVnI, ile.,
with the found conductances g“, the specified asplitude distribution is actually
realized in the aperture of the array.

The spacing computed froa foraula (6.30) realize the specified phase distribution.
For example, if it is necessary to realize a linear phase front in the antenna
aperture, than it is necessary to substitute the value (Zr/10M“ omen”, in
foraula (6.30) instead of °n-l - 8n.

Equation (6.27) is satisfied only for definite values of the spacing dz. Physic-
ally, this neans that in the aperture of an array with a spacing of (In between the
radiators, the specified phase distribution is realized, taking into account the
dominant node sutuel coupling of the radiators. In practice, d: is determined by
iteration using formula (6.30), where the original values of the spacings dn are
substituted the right side. If equation (6.27) is not satisfied in this case,
new values dig) are substituted in the right side, and the entire cycle is
repeated. It can be denonstrated that this process converges.

Thus, the method described here makes it possible to realize a specified anplitude-
phase distribution in a linear array, taking into account all of the electro-
dynanic mutual coupling factors.

The results of such a synthesis for the 20 element slotted waveguide array treated
earlier where 10 - 3.66 on are presented in Figure 6.8 and in Table 6.2. The
directional pattern synthesized using this procedure (Figure 6.8, the solid curve)
has a sidelobe level of less than -30 dB, and shows a good correlation prior to
these values with the requisite directional pattern (Figure 6.8, the dashed curve),
while the directional pattern computed without accounting for the mtual coupling

~167-

POROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 6.8. The results of calculating the
directional patterns of slotted
waveguide arrays.

Key: The dashed curve ie the theoret-
ical directional pattern;
The solid curve takes into
account mtual coupling effects;
The dotted curve is where the

mtual coupling of the radiators
is not taken into account.

 

effect (Figure 6.8, the dotted curve), correlates with the desired directional
pattern down to only about the ~15 dB level. It must be noted that there is no
precise correspondence between the synthesized and specified directional patterns
because the spacings betveen the slots changed and the elotted waveguide array
changed fre. an equally spaced one to an unequally spaced array.

TABLE 6

    
     
   
       

0.12 0.32.104
—0.I6 0.17404
0.60 o.“ ol0"
4.83 0.40404
1.48 o.|o-1o-I
—| .98 0.10- :04
2.00 0.31.104
--3.10 (ms- I0-'
3.17 0.04- Io-I
—4.4| 0.015404
5.30 0.153
—6.20 0.159
7.10 0,191
-7.27 0.205
6.31 0.!“
4.52 0.99.10-‘
2.86 0.37404
—l .43 0.!040"
0.63 0.17404
—0.21 04140--

Key: 1. Taking mutual coupling into account:
2. Without taking mutual coupling into account.

 

-l¢8-

FOROI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.5. A Procedure for Synthesizing a Planar Slotted Waveguide Array Taking Mutual
Coupling Into Account

we shall now briefly consider a synthesis procedure for a planar slotted waveguide
array. As was shown in 56.2, with a known law for the excitation of the waveguides,
the complex voltage amplitudes V3102 in the slots are determined from the systa

of equations (6.9). In accordance with (6.16), the magnetometive force is:

Fun-#- V£.L.(Y22.. ..,.,-I-Y,‘:,'.., .5). ‘ (6.31)

where V632 is the voltage in a slot without taking mutual influence into account.

By substituting (6.31) in (6.9), we obtain a system of equations which sakes it
possible to synthesize a slotted waveguide array by the sshods described in $6.10.
In fact, by asigning an arbitrary waveguide the number m; and knowing the aatrix
for the internal and external mutual and inherent admittances of the planar slotted

waveguide array fron the preceding set in the calculations, we arrive at the linear
array synthesis problen treated in $6.10:

N.

t
".23“ val-('0) [Y‘sqmgai I‘d.” 'I‘Ygzmgo) “or?” " “an." lygzu?) It'd.» 'l'
N. N. '
u ‘ ( ) . 2
‘i‘yﬂ:M:’ M‘Igo’] -. §' “é' VII‘Q. Y :ud..,'.n'. (6.”) (6 3 )
. a. 1‘":

By successively varying n30) from 1 to N2, we find all of the internal admittances
of the slots, and consequently,- their (the slots') arranguent in the wide wall of
each waveguide.

This, the following procedure for the design of a planar slotted waveguide array
can be recomended [3]:

1. We determine the external and internal inherent and mutual adnittances of the
slots and their (the slots') arrangement based on the amplitude- hase distribution
of Vanna“) specified for each waveguide having a number 1 3 Info 5 N2 by means of
the procedure of 56.6.

2. Using the geometry for the slot configuration found in paragraph 1 and employing
formlas (6.7) and (6.8), we find the external mutual admittance matrix.

3. By substituting the matrix of the external and internal admittances, calculated
in paragraphs 1 and 2 in the system of equations (6.32), based on the procedure of
56.4 we determine the next approximation of the array geometry and its admittance
matrices, etc.

This process usually converges after a few steps. Just as in the case of linear
array, that geometry of the planar array will be found as a result of the calcula-
tion which provides for the realisation of the requisite amplitude-phase distribu-
tion in the antenna aperture, taking into account all of the electrodynanic mutual
influence factors.

- 169-
MWLIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.6. Deeign Calculation Reco-endat'ions

The starting data in the design of planar nonresonant slotted waveguide arrays,

as a rule, are the following: the direction of the main he. of the directional
pattern; the width of the directional pattern in the main planea at the half-power
level; the permissible level of directional pattern sidelohes; the gain; the frac-
tion of the power lost in the load, and the permissible aperture size.

Depending on the purpose of the slotted waveguide array, particular groups of
initial requiraents will he the major ones. Examples of such groups of require-
menta (variants) are cited in Chapter 5. In all of these variants, one of the
intermediate stepa has to he the calculation of the amplitude-pin” distribution
of the field in the antenna aperture, the calculation of the spacings dn between
the slots as well as the nunher of waveguides I2 and slots “1 in each of the.
Based on these data, using the procedures of 56.10 and $6.5, we deternine the
arrangement of the slots in the wide walls of the waveguides, which realizes the
requisite amplitude-phase distribution of the field in the slotted waveguide
array aperture, taking mutual coupling into account.

The calculation of the remaining paraneters of the array is accomplished juat aa
described in 55.9.

In performing the calculations, one specific feature revealed in 56.6 must he
remembered: taking into accmmt all of the mutual coupling factors leads to an
unequally apaced configuration of the slots, because of which, the theoretical
level of the f irat aidelobes of the directional pattern nay not he achiwed. For
this reason, it is necessary in practical calculations to set standarda which are
several decibels more stringent for the requisite sidelohe level.

-150-

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. PEASBD ANTENNA ARRAYS HIT“ A BEHISPHERICAL SCAN SPACE
7.1. General Governing Laws

The Classification of Phased Antenna Arrays with a Hemispherical Scan Field.
Operational Principle. Planar phased arrays provide for a rather high gain

in scanning sectors not exceeding 60' to 50° from the normal to the plane of

the antenna. The scanning sector of a planar phased antenna array is bounded by
the main lobe of the directional pattern of a radiating element of the array
and is determined by the dimensions of the radiating elements as well as the
mutual coupling between them. However, for some radars (ground based and marine
long range radars, on-board multifunction radars in aircraft and space vehicles,
etc.), phased arrays are needed having a scan sector of more than a hemisphere
(including circular scanning in the horizontal plane). These requirements can

he met in phased arrays of a special structural design, which employ spatial
(aplanar) systems of radiators:

1. Hybrid phased antenna arrays, which take the form of a combination of a
planar phased array which scans in a comparatively small sector and an uncon-
trolled locking system, which makes it possible to extend the scan sector. One
of the most suitable structural designs for a hemispherical scan space is a
planar phased array with an axially symmetric lens, which is called a shell or
done shaped lens (see i 7.2) [1]. For a definite functional relationship between
the index of refraction of the lens and the central angle 0, the scan sector

of a planar phased array can be increased by 1.5 to 2 times.

2. Conformal phased arrays, the radiators of which are arranged on aplanar
surfaces (usually convex axially symmetric surfaces) [1 - 3]: cylindrical,
conical, spherical, etc. Besides conventional scanning conformal scanning

is also used, i.e., scanning which provides for a constant shape of the
directional pattern and a constant gain in the direction of the main lobe.
Conformal-scanning is accomplished through the switching of the radiators in
such a way that the shape and dimensions of the radiating region, moved around
the axis or the center of symmetry of the phased array, are preserved.

Conformal phased antenna arrays make it possible to obtain undistorted scanning
in azimuth (cylindrical and conical phased antenna arrays) or over the entire
hemisphere (spherical phased arrays). However, because of the simultaneous
utilization of only a small portion of the overall number of radiators (10 to
502), conformal phased agrays will contain a very large number of controlled
modules (about 10‘ to 10 ) and have a high cost.

3. Polyhedral phased antenna arrays, which take the form of a spatial system of
planar phased arrays (subarraya), arranged on the faces of convex polyhedra
(pyramids, prisms, regular polyhedra, etc.) and which can be phased either
independently or jointly [013]. Polyhedral phased arrays with hemispherical
scanning have fluctuations in the gain and changes in the shape of the direction-
al pattern, which decrease with an increasing number of subarrays.

- 151 -

IIIRCHNHCJAI.USB(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Requirements Placed on Radiating Elements. The in-phase addition of fields
having the same polarization of all of the radiators included in the radiating
region in necessary to generate the main lobe of a convex conformal phased
antenna array in a specified direction. The movement of the radiating region
over the convex surface requires changes in the plane of polarization of the
fields of the radiators included in it. For this reason, it is expedient to
use radiators with either circular or controlled polarization in certain phased
arrays with hemispherical scanning (spherical. conical, etc.).

The same types of poorly directional radiators with axial symmetry are used as
the radiating elements of phased arrays with hemispherical scanning as for
planar phased antenna arrays [05]. The following types of radiators have
become the most widespread for the generation of the requisite polarization
characteristics: cross-shaped dipoles, cylindrical helical antennas. frequency
independent antennas in the decimater band; open ends of waveguides (horns),
dielectric rods, helical and frequency independent antennas as well slot
radiators in the centimeter band.

The Directional Pattern and Gain of Hemispherical Scan Phased Antenna Arrays.
The Scan Pattern. The calculation of the directional pattern and the gain for
various phased array structural configurations have their own special features.
however, some of the basic governing laws can be utilized in all variants.

For pyramidal phased arrays. consisting of three to five planar subarrays, which
execute independent scanning in adjacent spatial sectors, the calculation of the
directional pattern and the gain is accoapliahed using the ease methods as for
planar phased antenna arrays.

For large convex conformal and polyhedral phased arrays, the approximate computa-
tion of the directional pattern and the gain, with the condition that the main
lobe is unique [01], can be carried out using the technique of an equivalent
plane aperture (EPR) [EPA] [3). The projection of the radiating region of the
convex phased antenna array onto a plane normal to the direction of the maximum
of the nain lobe (Figure 7.1) is taken as the equivalent plane aperture. The
equivalent plane aperture is made in-phase by phase leads in the radiators with
respect to the central radiator:

NDV - v .-: (r. -- r.), (7. l)

where k - 2r/A; r is the spacing of the v-th radiator from the equivalent plane
aperture; r0 is the spacing of the central radiator from the equivalent plane
aperture.

The amplitude distribution in the equivalent plane aperture A(p) can be
approximately represented in terns of the directional patterns of the radiating
elements P"(0) [Frad(°)1 in the direction of the main lobe maximum of the
phased antenna array (Figure 7.1):

A (P) :t I“). (0). (7 2)

- 152 -

FOR‘HHHCJALIﬂﬂBONLX
FINICI"HC1A1.USI§CH§LY

The differing density in the placement of the radiators in the equivalent plane
aperture when they are projected fro. the convex surface leads to a change in
the amplitude distribution A(p). This correction for the change in the amplitude
distribution can he found using the methods of geometric optics.

One can approximately determine the directional pattern and directional gain of
an equivalent plane aperture by the conventional aperture method [01] for the
value found for A(p). The approximate nature of the equivalent plane aperture
technique must be kept in mind, which when 80 - 30' - 60‘ yields a satisfactory
precision in the calculation of the directional pattern of a convex phased
array in a sector of 0.51“ 1 0', where:

0720... g (R/wn. (7 . 3)

(200.5 is the width of the main lobe of the directional pattern of the phased
antenna array). A more precise calculation of the directional pattern and
directional gain of convex antennas is set forth in paper [2].

nu The function G(O-.1n, Q ) normalized
n with respect to the maxi=ug value of
the gain Go is called the scan pattern:

:* (our W's) "1 G (on. anvas: (7 ' I.)

and the losses in the gain are defined
by the expression:

AG (our ‘9ru)"‘ 10"; RI (”no 1’”): (7 s 5)

The most reasonable placement of the
radiators on the surface of a phased
array (in the sense of minimal area
and gain losses) is achieved in the
case where the geometric area of a
Figure 7.1. Explanation of the equiva- cell 8”, is equa to its effective

 

lent plane aperture area 8" 30¢ - (y lbs)DH0:
technique.
Key: 1. Equivalent plane aperture; 8"25'”' (7.6)

2' Radiating surface. where DMD is the maximum directional

gain of an elesentary radiator of the
phased array. In this case:

“o K... 'I 3443/”). (7-7)

where Kan is the surface utilization coefficient of the equivalent aperture; n is
the efficiency of the phased array elements; Sr is the geonstric area of the
equivalent plane aperture.

- 153 -

FOR10FFKJA1.UGB(IULY
FORlOFFIClAL.USEIMVLY

7.2. A Hybrid Phased Antenna Array with a Bemispherical Scan Space. Operational
Principle. Specific Structural Design Features of a Phased Array with a
Dome Shaped Lens.

He shall consider one of the promising systems: a planar phased array with a
hemispherical dome shaped lens (Pigure 7.2) [1). A merit of this structural
design is the comparatively low cost, which exceeds the cost of the planar phased
array by 1.5 to 2 times in all. During hemispherical scanning, the effective
antenna area amounts to 0.3 to 0.6 times the geometric area of a planar phased
array.

A planar phased antenna array with a
circular radiating aperture scans in a
sector not exceeding 50 to 60' from the
normal to the antenna, irradiating a
dome shaped lens with a variable index
of refraction fro. the inside (when trans-
mitting). The lens. usually in the form
of a spherical shell (dome) of constant
thickness. consists of transmissive
elements, which include internal and
exterior radiators and waveguides which
couple them to uncontrolled phased shif-
ters. which produce fixed phase shifts.
These phase shifts are figured so that
the main lobe of the directional pattern
receives an additional deflection from
the axis of syuetry (the normal to the
Figure 7.2. Hybrid phased antenna array planar phased array), while the scan
with a dome shaped lens. sector is extended out to a hemisphere.

 

Key: 1. Effective plane surface;

2. Phased antenna array. The axial symmetry of the system assures

conformal scanning with respect to the
coordinate o (the directional pattern
parameters and the gain do not depend on the direction of the main lobe, ‘main)'
When the radiating region moves from the "pole" of the lens (emain - 0) to the
"equator” (6.31n - n/Z). the directional pattern changes from a pencil beam to
a fan-shaped one, while the gain changes, since the dimensions and shape of

the radiating region change.

Basic Design Expressions. The parameters of the phased antenna array and dome-
shaped lens depend on the distribution of the phase shift 0 (0), introduced by
the lens and which causes an additional deflection of the main lobe of the
directional pattern, e_,1n(e) (Figure 7.2).
In the case of a linear function:

0min ' 419. 0m «1.0. q.>l. (7.8)

The retardation factor along the surface of the lens (along the "meridian", see
Figure 7.2) is:

- 155 -

FOR‘OPFKJAI.USIIXVLY
FOIJDFHKJALlﬂﬂEONLY

 

 

. __I don) _
7" u: no
- sinker-001. (7.9)
where R is the radius of the lens; and:
¢(o),._ ”R sin’L-l); (7.10)
11—! 2

is the phase distribution.

To reduce the lens thickness, it should have a zonal configuration. so that the
following condition is net: 0 5 0(0) :- 21.

The boundaries of the zones, on. are determined from the condition °(°n) - -2:n:

 

0.r- 2 an: sin . “LL"; , (7.11)
41-4 2K

The specified phase distribution 0(6) (7.10) is assured through the appropriate

design of the uncontrolled phase shifters and determines the nature of the change
in the systen gain when the main lobe is defracted from the axis of aylmetry.

An approximate estiaate of the gain of a phased antenna array with s dome-shaped
lens can be made on the basis of the following considerations. Neglecting the
change in the amplitude distribution introduced_by the lens, we find:

mammowmmmm “g“. (7.12)

C(Ouain) ' Go’éent(°)Fgut(°l)[sepalsol

where G is the maximum gain of the phased antenna array (in the direction of the
normal); Fcent(°) is the directional pattern of the central radiator of the
planar phased array (in the direction of the beam 0A); rout(e) is the directional
pattern of the outside radiator of the lens, corresponding to the beam on, in

the direction of the deflected beam of the antenna directional pattern; 81 -

(ql - 1)e is the deflection of the Iain lobe of the antenna from the central

ray 0A; Sap, is the area of the equivalent plane aperture, normal to the
direction of the main maximum of the antenna directional pattern; so is the

area of the planar phased antenna array.

 

, ' 70 60 an a;
I . 1' r' 1 “

lip/l" 2 7."

       

Figure 7.3
Graphs of 6(emain)/GO as a function

of 9mm.

— 155 -

FINI<HHNCIAI.UBE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equivalent plane aperture of the radiating region has a circular shape when

in - 0 and the shape of an asymmetrical oval when 9 in > 0. The dimensions
0 the equivalent plane aperture can be approximately determined by solving
transcendental equations, derived on the basis of g tric optics. Graphs for
t e function G(°main)/Go are shown in Figure 7.3 for Pcent(° ) = case and
Fout(91) = cosel. It can be seen from the graphs that depen ing on tge require-
ments placed on the function C(emain)’ an optimal value of the parameter q1 can
be chosen. In the majority of cases, expedient values are q1 = 1.5 - 2.0.

The relationships for the gain were derived with the assumption that the
equivalent plane aperture is in phase. To meet this condition. the phase distri-
bution in the aperture of the phased antenna array should be nonlinear. The wave
front between the lens and the planar phased array should be convex facing the
phased array.

According to existing data [1], a hybrid phased antenna array with a dome-shaped
lens provides for hemispherical scanning even in large sectors. The gain
reduction during scanning for q1 - 1.5 - 2.0 reaches a to 5 dB. The level of
the sidelobes does not exceed -18 to -20 dB.

The main advantage of the structural design is the cost which is lower than
the cost of other phased antenna arrays with hemispherical scanning.

7.3. Conformal Phased Antenna Arrays.

Classification and Excitation Techniques. The radiators of conformal phased
arrays are arranged on aplanar (usually convex, axially symmetric) surfaces.
Cylindrical, conical and spherical phased arrays have become the most widespread.
Conformal phased arrays provide for a hemispherical scan space with the least
fluctuations in the gain and are the most expensive among systems of this class.
which is due to the large number of controlled phase shifters and the complex
phasing system.

Small fluctuations in the gain are achieved by scanning without changing the
shape of the directional pattern by means of moving the radiating region of
the array around the axis or the center of symmetry by means of electrical
switching. In this case, the size, shape, and number of elements in the radia-
ting region remain approximately the same (conformal scanning).

To realize conformal scanning, the feed distribution of the radiating elements
of the phased array should be the same, regardless of the direction of the main
lobe. Feeder systems (parallel or mixed) and active systems (amplifiers, gene-
rators or frequency multipliers in each element) are used to feed conformal
phased arrays.

Beside: switching the radiators. the phase distribution and the focusing system
for the radiators in the direction of the main lobe are controlled in conformal
phased arrays. The convex shape of the surface of conformal arrays leads to
the necessity of producing nonlinear phase distributions. The control is
accomplished, just as in planar phased arrays, by means of specialized computers
or matrix configurations (Butler matrices, etc.).

— 156 —

FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(N¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Jan

  

_L. .
48-0 at a w a,»

 

Figure 7.6. A cylindrical phased Figure 7.5. The directional pattern of
antenna array. a cylindrical phased
antenna array radiator.

Cylindrical Phased Antenna Arrays*. Cylindrical phased arrays (Figure 7.4) do
not provide for complete hemispherical scanning (they are not effective in a
sector of out to 30 to 40' from the system axis) and are used in those cases
where it is necessary to have circular conformal scanning with maximum gain in
a plane normal to the axis of symmetry. Effective scanning of the "axial"
sector can be accomplished by a planar phased array, placed on the upper base
of the cylinder (this variant is not treated here).

Since a cylindrical surface unwraps into a plane, the placement of the radiators
on it is the same as on planar phased arrays (a triangular or rectangular grid
can be used). Conformal scanning is accomplished in a plane normal to the axis
of symmetry of cylindrical phased arrays by moving the radiating region; in

the plane of the generatrix of the cylinder, conventional sector scanning is
employed using a linear phase distribution. Cylindrical phased arrays can pro-
duce radiation of any polarisation (including linear).

The elementary radiators of cylindrical phased arrays are chosen from the
usual considerations (see 5 7.1). The directional patterns of the isolated
radiators are close in the majority of cases in shape to a cosinusoidal form:

F.(0.?)e sinOcosw—vév). (7.13)
where ‘ﬁv are the coordinates of an element with the number uv.

The influence of mutual coupling of the radiators via the dominant and higher
modes is manifest in the greatly indented nature of the directional pattern of
an element in the plane normal to the system axis (Figure 7.5), and in the
sharp drop in the gain in the case where the radiating region encompasses a
sector greater than 210, where:

sin qr. I: Md,—-l,

(7.14)
*Additional information on cylindrical phased arrays is contained in chapter 4.

- 157 -

FOIIOIIIC1A1.UEI2(lVLY
FOI¢HHHC1A1.USE(NNLY

d0 is the array step in a plane normal to the system axis. The drop in the gain
is related to the violation of the uniqueness condition (the appearance of
additional main lobes) and the mismatching of the array because of mutual coupling
of the element. Since similar phenomena also occur during sector scanning in

the plane of the generatrix if the scan sector 2°C! does not satisfy the main

lobe uniqueness condition, the steps of the array d. and d2 should satisfy the
following conditions (see 2.3):

d./A<(l “mm—I, ' (7.15)
dill<(l ‘I‘Sin 0“! -', (7 16)

To focus the radiation in the direction (0Ila , 9331“); a phase distribution
should be created in the radiating portion 0 the surface of the cylindrical
phased array which assures that the distribution in the equivalent plane aperture
is in phase; the phase of the uv-th radiator is:

w- —K lasin 0.. caverns» + lvcosﬂnd. (7.17)

where k - ZIIA; a is the radius of the cylinder; 2; and Ouv are the coordinates
of the nu radiator of the phased antenna array.

When the main lobe uniqueness condition is met, the techniques of an equivalent
plane aperture and an equivalent linear antenna can be used to calculate the
directional pattern of the cylindrical phased array, while the concept of the
effective length of a linear antenna can be used to calculate the width of the
main lobe. The requisite level of the aperture sidelobea q can be achieved by
switching off a portion of the radiators (thinning the array).

To assure minimal cost of a cylindrical phased array, the aperture angle 0

is optimized. The optimization criteria are a minimum number of controlleg
radiators and minimal antenna dimensions. Minimal dimensions (the antenna
diameter 2a) are achieved when .0 - 60 — 90' (when 0 > 60'. the requisite
number of radiators practically does not change). 8 nce an increase in 90 leads
to a decrease in d./A (when do - 60 to 90', d IA I 0.54 - 0.50), something which
is frequently undesirable because of structur‘l design considerations, values

of ’0 - SO - 60’ are expedient.

The overall number of controlled radiators, in the case of dimensions of the
radiating region of H ' Zeoo and a rectangular grid is:

”'1' N.N.. (7.18)
and in the case of a triangular grid:
NA- =(l’5/2)No: (7.19)
Here, the requisite number of radiators along the generatrix is:
N,' =H/dz ' = Cs,s/209,5z (l ~i- Sin 0"). (7 .20)

290.52 - co SAIH is the width of the main lobe in the plane of the generatrix;
the requisite number of elements about the periphery of the cylinder is:

-153-

FOR OIIWCIA1.USE(MULY
FOR<0FFKJAI.USB(NVLY

(7.21)
260.5 is the width of the main lobe in a plane normal to the axis of the cylinder
(the directional pattern of an element of the phased array is taken as cosinuaoi-
dal).

Circular conformal scanning is achieved in a cylindrical phased array while at
the same time using a comparatively small fraction of the overall number of
radiators (30 to 1.0:).

Conical phased arrays (Figure 7.6) provide
for a hemispherical scan (with fluctuations
in the gain of several decibels). They
are used in cases where it is necessary to
place a hemispherical scanning phased
array in a conical (or ogive) housing of
an aircraft, as well as when the maximum
gain should be achieved in an axial direc-
tion or a direction inclined to the axis
of the cone.

Conformal scanning (movement of the radia-
ting region) is realized in conical phased
arrays in the plane of the base, as well
as conventional sector scanning in the
plane of the generatrix. The radiating
Figure 7.6. A conical phased antenna region occupies a sector, the size of
array. ' which depends on the direction of the main

lobe ’ enin e

In the case of hemispherical scanning, some portions of the conical surface
radiate at large angles, and for this reason, it is expedient to take the step
of the array close to 0.51 (dIA - 0.50 - 0.55), although in a number of cases,
it must be increased up to 0.6% to 0.75A because of structural design considera-
tions.

 

' It is expedient to use radiators, the main directional pattern lobe of which is
not directed along a normal to the generatrix of the cone, but rather in the
direction of the requisite maximum gain. The influence of mutual coupling
between the radiators of a conical phased array on the directional pattern of

a radiator in the plane of the base is manifest, just as in cylindrical phased
arrays, in an indented central portion of the directional pattern of a radiator.
However, in contrast to cylindrical phased arrays, the deep nulls inthe direction-
a1 pattern related to the appearance of additional interference maxima, are near-
ly absent because of the conical shape of the surface (Figure 7.7). The width

of the main lobe, 200.5, and the gain, Gmax' of a conical phased array are
determined by the dimensions of the equivalent plane aperture of the radiating

region. 6 .
N. 2nn/d,- 4:: M ————' Hm" , ‘
200.59 ‘i" 290'] 2?.

 

- 159 -

FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
..L

.”0 .w .‘0 o ‘a 80 yo 0 ’5 M ‘5 M ”I"
Figure 7.7. The directional pattern of Figure 7.8. sepa/SO as a function of
a conical phased antenna enain’
array radiator. Key: 1. Planar phase antenna
array.

The graphs of Figure 7.8 make it possible to estimate the change in he equiva-
lent plane aperture area of a conical phased array, 88 aISO (S . la is the
area of the base) with a change in the direction of £0 using 09 enain and the
vertex angle of the cone .k (the angle between the axis and the generatrix). As
a rule. radiators are not placed at the vertex of the cone, however. this area
is small and was not taken into account in the given case. An analysis of the
graphs shows that to reduce variations in the gain during scanning, it is
expedient to employ conical surfaces having .k - 18 to 20‘.

The impossibility of placing controlled radiators at the vertex of the cone leads
to the appearance of a nonradiating region in the equivalent plane aperture.

In the case of axial radiation. it has the shape of a circle with a radius of

a << a. The dinensions of the nonradiating region, when ao/a - 0.1 - 0.3, have
lgttle impact on the gain, but can substantially increase the level of the
aperture sidelobes q. The level of the sidelobes q as a function of the ratio
agla with a axial radiation for uniform (A (r) - l) and optinal Aopt(r) amplitude
d stributions are shown in Figure 7.9 [k].

The following phase distribution should be produced to focus the radiation in
the direction anal“, ‘nain on the radiating portion of a conical phased antenna
array:

Cm” KZ,UgmnﬂnQ_umomn—qﬁd-~anQ,L (7 22)

where the coordinates of the elements zv < 0. The requisite number of radiators
is:
N ' 3-"“»r- (7.23)

where:
S.‘ m ua’ll- -auﬂﬂ’lnuccqm

(7.26)
is the area of the conical surface; and:

- 160 -

F0l10FFKJALl£ﬂi0NLN
FTIICIHNC1A1.USE(HVLY

     

'5 ...L__..L_l__.
a 47 a“ at 4004/:

 

Figure 7.9. The level of sidelobes Figure 7.10. A spherical phased antenna
where a nonradiating region array.
is present.

S _ I «P in the case of a square grid,
I" 2dVI’3 in the case of a triangular grid.

is the geometric area of a cell; d is the step of the array.

(7.25)

To obtain narrow directional patterns. the overall number of controllzd radiators
in conical phased arrays should be of the sane order of magnitude (10 ) as for
cylindrical arrays. A hemispherical scan with gain variations of no more than

1 to 2 dB can be provided using a conical phased array.

Spherical phased arrays (Figure 7.10) provide for a hemispherical scan with
minimal changes in the directional pattern and gain variations (0.1 to 1.0 dB).
This is accomplished by arranging the radiators with a nearly uniform density
over the surface of the sphere and employing conformal scanning, i.e, maintaining
the shape and dimensions of the radiating region during scanning. The center

of the radiating region in usually located in the direction of the main lobe (or
the equal signal direction). The radiating region is moved by switching the

feed for the radiators, while the phasing (identical within the limits of the
radiating region for any position of the region) serves to compensate for

phase errors (focusing). Disconnecting some of the radiators and controlling
the shape of the radiating region make it possible to obtain directional patterns
with different parameters.

The most uniform filling of a spherical surface with radiators is obtained with
a triangular grid for the radiator layout.

To preclude large losses in the gain, the step of the array d/X when generating
an axially symmetric main lobe is to be chosen based on the condition (in a
manner similar to a cylindrical phased array):

align +sin o.)-'. (7.26)

where 200 is the central angle of the radiating segnent (Figure 7.10). The type
and dimensions of a radiating element are chosen based on the same considerations

- 161 -

FOI‘OFFHJMI.USIINVLY
FINI(MNHC1AI.USEioNLY

as ior other convex phased antenna arrays. The influence of mutual coupling of
the elements of a spherical phased array on the directional pattern of a radiator
is less pronounced than for other types. In the case of spheres with large radii
(all > 10), the directional pattern of a radiator is close to the directional
pattern of an element of a planar array having the sane period. When condition
(7.26) is net, the directional pattern of a radiator of a spherical phased
antenna array is:

F.(o.v)zcos(0-°v)°°'("""" (7.27)

where 0; and .uv are the spherical coordinates of the uv-th radiator.

The radiators of a spherical phased array should have either circular or con-
trolled polarisation.

The central angle of the radiating region, 0 , can be optilized based on the
criterion of a nininua overall nuaber of radgators to obtain the specified
width of the main lobe of the directional pattern or a specified gain [5].
Calculations show that the nininun number of controlled radiators is obtained
when a - 50° to 90°, but because of the poor radiation efficiency of elenents
having a directional pattern of the type of (7.27) at large angles, it is
expedient in practice to use phased arrays where 80 - 65' to 60'.

d? I, _ _ “afﬁb A surface covered with radiators should
encompass the portion of the sphere bounded
by the angles:

0 €- 0' :7. nI2-l-0.. (7.28)

w 5' where the spherical surface in the region
9' > n/Z can be replaced by a cylindrical
-zo 52 one because of structural design considera-
tions (a spherocylindrical phased array).
The total radiating area of the surface
does not change in this case. The follow-
ing phase distribution [06] is produced
' 3o'-- "hi - v. -5” to focus the radiation in the direction
’ 9.31“, ‘main on the radiating segment of
Figure 7.11. The parameters of a the spherical phased array:
spherical phased array
as a function of 00.

 
   

4d .50
(1,5 M

0.6 .50

a? 17/

d)” .A mllﬁnﬂm (080; I sin 0,. sin 0!, (213(1pm_q."w)l. (7 .29)

The overall dimensions and requisite number of radiators in a spherical ( or
spherocylindrical) phased array are calculated using the following procedure.

1. The radius of the circular equivalent planar aperture of the radiating seg-
ment. 'epa’ is determined:

2a,...n. 'c../20-... (7.30)

- 162 -

FIMI()FIHCIA1.UGIi(ﬂVLY
FOR‘DFFRJA1.USE20NLN

where in the case of a cosine directional pattern of a radiator (sec (7.27)) and
v0 - 45 - 60’, the coefficient 60.5 s 62 - 66’, while the level of the aperture
sidelobes is q I -20 to -21 dB (see Figure 7.11).

2. The radius of the spherical surface is determined:
a - ‘epal'1n80 (7.31)

3. The step of the array is determined (see (7.26)); when v0 - 65 - 60', the
step is d/A - 0.59 - 0.56 (see Figure 7.11).

b. The requisite number of radiators N in the case of a triangular layout grid.
taking formulas (7.25) and (7.28) into account, is found fro. the expression:

N .—. mm; ' (7.32)
where
N’ :7 .3. c; ‘ ___"""‘"°"’

V3- ain’ 0. (7 . 33)

(see Figure 7.11). The overall number of radiators in a spherical phased array
in the case of narrow directional patterns is N .106 - lO .

7.4. Polyhedral Phased Antenna Arrays.

Classification. Excitation Techniques. Polyhedral phased antenna arrays take
the form of a system of planar phased arrays (subarrays). arranged on the
faces of a convex polyhedron.

where the number of subarrays is “sub §_l0, they are usually arranged on the
faces of a regular or truncated pyramid. Such polyhedral phased arrays are
called pyramidal. In the case of a large number of subarrays. they are placed
on the faces of a regular polyhedron (for example, an icosahedron) on inscribed
in the sphere of a polyhedron derived from an icosahedron by the sequential
frgction zation of its faces. The overall number of subarrays zen regch l.ub s
10 - 10 , while the overall number of radiators runs to N 3 10 - 1

In terms of the directional pattern parameters, pyramidal phased arrays are
close to planar arrays, while polyhedral phased arrays where "sub e 102 are
close to conformal phased arrays (such phased arrays can be called quasicon-
formal). A spatial excitation technique (in a transmissive variant) can also
be used to excite the subarraye, in addition to feeder and active excitation
methods.

Polyhedral phased arrays have the following advantages over planar and hybrid
phased antenna arrays: the possibility of realizing hemispherical scanning with
smaller fluctuations in the gain and better utilisation of the surface taken up
by the radiators. As compared to conformal phased arrays, they are better suited
for production, something which is related to the use of not just modules of

the same type, but also subarrays of the same type, as well as the utilization
of a spatial feed system for the subatrays and the simplification of the phase

distribution control system.
- 163 -

INIICHHHCIA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [Si ONLY

In pyramidal phased arrays, the planar subarrays are placed on the faces of
regular or truncated pyramids where the number of aide faces is H - 3 - 6
(Figure 7.12). ‘No phasing modes are possible for the subarrsys: independent
and combined. In the first mode, each subarray scans independently of the
others in a definite spatial sector; in the second, several subarrsys scan as
a single system. It is expedient to employ both modes in combination.

 

Figure 7.12. Pyramidal phased antenna arrays.

In the case of independent phasing, the design procedure for the structural and
radio engineering parameters of planar subarrays does not differ from the
procedure used for planar phased arrays.

The optimal slope angle for the side face of a pyramid, Eopt’ can be determined
by working from one of the following requirements:

1) Maximum gain in a definite direction, an“, and in this case:

 

Eopt I emax ‘0'". “he“: (7.34)
2) Minimum variations in the 88.1“:1n the_hemisphere, in this case:
3|
a...-~arcm(cos 1;)- (7.35)
For a truncated pyramid (using the upper face. _where a subarray can be placed):
-. s_“____ . .0l_ 12...
E... arctus (coscc M Vcnsn. M case: M I I). (7.36)

The minimum gain 6.“ is obtained with maximum beam deflection from the normal
to the subarray:

0,“ - nrccos (sin E. cos n/M). (7 37)

The drop in the gain at the boundary of the scan sectors of the subarrays in
the case of a cosine directional pattern of a radiator is:

AGlnlil e: 10 lg (ons’ 0“). (7.38)
The main lobe uniqueness condition requires limiting the step of the subarrays:
(ID. C (I -l- sin 0")", (7.39)

- 151. -

FOR OFFICIAL LEE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and therefore. the overall number of radiators in a pyramidal phased array with
a circular configuration for the subarrays N - AN' arranged on the faces of the
pyramid, where: -

HGT) '
20, in the case of a square grid.
“V5 __.C_s__s 23:.)

 

in the case of a triangular grid.

co 5 - 62--67 when q - ~20 -- -25 dB and with a quasioptimal amplitude distri-
bution (or the equivalent thinning of the subarrays);

M(l 4. sin 0ch for a pyramid,

N (M‘I- l)(l -|-sinom)’ for a truncated pyramid.
Comparative data are given in Table 7.1 for pyramidal phased arrays where H -
3--6. An analysis of the data of Table 7.1 shows that pyramidal systems with
four sides have the best combination of parameters. In this case, a truncated
pyramid (five subarrays) has the least fluctuations in the gain, while a four
sided pyramid without a top face has the fewest number of radiators.

TABLE 7.1.

 

The joint phasing of several adjacent subarrays of pyramidal phased arrays is
expedient to reduce the drop in the gain in the region of the boundaries of
adjacent sectors. Thus, for a pyramidal phased array where H - lo, the joint
phasing of two subarrays in a range of i 20 to i 25' from the boundaries of
adjacent sectors leads to a drop in the gain from 10.8 down to 1.0 to 1.5 dB. In
this case, the considerable spacing between the centers of the subarrays leads
to the appearance of additional diffraction lobes, having a level of -10 to -13
db.

Pyramidal phased arrays are the simplest in terms of structural design among
phased arrays with hemispherical scanning. but have considerable fluctuations
in gain within the hemisphere.

-165-

mommmv
INDR OIWHCIAl.lﬂ§Ei(H‘LY

 

M

Figure 7.13. A strip structure of a Figure 7.16. An icosahedral structure
polyhedral phased antenna for a polyhedral phased
array. antenna array.

It is expedient to use quasiconformal phased arrays in the form of polyhedra
inscribed in a sphere, where the polyhedra have a large number of almost iden-
tical faces (20 to 400). on which identical planar subsrrays are arranged. to
reduce fluctuations in the gain within the scan sector. The subarrays can be
realized in the form of strip (Figure 7.13) or icosahedral structures (Figure
7.16). The number of radiators in one subarray (10 to 100) is governed by the
requisite overall number of radiators in the phased array, N, the minimum
permissible number of subarrays. "sub! and the operational convenience of the
system.

ﬂhen “sub 8 102, estimates of the main structural design and radio engineering
parameters of a quasiconformal polyhedral phased array can be derived just as
for a spherical phased array (see i 3.4). However, breaking the radiating
system down into subarrays and the polyhedral shape of the radiating surface
cause a certain change in the parameters, primarily in the gain and the direc-
tional pattern.

He shall use the number of subarrays “0 arranged about the periphery of a great
circle of the sphere as an independent parameter. “hen “0 > 10, the overall
number of subarrays “su , placed on the faces of s polyhedron inscribed in a
spherical segment, boun ed by the angles 0 ;_e' ; 1/2 + 60, can be approximated

by the expression:
N", a. u .1. sin (0.) "W“- (7 .61)

The overall number of subarrays in the case of strip and icosahedral structures
of a polyhedron is shown in the graphs of Figure 7.15.

Since when no > 10, the faces cannot be the same, while it is expedient to
standardize the form and dinensions of the subarrays, the entire area of the
faces cannot be utilized. The losses in area lead to gain losses of:

“#3 [as] - 10 log (nose/saw) AGslnB|--=l0|g(N¢S¢/S,,.), (7.42)

- 166 -

ltlltlﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(H¢LY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(NNLY

where 8c is the area of one subarray; ssph is the truncated area of the sphere,

circumscribed around the polyhedron.

“v

50’

  

_1_L__L_1_L_L
,0 .50 .90 70 0'
Figure 7.15. “c as a function or no
(the solid curves are for
an icosahedral structure;
the dashed curves are for
a strip structure).

The gain losses 6610.. for strip and
icosahedral structures of a polyhedral
phased array fall off with an increase
in no; when no - 10-402, A63 - -1.5 to
“0.5 dB.

The control of the phase distribution and
the motion of the radiating region in
quasiconformal polyhedral phased arrays
have some special features.

1. The steering of the radiating region
is accomplished by turning not individual
radiators on and off, but rather entire
aubarrays; since 10 to 100 subarrays are
incorporated in the radiating region
(sometimes less than 10), this causes
jumps in the gain, which fall off with
an increase in no; when no . lO--lO2

and 90 - 45-60’, the jumps in the gain
when switching the subarrays amount to
from 2 to 0.1 dB; when no > 30, they do
not exceed 0.5 dB.

2. Multistage phase control is usually employed in polyhedral phased arrays:
a special computer specifies the phase distribution relative to the centers of

the subarrays included in the radiating

region (see (7.29)); each planar sub-

array is focused by conventional means in the common direction (0.31“, .main)'

The calculation of the directional pattern, the gain and the overall structural
design parameters can be carried out just as in the case of spherical phased
arrays, while the design calculations for each subarray (structure, excitation,
matching, phasing) can he performed in accordance with the procedure used for

planar phased arrays.

- 167 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE¢HVLY
IN)! OlﬂﬂC1A1.lﬂiE(HNLY

8. BEAN STEERING SYSTEMS FOR PHASE! ANTENNA ARRAYS
8.1. Phased Antenna Array Control Problems.

Various electronically controlled radiofrequency devices are used for control
of the phase distribution of phased antenna array: phase shifters, switchers,
splitters and attenuators. Phase shifters are used in modern phased arrays in
which the phase shift can be varied discretely: in quantun steps, where the
number of quanta is equal to 2V, v - 3, 6, 5, while the quantum step is A I
360° ° Z'V, i.e., 65‘, 22‘30', ll°lS' respectively.

The phase shifting'elements in phase shifters can be ferrites and semiconductor
devices, in particular, PIN diodes. The structural design of the phase shifters
also differs correspondingly. The operation of phase shifting elements is
assured by actuating amplifiers. which are an integral part of the phase shif-
ters. The control signal is fed to the input of the actuating amplifiers from
the phase shifter control unit.

Phase shifters also have such a configuration of the phase shifting elements
that the number of its inputs is equal to the digit capacity (v) of the phase
shifter. A binary quantized signal is fed to each input. Consequently, a
v-place parallel binary code is fed to the phase shifter.

High frequency switchers provide for the connection of the input RF channel to
one of the two output channels in accordance with the binary control signal
which is fed in. Consequently, the signal controlling the switcher is a single
place binary code.

Attenuators are RP devices, the gain or the attenuation of which depends on the
control signal level. This control signal can be either continuous (analog) or
quantized.

The problems of beam steering in phased antenna arrays can be treated the most
completely using the example of a circular scan receiving phased array, for
which a generalized structural configuration of the control system is shown

in Figure 8.1. To provide electronic scanning in a wide scan sector (for exam-
ple, in the hemisphere above a ground surface), it is necessary to employ
phased arrays with a convex structure. for example, a spherical configuration.

The receiving elements and phase shifters are combined in subarrays, most frg-
quently planar arrays. The number of phased array elenents can run up to 10
and more and the number of subarrays can reach several hundreds. The combining
of the components in subarrays is necessary to reduce the number of input
channels of the switcher and simplify its design. Moreover, the packing of the
spherical surface with planar subarrays makes it possible to use the very
simplest row and column algorithms and control devices.

Only the working region of a phased array surface participates in generating a
directional pattern in a specified direction. The smaller the number of sub-
arrays incorporated in the working region, the fewer the possibilities for

-168-

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
IKHICNﬂﬂC1A1.USE(MVLY

adaptation: spatial filtering of interference. The greater the number of sub-

arrays incorporated in the working region. the more complicated the switcher is.
Taking these contradictory requirements into account, the number of subarrays in
the working region can fluctuate in a wide range (5 to 50).

The number of possible working zones is limited to several tens (depending on the

structural design of the phased array).

Bach working zone provides for scanning

in a definite sector of space, usually not exceeding :_15 to 1’30' from the

center direction.

The switcher serves to connect the subarrays participating in the formation of

the working zone to the subsequent processing channels.

The number of RP inputs

to the switcher is equal to the total number of subarrays on the surface of the
phased antenna array, while the number of outputs is equal to the number of sub-

arrays included in the working zone.

The switcher consists of a set of RF

switches, connected in accordance with a truth table and controlled by signals
generated in the switcher control unit (BUK).

Ammuwwi]
Antennal

     
   

I .
i
<2)! : '. a
(3): : g 43:1;
('0: ' ' q:
l IIIIIIII --- |
(5) : lﬂwmrrntw Adapte—irll
I - T'JL-‘Cl— :
(6) ' I l ﬁwozwyqu;m‘__¢fm (9 I

I
' I

| ' ‘ h ' I?
(7) 'E-g—IJ 67‘” 6mm 11m!
~-—- rom computer To receiver

Figure 8.1. Structural configuration of
a receiving phased antenna
array.

1.
2.
3.
A.
S.
69

Key: Beam steering system;
Phase shifter controller;
Automatic tuning unit;
Switcher control unit;
Adaptation control unit;
Honopulse signal pro-
cessing controller;
Automatic monitor;
Switcher;

Honopulse unit.

7.
8.
9.

The phasing direction code (direction
cosines of the main lobe of the direc-
tional pattern) is fed to the input of
the phase shifter controller (BU?) from
the central computer. The codes which
are fed to the phase shifters are gene-
rated in accordance with this code. For
this reason. it is most expedient to
design the phase shifter controllers in
the form of a special digital computer.
The phase shifter controller is the most
complex and most important assembly of
the beam steering system (80) and will
be treated in nore detail in subsequent
sections.

Hodsrn circular scan phased arrays take
the form of extremely large and complex
structures. These structures undergo
deformations, both elastic and irrever-
sible when exposed to external factors
(temperature changes, wind, rain, snow,
etc.). As a result. the position of the
direction of the main lobe of the direc-
tional pattern in space changes. If the
errors caused by these deformations ex-
ceed the specified aiming precision, it
becomes necessary to have tuning and
automatic fine tuning. Information on

the phased array geometry, external factors, true coordinates of the targets or
aiming points. based on which the tuning is accomplished, is fed to the input of

the automatic tuning unit (BAN).

The correction signals generated by the auto-

- 169 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(INLY
F03¢Hﬂﬁ€1AI.USE(NQLY

matic tuning unit are fed to the phase shifter controller, eliminating or reducing
the phase distribution errors.

I 7 n

' I” J.

! U QU J ’ . - ' l U

i I! I7 I“ M 2! 22 7., 20 III #2 0.5 at
I I! 7! n! ﬂ 2? n: [J 7.5 11.!

#20 n0
... Ill};;- 1’”. .u
if I i! ill

Figure 8.2. The principle of monopulse signal processing.

 

Modern radar is unthinkable without interference filtering (natural and artific-
ial). Spatial filtration is also used along with frequency and time filtration.
any directional antenna realizes spatial filtration. However, even with spatial
filtering of interference from different directions. falling on the sidelobes of
the directional pattern, reception is disrupted if the interference power is
much greater than the power of the useful received signal.

Adaptation systems have been developed to attenuate tne impact of interference in
modern phased arrays. The amplitude-phase distribution on the surface of a phased
array is changed in such a manner as a consequence of adaptation that reception is
substantially attenuated from interference source directions, retaining in this
case a sufficient level of the useful received signal in the direction of the

main lobe of the directional pattern. As a result of adaptation, "nulls" or
"dips" are formed in the directional pattern in the directions of the interference.

Adaptation is all the more effective, the more the paraaaters of the amplitude-
phase distribution change and the greater the number of channels in the adapta-
tion system. Usually, the gains and phase shift (anplitude-phase adaptation) or
only the phase shift (phase adaptation) change in each channel during adaptation.
In the case of amplitude-phase adaptation, each channel is split into two
quadrature channels (with a phase shift of r/Z), and a controlled attenuator with
a gain which varies from -1 to +1 is inserted in each subchannel. Thus, the
amplitude can be varied from 0 to /5 and the phase varied from 0 to Zn. In the
case of phase adaptation, a controlled phase shifter is used in each channel.

The adaptation controller (BUA) generates control signals for the attenuators and
phase shifters. The algorithms in accordance with which these control signals
are generated depend on the presence and completeness of the data on the inter-
ference sources, as well as on the choice of the adaptation quality indicator.

In the case of a multichannel antenna and monopulse signal processing, it becomes
possible to simultaneously generate four directional patterns, which are shifted
in pairs by approximately half of the 0.5 power level directional pattern width.
For this. four splitting phase shifters each are installed in each channel, as
shown in Figure 8.2. The phase shifts in these phase shifters must be changed

- 170 -

INJI‘OIFICIAI.IISII(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when the direction of phasing changes within one working zone and when changing
the working zones. Consequently, the splitting phase shifters are controllable,
and a monopulse signal processing control unit (BUM) is provided to control them.

An automatic monitor unit (BAR) for both the operability of the control system
itself and the antenna complex as a whole is included in the phased array control
system in addition to the units enumerated above (phase shifter controller, auto-
matic tuning unit, switcher control unit, adaptation controller and monopulse
signal processing controller). It should be noted that the monitoring of the
operational status of the phased array requires a clear cut definition of entire
antenna failure. Experiments show that the failure of up to 101 of all of the
elements does not lead to the failure of the entire antenna. In this case. the

shape of the directional pattern changes somewhat, but the antenna remains
operable.

The structural configuration of a phased array described here, of course, is not
the only one. The control system is somewhat simpler in transmitting phase
arrays: there is no adaptation control unit, no monopulse processing, there
can be many fewer modules and the switcher can be altogether absent or substan-
tially simplified. The control system for a phased array with a small scan
sector is simplified a great deal, when one can use an antenna with a planar
configuration.

8.2. Control Algorithms for Phase Shifters.

The major task of controlling phase shifters is the generation of a plane phase
front, perpendicular to the specified phasing direction.

The phasing direction is a unit vector r , having coordinates of me» 5,. and
ezmv which are direction cosinea. The pﬂasing direction can also be specified
by two angles 6 and 0, however. the algorithms for computing the control codes
prove to be considerably more complicated in this case.

He shall consider the i-th radiating element with phase center coordinates of
R1(x1, yi, 21). In order to produce a plane wave front, perpendicular to rIn and
passing through the origin, it is necessary to compensate for the spatial phase
change at a distance of di with the phase shifter (Figure 8.3). This distance is
determined by the scalar product:

d1 "‘0“ I’m) 'xlgx'll I ylhﬂ'l zltlm- (841)

For a specified wavelength A, at this distance the phase change (in radians) is
defined as follows:

2:: 2n
mx‘ "1— dl-_i (Him l-mEm l at...)- (8-2)

The phase change can contain a definite number of whole periods and an additional
phase shift 01:
(pa—.2111: [-0].

(8.3)
where k is an integer.

- 171 -

FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(N‘LY
FIHICMNHCJAL USElDNLY

Since a phase shift of 2nk does not have any influence when combining harmonics,
the phase shifter should compensate for the phase shift of 01, determined from
(8.2):

(Du-.214? {sari- '¥‘§pn"'%€ln] o (8J0)

[P

where {'}AP is the operation of isolating the fractional part of the number.

As has already been noted, phase shifters
with a quantum step of A + 21 o 2‘” rad
are used at the present time for control-
ling the beam of phased arrays. The
value of the quantized phase shift is
found by quantizing 01, i.e., by per-
forming a nonlinear transformation,
defined by the graphs shown in Figure
8.4 for v - 2. In these graphs, the
phase shifts are plotted on the'ordi-
nate, where these shifts can be produced
Figure 8.3. On the determination of the by the phase shifter, while the conti-
spatial phase change. nuous value of 01 is plotted along the

 

‘vu “V4
qu

    

    

J (3)0) 2' ’1 0 b) a, 21!:-
Figure 8.6. Rounding off to the least (a) and to the nearest (b)
value.

abscissa. The quantization operation is essentially one of rounding-off: in
Figure 8.6a, in the direction of the least, and in Figure 8.6b, in the direction
of the nearest permitted (quantized) value. A definite binary v-digit code,

n1. corresponds to each permitted value of the phase shift. It is convenient,
and so it is usually done, for this code to numerically determine the number of
quanta included in 01 qu or to determine a quantity proportional to this number.

To determine the control code when rounding-off in the direction of the least
value of hi, the phase shift 01 is not to be expressed in radians, but rather in
quanta by working from the fact that 21 radians correspond to 2v quanta, and
after this, the lower order digits following the decimal point are rejected, i.c.,
the integer part of the following number is singled out:

"I “ [3% '2'}-"‘{2' [% tan-l 1%; turf"? ErnL’L- (8. 5)

where (~}u is the isolation of the integer portion of the number.

- 172 -
FOIIOFFICIAI.USE(NNLY
F!“l()FF1CLAI.lHﬂE(M‘LY

If all of the numbers included in (8.5) are expressed in binary notation, then
multiplying by 2v is simply shifting the number over by v places. This operation
can be performed by a separation method, not feeding the integer part of 2VO1/21
to the control inputs of the phase shifter, but rather the v high order digits

of the number 01/21. Then the algorithm for computing the code for the i-th
phase shifter can be written in the following manner:

n 11 l l (8'6)
“‘3!— la — ‘l .
where: ' v+'

‘1"‘IExn'l'9lE'm'i'3l ﬁrst: (8.7)

x1] - x1/x; y - y1/A; and 21- 21/1 are the coordinates expressed in wavelengths;
- are the digits to the left of the decimal point, beginning with the first;
]- [v+l are the digits to the right of the decimal point, starting with v + 1.

Thus. to calculate the control code for a v-place capacity phase shifter, it is
necessary to perform three multiplication and two addition (8.7) operations.
after which the v digits to the right of the decimal point are isolated. Element
coordinates are stored in a read only memory; the codes for the direction cosines
are fed to the input of the beam control system.

   

Figure 8.5. A planar orthogonal phased Figure 8.6. On the beam steering of
antenna array. a modular phased array.

when rounding off to the nearest side, as 33R be° seen from Figure 8 4b. prior
to rounding off it is necessary to add 2' '( )t &pumber s11, which corresponds
to adding half of a quantum step to 01. Adding 2' corresponds to feeding

a carry to the (v + l)th digit following the decimal point after finishing the
computation of the unit place.

The algorithm (8.6), (8.7) provides for calculating the code for any phase
shifter and is therefore applicable to any phased array design, however, its
realization requires either that an individual computer (and then the speed of
the control system will be a maximum) be installed at each phase shifter, or
that the phase codes be computed sequentially for a group of phase shifters.

- 173 -

FOR'0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the latter case, it is necessary to provide a switcher which connects the
computer sequentially to the requisite elements. The control circuitry can
be simplified in the special of a planar phased array with an equally spaced
configuration of the elements.

As can be seen fron Figure 8.5, each element has its own column and row number,
“kl. The coordinates of an element are 2&1 I kdx, ykl I lny and ‘kl I 0.
Consequently, algorithm (8.7) reduces to the form:

5M ”Minn | INN... hr; Ir, (8.8)

This is the so-called row and column control algorithm. It is necessary to
compute the phase changes for the array step along the x and y axes to realize
this algorithm: c I AXE and I 6y: , after which, by using expression
(8.8), the total p ase shi t sklczs compxged, and finally, the quantization is
performed in accordance with (8.6).

The calculation of kcx and 1cy can be simplified if one considers that k and l
are integers. Thus, if k. l I 2, 4, 8, 16. etc., then multiplication is accom-
plished by simply shifting by one, two and three places respectively. Multipli-
cation by 3, 5, 6, ... reduces to the addition of the two numbers already
obtained for the corresponding cells (2 + 1 I 3, a + l I 5, b + 2 I 6, etc.).

In a similar manner, multiplication by other integers can also be realized, for
example. 7 I 6 + l I b + 2 + l, 11 I 8 + 2 + 1.

If the working zone of an antenna consists of several planar modules. then the
phasing is accomplished in a single system of coordinates. In this case. the
reference phase son is calculated for each module, which is determined by the
spatial phase change of the i-th module (d1) relative to the phase at the origin
of the central system of coordinates XYZ, as shown in Figure 8.6. The phase
change in accordance with an expression similar to (8.8), but which takes into
account the position and orientation of the module, is added to this reference
phase.

Thus:
m ' 5-. Him ”5-. (8.9)

The further generation of the control code is carried out in accordance with
(8.6).

To calculate the phase changes for the array step ‘x' and c ' , it is necessary
to determine the spatial phase changes in a single system 0 coordinates for
two points on the X' axis and two points on the Y' axis (for example, for the
points 0, l and 2 in Figure 8.6), and then to determine the difference in the

phase Changes: ﬂu in 5-” Kuhn-n I ”in. l hogan "(lash-o" ”steam | ’61:")-

' AT, {an 'l A", hm l 52' {um
'- ' “rims "NI. {an I A" Emu.

Ax' -x..~--.t., Ar 1., - r... (8.10)
NJ’ .1“. 11... Ml' gm a...
All I" I. M. :‘l' '1”;

- 174 -

FIN!(MGH(1AI.USE(MVLY
FIHI(HﬂﬂCLALllSE(HVLY

x00, yOO and '00 are the coordinates of the point 0'; x10. ’10 and :10 are the
coordinates of point 1; x01, y01 and 201 are the coordinates of point 2 in
Figure 8.6:

5.- -"ss£_w-o I'Isainn- (8.11)
Row and column algorithms are applicable in the case of equally spaced nodules

in a planar phased array. However, to reduce the directional pattern sidelobes,
it is expedient to introduced random components into the configuration of the
modules. In this case, the application of row and column algorithms proves to

be impossible in the general case. A quasirandon arrangement of the nodules

at the nodes of a rather thick equally spaced array is sometimes used, the
majority of the nodes of which renain unfilled. Individual control with the
calculation of the code independently for each cell renains a universal approach.

8.3. Algorithms for Generating Directional Patterns of Special Shapes.

"hen generating a directional pattern of a special shape (cosiocsnt, beavertail
pattern, etc.), the wave front in the direction of the radiation differs frou
a plane front. A slall deviation from a plane front is achieved by changing the

geometry of conventional parabolic antennas. for example. using special cosecant
hoods.

The requisite deviations from a plane front can be realized in phased arrays_by
feeding the appropriate control codes to the phase shifters. This makes it
possible to change the shape of the directional pattern during operation by
electronic means.

The shape of the directional is specified relative to the direction of radiation
by a functional relationship in the vertical and horizontal planes. For this
reason, the deviation in the phase distribution is specified relative to a plane
front, perpendicular to the phasing direction in the x', y' coordinates. The
OY' and 02' coordinate axes and the phasing direction vector, :3. fall in one
plane, and the OX' axis as perpendicular to 01' (Figure 8.7).

It can be shown that the unit vectors of the new systea of systea of coordinates

(i, j, k) are expressed in terms of the unit vectors of the main systen of coordi-
nates and the phasing vector r.:

"i 'n ‘ ﬁrst I “on I tElﬁn

 

 

I i I.
0 0 0 l
__E" r‘ in. Egan {Ms = all”. l IE...
Ilu'll Illl'll |/t:..l 5;, '

(8.12)
- It... t...--1&...t... ”(3... Liz.)

i" '“" rm:

where [A B] is the vector product of the vectors A and B.

- 175 -

INJI‘OFIICIAI.IESI:(H‘LY
mamauusaoutv

x'u(Rl)n "‘lgys Flinn '
P ‘m'l Eu
v'---(Rl’)
_ -‘Ernhumﬂhn |z(§:'—P-.)
Vt}. I a: '

 

(8.13)

The additional phase shift, which changes the direction of the directional pattern
been, is given in general form by the function:

oldd - .addb‘.’ y!) - ‘I'nou..tlm-u(.t"!,'). I (8.110)

Consequently, the phase shift calcula-
tion algoritb for the i-th cell consists
of the following operation: 1) The cal-
culation of the phase shift to produce

a plane front in accordance with (8.7);
2) The deternination of the new coordi-
nates of the cell in accordance with
(8.13); 3) The calculation of the addi-
tional phase shift for the i-th cell in
accordance with (8.16); ’0) The deternina-
tion of the overall phase shift for the
i-th cell:

 

Figure 8.7. Rotation of the syetsn of
coord inates. s; - u l- 01.": (B . 15)

and 5) The determination of the code generated for the control of the i-th phase
shifter, in accordance with (8.6).

The algorith for generating directional patterns of a special shape includes
extremely complex expressions for coordinate transformation (8.13), functional
transfornation (8.15), supplenentsl addition (8.15), and noreover, there raain all
of the procedures for calculating the plane front (8.6) and (8.7).

Different ways of sinplifying the computational slgoritl- are possible by neans of
approximting the requisite phase distribution. This, with a nodular configuration
of a phased array, one can calculate the supple-ental phase angles only for the
reference phase of the nodules, defined by relationship (8.11). In this case, the
phase distribution in the antenna aperture is of a piecewise plane-parallel nature:
each nodule produces a plane front, perpendicular to the direction of radiation,
while there are ptnse jumps between these plane sections. which also produce the
total approximation of the phase distribution.

-176-

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The phase distributions can be more precisely approximated by the plane sections

if these sections are not made mutually parallel, but tangential to the requisite
phase distribution. In this case, it is necessary to calculate the column for each
module using the casplex slgorittm of (8.13).

8.6. Switcher Control Algoritl'ms

A switcher serves to generate the working area fro: the set of subarrays. The
output channels of the switcher are connected to the subarrsys of the working zone
in a strictly defined order, for example, the first channel to the center subarray,
the second to the next one up, etc. A possible variant for the generation of the
working area from seven subsrrsys is shown in Figure 8.8. When the phasing direc-
tion is changed and the working area is changed, the sane subsrray can appear in a
different place in the working zone. Thus, when producing the working area, which
is shown with the dashed line, the subsrray which was designated with the number 1,
is now designated number 7. This same subarray can appear in any other location
in the working zone. Consequently, the switcher should provide for the capability
of connecting each antenna subarrey to any output of the switcher.

If the number of input channels (number of antenna
subarrays) is N, while the number of subsrrays
including the working zone M, then the number of
switches is:

 

sn - H logZN (8.16)
\ /
\9__9_/ A single digit control code (0 or 1) is fed to each
switch. Consequently, the control unit for the
Figure 8.8. Shifting the - switcher has Sn outputs. The direction code (of
working zone. the direction cosines of the vector 1'.) is fed to

the input of this device. The operational algorith-

for the control device for the switcher is broken
down into two parts: the determination of the number of the working area which will
generate the directional pattern in the requisite direction, and the generation of
the control signals for the switches of the switcher. The first task is handled by
a decoder and the second by an encoder.

Each working zone provides for seeming space in a rather narrow sector of 115 to
120° relative to the central direction of the given working zone. When the target
leaves this sector, the next working zone is switched on. For this reason, the
task of selecting the working zone consists in deternining whether the specified
direction belongs to the scan sector of a working zone. This task is simplest to
solve by determing the angle between the central direction of the working zone and
the specified =phasing direction.

That working zone is selected for which this angle is the least. To curtail the
calculations, one can determine the cosine of this angle and select that writing

-l77-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

No new
I) (b)

 

Figure 8.9. Priority coupling configuration.

zone for which this cosine is the greatest. The calculation of the cosine of an
angle is the determination of the scalar product of two unit vectors:

mv=(:..:'.)-:...t..+e..t..+tmtw (8.17)

where v is the angle between the phasing direction and the central direction of
the working zone; r(€x , Ly , E; ) is the unit vector of the center direction of
the working zone.

The coordinates of the working zone center in spherical antemas are proportional
to the direction cosines of the center direction of the working zone:

“nun. no 'd-R'ﬂhn. Erna W- (8 . 18)

For this reason, (8.17) may not be computed, but the quantites 31 determined by
(8.7) compared in calculating the reference phase of a nodule.

The algorthims for selecting the greatest from a set of values can differ. The
simplest is a sequential elimination of the least values, however, it requires the
performance of lundreds (based on the number of working area) of sequential coepar-
isons, and for this reason, it is the worst in terns of operational speed. Since
the function (8.17) is monotonic with respect to v. there is no need to compare
the value of this function for a given working zone with the values for all other
zones; it is sufficient to compare it with the nearest zones on the surface of the
phased array. That working zone is selected for which the value of cos v is the
greatest as coupered to the nearest one, but not with all of then. '

It can be seen from Figure 8.8 that the nearest working zones can nunber no more
than six. Cmsequently, the choice of the working zone is node by an AND gate with
six inputs. When the value of cos(v) is equal for two or even three working zones,

-178-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is necessary to give priority to a particular circuit. A schematic showing
priority based on a give: direction (axial priority) is slown as an exuple in
Figure 8.9. Each arrow in this figure is a priority comparison gate, the opera—
tional principle of which is shown in Figure 8.9b. When cos(v) is equal for the
right and left working zones, a "1" will be fed to AND gate of the right side
working zone; this zone enjoys the priority in this case.

Thus, the switcher control unit consists of two units: a decoder and an encoder.
The phasing direction code is 'fed to the decoder input. A "1" signal appears at
one of the Nod, outputs of the decoder, which corresponds to the selected working
zone, while a "zero" appears at the remaining ones (No.3, is the number of working

zones, which can be less than the nunber of subarrsys, since not every subarray
can be the center of a working zone.

The encoder Ins "v.2. inputs and 8.. outputs (Sn is the number of binary switches
in the RF switcher). when a "l" is fed to one of the encoder inputs, a S-digit
code is produced at its output, which provides for the connection of the requisite
subarrays into a working zone in accordance with the truth table.

For convex phsed arrays, the truth table is drawn up manually. This is explained
by the fact that convex surfaces (sphere, ellipsoid of rotation, etc.) cannot be
packed regularly with a rather large number of points. It is known fron geometry
tint no more than 12 points (an icosahedron) can be regularly arranged [equi-
distantly spaced] on a complete sphere. For this reason, when packing a sphere with
a large number of substrays, it is impossible to provide for an identical configur-
ation of the working zones and to define a single phasing algorith. This leads to
the necessity of composing the truth table for the switcher manually.

The circuit configuration for encoders are determined by the component base and
are described in the considerable literature on digital device design.

8.5. Adaptation Control AlgoritI'ns

Phased array adaptation is the generation of such a directional pattern that or
improvement is assured in the .quality indicators for antenna functioning. Optimal
adaptation provides for the extremun of the generalized quality indicator.

Adaptation of receiving phased arrays is accomplished for the spatial filtering

of interference, i.e., to suppress the gain in the directions of incomim inter-
ference while retaining adequate gain in the requisite direction. In this case,
the Quality indicator is either the signal power to noise power ratio at the
output of the phased array, or the scan square error between the requisite and
actual output signals. Adaptation is realized by changing the complex frequency
response in the channels of the nodules included in the working zone. Each channel
is split into two: a phase shift of 1/2 is realized in one of the subchmnels; an
electronically controlled amplifier or attenuator is inserted in each subchannel.
The signals in all the channels are then added. Thus, the output signal:

g! 17-5”: x' w-.- w'x.

-l79-

FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
I‘OR OHIO“. USE ONLY

where x = [x1] is the coluan vector of the signals; 9 - [191:] is the column vector
of the weighting coefficients: HT and {r are transposed vectors.

If the requisite signal is yo, than the lean square error is defined by the
expression:

r3“) - (51-11.? 17—27on ,7: .sw'xxv—zw'iE-q ii. (8.19)

where (.) is averaging with respect to tine. The product XXI. is the square
gatrix for the interchannel cross-correlation coefficients Rn - [xirk], while
xyo - x, is the correlation vector between the input signals and the requisite
output signal; Taking this into account. expression (8.19) can be written as
follows:

37,- "'"w' nsxw"2w'su.‘i'9:' (8.20)

The optimal value of the vector for the coefficients 3* correspond to the nininsl
nean square error e (0.3,. Any variation W

W -W' I W (3.21)

for an arbitrary vector 0 and a small coefficient of variation increases the
mean square error. By substituting (8.21) in (8.20), we obtain the function‘
02(u). This function is ninisnl when u - 0. Consequently, the following equation
is observed (the extremal condition):

ml .,
"1‘ "-0

(8.22)

   

(‘9 a)

Figure 8.10. mltichannel adaptation.

By substituting (8.21) in (8.20), (8.21) can be written in the following form:

'M’Q‘l .-2U'(Ruw° 5".) 0.
a,” I" 0 (8.23)

-180-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since U is an arbitrary vector. then (8.23) can be satisfied only when the

expression in parentheses is equal to zero, i.e., when any" - stO’ The vector
of the optimal coefficient is also determined fro- this equation:

W' 31-1! st”: R; My, (8.24)

This is the equation for optimal Wiener multichannel filtration.

We determine the requisite output signal by the transforn Ho on the useful output
signal X0, so that:

r X: W. W: x.. (8.25)

By virtue of this, expression (8.26) is reduced to the fore:

 

w' -- [cl-g x(x.' w.) .R;,' R,,,\V.- (8.26)

In particular, if the input signal contains the expected signal Io and interference
X,“ then:

w' '(Rx.x. l' "x. x" " Rx"x.'| I'x,,1r,,)"("x..wr. "ax. x") w"

(8.27)
When the signal x0 and the interference X, are independent:
w- (RA-J. l'Rx_x,,)"*x.x.w-- (8.28)
It is completely obvious in the absence of interference:
w' Rx:§.R§.x.Wo~W- (8.29)

and those coefficients "0 are established in systaa for which y . yo and there is
no error.

One of the most widespread adaptation control circuit configurations is shown in
Figure 8.10, where the control circuitry for a module and for the ergunent of the
complex frequency response W is shown (Figure 8.10a), as well as its schematic
representation (Figure 8.10b). In the case of a linear control characteristic for
the weighting coefficients:

vi 3 801 (8.30)

The behavior of the system depicted in Figure 8.10c is described by the expres-
sions:

dug
d!

 

‘
a... n-m: c-y- yo: I " ZU-n'm- (8.31)
M

-l81-

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Eliminating all of the intermediate variables from these expressions and taking
into account the averaging narrow band response of the control systan, we obtain
the systen of equations:

dﬂ __ __
-—' n—ak(2nx,.m——y.x..). n:-l.2. ....M.

dc ' (8.32)
We write this equation as follows in vector fern:
N
7 u—“(RxxW—beyn —ak(RxxW—Xy.). (8.33)

It follows fron (8.33) that in the steady-state node, the weighting coefficients
are:

I "R’ x .
""3. Wm xi 9' (8.310)

In this case. as can be seen fron e casparison with (8.26), the seen square error
eat) is nininal and the entire systua provides for optimal Wiener filtration.

The adaptation circuit described here was proposed for the first tine by Vidrow.
The main drawback to this configuration is the necessity of apriori knowledge of
the form of the useful (requisite) signal yo. However, if it is knonw. then
adaptation is not necessary.

In the case of signals which are weak relative to the noise, the useful signal
power can be disregarded (yo - 0). In this case, adaptation is realized, however,
in accordance with (8.36) all of the channels are blocked, H + 0 and the antenna
ceases to respond not only to the interfence. but also to any other signals.

Various methods have been proposed for eliminating this deficiency. One of the
techniques is dual mode adaptation. In the first node, it is assumed that the
useful signal is absent and that the interference is suppressed (along with the
useful signal, if it is present!). In the second mode, the inputs of all of the
channels are switched to a useful signal simlator for xo. In this case, the
known output signal yo for the input signal being simulated is fed to the control
circuit.

If prior to the start of the first node, the coefficient vector is designated as
HIn], then by the end of the first node of duration n, we obtain the increnent of
the coefficients in a first approxination deter-med fron (8.33) when yo - 0:

{gm

AVI [n]. e: d:

 

u—slzr R Wlul, nnl.2.
'2: ‘ 3" (8.35)

~182-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

Similarly, when Rxx - RXOXO we deter-sine fron (8.33) the increment of the coef-
ficient vector during the second mode which is of duration 1'2:

AW [III HIT WI") H—ms (Rx.x. Vlﬂl— xIUJ'

Rx. x.
'0

(8 .36)

Thus, by the start of the next first node, the coefficient vector "[Ml] is
determined frm (8.35) and (8.36) by the recurrent equation:

 

W III.}- '1 HIV [fir—'0‘ i-(*; i; + 15". I.) w'"."-""' . ’9 -
-wlnl—aaw. Rxx-I-t. Rx. x.) w [a] — t. ‘x. x. m}, (8.36s)

After completing the transition nodes "[Ml] - "[n] - H[-] and using (8.36s). we
find:

WImI—(r. Rxx+“1Rx.xJ'""x.x.w0' (8.37)

It follows from (8.37) that with an increase in the signal level, adaptation
approaches optimal Hiener filtration when the interference and the useful signal
are independent, and in the absence of interference (X1 - 0), the adaptation
system provides for the requisite directional pattern.

Various circuits are possible which assure a couproniae pattern between that needed
without interference and the optimal one in the presence of interference. Some of
that are shown in Figure 8.11.

 

Figure 8.11. Variants of adaptation
circuits.

Key: 1. PNCh - low pass filter.

 

~183-

l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The circuit configuration described here with mode switching is shown in Figure
8.11s; open loop and closed loop single mode feed circuits for the desired distri-

butions, mo, in the form of low frequency control signals are shown in Figures
8.11!) and 8.11c.

8.6. The Design of Beam Steering Systems for a Specified Precision of the
Directional Pattern Orientation in Space

For the correct choice of the parameters for the beam steering system of a

phased array it is necessary to analyze the errors produced by the control unit
and their impact on the directional pattern. Some three types of control errors
can be singled out according to the point of occurrence: input errors, computer
errors and output quantization errors. In this case, the phase error element of a
phased array can be represented by the expression:

I‘l‘ﬂlm‘l‘l‘lr‘H‘m. (8.38)

where “in is the phase distortion caused by the input errors; uh- is the phase
distortion caused by computational errors; um are the phase shifter quantization
errors.

If the input data in expression (8.1) are specified with errors of 631 - Ridri.
6r“, then the resulting error in the computations will be:

M. m. 6c.) l we. r...) m... (a... (8.39)

The quantity
"In. RI‘fl (if...) (8-40)

is the function for each element of the error in the representation of the vector
rm by a digital code, where the argument of this function, 6r“, which is canon
to all elements is determined only the direction of r...

The second component

[I], “1""! 6ft) (801.1)

is determined by the errors in the digital code representation of the vector :1.
The quantity 6,1 differs for each element in the general case.

The quantization error cm is distributed over the set of elements uniformly in
a range of «LA/2, where A is the phase shifter quantun step.

Thus, the phase distortion cm is functionally distributed over the elements of
the phased array. The quantities 1:1: and ”A in the case of a large number of

-18lo -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phased array elements not nutually correlated and are randomly distributed over
the elements of the phased array. The mathusticsl expectations of the errors c1,

and cm are equal to zero by virtue of the symmetry of the distribution of these
quantities.

The dispersion of these errors is:

J"INr I'Ml "ﬁll-"II ”In.“ ”Hi/'2 I MM 4), 1mm (8.52)

where qr - 2-9:; pr is the number of digit places in the computer.

In analyzing the impact of control errrors on the shifting of the directional
pattern maximum with deviations in the-phase direction ‘1: fra: the axis of symmetry
of a convex phased array through an angle of 0 ; lS--20', the vector for the dis-

placasent in the directional pattern maximum can be represented as the vector mm
of two orthogonal components.

It has been demonstrated that in a first approximation the position of a directional
pattern maximum in space is defined by the normal to the plane of regression of the
phase distribution. Taking this displacement of the directional pattern maximum
into account, bx and hy are defined by the following ratios:

 

 

I: £"(W' ‘ ”.10 I $2“ (In: l-llm) (8.103)
3 SI: "1' . l” x”, .;
l
1/: w gap/m ”U/ (ﬁlly-mlhql- . Cm). I'm); (8.“)
M lhxl- IM w o. (8.45)

In a rectangular planar array of m x In cells, the displacements of the direc-
tional pattern maxima in the X02 and Y02 planes are independutt and are determined

by the errors in the calculation of the phase change over an array step, x0, yo,
and by the quantization errors of the cells, nu:

m ll of
h, 2‘. E klullmx. 2'. I3 | 'c./r.; (8'56)
h.|1...| t-vl

"I
2/ n. .7: g a. g \' P.
I| r| .lr A[nu ‘f' (8.47)

where no is the error in calculating the pines shift for one step of the planar

array; um is the quantization error of the kl-th cell; kl are the numbers of the
cells with respect to rows and columns.

-185-

MOFHCIALISEONLY
FOR omen. USE ONLY

The shift in the directional pattern maximum because of the functional error is
defined sinilarly:

(I N N N
I .1”. \"2. ,.\‘ a
S ‘7‘ l “I! 1.; 'l n I! ‘7'!" "In ‘7‘ y}, (8"8)

Since the following condition is net for an axially ayusetric phased array:

~. ~ '
2, an = 2'. I‘m-=0. (8J9)

[NI In]

Then expression (8.48) can be represented in the fore:

 

N... N k. N N
I!“ N 2x, Ih==—N----[I( ‘nn)ll(2nm)l

2“ x,‘ "" 2“ x" . '--'| 1—; (8.50)
an! ..
' '~
.|K(2112‘)J,
awn
“'n' ‘5‘» (8.51)

where qI - Z‘PI; p. is the nunber of digits which specify the components of e unit
vector.

An analysis of 'the random quantities hx end hy shows tint they have s two-
dimensional gauasinn distribution while the correlation coefficient between the

quantities h, and by is equal to zero. In this case, the scalar value of h -
- “bx: + h; has a Rayleigh distribution.

h h, 8.52
90.):1 :E‘f‘p(_ﬁ)’ I ( )
where Mu'ﬂi- -a;' ”Ihxl MIMI-

The distribution of the systen of tendon quantities f; and fy is uniform in a
range of:

”Qua/2 < I: < Que/2: " 4.1/2 ( hives/2:
-q.,. V: I2 «1; VII: I 7; < V 0:.” l- em q... Vila. (a. 53)

-186-

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the input errors determine the discrete positions of a phased array been in
space. Its displacement, which is caused by these errors, depends only on the
number of digits in the code which specifies the direction cosines of the vector rm.

Computational errors and output quantization errors lead to a randus shifting of
the ban from its discrete positions. The shift depends on the phased array
geometry, the number of eluents in the array, the word length of the computer and
the word length of the phase shifters which are used.

We shall consider the procedure for calculating the parameters of the control

systas computer by a phased array. Let the discrete step for beam steering, f.”
(radians) and the ultimate permissible steering error, Max- be specified, where

fmax > hmax-

He determine the number of digits p. in the input code from expression (8.53):

QnV'z/2<Imsr- (8.54)

Considering the fact that q. - 2-9“, we obtain:

- - 8.55
Pm 7‘ ---('°¢s’mu I-0.5)- ( )

We determine thw word step pr by nesns of relationships (8.102) or (8.44) given
the condition:

Ingma- osmm- men-o, p.95) (8.56)

For this, we express the permissible dispersion 0,:

s, -{,‘ «Lu/9c. «0,. (8 . 57)

For a Imown value of the quantum step of the phase shifter and a known phased
array geometry, we find:

A: I "L "' 853
Mr amia- ‘- ’
l l

Taking (8.42) into account, we obtain:

_ "nu-L
" ‘ RV ”(9c D‘)‘ (8.59)

"hence: Pr I). -1.08qu (8 o 60)

-187-

FOIOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The caaputation sequence established here makes it possible to determine the word
length of the input data code and the word length of the computer based on the
requisite discrete step and precision of phased array beam steering, given the
condition that the coordinates of the phased array elements and the phase shifter
quantum step are specified.

Sample Calculation. l. The planar array m x I, m - 11. so - yo - 2! and A - all.
is specified. The requisite discrete step for the beam is 1' and the bean steering
precision is 10'.

He express the angular quantities in radians:

rm - 1.75 . 10‘2 rad; hm - 0.292 . 10‘2 rad.

Substituting the value f.“ in (8.67), we obtain:

p. ; —(log21.75 . 10'2 + 0.5) - 55 [sic].
We choose p. - 6 digits.
We determine the square of the permissible beam deflection:

13 (0.292 ~ 10'2)2 - 8.5 . 10‘6 radz.
DIX

The second term in equation (8.47) is:

 

————w‘ .m- _________(uli)’(lll2) an Lo: "0' ' 2.0.3.“)“931‘.
m, “9‘ u (2»)t2(l+2t+3a1-v+5*) 4.7140!
0 .u

The first term in equation (8.47) is:

. a . -s
J), I..._.._._.__’_0.M.m_.__a 3.5 I0

 

-—0.M- IO' ' -~0,0- If.“ pan’.

a: 9

We determine the conputer word:

”,:.:x:q:/l2. 9,14 «mm-0,6404.
whence: _

q’-.—7,2.|0‘0' 4,-2 "—2,68.I0-l.
Frcn the last expression, we have the following:

-prlog2 - -3 + 0.103 - -2.S7; Pr ; 2.57/0.3 I 8.6

-188 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIITICIAL USE ONLY

We choose p2 - 9 digits.

2. A hemispherical array has a radius p1 - 25 ' 211, A - 1/6 and C1 - 0.2 . 10".

The digit capacity of the input code Pu has already been determined. He substitute
the initial data in equation (8.58):

5.5.104 (.14):
9' C Eon-nod ' l2

 

 

-4,72- 10”— I .63- IO" -3,09- l0" pa“.

We obtain the following fron formula (8.59):

. -|
q,<—' VI2-. ~Io-'-——"'°9 '°

- - ".
25.2; I,57-l0‘ 3.3110

From this we obtain Pr - 8 digits.

-189-

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
9. PRINTED CIRCUIT ANTENNA
9.1. The Function and Specific Features of Printed Circuit Antennas

Printed circuit antennas differ in their structural design froe other types of
nicrowave antennas. Not only radiators, but also trensnission lines, fetching

elements, etc. can be node using the techniques of printed circuit technology.
More than other antennas, these meet the requirement of miniaturization, one of

the major requirements for aircraft equipnent. This explains the increasingly
widespread use of printed circuit antennas.

we shall note the najor advantages of printed circuit antennae:
-Structural sinplicity, small volume, weight and coat;
«Convenience in combining antennas with printed circuit feed lines and devices;

"High fabrication precision, because of which good reproducibility of antenna
characteristics is achieved;

«The ability to design antenna structures for aircraft which protrude little or
not at all, in particular, structural designs which do not change their strength
characteristics.

The drawbacks to printed circuit antennas include poor- electrical strength, the
difficulty of designing tunable devices and neasuring the panneters of printed
circuit components.

Printed circuit antennas are used in a frequency range of from 100 m: to 30 GB:
at low and moderate power levels. At very low frequencies, the size and weight
of antennas which are conperable to the wavelength become quite considerable. At
higher frequencies, these antennas have no advantages as compared to others.
Printed circuit antennas are poorly directional and for this reason, they are
used primarily as constituents of antenna arrays.

9.2. The Major Types of Printed Circuit Antennas and Their Operational
Principles '

The major elements which form an antenna are the radiator (the antenna itself)
and the excitation device. Printed circuit antennas correspondingly differ in

the operational principle of the radiator and the manner of its excitation, as
well as in the type of transmission line. Moreover, the radiation characteristics
of the antennas and their structural pareneters can also he distinctive

-190-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attributes. Primarily the first group of attributes is treated in this chapter.

The radiation characteristics of the antennas are of the topic treated in this
clmpter.

~Striplines are most frequently used as the transmission lines. As a rule, the
type of striplines governs the structural design of the other antenna elements.
In the low frequency portion of the band, the excitation is accomplished by means
of coaxial lines. It is also possible to use a waveguide transmission line.

Resonator type printed circuit radiators designed around asynetrical striplinea
(see Chapter 2) also find widescale application. Another more traditional type
of printed circuit antenna is dipoles of various configurations and slots cut in
the metal wall of a synnstrical type tranmniasion stripline. Developmental modi—
fications of these antennas are stripline spirals and curvilinear radiators.

An example of a resonator printed circuit radiator is shown in Figure 9.1. This
radiator is used most often [1, 2]. It consists of a rectangular strip conductor
[I], placed on a thin dielectric layer (2) with a conducting substrate (3). The
radiator is excited by a strip transmission line. This system is a flat lossy
resonator filled with a dielectric for the transmission line, where the losses are
due to radiation. The edges of the resonator form two radiating slots A and B,
which are spaced 1 apart, approximately equal to 14/2, where M is the wave-
length in the dielectric. At the edges of the resonator. the components of the
field which are normal to the conducting substrate are out of phase. The field
components parallel to the conducting substrate add together in phase and form a
linearly polarized radiation field having a direction of maximm radiation along

to the normal to the plane of the substrate. The dimension b of the radiator
can differ.

To obtain a rotating polarization field, two pairs of radiating slots are needed
which are arranged perpendicular to each other and are excited with a phase shift
of 90‘ each. For this, a square radiator is chosen which is excited at two points
in the center of adjacent sides of a strip conductor. The excitation is realized
most readily by a rectangular radiator with a single feed point, which is shown

in Figure 9.2. One side of the strip conductor of the radiator is greater than
“/2 by the amount A, while the other is smaller by the same amount, something
which provides for the 90' phase shift for each. The quantity A is chosen experi-
mentally. The radiator is excited by astripline. A possible excitation variant
for this radiator is a coaxial line perpendicular to the conducting substrate.

The center conductor of the coax line is connected to the strip cmductor of the
radiator.

Other types are discrete radiators in the form of printed circuit dipoles and
slots. The current in the strip conductor of the radiator serves as the radiation
source in this case. Slot antennas, excited by a atripline, are a direct analog
of slotted waveguide antennas. They are widely used as the radiating elmnents of
scanning antennas arrays. With the appropriate excitation, one can use such

radiators to design antenna systems which realise extremely arbitrary directional
characteristics.

-191-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

1 s: pun-rm

Figure 9.1. A printed circuit resonator Figure 9.2. A printed circuit resonator

antenna uith linear polar- antenna with a rotating
ization. polarization field.
aW‘-

,o
l‘) 4

A. \(n,
l} (a) (M!) Q

Figure 9.3. Antenna excitation circuits.

 

One of the nethods of exciting radiating elasents is excitation using a system of
branched lines of the sane electrical length. (Figure 9.3). If the excitation is
realized using a line with a characteristic impedance 01, than with -'N branches
having a characteristic impedance of 92 (Figure 9.3), the relationship 01 - N92 is
observed. With a large number of radiators, it is expedient to insert a trans-
former ahead of each branch (Figure 9.3b). Such an excitation techniques is
realized especially conveniently using atriplines.

In another approach, the traveling mve excites the radiating elements which are
arranged along the transmission line. This teclmique is also realized quite well
using strip transmission lines. A drawback to it is the great dependence on
frequency. Other excitation methods are also possible, but they are used compara-
tively rarely.

Almost all of the elaents of a feed line channel which are used for coaxial and
waveguide transnission lines, as well as the feeder channel as a whole can be
constructed in a printed circuit design. However. as a rule, only individual
printed circuit assemblies are used in a feeder channel. For printed circuit
antennas, coaxial or waveguide lines are most frequently used as the main feed
line. Because of this, it becomes necessary to have elements for joining strip-
lines to waveguide and coaxial lines. The sajor conponents of striplines,

-192 -

l-‘OROFI'ICIALWONLY
.‘ -_ -
4 f :; 'l-‘Oll omcm. usruontv
. a ‘ ‘ ‘-.. .
\- ‘ \ , ..
‘33: 3‘ o ‘ '

r u. .
including coaxial to‘ uripliRe-snd waveguide to stripline junctions, as well as
stripline connectors and splitters, are described in [07, 014, 02].

9.3. The Major Characteristics and Design of Printed Circuit Resonator Antennas.

We shall single out anong antennas of this type the antenna which is shown in
Figure 9.1 as the basic antenna. The linearly polarized field is produced by the
radiation of two slots. which for- the walls of the resonator. which represents a
half-wave section of an asymetrical stripline. Antennas of this type are usually
enployed as receiving antennas.

It is asmed in the antenna design that the dinension h(Figure 9.1) satisfies the
condition kh << 1, where k - 2r/l, l is the working wavelength. It is also
assumed that the field distribution in the radiating slot corresponds to a T node
field distribution in the cross-section of a regular stripline. In this way, the
influence of higher nodes on the radiation of the slot is neglected.

These presuppositions aske it possible to represent the radiating slot of a resona-
tor as a linear radiator, similar to a narrow slot in a conducting shield

Figure 9.6). Thus, the analysis of a resonator antenna reduces to the analysis of
ord ry s_l'ot antennas. The field in the radiating slot,of the antenna has the
form . onx. IX] 5. 11/2; This field determines the gagnetis current of an equiva-
lent linear radiator as I" - 2023,, I2] ; b/2, where no and so are unit vectors of
the coordinate systu of Figure 9.6.

The Antenna Directional Pattern. The field of a linear magnetic radiator is known
(for exanple, see 01). The electrical field of the radiator Ins coaponents of
Be and to in the spherical cysts: of coordinates of Figure 9.10. The antenna polari-

zation is deternined by the projection of the £9 component on the nornel to the
plane of the slots (the Y axis). Then for the indicated polarization, the direc-

tional pattern (DR) of the antenna as a systen of two equivalent linear radiators,
which are excited in phase. has the fore:

 

F(0.‘l')= ﬂux303") cos9_oos(%sin 0). (9.1)

The first two factors in expression
(9.1) define the directional pattern
of an equivalent linear radiator for
the indicated polarization, while

the last tern is the directivity
characteristic of a system of two
identical radiators, spaced a distance
Z fron each other.

 

Figure 9.4. The coordinate system for the

radiating slot of a printed
circuit antenna.

-193-

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

    

.4 . ‘ .
’0‘ a" I Figure 9.5. The equivalent circuit of a
printed circuit reamator type
' ' antenna.
. -3 -1 -
Cally-laugh" ’a-ll,’
as
m" 0,7
0,6‘
to" -
45
[0 ‘ - ae
_ 0.3
10 ° ___L_ -‘——'-LL
”'1 ’0" ”I 0/4 I ,0 0/17
Figure 9.6. Antenna slot conduct- Figure 9.7. The quantity 1g 1v/h as a func-
ance G as a function tion of the rat of the dimen-
of the quantity bl). sions b/h and the dielectric

permittivity t of a printed
circuit antenna.

The Antmna Input Admittance. The equivalent circuit of the antenna as a trans-
mission load is shown in Figure 9.5. The two radiating slots of the antenna,
having an input admittance of Y - G + j]! are separated by a line section of length
1 with a low characteristic impedance of 9k The input admittance of the antenna
Yin is the result of canbining the slot admittance at the antenna input (the

terminals l-l')’ and of the slot which is transformed to the input through the line
section I so that:

(0-i'l”)+lya'lu

Y Y -.-.-G-|- B Y ————, (9.2)
1" " j + “mum-Hausa!
whu-e B is the line propagation constant; YA - l-pA.

The radiation conductance G is calculated by the method usually nployed in '
slotted antenna theory. The conductance G is shown in Figure 9.6 as a function
of 13/). For b/A > 1, we have [2]:

c [cu-{1] s b/nox (9.3)

The reactive calponent B of the slot admittance is due to its capacitance and is
computed frat the formula:

-l9lo-

MWLIEEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 [on-3'1] . 1 /60A (9.0

equiv

where Zequiv is a quantity equivalent to the length of a stripline open at the end
having the same input admittance; A - AI/tgff where A is the wavelength in the
stripline; ceff is the effective dielectric permittivity of the substrate, which is

determined in 014, p 62]. The curves for lequiv/h for various values of t are
plotted in Figure 9.7 as a function of b/h.

An antenna is tuned to resonance if its input admittance is a real quantity. The
resonance condition follows frma expression (9.2):

mw- 2x'AII/(a- I m .m. (95)

Expression (9.5) defines the resonant length of a line section I having a low
characteristic impedance 9A- In this case, the input admittance of the antenna is

Yin - 26. The quantity 1 computed in this fashion is somewht less than half of
a wavelength in the stripline.

The design of an antenna consists in computing the dimensions of its resonator and
selecting a stripline to obtain the specified width of the main lobe of the
directional pattern (or directional gain) of the antenna. Additional requirements
are set which are related to the conditions for the placement and operation of the
antenna on board the vehicle. These requirements are important when selecting the
dimensions of the strip conductor and the dielectric substrate of the antenna which
are its major structural cmponents. The design of an antenna is most eadily
accomplished by means of trial-and-error selection of its parameters.

The selection of antenna dimensions consists in the following. Based on a speci-i
fied directivity characteristic, the dimension b is determined for the strip
conductor of the antenna (Figure 9.1). In this case, the dimension 1 is asmed
to be equal to 0.4). to 0.51. The stripline conductor can have either a square or
a rectangular shape. The characteristic impedance 9A of an asynctricsl stripline
depends on the value of b (Figure 9.5), where this impedance should not be too
low and usually amounts to 10 to 15 ohms. Then the h dimension of the antenna
is chosen, usually h < 0.11, as well as the material of the dielectric substrate
[016]. The dielectric permittivity of the substrate is most frequently chosen

equal to c - 2.25--2.5. In individual cases, a ceramic (t v 10) can be chosen as
the substrate.

The selected antenna parameters make it possible to calculate the characteristic
impedance 9A of a low impedance asymmetrical stripline as well as the input admit-
tance of the radiating slot of the antenna Y - G + 33 using farmlas (9.3) and
(9.4), taking into accent the function shown in Figure 9.7. The propagation
constant B of a low impedance line is determined fro: [0110]. The resonant length
of a low impedance stripline section 1 and the input admittance of the antenna
Yin are determined from formula (9.5). An asylmastrical stripline with a character-
istic impedance of p. - 50 sills is usually chosen as the trannission line. A
matching elment in the form of a quarter-wave transformer is used to match the

-195-

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
   

I Plane
I mum m If,

a figure 9.8. The directional pattern of a
I printed circuit resonator type
I antenna.

    

lat-2' 500”
50 9 Input

    

. I
1/; ,1, MI;
'I L 96 9 input
Figure 9.9. Excitation configurations for a
printec circuit resonator type antenna
having a large value of the dimension b.

Key: 1. Printed circuit antenna.

antenna to the stripline. Hatching is an extruely labor intensive operation.

It is accomplished by the trial and error design of the natching elaent and is
more successful, the closer the characteristic impedance of the antenna is to the
chracteristic impedance of the line. Where there is a substantial difference in
these values, the antenna design procedure is repeated for its other parameters.

A linearly polarized antenna (Figure 9.1) with a sqare stripline conductor
designed for a frequency of 9 Che, has the following cl'nracteristics. The radi-
ating slot adnittance of the antenna is Y - (0.922 + 17.65) - 10-3 obs‘l. The
resonant length of the antenna is Z . 0.661 when 9A - 15' obs. The antenna is
matched to the atripline having a characteristic impedance of p. - 50 olns by
scans of a quarter-wave transformer. In a passband of Af/fo - 21, the SHR is less
than two. The neasured gain is 7.6 dB am: losses in the line of 0.3 db. The

typical directional pattern of the antenna in the E and ﬂ planes is shown in
Figure 9.8.

The antenna is extremely narrow band. To improve the bandwidth performance it is
races-tended thatithe characteristic impedance 9A of the low impedance stripline
be increased. a dielectric substrate with a greater value of c be selected to
reduce the resonator length, the inductance of the antenna be increased by neane
of snaking holes or slotted cuts in the stripline conductor of the antenna, as well

-196-

For omcm use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as that broadband tectniques for natching the antenna to the trans-ission line be
employed. All of this will make it possible to increase the passband of the
antenna Af/fo up to 502.

For an antenna with a rectangular strip conductor and dimensions of d > A, the
excitation syataa is built for the condition of equal electrical paths of the
branched transmission lines (see $9.2). Several points are excited in the strip
conductor in this case. 'No excitation configurations are shown in Figure 9.9 for
an antenna with a dimension 1) - 21 for a line with a characteristic inpedance

p. - 50 she. The proposed technique is also applicable to the design of rota-
tionally polarized antennas.

9.6. Antenna Arrays with Resonator ﬂaunts

Antenna arrays with radiating resonator type elaaents are constructed in the form
of strings of radiators and sets of these strings. when designing a linear
antenna array, it is usually assumed that the radiators are arranged at equal
spacings d from each other and are excited in-phase or with a constant and small
phase difference. The analysis of such arrays is performed as an analysis of
in-plnse arrays, with subsequent accounting for the inclination of the main lobe
of the directional pattern if this is necessary. Such excitatin presupposes a
single transmission line for a linear array. It is also possible to excite array
elements where the electrical length of the transmission lines are equal (see
59.2).

Basic Relationships for a Linear Array. The directional pattern of a linear
system of identical radiators with in-phase excitation has the form (see
Chapter 2):

N ‘
F” :a 2“ [1,. exp ”K (n — I) d cos 0'.

(9.6)

where An is the amplitude of the n-th radiator; 0 is the angle read out from the
axis of the array; N is the number of radiators. It is asmed in this case
that the number of resonator type elaents is “/2. If the spacing between the
radiators oi- the array is d - A/Z, then the directional gain of the array is:

N s N
0= 2} 4-9/2} A:.' (9.7)

The greatest directivity of an array is achieved when all of the amplitudes are
equal: An - A. Then the directional gain of the array is D I N. This is the
case of uniform excitation of a linear array and it is of the greatest practical
interest.

The directional pattern of a uniform array, using the principle of directional
pattern mltiplication of [01], can be written in the form:

rm, q.) =_- r40, cp) [54(0), (9.8)
- 197 -

POROMCIALISEONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

where P1(6. o) is the directional pattern of a single radiator; F“ is the group
directional pattern of the array. The directional pattern of a resonator type
element is described by expression (9.1). In the case of “/2 elements in the
array, the group directional pattern is:

F" := sin (Nib/4)/(N/2) sin (D, (9-9)

where O - (kd cose - so) is the phase shift between the fields produced by
adjacent elements; so is the place difference in the excitation of the adjacent
elements. In the case of in-plmse excitation of the elements of the array, 90 - 0.

Ways of Exciting Array Bluents. In the case of in-phase excitation of resonator
type elements, one speaks of resonant excitation of an array. In order to avoid
the appearance of secondary main lobes in the directional pattern, the spacing
between array elements (taking the directional pattern of an element into account)
(Figure 9.8) should not exceed l/Z. Resonant excitation of an array is character-
ized by the fact that the main radiation is directed along a normal to the plane

of the array. The major drawback to such excitation is the poor matching of the
array to the transission line. For an array of four series connected resonator
elments, designed for a frequency of 9 632, the matching paasband far a Sﬂk'level
of no more than two amounts to 1.7 I. The resonant frequency, the input admittance
of the array. as follows fra the schematic shown in Figure 9.10, is Ym - NG,
where Y - c + 33 is the input admittance of the radiating slot of a resonator
element (see 59.3); N is the number of slots. An antenna array with the elements
excited "off of resonance" in a traveling wave node is free of this deficiency.
With a large number of elements, the reflections from each of than "on the average"
cancel out, which provides for good matching of the antenna array. A drawback to
this excitation technique is the deviation of the direction of the main lobe from
a normal to the plane of the array, which changes with a change in frequency.
However, with a small phase difference for the excitation of adjacent elements
"close to resonance", this deviation is small.

Figure 9.10. The equivalent circuit
of a linear in-phase array
using printed circuit
resonator type eleaents.

 

An example of an array excited in a traveling wave mode is shown in Figure 9.10.
One end of the array is connected to a coaxial feed line, while the other is
loaded into an absorbing load. The angle of inclination e of the main lobe of the
directional pattern to the antenna axis is computed fraa formula [3]:

cm 0 .. [A —. (1 -|- 0,5b)l/l. (9.10)

where Z and b are the dimensions of the array. It follows from formula
(9.10) that the inclination angle 0 changes with a change in frequency, where the

-198-

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
main radiation is directed in a direction opposite to the direction of wave propa-
gation in the transmission line. It follows from the theory of periodic structures
that this is explained by the choice of the propagation constant 8 - In case for
the spatial haracnic which is responsible for the primary radiation.

The characteristic features of antenna arrays with resonator type elements, when
they are excited in resonance and traveling wave modes are similar to the features

of slotted waveguide arrays which were treated in Chapter 5, with the same excita-
tion nodes.

The design of an antenna array consists in selecting the number of elements in it
and designing the elenents for a specified directivity, i.e., main lobe width of
the directional pattern or directional gain. A uniform in-phase array is taken as
the basis for the design calculations, for which expressions (9.7) - (9.9) apply.
The calculation of array gain is extranely approximate, since it is necessary to
take transmission losses into account, and the calculation of the gain can serve

only as a qualitative estimate of the selected antenna circuit. The design proce-
dure for a linear array is as follows.

To the Load
Antenna ll III/90417577

I'll/rim It «I

 

.roo' l/Inplam
nput Load
«3
J J I I Itl I I I I I III/claim!!!»
10
Input 0 the
- load
Pmmowamme
Jﬂeﬁ/Pﬂﬂllv
Ill/”(Wily (1)
:7an Input
Figure 9.11. A linear traveling wave array Figure 9.12. A printed circuit
with printed circuit resonator antenna in the for" of
type elements. a composition of
Key: 1. Resonator antenna elements. linear traveling

wave arrays.

The number of resonator type array elements, N/Z, is chosen for a specified direc-
tivity. This number is taken equal to the directional gain of the array. Then
the radiating element is designed using the procedure given in 59.3. The spacing
between the array elements d is chosen equal to the dimension Z, which is the

-199-

FORWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resonant dimension of an element. The dimension b of a radiating element is.
chosen equal to either 1 or A for a rectangular stripline conductor. In the case
of a large value of b, the excitation of. an element is complicated and takes on
the form shown in Figure 9.9. With in-plnse excitation of the antenna array, the
directional pattern is computed using formulas (9.8) and (9.9) for 00 - 0.

When an array is excited in a traveling wave mode, the angle of inclination of the
main lobe of the directional pattern is calculated using formula (9.10). This
makes it possible to determine the pinse shift, 00, and to employ formulas (9.8)
and (9.9) to calculate the directional pattern as well as the directional gain of
the antenna array. The gain of the array is determined by the value of the eff ici-
ency, which under conditions of weak coupling of the radiators to the transmission
line may be less than 50 percent. The radiation losses in a line loaded with an
antenna array are taken at a level of 10 dB, which makes the results of analyzing
traveling wave antnnas reliable and makes it possible to obtain the optimal gain.

The coupling of the radiators of a yagi antenna to a transmission line is governed
by the h dimension (Figure 9.11) and the characteristic impedance of the line
9. The smaller h is, the smaller the attenuation constant c for the traveling
wave in the line. It is assumed in this case that the propagation constant B
does not change over the length of the line. The longer the antenna array, the
smaller the height h. For an antenna structure with a length of 20X, the height
h reaches 0.025%.

If the yagi antenna designed in this manner does not have the requisite directivity,
then its design calculations are repeated for a different number of radiating
elements. A traveling wave array, designed for a frequency of 635 Wis, has dimen-
sions of: Z - 0.61, b - l and h - 0.075A [3]. A set of strips is used to improve
the directivity. An example of an antenna of four strips is shown in Figure 9.12.

9.5. Printed Circuit Dipole Antennas

Dipole antennas and modifications of them are some of the most used radiators in
antenna engineering. They are used particularly as the radiating elements of '
large antenna arrays. This explains the ever greater use of printed circuit dipole
antennas. A stripline dipole takes the form of a strip conductor on a thin di-
electric layer (Figure 9.13). When used as a part of an antenna array, a printed
circuit dipole is usually positioned above a flat conducting shield.

The design calculations for a printed circuit dipole can be performed as the
calculations of a strip dipole, with the subsequent accounting for the impact of
the thin dielectric layer. In turn, a correspondence can be established between
the strip dipole and v. dipole with a circular cross—section (a wire dipole), which
has the same directional pattern and input impedance. In this case, the cross-
sectional dimension of the wire dipole is half as great (Figure 9.13). Such a
comparison is experimentally confirmed given the condition that the length of the
strip dipole 2L is substantially greater than its cross-sectional size 2d where

2d << 1. In this case, to calculate the characteristics of a strip dipole, one

-200-

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an use the results of numerical and experimental studies of fine wire antennas.
The influence of a dielectric layer consists in changing the length of a strip
dipole, in particular. in shortening the resonant: length of the dipole.

The Current Distribution and Dyer-all Input Inpedance of a Strip Dipole. The
surface current, $7 (I. y) '-'- X. 10‘. y). , induced in a narrow strip conductor of

a dipole where -d :y ;d and -I. 3x 31., can be characterized by the quantity:
4 ., .

ununi j 3L(x.y)dy, (9.11)
—l

which is used in calculating the total input impedance of a strip dipole. The

surface current 2/ (x. g) has a singularity at the corner edges of the strip
conductor, which is of a local nature and constant over its length. Taking this
singularity and expression (9.11) into account, the current ‘71-(3'. g) has the

repreaaltat ion: . . ...
#(x-y)=-l (xm/JLP. (9.12)
Equivalent
Printed Circuit Dipole Hire Dipole .

' a JMMWW
”NM/INTI 5M0 W ”N, W” 0000””!

   

Figure 9.13. A comparison of a printed circuit dipole with a
wire one.

Taken as the current lot) in this expression is the current of an equivalent wire
dipole (Figure 9.13).

The results of a numerical investigation show that the current distribution over
the length of the dipole approaches a sine distribution, as is adopted in approx-
imate dipole theory [01], only for a dipole length of 21. .<_ 0.51. maples of the
current distribution for other values of I. are given in [01]. Resonant length
dipoles find the most widescale practical applications.-

The resistive and reactive components of the input impedance, 21,. - Rm 4- JXm. of

a strip dipole are shown as a function of its length I. for various values of d

in Figure 9.11.. The value of the input impedance of a strip dipole differs from
the input impedance of the infinitely fine wire dipole which is treated in

-201-

FORWIJSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approximate dipole antenna theory. we will also note that the resonant length of

a strip dipole is close to 0.23}, and practically does not change with a change in
the d disension of a narrow strip.

 

Figure 9.14. The input 'inpedence of a strip dipole as a function
of the arm length LIX and the dimension d.

 

I :«a
£8
- 2,56
:0
w w
a 0,2 46 #2; a 0,2 41; 6/1
Figure 9.15. The retardation of the Figure 9.16. The retardation y of a
surface wave as a function surface wave as a function
of the dielectric layer of the height h/x of a di-
thickness. electric layer of thickness
t above the surface of a

shield .

The directional pattern of a strip dipole where L/d > S is taken to he the same as
for an infinitely fine wire dipole. The dipole directional pattern is shown in
[01]. However, when L/d ; 5, instead of nulls. ninina at a level of approxinately
12 dB appear. Such "swelling" of the directional pattern nulls is undesirable
when a dipole is used as an elenent in an antenna array, prinarily because of the
increase in the coupling between elements, the appearance of cross-polarizat ion
of the radiation and the reduction in the gain. The design method described here

for a strip dipole is applicable to a conductor with a dinension of 2d 5 0.11.

-202 -

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Arm of the dipole

 

We Mom
|
i
(1,! Mum (2)M’IIIIM’I IIIMOAMWW ”may a)
n (a) 0 (b) ‘3’ ”(c)

Figure 9.17. Excitation configurations for a printed circuit dipole
using a balanced (a). balanced three-plate (b) and a
two-wire (c) stripline.

Key: 1. Dielectric substrate;
2. Conductors;
3. Dielectrics;
6. Balancing elaent.

The Influence of the Dielectric Layer. The dielectric layer of a printed circuit
dipole is chosen to be extrenely' thin t < 0.1x, since it is only a structural
cmponent with low losses. For this reason, as a rule, it does not influence the
directional pattern of a dipole and is considered primarily when calculating its
resonant length. The shortening of a dipole depends on the retardation of the
electrical wave propagating in the planar dielectric layer with a thickneae t.
When t -o 0, these waves degenerate into a free space ‘r-type node.

The retardation y - c/u of a lower node is show in Figure 9.15 as a function of
the layer thiclmeas t 6]. The retardation y of the indicated node is shown in
Figure 9.16 as the function of the thickness t of a dielectric layer positioned
above a conducting shield at a distance of h iron the shield where the dielec-r
tric pernittivity of the layer is c - 6 [6]. The resonant length of the dipole
is taken equal to 14-” II 0.23X/y.

brcitstion of a Printed Circuit Dipole. 'l'he trannission line can be tied into

a printed circuit dipole both perpendicularly to the strip conductor of the i
dipole, and in the plane of the conductor. In the first case, a coax line with a
balancing device is usually enployed, just as in the case of a wire dipole. In
the second, excitation by needs of balanced atripline finds the widest applica-
tions (Figure 9.17s, b). Sonatinea the excitation is act‘mpliahed by means of

a two conductor stripline (Figure 9.17c). As a rule, striplinea connected to the
input of a dipole by neana of transition couplers [07, 016] are connected to
other types of trannission lines (stripline and coaxial transnission lines, as

well as waveguides), which are nore convenient in structural terns and have
better characteristics.

-203-

mmmmv
9.6. Antama Arrays with Printed Circuit Dipole Eluents

Printed circuit dipole radiators are successfully used as phased array elements
both for trannission and reception. The basic node for the study of large planar
arrays is an infinite array, the radiating elements of which are excited by a
current having the sane uplitude and a linearly changing phase. Such a model can
yield satisfactory results for a dipole array over a plane shield where the nuaber
of dipole elements is just 10 x 10. The analysis of a dipole antenna array con-
sists in analyzing the input inpadances as a function of the scan angle. Knowing
these iapedances, the influence of the latter on uni-latching in the feed systen
of the antenna array can be aininizad.

Printed circuit dipoles in a periodic antenna array are placed at its nodes,
usually above a conducting shield. Printed circuit dipoles incorporated in an
antenna array can be combined in quadrupole elnsnts (quadrupoles), as shown in
I’igure 9.18. By changing the interconnection of the dipoles in a quadrupole. one
can substantially change the characteristics of the antenna array. Printed cir-
cuit dipoles are usually assuned to be resonant and lave a size of 2d << A. Under
these conditions, the analysis of an array with dipole elasents can be carried

out based on the existing literature [03, Vol 2; 6]. For dipoles of arbitrary
length, a study of dipole arrays using integral equations is given in [7].

- -~ The Total Input Impedance of a Dipole Element
of an Array Positioned Above a Shield. A
printed circuit dipole as an elasent in an
infinite array. depending on the nunbers n, n,
has an exciting voltage at the input which
varies in accordance with the following law.

11.. 0.3"“: 04'“. (9.13)

 

whereﬁ -. xsinOms 'I'? a xsm Osmtp. K 231/1: ;

ﬁgure 9.13. Quadrupole d‘ and dy are the periods of the array.
elasents of
“Intel,” Since an array is a periodic structure, the

surface current induced with such excitation in
the strip conductors of the dipoles, can be
represented by a Fourier series expansion:

array .

_ ,. ._. é. -~ '_ ---’.
if“); 2: 21‘ 7ng ‘“"'e «is. (9.11.)

where 6... ﬂ ~I- Quin/J... 0!. a ‘| 21mm. ; i is the nunber of the dipole which
canbines the wbscripts n' and n'. The coefficients 933 can be calculated if

the current distribution in the dipole is specified. This distribution is
known for a resonant length dipole. Taking (9.12) into account. the surface
current of the i-th dipole is defined as:

-201...
WWWMY
MWLUSEONLY

 

. It" 3;
,1(fl...v“p_;g. cos 2:. . (9.15)

where I“) is the current at the input to the i-th dipole. Then the Pmrier
coeffic cuts in expansion (9.16) have the fore:

.J. , 2L" 2! d_m_ﬁ.;'._ ‘ 9.16
us- 2"“, J0(a' I d) I-(YﬂuL/“P ' ( )

where Jo is a zero order Bessel function.

The input impedance of a dipole is defined as the ratio of twice the couple:
power P at the surface of the array within the bounds of its eluentary cell to
the square of the absolute value of the current at the dipole input:

2_I’ , I. ~ ' ~ " '2"-
Z' 1—1.1: ”an—(1:3, 2 Emmy...”

nu —-.Iln -.

x M II «MM—iv...- 2101'

fem/K

(9.17)

wait-£613“ + 32+ an - k2; p0 - 120s olsss; h is the spacing free the array to the
. C

The series (9.17) converges, and when calculating the value of 2, one can linit
oneself to a finite nuaber of tens in the series. Knowing the input inpedance
of the dipole, it is not difficult to calculate the reflection factor in the
traneaission line which couples the dipole to the generator. It depmds on the
scan angle and is deter-ined from the formla:

I‘m. q.) M... 2m wile. I 20!. m)! (9.18)

where p. is the characteristic impedance of the feed line.
Formulas (9.17) and (9.18) are easily subjected to merical study.

When studying the influence of the input impedance of a dipole on the reflection
factor, which deternines the conditions in the transmission line, a distinction
nust be drawn between the behavior of the resistive R and the reactive X
couponents of the inpedance. As studies of dipole arrays shown, these components
are different functions of the scan angle. For this reason, the convergence of
series (9.17) when calculating the quantities R and 1: requires separate
treatment. when additional nain lobes are absent in the directiona1< pattern of
an array. one can linit oneself to one tern of the series (9.17), which corres-
ponds to the nunber :- - 0 and n - 0, to calculate the resistive couponent R.

The calculation of the reactive component It requires taking a large nunber of

-205-

MWNONLY
FORMIJSEONLY

tens of this series into account [03, Vol. 2). The detailed analysis of the
quantities R and It depends on the specific dimensions of the antenna array.
However. there is no need in many cases to know the true value of the total input
inpedance 2, since the array elenmts are matched for a certain scan angle,
usually nornal to ,the plane of the array. In this case, it is of interest to
change the input impedance when changing the scan angle, which reduces the value
of computational work.

The Total Input Inpedance of a Quadrupole Bluent of an Array. A systan of tw
coupled dipoles, which form a quadrupole element of an array (Figure 9.18), is
excited by the voltage 110 of a generator which is connected to its center point.
Depending on the masher n, n of the quadrupole element, the exciting voltage
varies in accordance with (9.13). By representing the wrface current induced in
the strip conductors of the dipoles with expansion (9.11.), where i - l, 2, we
obtain the expansion factors for the current in the following fora on analogy with
(9.16):

5.3....2 "W” 1.0%,!) couch-L)

 

«,4, l—(aa.L/I)‘ '
. (gnu code-.1.) _
a:— 27:4. Maud) I—(muui’ (9.19)

Taking (9.19) into account, the internal and mutual inpedances of the dipoles
comprising the quadrupole, luv. where u, v . 1,2, are deternined by expression

[5]:

.,__ 43"!— " il)‘
z..- 2/3“”4” p. 2 2 3... x

 

xvii: 1',“ " (l—e‘mm').
M

(9.20)

 

where no - 120!

Because of the identical nature of the dipoles, we write 211 - 222. The series
(9.20) converges, and when calculating the quantity luv, one can limit oneself to
a finite nuaher of terns in the series.

The input iapedance of a quadrupole, 2 - R + 1x, as a generator load, is cmposed
of the input inpedances of the dipoles under conditions of their mtual coupling,
transfer-ed to the point where the generator is connected. Then, taking (9.20)
into account, we have [5]:
. U.

I‘lhfﬂ.”
—2lzuwas?!sinylmzu+zu+22..(sin'yl_¢ossm 4.

+ 219? (Zulu—2:. —oX)cos ylsln 7!]. (9.21)

 

'5 “Zn zn—zfl) 008’ 71—93 sin’ y!—

-205-

”MUSIONLY
FORWUSEONLY

where ”A' y and Z are the characteristic impedance, propagation constant and
length of the transmission line segment respectively (Figure 9.18).

Knowing the input impedance of a quadrupole, Z, we calculate the reflection factor
No, 0) from formula (9.18), where this factor determines the conditions in the
quadrupole tran-ission line as a function of the scan angle. The ranarks made

for a dipole element of an array also apply to the calculation of the quantities
2m, and Z.

The design calculations for a printed circuit dipole array are carried out using
the procedure indicated in Chapter 2. The design of a dipole and s quadrupole
as elatents of an array with a selected cell size for the array, consists in
choosing prined circuit dipolea at the resonant length (see 59.6) and the quadru-
pole dimensions, with the subsequent calculation of the input impedances using
formlas (9.17) and (9.21) respectively, as well as the reflection factor I‘ in
the transmission line using formula (9.18). The array gain can be determined
based on I‘ (see Chapter 2). If the gain is less than the requisite value, the
design calculations are performed for other array dimensions.

The study of dipole arrays has shown that the size of an array cell is one of the
major parameters governing the input impedance of a dipole. Cell dimensions should
be chosen somewhat less than follows from the condition for the lack of additional
main lobes in the directional pattern. This makes it possible to match the input
impedances of the dipoles in the array in a wider scan sector. Horeover, an
important paraneter is the spacing of the array dipoles, h, from the shield. It
has been determined that one can select a value of h such that the dipole mis-
matching in the scan sector is the same in the B and I! planes. In this case,
the mame value of the SRR in the transmission line is minimized and the best
matching results are obtained within the scanning sector. The initial value is

h - 0.25%. As a result of matching, one can obtain a sun of no more than two in
a scan sector of 65'.

9.7. Other Printed Circuit Radiating Syetmas

Also to be singled out among printed circuit antennas are planar spirals (detailed
data on them are given in [03, Vol. 2], as well as other types of antennas, the

major difference in which is the manner of excitation. We stall consider a few of
them.

Dipoles Systeas With In-Phase Excitation. Dipole arrays with in-phase excitation
find practical applications. The connection of the dipoles in a quadrupole (sec
59.7) makes it possible to produce in-phase apertures. the effective arm of which
is practically the same as the geometric area of the aperture. For this reason, in
composing apertures of different areas, the width of the antenna bema directed
along the normal to its. surface can change. An example of a quadrupole composed

of triangular dipoles is shown in Figure 9.19. Another method of in-phase excita-
tion of dipoles is their series connection to the tranmaiaeion line, similar to
the excitation of a system of resonator type radiators (sec 59.0.. Series excita-
tion is extremely narrow band.

-207 -

FOR 0mm USE ONLY
I-‘OIOl-‘FIOALUSEONLY

Figure 9.19. An indphase antenna array
of four printed circuit
dipoles.

Key: 1. Quarter-wavelength trans-
' formers;
2. Matching slot.

 

Figure 9.20. A five element dipole array
with resonant excitation.

      

eld Key: 1. Array eluenta;

     
   
 

how it“? [may 2. Renaission line.
" “163A...“ Dielectric
InPUt am) Nghield

Dipole Systeas with Resonance Excitation. Series excitation of dipole systems can
also he acconplished by the aethod realized in a Franklin antenna [02]. In this -
case, each dipole of the antenna system mites the next dipole so that' an in-
-phase radiating system is for-ed. An example of the structural design of such

an antenna with five dipole alsnents which are capscitively coupled is shown in
Pigure 9.60. Planar arrays are put together using the sale principle. Radiating
systh with resonant exciation are narrow band systens. The direction of the
radiation depends on the frequency.

Traveling Wave Radiating Systems. The principles employed in the design of
antennas for the long wave band are used in printed circuit radiating systuas
made in the form of traveling wave antennas [Yegi antennas]. An exuaple of such
an antenna (a "sandwich" type) is shown in Figure 9.21. The radiating structure
takes the torn of rig-rag strip conductor (wave shaped), through which the
traveling current wave propagates. The conductor is placed above the conducting
shield. which can be replaced by a resonator. The main radiation direction 60 is

cuputed fro- the for-tile:

' '..',.;.' "
sin --
0' 4/). '

 

where l. is the length of the conductor from point A to point B; d is the
period of the structure. For LIA I l, the angle 0 - 0, and we obtain a transverse
radiation antenna. If LIA - 2, than the angle so - 90‘, i.e., the antenna radi-
ates longitudinally.

Slotted Antennas, Excited by a Strip ‘l‘ranasission Line, are used in the sane band
of frequencies as slotted waveguide antennas. In contrast to the latter, slotted

antennas have the advantage that the tran-sission has practically no dispersion.
For this reason, the frequency dependence of the characteristics of these slotted

-zm-

mmuseomv
antennas is less than for slotted waveguide antennas. Drawbacks to the slot an-
tennas are the increased requirments placed on the tranmaission stripline for

antennas of great length and the necessity of experimentally working out its
dimensions.

eBOMtOl'B (1)
, JOIN/"0’0! ‘/. ”mnmﬁuwm

  
  

.---.oou-.--u"

   

 

(1) Ilmmovnur nuloiqwm

[Myanmar/Mi W 2
(”Alina/”mama nahoum 001:de ””W’ ( )

Figure 9.21; A sandwich type tr-veling Have

Figure 9.22. A slot antenna in a
antenna array.

symmetrical stripline.

Key: 1. Short circuiting pins;
2. Center conductor of
the stripline.

Key: 1. Strip conductors;
2. Dielectric substrate.

Slot radiators for an antenna are cut in the outer conductor of a balanced stripline.
The presence of the slot causes higher modes to appear in the atripline, where a

combination of pine is used to suppress these modes (Figure 9.22). The slot length
is computed from the formula Z - 0.5le: + 15 [08] and is made more precise

      
    
 

%.
\ .
:25
Slots -’
0.50 ”law (1)
”’0” 90 Ohms a ” '
. I!
am / W”
. I: may . . t. .3
I III '
72.56.; ”pnggdﬁewm’r’z (1) _
a) (a) W (b)

Figure 9.23. Excitation configurations for a multislot antenna using

a three-plate symmetrical stripline.
Key: 1. Center conductor of the atripline.

-209-

FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experimentally. The coupling of the slot to the transmission stripline is adjusted
by shifting the slot relative to the center conductor of the line.

has excitation circuits, which are shown in Figure 9.23, are used for comparatively
mall slot arrays. The circuit which realizes series excitation of the slot is
shown in Figure 9.23s. The dimensions indicated in the schematic were worked out
experimentally. The circuit which provides for excitation of the slots with
identical electrical paths is shown in Figure 9.23b. In long arrays, the slots are
ucited by traveling waves in the feed line. It is also possible to have slot
«citation in a standing wave node. The directional characteristics of slot arrays
are determined just as for slotted waveguide antennas (see Chapter 5).

A slot antenna excited by a stripline is convenient for frequency scanning. To
increase the phase difference between adjacent slots with a change in frequency,
one can place devices in the stripline which increase its electrical length, in
particular, caploy a zigzag center conductor for the stripline. The electrical
length between the slots can anount to several wavelengths. Thus, one can obtain
wide angle scanning. A seaming angle of up to 60' has been obtained in the 3-cm
band when the frequency is changed by 51.

-210-

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

10. YAGI RADIATORS FOR PLANAR PHASED ANTENNA ARRAYS
10.1. Phased Arrays of Yagi Radiators

A design procedure is given in this chapter for antenna arrays of radiators in
the form of director antennas, or as they are still called, "wave channel"
antennas [yagi antennas] [05] (Figure 10.1). The technique is realized in the
form of a computer program which makes it possible to calculate the Iain charac-
teristics and optimal geometric dimensions of the array radiators.

The set of the directors of the antenna array radiators form an interacting
structure, which can be treated as a layer of an artificial dielectric, covering
the array [08]. By varying the parameters of this dielectric, one can improve
the matching of the array radiators to the exciting feedlincs in a specified

scan sector, which is an important merit of yagi radiators [2]. Such antenna
arrays can be used in the traditional meter and decimeter bands for yagi antennas.
The development of stripline technology has made it possible to use yagi radia-
tors in the centimeter band.

~.—.,—

    

\\\ \ R

 

Figure 10.1. Schematic of a yagi Figure 10.2. The geometry of a phased
radiator. yagi array.

During antenna array beam scanning. because of the interaction of the radiators,
there is a change in the input impedances which leads to their mismatching.
Therefore, when designing antenna arrays, it is necessary to assure those geo-
metric dimensions of the radiators, shape and dimensions of a cell in the

array [03] and parameters of the radiator input circuit for which the beat
matching of the radiators of the array to the exciting feedlines is provided in
the specified scan sector in the working band of frequencies. Since mismatching
during scanning is due to the interaction of the radiators, which occurs only

in arrays, the design of a yagi radiator should be based on the analysis of its
characteristics as a part of an array of identical elements.

10.2. Analysis of the Electromagnetic Field of a Phased Antenna Array of Yagi
Radiators

The properties of an antenna array of yagi radiators (Figure 10.2) can be des—
cribed most completely by means of solving the electrodynamic boundary problem
for Maxwell's equations in the case of boundary conditions for the tangential
components of the field vectors at the separation boundary ot‘the different media.

- 2;; -

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of phased arrays with large dimensions (more than 10 x 10 radiators),
the mismatching of the majority of its radiators, located in the central region
of the array. can be studied using a simpler model in the form of an infinite
antenna array with a uniform amplitude distribution [08].

An infinite planar array is a periodic structure. the study of the electromagnetic
field of which can be reduced to the solution of the electrodynamic boundary
problem in one cell of the structure [08]. This boundary problem is solved based
on the formulation of an integral equation for the currents in the dipoles of a
yagi radiator and solving it by the method of moments [2]. As a result, the
following expressions are derived for the directional pattern of a radiator in
the array when the dipoles are oriented along the y axis (Figure. 10.2):

F..(0 V) few ‘3’, (7- “) 2 x but (7- a) In! (7: a) £5 (0) Sill OI!»

l-o n-o

r. (0. '9) nonsosin «*1 (1. u) 2‘, 2‘, bum. u)g.uh(0)sin 011..

l-Oll-I (10.1)
where b...» .- Mali/".1!” are the expansion coefficients for the current
distribution in :h: k-th dipole of a ysgi radiator for the sinusoidal harmonics
of the current: _ .._

t‘:’(y)--sin[—’"- I. "(%—-—t )1, m=l.2,.,.,M

(1k is the length and h is the mounting height of the k-th dipole) (Figure 10.1).
The quantitiesxmk are determined from the solution of a system of linear

algebraic equations . M

k§0n§lxn'r Zm'h'mh(7l“)""laahh (10.2)

where 2“?“ are the mutual impedances for the m'-th current harmonic in the
k'-th dipole and the m-th current harmonic in the k-th dipole of a radiator when
the entire array is excited. Expressions for the mutual impedances are given
in [2]: - - - n. .

I .7. (—l)"'""”. m "cannot. °dd
" 0 . m ucmoc. even

where 6 v is Kronecker' a delta: 61¢ - l, Gav - 0 when It If k'; 1(7, u) is the
currentktn the gap of the active dipole;

1r-xsinOcostp;u=xsin05inqn0wncosa (10 3)
The directional pattern of a radiator in an array is influenced by the parameters
of the equivalent circuit of its input circuit (Figure 10.3). In this circuit,
the characteristic impedance of the transmission feedline p, the transformation

ratio of the ideal transformer n and the reactive component ,1: are the equivalent
parameters of its input four-pole network;

K
Zuhhﬂl-I 2‘, 2 .54 bn' 'h'bmozn‘h'.m0(vru) (10.4)

-212-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR'0F11CJA1.lEﬂE(MVLY

is the input impedance of the active dipole, taking into account the influence of
the directors and the adjacent radiators (when the entire array is excited with
a uniform amplitude and a linear phase distribution).

This impedance (in contrast to the input impedance of an individually excited
radiator) is frequently called the effective input impedance. It follows from
the equivalent circuit that the dipole current is:

' In. a)= 2nV?p/zz . (7. mm. (10.5)

n

 

where Z, 9’ n’p 'l' j.\'.

It is usually necessary in practice to
turn to the experimental alignment of
the input circuit for good matching of

 

,0 the radiators, for example, using a wave-
guide model of the phased array [08],
'kn which corresponds to matching of the
Figure 10.3. The equivalent circuit of phased array for radiation in a certain
a yagi radiator. direction 80, ¢0‘ It is not difficult

to determine from the equivalent circuit
that for the condition of matching, the equivalent parameters of the input four-
pole network are defined by the expressions:

“ " I Re 2a: (70' "0/0: X "' ‘lm Zn (7.- “0):

(10.6)
where \'-- - - 1: sin 0. cm «a; u. = 1: sin 0,, am In..-

For this reason, when calculating the characteristics of phased arrays, it is
expedient to assume that the equivalent parameters of the input circuit corres-
pond to (10.6), and when designing the circuit, it is necessary to provide for
the selection of its equivalent parameters in accordance with the calculated

or measured value of the effective input inpedance zin(Y0' no).

Based on the effective input impedance of a radiator, one can determine the
effective reflection factor from the radiator input. Re have from the equivalent
circuit and formulas (10.6):

_ 2.,(1. u)—z..n-.. néi . (10.7)

"" ‘Zn (1'. u) m. (n. u.)

l23x ' in]

Information on a program written in the algorithmic Fortran language which
realizes the calculation of the indicated characteristics of a yagi radiator in
an array using the BESH-é computer is given in [1].

10.3. The Characteristics of a Yagi Radiator in a Planar Phased Antenna Array

It is essential to know the number of the current harmonics in the dipoles, H,
and the number of spatial Floquet harmonics [08], which must be taken into

- 213 -

FOI(NHHCJAI.USE(NVLY
F{MICHHHCJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY

account when calculating the mutual inpedances in (10.2) to obtain satisfactory
precision in practice in calculations of the characteristics of a radiator in

an array. Computations show that for a dipole length of 0.2 to 0.7 A, to assure
a precision of 0.5 to 1: it is sufficient to retain three to five harnonics
when calculating the B-planc directional pattern and one to three harmonica
when calculating the H-plane directional pattern. In this case, the requisite
nunber of Floquet spatial harmonics anounts 60-100 [2]. A slightly greater
error, running up to a few percent. will he observed in this case in a narrow
region of sharp resonance changes in the directional pattern. To illustrate the
convergence of the solution, the directional patterns of a yagi radiator in an
array are shown in Figure 10.6a in the B-plane where the different nuabere of
current harnonics considered are H . l, 3, 5.

Hem/ﬂu, 9,7? m, .64 4,72!
to

 
   
 
    

 
  
 
  

, to [-aaamonwe _ Aﬁamwmvcea plane
46 a: ; 5" .
. .. 1,,- 4311
a! 46
at at

a: 42

’ 20 u a? cor " 20 we,» an
a) (a). I) (1,) '

 

Figure 10.6. The directional pattern of a yagi radiator in an array
with a rectangular grid.

”hwy/A '

1,0

 

d!

a:

at

 

Figure 10.5. The directional pattern of a yagi radiator in an array
with a triangular grid.

An important feature of a yagi radiator is the possible presence of sharp reso-
nance "dips" of a finite depth in its directional pattern in the ﬂ-plsne (and in

- 214 -

IKNlCIHHK1A1.USB(H'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

other close planes where lo] ; 30--6S') (Figure 10.6b). In particular. in an
array with a rectangular grid, a dip occurs in the B-plane in directions close to
the angle 6, 0-1 - arcsin(x/d* - 1) on the part of the snaller values. The angle
e_1 is frequently called the grazing" diffraction lobe occurrence angle. In

the general case, the directions of the dips are also close to the directions

of the "grazing" diffraction lobes, which are determined from the equation:

1 a
(sinOoosqa+ I p) -|.(sino.sinq~-| qu—di pctg (5)2: I. (10.3)
. U 3

where p, q - 0, :_l are the numbers of the diffraction lobes (p2 + Q2 f 0). The
dip in the directional pattern of a yagi radiator is due to the retarding pro-
perties of the aggregate of array directors where the dipole length is less than
resonant (about 1/2) [3]. If the retarding interacting director structure is
treated as a layer of an artificial dielectric [07], then as follows from a
comparison with an array covered with a dielectric plate [08, 09], the existence
of a dip is to be anticipated if the retardation of the yagi structure is
sufficiently great. The greater this retardation and the coating thickness,

the closer the dip should be shifted to the transverse direction to the array.
This shift actually occurs when the retardation increases in a director structure,
in particular, with a reduction in the spacing between the directors and with

an increase in their length (but no greater than the resonance length) [3], and
amounts to a few degrees (Figure 10.6b).

5N9". d,/l' I/p’msg/A’
£0

  

  

I 0 I
10 kt n ‘20) I! I

Figure 10.6. The directional pattern of an optimised yagi radiator
in an array.

a. Rectangular grid:

b. Triangular grid:

Since the analogy with the case of an array covered with a dielectric layer is

not complete, there can also be no dip in the directional pattern of a yagi
radiator at certain values of the radiator parameters (for K - l in Figure 10.6b).

In this case. there is a sharp rolloff in the directional pattern at angles of
0 > 8-1. -

Since with an increase in the wavelength, the direction of a dip moves away from
the transverse direction to the array, then the array step in the H-plane, dx.
is to be chosen from the condition for single bean scanning at the upper working
frequency in an angular sector which exceeds the specified scan sector by the
width of the dip region in the directional pattern of a radiator in the array.

- 215 ?
l-‘OI omcuu. ‘uss ONLY
F0l10IIHCIA1.lﬂﬂ!(MVLY

By virtue of the fact that dipoles do not radiate along their own axis, a dip

does not occur in the directional pattern of a radiator, as a rule, in the 8-
plane and in planes close to it (Iol = 1/2) (Figure 10.ha). Since the directional
pattern of a yagi radiator in the E-plsne is of a smooth monotonic nature and
takes on small values at angles of 6 close to 90', then the spacing between
radiators in the E—plane, d , can be chosen somewhat greater than the value

which follows from the cond tion for single beam scanning. The step dy is

chosen depending on the permissible decrease in the gain at the edge of the

scan sector and the permissible diffraction lobe level at the highest frequency.

Arrays with a triangular grid and the dipoles oriented along one of the sides
of a triangular cell are an exception. In this case, a dip also occurs in the
B-plane (Figure 10.5). For this reason, the use of such a grid is not expedient
in a number of cases. A grid with an orthogonal orientation of the dipoles is
preferable, in which there is no dip in the B-plane (Figure 10.6b).

However, it must be remembered that all of the directional patterns cited here
belong to an infinite array.

The finite dimensions of an actual antenna array has an impact first of all on
the directional pattern of a radiator in the region of the dip. The finite
nature of a phased array is not felt if the dimensions of an array are so great
that the beam width does not exceed the region of the dip. Hith a decrease in
array dimensions, the depth of the dip will fall off, while its width will
increase in proportion to the beam width of the array. With a further reduction
in antenna dimensions, the dip completely disappears. In this case, a model in
the form of an infinite array can be considered justified only for directions
falling outside the region of the dip in an infinite antenna array.

19.4. The Optimization of a Yagi Radiator in an Array

He shall now consider questions of designing the geometry of a yagi radiator:

the choice of the number of directors. the length, the mounting height, etc.

The existence of a program for calculating radiator characteristics on a computer
makes it possible to automate this portion of the design work to a certain
extent. The mathematical tools for this are numerical optimization techniques
[4]. where these techniques are used, by working from the requirements placed
on the antenna array characteristics, a so-called quality indicator is put
together, which depends on the radiator parameters. Numerical optimization
algorithms provide for searching out the optimal values of the parameters which
attain the extremal value of the quality indicator.

The average array gain in the scanning sector can frequently be chosen as the
quality indicator for the phased array, which by virtue of (2.13), is propor-
tional to the quantity: ‘

I~= £3153: cp)|'sin0d0dq~. (10.9)

where “CK is the scan sector.

-216.
monomv
FOIlOFFﬂﬂAl.USE(M‘LY

The optimization of a yagi radiator based on this quality indicator is carried
out in accordance with the program of [l]. Computation of the double integral
of (10.9) in the program is replaced by summing using Gauss' formula (n - 6)

for the inner integral with respect to 0 and using the rectangle formula for the
outside integral with respect to 0. Since the range of variation in the radiator
parameters is limited: the spacing between the dipoles is always greater than
their width, the length of the dipoles is always positive, etc., it is necessary
to employ optimization techniques with limitations [6]. Since the quality
indicator (10.9) is always positive, one can employ the following variant of
the external penalty function technique: set f - 0 outside the range of permis-
sible values of the parameters. To find the extremum of the resulting function
f, defined in an unlimited range of values of the arguments, the method of local
variations is employed in the program [4].

The major parameters which characterize the properties of the yagi structure
(Figure 10.1) are taken as the parameters to be optimized in the program. These
are the mounting height for the layer of directors hl' the spacing between the
dipoles Ah I hk+1 - “R (k - l, 2, ... K - 1) which is assumed to be constant,
the length of the first director 1 and the shortening of the directors A -

k+1 - k (k - l, 2, ... K - l), which is also taken to be constant. As a
result of this, the number of variables is curtailed so much that it is now
possible to optimize a radiator in a comparatively small amount of machine time.
In this case, the following approach to the design of a yagi radiator can be
proposed. The optimization with respect to the selected main parameters is
carried out in a first approximation (H - 1) in the first stage. Then, treating
the resulting geometry of a radiator as the starting point, a more precise
selection of these parameters is made for H - 3...5. In the third stage, the
radiator can be optimized with respect to the remaining parameters, for example,
one can choose the best 00, e0 matching direction. Such an approach to the
solution makes it possible to choose parameters for a yagi radiator, expending
no more than a few hours of BBSH-é computer time on each step. Results of
calculations show that even after the first optimization step, sufficiently
good matching of the radiator to space is achieved, so that the subsequent steps
may prove to be superfluous.

Since a quality indicator usually has several local extreme, the choice of the
starting point for the optimization program is of considerable importance.
Calculations show that such parameters as the mounting height hl and the length
of the first dipole 11, can be arbitrarily chosen in a range of hl - 0.25-0.4 A
and 11 - 0.3-0.b A. At the same time, depending on the choice of the initial
values of the parameters Ah and Al, one can obtain different "optimal" values .
of the parameters. For this reason, it is necessary to take somewhat different
starting sets of values for Ah and Al. Usually, these quantities fall in a
range of Ah - 0.l--0.35 A and d1 - -0.05--0.15 l. The initial direction for
the matching can be arbitrary, just so the condition 80 < 8_1 is met, for
example, 80 - 0. Experience with the calculations shows that the number of
directors in a radiator is expediently chosen larger than K - 2--3.

The directional patterns of an optimized ysgi radiator with three directors in
a scan sector of 1 00' in the H-plsne and :_60° in the B-plane are shown in
Figure 10.6a for a rectangular grid with steps of d‘ - 0.6 A and dy - 0.54 A.

-217...

mom'mtwtomv
IIHI(HWWC141.USEIDNLY

The directional patterns of a dipole radiator (K - 0) are also shown in this

same figure for comparison. As can be seen from these curves, the reduction in
the gain of the array for optimized radiators as compared to the maximum possible
value amounts to 0.3 dB overall in the scan sector. This is considerably less
than for an array of radiators consisting only of one active dipole (K - 0).

Better matching to space in the main planes can be achieved in an antenna array
with a triangular grid for the configuration of the radiators, since in this

case, the dip in the directional pattern of a radiator in the H-plane is

removed considerably from the transverse direction. However, the dip in the plane
IQI - 30’ is brought closer to the direction of the normal in this case. The
directional patterns of an optimized yagi radiator in an array with an equilateral
triangular grid for a specified scan sector of IOI‘; 32° and array steps of d‘ -
0.7653 A and dy - 0.6615 A are shown in Figure 10.6b. As can be seen, practically
ideal matching of the phased array in the single beam sector is achieved, with

the exception of a narrow dip region.

It must be noted that the quality indicator in the cases cited here has yet
another maximun at Ah - 0.03--0.05 A and Al - -0.05-0.06 A, which corresponds
to a more compact structural design of the yagi radiator. However, the maximum
gain losses of the phased array in this case because of mismatching amount to
about 0.5 dB.

The calculation of the characteristics of optimized radiators in a band of fre-
quencies shows that an array matched to space at the high frequency remains
well matched with a reduction of 201 and more in the frequency, given the
condition that the parameters of the input circuit conform to (10.6).

10.5. Designing the Input Circuit of a Yagi Radiator

The conditions for matching the radiators of an array during scanning in a
chosen direction 80. ’0 (10.6) seen that the input circuit accomplishes the
matching of the characteristic impedance of the transmission line 9 to the
impedance of the load 21n(y , uo) in a specified frequency band. Such an input
circuit is designed using t e methods of microwave network theory.

He shall consider the procedure for designing the simplest input circuit. The
structural design of a linear array of yagi radiators for the centimeter hand
using striplines is shown in Figure 10.7a [6]. In this figure: 1 are the
directors of the radiator; 2 is the active dipole; 3-5 are the balancing device
elements for the excitation of the dipole; 6 is the exciting stripline radiator;
7 is a phase shifter; 8 is a directional coupler; 9 is the matched load for

the free arm of the coupler; 10 is the distribution stripline exciting the
phased array; 11 is the dielectric substrate. The dashed lines show the confi-
guration of the conductors on the back side of the substrate.

The strip transmission line section 4 is a quarter-wave transformer [06] which
matches the load impedance connected to the balancing device in the active dipole

gap to the characteristic impedance of exciting line 6. The short circuited loop
5 using a slotted transmission line provides for symmetrical excitation of the

- 218 -

FOI!0FFKJA1.USI(HVLY
FI”!(HWﬂ(JAL.USE(NNLY

dipole. At the center frequency, its length is - ASIA, where X5 is the wave-
length in the slotted line. In the case of a purely resistive load, the length
of an open-circuited section of atripline 3 is also equal to Ablb (1‘ is the
anelength in the atripline). In the general case, the length ‘3 is chosen from
the condition for the compensation of the reactive component of the input
impedance of the radiator: .e-

etc (285/10 = Xe: (n. "0/0:-

(10.10)

 

Figure 10.7. The structural design of a linear atripline array of
yagi radiators (a) and the equivalent circuit of the
exciter (b).

The characteristic impedance of the quarter-wave transformer 96 - 93 is deter-
mined by the values of the impedances being matched [06]:

p‘ = ang ('0. U.) 9.. (10 o 11)

The calculation of the wavelength in atripline and slotted line, as well as the
calculation of the geometric dimensions of the lines based on a specified value
of the characteristic impedance can be carried out using the techniques given
in [5].

Since the input circuit configuration cited here can provide for only narrow
band matching of the radiator to the transmission line, the entire calculation
is carried out at the center frequency. The pasaband of such a radiator amounts
to a few percent. Since the methods of calculating the input circuitry are
rather approximate, while the mathematical model for the yagi array considered
here is idealized, the results obtained from calculating the parameters of the
input network require an experimental improvement in the precision. As has
already been noted, this is conveniently done using a waveguide model of the
phased array, which simulates the radiation in the direction 60. 00.

If the requisite pasaband of a radiator is more than 101, then a more complex
microwave network is to be used instead of the quarter-wave transformer (A),

-219-
monimiusrmv
FIHIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

where broadband matching techniques must be used for the design of this network

[7).
10.6. A Design Procedure for a Yagi Radiator for Phased Antenna Arrays

Various sets of initial data are possible for the design of a yagi radiator.
Typical is the specification of the scan sector, the permissible reduction in
the gain during scanning and the permissible level of the sidelobes of the
phased array. The parameters of a unit cell in the array dx, diaand ’ can be
chosen based on these initial data (see chapter 2). In particu r, with a
rectangular grid for the layout of the radiators. the steps are chosen in
accordance with the specified scan sector using formula (2.3). and in the case
of a triangular grid, using formula (2.4).

The mounting height of the active dipole, ho, is ordinarily chosen equal 0.2-
0.25 A and the length 10 - 0.LS--0.5 A. The thickness of the dipoles is chosen
in a range of 0.02 to 0.05 x and the matching direction 90 < 0_1. The number

of directors of a radiator is chosen as K - l and the initial values of the
radiator parameters being varied, 11 and hl are chosen in accordance with the
recs-endations given in S 10.6; the initial optimization of the radiator para-
meters is accomplished on a computer for the case where H - 1. It is necessary
for the optimization program to specify the precision in the determination of
the extremum and the error in the determination of the optimal dimensions of

the dipoles. It is usually sufficient to take the former as 0.005 - 0.01, and
the precision in the determination of the geometric dieensions as 0.005 - 0.01 A.
The Optimization results are evaluated in the sense of attaining the specified
radiator characteristics. The array steps are made more precise in accordance
with the recommendations given in S 10.3. In particular, the array step can

be slightly increased in the E-plane, given the condition of assuring a specified
gain and diffraction lobe level. where necessary. the number of directors is
increased and the the initial value of the parameters Al and Ah is specified
(see 5 10.4). The optimal dimensions of an array cell and the radiators are
found as a result of several trial and error calculations. which are then made
more precise using optimization programs where H - 3-5.

Based on the value of the input impedance 21n(y . uo) obtained with the computer,
the input network is designed and the structure? design of the antenna array
is worked out.

The calculation of the directional pattern characteristics of the antenna array
is then carried out on the whole in accordance with the general procedure (see

Chapter 2).

f 220 -

FOI:(IHﬂ(1AI.lI§l2(H§LY
IIIICHﬂﬂCbA1.lEﬂE(NVLY

11. APPROXIMATE DESIGN CALCULATIONS FOR PNASED NAVEGUIDB ANTENNA ARRAYS TAKING
MUTUAL COUPLING INTO ACCOUNT

11.1. General Considerations

The open ends of waveguides are the most widespread radiators for antenna arrays
in the centimeter band. Various modifications of waveguide radiators. realized
by means of dielectric inserts, stops and other devices, are described in Chapter
12. A design procedure for phased array geometry is given in I 2.12 without
taking mutual coupling into account. The results of such design calculations

can be used as the initial approximation in drawing up the mathematical model

of a phased array, in which the interaction between radiators. edge effect,

excitation circuit configuration, etc. should be taken into account in the
general case.

An approximate design procedure for phased arrays is proposed in this chapter
using graphs, calculated taking mutual coupling into effect. The graphs are
plotted for planar waveguide arrays with a rectangular grid for the arrangement
of the radiators in the case of small cross-sections of the waveguide radiators
and small thickness of their walls. In such arrays. the mutual coupling is due
primarily to the dominant mode, however, the majority of the graphs in this
chapter were plotted taking into account the existence of higher modes also.
Thus, the material of this chapter makes it possible to improve on the precision
of the design procedure adopted in Chapter 2.

11.2. Design Graphs

The concept of the gain of an element in an array was introduced in Chapter 2
(formula (2.16)). The power transmission gain of 1 - r2(o. O). incorporated
in (2.16) is a function of the position of the main lobe of the directional
pattern (a , .max)' since as is well known, the input admittance of the

radiators :3: the reflection factor r(e, 0) change during the scanning process.

- z
I V1 4%:

 

ﬁner
a7 (a)

 

Figure 11.1. The power transmission gain in the case of B-plane (a)
and ﬂ-plane (b) scanning for various spacings between
the array radiators.

- 221 -

FOR40FFNJA1.USI(NVLY
FilltlﬂﬂC1A1.US£10NlY

Curves are plotted in Figure 11.1 which characterize the change in the power
transmission gain during scanning in the E and B-planes for an infinite wave-
guide array with a rectangular grid for the radiator layout with various
spacings dx and d between the radiators (see Figure 2.1) [l]. The curves in
the B-plane were gbtained experimentally; they were calculated for the H-plane
assuming infinitely thin walls (a - dx and b - d,). The arrows on the abscissa
indicate the values of the angles emax’ which when the main lobe deviates by
these amounts. a grazing (at an angle of 90') diffraction maximum appears.
Corresponding to each spacing between the radiators (dx or d ), as is well
known, is its own value of e..x. With the deflection of the main lobe through
an angle approximately equal to emax' a sharp mismatching of the radiators to
the feeders is observed, the reflection increases while the power transmission
gain falls off. The sharp drop in the power transmission gain limits the scan

sector 89c . In the case of E-plane scanning, the permissible scan sector is
less than :ﬂe ultimate angle 6.333:

escan E ' 0'"me '-0..s&'0.70..'e. (11.1)
when scanning in the H-plane, enax ﬂ practically coincides with the angle o‘can H-

Hhen taking only dominant mode mutual coupling into account, the reflection
factor changes monotonically within the bounds of the scan sector escan'
The maxi-um permissible beam deflection
angles 9 n B and 0 is shown in
Figure lifi as a fungglgnnof the spacing
between the array radiators for the
dominant mode.

The reflection factor can be determined
as a function of the aperture dimensions
of the radiators and the spacings between
them taking mutual coupling via higher
Figure 11.2. The permissible scan sec- modes into account using the results

tor as a function of the found in the literature [08]. Also

spacing between array studied there is the reflection factor

radiators. as a function of the waveguide wall

thickness t in an infinite array. It is

shown that changing the thickness of the waveguide walls with a constant spacing
between waveguides has no impact on the position of the minimum gain in the
scan sector which is due to the considerable mismatching at the moment of the
appearance of the highest, the first maximum in the array factor; on the other
hand, changing the thickness of the walls has a substantial influence on the
absolute value of the reflection factor.

 

The change in the absolute value and phase of the reflection factor in the B and
H-planes for various thicknesses of the waveguide walls is shown in Figures 11.3
and 11.5 by way of example. In accordance with these figures, as well as based
on similar curves available in the literature [08] for other array dimensions.
one can plot generalizing graphs for the maximum possible reflection factor in

- 222 -

FOR OFFICIAI.lEﬂECNVLY
FOI.051ﬂ(1AI.lEﬂB(HULY

the scan sector as a function of the dimensions of one radiator, a and b. for the
case of a constant spacing between radiators (Figure 11.5). One can draw the
following conclusions based on what has been presented.

lrl
«Lug-emu

 

4' 43 am,

Figure 11.3. The absolute value of the
reflection factor for 3-
plane scanning as a func-
tion of waveguide wall
thickness.

 

9 4/ a: a: 47 stat,

l. The maximum value of the absolute value
of the reflection factor occurs with
radiation along a normal when scanning in
the B-plane in a planar array of rectan-
gular smooth waveguides with a small
cross-section, which are placed at the
junction nodes of a rectangular grid.

The absolute value of the reflection fac-
tor IFI is greater, the smaller the
radiator aperture a for a constant d‘,

or what is the sane thing, the thicker
the waveguide wall.

Using the curves of Figure 11.5b, one
can approximate the absolute value of
the reflection factor for the case of
radiation along the normal based on the
selected spacing between the radiators
dx/A and the aperture dimensions of a
single radiator.

[00

(ca

  

a: as 4: 47am.

\

Figure 11.0. The absolute value of F and the phase, argr, of the

reflection factor for the case of H-plane scanning as
a function of waveguide wall thickness.

2. In the case of B-plane scanning, the reflection factor function is more

comples.
not only on b and
H-plane.

Its absolute value in the case of radiation along the normal depends
, but also on the a and dx dimensions of the array in the
"hen the main lobe of the direction pattern is deflected from the

normal, |r| initially falls off to a certain minimum value, and then rises
rather sharply. Corresponding to each waveguide wall thickness is its own main
lobe deflection angle for which |r| is minimal. The maximum value of Irlmax

- 223 -

INJR OFIWCLAL lﬂﬂE(N‘LY
0,5 0.6 0/;-
(a) m

Figure 11.5. The maximum reflection factor of a radiating waveguide
for various vall thicknesses in the case of E-plane (a)
and H-plane (b) scanning.

 

(Figure 11.5a) is obtained in the majority of cases at the edge of the scan
sector (thus, for exanple, for b/x - 0. 5716 when 6 . 38° and b/A I 0. 6726 when
9 - 25°, where the angles 38’ and 25° bound the scan sector for the correspond-
ing array dimensions), and If] rises considerably outside the bounds of the

8C“ sector.

The graphs of Figure 11.5a were plotted
with respect to two points, and can
therefore be used only in rough calcula-
tions. The resulting graph (Figure 11.6)
vas plotted based on the curves of Figure
11.5, which shows what maximum mismatch
20 so ‘0 ’, can be anticipated in an array when

“ scanning throughout the entire permissible

Figure 11.6. The maximum reflection sector oscan 1“ the B '“d n-planes.
factor as a function of
the selected scan sector,
ecu [9 l in the B-
plane iﬁﬁfaa curves) and
B-plane (dashed curves).

 

The maximum permissible mismatching in the
exciting waveguides I!‘Ila I may be stipu-
lated in the technicalIla specifications
when designing the antenna array. Then
the permissible scan sector will be limit-
ed by the specified value of Irlmax and
can be determined for the waveguide array without the matching devices using

the graph of Figure 11.6. As can be seen from Figure ll. 6, the reflection

factor cannot be less than 0.2 for any vall thickness or dimensions of the
waveguide aperture when scanning in a sector of more than 30'.

If the requisite values of the maximum permissible reflection factor and scan
sector are not assured, then a provision should be made for matching the
radiators to the exciting waveguides. Impedance transformers, dielectric inserts
inside the waveguides and dielectric coatings in the antenna aperture can be
employed as the matching devices. The presence of a dielectric can substantially
improve the matching thoughout the entire scan sector, but at the same time, it
leads to the appearance of anomalous nulls in the gain.

- 226 -

IKIIC”WHCIAL.USI(MULY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Questions of matching waveguide radiators in scanning arrays are treated in
detail in Chapter 12.

The graphs shown in Figures ll.2--ll.6 can be successfully used to determine
the reflection factor in waveguide phased arrays where the waveguide wall
thickness is small and where their cross-section dimensions satisfy the condi-
tions: _ . __
a<kab<Qﬂ.
(11.2)

In this case, the interaction of higher modes changes the reflection factor by
no more than 101 as compared to the value calculated when taking only the
dominant mode into account.

The direct method of determining the reflection factor r(e, ¢). taking mutual
coupling via higher modes into account for any array structure. consists in

the following. By treating a large multielement phased array as a infinite
periodic structure, the field in the exterior region (where z 3 0) can be broken
down in terms of the spatial harmonics of this structure. The field in the
interior region (where z a 0) can be represented in the form of the superposition
of the dominant mode and higher modes, of which only the 310 mode may propagate
through the waveguide [3 - 5].

The condition of field equality at the boundary of the internal and external
regions (when a - 0) leads to an integral Predholm equation of the first (or
second) kind. For the numerical solution of a Predholm equation, it is necessary
to make a transition from the integral equation to a system of linear algebraic
equations, by selecting the appropriate system of base functions. In the case

of a waveguide phased array, it is convenient to take the set of modes in the
waveguide as the base functions. Only a limited number of modes in the waveguide
and spatial harmonics in the external space, needed to obtain a good approxima-
tion, are used in the calculations. The computational program, compiled using
the algorithm described here, is given in Chapter 12.

11.3. Design Recommendations

1. When designing phased waveguide arrays. it must be kept in mind that mutual
coupling of the radiators can have a substantial impact on their matching to
the exciting waveguides and on the antenna gain in the scan sector.

2. The geometric dimensions of the array and its elements can be roughly deter-
mined without taking mutual coupling into account using the formulas given in
Chapter 2.

The initial values for the design calculations are the width of the main lobe

of the directional pattern, the level of the first sidelobe, the scan sectors
escan E and escan a. the permissible reflection factor lrlmax and the permissible
nonuniformity in the antenna gain within the scan sector. In accordance with the
design procedure recommended in § 2.12, the overall dimensions of the array Lx
and Ly are determined, as well as the amplitude distribution (see Table 2.1) and
the spacing between the radiators and the number of them.

- 225 -

FOI1OFEKJA1.USECNNLY
FORIOFIICJAl.lEﬂE(HVLY

The results obtained are to be treated only as an initial approximation.

3. Taking the mutual coupling of the radiators in the array into account makes

it possible to specify its dimensions more precisely. In particular, the spacing
between the radiators is to be chosen from the graphs of Figure 11.2, taking into
account the fact that in the E-plane, the angle 6 x B included in formulas (2.3)-
-(2.6) must be determined using formula (11.1). Egcreasing the spacing between
the radiators to a value greater than the design figure is not permissible, since
this leads to the appearance of a dip in the gain within the scan sector. Reduc-
ing the spacing between the radiators as compared to the calculated value is not
expedient in the majority of cases, since this leads to an increase in the reflec-
tion factor |rmax| when scanning in the B-plane. although |r|nax [sic] decreases
slightly in the case of E-plane scanning. Moreover, with a decrease in the
spacing between the radiators, it is necessary to increase the overall number

of them in the array to maintain the previous overall dimensions Lx and Ly.

The anticipated maximum value of the absolute value of the reflection factor in
a given scan sector can be roughly determined from the curves of Figure 11.6.
If lrlnax exceeds the reflection factor permitted by the operational conditions
of the entire antenna and feed system, then the scan sector should be reduced
or provisions should be made for matching devices in the structural design

of the radiators.

6. The maximum aperture size of a single radiator is determined by the permissi-
ble spacing between the radiators in the array; the minimum size “min > X/Z is
limited by the propagation conditions of the H10 mode. Moreover, it is necessary
to keep the following in mind when selecting the dimensions of the aperture of

a radiator. With a decrease in the dimensions a and b, the reflection factor
Il‘lnx increases. The value of |r| x can be estimated by means of Figure 11.5.
On the other hand, an increase in t“: a and b dimensions can lead to the
appearance of anomalous nulls in the scan sector [3]. If the aperture dimensions
do not exceed those recommended by the conditions of 5 11.2, then anomalous nulls
will not appear in the entire secrar of 1 90°; if the indicated conditions are
not met, then it is necessary to completely calculated the input admittances

and reflection factors.

5. The recommended procedure, which was drawn up based on the results of analyz-
ing infinite arrays. can also be used to choose all of the dimensions of
sufficient large finite arrays. This is Justified by the fact that the direc-
tions in which there are dips in the gain do not depend on the overall dimen-
sions of the array. However, with a decrease in the array dimensions, a dip
becomes wider (occupies a greater angle) while its depth decreases. If it

is assumed that the edge effect is manifest in five radiators on each side of
the array, then arrays where the number of radiators is more than a thousand

may be considered large.

6. The electrical parameters of a phased array can be calculated after its
geometric dimensions have been selected.

- 226 -

lNHR<HHﬂC1AI.lﬂiE(HVLY
F0810FFKJAL.USE(NVLY

To precisely determine such antenna parameters as the directional pattern. gain
and reflection factor, it is necessary to obtain a complete solution of the
problem, i.e.. find the input admittances of all the radiators (the central and
edge ones) as well as the amplitude-phase distribution of the fields in the
aperture. This calculation is extremely cumbersome and requires the use of
high speed computers.

The electrical parameters of antennas are approximately estimated as follows.

The normalized curves for the change in the gain

glg...=cosOII—I"(5.y)f (11.3)

(sec (2.16)) for various values of dx/A approxmately match each other up to
angles at which diffraction maxima appear, and within this range of angles, are
well approximated by the function:

no") ---(oosou+vcos—ou)/2. (11.1.)

The gain along the normal is determined with respect to the width of the main
lobe of the directional patterns in the two planes 203 and 203:

0m = '33 00W (2011-202). (11 .5)

(where n is the efficiency of the array), or based on the radiating surface of
the array:
Omar ‘3 23L: La "ll”. (11 . 6)

where v is the surface utilization factor for the array, which depends on the
amplitude distribution in the array. '

The directional pattern is approximately calculated from the formulas for a
continuous radiating aperture as a function of the amplitude distribution of
the field in the aperture (see Table 2.1).

Mutual coupling of the radiators somewhat changes the structure of the sidelobes
of the directional pattern, which in this case, cannot be described by a suffic—
iently simple analytical expression.

7. The procedure considered here can be used for the approximate design of
phased antenna arrays. It yields more precise results than calculations without
considering mutual coupling of the radiators using the formulas of Chapter 2.
Using this same procedure, the initial approximation can be calculated when
constructing an algorithm for the more precise computer design of phased antenna
arrays.

- 227 -

FOR 0F11C1Al.l!ﬂi(HVLY
IIIICIHHC1A1.USEINNLY

12. WIDE ANGLE MATCHING OF THE UAVEGUIDE RADIATORS OP PLANAR PHASBD AﬂTENNA
ARRAYS

In a nulti-elemant planar phased array, the radiators, in the form of open ends
of rectangular waveguides, are placed at the intersection points of a generalized
triangular coordinate grid (Figure 12.1). The following symbols are used in the
figure: a and b are the waveguide dimensions; a' and b' are the dimensions of
the window of a stop, placed in the radiator aperture; d‘ and dy are the spacings
between the rows of radiators in an array along the X and Y axes respectively;

a is an angle which defines the mutual arrangement of the rows of radiators in
the array. In particular, when a - 90', we obtain a rectangular grid and when

a - 60', a hexagonal grid.

\

--£- ﬂ1"“'x The end goal of designing the radiating

"“ """ "" element of a phased array is the wide
u
‘ :D g : DI [D I angle matching of the radiator, i.e.,

r_:::“":_:::::‘:t:::::' finding those geometric dimensions of the
. , I l array and characteristics of the matching
l {-m | ID I devices for which the maximum reflection
L-__ t,._4 __4

a factor in the feeders does not exceed a
r“---I ---' f---'I

l | | I certain specified value within the scan

[:23' sector.
' J l“-.. L

l.._— ..__

f“""} '_.._.l r"'""} h ( The most effective method of designing
I [::]J I I ‘J‘ waveguide radiators for phased arrays,
u--- ""' 1318:: “ matched in a wide range of angles, is a

technique based on the calculation of the
Figure 12.1. The layout of radiators radiator characteristics taking into

in an array with a account the matching devices both within
generalized triangular the feeder elements and outside of them,
grid. with the subsequent variation of the para-

meters in the problem of designing phased
arrays until obtaining the requisite results [013]. The tine and cost for the
development of nulti-element phased arrays with this method are significantly
curtailed as compared to methods based on the experimental development of the
radiators. The utilization of this method presupposes the presence of computer
programs with which one can calculate the characteristics of a radiator based
on the solution of the corresponding electrodynamic problem for a waveguide
array with the matching devices for subsequent system optimization.

12.1. Methods of Hatching Waveguide Radiators in Planar Phased Antenna Arrays

He shall treat the most widespread methods of matching the radiators of planar
waveguide phased arrays.

The Utilization of Dielectrics [08]. The use of dielectrics in antenna arrays
leads to the appearance of additional parameters in the design problem. The
presence of dielectric elements exerts a substantial influence on the distribu-
tion of the fields in the waveguide apertures. For this reason, the choice of
the parameters of dielectric elements such as the dielectric permittivity

- 228 -

FOR!0FFIJAI.UBE(NVLY
FOI10FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

and the thickness of the dielectric has a strong influence on the characteristics
of an antenna array.

For optimal matching, the choice of the parameters in an antenna array with
dielectrics is best of all accomplished using the method of parameter variation.
In this case. all of the parameters, with the exception of one, are fixed and

the calculations are performed while changing this parameter in a specified range.
The method of parameter variation is most effectively realized in a “nan-~com-
puter" system. which makes it possible to narrow the range of values of several
parameters.

 

Figure 12.2. The absolute value and the phase of the reflection
factor as a function of the scan angle in the n-plane

for an array of waveguides completely filled with a
dielectric (dx - 0.5714 A; a . 0.5354 A).

 

Figure 12.3. A phased waveguide array with dielectric inserts.

We shall consider some design data to illustrate the influence of dielectrics
on antenna array characteristics.

Typical results are given in Figure 12.2 for a waveguide array in the case of
H-plane scanning when the waveguides are filled with a dielectric. He will note

that the absolute value [PI and the phase arg f of the reflection factor change
little with a change in the scan angle, which makes it possible to have good
matching of the antenna array in a wide range of angles (at least at one fre-
quency), even in those cases where considerable reflection is present. The
break in the curves considered here is due to the occurrence of a diffraction

beam.

- 229 -

INHICHHNCJAI.USIIMVLY
FOI1OFFKJAL.USBIHNLY

 

4‘ ram/1
¢5
46
42
w w m m w w :24 av

21%”!

Figure 12.4. The absolute value and phase of the reflection factor as
a function of the B-plane scan angle for an array of
waveguides with dielectric inserts (e - 2; dx - 0.5714 x;
a - 0.5354 x).

 

Figure 12.5. A phased waveguide antenna array with a dielectric
coating.

In the case where the antenna array waveguides have dielectric inserts (Figure
12.3), an additional air-dielectric separation boundary appears. In this case,
to control the characteristics of the radiators, two new parameters are added:
the dielectric permittivity of the dielectric e and the insert thickness t. For
each value of the dielectric pernittivity, one can find that insert thickness
for which the absolute value and phase of the reflection factor change little
practically throughout the entire working scan range, i.e., in the region where
only one main beam exists (Figure 12.6). However, the presence of a supplemental
separation boundary leads to the fact that the dependence of the reflection
factor on the scan angle becomes more sensitive to a change in frequency. More-
over, if the absolute value of the reflection factor has greater values (see,
for example. the curves for t - 0.3531 A), then the problem of matching the -
antenna array in the passbsnd becomes complicated. With an increase in the
dielectric permittivity of the insert, the task of broadband matching becomes
even more difficult. Moreover, the presence of dielectric inserts can lead to
the propagation of higher modes in the region of the waveguide filled with the
dielectric, where these nodes are excited in the antenna aperture and disappear
in a region not filled with the dielectric. something which at certain values

of t can produce resonance peaks in the curves of the reflection factor.

- 230 -

IIHICHHHCIAI.USE(N‘LY
F‘l!(ﬂﬂﬂ€lAl.USE(NVLY

Figure 12.6. The absolute value of the
the reflection factor as a
function of the scan angle
for an array with a single
layer dielectric coating.

dx - a - 0.5710); c I
I 3.0625; Ac is the wave-
length in the dielectric.

 

In the case where a dielectric coating is used in the aperture of a phased array
(Pigure 12.5), the reflection from the "coating--free space" separation boundary
is used to partially elininate the reflection from the aperture. Just as in the
case of an antenna array with dielectric inserts, with the appropriate choice of
coating parameters, one can make the reflection factor in the working band only
slightly dependent on the scan angles. However, because of the fact that at
rather large values of e, the beam deflection from the normal leads to the
occurrence of a wave in the antenna array similar to a surface wave, which pro-
pagates inside the dielectric, but decays in free space; an increase in the
dielectric coating thickness above a certain critical value causes a resonance
peak to appear in the curve of the reflection factor, the maximum value of which
is practically equal to l and which, with an increase in the coating thickness,
shifts in the direction of the normal to the array. A further increase in the
coating thickness leads to the appearance of two and more peaks in the reflection
factor curve (Figure 12.6).

we will note that the curves of the reflection factor plotted as a function of
the scan angle for an antenna array with dielectric inserts usually are of a
more continuous nature than the corresponding characteristics of an antenna array
with a dielectric coating. This is of considerable practical importance when
matching an array. ’

Thus, the use of dielectrics makes it possible to improve the antenna array
matching during scanning. However, wide angle matching by means of dielectric
inserts or coatings degrades the frequency response of the phased antenna array
parameters as the result of the appearance of an additional separation surface.
It was shown in the literature [08] that matching can be inprovsd in a wide range
of scanning angles at a single frequency. The use of multilayer dielectric

inserts or coatings makes it possible to improve the frequency properties of an
element.

Stops in a Waveguide Aperture [1]. An advantage of matching by neans of a stop

is the lack of a finite spacing between it and the radiating aperture, which leads
to a lower frequency sensitivity of the array.

A waveguide radiator loaded with a stop is shown in Figure 12.7, in which a dielec-
tric is incorporated to improve the matching. Here, c' is the dielectric permit-

- 231 -

ltﬂlIlﬂﬂClAl.U§E(HNlY
FIH!(HWN(JAI.USE¢DNIN

tivity of the material filling the waveguide; cl is the dielectric permittivity
of the insert material; :2 and :3 are the dielectric constants of the dielectric
coating of the array surface; c1 and c2 are the distances from the center of the
waveguide to the edges of the stop along the X axis: d1 and d2 are the distances
from the center of the waveguide to the edges of ‘ESmﬁ°°P along the Y axis.

#0).”

  
       

'. -Y RaNN'IﬁﬂtiﬂtltZi: _

 

3;.Q-vvvv‘ ‘
. 0.03:.»
D O...

9 o‘. ' $.34

        
   

               

' 20
Figure 12.7. A waveguide radiator a 20 40 6?? l'
loaded with a dielectric
and a stop in the aper-

ture .

Figure 12.8. The power directional
pattern in the u-plane
for a waveguide radiator
loaded with a stop.

The power directional pattern of the waveguide radiator depicted in Figure

12.7 and arranged in a triangular grid is shown in Figure 12.8 for the following
parameter values: dx I 1.008 1, dy I 0.506 A, o I 65°, a I 0.905 x, h I 0.4 1,
c' I :1 I £2-' :3 I l (the radiator is not loaded with a dielectric), d1 I d2 I
0.2 A, the parameters c1 and c2 are equal to each other and vary from 0.6525 A
to 0.226 X (the stop covers half of the waveguide aperture). The solid curve
corresponds to the lack of a stop, while the dashed and dotted as well as the
dashed curves correspond to the presence of stops which cover 25 and 50% of the
aperture area of the waveguide respectively. In the absence of a stop, a

sharp dip is observed in the directional pattern at an angle of 0 I 34° (although
the diffraction beam appearance angle is approximately 60°). The introduction
of a stop shifts the dip from the direction normal to the antenna aperture. A
further increase in the area occupied by the stop leads to a reduction in the
radiation along the normal to the surface and to overcoapensation for the mis-
matching of the array. In this case, the presence of the stop does not degrade
the characteristics of the array in the B-plane and D-plane (diagonal plane,
i.e., at an angle of 45° to the E and n planes).

Eliminating the dip in the directional pattern of an element is an important
feature of the method of matching by means of stops, which makes it possible
to simply and effectively solve the problem of combatting anomalous "blinding"
of the array.

The reflection factor is shown in Figure 12.9 as a function of the scanning
angle in the H, E and 0 planes for the waveguide radiator depicted in Figure
12.7 and arranged in a triangular grid, for the following parameter values:

- 232 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
INJR10FFIC1A1.IMSEZ(NVLY

l’l argi‘ ’
45' I/ o- 4'
40- II

a 20 40 I0 I. 0 20 M M I’

Pigure 12.9. The reflection factor as a function of the scan angle
for a waveguide radiator loaded with a stop and a
dielectric.

dx ' 0.9225 1, dy ' 0.27 X, a ' 30., a I 0.905 X, b I 0.187 A, e' ' l, c ' 2.56,
£2 ' 1, C3 ' 2.6, CI ' 0.984 X, ‘2 . 0. l X, (3 ' 0.101 X, d1 ' d2 ' 0. 935 A
and c1 - c2 - 0.2715 A.

One can note slight deviations of the reflection factor in the scan sector, which
makes it possible to effectively match the antenna array.

Thus, the use of stops as matching elements can substantially improve phased
array matching in a wide sector of scan angles in a rather broad bandwidth,

as well as significantly shift the resonance dip in the directional pattern of
a radiating element from the direction normal to the array aperture, or even
elininate it. The simplicity of fabricating stops is also to be noted.

12.2. Hatching With a Fixed Scanning Angle

The radiating aperture of a waveguide element in a phased array represents a
complex load for the exciting waveguide where this load changes during scanning.
The conventional matching four-pole network inserted in the feed channel for
each element can match the feeder to the load for a certain scanning angle,
however, a considerable mismatch'will be retained for the other angles because
of the fact that the conventional matching four-pole network does not change

its parameters with a change in the scanning angle. However, if one can before-
hand manage to have the reflection factor change in a relative small range
within the scan sector (for example, by using a dielectric or stops in the
waveguide aperture), then the use of natching for some of the scan angles will
make it possible to achieve better matching of the phased array throughout the
entire sector. As a rule, matching consists in introducing an additional
inhomogeneity into the radiator waveguide, where this inhomogeneity creates a
reflected wave equal in amplitude and opposite in sign to the wave existing in
the line which is reflected from the load.

An equivalent circuit for the connection of a feeder to the waveguide radiator
of a phased array is shown in Figure 12.10 [2]. The insertion admittance of the
radiating aperture which depends on the scanning angles is expressed in terms

of the reflection factor r in a given cross-section by the well known-relation-
ship:

! " ' ‘ ' l—l‘(0. ) I .
Y.(0.w)m6«,(0.v)-+iB.(0HP)"m7." (12.1)

- 233 -

FtHICHNHCIAI.USI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where B.(Oo, do) is the reactance of the matching device which compensates for
the reactance introduced by the radiating aperture at the specified scan angle;
no is the transformation ratio of the ideal transformer which serves for match-
ing the characteristic impedance of the feeder to the resistive component of

the radiator input impedance; 91 and 90 are the characteristic inedancea of
the feeder and the waveguide radiator respectively.

Inductive and capacitive stops as well as inductive rods are used moat often as
the mpensating reactancea in waveguides.

Figure 12.10. The equivalent circuit
for snatching a feedline

 

        
 

  
   

 
 

    

A; to a radiator.
Key: 1. Matching device.
Ylllllllll'llllla’ll' . _
a T
I'lllllﬂltilllnllllll‘ __ : s
s s i e
a a
g 51.-
. Illllllll‘l. 'llllll: ’lllll
I
4
“ﬂ.
0
Figure 12.11. An inductive stop in a Figure 12.12. An inductive rod in a
waveguide . waveguide .

An inductive stop (Figure 12.11) can he asynetrical in the general case and
is characterized by the width of the window d and the thickness b, as well ae
the spacing br.ween the centers of the waveguide and the stop window, c.

The foIlowing approximate formula can be used for the calcu1ation of the nonal-
ired susceptance of a very thin (6 << d) stop:

‘~ A. 21‘. -. :14. a_"‘_ (12.2)
B_—-actg’m(l|scc at: .)'
where:
A___;_
V‘I—(Ilﬁr (12.3)

is the wavelength in the waveguide.

.236 -

l-‘Oll omen. 1188 ONLY
FIIICIWNCJALIJSEiMNLY

For a symmetrical stop (c - 0):
A ad
32—7Ciﬂ’z, (12.4)

while for a one-sided stop [c I (a - d)/2]:

~_A :1 4:97." L—A ' 12.5)
8" .“"u(""‘ mt€“za)' (

The finite thickness of a stop can be approximately taken into account by substi-
tuting the quantity d - 6 in place of the quantity d. For inductive stops, the
influence of the finite thickness is comparatively small.

The Inductive Rod (Figure 12.12). The normalized susceptance of an inductive
rod is calculated from the approximate formula:

gﬁ_£"_[ma(%)m(9_amz;_)_ 2]", (12.6)

d I

which yields adequate precision in the cases of practical importance.

The Capacitive Stop (Figure 12.13). An approximate formula for the calculation

of the normalised susceptance of a capacitive stop. assuming that its thickness
is infinitely small. has the form:

' »".'..'(;..,.c£,.;:)5 um

Taking the finite thickness into account is accomplished by adding the follow-
ing correction factor to B: ‘ ._"_

“a"? ﬁ—‘ﬁ- (12.8)

Capacitive stops reduce the electrical
. strength of the waveguide channel and
. thereby decrease the power vhich can be
‘ transmitted through the waveguide. For
I

  

\.

n“\‘sa ‘\“‘
\\\ \\ \\\“\

      

\
b
\
\
\
\
\
\
h
a
\
\
\
s
a
\
~
\
\
u
v.
\
\
.
a

this reason, they are rarely used as
matching elements.

A more precise calculation of the
matching reactances can be made using
Figure 12.13. A capacitive stop in a the graphs given in [3].
waveguide.

Quarter-wave transformers, continuous or stepped transitions. etc. can be used
as the ideal transformers, the detailed design procedure for which is also given
in [3]. '

- 23S -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.U§I(NVLY
FIHRCHWHCJA1.USEiﬂNLY

Thus, the design of a waveguide radiator for a planar phased antenna array,
matched in a wide range of scan angles, is carried-out in the following order:

1. The array geometry and dimensions of a radiator are selected (see Chapters
2 and 11 .

2. The matching device in the radiator aperture (dielectric, stops, etc.) is
selected using the method of parameter variation on a computer to obtain the
minimum change in the reflection factor within the scan sector. In this case,
a certain correction of the array geometry and radiator dimensions is possible.

3. The mtching device in the radiator waveguide is selected to obtain a reflec-
tion factor in the feeder for all scanning directions no greater than the
permissible factor.

There are a program and description of an algorithm for the calculation of the
directional pattern and reflection factor for a waveguide radiator in a planar
array in the library of algorithms and program of ﬂoscov Aviation Institute,
where this program and algorithm can be used to calculate the characteristics
of a waveguide radiator for a specified array geometry and parameters of the
utching devices as well as to optimize the radiator characteristics by means
of dynamic programming.

-236-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

CHAPTER 13. SLOTTED RESONATOR IADIATORS FOR PLANAR ANTENNA ARRAYS

Slotted resonator antennas are used in the microwave band as independent antennas
as well as in the form of radiators for antenna arrays (A3) with linear, ellip-
tical and controlled polarization of the radiated field. It is most expedient

to use them at wavelengths of 10 to 60 cm.

A merit of slotted resonator radiators is the possibility of combining them with
the metallic surface of the objects in which they are installed.

A single slotted resonator radiator takes the form of a s1ot cut in a conducting
shield, where the slot closes a metal cavity (the resonator) and is excited at
one or more points by means of coaxial or striplines. Excitation directly in
the plane of the slot makes it possible to not only tune to resonance with a
small resonator depth, but to match the input impedance of the slot in a
structurally simple manner to the characteristic impedance of the exciting feed-
line, by displacing the connection point of the feeder relative to the center
of the slot. '

The major characteristics in the design of antenna arrays made of slotted
resonator radiators are: the input impedance of the radiator incorporated in
the antenna array as a function of the scanning direction; the geometry of the
array and radiator; the partial directional pattern of a radiator; the polari-
sation characteristics (for elliptically polarized radiators). In the case
where a slotted resonator radiator is used as an independent antenna (for
example, in telemetry, communications. etc.), the aajor characteristics are:
the input admittance within the passband [as a function of frequency], the
directional pattern and the polarization characteristic.

A complete analysis and the optimization of the indicated characteristics can
be made only by means of mathematical models close to the actual devices and
the study of these models by rigorous methods of electrodynamics.

13.1. Analysis of the Characteristics of a Slotted Resonator Radiator

The analysis is based on the solution of Maxwell's equation taking into account
the boundary conditions at the appropriate surfaces.

The following model has been adopted for the antenna arrays (Figure 13.1). Each
radiator is excited by a system of N sources at the points "i (i - l, 2, ...).
Each source takes the form of an electrical current sheet with a density of jﬁi
(ni - y), directed along the 0X axis. With the action of the field produced

by the sources, such a distribution of the magnetic current density ju(x, y)
arises in the slot that the tangential component of the electrical field inten-
sity vector is equal to zero at the surface of the shield and is continuous in
the slot, while the tangential component of the Imgnetic vector in the slot
satisfies the condition [1]:

l0. (ﬂll)_"(ll))l=e{£ (amt—WI".- (13.1)

l-l

« 237 -

FOIGDFFKJAI.USB(N‘LY
FOROFFICKALUSEONLY

where H“) and “(11) are the nagnetic field intensity vectors for the regions
under consideration; region I is the dielectric coating (0 g a g a"), region
11 is the resonator (-h g a < 0) (see Figure 13.1); n is a unit normal; x0 is

a unit vector along the 0X axis.

Taking (13.1) into account, one can derive the following integral equation for
the unknown electrical field distribution Exh, y) in the slot [2] both in the
case of an antema array (lo, 6] and in the case of an individual radiator [3, 5]:

J

\

I
E: (X', 11') [6:u,‘l-G:“" +252 4;" dy'i‘

a a-a'u-O

, a .
+% j 0L-gsinKaly—tldE-Cmosxzqulnm—
-1 .

1 .1: ”. " . , ,' (13.2)
-;l/-{‘;1:.._I‘I(m-msmx.ly—y ldy}

llere:

-———""‘j“|". muff—WW.
Ml WIIIO'IROI‘O myuamm.
G'.‘"’=- 2 2 up"lumtx-x'Htuu—p'n} x
.--. .-_. rush-1mg:
xlf...(z.z’)+2/1...oosy(gzl Mu may-lama a AP

for an individual radiator

for a radiator in an
antenna array

are the diagonal eleaents of Green's tensor function;

0 Mn omnmnom Imyqamm. for an individual
{. g‘ ”I... . .).¢.In,0.lxm(x «Ml-m.» --.~'mx “4m"
.3 1-1 \ 'a 2d, d, ﬂung),

an u». III —l.

21“":

72,: cm 7:2 I. |- ”g!" sin rm” :. antenna array

mm n AP

,. ' -'.M ; (I)
XSiﬂ vmz[m_ﬂlﬁn_.]l M“ "NIWO' for I radiator in an

are the nondiagonal elements of Green's tensor function,

W. zm-eaim Limb-2'01 eXNiv‘lez I-z'n:

—— -

«wool/mm: Ka‘“V"O'1I'-oi ﬁlm/q... x}.- -N:.;

m , um

'4 "I! _ I'M
I1 I, I (X 2') ___.._.__.___._———-:
n I" v 29471:" mfg.” I. I 1': ’(32 5"! 7:2 ‘3)

-238-
FORWIBBONLY
FOROFHCIALLBEONLY

 

 

 

bum—9. - ( n m t,
x ' K =2“ -— —— n 0. 4-!
“W: s ' n d,sin¢ dxlga) d, ' - " °

$2."; m=—-0. 3:1. 3:2...4

has. d,sin0mw; w'rml‘od' sin 05in o. x.=m I’m;

 

1".L'."-VN§-K}---K:«: Its-«Mum»;

05“" a 2“ E .t_;‘. on. (x, y) 0",.(3'. y’)X
...-o ill-l

msyﬂ’zoosﬂﬂ'w— 2'). z<z'.

x @57315’1'mfﬂ’01m2). z>z';
9-.(Xoy)-008ﬂ,(x-I--1})sinﬁ,(g-|-%), ”8-?. "Um—‘51;

nun-0,

I _—..
c -. ' duh-3V K7- . $'.- 5';
ll {2. l”:#o' ‘u I ll ‘U

where (5“1 is the slot area; (a, y) and (x', y') are the coordinates of the obser-
vation point and the integration point respectively; 0, 6 are the angles in
spherical coordinates; to is the absolute dielectric permittivity; :1, c2 and
:3 are the relative dielectric pernittivity of the dielectric coating, the
resonator and the space above the coating respectively; 01 and 02 are conplex
constants of integration; f(n - y) is a function which takes into account the
specified features of the excitation of the antenna (one usually takes f(ni - y)
I 601; - y), where 601; - y) is a 6 function); mi is the coupler anplitude of
the exciting current;

0 for a single radiator
(b“l(xg._ “9,1:("+ x} A;"‘" for a radiator in an antenna array
ll:"’— [8,92 y’) 0‘,“" dx’ (10':
"I!

Mum “5 E,(x'. 9') 13%.an dx' ('9'.

‘II

To find 3,5(x’, y') fron integral equation (13.2), it is necessary to employ
regulariung nethods. This is related to the fact that the solution of equation
(13.2) is an improper problem as great a change in the solution as desired
can correspond to a small change in the right side of (13.2). One of the
regularising methods which makes it possible to obtain a solution of (13.2)

with a sufficient degree of precision is the autoregularization technique of
[2}. The basis for the nethod is the hypothesis of the smoothness of the
solution and apriori information on the type l/lonr integrable singularity in
the nucleus of equation (13.2). By ewloying a piecewise constant approximation

~239-

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
_ . ' , v I ‘ ' ‘ "' i

.. r. “4,, w» o o ’9‘ 9 w ' I, .
" A J O . . . .V V s -

o , 5"?»I~v.=.r‘?é‘-°If" ""“ﬁg's‘m .
, O ‘ ‘ ’ in.“

, A!" 0
. 5“, / .
4/x’
ETHICHHNCJAI.lEﬂB(HVLY

admittance Yni is defined as the ratio of the current Iﬁi to the voltage at the
points ni:
4n
Unl== 5' E,(x.y) (Ln
-4]: s- n,

Yn.=0-I-iB-=I',/Uu.. (13.3)

‘I

The directivity function g(e, d) of a slotted resonator radiator incorporated in
an antenna array, in a single beam scanning mode, which coincides with the
normalized partial directional pattern of a radiator with res ct to power. F2
(e, o), with a precision of within the constant factor 418/1 , is defined as:

g<o.«r)=%éosou- ||‘(0.~r)l'l- ~ (13.4)

Here, S - dxdysin a;

1 - (13.5)
no. «n- ll 4- Y(0. urn/II --. y (o. W

is the reflection factor, 7(9, 0) is the input admittance at the excitation
point normalized with respect to the exciting feeder. when a radiator is

excited at several points:
N

Y (00 '0) -‘§. Y‘l‘ (0,. 9’)-

The directional pattern of a slotted resonator radiator, used as an independent
antenna; is found from the known field distribution in the slot £‘(x', y').

13.2. The Characteristics of a Slotted Resonator Radiator as a Independent
Antenna

Functions were derived based on the program for the solution of integral equation
(13.2), where these functions are recommended for the calculation of the reso-
nant* operating mode of an antenna. The results of the numerical calculation:
are given in Figures 13.2--13.4.

Figure 13.2 illustrates the conductance component a of the input admittance Y
as a function of the position of the antenna excitation point relative to the
center of the slot in the resonant operating mode (3 I 0) for various relative
widths (dull) [(dslot/A)] and lengths (21/1) of the slot. Curves for the
relative width of the resonator (all) are shown in Figure 13.3 as a function of
its relative depth (h/A) when B I 0. The voltage standing wave ratio Rat U

[VSHR] curves for the antenna as a function of frequency are shown in Figure
13.4 for various slot widths.

*The resonant operating mode of an antenna is understood to be that mode in

which the reactive component of the input admittance of the antenna is Yno .
0.

- 241 -

IIIICHﬂﬂC1A1.USE4DNLY
FOR‘OFRKJA1.USE(MVLY

-3
.. C - 10 olun'1
raa;a; -

_._(./ﬂ.p' -- 1- --

"MW-v ’
5/4517:

   

__ "-G/ﬂ'ﬁ"
” 'W 4’ ’1” 4’ [Wat/1 ” at a: a: 4/2
Figure 13.2. The conductance of a Figure 13.3. Resonator width all
slot (3 I 0) as a function as a function of the
of the position of the depth h/A when B I 0.

excitation point relative

to the center of the slot. We shall consider a specific example

of the determination of antenna para—
mnters which assure a matched operating
mode of a slotted resonator antenna
with an exciting feeder having a
characteristic ilpedance of p I 100
ohms with a bandwidth of about 121 for
a VSHR of 2 with slot dimensions of
2m - 0.6 and duct/2x - 10-2. since
the antenna and the feeder are ntched
when G I 1/9, we find the point corres-
ponding to G I 10 - 10'3 ohms"1 on the
curve for the specified slot d' mensions
(21/) - 0.6 and an t/ZA I 10' ). The
abscissa of this point, which defines
the displacement of the excitation
point relative to the center of the
slot is equal to 0.259 A. The resona-
tor dimensions which assure a resonant
operating mode of the antenna are
chosen from the graphs of Figure 13.3. For example, if it is important because
of structural.considerations to keep the depth of the resonator h small (approxi-
mately 0.1 x), then for a slot of the same dimensions, the width a and length b
of the resonator should be 0.375 A and 0.6 A respectively.

    

I
4.? 4.94 0.90 m w" I,” 1,; r/r,

Figure 13.6. The SHR as a function of
frequency for various
slot widths.

13.3. The Characteristics of a slotted Resonator Radiator in a Planar Antenna
Array

Curves for the conductance component 6 and susceptance component B of the input
admittance Y of a slot antenna incorporated in an antenna array with various
dielectric coatings (:1 I 3, 2.35) are shown in Figure 13.5 as a function of the

- 262 -

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FIHICHWNCJAI.USE¢N‘LY

 

Figure 13.5. The conductance and reactive component of the input
admittance of a radiator incorporated in an antenna
array as a function of the scan angle in the B and
ﬂ planes: rectangular grid, dy - 0.6x and 22/) - 0.5.

p

  
 
 

”425-0.!“ mm

now am g/k
_L_.L.—.. I. J ...

.J__.- I-

 

 

——~—,4- \.~..’L"
" I
_______

of (b)

Figure-13.6. The amplitude (a) and phase (b) distributions of the
electrical field over the slot.

' dx I d, I 0.61; ZZ/l - 0.5; the dashed curves are for 8-
plane scanning; a a 42°; the dashed and dotted curves
are for n-plane scanning, o a 40°; the solid curves are
the characteristic distribution.

scanning angle in the 3 and H planes when each radiator is excited at a single
point (n1 - 0). The dielectric coatings have a substantial influence on the
distribution of the fields and the mutual coupling of the radiators in the array.
For this reason, the correct selection of the parameters :1 and x. is quite
iaportant in the design work. It can be seen from Figure 13.5 that with an
increase in :1, the absolute values of G and 3 change significantly. and with

an increase in the thickness of the dielectric coating, the range of variation
in these parameters increases (the angle 6-1 for the occurrence of the first
diffraction lobe is noted).

Curves for the auplitude and phase distributions of the electrical field in the
plane of the slot are shown in Figure 13.6 for various operating nodes of a
radiator incorporated in an antenna array. As can be seen from Figure 13.6, when

- 263 -

FIN!(HHﬂ(1AI.lﬂNB(ﬂVLY
Figure 13.7. The influence of the quantity :1 on the total input
admittance.

6 I 102‘ (the occurrence of the first diffraction lobe). the field distribution
along the slot differs sharply from a sinusoidal distribution when scanning
in tube B-plane and is say-etrical and out-of-phase in the li-plane. The most
characteristic nplitude-phase distribution of the field in an array with a
dielectric coating where e] - 3 is shown in Iigure 13.6 with the dashed curve.

'Pigure 13.7 illustrates the influence of the relative dielectric pernittivity
$1 on the conponents of the input adnittance of a slotted resonator radiator
incorporated in an- antenna array with a triangular'grid where the coating thick-
_ nese is x. - 0.051: and for the case of B-plane seaming.

13.6. The Optimization of the Characteristics of a Slotted Resonator Radiator
in an Antenna Array

when designing a phased antenna array, it is necessary to assure a nininal
reflection factor l‘(9, e) in the specified scan sector and frequency band. The
optinization of a radiator incorporated in an antenna array at a fixed frequency
is acconplished by neans of nininizing the function [08]:

Lsﬁnmowouw mg; l'ao. (13.5)

 

where 6c; [Gun] is the specified seaming sector.

The optinization was carried out using the nethod of local variations in a
"user -- conputer" dialog node, which nade it possible to narrow the range of

‘3“-

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Ftﬂll)FFlC1Ai.lﬁnE(ﬂﬁLY

values of the parameters needed to obtain the requisite characteristics. The cal-
culation of the double integral in formula (13.6) was carried out for three sec-
tions: 9 I 0, 1/2 and 1/6. The optimization was accomplished in the specified
sector escan through the choice of the geometry of the array and radiator, and the
parameters of the dielectric coating c; and x..

Iﬁtpv

   

Figure 13.8. Optimization of the E-plane Figure 13.9. The frequency curves for a
directional pattern of a radiator within the sector
radiator. of scan angles.

Curves for 6(8) and 3(8) in the B and ﬂ planes of an optimized radiator for a
rectangular grid are shown in Figure 13.5. It can be seen that by selecting the
parameters c1 and a, one can achieve a smooth change in these curves in an angular
sector of 9 I 0 to 45° (:1 I 2.35; x. I 0.051.). Similar optimization results in
the B-plane for an arrangement of the radiators in a triangular grid are shown in
Figure 13.7 (see the curves for c; I 2.25).

The normalized power directional pattern of a radiator F2(0. s) I (AZ/hrs)g(8, ¢)
is shown in Figure 13.8 for a nonoptimized (:1 I l and :1 I 3 and an optimised
(:1 I 2.35) slotted resonator radiator incorporated in an antenna array.

The frequency characteristics of Y(8) for a rectangular grid in the B-plane of a
radiator optimized at the center frequency f0 are shown in Figure 13.9. The
working bandwidth at a level where the SHR is 2 is about 10 percent. We will note
that for complete optimization of the radiator, working from the specified sector
and frequency coverage, it is necessary to minimize (13.6) within the passband.

Matching of the radiators incorporated in an antenna array to the excited device is
usually achieved for e I 0. This can be achieved for the radiators considered
here by means of shifting the excitation point relative to the center of the slot
(see Figure 13.2) for each radiator. To find the precise position of the excita-
tion point ni in the plane of the slot, it is necessary to use the program for
calculating the characteristics of a radiator by the autoregularization method;

~265 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR 0i1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(HULY

during the design stage, one can use the functions shown in Figure 13.2 with a
high degree of confidence.

13.5. Examples of the Realization of Slotted Resonator Radiators

Structural designs of slotted resonator radiators excited by a niniature coaxial
cable (Figure 13.10a) or by a stripline or a systen of striplines in the case of
excitation at several points (Figure 13.10b) are shown in Figure 13.10.

The stripline conductor (3) is run inside the resonator until it interacts the slot
1 and is shorted at a certain spacing fro- the slot by the jumper b. The stripline
conductor is coupled to the exciting feeder by scans of the coaxial to stripline
transition (5). The choice of the dinensions of components 3-5 for natching is
acconplished experimentally. The structure shown in Figure 13.10b is used to
obtain radiation with circular polarisation. A sche-atic of the excitation is
shown in Figure 13.1la and its stripline realization is shown in Figure 13.11b.

The circuit provides for the excitation of each slot at two points and a phase
shift of 90° between the slots. Radiator inputs 1-h in Figure 13.10b are con-
nected directly to outputs l--4 of the excitation circuit (see Figure 3.llc [sic])
by means of the coaxial to stripline transitions (5). The stripline excitation
device consists of a 3 dB divider and two 3 dB directional couplers; the charac-
teristics and paraneters of the directional couplers can be deternined using the
procedure set forth in Chapter 22 and 23. The excitation of each slot at two
points provides for 20 to 25 dB of isolation between the slots with respect to the
feed.

 

Figure 13.10. Rays of exciting a slotted resonator radiator with a
coaxial cable (a):

Key: 1. Rectangular slot;
2. Resonator;
3. RF connector;
4. Coaxial cable;

with a stripline (b):
1. Orthogonal slots;
2. Cross-shaped resonator;

« 246 -

ROI OIWNCIAI.IEI!(H'LY
FIHRIJFFICJAJ.IIBE‘ORHUY

[Key to Figure 13.10, continued]:

3. Stripline;
A. Shorting jumper;
5. Coaxial transition.

' Output 2

 

Figure 13.11. circuit configuration for the excitation of a slotted
resonator with rotating polarisation of the field.

Key: a. Electrical circuit;
h. Topology: 1. 3 dB divider;
l. 3 dB divider:
2. Directional couplers with front coupling.

13.6. The Design Procedure

The design procedure for a slotted resonator radiator as an independent antenna
where the characteristic impedance of the exciting feeder, the dimensions and the
bandwidth are specified is acconplished using the functions shown in Figures 13.2
to 13.h. The directional pattern and gain of the antenna are found from the
formulas derived, for example, in [0.1, 02].

The design procedure for phased arrays of slotted resonator radiators is similar
to the general procedure for the design of antenna arrays based on specified
technical requirenents (see Chapter 2).

The characteristics of an individual radiator as part of an antenna array can be
computed using the program which makes it possible to assure a resonant node (the
selection of the dimensions a. b, h and 21), achieve matching (the choice of ti
when 0 I 0) and optimize the radiator characteristics within the scan sector.
However, the following procedure for working with the program in a user—-conputer
dialog mode is expedient for the cfficient utilisation of the machine tine:

« 267 -

IIIICHHHIIA1.USEGHNLY
”MUSEONLY

1. Working from the value found for the array atep h, determined by Oacan (aee
Chapter 2), we chooae the slot length 21 and the reaonator b 2. 21 (Figure 13.1).

2. Working iron the specified value :1 for the dielectric coating and the struc-
tural requirementa for the dimensiona a, h and x., we find the reaonator oper-
ating node of the radiator (B I 0) and optimize it (the moat expedient range of
change for a/2 and h/X are reapectively: 0.1 3 all g 0.5 and 0.1 < h/x).

3. We achieve matching to the radiator excitation circuit by ahifting the point

ti (in a first approximation, thia diaplacement can be determined from the graph
in Figure 13.2).

A. The gain of a radiator incorporated in an antenna array, 3(0, 6) in deternined

from (13.10), while the radiator directional pattern ia determined uaing the
formula: F0. 9) ' (AZ/lush“. Q).

5. “here necessary, the bandwidth ia calculated for tne radiator incorporated in

the antenna array (see Figure 13.9). The bandwidth of an optimized radiator is
approximately 10 percent for a VSHR of 2.

-248 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16. RADIATING WAVEGUIDE MODULES WITH REFLECTIVE PHASE sums

110.1. The Modular Design of a Pinned Antenna Array

Regardless of the structural configuration of a phased array, honogeneous units can
be singled out in it which consist of a nunber of nicrowave elenente and devices.
These units are joined together by a distribution feeder. Units of a nodular '
design are aployed to provide for production suitability of pinsed antenna arrays
and to standardize their structural design.

The basic elenente of a nodule are the radiator (or a group of the). phase shifter
and an elenent for coupling the distribution feed line. The presence of isolation,
tuning and other auxiliary assenblies is also possible.

   

l)
(I) (b)

Figure 16.1. Configurations of radiating nodules.
a. with a feedthrough plane shifter and a
nath load;
b. Hithout it:
c. With a reflective phase shifter.

Key: 1. short-circuit“.

The basic configurations of nodules are depicted in Figure 16.1. A nodule with a
coupling elenent in the forn of directional coupler is depicted in Figure 1b.la,
where an of the coupler forns a distribution feeder section, while the other is
loaded into a feedthrough phase shifter with a radiator and an absorbing load.

The absorbing load is provided to conpeneate for re-reflections which occur in the
nodule. A nodule is depicted in Figure 14.1b in which the coupling element is a tee.
A nodule is depicted in Figure llo.lc which contains a radiator and a directional
coupler with a reflective phase shifter in one of the arns. The paths for the
distribution of the electronegnetic wave to the radiator are indicated by the

dashed arrow lines in these figures.

-269-

FOROFI'ICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The greateest value of the directional gain of an array is achieved in the phased
array shown in Figure 14.2. The impact of various kinds of distortions and ais-
matching on the directional gain is substantially attenuated in this circuit be-
cause of the use of directional coupler with absorbing loads.

Variants of waveguide nodules have been considered, however, the theoretical
results and circuits of the nodules are also applicable to other types of micro-
wave lines.

110.2. Multiposition Phase Shifter for a Module

The basis for a nultiposition phase shifter is an extrenely simple series produced
phse shifter using sniconductor n-i-p-i-n diodes with four phase positions
(Figure 16.3) [1]. It has the following nain para-eters: working frequency of

7. 7 6H2, Discrete phase step of A - n/Z, average theml losses of from 1.2 to 1.6
dB, switching current of 100 + 10 IA, switching voltage of 1 volt and an ultimate
microwave through pow: of froa 10 to 15 RH and an average power of up to 10 watts.

The thee-ml losses introduced by phase
shifters govern the efficiency of an
antenna and its gain. These losses
are determined by the quality of the
diodes used in the phase shifters [l]:

 

/r

K-r

rev loss for loss'

where r," 10” is the reverse loss
resistance of the diode; If“: 10” is
the forward loss resistance of the
diode. The relative gain of an
antenna, 6, is plotted in Figure 16.4
as a function of thd discrete phase
control step, A. The quality of the
switchers is the parameter in these
graphs. In centiaer band series
produced diodes, the quality figure
fluctuates from 300 to 1,000. In the
case of large values of the discrete
phase control step (A g 1/2), the
antenna gain is low because of the
large switching errors in been steer-
ing, i.a., because of the low direc-
Pigure 110.3. A reflective phase shifter tional gain. Hith a decrease in A,
with n-i-p-i-n diodes. the thermal losses increase, but the
. . . directional gain rises more rapidly,
Kc" #:2321112: sigf’m‘“ with right up to a certain value of A,
3 n-i-p-i-n doide which depends on the quality of the
° ' switchers.

Figure 16.2. Schematic of an antenna
array with a series distri-
bution of the energy.

 

-250—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

6‘
0.7 ‘
476' Output
4.7
44 mput
0'" x 2 I I I
0 2. '3' ”Ya!

Figure 14.4. The antenna gain-as a func- Figure 14.5. Schnetic of a through
tion of the discrete step transfer bridge phase
of the phase shifter and shifter with 11 end
the quality of the n-i-n-i-n 2N discrete phase state
diode. steps.

Thus, the minus value of the coefficient is achieved when III. 3 A g 12, and as
follows from the graphs of Figure 110.10, circuits with four and eight phase states
have the sane gain. However, the fewer the nunber of discrete steps I - Zl/A, the
higher the sidelobe level and the lower the hen steering precision. lioreover. the
line-—colunn nethod of controlling the phase distribution which is widely used at
the presmt tins leads to a doubling of the phase errors in the aperture and cor-
respondingly requires a reduction in A. For this reason. phase shifters with
eight phase states are to be prefered.

One of the widespread and simple circuit designs for through transfer phase

shifters based on reflective configurations is a circuit which enploys a slotted

waveguide bridge (Figure 1b.5). The operational principle of a slotted bridge is
described in the literature [2].. Such a
through transfer phase shifter. in the case of
sequential switching of the switching elelents

TABLE 16.1 -synchronously in two reflective phase shifters
- provides for a nunber of phaselstates equal to
_-____'_——————-’- the nunber of phases of a single reflective
:2 :u r. p p-H 2N PM“ shifter “-
— The doubling of the number of discrete phase
“ ' ' 223 "“ ‘ N states (21!) is achieved by inserting a static
-—' -—-—"‘———‘——— Allo phase shifter in one of the arse of the
m 0| l 2 2 l-—Il N bridge (opposite the input). which is equiva‘
-_.._____.__.__..———-—- lent to lengthening this an by the amount:
I - xB/lm, (no.1)

where )3 is the wavelength in the waveguide.

-251-

FOR 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The switching of the switching elnents in a through transfer phase shifter takes
place sequmtially: first in one reflective phase shifter, then in the other.

The switching sequence for reflective phase shifters to obtain a through transfer
pl'nse shifter with two N phase states is shown in Table 16.1. The following
symbols are used in the table: n - q + a is the number of the phase state of the
feedthrough phase shifter with two 21! phase states; q and n are the phase state
nunbers of the upper and lower reflective phase shifters respectively (Figure 16.5).

Such a circuit configuration for reflective phase shifters is called a circuit with
double the amber of discrete phase values. The scattering matrix of an ideal
phase shifter has the following form with a precision of down to the canon phse
mltiplying factor:

 

l3|"-‘c|llzl :13: 1' (16.2)
where I'd, -“sin[(q 410%. "{chpr. j(n/\. | ‘2'»

W "»%—-2-]°wl--i("~ . -:—)I.

where A - 21/8 is the discrete phase step of the reflective phase shifter; A1 -
- s/N - A/2 is the discrete phase step of the feedthrough phase shifter.

The constancy of the absolute values of the coefficients K. and 1'. is achieved
through the selection of the phase shift 6/5 and the «itching algorithl for the
diodes, which is given in Table 14.1, from which the follows the condition:

m= o npn mum n. for even m

q-- I up" mocnmw u. for odd n.

(15.3)

when condition (14.3) is net, the absolute value of the transmission gain is
constant and equal to cosA/lo.

By adducing sinilar arguaents concerning the absolute value of the reflection
factor, we find that it is also constant and equal to sinA/b.

The errors in slotted bridge operation and the thermal losses in the switchers
have an influence on phase shifter characteristics. The trans-ission and reflec-
tion factors for an ideal feedthsough phase shifter with two N states are
expressed as follows:

 

K$=j2xQ“' (I ll”, ---C’)oxp[;—j(n ~31 %)]ms -':— -|.

.l c-l 2Q--=ru(l l'ﬂ ----c')cXpl—-j2(n {3—1 %)]W%3 (15.0

 

-252-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE'ONLY

P3; —j2x_’5" (ﬁ:)cxpr:j(n 1;- -l- L:- lsin-e- -l-
+W4-w"°"(...'7-c')w[-ﬂ(~%+%)]sm%'

where Q is are the power losses in the phase shifter which ere due to the quality
of the switchers K; I‘ is the reflection factor fron the input of the slotted
waveguide bridge; c is the decoupling of the slotted bridge; I: - lb/d/ is the
division factor with respect to the field between the output arms of the slotted
waveguide bridge (for an ideal 3 dB bridge. I: - 1).

The relationship between these coefficients is determined by the equation:
rr+lbr+lcr+IdP-n.

In series produced slotted waveguide bridges:

l‘ I 0.1 to 0.15; c . ~20 to -25 d8; b 8 d.

. For feedthrough and reflective phase shifters [1]:

04.-..2']/—"¥ix_3)'i72('£.. :)

The first tern in (16.6) for the trsnuission gsin Kl determines the uplitude end
phsse st the output of s feedthrough phsse shifter, while the second end third

terns determine the enplitude end phsse errors of the phase shifter which are due to
the error in the psrsneters of its caponents.

The mil-um relative snplitude error on end the nuinun phase error v are determined
by the expressions: ' '

 

 

 

 

l A ‘
2Q--Ix(l+x’-—c°)cm7 (110.7)

~253-

uncommon“
The mean square value of the efficiency or a feedthrough phase shifter with respect
to all of the phase states is:

.‘II
I \ I
'Inf‘ﬁ “.1 ' M" (14.8)

14.3. Microwave Bridge Devices for Feedthrough Phase Shifters

There are two types of bridges which are the neat widely used in a waveguide
design: H-plane bridge, which takes the form of the connection of two rectangular
waveguides at the narrow wall (Figure 14.6a) and an E-‘plane bridge. which takes
the forn of the connection of two waveguides at the wide wall (rigure 16.6b).

These bridges are called forward directivity devices. The wave incoming to the one
of the arms (1 and 2) of the bridge (Figure 16.6) is divided equally between the
arms which are opposite each other (3 and 4), without chnging the direction of
propagation.

 

Figure 16.7. Schematic of an inverse Figure 16.8. A through tranater pluse
directivity slotted wave- shifter with a reverse
guide bridge. directivity bridge.

- 256 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI<NHHC1A1.lEﬂE(MNLY

The input and output of a through transmission phase shifter using these bridges
prove to be arranged in a row, something which is structurally inconvenient. For
this reason, reverse directivity slotted bridges are used (Figure 14.7) [3], in
which the opposite inputs are separated. They consist of two series connected
slotted waveguide bridges I and II (Figure 14.7), which are coupled to each other
by identical reactances III with identical susceptances 53.

The effect of the reactances reduces to the reflection of the incident wave. The
reactances are chosen so that the reflection and transmission gains are equal.
when a wave is incident at input I of bridge I, it does not pass through to arm 2
by virtue of the cancelling effect of the wave reflected from reactance III. In
this case, the waves passing through the reactances add in arm 3 of bridge II.

A schematic drawing of the wave motion inside the bridge is shown in Figure 14.7.
The dashed lines indicate the motion of the reflected wave while the solid lines
show the wave passing through.

When reflective phase shifters are connected to arms 2 and 3, the device is con-
verted to a feedthrough phase shifter, the input and output of which are diamet-
rically opposite. Such phase shifters using an E-plsne slotted waveguide bridge
has extremely small transverse dimensions, which are determined by the size of the
wide wall of the waveguide and a doubled dimension for the narrow wall, because of
which they are used in transmissive phased arrays with wide angle scanning.

A variant of a reverse directivity bridge is a directional coupler, consisting of
two rectangular waveguides which are coupled by a cross-shaped coupling hole
(Figure 14.8). The waveguides are laid on each other and offset by half of the
wide well width. with 50 percent coupling between them, a directional coupler is
a waveguide bridge with reverse directivity. When a wave impinges an arm 1, it is
divided equally between arms 2 and 6. Arm 3 proves to be decoupled from arm 1.

By connecting reflective phase shifters to arms 2 and 4, we realize a transmissive
phase shifter (Figure lb.8). The resulting structural design proves to be rather
compact, since its vertical dimension is determined by twice the height of the
waveguide, while the transverse dimension is approximately equal to 7.

14.4. The Design of a Radiating Module of an Antenna Array

A module with an absorbing load (Figure lb.9, also see Figure 14.1a) takes the
structural form of two waveguides (l and 2) arranged orthogonally one on top of the
other, and coupled via the wide wall with a coupling hole (3). An absorbing load
(A) and feedthoough phase shifter (5) (see ilk.2) are connected to the upper wave-
guide, where the radiator (6) is connected to the output of the phase shifter.

The power coupling factor 82 through the coupling element is chosen depending on
the amplitude distribution in the aperture of the phased array. The coefficient
1 characterizes the energy which passes into the absorbing load because of the
nonideal nature of the coupling element. The portion of the energy which flows
through waveguide l to excite the subsequent modules is characterized by the

- 255 -

IIHICHHHC1A1.USE20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through transnission factor a. Re designate the reflection factor from the
nodule input as 6. These coefficients are related by the expression:

IGP'I‘WP'I'IYN-IN’“ - (1L9)
Actual absorbing loads have a finite absorption and introduce small reflections,

which we shall designate as 1'“.

when nodules operate in a phased array, there are reflections, PP, fro. its
radiators because of their mutual coupling.

Taking (15.4) and (110.5) into account, the nodule transmission gain is defined by
the expression:

[Kn] “K50. . Yr..'1-- 6“‘_ lv’r‘_agrur‘)' (14.10)

while the nodule reflection factor is:

The amplitude and phase errors of a nodule are maxim when all of the revreflec-
tions and distortions add together with unfavorable phases. since the phase of the
field in equations (10.10) and (No.11) changes in accordance with a couple: law and
depends on a large number of factors, the sexism: errors determine the minimal
possible gain of a phased array in the scan sector.

 

Figure 14.9. A radiating nodule with an absorbing load.

To estinate the minus amplitude error in the excitation of the radiators of a
nodule, the following expression is justified:

'256-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“-II '4“... 5+ “c + (G. “I" c [-
'i' I‘rpc I' 54’) sin (AM) -|-
-| ayl‘. cos (AM) -|. an" -I-
I- a’ N‘.) sin (AM) cos (Mm;

(110. 12)

:licos(A/4).

The maximum phase error in the excitation is:
l5‘Dl---nrcsln|AA|. (14.13)

Knowing the relative amplitude and phase errors of a nodule makes it possible to
determine the minimal values of the directional gain and gain 6 in a real

phased array (the inverse problem also frequently occurs in practice: having speci-
fied the minimal directional and gain G of a phased array, determine the permis-
sible scatter in the module parameters). The efficiency of a module is:

n - "Si/Kn idl2 (14.11.)

In order to obtain Kn id. it is necessary to substitute K)! for the case of ideal
elements of a module in expression (14.10).

-A module without an absorbing load (Pigure 14.10) is structurally simpler than
that depicted in Figure 14.9. It consists of two orthogonally arranged waveguides
(l and 2), which are directionally coupled together by whole (3) in the wide wall.
A reflective phase shifter (lo) with a discrete step of A and s radiator (5) are
connected to the upper waveguide. In such a module, the coefficient y character-
izes the energy passing through the coupling element from the input of waveguide

l to the radiator, bypassing the phase shifter.

Figure 14. 10. A radiating module without an
absorbing load.

 

The resulting transmission gain fran the input of waveguide l to the aperture of
the radiator is defined by the expression:

m-Iy‘i'Ziﬁe‘M l
K -.-¢——._'_.__ ...._.?________6).
I "I I “90" l‘,,¢:""“A (1 3 aq-1c‘M (Us. 15)

-257!.-

ros omcm. use on“
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this nodule, even in the case of ideal elements, the input of waveguide l is
always nisnatched because of the presence of a wave which propagates thrOugh the
coupling pole of the phase shifter to the radiator.

The reflection factor of the radiating nodule without an absorbing load, taking
into account the nonideal nature of the elements incorporated in it, is:

 

~ _ ﬂ’Q'W—‘u l._m . l. 6
u..|-a— ..wq-ur..-N ( s ) (1.1)

The naxinum anplitude and phase errors of a nodule without an absorbing load are:

IMI --.---~-'- --(Iz=|',| ”11.-.. a). (14.17)
~. ' 1"“! 'l". ‘ (“W I '
______._.__'_ --..-r_. a".
|qu an "I ‘ IH’U 'r, (a lp. aﬂQ" ) (16.18)

when designing a nodule, by specifying definite values of its anplitude and phase
errors, a nodule circuit configuration is chosen which governs its structural
design.

14.5. Waveguide Directional Couplers

One of the elenents of a radiating nodule is a directional coupler, on the
properties of which the characteristics of the nodule itself substantially depend.
Directional couplers using coupled striplines are treated in Chapter 23. The major
parameters of couplers cited there (the cross-talk attenuation 012, directivity
024. etc.) are also characteristic of waveguide directional couplers. In this
chapter, C12 and 02a are defined by the following expression:

cu. - —10lz(llﬁ)’. C. =—- — low/yr. (1549)

The waveguides in couplers are frequently arranged perpendicularly to each other
(Figure 14.11). One or two coupling holes are used depending on the requisite
cross-talk attenuation 012 [6]. The spacing from the waveguide walls to the center
of a hole is x ' allo.

Experimental gaphs of 012 and 024 are given in Figures lb.lh-—lb.l7 as a function
of the slot dinensions for directional couplers with orthogonal configuration of
the waveguide. We will note that for crosstalk attenuations of less than -20 dB,

- 258 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

" .r
W“ | m-‘Jfl
.9”. I *I 91.42. ' . .
: ,k : Output Figure 14.11. Configuration of.
I. ' | 3 a crossed waveguide
directional
coupler.

 

Auxiliary waveguide

@54M%%}°

”(m ”(cl 3’ (d) 0(a) 'I (s)

 

Figure lb.12. Configuration of coupling holes.
a. Circular;
b,c. Rectangular with and without dumbbells;
d,e. Cross-shaped with and without dumbbella;
f. Bllipsoidal.

Figure 14.13. A directional coupler with variable
crosstalk attenuation.

Key: 1. Circular coupling hole;
2. Moving metal disk.

 

the dimensions of the slots are calculated from the fornulaa given in [7], how“
ever, for a greater attenuation (right up to C12 - 13 d3), these'formulas yield
considerable errors and it is better in practice to employ the experimental graphs
(Figures 16.lb--14.17).

The configurations of the coupling elements which are noat frequently employed in
practice are shown in Figure 14.12. It is impossible to obtain a crosstalk attenu-
ation of 612 > -l6...-18 dB for a single circular opening. Either two holes

made in opposite angles of the common wall of thewuveguides(?igure 14.11) or
directional couplers with variable coupling (Figure 16.13) are used to increase

C12.

- 259 -

FIMR(HHﬂClALIﬂﬂE(HQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

-m
'I
4? 425' 48 a.” (/1 4” 0 I”

Figure llo.lb. The crosstalk attenuation Figure 14.15. The crosstalk
C12 and directivity C24 attenuation on
of a coupler with two and the direc-
circulsr coupling holes as a tivity 02:. as s
function of the hole di-eter. fmction of

‘ the_ disk.

 

Figure llo.l6. The cvosstalk attenuation Figure 14.17. The crosstalk attenu-
for a cross-shaped coup- ation C12 end direc-
ling hole (Figure 14.12:!) tivity (:24 of s
as a function of the slot coupler with two
length. cross-shaped coupling
[The dashed waves are tron holes as s function
theoty and the solid curves of the slot length.

are experimental] .

-260—

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(:12 , dB
0:.”

ova-'0.” "H "
..‘/"." ”"7

Curves for Cu and cu. are spotted in

Figure 14.14 as a function of the change in
the diameter d of the opening. The cross-
talk attenuation of C12 I -8 d3 corresponds
to the noxious diameters of the two openings.

    
   

Experinental curves for the crosstalk attenu-
ation 012 and the directivity czl. are plotted
in Figure 14.15 as a function of the depth of
disk imersion, 11.

Crossed coupling slots (Figures 110.12d, e)
nake it possible to provide a crosstalk
attenuation of down to -3 d3 while retaining

'9
¢05 ”.119 42.5 M!

Figure 14,18. ‘nje croggtglk 8 high directivity. “IO theoretical and
attenuation of a experimntal curves for the crosstalk attenu-
coupler with two ation C12 are shown in Figure 110.16 for a
"a”-ﬂuped change in the slot length for a cross-shaped
coupling holes Openingil’igure 110.12d).
as a function the
waveguide‘height. Experimental curves for the crosstalk attenu-

ation and directivity as a function of the

slot length as shown in Figure 145.17 for a

directional coupler with two cross-shaped
coupling poles of the dunbhell type (the dashed curves) as well as those without
dunbbells (the solid curves). It can well seen from this figure that the dumbbell
and its size has a considerable ispact on the crosstalk attenuation for the sam
slot length l. The directivity of such couplers, right up to 012 - -3 dB, is
no worse than -20 to -25 dB. For a greater increase in the crosstalk attenuation,
it is necessary to inprove the precision in the fabrication of the coupling holes.

The crosstalk attenuation of directional couplers changes substantially as a func-
tion of the waveguide height. The crosstalk attenuation is shown in l'igure 110.18
as a function of the b dimension of the narrow wall of a waveguide. 012 changes
especially sharply at small values of h.

14.6. An Approxinate Design Calculation Procedure for a Radiating Module

When designing a radiating nodule, one takes into account the fact that it is an
element of a phased waveguide array. Then the initial data are:

—The width of the directional pattern of a single nodule at the half-power level,
280.5;

—The discrete step of the phase shifter, A;

--The permissible values of the anplitude and phase errors of the phase shifter
(a... v) and the radiating nodule (AA, 60);

-261-

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The parameters of the slotted bridge (the decoupling c, the reflection factor
at the bridge input l‘ and the division ratio between the output arms, I);

“The parameters of the directional coupler (crosstalk attenuation (:12 or the
branching of the incident wave 8, the directivity 021., the reflection factor 6);

«The reflection factor from the absorbing load 1‘3;
--‘lhe module efficiency n.

He shall consider an approximate procedure for the design of a radiating nodule for
two possible variants.

Variant l. The following are specified: A, 2805, 0., v, AA, 00, Pa, 1‘, C21,. C12.
x, 6 and c. Determine the efficiency of the nodule.

1. It is expedient to start the design with the choice of the module circuit
configuration (see Figure 14.1), working from the specified directional pattern
width of the module, 2005, and its amplitude AA and phase 60 errors.

2. Knowing A, determine the type and circuit configuration of the phase shifter
(see 5 l4.2). Then, the coefficients [5 and I". of the selected phase shifter are
found using formulas (110.5) and (14.5). The losses in the n-i-p-i-n diodes of the
phase shifter are determined from formula (14.6).

3. After this, the amplitude a. and phase v errors in the phase shifter are found
and they are coapared with the specified values. If a. and v exceed the specified
values, then it is necessary to more precisely specify the type and circuit of the
phase shifter and repeat all of the calculations.

lo. Horns, dielectric rods and spirals find the greatest application as radiators.
The type of radiator is chosen from (0.5] and its dimensions and electrical charac-

teristics are calculated.

5. Knowing 012 for 8, we determine 7 from expression (110.19), and the number of
coupling holes in the coupler and their dimensions are chosen from the graph of
Figures 110.11. - 16.18.

6. Then, based on the values found fro the parameters of the module and phase
shifter, the transmission gain KM and the reflection factor 1‘“ of the module are
determined from formlss (lb.l0) and (110.11). The maxi-um values of the amplitude
error AA and the phase error 60 of the module are found from formula (110.12) and

(110.13).
7. Then the module efficiency is deternined (see (110.110).
Variant 2. The following are specified: A, 200.5, 0., v, r, c, e, 6, r3, C12,

C21. and n. Determine the maximum values of the amplitude M and phase 60 errors
of the module.

-262 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l:0FFﬂJA1.USE(NVLY

It is first of all necessary to perform the design calculations for the module as
indicated in paragraph 1-5 for variant 1. Then the coefficients Ru (16.10) and
r" (16.11) are determined. We find n from formula (16.16).

If n is less than the specified value, then it is necessary to moreprecisely
specify the coefficients in formulas (16.16), (16.10) and (16.11) which influence
the efficiency of the nodule, and then determine In, r" and n over again. Then,
AA and 60 are to be determined from equations (16.12) and (16.13).

If the design calculations are performed for a module with an absorbing load, then
the procedure for the calculations remains as before, only instead of expressions
(16.10) - (16.13), the corresponding formulas are used: (16.15) - (16.18).

In both variants, it is necessary during the module design process to determine
which of its parameters (r, P, c, 6, y, B, Pg, PP) have the greatest influence on
the module characteristics (Kg, Pu, AA, 60, n). For this, some of the elements
are assumed to be ideal or their parameters are fixed in the appropriate formulas
(16.10) - (16.16) or (16.15) - (16.18), and in the calculations, one must change
the parameter, the influence of which on the resulting characteristics of the
module must be ascertained.

The structural design of a module is accomplished taking its use in a phased array
into account.

- 263 -

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

FOR!0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY

reflective circuit is shown in Figure 15.2d. It is expedient to use the two
latter excitation circuits in the case of modules with frequency conversion (or
multiplication), since in this case, the portion of the exciter power radiated
beyond the edge of the array does not participate in the formation of sidelobes
in the array directional pattern at the working frequency.

.3 g E11135? my

Exciter
50.2qu mm“ \

 

”(um I} (M Li‘ (cl a) an

Figure 15.2. Excitation configurations for modules in active phased
arrays.

He shall also note the possibility in principle of using mutual coupling between
the radiators to excite an active phased array. In this case, there is no need
to use a cumbersome distribution device. Thus, using two pole active devices,
one can provide for a synchronous self-oscillating mode in the array nodules.

15.1. The Major Characteristics of the Active Elements of Modules

A transmitting active phased array can be treated as a device which sums the
radiation power of several modules in a specific direction.

He shall consider the major requirements placed on the characteristics of the
active elements of active phased array modules, the meeting of which assures
effective summing. The output power of a module is governed by the requirements
placed on the radiation power level and can be defined as the ratio P" I Ptlﬂ,
where P: is the total radiation power; N is the number of modules in the array.

The gain of the generator of a module is defined as the ratio of the input power
to the module to the excitation power. Increasing the gain makes it possible

to reduce the excitation power for s set radiation power, and consequently, the
power losses in the distribution device in which the bulk of the radio frequency
losses occur. With an increase in the number of modules with a constant array
step. its directional pattern narrows and the losses in the distribution system
increase. For this reason. modules with a high gain should be used for arrays
with narrow directional patterns.

The gain of a generator which provides for complete compensation of the losses in
the excitation system is KP - l/n. , where n. is the overall efficiency of the
distribution system, taking into account the losses in the phase shifters and

the matching elements at the inputs to the modules. The maximum value of KP is

limited by the amplifier stability margin or the synchronous operational mode
margin of a self-excited oscillator. Moreover. there are possible limitations

- 265 -
FOR¢0FFIJAIQUSEINVLY
FII!€Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(M€LY

related to the increase in the phase instability in the modules with an increase
in KP because of the rise in the slope of the generator phase characteristic.

The efficiency of a generator governs the overall efficiency of an active phased
array to a considerable extent, which is equal to the ratio of the total radia-
tion power to the power of the primary power supplies for the array, including
the exciter power supply. Moreover, generator efficiency governs the thermal
mode of the array modules. A poor efficiency of the active elements can lead to
severe thermal conditions and limit the maximum radiation power.

The load characteristic of a generator (the output power and phase of the output
signals as a function of the total input impedance of the radiator zin) is one
of the most important characteristics of a generator when it is used in array
nodules with wide angle scanning. In these arrays, the total input impedance

of a radiator during scanning changes considerably because of the mutual coupling
of the radiators, where the laws governing the change in 21“ prove to be differ-
ent for the central and peripheral radiators. Because of the change in zinv
there is a change in the resistive component of the load impedance of the
generator output stage, something which leads to a change in the output power
and the electronic operating conditions, in particular, to a change in the

power losses in the generator. The reactive component of the load impedance
determines the mistuning of the output microwave circuit of the generator rela-
tive to the excitation frequency as well as the corresponding change in the out-
put phase. Thus, a change in the input impedance of a radiator during scanning
leads to the appearance of amplitude and phase errors at the output of a module,
and as a result, to a reduction in the directional gain for specific radiation
directions. The maximum scan angle in this case can prove to be limited by the
permissible reduction in the array directional gain.

Figure 15.3. Block diagram of an active
phased array module having
a generator with a phase
locked loop.

Key: 1. Microwave oscillator;
2. Phase detector;
3. Direct current amplifier;
b. Phase controller for the
oscillator output;
5. Phase shifter;
6. From the controller.

 

One of the ways of reducing the impact of the input impedance of a radiator on
the parameters of a module in a transmitting active phased array is the use of

nonreciprocal elements, for example, ferrite isolators and circulators, inserted
between the generator and radiator.

Besides the requirements treated above, others are also placed on modules which
are common to generators operating as part of radio transmitting systems, for
example, on the passhand, level of harmonic filtration, etc.

- 266 -

FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

He will note that the inconstancy of not only the load but also the supply
voltages and temperature have a destabilizing effect on the phase of the output
signals of a module. The overall phase error at the output of a module, taking
into account the effect of all of the destabilizing factors, can prove to be
impermissibly high. In this case, phase locked loop tuning systems can be used
to eliminate the phase error. An example of the structural configuration of a
module having an oscillator using a phase locked loop is shown in Figure 15.3.

15.2. Major Structural Design Requirements

The overall dimensions of active phased array modules are governed by the possi-
bility of placing them in an antenna array. To eliminate spurious radiation
maxima during scanning, the array step should not be significantly greater than
X/2. For this reason, when designing active phased array modules, especially

for the centimeter band, there arises the problem of their miniaturization. This
task is complicated in the case of transceiving arrays in which the module should
also contain a receiving section and a device for separating the transmitted

and received waves.

These requirements can be satified with a hybrid integrated circuit design of the
modules. However, the small dimensions of active semiconductor devices and

their limited electron efficiency leads to excessive localization of the heat
emissions and the necessity of using effective heat sinks and cooling devices,
which limit the miniaturization possibilities.

The range of miniaturization of electromagnetic systems in a film integrated
circuit design is limited. The major component of a microwave circuit is the
asymmetrical microstrip transmission line. The microwave networks of oscillators
and amplifiers should contain line sections. the length of which is commensurate
with a half-wavelength. Thin (units and tenths of a millimeter) dielectric
substrates with a high relative dielectric permittivity (about ten) are used to
reduce the wavelength in a line as well as the transverse dimensions of a line,
where these substrates make it possible to reduce the wavelength in a line by

a factor of about 2.5 times, while the transverse dimension of the conducting
strip is reduced to tenths of a millimeter. However, such small transverse
dimensions lead to an increase in the losses in the conductors. Moreover, ele-
vated losses occur in dielectrics with a large dielectric permittivity. As a
result, the Q of microstrip oscillating systems falls off an average of 5 to

10 times as compared to waveguide and coaxial oscillatory systems, something
which leads to a reduction in the efficiency of the microwave circuits of high
power oscillators.

In the decimeter band, one can employ oscillating systems using lumped induct-
ances made with film technology and lumped capacitances, both outboard types
and film technology capacitors, which makes it possible to additionally reduce
the size of the microwave circuitry as compared to the wavelength, but which
leads to an even greater increase in conductance losses.

n 267 «

lilttlﬂﬂClAl.USB(ﬂﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15.3. Active Semiconductor Devices for Active Phased Antenna Array Modules

At the present time, transistors and various diodes with negative resistance

are used in active phased array modules. Moreover, diodes with a nonlinear
capacitance of the p-n junction (parametric diodes, varactors and charge storage
diodes) are also used. With the exception of parametric amplifiers and oscilla-
tors, nonlinear capacitance devices are not active ones and are used as passive
microwave frequency multipliers, as well as for amplitude, frequency and phase
modulation.

We shall briefly consider the properties of microwave devices in which the semi-
conductor devices enumerated above are employed.

Microwave power amplifiers using transistors are employed in the decimater and
centimeter bands at output powers of from tens to a few watts in the long wave
portion of the centimeter band. These amplifiers have a relative bandwidth of
up to 10 to 15%. Their gain amounts to 15 to 25 in the long wave portion of

the decimeter band and 2 to 3 in the short wave portion of this band, as well as
in the centimeter band. The efficiency of transistor amplifiers ranges from

15 to 252, which is markedly greater than the efficiency of power amplifiers
using other semiconductor devices. Microwave self-excited oscillators are also
designed around transistors. both with mechanical and electronic frequency tuning.
In such self-excited oscillators, as a rule, external feedback circuits are
employed, which, of course, complicates their structural design as compared to
diode oscillators and amplifiers. An advantage of transistorized microwave
amplifiers is also the unidirectional nature (without additional decoupling
components).

Generators and amplifiers using negative resistance diodes are employed primarily
in the centimeter and millimeter bands. The operational principle of such
devices is based on the compensation of the resistance of the resonant system,
taking into account the resistance introduced by the load: by the negative
resistance of the impedance of the diode. Hith total compensation for the
losses. as self-excited oscillator mode is established in the generator. With
partial compensation of the losses, there is regenerative amplification of
external signals. As specific feature of self-excited diode oscillators is the
absence of external feedback circuits, which simplifies their design as compared
to the design of three-terminal generators. Regenerative amplifiers do no have
unidirectional properties and require the use of isolating elements.

Diodes with various negative resistance mechanisms are used in microwave diode
oscillators and amplifiers: avalanche-transit diodes (LPD's) [IMPATT diodes]
and diodes with electron transport between valleys (DPE's) [tunnel diodes].
IMPATT diodes are used primarily in generators with an output power of a few
watts in the centimeter band and hundreds of milliwatts in the millimeter band.
The wide scale use of IMPATT diode amplifiers is precluded by the high noise
level, which is related to the avalanche nature of the generation of charge
carriers in these diodes. Tunnel diode oscillators are three to ten times
inferior in terms of power to IMPATT diode oscillators, however, they have some-
what better noise characteristics. The efficiency of diode oscillators does not
exceed 102 at the present time in the centimeter band.

“268'-

IYJR OWNWCJAI.IKNE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Frequency multipliers using varactors and charge storage diodes (Dﬂz's) are
usually employed for frequency multiplication in transistor power amplifiers,
which makes it possible to obtain outputs with power levels suitable for many
practical applications as well as acceptable efficiencies in the shortwave por-
tion of the decimeter and centimeter bands. The output frequencies of varactor
multipliers with a blocked junction can attain 30 to 50 Ghz. As has already been
noted, diode multipliers with a nonlinear capacitance of the p-n junction do not
have any gain and the microwave power conversion gain for them is always less
than unity, and becomes less, the greater the multiplication factor.

We will note that each of the semiconductor devices treated here can operate
using parametric effects. For example, an amplification mode in a transistor
can be combined with parametric frequency multiplication of the amplified signals

across a nonlinear collector capacitance. Autoparametric modes are employed in
diode oscillators.

15.4. The Radiation Power of Active Semiconductor Phased Antenna Arrays

He shall estimate the radiation power of a planar active phased array designed
using the configuration of Figure 15.2a, for the following types of active
devices: transistors, IMPATT diodes and tunnel diodes. The power capabilities
of these devices are illustrated by the graphs in Figure lS.b. In the active
phased array configuration considered here, the devices enumerated above can be
used both as amplifiers and self-excited oscillators. In the latter case, the
exciter synchronizes the oscillations in all of the modules of the active array.

      

. .- Pavg- H anax' "
. Frmhﬂ" Transistors
. l 1-" u-' (7’ ~~ l/Iwuum/m
... z‘
II '
i\ ”‘ st:
l
l ~‘i;ﬂ
. ”)
'u.?&‘
m’
0
. {If— I .. .-.-. L I . ..__.| CH!
4/ w M UM
Figure 15.4. The power of semiconductor Figure 15.5. The total radiated power
devices as a function of as a function of fre-
the working frequency. quency.
Key: 1. Permissible radiation Key: 1. IHPATT diodes;
POVef f0? 8 913813 2. Tunnel diodes.

element in an array
(20 - 30°);

2. IHPRT; diodes;

3. Tunnel diodes.

- 269 -

roa omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total radiation power of an active phased array is governed by the output
power of a nodule, the layout density of the radiators and the size of the
array. In turn, the array size depends on the width of its directional pattern,
200.5 and can be defined as L - GOA/200.5.

As has already been noted, the array step is approximately 1/2. It is difficult
in practice to reduce the step, since the transverse dimensions of the radiators
are usually close to a half-wavelength (for example, 1/3 for spirals, about A/Z
for symmetrical dipoles, etc.).

Thus, ghe maximum number of radiators in, for example, a square array is N2 -

(2k/A)2 or taking into account the relationship between L and 200.5, N - 1.64 '
10 l2°0.5°
Then the maximum value of the total radiation power is:

' P2,,“ 1.4440‘ Pawns,"
where PM is the radiation power of a single array element.

An estimate of the total radiation power for arrays built using transistors,
IMPAIT diodes and tunnel diodes which was obtained in this fashion in shown in
Figure 15.5. The dashed lines show the possible limitation of the power in the
long wave region because of the unacceptably large array dimensions.

The problem of minimizing the number of radiators for the purpose of simplifying
and reducing the cost of the structural design of an array and the control devices
usually comes up when developing a phased array. The same problem can also occur
in the case of active phased antenna arrays. He shall determine the reduction in
the radiation power with such minimization.

The maximum array step for which there are no spurious maxima is:
d '-= “(I '1‘ Sin om.g)r

where enax is the maximum beam deflection angle from the norual.

Correspondingly, the number of radiators in a square array is:

N' - .‘(l l-sinOleP.

and the total radiation power is:

p. 3x401!) M101“: .
’ ' ‘( mi )

The reduction in the power as compared to the maximum value is:

1‘; (L Lrin I).,,;_.'._)'
rims: 2

 

This ratio is shown in Figure 15.6 as a function of a specified scan angle 6. It
can be seen from this figure, for example, that with the minimization of the

-uo-
Kmahaumwmnv
Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USElNVLY

”2/ ’21s:
to-
ag ..

d5

44'

       

 

a; i___"__l. ,
0 M we; all 157 Jar/n,
Figure 15.6. The relative reduction in Figure 15.7. The efficiency of semi-
power as a function of the conductor oscillators
scanning angle. as a function of
frequency.

number of radiators, and consequently also
the number of array modules, for a scan
sector of ems, < 15', the total radiated
power amounts to approximately a quarter
of the maximum value determined by the graphs of Figure 15.5.

Key: 1. IMPATT diodes;
2. Tunnel diodes.

The Efficiency of Active Elements and the Thermal Conditions in an Array. The
maximum values of the efficiency which can be attained at the present time for
the semiconductor devices considered here are shown in Figure 15.7 for various
frequencies, from which it can be seen that the efficiency of the active devices
falls off with a rise in frequency, and at frequencies above 5 G81, can drop
down to 10 to 251. Along with this, the average radiofrequency power flux
density through the radiating surface of the array, 5, for an array step close
to X/Z, is: '

mas—p.» / e N)'..—. 413.»:

and, as can be seen, increases for a set power of an array element in proportion
to the square of the frequency. The thermal flux density through the surfaces
bounding the array structure, by virtue of the decrease in the efficiency with
increasing frequency, rises even more rapidly,_something which can lead to the
establishing of severe and even unacceptable thermal conditions in the modules.
The use of effective forced cooling methods though detracts to some extent from
one of the advantages of a semiconductor active phased array: its compactness.

He shall estimate the thermal limitations in the case of natural cooling of a
structure by the ambient air, keeping in mind that the thermal mode of an array
depends on the specific features of its structural design, and for this reason,
a preliminary estimate can only be a very approximate one.

He shall represent the structural design of an array in simplified terms: in

the form of a compact planar unit with solid walls. He shall initially treat
the case where the area s of the radiating surface is considerably greater than

- 271 ‘
ma omau. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the area of the side surfaces of the structure, while the heat output through
the surface opposite to the radiating surface is made difficult because of the
presence of the distribution device which is close to it. It can be assumed
that the thermal output in this case, which occurs with the generation of narrow
directional patterns, takes place primarily through the radiating surface of the
array, i.e., the heat output surface can be considered as coinciding with the
radiating surface S.

Then, in a steady-state thermal mode, the heat flux density is:

. 191m»; 12L .1. "I '
PM loss/SH s. "I 8.. ('1- —')"*W T"')'
where PM loss is the power loss in the module; “H is the module efficiency; SM

is the array area allocated for one module.

The heat flux density determines the temperature gradient between the cooled
surface and the air in accordance with the relationship:

 

Pause? _ aM Ml! ‘_r_"_(_l_ —l)-"Ml,
s 1' M

where a is the heat transfer coefficient.

He shall set a permissible temperature gradient of At er . 50° C, for which in
ths case of cooling by natural air convection and thegmal radiation, c = 8 W -
m' ' deg'l. The minimum permissible value of the module efficiency is:

1/nu per - 0.25 oAtperﬂ/PH + 1 """I"-"°:25¢Mmi'lr..|.|,
and for the values adopted for e and At:
1/")! per ' IOOAZIP“ + 1. ”mm... =I0thP.-l-l.

The calculation performed with this formula for a transistor module shows that
the quantity n“ er changes with frequency, as shown in Figure 15.7. It can-
be seen that at requencies above 0.6 GHz, the actual efficiencies of devices
is less than the minimum permissible. and this means (for the assumed value of
s), that the use of transistors in this frequency range in maximum power modes,
determined by the corresponding curve (Figure 15.0), leads to unacceptable
thermal conditions in the array.

Also shown in Figure 15.7 are the attainable values of the efficiency for
IMPAIT and tunnel diodes. For IMPATT diode modules, the minimum permissible
efficiency amounts to no less than 901, which significantly exceeds the actual
efficiency throughout the entire range of utilization of these devices. For
modules using tunnel diodes, the values of "H per approximately coincide with
the feasible values. Consequently, these devices can be used in maximum power
modes.

To establish the permissible thermal mode of an array in frequency regions where

the actual efficiencies of a module are less than the minimum permissible values,
the power of an array element should be reduced down to:

- 272 -

Iron orincw. use ONLY
IIHRCHNHCJAI.USEGDNLX

PH per - nwcmleau - n“).

PIM- '"h Whoa ”I‘ U —'h).

while for the values adopted for s and At. it should be reduced down to:

p“ Per - mannxzu - nu).

In some usage ranges for transistors, the permissible power is more than an
order of magnitude lower than the possible power of the device (see the curve
for PM er for 200 5 - 3' in Figure 15.4. The maximum value of the total

radiate

pzm-l.«-lo'

 

power because of thermal limitations does not exceed:

“I
|-ﬂ-

his)“

In the case of a broad directional pattern, the radiating surface of the array
proves to be reduced and the structural configuration of the array approaches

a cube.

virtue of heat transfer from the side surfaces of the structure.

The cooling conditions are significantly improved in this case by

Assuming the

shape of the structure to be close to a cube, one can figure that the thermal

flux density is reduced by a factor of three to five.

Then, we obtain the

following for the minimum permissible efficiency and power:

”‘5! Ion
Pu mm ‘

4mnvr.lu
400n-*’K'--n.y

In this case, the gap between the maximum possible module power and the permis-
sible power proves to be smaller (see the curve for PM per for 260.5 - 30' in

Figure 15.4).

ﬂt-g,ﬂﬁ H

 

ansistors
I _-J..J ..I .J.. .._..
d1 [7.5 {06a 1'0 [17.4

Figure 15.8. The total radiated power
as a function of frequency,
taking thermal limitations
into account.

1. IMPATT diodes;
2. Tunnel diodes.

Key:

Graphs of the maximua values Pt max are
shown in Figure 15.8 for values of

n“ per determined from the graphs of
Figure 15.7 for narrow (20 5 = 3') and
wide (200 5 8 30°) array d factionel
patterns for three types of active
devices used in modules. It can be

seen from Figure 15.8 in particular that
when using tunnel diodes, because of

the absence of thermal limitations, the
radiated power is increased while the
directional pattern narrows much more
rapidly than, for example, when using
IMPAIT diodes, for which there are ther-
mal limitations.

The estimate made here for the powers
and working frequencies of active phased
arrays with microwave amplifiers or
oscillators using semiconductor active
devices is approximate. The limitations
which have been ascertained are not to
be treated as the impossibility of

- 273 -

IN)! (IHHCIAI.LEHI(HVLY
FOR m1. USE ONLY

of designing active phased arrays for certain values of transmitted powers and
frequencies. These limitations point only towards certain difficulties in con-
structing an array. The thermal limitations which arise because of the
necessity of a rather dense layout of the modules, as well as because of the
insufficient efficiency of semiconductor oscillators and amplifiers in certain
frequency bands are obviously the most important.

There are the following possibilities for reducing or eliminating thermal
limitations: increasing the efficiency of the active devices or developing
effective methods of cooling them. which do not substantially increase the size
and weight of the array structure.

15.5. Active Phased Antenna Array Efficiency

As has already been noted, an active antenna array can have a greater efficiency
than a passive one as a result of the decrease in the losses in the distribution
system. The possibility of realizing a gain in the efficiency depends on the
efficiency of the array distribution system, the efficiency of a module and its
active element gain.

He shall estimate the efficiency of an active array designed in the configuration
of Figure 15.2a. and determine the advantage gained in the efficiency as compared
to a passive array. We shall introduce the following symbols: nr is the overall
efficiency of thc transmitter working into a passive array; no and n. are the
efficiencies of the distribution units for the passive and active arrays [res-
pectively]: n; and n“ are the efficiencies of the exciter and a module of the
active array; KpM is the power gain of an active array module; P is the RF power
delivered to a radiator; we assume the efficiencies of the radiators to be close
to unity in both systems.

The efficiency of an array is “A - l - P1 [P2 . where P is the power consumed from
the active element power supplies;P , -P'2 P" are tge total power losses in

the array. which are composed of the RP losses P' in the distribution device and
the conversion losses P" in the active elements.“

For an active array, when figured on a per radiator basis, we have a conversion
lose power in the generator Pr" and the exciter Pg“:

Pi. .. (1 —n4) Plné: P1. =9 (l —-n.) P/Krné'h-
The power losses 1n the distribution unit are:
P'—(l-‘1¢')PIKP-'l$-

The power of the power supplies for the modules P0P and the exciter P03 3, when
figured on a per module basis. amount to P0 - POT + PoB - Pin“ + P' KpMn.nB.

By summing all of the losses, in accordance with the definition introduced for
the efficiency, we obtain the expression for the efficiency of an active array:

"A. .__. n3 .1, n. (to... .1. mm. + Km '13 m).

- 27a .-
roe omcut Ussomx
F(I!(ﬂﬂﬂCLALIJ§E(MVLY

The efficiency of a passive array is n.“ - nrno. Thus, the gain in the
efficiency of an active array as compared to a passive one is:
M=-‘ "As tun; ' Kpn‘I‘l

n... ‘Ir'lt vulm-PKPJS .

 

 

The graphs of the advantage gained as a function of n. plotted from the formula:

M ﬁ(K».+ 1m! + KruﬂQ).

are justified for n - n5; nr . n" - us, are shown in Figure 15.9. To determine
the advantage gained, H. using these graphs, the scale on the ordinate is to be
changed by a factor of nﬂlnr times in the case where nH * up. which is frequently
encountered in practice.

J are ,
\‘w

     
  

-. _.5_L_ J

 

0 “WW: an 4»,

Figure 15.9. The amount of the gain in Figure 15.10. The amount of the gain
the efficiency of an in active array effi-
active array as a function ciency as a function
of the feed channel of nodule gain.
efficiency.

The graphs show that it is expedient to use active phased arrays in the case of
large losses in the distribution system. For example, when n. - 0.2M - 3.7,
for Ky“ - 10. The advantage gained in the efficiency depends on the nusber of
radiators: with an increase in the number of radiators (when the directional
pattern is narrowed), the advantage gained in the efficiency of an active array
increases as compared to a passive array.

The advantage gained in the efficiency also increases when nodules are used which
have a high power gain. Curves of the advantage gained H are shown in Figure
15.10 as a function of the gain KPM° As follows from the graphs, a substantial
rise in the advantage occurs with an increase in KpH up to approximately 10.

A further increase in the gain does not lead to a marked rise in the advantage.
if the efficiency of the distribution syste- is no lower than 0.2.

The expression derived for the advantage gained in the efficiency makes it
possible to evaluate the expediency in power terms of using an active antenna

- 27s -
Iron ommt use on“
FIHICHWNCJAI.USE4DNLN

array in place of a passive one. An advantage of H > 1 obtains if the efficiency
of the modules used in the active array satisfy the condition:
Km. 1...!»

ll -—-——

“ Krul l "rug/uh";

or when X?“ >> 1, the condition an > nrno. For example. if in a passive array
0. 8 0.3nr I 0.5, then a transition to an active array is expedient in power
terms where the efficiency of a module in such an array is no less than 0.15.

It should be noted that the increase in the radiation power in the direction of
the main lobe of the directional pattern when changing over from a passive to

an active array, with a constant power of the power supplies. will be less than
the advantage gained in the efficiency. This is due to the presence of additional
amplitude, and primarily phase errors in the active elements of the modules. The
influence of amplitude errors in the output signals of the nodules can be dis-
regarded, however, the appearance of additional phase errors leads to a reduction
in the directional gain of an active as conpared to a passive array.

15.6. Recommendations for the Selection of Module Circuits and Parameters

The circuit configuration of a module is selected by working from the necessity
of obtaining the requisite microwave power level at its output, assuring as
high an efficiency as possible for a module as well as a power gain sufficient
to reduce the power in the distribution system (for example, by an order of
magnitude as compared to the radiated power) for the purpose of increasing

the efficiency of the active array. Horeover, the point of insertion of the
phase shifter and the modulation method are to be determined, if modulation is
provided for the signals specifically in an array module.

The selection of the structural configuration of an active antenna array module
should start with the estimate of the nodule output power. For a known value
of the total radiated power P; and a specified directional pattern width of the
array, the power required for each ragiator, for a square array with a step
close to A/Z, 1: p" . 7 - 1°'S(2°o.s) P2.

The power of the output stage of a nodule is P a 1.2P1. By knowing P, we choose
the seniconductor device for the output stage, which, in providing the requisite
power at the working frequency, has the greatest efficiency. For a comparative
estimate of the power and efficiency of various semiconductor devices, one can
make use of the graphs of Figures 15.4 and 15.7. In accordance with these
graphs, it is preferable to employ transistors in the decimeter band up to
frequencies below 1 - 3 GHz. He will note that in this band, the output power
of a module can be increased as compared to the values defined by the graphs of
Figure 15.4 through adding the powers of several transistors in a nodule.

At frequencies of l - 3 GHz, one can reconmend the use of a multiplier stage
using a varactor with a multiplication factor of 2 to a, excited by a transistor

oscillator, at the output of a module. The output power of such a transistor--
varactor network runs to a few watts with an overall efficiency of 20 to 601.

. 276 -
soa‘orimcmntlhs:<HVLv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At frequencies of l - 3 Gﬂz, one can also use TRAPATT diode amplifiers and
self-excited oscillators.

Both transistor-~varactor chains as well as microwave diode oscillators, IMPAIT
self-excited oscillators and tunnel diodes can be used in a frequency range of
3 - 10 632.

One can obtain powers of units and fractions of a watt with efficiencies of up

to 10: in the output stages of a nodule. Additional considerations may be taken
into account in the final selection of the nodule output stage. For example,

the use of transistor—-varactor chains makes it possible have phase control at

a reduced frequency, which makes it possible in a number of cases to reduce the
losses in the phase shifters. 0n the other hand, diode oscillators and amplifiers
are simpler and more compact.

The choice of the semiconductor device for the module output stage determines the
entire structural configuration of the module to a considerable extent, since

all of the remaining module stages are chosen by working from the necessity of
obtaining a definite module power gain.

Transistorized oscillators and amplifiers in the decimeter band, as a rule, have
low power gains (2 to a), and for this reason, to obtain an overall module gain
of about 10, it is necessary to use 2 to 3 stages of amplification.

Then one can estimate the overall module efficiency, taking into account the fact
that at low gains per stage, it is determined by not just the efficiency of the
output stage, but also the preceding stages. Assuming the efficiency and gains
of all of the stages to be approximately the same, the overall efficiency of

a module can be estimated from the following formula:
ﬁll-II '

||’_‘f

 

an“ Klﬁam

where n1 is the efficiency of a stage; “PR is the stage power gain; n is the
number of stages in a module. The losses in the phase shifter have not been

taken into account in the formula cited here, assuming that the phase shifter is
inserted at the input to the module. The insertion of the phase shifter at
another point leads to a drop in the efficiency, and this becomes greater, the
higher the power level at which the phase shifter operates. The value of the
module efficiency obtained in this manner can be taken as the basis for the
estimation of the thermal mode of the array (see 5 15.6). Such an estimate should
ascertain the necessity of forced cooling of a module.

In the case of active phased arrays using diode generators in a module, as a rule,
is a single stage design and consists of an amplifier or a self-excited oscilla-
tor and a phase shifter separated by an isolating elesent. The output of the
diode generator is fed to the input of the phase shifter, where the generator is
of the same type as the module generator. Taking into account the fact that to
obtain a stable gain mode or reliable synchronization of a diode generator, the
ratio of its output power to the excitation or synchronization power should be
approximately 10, the oscillator or amplifier of the preceding stage can drive

- 277 -

FOR OFIHCIAI.lEﬂ!(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 to 10 modules. Thus. in the case where diode amplifiers or oscillators are
used, an active phased array is designed in the circuit configuration of Figure
15.2b, which makes it possible to standardize the active elements of the array.

When choosing the modulation method. as well as the modulated stage and number
of stages, one is to be governed by the same considerations as for multistage
transmitters. Here, we shall only note some of the special features which

are related to the fact that a large number of nodules are modulated simultan-
eously. No techniques can be used for the simultaneous modulation of the
modules. The first, incorporated in each nodule is its own modulator, vhile
the modulating signal is fed to the inputs of the modulators at a low power
level. In the second, one rather high power modulator services all of the array
modules. Hith the second approach, the modulator power proves to be increased.
since a portion of it is lost in the distribution device for the modulating
signal. In the first, the module size is increased and its thermal conditions
can be degraded because of unavoidable losses in the modulator. In both cases,
the distribution unit for the modulating signals should be carefully designed.
since with broadband modulation (for example, using short pulses), various
modulation distortions can appear in a complex channelizing system.

He shall also note that any amplitude modulation in an active phased array using
synchronized diode amplifiers or oscillators is possible only in the output
stages. while frequency modulation is possible only by means of synchronizing
the output stages with frequency modulated signals. In all cases, the spectral
width of the modulating signals should not exceed the synchronization bandwidth.

- 27a -
won 0mm usromv
FOI:OFFKJA1.USE¢DNLY

CHAPTER 16. EXTERNALLY EXCITED OSCILIATORS AND AMPLIFIERS usm: POWER TRANSISTORS

16.1. General Information

Microwave power transistors are widely used in externally excited oscillators and
amplifiers (Figure 16.1), used in the modules of transmitting active phased

antenna arrays as the driver or the output stages, where these have been given the
name of power amplifiers. A specific feature of these amplifiers is the compara-
tively high output power level (more than a watt) with a relatively high efficiency
(more than 30 to 60 percent). The power gain KP is of no less importance for pre-
amplifier stages. Power amplifier usually operate in a transistor collector cur-
rent cutoff mode. They are frequently structured in the form of hybrid integrated
circuits (618). Questions of the theory and design of microwave power amplifiers
are treated in the literature [l-S].

' A number of problems must be solved when

0’ 4, 6'.) £3 . . .
°ﬂ A“, designing a microwave power amplifier,
6} A“, a; Q one of which is assuring a transistor oper-

t'1 sting mode which makes it possible to
050 obtain sufficiently high values of the

efficiency and R; for a specified output

Figure 16.1. Basic schematic of power. Because of the difficulty of an
a microwave trans- analytical solution of such a problem,

istor power amplifier. experimental techniques are frequently
used in practice to determine the optimum
operational mode of-a transistor [6].

The procedure presented here for the design calculations of a microwave power
amplifier is based on the utilization of the "piecewise-linear" transistor model.
This thoery makes it possible to analyze the major processes in a transistor in

a collector current cutoff mode, ascertain the influence of transistor equivalent
circuit parameters of its operational mode, develop an engineer procedure for
design calculations of high power amplifier stages and compare two transistor cir-
cuit configurations: common emitter (OE) and common base (03).

The amplifier mode depends in many respects on the proper design of its external
microwave circuits. In this regard, questions of the electrical and structural
design of microwave circuits for transistor power amplifiers are treated in
Chapters 17 and 20.

16.2. The Equivalent circuit of a Microwave Transistor

The equivalent circuit of a microwave power transistor is shown in Figure 16.2 for
the collector current cutoff mode. Taken as its basis is the physical equivalent
circuit of Giacoletto, supplemented with certain elements of importance for the
microwave band. He shall explain the elements of the circuit of Figure 16.2: L52,
1.32 and ch are the external lead inductances of the base, emitter and collector

-279-

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB(MVLY
FORl0FFKJAL.USE(NNLY

[respectively], usually made in the form of strips or stubs; L51, Lel and Lcl are
the corresponding inductances of the internal leads; 050, 090 and cco are the
transistor lead capacitances to the package; Cu; is the collector metallization
capacitance to the package; ‘b' r; and ré are the resistances of the base, collec-
tor and enitter material (ré also incorporates stabilising reistance which is a
structural component of a number of microwave transistors); r is the recombina-
tion resistance; Ce is the barrier capacitance of a cutoff emitter junction; Cdif
is the diffusion capacitance of a turned-on emitter junction; Cc. and cc, are the
components of the collector junction capacitance, called the active and passive
component capacitances respectively of Cc; cce is the through capacitance of the
emitter contact region;

i

m i . .lsu (“u—U1). ll,,> U"
8 r 0'

u"£;U'

is the equivalent controlled current generator. The junction transconductance is
a complex quantity: Sn- Snvxp--j«"". , where er, s 0.4uﬂnu1t is the phase
determined by the charge carrier transit time (wult - Zufult. where felt is the
ultimate current gain frequency in a common emitter configuration); us is the
instantaneous voltage across the emitter junction; 0' is the voltage shift for the
approximated static characteristic ic (uv) of the transistor with the piecewise
linear approximation. The capacitances between the leads of the transistor are
not shown in the schematic of Figure 16.2, which can be neglected in the case of
power devices.

The use of the relatively cumbersome equivalent circuit of Figure 16.2 is justi-
fied for practical calculations at frequencies-olfor which l/Iucvo < lOuLBz. At
lower frequencies, one may disregard the capacitance between the leads and the
package CV0 (050, 6:0 and C o) and the capacitance Cxx, while the inductances of
leads Lvl (L51, L21 and Lets and va (L52, L32, ch) are replaced by their sum

Lv ' Lvl * va.

The parameters of the equivalent circuit depend on the currents flowing through
it and the applied voltages. Because of this, a rigorous calculation of a trans-
istor operating mode is difficult, even on a computer. however, one can make a
rather simple analysis of the processes in a transistor, taking into account the
major phenomenon in a cutoff mode, if a simplified model is employed. The para—
meters of this model are the result of linearization of the actual transistor
parameters individually for the active operating regions and the cutoff region.
Linearized parameters depend on the transistor operating conditions, for a sel-
ected mode, they are considered constant within the range of each region.

Reference data, which are usually the following quantities, can be used to
estimate the parameters of a transistor equivalent circuit. hzle is the static
current gain in a cannon emitter configuration, rk is the time constant of the
internal feedback circuit, also designated as "rb, Cc, where cc is the capacitance

- 280 -
INDR‘OFTWCIAI.IISE2(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

    

I

l

Fransistor ?ackage I
I W in :
J

LMLWL____ -U _____
[as
in

Figure 16.2. The equivalent circuit of a nicrowave transistor.

(The closed position of the switch corresponds to
the turned-on state of the transistor; an open
switch corresponds to the cutoff state).

of the collector junction, ce is the capacitance of the emitter junction, fult is
the ultimate current gain frequency in a cannon enitter configuration. Moreover,
the collector current at which the value of fult decreases by J7 as conpared to
the-nariaun value fult at a certain frequency f for a specified collector voltage

is also indicated for power transistors. This current is called the critical
current icr [1] .

The following relationships exist between the data sheet parameters for a transis-
tor and the equivalent circuit parameters:

c - c + C
e

dif; cc - cc. * ccp' cc. ' cc/(Z...b);

tk - rhcca; h21c . Sﬁr; fult- S'IZch. (16.1)
Ca" Co‘l'cmt: Cu 'Cm'I Cm" C....-sC.I(2...4):
1’" rec"; "2'3 "sun In! :snlzncl'
. . -3
s" etc/ij 42.51c/(l + 3.66 - 10 t5). (16.2)

3"}. gm”, .-= 42.51,“! -|--8,66- 10-31.).

- 281 -
ma omaAL'usa ONLY
I'T387

KTfm

K‘I‘lil 0B
K1304 A
K'FJWA
KTWA
Km!!!“
KT!) ISA
KT‘JI 313
KT‘JI 38
R19 I “B
KTDHM
KT9I 95
KT9I913

KTOR‘M-

 

mﬁW—‘——_

up."

 

4w
.1!!!
5m
4'!)
mm
500
lull
lmn
lll|0
mm
'3")
'3“)
gun]
5m"

2 I}

'c

§8§3§§§3$§q
w—nrngy‘é‘EQ—c

323823

«'5

N1

6

-0!

III

55
5-":

45

45

A53 (-6—.- N,

\4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

a :3 is 'm

93....»

wuypnaay
umuuma

pa rumor-n pun-a

0!

_ .
53 50.
0.3 0.0

0.3
L5 0.»;
a l
4 2
a 4
I 0.5
2 l
2 l
0.2
1.5 0.1
0.1 0.15
0.4 0.2
0.25

a
U!
1.
O
f 9 1’ t’
B I - .
~ts £6 .37 ‘8
OJ!” lm‘ 100
>0.l 44 I20 M
.0.4 Ian
0.}! m 120 85
M! 1.5 I20 85
4 3.8 I20 or.
n l.9 IN 35
0.0 20 l60 125
|.2 I0 150 I25
2 10 ISO I25
0.2 60 150 36
L5 I2 150
0.8 as 150
0.4 00 ISO
0.2 34.5 150

 

Spam-“rum: nun-tun II ulna-em mun-comm.

50 0.3
20 0.7
70 0.7
30 0.6
50 0.6
l5 0.6
20 0.6
40 0.7
60 0.7
50 0.7

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.7
00 0.7

 

um (20)
a I MI' 6 W
- w. n or
‘0. 1 18. 19-
0,005 .1000 |.7
0.018 400 4
0.! 1000 3.8
0.00 500 6
0.") (m 15
0.46 050 24
0.92 050 40
0415 1100 4
0.“ two 7.5
0.20 “00 7.6
0.02 2000 2
0J3 I800 1.6
0.00 RIOO 4.l
0.03 2|00 2.8
0.]! 3000 up» C.n0.9.
l.=0.6l\ C..e-0.8

.‘_________s;2.2_.___

- 282

-. .. nuanct.

FOR omcm. usi: ONLY

0 .._..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 16.1 [continued]:

(zopanmmccm ”sultry-O; :- Inns-swan sun-sumo! clean

 

  
  
      
 

 

 

 

 

 

P ck
ﬁéﬁ‘fzt : C". ’. Cr "" 6. | 6. ‘ 8. "Z 1... "TI ‘1' III
e I x (21) ‘3 ‘: ‘3 J." an “a

   
  

        

[1381 II 0.3 4 l0 — 3 0.6 0.9 0.9
KTf-Oﬁ II 1.5 .1! 4 0.2 6 3 3 3
KTGIOB M Li! I!» G 2 -- 2.5 0.7 2.5
KT‘JOOA H 2 65 2 OJ 3 .1 3 3
KT‘JOM 3 6 II!) I 0.4 1.6 .1 0.8 .1
KTOODA 3 8 :50 2 0.! l I .7 0.45 2
KT'JO‘JB 3 I3 .100 0.13 0.05 0.6 I.7 0.35 2
Imus/l H I.3 25 2 OJ!) 2 3 0.52 .1
KT‘JIJB H 2.5 50 l 0.2 l 2.5 0.25 2.5
KTQIRB H 2.5 30 I 0.2 l 2.3 0.23 2.5
KT9IN'; 5 0.7 I0 l..‘l — 0.1 0.l5 0.8 0,8
KT9I‘JA 5 2.5 50 0.5 0.l4 0.1 0.“ 0.4 0.7
KNIDB T) 1.5 20 I -— |.4 0.25 0.5 0.“
KT9l9ll [3 0.7 K) 2 — 3 0.35 I .3 0.1
Hymn-2 n can-0.3 c.- In 2 — 2 0.25 L..-o. LIN—03
({lI' 0, C» 2!! ’4" 'oo Il'ro'ﬁ

...,.-o,2

' nee um s—p-n.

' "—3” Wu or sollyu. 8—: "‘1'"an cat-Ann- slump. ll-Gsss.
' Tmosoo Wm serum—en».

‘ man stem-as 3mm ‘2!!! am no mam: IB. . .II.

' "In! mum I note turn" sauna-no plum "no.

_________________.___———-

 

1All of the transistors are n-p-n.

2I: all of the leads are insulated fro. the package; 3: with the package connected
to the emitter; B: to the base.

3‘l'he junction to environnent thermal resistance.

“when there is no value for 1121;, take it as equal to 15 - 50.

sWhen drawn in a graph, the parauster is considered equal to zero.

Key: 1. lice. volts; 18. fult» ﬁlls;
2. Ueb. volts; 19. cc, de;
3- Ic.i, ”PI; 20. Electrical parameters and equivalent
’0‘ 1c. “9'; circuit parameters;
5. Icr. am: 21. c“. pl’d;
6- Rjunc.coll.a ”(z/"3; 22. 3,000 n i. - 0.6 alps.
7. tj, 'C;
8. tc, 'C;
9. P, watts at tc . 25 'C;
10. f, Mlle;

11. "c0, V;

12. Pout, th8;
13. Power gain;
ll». Efficiency, 1;
15. hue";

16. U', volts;

17. 8.31;, nhos;

- 283 -
roe 0mm use ONLY
FOR 0FFK]AL.USEIONL¥

where q is the charge on an electron; k is Boltzmann's constant; T5 and tj are
the junction temperatures in ‘K and °C; ic is the collector current, amps; S" is
in mhos.

Moreover, the static transconductance i¢(uv) is used in the calculations, which is
equal to the ratio of the small increments in the collector current and the base
to emitter voltage in the case of a short-circuited load:

5 - hue/[2,; + r + (1+h21e)r;] (16.3)

3 "-' has/I'd 44+“ +hn9)';l-

when averaging the parameter 8,, it is recommended that a value of the current ic,
equal to half of the height of a current pulse of the equivalent generator icm or
the amplitude of its fundamental 181’ be subsituted in formual (16.2), which in
typical modes is close to 0.5icn.

The junction capacitances cc and Ce depend on the voltages applied to them. when
averaging the junction capacitance over a radio frequency period, one can take the
collector capacitance in the case of a voltage across it of “co as cc. The avern
aged value of Ce falls in a range between c. (“ab - 0) and c. (ueb I Dab max):
When calculating transistor operating conditions, the averaged parameters of cc
and 09 are taken from Table 16.1.

16.3. A Time and Harmonic Analysis of Transistor Currents and Voltages

In the general case, the voltage and current at the input to a transistor in a
cutoff mode have a nonharmonic waveform and this complicates the calculation.

In the microwave band, the input current of power transistors proves to be close
to a harmonic waveform though because of the suppression of the higher harmonics
of the current by the inductance of the input lead. The current waveform is even
closer to a harmonic one when coupling networks are used which contain an induct-
ance inserted in series with the input transistors (Figure 16.1). The collector
voltage waveform is also different from a harmonic waveform because of the non-
linearity of the collector capacitance, as well as because of the nonzero
resistance of the collector circuit for higher harmonics. However, practice shows
that the assumption of a harmonic voltage waveform does not lead to large errors
when determining the major power indicators of amplifiers. In accordance with
this, in the following analysis we shall assume that the input current and the
collector voltage do not contain higher harmonics.

At frequencies of f 3 3fu1¢Ih21e, the resistance R (Figure 16.2) is a poor
shunt of the capacitance Cd, and it can be disregarded. This inequality also
governs the lower cutoff frequency for the analysis given here.

At low~frequenciea, with a harmonic voltage across the collector, the optimal
condition in terms of the set of parameters (power delivered by the transistor,

- 284 -

FIMICHHHCLALIIEEINVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEZONLY

Pout. the efficiency and K [power gain]) is the limiting mode, which is character-
ized by the slope of the limiting mode line, Slimit. determined from the static

characteristics. At microwave frequencies, the residual voltage across the collec-
tor exceeds the value found from the static characteristics for the specified pulse
height [2], and thereforerthe quantity siimit < slimit is used in the calculations.

 

Figure 16.3. The equivalent circuit of the input circuit of an
amplifier for the calculation of the voltage across
the emitter junction for the on (a) and off (b)
states.

To assure the maximum efficiency with s harmonic collector voltage, the load resis-
tance, as, of the equivalent generator with respect to the first harmonic should be
resistive. The resistive nature of this lead and its value are assured through

the tuning of the collector circuit.

We shall now move on to the time analysis of the voltages and currents in the
circuits of Figure 16.3. we shall initially treat the voltage waveform across

the emitter junction of the transistor in the common emitter configuration. It

is governed by the control current i, which takes the form of the difference
between the base current and the current flowing through the collector capaci-
tance. The base current contains axsmall constant component 15 and a harmonic
component, equal to the input current of the stage. He shall consider the current
through cc ti be harmonic, since it is primarily determined by the sinusoidal vol—
tage at the collector. For this reason, one can assume that the alternating compo-
nent of the control current contains only the primary frequency component with an
amplitude of I, which governs the voltage across the junction u, [uj].

The voltage uj can be calculated by employing the equivalent circuit of Figure 16.3,
which reflects the processes in the emitter junction and is a part of the equiva-
lent circuit of Figure 16.2. The voltage across the transistor emitter junction for
the active range, uj on and for the cutoff range, uj off, is determined by the fol-
lowing differential equations respectively:

 

.. 1' ( 16 . (0)
(.A 'I(""""'i:3—-(—L or I ms an! mm :4,' > (I';
c
«l . . I'
C_. il‘ﬂﬁ—Q- m Imam! up" u“ -' II
I
(16.5)
- 285 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

,______———————_____—_.___————————-

0° ‘ «:11 1.10) 11110121101 0' m0 7.101 71104311")

00 0.500 0.109 0.190 1.110 911 4.002 0.315 0.012 1.51
06 0.423 0.1:» 0.219 1.711 114 —0.070 0.354 0.54:1 1.0.1
70 11.:112 0.1011 0.2101 1.1.1 95 _0.0117 0.30:1 0.: 1.01
11 0.3211 0.172 0.290 1.72 1111 ——0.1115 0.372 0,500 1.52
72 11.11011 0.1711 0.3111 1.11 111 _.0.122 0.3111 0.517 1.1.1
71 0.292 0.1110 0.310 1.70 90 41.139 0.091 0.5113 1.110
74 0.270 0.192 0.:120 1.70 99 —0.150 0.4111 0.099 1.40
10 0.209 0.199 0.117 1.09 100 41.114 0.411 0.1111 1.49
70 0.242 0.2011 0.1111 1.00 101 .—0.191 0.420 0.022 1.411
71 0.22:. 0.214 9.309 1.60 102 41.208 0.4.10 0.011 1.11
711 0.2011 0.221 0.va 1.07 10.1 41.225 0.4311 0.1112 1.411
79 0.191 0.229 0.3110 1.00 104 41.242 0.449 1.052 1.4'1
110 0.174 0.210 0.390 1.05 100 4.2.09 0.4511 0.0112 1.4!.
111 0.150 0.244 0.400 1.111 1011 --0.2711 0.4111 0.1114 1.11
02 0.119 0.253 11.411 1.01 1111 41.201 0.471 0.1111: 1.41
111 11.1.12 0.209 11.422 1.02 1110 «0.11111 11.41124 11.11112 1.42
114 0.105 0.2111 0.414 1.01 1110 —0.:121'. 11,4213 0.1111 1.41
11'» 11.0111 0.2111 0.44'. 1.111 110 4,112 0.111111 0.11:1 1.40
110 0.1110 0.281 0.450 1.01 111 4.3511 0.019 0.72.1 1.39
07 11.052 1.- 2911 0.4111 1.00 112 --0.:171'1 0.5211 0111 1.:111
1111 0.016 0.1111 0.470 1.59 11:1 .-.o.:1e11 0.5111 0.741 1.33
110 0.017 0.309 0.4119 1.55 114 41.401 0.018 0.7111 1.31
90 0.000 0.310 0.500 1.07 115 “0.423 0.553 0.100 1.3-”-
91 —0.011 0.3211 0.511 1.60 110 —0.409 0.5119 0.7110. 1.11
92 4.035 0.3217 0.622 1.56 120 -0.500 0.009 0.006 1.32

 

4- Figure 16.6. A graph for calculating t
ficiente 71 tron equetion

 

+

Figure 16.5. The equivalent circuit 0
emitter uplifier for th
frequency currents and v1

 

~286-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. I. u —lI’--(l/coCa)(slnul-cosm
“5 “f u "m Wlun<U’. (16.7) (16.7)

when uj ; 0'

where e in the equivalent generator (EG) current cutoff angle.

The equivalent generator current, is, is proportional to the voltage (uj on - U')
and has a cosine pulse waveforn. Taking (16.1) into account:

i - it “Np/U) Isin (ml --m..). -m0I
8' "P" "a > U’- (no.8) (16.8)

when uj > U'

The complex amplitude of the first harmonic I 1 and the constant component of the
equivalent generator current, Ic, can be fcung using the expasion coefficients for
the cosine pulse 71 and 70 (see Table 16.2):

181 I In ' "j("'l’n/“’)YI "P(-i‘“ﬂ)3 (16.9)

I: . ’x l..n=l«..,.y.ln. . (16.10)

The cutoff angle is governed by the balance equation for the DC voltages at the

transistor input, which taking expressions (16.6), (16.7) and (16.9) into account

as well as the relationships between the transistor parameters, can be reduced to
the form:

"(“vo ‘ "W11ch 131 ' °°‘°/YI " (l'wuucelsho/n - (16.11)

- —(u.....u')«,,. 0.1!" "mo/v: I-(I --uncal8)1.ln.

Here, Uvo is the base--enitter bias voltage.

-287 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 16.6. Ihe equivalent circuit of a canon base uplifier
for the first harnonic current and voltages without
taking the package capacitances into account (a)
and taking then into accOunt (1)).

Knowing the transistor parameters 8, volt, Ca and 0', one can deternine the
expansion coefficient y; for the specified current 1:1 and the bias uvo using the
graph of Figure 16.6, which is plotted in accordance with equation (16.11).

The peak inverse voltage across the emitter junction, in accordance with (16.7)
and (16.9), is equal to:

-288 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"eh peak ' "Wm-n.1,." I-m0)I«r..C=-n-I-"'- (16.12)

The first harmonic of the voltage at the emitter junction, averaged over one
high frequency period, in accordance with (16.7), is equal to:

g N .3 . - ' _ (16. 13)
ujunction 1 ‘3 ujunction 1 off U"""”“'"'” 1"(1 70/06..

In a cannon base circuit configuration, the voltage across a cutoff emitter junc-
tion and the collector current pulse are somewhat asy-etrical in the general
case with excitation by a harmonic emitter current. This leads primarily to a
change in the phase of the. fundamental of the emitter output current relative to
the input current. However, at the higher operating frequencies of a transistor
(above frp [fcutoff]), this change is comparatively small (about a few degrees)
and it can be disregarded because of the small gain in the calculation precision.

The harmonic analysis made here makes it possible to move on from the transistor
model shown in Figure 16.2 to the equivalent circuits of generators with cosmon
emitter and cor-son base configurations for the fundamental current and voltages.
For frequencies at the which the capacitance Cno can be disregarded, these cir-
cuits are shown in Figures 16.5 and 16.6a, while for higher frequencies at which
a common emitter circuit is usually employed, see the circuit of Figure 16.6b.
An equivalent current generator with a switch is replaced with a fundamental
harmonic current generator I.- [I 1], defined by formula (16.9), while the
emitter junction is represented 63 a capacitance averaged over a period of the
radio frequency, which in accordance with (16.13) is equal to 8 . c.(1 - “)4.
The resistance rx represents the losses in the material of the collector in the
parallel equivalent circuit.

The system of equations which relate the couplexing amplitudes of the currents
and voltages in the circuits of Figures 16.5 and 16.6a is given in 516.5.
16.0. The Properties of Common Emitter and Common Base Generator Configurations

In analyzing and comparing the main properties of cos-non emitter and con-Ion base '
oscillators/amplifiers, it is expedient to treat two cases separately:

1. A low inductive reactance for the comaon lead “Leann for which the fundamental
harmonic voltage across the inductance Lcom does not exceed 3 to 5 percent of

the voltage amplitude across the collector. The following inequality corresponds
to this case: for a couson emitter circuit:

“Le - mL,<0,03R.. (16.16)

while for a common base configuration:

- 289 -
roe Osman. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Lb - ”L6 g 0,] (“rp 111°)R.U 'l” 0I'D C! RI YIY‘I (16 . 15)

where an - [11,31 - (o.2s...o.3s)u§o/r.ut, y, a 0.3...0.6.
2. A large inductive reactsnce of the col-on electrode lead.

In the first case, all of the design calculation equations prove to be simpler and
they can be used to easily illustrate and explain the basic properties of ampli-
fiers and siaply execute the design of an oscillator/amplifier for a specified
power in a load. Po: this reason, we initially turn to the first case. We shall
aaaune that f ; fcutoff. Then, as a rule, one can disregard the resistance r' and
consider the junction transconductance to he a_real quantity. Moreover, in is
case, one can neglect the capacitances Cg}; [cal and Cu [Cccl-

| .
By solving the system of equations which relate the complex nplitudes of the
voltages and currents introduced in the equivalent circuits of Figures 16.5 and
16.6a, we find the current transnission gain:

 

. . 16.16
K‘ COIJII. - 18931/‘Ib1 - K100 '-' ’rI/Iﬁl I‘M-ﬁlm" l""rpC. Raﬁ). ( )
11 con. hue - “aw-Julian- -(|-l Mango"; (16.11)
And the input inpedance for the funduental frequency current is:
71-1!" "II-Fl jxuﬁ lulu? UJIm; 71:10“ Unilat-
where
(“I [0"an Ra‘hH ”robuh'l": 16 18
=—————————-— ; .
Vigil? | '4‘an Ru'fl ( )
L | al._,-—(I—1.)Ioc.. dawnin-
' (I. _ §
1...“. “ ""“rn‘-‘n"«YI (16.19)
7.110“ ' "r; i'
. ' l' 71 "r 11
4.0 lI-amlimkuv.) «rpm-.0 I «wt-«Rn» "I- a (16.20)
. __________.._—___—‘——:
' I I («m war
tuna“ - «ILa I
1 l...
mu I «momma I ran I we... ngrtn, '73-. (16-21)

 

‘1 +0.". w»):
and the power gains are:

K. . 00,-"?! ’. _ _ R_!-———————————
H" .. Iréu I we». an:)-l---pla'ln I-r:I('+»u-C«"’Hd

06.22) (16.22)

 

 

 

- 290 -
POI! OFFICIALIBI ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Knur. W“ Y.l0’)’R I'oU [m Cat-kn“)—
"‘0I||I'ﬂvl (I I (”I'PCH R" Y'). .I (I _M) “VI/(”’0 |’
I- all -I (e ,y,lm)’|} t (16.23)

The properties of microwave transistor oscillators/amplifiers are determined to

a significant extent by the high level internal feedback loops in the transistors,
the nature of which differs 'for the canon emitter and col-Ion base configurations.
In a common base generator configuration with a resistive load. these are negative
feedback loops through the inductance of the emitter lead 1.0 and the collector ck.

The governing factor in a cannon base configuration oscillator/amplifier is the
positive feedback through the base lead inductance.

It follows from formula 16.16 that in a coamon emitter circuit, the coupling
through Ck leads to a reduction in the current transmission gain by a factor of

(1 + ucugckkkn) as compared to a short-circuited load. In accordance with (16.17),
the transmission gain Ki com.base depends on the load impedance. In both cir-
cuits, the current transmission gain at microwave frequencies is usually less than
unity. Only at freuencies several times lower than fcut in a comon emitter con-
figuration does Ki > 1.

In a couson emitter circuit, the real part of the input impedance rinl 03 (16.18)
is positive in the case of a resistive load and is independent of frequency. The
quantity fin 03 [cor-non base input resistance] (16.20) depends greatly on the
frequency and with an increase in the inductance 1.5 can become negative. This.
means that an externally excited generator is potentially unstable because of the
positive coupling through 14,.

For both configurations, the quantity rinl'. proves to be small: units or fractions
of an ohm. An increase in the maximum power of a single transistor up to hundreds
of watts is accompanied by a reduction in run down to hundredths of an ohm. In
this case, the efficiency of the input matching circuit proves to be poor and this
is one of the reasons which limit the increase in transistor power.

The reactive component of the input impedance, xinl. close to the upper cutoff
frequency of a transistor, is, as a rule, of an inductive nature which is due to
the inductances of the base and emitter leads. Usually, Xinl component is consid-
erably greater than fin]. and is a component part of the input matching network of
an amplifier.

It follows from formula (16.22) that the power gain in a cannon emitter configura-
tion is inversely proportional to the square of the working frequency. It is

governed to a considerable extent by the values of Ck [can] and Le. It can be
shown that if we“; LeYl > 3rl', and- “cutccolkcolYl > 3, then:

Kl’ com .em. 3' 1/u2che " Kroszllto‘CnL,

«~291-

mommuseomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An amplifier/oscillator is little sensitive in this case to the scatter in the
transistor parameters and the change in the cutoff angle, but the gain proves to
be low. The upper working frequency of a common emitter amplifier, corresponding
to a reduction KP down to 2 to 3 usually does not exceed fcut-

Positive feedback loops act through the inductance Lb and the capacitance Cce in
a common base amplifier. The feedback through Che is of secondary importance for
power transistors, just as the feedback through the capacitances Cu, and Chg. The
positive feedback through Lb explains the'comparatively high sensitivity of a
col-on base configuration to changes in transistor parameters and Cutoff angle.
This coupling can cause parasitic oscillation or strong gain in stability. It is
necessary to take special steps to prevent this: incorporate emitter degeneration
bias, insert neutralising capacitances in the base circuit, or use an unblocked
resistance in the emitter circuit. A special resistor can be used for this re-
sistance, and sometimes, the internal resistance of the exciting generator, the
output resistance of the power divider bridge, etc.

The upper working frequency in a cannon base configuration can run to approximately
3fcutoff-

Formulas (16.16) - (16.23) were derived with the assumption that chon_ is small.
This assumption leads to a marked understatement of the output power and efficiency
in a common emitter configuration with large values of mica. and to an exaggera-
tion of these quantities in the common base configuration. Because of this, we
shall consider the impact of Lean on the power relationships in an amplifier]
Ioscillator.

In studying an externally excited generator, we are dealing with a system of two
generators (the input signal generator and the equivalent controlled generator

of the active device), which are connected through the elements of the equivalent
circuit of the transistor to its load. It is well known from the theory of the
joint operation of generators driving the common load that depending on the
amplitude and phase relationships in the circuit, both power addition in the load
as well as the transition of any of the generators to a power consumption mode are
possible.

In the common emitter configuration, the voltage across the load, Uk, and conse-
quently also the power are determined by the voltage difference between "8 and 02,
The voltage Ue it partially produced by the excitation generator current. The
phase relationships for the currents and voltages are such that there is an in-
crease in the power in the load as compared to the case where Le I 0 ("straight-
through"). with a short circuit of the output or with a low load resistance, the
portion of the excitation generator power related to the voltage He is dissipated
in the collector of the transistor.

If the generator efficiency is defined as the ratio of the power in the load, Pout»
to the power consumed from the collector supply, Po, because of the straight-
through flow, the generator efficiency increases simultaneously with the increase
in Pout- It should be noted that with this definition, the efficiency can prove
to be greater than unity. '

- 292 -

FOR‘OFFKJALIRHEONLY
FIHI(MﬂﬂC1AL USE!)NLY

In a common base configuration, the voltage across the load is pri rily determined
by the sum of U and “Lb: since the voltage across the capacitanceus is extremely
small. Just as in the preceding case, the voltage across the inductance of the
common electrode is produced partially by the input current, however, in contrast
to the common emitter circuit, the phase relationships in a common base configura-
tion are such that a portion of the power P8 is transmitted to the input network.
Because of this, the useful power in the load of an externally excited generator
and the generator efficiency are reduced as compared to the case where Lb . 0, but
nonetheless, less power is required from the excitation generator and consequently
the gain is increased and self-excitation can even-occur.

16.5. The Procedure and Sequence for the Design Calculations of the Operating Mode
of an Oscillator/Amplifier

In the course of designing a generator with external excitation, one is to first
choose the transistor and determine its circuit configuration based on the speci-
fied power and frequency. If the requisite transistor type is not present in
Table 16.1, one can estimate the parameters of its equivalent circuit, using
reference data and the estimates given in this section. Then the design calcula-
tions are performed for the-electrical and thermal operating conditions of the
transistor.

The type of transistor is selected taking into account the specified requirements
for the output power and frequency from the reference handbook data. The para-
meters of the typical operating condition, corresponding to the maximum utiliza-
tion of the device both with respect to power and frequency are specified in the
reference data for microwave power devices. The indicated output power corres-
ponds to a transistor package temperature of about 20 °c. The useful power falls
off with an increase in temperature, since the permissible power dissipation is
reduced. with a reduction in frequency, the maximum useful power of a transistor
increases.

It is expedient to use microwave power transistors at powers of no less than 40 to
501 of the power in the typical mode indicated in the handbook. Considerable
underutilization of a device with respect to power leads to a substantial degrada-
tion of its amplification properties.

The range of operating frequencies recommended for a given transistor is also
frequently indicated in the handbook. The lower working frequency is usually
recommended at no less than 20 to 30 percent of fcugoff, while the upper frequency
is close to Ecutoff for a common emitter circuit and reaches 2 to 3 times Ecutoff
for a common base configuration. At the lower operating frequency of this range,
the maximum output power can be approximately twice as great as the power at the
upper frequency limit.

It sometimes turns out that the requisite power at a specified frequency can be

obtained with different transistors. where a choice is possible, it is preferable
to use transistors with a higher gain, however, it is not desirable to use devices,

- 293 :-
FOR omcut use ONLY
FOR 0F?“JA1.USE¢DNL¥

the lower frequency limit of which is higher than the specified working frequency,
since in this case, operational reliability will be reduced, and the probability of
self-excitation will increase. Moreover, higher frequency devices also cost more.

The circuit configuration (common emitter or common base) is determined in a numr
ber of cases by the package structure of the selected transistor. For example,
KT907 and KT909 transistors can be used only in a common emitter configuration,
since they have the emitter connected to the package. The KT918 and KT919 trans-
istors, on the other hand, are used only in a common base configuration: they have
the package connected to the base. The KT606 and KT906 devices can operate in
either configuration, since they have leads which are insulated from the package.
The KT911, KT913 and KT916 devices, although they also have leads insulated from
the package, are more conveniently used in a common emitter configuration, since
two of their emitter leads should be inserted in the circuit in a balanced

fashion because of structural design considerations. The common base configura-
tion is a higher frequency circuit and is used considerably more often frequencies
above 1 Gas.

The parameters of transistors needed for operational mode design are given in
Table 16.1. If the selected transistor is not present in Table 16.1, its para-
meters may be estimated by knowing the data sheet values for fcutoff, rgck and Ck.
Moreover, one must know the inductance of the common lead. Transistors which are
specially intended for common emitter or common base circuits have a minimal
cos-mm lead inductance (0.1 to 0.4 nﬂy) while the inductance of the collector and
input leads are several times higher. The capacitance C; is usually 5 to 10 times
greater than Ck; the resistance rﬁ is close to rs and r; does not exceed 0.3r5.
The data sheet value of feutoff is usually 1.5 to 2 times less than the actual

The time constant rick, which is indicated in the data sheet, can sometimes exceed
the actual value by an order of magnitude. It must be kept in mind that the
parameter rﬁck is the product of rﬁ times cka, and not times Ck. The parameter
h21e is not critical in the design calculations for microwave amplifiers and
oscillators. The static characteristic shift voltage U' for silicon transistors
falls in a range of 0.6 to 0.9 volts. The parameter 5}” [Séutoff] can be taken as
approximately equal to ISPout/Uﬁo, where Ugo and Pout correspond to the typical
mode (Pout in watts and Uko is in volts).

If the design calculations using the typical mode power and frequency yield a
value of Kp which differs from the data sheet value by no more than 1202 for a
common emitter cnfiguration, one can assume that the equivalent circuit parameters
have been correctly estimated. If the absolute value of the peak inverse voltage
at the emitter lueb eakl is greater than the permissible value or almost equal to
it according to the Resign calculations, this means that the calculated value of
Ce is understated.

He shall move on the design procedure for the transistor operating mode at a

specified power into a load Pout- The initial data for the design calculations
are: power delivered by the transistor, Pout; the working frequency f; the

-294-
IWJR10FFICIAl.lEﬂE(NVLY'
FOIlOFI1C1Al.USE10NLN

ambient temperature, t P; the transistor type and the circuit configuration (common
emitter or connon bases.

If the requisite power is close to the level which the transistor can deliver (but
does not exceed it), then the standard supply voltage for this transistor is to be
used: most often 28 volts. "hen a transistor is underutilized in terms of power, it
it expedient to lower the supply voltage to improve the reliability. however, one
nust take into account the fact that cutting 0&0 in half leads to a reduction in
fcutoff by approximately 5 to 152 and to an increase in On by approximately 20 to
252. The bias voltage 030 in power stages is usually taken as zero. This simpli-
fies the circuit and makes it possible to obtain a cutoff angle close to 90°, for
which the ratio between Pout. the efficiency and Kp is close to optimal.

The transistor package tenperature can be taken equal to pk - tambient + (10...20)
°c, taking into account the extra heating of the heat sink relative to the ambient
medium.

1f the influence of steam can be disregarded in accordance with inequality
(16.1b) and (16.15), then in the design calculations one can employ the simpli-
fied equations (16.16)-(l6.23). The procedure for such design calculations is
set forth in [5-6].

We shall give a design calculation procedure for the more general case, where
inequalities (16.16) and (16.15) nay not be observed. In this case, however, it
is difficult to accomplish the calculations directly for the specified power in
the load. If is considerably easier to carry out the calculations by specifying
the power P developed by an equivalent generator. This power in a cannon
emitter configuration is to be taken as 10 to 20 percent less than Pout. since in
this circuit, the transistor output power has an increment because of the
straight flow through of a portion of the input power. On the other hand, P8 is
to be taken greater than Pout in a common base configuration, since a consider-
able portion of the power developed by the current generator, 181» is fed to the
input circuit of the amplifier. At frequencies above fcutoff. P8 is to be taken
at 20 to 202 higher than Pout in a common base configuration; at frequencies
below fcugoff, this difference is less.

Initially, the calculation is carried out in the following order regardless of
the circuit configuration (con-on emitter or cannon base).

1. We determine the collector voltage utilization factor, specifying P8 and Uko
taking what has been presented above into account:

z ;,,=-.-o.5lI+I’T—_IW.T($’.TUTJI-

cutoff .

2. We find the current and voltage amplitude of the fundamental frequency of the
equivalent generator:
(1,. gull“... I": 2P,./l/,..

- 295 -

FOIIOFFKJAI.U§E(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The pub. collector voltage, uk peak» should not exceed the permissible value of
“RE than:z

ucoll.peak - uc0 + ugen < "cc max ' """"" "' U"""’r<stmu.

This inequality is not observed, the operational node is to be changes or another
type of transistor is to be selected.

lo. We determine the transistor parameters:

8. '7 42.5].0’“ "' 3.66' '0‘, In): I "" "lids-s- S '1 "“3 lral
-}- f+ f; (1 -|- "man"-

The value of t, [tjunction] can be taken equal to the ultimate permissible value
(see Table 16.1).

5. Having calculated the values of the parameters -(l130 - U'MicutCe/Igenl and
«bucce/s, we find the expansion coefficient 1) from the graphs of Figures 16.10 for
the fundamental frequency of the equivalent generator current. Then, for the
value found for 71, we determine the values of coao and the coefficient of the
form 21 - n/Yo from Table 16.2.

6. He determine the peak inverse voltage at the emitter, ueb peak. from formls
(16.12). The absolute value of Ugh peak should not exceed Ugh nan.

Then in paragraphs 7 through 22 we calculate the complex amplitudes of the currents
and voltages in the elements of the equivalent circuit of Figures 16.5 and 16.6a.
The current 181 is taken as the vector with the zero phase. In this case, the
vector lg], is equal to its own scalar value I81 found in paragraph 2.

u
“’rPTI
a. u... . -iI(I ---n)/<»C.. 9. ”an" Urn-Um. 10. Ian--
iMCm.U¢:..a. H. by Il-I-lmu. 12'. ”rd" ’éII'G- 13. ”can-"-
U.(,- I U45... '4. ic...‘ jhlcm‘ ”Call- '5‘ ’a "OK-'0'!“ '-
NB. I," (lam/f... l7. Inn‘- "IO’ ["6“ I'lnu- “‘- ULG"j‘"I'a If."
m. I»: -I l I... 20. U9"‘*’:-)I(’; I-imL=.)- 2l-'U.--Ua-I-Um -3
E Um! I Unl- 22. In 9'- I'l—lc-s""mm "lla-

7, I. . jlr. (cosm.-|-jsium,,). rue m...--o.4mm,,..

 

23. We calculate the voltage amplitude across the load and the input impedance of
the transistor for the fundamental frequency: “col comem. - use“ - "e3

git/:1: comem. ' UB/Ibau 13 ac combaae " uC col. an. " uI. base; 2in l combase "
B 1' . . ”K03“
Us - Us: hung" UJlsl. UnoanCun-i-Um:1ulon-" n/IDI-

- 296 -
roe orhcut'wt own}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

26. The excitation power and the power delivered to the load are:

exc 1’- .— 0.5ch U. Re I.“ + lm 0, lm [m];
P _ I Pal-Ir‘ 0.5lRCUchIK. l-lllllellllml.

For the canon emitter configuration, Iin 1 I lb“. 1; "col I "col com.em.3 and for
the cos-non base configuration, Iin 1 I Iel: “col I “col com.base~

If the power in the load Pout found as a result of the calculations differs consid-
erably from the specified value, the calculations are to be repeated, correcting
the value of Pgen. taking the deviation into account.

25. The Dc component of the collector current, the power consumed from the, supply

and the efficiency are equal to the following regardless of the circuit configura-
tion:

Ix ' - [with (9); Po "IIK Una: 1! Pull/PO'

26. The power gain, the power dissipated by the transistor, and the permissible
power dissipation for a given transistor package temperature are determined from
the following formulas, regardless of the circuit configuration:

KP -Psanlpa; Pane“ Ps—Pmu-I-Pﬁ
P-s"(!u|ms"lu)/Run.

The maximum value of t, m [maximum junction teqerature] is the maximum permis-
sible value of t1r from Table 16.1.

It must be demonstrated that PP“ [Pain] < Pug.

27. The equivalent load inedance at the external leads of the transistor is:

2load 1 I ucol/Icol l - jul‘col’ zul “I’m—h"!!-

where "col I “col com.em. for a cannon emitter circuit and “col I Ucol con.bage
for a cannon base circuit.

In some cases. zero bias is not optimal. For example, when a transistor is con-
siderably underutilized in terms of. power, the cutoff angle in a zero bias mode"
is too small as compared to the optimal value. 0n the other hand, in a canon

-297-
FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
FINICHHNCJA1.USE(MVLY

base amplifier, a reo‘uction in the cutoff angles may be needed to stabilize the
operating mode. For this reason, it is necessary in the first case to introduce
unblocking bias to increase the cutoff angle, and In the second case. to use block-
ing bias. for exanple. self-biasing to reduce the cutoff angle. In these cases,
the design calculations should be performed for the specified cutoff angle. The

procedure for such design calculations differs somewhat from that given in para-
graphs 1 and 5. '

A more precise formula is used in paragraph 1:
Ecutoff - Ern *‘0-5 I' '1' V' "‘ apt/(Smalleluio) '-

where a1(0) is determined for the specified angle 6 from Table 16.2. ‘me bias
voltage 1130 is found in paragraph 5 from formula (16.11), where this bias assures
the specified cutoff angle. If the bias is blocking bias, it can be realized by
means of a resistance Re ' -Uao/Ic, which is bypassed with a capacitor.

The calculation procedure cited here for power amplifiers is given for frequencies
at which one can disregard the capacitance 030. For the 3 to 5 cu: band, a more

.. complete equivalent circuit of a transistor is to be used (Figure 16.2). Cannon

base amplifiers operate in this band. The equivalent circuit of a common base
amplifier is shovn in Figure 16.6b. The design calculations are carried out ini-
tially in accordance with paragraphs l--18. Then, the following currents, voltages
and resistances are calculated in paragraphs l9--37:

'9. 'c “’r. “ﬂ": ”3-. m. ’L'" -,-l ”I Ir| ""6...
21. ”Lil =310’Qg lb“ 22. ”CW -0‘5 Furo'|UII'I'UL.I

(He neglect the voltage across ré because it is small).

2.1. lam Imuucw 2"- ’M‘hgrwcao-

'25. (lug-‘JN-a’nv ”Woman“ ”(Jr

27. In Usl’m- 28. ”c:-«"-”c--""’w 29- ’0.- 2140C... ”Cw

:u. I,”""u—Im_’Caa“,Csa-Ic‘as—lam' 3" ”(JV-”Fink:-

32, (1m..-(Ic“—Um. 33. ’c.o"5°'cmuc.o- .11. l..--v —la°-|-Iw.
35. (Ibu- jaoLn I... .13. Una-(lar—Uuz. 37. III-Uni]...

38. The excitation power and the power delivered to the load are:

P. "I 0.5(Rc ”- RC ’9' 'I‘ Im an ha ’3‘):
. Puugw,5(kc U" Re In] ll“ U. II" I“).

Pexc

out

-298-
momdnuseomv
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quantities Ic, Po, n, Kp and Pdig. are found just as in paragraphs 25 and 26
of the preceding design procedure.

As experience shows, at frequencies on the order of hundreds of megahertz the
experimental and calculated results for the averaged parameters of a given type
of transistor are sufficiently close, and for this reason, there is no necessity
of a substantial reworking of the circuitry and structural design as compared to
the calculated values. The influence of the imprecision in the knowledge of the
transistor parameters and their scatter is easily eliminated by means of using
fine tuning elements without changing the circuitry.

The design of amplifiers for frequencies on the order of several gigaherts based
on the handbook data for transistors can apparently not be accomplished at the
present time without experimental breadboarding to realize possible changes in the
circuitry and structural design. This is explained by the approximate nature and
complexity of the equivalent circuits of transistors and the inadequate precision
in determining their parameters. The latter is related, on one hand, to measure-
ment difficulties, and on the other, to the scatter in the parameters. In a
wavelength range of 10 cm and shorter, even a comparatively slight scatter in the
inductances of the leads and capacitances of the package can lead to sharp changes
in the input impedance of a transistor because of resonance phenomena. This is
explained by the fact that the input circuit of a transistor, which includes these
reactive elements, forms a resonant system with a high Q (of about 10), which
resonates:within the working passband of the transistor. For example, in a range
of 3 to 5 682, the calculated values of the resistive and reactive components of
the input impedance of a KT937 transistor change by two orders of magnitude. The
resonator nature of the input circuit is also responsible for the high sensitivity
of the input impedance at a fixed frequency to small changes in the input circuit
parameters. For example, an error of 201 in determining the inductance L91 close
to resonance changes the values of the resistive and reactive components of the
input impedance of K1937 transistor by an order of magnitude. imprecision in

the fabrication of passive networks can have similar consequences. Moreover,

when designing coupling networks, certain parasitic coupling circuits which in-
fluence the operating mode of an amplifier are not taken into account. “any of
these factors can be disregarded at lower frequencies.

The measurement of the matrix parameters of a transistor does not eliminate the
indicated difficult. Such measurements are also have a great deal of ambiguity,

since a slight change in the length of transistor leads can greatly change the
measurement result.

The conclusion that calculations where one fixed set of any parameters are used,
either "physical" or matrix, are inadequate follows from what has been said above.
It is recommended that calculations be performed with variations in the parameters.
A series of such calculations will assist in ascertaining the most critical para-
meters, predicting possible changes in the Operating mode of a transistor which
are related to the scatter in different specimens of the transistor, the change

in frequency, etc., as well as in selecting the kind of coupling network and
providing for the requisite means of fine tuning.

- 299 -
son m1. us'somx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17. EXTERNALLY EXCITED MICROWAVE CIRCUITS FOR TRANSISTOR OSCILLATORS AND
AMPLIFIERS

17.1. General Information

In externally excited generators, designed in common emitter (Figure 17.1a) or

conmnn base (Figure 17.1b) configurations, the microwave networks can be repre-
sented in the form of four-pole networks of linear reactive elements, the power
losses in which are neglectably small.

To obtain a selected power operating mode for a transistor, it is necessary to
provide the requisite impedances with respect to the fundamental frequency,

21“ 1 and zload 1 (Figure 17.1), at its input and output. These impedances can
in principle be determined by calculating the operational mode of the transistor
based on its physical equivalent circuit (see chapter 16 or [1 - 5]). At the
present time, the calculation of the operational mode of a microwave power trans-
istor is an approximate calculation, and as a rule, requires in addition that

the electrical parameters of the transistor be found more precisely experimental-
ly. Because of this, the method of experimentally determining the total input
21“ 1 and output 2:“: 1 impedances of the transistor with respect to the first
harmonic at some specified frequency and a definite electrical operating mode
has become widespread in practice along with the analytical technique. A general-
ized schematic of a generator in which the transistor is replaced by the
equivalent circuit taking these impedances into account is shown in Figure 17.2.

   

u) (b) 0

Figure 17.1. General schematic of an amplifier/oscillator with
external excitation.

Key: 1. Input microwave network;
2. Output microwave network.

f/wlm hunt“!
I ---------- 7 g"

    

1l _| 2m I
- I
( II n) if; {I "" (1)"!Izload
— L _________ l

 

 

audnw t sane". '_"Eiﬁiﬁ?1§xcuit
“€33“: M

Figure 17.2. Generalized radiofrequency circuit of an amplifier]
oscillator with the transistor equivalent circuit.

.,_________________
It is presupposed that 20“: 1 corresponds to the complex conjugate of the
load impedance of the transistor zload 1, i.e., 2°“: 1 I zgoad 1.

- 300 -
FOR!0FFNJAI.USE(NWLY
IIIIGJFF1C1A1.lﬂiI(MVLY

tu «9:3:
z ls: - ﬁg“ Fm - = lg.
tnl ' I gout 1 Ann
" (a) 0 0:!

Figure 17.3. The equivalent circuits of transistor input (a) and
output (b) networks.

TABLE 17.1.

 

 

I
mm o 1.3 m I 1.2 l I a 45 23
KT6I2 4.2 0.9 [w 2.2 I 0.3 6 _ 60 2;
KIM 5.6 6.5 85 B 0.4 3 3 30 28
NIM‘ 4.5 3 IN 1.9 0,4 3 4 60 2°
RIVIIA 8 5 no 6 I L5 d 40 28
. rumm- 5 J as 5 I l.6 5 40 as
“mm 3 3.19 52.5 2.1 I 3 3 45m 28
XVII-16 [.2 2.55 32.9 4 I 5 2.8...3 55... 2.
' KWIIIB |.2 2.23 "3.0 4.‘ I l0 .6...2. 60...“ 26
KT‘JIO 6.5 l.5 200 2.4 2 I 4 40m 26
I was. a-g “a; 2-? 2-: : a. 2 “35' m
i I . s '0 a 9 '
RI9IBBV 4.5 0.965l18.6 5.8 I 2.0 I0 68 22
‘ 'Bcuomtsssmnms
*Unpackaged structure.
Key: 1. 'in 1, ohms;
2. L1“, nanohenries;
3. no t 1. ohms;
6: Co: , picofsrsds;
S. Horﬁing frequency. GH:;
6. P watts’
t. ’
7. Pgser gain;
3. "coll. 0, volts.
Calculations and measurements of the inpedances 21“ 1 and zout have shown

[3, 6. 8] that the input circuit impedance.of a transistor can s approximated
by the overall impedance of a series circuit consisting of a resistance tin 1,
an inductance Lin and a capacitance cin (Figure 17.3a), the resonant frequency
of which can be higher or lower than the working frequency of the amplifier]
oscillator. while the impedance of the output circuit is quite well approximated
by the inpedance of a parallel circuit consisting of no“: 1, Lout and cout’ which
is shown in Figure 17.3b. The parameters of the transistor input and

output
circuits depend on its operating power conditions and frequency.

For this

- 301 -

IIIICINNCIAI.UBE(NELY
INJR OIWHCth USEICNULY

reason, the impedances Z1n 1 and 2°“: 1 are determined at the working frequency
for the selected operating mode. when an amplifier or oscillator operates in a
certain band of frequencies, it is necessary to determine zin 1 and zout 1 for
the transistor, taking its power operating mode throughout the entire specified
bandwidth into account. The reactive component of the impedance 21“ 1 or zout 1
can be of in inductive or capacitive nature, depending on the working frequency
of the transistor. Experimental values are given in Table 17.1 for the elements
of the equivalent circuit of the input and output networks of some microwave
transistors, with the operating mode parameters indicated for which they were
measured.

when designing microwave circuits for oscillators/amplifiers, we shall assume
that the impedances 21“ and 210,4 1 (or 2°“t ) are known. Then the four—pole
network in the input circuit of a generator (iigure 17.2) should transform the
impedance at the generator input 21 to the impedance 213 1, while the four-pole
network in the output circuit should transform the load impedance 210,6 to the
impedance zload 1 (or zout 1). Consequently, the microwave four-pole network

in this case plays the part of an impedance transformer and for this reason is
called a transforming network. Since the transformation of the impedances in
the input (or output) microwave network is usually accomplished for matching in
this circuit, the four-pole network is also called a matching circuit. It is
understood in this case that when matching is achieved in the microwave input
circuit of a generator, the greatest power will be transmitted from the stage
driving the generator to the input circuit of the transistor. In this case, the
impedance 21“ 1 and the impedance of the four-pole network at the connection
points, 21“ 1, will be complex conjugate quantities. In the output microwave
network when matched, zout 1 is the complex conjugate of the input impedance
210‘ of the four-pole network on the transistor side, which will deliver the
specified power to the load. Taking that presented above into account, we shall
call the microwave network formed by the transforming four-pole network of
linear reactive elements a matching network [7].

The major electrical requirements placed on the microwave networks of an exter-
nally excited generator are providing for the requisite impedance transformation,
as low as possible power losses during power transmission, the specified band-
width. the requisite filtration level of the higher harmonics and suppression

of spurious frequencies.

A specific feature of high power amplifier transistors as compared to low and
intermediate power transistors is the small values of the resistive components
r1“ 1 and “out 1 of the impedances zin 1 and 2°ut 1 respectively, which are fre-
quently substantially less than the resistive components of the impedances at the
generator input and output. In this regard, a microwave network should provide
a relatively high transformation ratio (from a few units up to 10). In this
case, the power losses increase markedly in the networks and the paasband is
narrowed.

The efficiency of power transmission to the load is estimated in terms of the
circuit efficiency, "cit: defined as the ratio of the power Ploadr dissipated in

--3oz -
ma mtm on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the load, to the oscillatory power P delivered to the microwave network:

ncir -' l,losd/l, 07'”

In modern transistorised transmitters, including integrated circuit stages,
externally excited generators are usually not tuned. The requisite bandwidth of
the amplifier stage is governed by the conditions necessary for normal trans-
sitter operation (for example, the kind of modulation, the range of frequencies
covered without tuning the stage, the requisite phase stability of the signals
at the output).

The requirement of filtration of the higher harmonics basically applies to the
output microwave circuit of an amplifier/oscillator. This is explained by the
fact that microwave power transistors usually operate in modes in which the
voltage waveform at the collector differs substantially from a sine wave. For
this reason, to obtain a voltage close to a sine wave at the output of an ampli-
fier/oscillator, the output microwave circuit should filter out the higher
harmonics as much as possible.

Matching microwave four-pole networks of the coupled resonant parallel circuit
type or individual I', ‘r and 11 section filters (or two to three series stages

of such filters) meet the electrical requirements considered here to a sufficient
extent. The use of one to two such sections makes it possible to obtain a
rather high impedance transformation ratio, provide for a comparatively wide
passband and filter the higher harmonics. In the case of elevated requirements
placed on the passband and the suppression of spurious and out-of-band signals,
complex filters are employed.

When designing the microwave networks for amplifier/oscillators used in the
modules of active phased arrays, it is desirable to use the simplest microwave
circuits which are convenient for integrated circuit technology.

Hicrowave circuits for transistorized amplifier/oscillators using integrated
circuit technology can be constructed from elements with lumped parameters, such
as inductance coils, capacitors and resistors. These components have small

dimensions and a sufficiently high Q in a frequency range of from hundreds of
megahertz up to 1 Glis“. In circuits intended for operation at frequencies above

1 Gllz, elements with distributed parameters are used in the form of sections of
unbalanced striplines. Making a stripline on substrate of a dielectric
material with a high relative dielectric permittivity (t > 7) makes it possible
to substantially reduce the dimensions of a circuit. with the present state of
the art in microwave microelectronics technology, integrated circuits with
distributed and to a greater extent, with lumped parameters have relatively high
losses, which are primarily due to the significant reduction in the perimeter of
the conductors in step with the decrease in the element size. Because of this,
microwave circuits should not be especially complex and contain a large number
of elements.

:See Chapter 50 of this book.

-303,
msomantssomx
FINI¢HWNC1AI.IENE(N§L¥

17.2. The Design of the Microwave Networks of Amplifiers and Oscillators

The Input Microwave Matching Network (Figure 17.2). If the excitation power

is delivered to the generator input by means of a matched transmission line with
a characteristic impedance of p, then one can assume that the internal impedance
of the driving source 21 is equal to o.

In accordance with the equivalent circuit of the input circuit of a transistor,
shown in Figure 17.3a:

zin 1 . zen = r"; + i (”Ln‘ ”06") = ’aai + hub

The reactive component x1“ 1 of this impedance can be both of an inductive nature
(at a working frequency higher than the resonant frequency of the transistor
input circuit). and a capacitive nature (at a working frequency lower than the
resonant frequency of the input circuit). For many modern intermediate and high
power transistors. operating in the decimeter band. the values 1/0001n are sub-

stantially less than uL1n [3.6], and in this case, one can approximately assume
that:

21!! 1 a r1“ 1 + jul'in - 2.“2.’r"l-|- imL...

Because of the fact that the inductance Lin cannot be less than a certain value
governed by the dimensions and structural design of the package and length of
the leads (where a package is absent) of a transistor, while r1“ 1 decreases
with increasing transistor power [3.8]. the quality factor 01“ of its equivalent
input circuit at the working frequency f. which is defined as:

Qu" ‘2n’LnIrnln

proves to be rather high, something which makes it considerably more difficult
to design broadband input microwave circuits for an amplifier or oscillator.

An input microwave circuit using lumped elements is simplest when a r-section
reactive four-pole network is used. Examples of such networks are shown in
Figures 17.ha and b. These circuits are feasible if the resistance 9 (or the
resistive component of the impedance 21) is greater than rim 1. In the circuit
of Figure 17.6a, the inductance Lin can be incorporated in the inductance L1, and
then the total series inductance of the P-network is Lseries - L1 + Lin' In the
circuit of Figure 17.6b. the inductive reactance obi“ can be partially compensated
by the reactance 1/uc2, if Lin is greater than the requisite value of Lserie of
the f—network. The T and n section networks (Figure 17.4, c-e) make it possible
to provide for impedance transformations in greater ranges for a specified
frequency band than does a r section circuit. Moreover, with rather large
parallel capacitances of these circuits. the filtering of the higher harmonics
at the generator input is improved.

When it is necessary to match impedances which differ significantly in value in
a certain range of frequencies, stepped transformation is employed. Circuits

are used for this which consist of several P or n sections with low transforma-
tion ratios.

-306-

' FOI10FFKJAJ.USB(HTLY
INJRioiiﬂCIAl.lﬂ5IE(M§LY

 

I, h. :3 5" h “a ‘I
6! 0 C1 I), I;
(a) a; 13)!) (ch (em

Figure 17.6. Circuit configurations of input microwave matching
networks for an amplifier/oscillator using lumped
elements.

   

a) (a) a; (b) a; (c)

Figure 17.5. Circuit configurations for input microwave matching
networks of an oscillator/amplifier using asymmetrical
stripline sections.

[lsh - shunt inductance].

At frequencies above 1 CH2, microwave networks are designed around asymmetrical
stripline sections (Figure 17.5), in which lumped noninductive capacitors are
frequently inserted, which make it possible to additionally create an isolating
capacitance in the circuit for the DC. In the circuit of Figure 17.5s, matching
is achieved by using a single loop transformer (1, 15h 1). In the circuit of
Figure 17.5b. the matching network is made in the form of an irregular stripline
1 with a changing characteristic impedance 9(1). The circuit of Figure 17.5c
differs from the circuit of Figure 17.5a only in the presence of capacitance

C1. The loops 1 h in the circuits of Figures 17.5a and c and l.h in the cir-
cuit of Figure 17.5% play the part of RF blocking chokes. The loops are
structurally made in the form of short circuited line sections with a length
close to Alb (where A is the working wavelength in the line). having a high
characteristic impedance (of about 100 ohms). The radiofrequency short circuit-
ing of the loop 1sh 2 in the circuit of Figure 17.5c is achieved by connecting
capacitor Cb1.1 to it which has a rather high capacitance.

Naturally. the examples cited here do not exhaust the possible circuit configu-
rations for these networks. when selecting a microwave network configuration
which meets the electrical requirements placed on it, one must remember that
the use of simpler circuits with low power losses makes it possible to simplify
the structural execution of the microwave network and reduce the overall area

occupied by the circuit on the substrate of a hybrid IC.

The Output Hatching Microwave Network (Figure 17.2). In the general case, the
load impedance is 2“ - ra + jxﬂ. where r“ and x“ are the resistive and reactive

components of this impedance respectively. In the case where the generator load
is the input impedance of a matched transmission line with a characteristic
impedance of p, Z” - p.

-305-
mommiussouu
FOI10i1lC1A1.USE‘0NlN

In the design calculations of a generator output circuit, it is more convenient
to use the admittance instead of the impedance 299: 1 {29° figure 17,35):

 

 

 

'- I . __ l . __ I
.an-{iluu '-= tum ==Zueu+lboun ‘- Rum ‘l‘ 1(on, “L.” )

here go and‘b are the conductance and the reactive components of the
ut out 1
admittance out 1 .

For the majority of modern transistors in the decimeter band, the reactive com-
.ponent of the output admittance has a capacitive character (see Table 17.1) and:

Yout 1 ' 1[Rout l + 3wout' mm“?! ”ng‘l'l-MN“

The Q of the equivalent output circuit of a transistor in this case is:

anr " ‘ Rm“ ”Cm: “ Ru: “baux-

Here, u - 2st (f is the working frequency of the generator); R“ 1 is the resistive
component of the impedance Zn 1 of a parallel circuit consisting of Ru 1 and

X“ lo

Microwave power transistors usually have a low quality factor qut' which is
substantially less than the quality factor of their input circu t Q In this
respect, it is easier to design a generator output microwave networ of suffi-
cient bandwidth than an input circuit.

Besides the impedance transformation, requirements are also placed on a latching
four-pole network in the output microwave circuit of a generator to provide for
a high efficiency, nc , a definite bandwidth and a requisite higher harmonic
filtration level. The meeting of these requirements depends in many on the
correct choice of the microwave network output circuit, the electrical character-
-istics of which are governed to a considerable extent by its quality factor Q,
taking the load into account. With a small Q in the circuit, it is easier to
obtain a high efficiency and a relatively wide passband, but in this case, it

is more difficult to meet the requirement for good filtration of the higher har-
monica. For this reason, such a value of Q should be assured in the design of

a microwave output network that certain compromise requirements are satisfied.

 

I l 6‘
t" 6;, ”u l I
to. g [t h 01

It, 0’ Us: ‘In

0 (h) n (a)

 

Figure 17.6. Circuit configurations of output microwave matching
networks of an amplifier/oscillator using lumped

elements.

- 306 -
F0!<0FFKJAI.U§I¢MNLY
F0!‘05|H1Al.USE(MQLY

(7.,0 “1 6... "3190 4P 1', ‘IP tan
‘" i115” a” ' ‘*
H at!“ H “I: ' Hem ,
“m “w 0h
a; ‘6) 0(7)) l/ (O) u (6’

Figure 17.7. Circuit configurations for the output microwave matching
networks of an amplifier/oscillator using asymmetrical _
stripline sections.

r and n section networks are frequently used in the matching output microwave
circuit of transistor amplifier/oscillators. The simplest of them (the F section)
can be used in cases where increased requirements are not placed on the filtering
of higher harmonics at the generator output and it is necessary to match imped-
ances which are close in value in a narrow band of frequencies. It is expedient
to have a Q of such a circuit of no more than two to three.

n-networks have become widespread in the circuit configurations of output micro-
wave networks. To improve the filtering properties of microwave networks with
respect to the higher harmonics, capacitances are inserted in the parallel
branches of the n-network. For this purpose, n-networks are used which contain
an additional series tuned circuit in the series branch, which is tuned to the
fundamental frequency of the oscillator/amplifier (Figure 17.6b-d). The presence
of such a filter makes it possible to substantially reduce the impedance of the
series circuit (L1, c in Figure 17.6c, d) for the fundamental as compared to

its impedance for higher harmonics, and thereby improve the filtering properties
of the microwave network. ﬂ-networks which start with an inductance are used in
a number of cases to improve transistor efficiency. Such micrOwave networks,
because of the presence of the inductance, create a considerable resistance to
higher harmonics. and a relatively large voltage level of these harmonics appears
at the transistor collector, something which produces a substantially nonsinusoid-
al waveform of the collector voltage. The collector voltage is small during

that portion of the signal period when the majority of the resistive collector
current is flowing, something which leads to an improvement in transistor
efficiency.

The circuit configurations for the output microwave network of an oscillator]
amplifier, depending on their operating frequency and structural requirements,
are designed around components with either lumped or distributed parameters.

Examples of output microwave circuit designs for a transistor oscillator/ampli-
fier with external excitation and using lumped elements are shown in Figure 17.6.
The circuit of 17.6a contains a n-network. starting with a capacitor c . Pre-
quently, capacitor Cl is absent from the circuit and its role is played by the
capacitance C u of the transistor.. Capacitor cbl 3 is a blocking capacitor.

The circuit of Figure 17.6b with a series resonant circuit, the inductances of
which are a part of the inductance L, has better filtering properties with respect
to higher harmonics. In the circuit of Figure 17.6c, the n-network starts with

.. 30] .-
ros or'ncm'use on“
the inductance L2, the function of which has already been stated. The circuit
of Figure 17.6d makes it possible to satisfy higher requirements placed on the
matching of impedances in a rather wide band of frequencies as well as the
filtering of higher harmonics at the generator output.

Examples of output microwave network configurations are given in Figure 17.7
using asymmetrical stripline elements. Lumped isolating and blocking noninduc-
tive capacitors are also used in these circuits.

In the circuit of Figure 17.7a, matching is achieved by a single loop transformer
(11. 1sh 2). The characteristic impedance 0 of the line 11 is equal to the load
impedance. The short-circuited loop lab 1 with a length of Alb performs the
function of a radiofrequency blocking choke. a quarter-wave transformer is used
in the circuit of Figure 17.7b which matches the resistances Rout 1 of the
transistor and o of the load. The reactive component of the output impedance
of the transistor output circuit is compensated by the impedance of the short-
circuited loop lsh' In the circuit of Figure l7.7c. line section 1, capacitance
cout and capacitors C1 and CZ for- a microwave network close to a n-network. In
the circuit of Figure 17.7d, the microwave network consisting of line section

, loaded into capacitance C1, is tuned to resonance at the fundamental frequency.
The necessary coupling to the load is assured by connecting the load resistance
9 through an isolating capacitor C2 to a part of the line section 1.

when designing the circuit configuration for a microwave output network which
meets the electrical requirements placed on it, one must strive to see that the
circuit is as simple and as convenient as possible for its execution in the
form of a hybrid integrated circuit.

17.3. Oscillator/Amplifier Power Supply Circuits

The power supply circuit for an oscillator/amplifier should be designed so that
it does not disrupt the operation of its microwave circuitry. A parallel supply
circuit is most frequently used (Figure 17.8). since the usual microwave circuit
configuration does not allow for the use of a series supply circuit. In the
case of a parallel supply circuit. the DC source is connected to the transistor
terminals through a blocking choke, L51 1, which has a high resistance to the
alternating component of the amplifier/oscillator current, so that the supply
source has no influence on the operation of the microwave circuitry. Improved
blocking of the voltage supply is achieved by inserting a capacitor which has

a low resistance to alternating current (capacitors Chi and C51 4 in Figure
l7.8a and b). To prevent the direct current component of the oscillator/ampli-
fier from flowing into the load networks (or into the network of the preceding
stage), isolating capacitors are inserted in the circuit (cbl 1 and Cbl 2 in
Figure l7.8a and b). A series inserted microwave circuit capacitor (CI in Figure
17.6c, d) frequently performs the function of an isolating capacitor. The
choice of the choke inductance and capacitance of the blocking capacitors is
made by working from the requirements for normal operation of the oscillator]
amplifier circuit and the possibilities for realizing the blocking elements.

-303 -
mommiusaomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

w (b)

 

Figure 17.8. Parallel power supply configurations for an amplifier/
oscillator.

In order that the blocking choke (Figure 17.8a) does not exert any marked
influence on the operation of the transistor output circuit, its inductance
Lbl 2 is chosen by using the approximate relationship:

“11,1 2 L 1°R1oaa 1 ml...» Ion... ' (17.2)

The capacitance of capacitor cbl 6 is determined from the relationship:

derived from the condition that the resonant frequency for series resonance of
the circuit L51 2, cbl a (Figure 17. 8a) should be considerably lower than the
working frequency of the oscillator or amplifier .

The upper limit for the values of the inductance 1 and the capacitance chl is
basically limited by the production process capabi iities. To reduce the requi-
site value of Lbl in the case where 310 d > rload' it is expedient to connect
the power supply circuit closer to the lo ad, for example. as shown in Figure

17. 8b. The value of Lbl with this circuit configuration can be chosen from the

condition ”Lbl 2> _ lorload.

To estimate the approximate values of the parameters of the blocking elements
inserted in the input circuit of an amplifier/oscillator (Figure 17.8a), one
can derive relationships similar to (17.2) and (17.3):

«14“.; mm; cm; WIN/«37.1“... '

where 1m VAL: 'l-A’hu .

The capacitance of the isolating capacitor (if it is not a component of the micro-
wave circuit) is determined from the condition that the voltage be small as com-
pared to the voltage across the resistance [10 1 (Figure 17.8a) or rload

(Figure 17.8b) when the fundamental frequency flows through the capacitor, i.e..

*In expressions (17.2) and (17.3) and in those given in the following, it is
assumed that u - Zuf, the working frequency is taken in gigahertz. the cape-

citance is in picofarads, the inductance is in nanohenries and the resistance
is in ohms.

- 309 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HWLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(M§LY

cbl 2 g 10 - 103/uR, where R is either Rload 1 or ‘load depending on the point
where cbl 2 is inserted.

When designing power supply circuits for an amplifier/oscillator, one must keep
in mind the fact that the blocking chokes and capacitors form tuned systems,
which not infrequently lead to the appearance of parasitics in the amplifier or
oscillator at a frequency considerably lower than the working frequency. This
promotes an increase in the transistor current gain with a reduction in its
working frequency. To prevent the appearance of these oscillations, it is
necessary to reduce the Q of the blocking chokes, something which can be achieved,
for example, by inserting a resistor with a small resistance r (a few ohms) in
series with the choke (Figure 17.8c), or by fabricating the coil Lbl from a
conductor with a high ohmic resistance. Another method of breaking up oscilla-
tions at low frequencies is inserting capacitors of various values in series with
L51, which creates series resonances at definite frequencies substantially lower
than the working frequency in the power supply circuitry (cbl 1, Cbl 2 and

C51 3 in the circuit of Figure 17.8c). These recommendations should be taken
into account when designing an automatic bias network.

17.6. The Design of Microwave Hatching Transformer Networks Using bumped Elements

As has already been noted, linear reactive four-pole networks in the form of r,
T and n section networks and combinations of them made from lumped elements are
widely used as microwave networks. Complex impedances can be inserted in prac-
tical circuits in the general case at the input and output of the matching four-
pole networks. When designing a microwave network, the reactive components of
these impedances can be incorporated in the four-pole network. Then there will
be only resistive components* at theinput and output of the four-pole network.

...—_. .-_._—_———.

3

series 1 o
:- hem _ I 3am!
o-:H:I—o 1E} I; E,
,, lb per . . Lo
(e) 1 ’ a) Cal 0 (b) a; (c)
Figure 17.9. Equivalent series (a) and Figure 17.10. A T section network.

parallel (b) networks.

The property of four-pole P, T and n networks of transforming an impedance is
based on the principle of converting a series circuit of resistive and reactive
impedance components at a definite frequency to an equivalent parallel circuit,
which has the same impedance as the series circuit (Figure 17.9). we shall give
the basic relationships for such equivalent circuits [9, 10], by introducing the

concept of circuit Q: Q - Xaerlr for a series circuit and Q - R/xpar for a
parallel circuit.

iThe solution of the problem of matching arbitrary complex impedances by means
of very simple matching networks is treated in the literature [11].

- 310 -
ma muss ONLY
FOI¢HHH£IAI.USE10NLY

By equating the impedances of these circuits, we obtain:

r + ster ' mxpar/(R + ijar) "rum-"RH“"KR'H In”). (17")

Assuming that the quality factor of a circuit Q does not change during transfor-
mation, and by using expression (17.6), we find the relationship between the
impedances of the series and parallel circuits:

,.__ Rxdap/(R' .1 ;;)=11/(1.1.Qi). (17 .5)
mm... mum-Ir xiwr-ano‘l“ +0». . <17 -6)
“(n-14.3.0” uru +0». (17.7)
Imp-(ﬂ-I-ﬂh)llhnos=xuocs U 'l' Q')/Q'- (17.8)

In the case where the resistances r and R are known, the reactances “set and
“par can be found from the formulas:

.____. ' —n:
rm =V(R—-') '. Xu-v"R“R—')m ’ ‘ (17.9)

If follows from expression (17.5) that:

Mr - (I-I-Q')- (17.10)

Thus, by varying the Q with the appropriate choice of values for x3e, and ‘par'
one can obtain the requisite resistance transformation.

The relationships obtained here make it possible to design r. n and T transform-
ing networks, assuming that they match the resistances for a definite working
frequency. The simplest of these circuits is a T-network, containing two
reactive elements.

The F-Network. The equivalent circuit of a r-network is shown in Figure 17.10a,
while two of its possible practical variants for matching resistances of r and
R are shown in Figure 17.10b, c (where R > r). The impedances of the series
and parallel circuit components have different kinds of reactance to obtain a
purely resistive impedance at the input and output. The circuits of Figures
17.10b and c are identical in terms of their transforming properties, however,
the circuit of Figure 17.10b has better filtering properties as regards the
higher harmonics, thanks to the insertion of a parallel capacitance.

We shall give an approximate procedure for the design calculations of F-network
elements for two cases, which are encountered most frequently during design
work.

'1. The resistances r and R, which must be matched. are specified. In this case.
the resistances xser and “par can be determined from formulas (17.9). It is

- 311 9

FOI:0IITC1AI.[E§E(HVLY
frequently convenient during calculations to make use of the quality factor of
the circuit, Q, which makes it possible to estimate such circuit parameters as
the efficiency and filtration factor. For specified values of r and R:

Q =VRIr-i- (17.11)

2. The quality factor Q and one of the resistances are specified. By employing
the formulas for the Q and expression (17.10), we find:

for known -values of Q and r:
4 .1 'f'._ .. x'W-Qf' R=-r(l+Q'), ‘Inv‘R’Q-

I'h-

for known values of Q and R:
x“11"”qu '='R/(l +Q'). Inc-EQI.

The nature- -of the reactances 1.9: and x3“: should be different and determined by

the specific r-network configuration. n the case of known reactances near and

“par:
L =_. mm; c - lo'lwxc. (17.12)

A specific feature of a P-network is the fact that its requisite Q is determined
by the impedances which must be matched. For this reason, if the i-pedances
being matched differ substantially in their value, then the Q proves to be
rather high, which leads to a narrowing of the circuit bandwidth. With values
of the impedances which are close, the requisite circuit Q proves to be low and
the filtering capability of the circuit is degraded. Calculations show that for
a Q of about 3, the attenuation of the second harmonic at the circuit output
will_be about 20 dB.

amn- ~-»~-~
max! f

”if".

Figure 17.11. The equivalent circuit of a n-network.

H and T-Networka. The equivalent circuits of n and T-networka are shown in
Figures 17.11 and 17.13 respectively. The variants of these circuits which are
most frequently used in oscillator and amplifier circuits are shown in Figures
17.12 and 17.14.

We shall consider that n and T-networhs consist of two f-networks, which we call
sections. Consequently, when calculating the parameters of the elements of n
and T-networks, one can employ the formulas derived for the P-network. For this,
each P-network should be supplemented with a second resistance, which in the
case of a ﬂ-network will appear in the P section as a series to, and in the T-

-3],2 :-

FOI‘OFFKJMI.[IIB(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

network as a parallel (the same for both sections, since it acts at the points

where they are connecte ). The resistances to and no (see Figures 17.11 and
17.13) should satisfy the conditions:

'0 < Rh R3: R. >I’]. n.

' n

L t z ' ‘

It! II, = I“: I It" l'l"l. ‘1

Q (aY’ d

z, ‘ .
El, E5, = L, = 01 3n":r"‘u

[-2 ‘DV’ [1 t

I
ll 0/: Eh. I E0; ‘tl"‘f"’“
i}: (

(97)
Figure 17.12. n-networks.

 

Figure 17.13. The equivalent circuit of a T-network.

I
L, I t; = (1 III f7 0.53;"
It ‘ ('I | If
(nfv
0—} 0H 6 - I: ‘2'
I I = t 4' ' "4-37
I ’ .
_1 m” .
.. "H! (
_.‘2 ' ‘2 g E
a l +0 _ all, : of M. 3:298”.
no. a) (c) '

Figure 17.14. T-networks.

To find the resistance to (or R0), the quality factor Q of one of the r sections
is to be specified beforehand, and then, knowing the reaistsnce being latched
R (or r), the following is calculated from formula (17.10):

., a /
r0 - n/(1+q2) or no - r(1+QZ). °-R"+Q”
undo R.-1r(l+Q’).

- 313 -
mom'mtu'scomv
FOIIOFIIClAl.lEﬂI(HVLY

TABLE 17.2.
f . A n-Network with a Supple- A T-Network

A.n:ggtwork (Figure 17.11) mental Filter (Figure 17.15b) - (Figure 17.13)

The values of R1, 32, 01 The values of R1, R2, 01’ Q0 The values of r1, :2.

and f0 are known. and f0 are known. 01 and f0 are known.
1. r0 - slump 1. r0 - n1/(1+Qf) 1. no - r1(1+qi)
2. Check for the condi- 2. Check for the condition 2. Check for the con-
‘ tion r0 < 82. r0 < R2. dition no > r2.
3. IR/Q 3.!O'Ql.‘ - 3.: -Qt‘
ar 1 l 1’ 1 0' *0 l ser 1 1 1'
xser ' er0 R1 Q1 x13a: ' ROIQl
It. Q2'4n27l‘0-1 5.xLo-Xco-Qoro ‘. Qz'VRo/rz-l
5e x375 ' taos xp‘r 2 . 50 Q2 - ““2er - 1 50 1;". . Ro/QZe
n2 2 ‘ser 2 ' Q2'2
6. x - x' + x" 6. . Q r 6. - ( ' " )/
eer ser set ‘L 1" 0' ar xp r or
‘C 2 ' R2 Q2 Expat + ‘ga:g
7. Calculate L and c 7. - x o + “L 1" + x 0 7. Calculate L and c
from formulas (17.12). xL L 1 L from formulas
(17.12).

8. Calculate L and c from
formulas (17.12).

 

Notes: 1. If r0 > Rinéa n-nctwork) or 30 < r2 (a T-network), then matching is
impossible. 2. The edances ‘ser and ‘par should have different signs.
3. Take the sign of the reactances into account during summing.

Here R - 31 or R - :2, while r - r1 or r - r2 depending on the Q of which section
is known. The para ters of the P section components are calculated sequentially
from one section to the other using the procedure given for a P-network. The
design calculation procedure for n and T-networks, in the case of known resis-
tances which are being matched and a known Q1 of the first f section of the
network at the working frequency f0, is given in Table 17.2.

In contrast to a r-network, in which the resistances being matched, r and R,
should satisfy the condition r < R. in a n-network, we can have both R1 > R2 and
31 < (similarly. for a T-network, there can be both r1 > r2 and r1 < r2),
soeeth ng which is important when designing the microwave circuit of an anplifier
or oscillator. A drawback to the given calculation procedure is the ambiguity

in the parameters of the circuit elements which depend on the value of Q1, which
can be chosen with different values in the design calculations. It is expedient
to take the quantity Q as no more than 2 to 5 [l].

A n-Network with Improved Filtering of Higher Harmonics. To improve the filter-
ing properties of the microwave network, the circuit of which is shown in Figure
17.12a. a filter in the form of a series tuned circuit Lo and Co. which resonates
at the working frequency (Figure 17.15), is additionally inserted in the

- 311. -
roe omcuu. venom“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inductive branch of the circuit. The inductance and capacitance of the resonant
circuit are related by the relationship ”0L0 - l/uoco, where “0 - 21f . The
procedure for the design calculations for a n-network configuration w th an
additional filter is given in Table 17.2.

The r, n and T-networka treated here do not always make it possible to match the
specified resistances within the requisite frequency passband with an easily
realized quality factor Q. Then one can use a more complex four-pole network
consisting of several n and T sections in the matching network, where this four-

pole network is also represented in the form of joined f sections in the calcula-
tions. - .

‘r_'h"0. [4.6

 

Figure 17.15. A H-network with an additional filter Lo, Co (a) and
its representation in the form of three sections.

The efficiency of a nicrowave circuit, in accordance with formula (17.1) is:
.M'zp.lp= l—PJ(P.+P-)a

Here P - P + P“ [P . Pload + Peon]; Pcon is the power lost in the elements of
the networE and the connecting conductors.

l One of the powers (Pload or P) is
0‘ p c ’5 , usually known when designing a network.
To find the power Pcon' it is necessary
a, 0 to determine the power losses in each
element of the network as well as the
Figure 17.16. 0n the calculation of the connecting conductors, and then to sun
efficiency of a P-network. them. Hhen using a hybrid integrated

circuit, the length of the connecting
conductors is to be kept to a minimum. For this reason, one can assume that the
losses in the connecting conductors are neglectably small and disregard them
when calculating the efficiency.

We shall initially consider the procedure for determining the efficiency of the
simplest microwave network: the P section shown in Figure 17.16a. The power
losses in such a network are conposed of the losses in the inductance coil and
the capacitor. In many practical circuits, the losses in the capacitor are
substantially less than the losses in the coil, since the Q of the capacitors

-3J.59

IMNRCIHHCIAI.USEGMNLY
IIII(IHNCIA1.USEGNVLY

used in microwave circuits is an order of magnitude higher than the Q of the
coils, QL' Consequently, the losses in a capacitor can be disregarded and then
the equivalent circuit of a r section, taking into account only the losses in the
coil (rL), will assume the form shown in Figure l7.l6b, while its efficiency can
be determined from the approximate formula:

'qu l—rd(r,_+r)- l—Q/Q'. ' (17.13)

Here Q - xL/(r + r ); Q' a QL - xL/rL is the Q of the r section taking the resis-
tance r of the load into account and without this resistance respectively.

TABLE 17.3.
. _
1 In IM0'>O I 0'42»
woi'ﬁfmxx ' 4‘ ‘ ' '

. . mo l I-o/Q'
. m it“s“) n 1 10 '

llaem. (put. l1.l2) (I _&J (I __Q+) z 'm 0'3,“
P1 Network (919. 17.12

._.——

........ . ﬁlm...“ (' ‘5?)("%)(' “5%)”

 

 

 

 

“m“ ""'°' ms) ~. o.+o.+o.
— _—Q'
tum. (put. [1.10. . (I _L"“ (| ”3".) il _&*_;_93.
'T Network (rig. 17.14 9| I Q: Q

 

Key: 1. n-network with additional filter (Figure 17.15).

It follows from formula (17.13) that to obtain a high efficiency, the quality
factor Q' should be considerably greater than Q, which becomes difficult to
accomplish when the load resistance is low and can become even commensurate with
the loss resistance in the nicrowsve network elements. The actual Q of induc-
tance coils using film technology amounts to 50 to 100. For this reason. to
achieve a high efficiency (about 0.9), the Q of a r section should be no less
than 5 to 8.

A f section is an integral part of n and T-networks, and for this reason, the
efficiency of such networks can be found as the product of the efficiencies of
the individual f sections comprising these networks. For a network consisting
of k r sections, nc - nlnz...nk. Here, nk - l - Qk/Qﬂ (Qk is the quality factor
of the k—th f section, taking the load impedance into account; Qi is the quality
factor of the k-th r section, due solely to the losses in it).

The calculation of the efficiency requires knowledge of the true values of the
quality factors QR and Qé. However, in the majority of practical cases, the

- 31,6 -
ms omits: ONLY
l-‘Oll omcun. use ONLY

values Qk and Qi are known approximately. since they considerably dependent on the
specific realization of the entire network circuitry. For this reason, to esti-
mate the efficiency of a microwave circuit. one can assume that the quality

factor of a 1‘ section is Qk I "ser/rv while the quality factor of the coil is
found from the approximate formulas (see Chapter 20) or is taken from practical
data. Approximate formulas for determining the efficiency of n and ‘1' section
microwave circuits, assuming that Q." >> Qk' while the quality factors Ql'r of each
of the sections are approximately the same, are given in Table 17.3.

Estimating the Frequency Passband. When designing microwave networks in the

form of four-pole networks which match resistances, we worked from the condition
for complete network matching at a specified frequency f . "hen the frequency
deviates from £0. mismatching occurs in the network. tin or actual operational
conditions of a microwave network, some mismatching is permissible. Consequently,
one can determine the passband of a network. within which mismatching will be
acceptable. The passband is frequently estimated based on the change in the
microwave circuit transmission gain [12] which is related to the absolute value
of the voltage reflection factor, 1‘, at the input to this circuit*. For “‘19
reason, to determine the passband, we employ the condition for obtaining a speci-

fied permissible value 1‘ er at the limits of the passband for the case of complete
circuit matching at the frequency £0.

The absolute value of the reflection

in!
_ . factor at the input of a linear reactive
Gm ‘7" ll four-pole microwave network. loaded into'
. I‘m . a resistance R10“ (Figure 17.17) [12],
' is:

Figure 17.17. 0n the determination of Fall-‘RJI'IIZ'FRIL —
the reflection factor at

gsrinpﬁ :Ztgﬁcrowave Here, 81 is the resistance at the micro-
po ' wave network input; 2. is the input

Key: a. Hicrowsve network. impedance of the four-pole network at
the frequency f.

At a frequency of f0, 2 - R1 and I‘ - 0. “hen the frequency changes in the
vicinity of fo, the impedance 2 becomes different from 9.1 and I‘ f 0. having
specified the value of l‘ r and finding the frequencies for which 1‘ - rper' we
define the bandwidth within the limits of which rm 5, r9“.

A possible approach to the determination of the passband from a specified value
of rper' for example, the f-network shown in Figure 17.1%, can be the follow-
ing. we initially calculate the parameters of the l. and c components of the
r-network for the condition of complete matching at a specified frequency f0
for which 2 - 31. Then, assuming that the parameters of the 1., c and r circuit
components are independent of frequency. we find the impedance 2 at the points
1 - l' at a frequency f which differs slightly from the specified frequency.

i‘There there are no losses in a microwave network, the absolute value of the
reflection factor at its input and output is the same.

-317-
momiusaoau
FOIKOFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

Having accomplished the necessary transformations, we derive a formula for the
absolute value of the reflection factor, expressed in terms of the resistances
R' and x$a: of a parallel circuit equivalent to a series circuit of r and ‘ser’

n-( u—RAI )’ ——I‘R'R"'+(x'.;. "Ir-Rm
I' H?“ (R.R'r+(x;'.,)’tk'+k.)' '

 

Here: ”5a: " ﬁarxpar/(‘par + "par)° xgp=x.,,x;,/(x..p+x;,).

The frequencies in the vicinity of £0 for which r I f e determine the boundaries
of the passband. The calculation of the frequency pagsgand is substantially
facilitated when a computer is used.

A Procedure and Examples of the Design Calculations for the Microwave Circuit of
a Transistor Amplifier/Oscillator. We shall consider an approximate design
procedure for the input and output microwave circuits of transistor amplifiers]
oscillators which are frequently encountered. Some practical circuits for
these networks are shown in Figures 17.6 and 17.6. The procedure for the
determination of the component parameters of microwave networks can be as
follows:

1. He compose the total equivalent circuit for the microwave network being
designed, taking into account the requisite impedance with respect to the funda-
mental at the input (or output) of the transistor, the impedance at the ampli-
fier/oscillator input (or the load impedance at the output of the amplifier]
oscillator). Assuming that the blocking elements (Lbl' cbl) have no substantial
impact on the operation of the microwave circuitry, we do not include them in
the circuits. However, if these elements perform definite functions in the
microwave network circuitry, then they must be taken into account.

2. We represent the total equivalent circuit in the form of series connected

r sections (as was done in the calculation of n and T-networks, etc.), in which
the series and parallel reactances should be of a different nature (if an
inductance is inserted in series, then a capacitance is to be inserted in paral-
lel).

3. We calculate the parameters of the components of the r sections using the
procedure given.

4. We determine the parameters of the equivalent circuit components, and in the
case where the inductances and capacitances which are obtained can be realized
conveniently, we conclude the calculations. however, if the requisite nominal
values of the reactive elements make it difficult to execute the microwave net-
work in the form of a desirable type of structure, for example, in the form of

a hybrid 10, then the calculation of the component parameters of the network is
to be repeated, specifying other values for the Q of the P sections or by slightly
changing the circuit of the network, for example, by adding one or two F sections
to it. It is recommended that during the course of the electrical design cal-
culations, an approximate structural design of the circuit elements be carried
out so as to get an idea of their overall dimensions and degree of complexity.

- 3‘3 -

mornmtussomv
Fill(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(N§LY

5. He determine the parameters of the electrical circuit components more pre-
cisely for the network being designed.

6. He determine the passband of the microwave network based on the specified
permissible value of the absolute value of the reflection factor at the network
input.

7. He structurally design the circuit components (inductance coils, capacitors)
or choose them from catalogs of ready-made products; we determine the Q of these
elements.

8. We calculate the efficiency of the circuit being designed.

During design calculations of microwave network configurations, it must be kept
in mind that each of their structural components (inductance coils, capacitors,
connecting wires) is a complex electromagnetic circuit in the general case. For
this reason. when designing a circuit around hybrid Ic's, one ie to take into
account the impedance of each element. However, this is possible only after

the preliminary breadboarding of the circuit.

Hicrowave network design is facilitated when computers are used.

z ' t ' ' '
’° H'-
g, (‘1 I) a), i) O .

Figure 17.18. The equivalent circuit for the input microwave network
of an amplifier/oscillator (Figure l7.bc) and its
representation in the form of two F sections.

   

8am! 4r ﬂ

4' 6‘: l"
"’1 IM‘ " "‘l‘l'u'
2out 1 :E? _ '

Figure 17.19. The equivalent circuit of the output microwave network
of an amplifier/oscillator (Figure l7.6b) and its
representation in the form of two F sections and an
additional filter.

He shall give the procedure for the electrical design of some microwave network
circuit configurations for transistor amplifiers/oscillators as an example.

Example 1. He shall consider the circuit of the input microwave network for
the amplifier/oscillator depicted in Figure 17.6c. Taking into account the
connection of a transmissiOn line having a characteristic impedance of p to the
input of this circuit and the replacement of the input circuit of the transistor

-319-
maorﬂcmdssmv
FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

with its equivalent impedance zin 1 - r1“ 1 + jubin and the subsequent combining
of the inductances L1 and Lin into a single inductance L to obtain a pure
resistance, connected to the network on the transistor side, we obtain an equiva-
lent circuit in the form of a T-network (Figure l7.l8b). We then represent this
circuit as a connection of two r sections (Figure 17.18c). Assuming the resis-
tances r1 - p and r2 - r1“ 1 and the working frequency f to be known. we calcu-
late the parameters of the circuit elements (see Table 19.2). After determining
the capacitances Cl and C2, we find the inductance of the circuit being designed
L1 '1; "L1“.

He estimate the efficiency of the network from the formula given in Table 17.3.
we then determine the passband of the circuit.

Example 2. The circuit of the output microwave network of the transistor ampli-
fier/oscillator shown in Figure l7.6b. We represent the impedance of the trans-
istor output network at the fundamental frequency. 2°“t 1 - zload 1, in the form
of the impedance of a parallel network consisting of a resistance Rout 1 and a
capacitance Co t’ while we take the load impedance equal to the characteristic
impedance of the transmission line 9 which is connected to the output of the
amplifier/oscillator. Taking this into account, we draw the equivalent circuit
in the form of a n-network with an additional filter and then we represent it

as the connection of two P sections, between which the additional filter is
inserted (see Figure 17.19). Assuming that 31 I “out and R2 I p. cout' and
the working frequency f0 are specified, we deternine t e component parameters of
the circuit depicted in Figure 17.19 using the procedure given in Table 17.2.
The Q of one of the T sections and the filter is to be specified beforehand.
Then, we find the capacitance of the capacitor cl - C - cont. we calculate the
network efficiency from the appropriate formula in Table 17.3. Then we determine
the passband of the network.

17.5. The Design of A Microwave Matching and Transforming network Using Elements
with Distributed Parameters

Components with distributed parameters, which take the form of asymmetrical
transmission stripline sections, and which are often called stripline elements,
are widely used in the microwave networks of integrated circuit transistor
amplifiers and oscillators. These elements make it possible to transform imped-
ances, attain a specified level of matching in the microwave network. create the
requisite reactances, assure the filtering of higher harmonics, realize a radio-
frequency blocking choke in the power supply circuit for the amplifier/oscillator,
etc.

Stripline elements are usually made in the form of regular unbalanced transmis-
sion lines of various lengths. Quarter-wave resistance transformers are widely
used. It is expedient in a number of practical cases to employ sections of an
irregular transmission line, the characteristic impedance of which changes along
its length, for example, either linearly or exponentially. This makes it possi-
ble to provide for impedance transformation with a shorter geometric line length
and to obtain a broader passband for the network than with a regular line section.
A stepped network of two and more quarter-wave regular line sections with differ-

-320—
mommtmomv
FOR omcut USE ONLY

ent characteristic impedances can also serve as an_example of an irregular
transmission line.

 

z I To match a transsission line, line sec-
in I tions are connected to it which are
114%.). 1° “(5-, short-circuited or open-circuited at the
(0! Yin}, 210““ end, which make it possible to create
I 1 3 different resistances to the radio-

Cor
a ‘iOHQ frequency current at a certain point in

f I
the line. Such elements have been given
Figure 17.20. The equivalent circuit of the name of loops. Loops with a length
a regular transmission of l g 1/4 (x is the wavelength in the
line with a length 1. line) are the most frequently used.
Loops longer than Alb are rarely used
because of their considerable geosetric length and narrow bandwidth. Loops with
a length of 1 < x/a are used to produce reectances. Quarteruwave loops, open-
circuited at the end, serve to produce a low RF resistance, for exasple, to im-
prove the filtering of undesirable harmonics, while short-circuited loops are
used to create a high RP resistance, for example. to realize a blocking choke in
an amplifier or oscillator circuit. The most widespread matching network is a

single loop transformer, which takes the form of a transsission line section with
a loop connected to it.

TABLE 17.10.

‘—

    

m Ame-us I mm- mouse-g

   
   
 
  

P’ 's (' HIP“) F
9—3.»! ‘1 “)r'H’a ‘l ‘0'

P‘ 1- 0 -’§ R’H'P (PL-’3 '- 13).“!
(P-ls ‘1 ‘0' "H's '8“?

"t (g
In "' I“ ‘0

’:-H'u'H‘ ‘l ‘0"

1:. Lay 1:04-94 (pi—ni— n') I"!
Q‘H‘s-H’ WW

8 0044:“)
as ’ "-—

U—Pbs‘IWji'Wls'l'd)‘

n. (I .—t¢- x9 mg 2"— 1.5- ‘3)‘0‘
bum——

(l—P be'l")"|‘0’8s'1‘0' '

'sr-
ﬂu "' 'sr'H In

3.! r.-.

ln-fu-Hl's

 
  
 
 

hl'lu—l be:
be: "

        
 

In "'1: 'H 5s In 1.‘"+ I b"

Notes: 1. If Zn . r“ - 3x3 [210 d - r1 d - 3x1 ad]’ the sign in front of an in
the formulas for r1 , sin’ x n and b 33s: be changed. 2. If Ya I g3 - jbu, then
the sign in front 0? ha in t e formu as for zin and bin sust be changed.

Key: A. Resistive and reactive components.

- 321 -
roe oniqm us: ONLY
The design procedure for stripline elements is based on the relationships which
follow from the theory of long lines. when drawing up the equivalent circuit of
a microwave network for an amplifier/oscillator, the line section of length l is
replaced by an impedance equal to its input impedance.

The input impedance 21 and the input admittance Y of a lossless* line at a
distance "from its an , loaded into a complex impgaance Zn [210.6] (Figure 17.20)
are defined by the relationships:

z..-p(z.+lm~mo+miuo: ' (17.11.)

yu-(Hlxdswlpm-i-loiuo.
' (17.15)

here. 9 is the characteristic impedance of the line; k - Zw/A.

Taking the load impedance to be Zn - r“ + 3x3, we represent 23X [21“] and YBX
[Yin] in the form of two components also:

in'hri'l‘u: yer-Wax-l'hs-

The formulas for the determination of the components of the input impedance or
admittance of a line loaded into 210.4 or 'load' derived from expressions (17.16)
and (17.15). are given in Table 17.4.

The input impedance of a regular line section with a length of x/a. loaded into
a resistance 'load’ is purely resistive: zin - tin I oz/rload'

In the case where a line section with a length of l ; Alb is short-circuited
(s.c.) or open-circuited (o.c.) at one end. its input impedance and input admit-
tance are defined by the relationships:

zin s.c." 59 tan 1‘1! Yin s.c.' -jo'1cot k1 has-"1913'“. yun__“,-.| "U“ (”'16)

2m c.c.' -30 c0: k1. Ya. o.c.' Jo'ltan k1 mum—“MW“ V-in‘li'"‘"" (17.17)

By changing the length 1 of the line sections, one can change the nature of the
reactance in the input impedance. The quantity 21“ also depends on the charac-
teristic impedance of the line 9. Hhen l I Alb, zin ,.c,* O and 21“ °.c_+ 0 with
a decrease in the losses in the line.

Estimating the Bandwidth. As has already been noted in 5 l7.b, an estimate of

the bandwidth of a microwave network can be made based on the permissible voltage
reflection factor, rper, at the input of the microwave network or based on the
voltage standing wave ratio (sun) which is related to it. Let's say that a micro-
wave network is formed by a line section having an input impedance of Zia - r1“

+ 3x1“ and is loaded into an impedance 210.4. A transmission line with a

 

*The assumption of low losses is justified for a large number of practical pro-
blems without a substantial error. since the length of the line sections used
is l < Alb.

- 322 -

IIIICIWHC1A1.lEIB(HNLY
INJR‘OFF1C1AI.USEZ(MVLY

characteristic impedance 9 is connected to the input to this circuit. The
absolute value of the reflection factor at the input of such a microwave network
is:

I" a. ins—P I" I ("1-9; +‘::
W__.

“n+9 rn+o)‘ 1-1:.

 

By specifying the permissible value of T r (or the SHR) at the circuit input.
one can determine the paesband within whggh r (or the sun) will not exceed a
specified value.

By way of example, we shall give a procedure for determining the passbsnd of a
quarter-wave transformer, which matches two resistances 81 and 32. We shall
also assume that the frequency f0 and the permissible reflection factor P r
are specified. At the frequency fo, the transformer length is l - Ao/é egg the
characteristic impedance of the line is o - JRIRZ. The reflection factor at
the transformer input (at the point of connection of the resistance 31) is:

l‘"(1s;-‘RI)I(III I'm). (17.18)

Since at the frequency f , the impedance is 21“ - R1, then P - 0. When the
frequency deviates from 90’ the impedance 21“ becomes different from R . 'He
shall determine the impedance zin using formula (17.14), and by employing expres-
sion (17.18), we shall find the reflection factor T, and then we derive the
formula to calculate its absolute value:

_l/I
. (y... "Li-4r lg'0.5ﬂI/Ie .

Here, r - R [R ; the argument of the tangent is converted to the form (Zr/A)
00/1.) - 031:}:0

By equating T - F er’ we find the values for the relative frequencies f1/fo and
lefo at the 11.13 of the passband:

In 1 0-!» (my
I. "‘ u "dale“ or)" - 4! ]'

Thus, within the passband (f2 - f1)lfo r ; rp.,.

 

The Single Loop Transformer. Two circuits of a single loop transformer are shown
in Figure 17.21, which differ in the type of loop (short-circuited or open-cir-
cuited) and the point of its connection to the line. One can obtain an input
impedance of a transformer loaded into an impedance 22, close or equal to the
requisite impedance 21 in the general case by changing the length of the line 1.
the length of the loop lsh and the characteristic impedances of the line 0 and
the loop °sh° The solution of such a problem is not unique. For this reason.
one can search out a certain optimal circuit variant when solving the problem.

In this case, the optimization can be carried out using different parameters,

-323-
momaA‘Lussomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which are the most important ones in each specific problem, for example, a
minimal overall line length. or requisite passband. In those cases. where the
optimization is not obligatory, the requisite input impedance can be obtained
through the choice of l and lsh' The characteristic impedances p and ash are
chosen based on structural design considerations or by working from the
convenience of connecting them to other microwave networks. In some cases. it is
more convenient to specify the line length 1 and to determine the requisite

_ characteristic impedance of the line 9 and the loop parameters. However, it

can turn out that the value obtained for o is difficult to realize structurally.

4p (p
. !'I ll-
21 11
It? a 53 FP- ﬂ
. m ' 0

Figure 17.21. The circuit of a matching microwave network in the
form of a stripline with a loop for the load impedance
(3) and at the network input (b).

Iu-l

 

Figure 17.22. Circuit configurations for a microwave network in
the form of a stripline with a single loop. which
match a complex impedance to a resistance.

In practical circuits of transistor oscillators/amplifiers, frequently one of
the inpedances being matched is purely resistive and equal to the characteristic
impedance of the transmission line connected at the input or output of the
oscillator/amplifier. Circuit variants of a single loop transformer which make
it possible to match a complex impedance to a resistance are shown in Figure
17.22. In this case. the loop (short-circuited or open) serves to compensate
for the reactive component or the load impedance 22 (Figure 17.22a and b), or
the input impedance (Figure 17.22c - e) of the transformer. In the realization
of the configurations of Figures 17.22 a and b, structural difficulties are
frequently encountered which are related to the necessity of placing the loop
directly at the input (or output) of the transistor or the realization of a
quarterdwave line with the requisite characteristic impedance. In such cases,

- 326 -
FOI!0FPKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the circuits of Figures 17.22c - e are more convenient, where the characteristic
impedance of the line can be selected based on structural design considerations
or chosen equal to the characteristic impedance 9 of the transmission line
connected to the input (Figure 17.22e).

A Design Procedure for the Circuits Shown in Figures 17.22a and b. The loop in
these circuits serves to compensate for the reactive component x2 of the imped-
ance zz. The resistive component r of this impedance is transformed to the
requisite resistance R by the line section of l - Ala. We choose the type of
loop by working from t e requisite nature of the compensating reactance, assuming
that the loop length should be less than A/A. He specify the characteristic
impedance ”sh of the line section forming the loop based on structural consider-
ations (from 50 to 100 ohms).

We then proceed as follows for the subsequent design calculations:

1. We transform the impedance 22 - r2 + 3x2 to a parallel circuit consisting of
the resistive 82 and reactive x2 components, which are found from formulas (17.7)
and (17.8).

2. We find the length of the compensating loop lsh from the condition that the
input impedance of the loop Zsh should be equal to the reactance x2 and be of
the opposite kind of reactance (in the formulas, one must take into account the
sign of the reactance x ). It is expedient in this case that 18h < x/a. By
using expressions (17.1%) and (17.17), we determine lsh'

3. We calculate the characteristic impedance of the transforming x/a line:

D ' VR1R2.

The Design Calculation Procedure for the Circuits Shown in Figure 17.22c - e.

In the circuits considered here, matching can be achieved if the input admittance
of the line 1, loaded into the impedance 22, has a conductance component equal

to 1/R1, while its susceptance component is compensated by the input admittance
of the loop. We choose the characteristic impedancea of the line p and the loop
Psh in this case solely from structural design considerations. We assume that
the load impedance is 22 - r2 + 5:2.

He proceed as follows with the calculations:
1. We find the length of the line section 1 from the condition that the conduc-
tance component of the input admittance of the line Sin is equal to the quantity

l/Rl. Designating l/Rl - cl and equating it to Sin, we obtain g1“ - 61. By
using the formula from Table 17.4 for Sin! we solve this equation for tan(kl):

011gei vagfg+at's"!+a;l’"I-'f—0fii (g.

“—6: 9‘

‘81.:(‘0 "-’ Tu"
we then determine the possible length of the line sections:

l. - -%- (arctg 7‘, +mn), l, =- %- (arctg T,+mn), m = D. 1.2,

- 325 -

FOR 0I11C1Al.lﬁﬂ£(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY

we choose the shortest most structurally feasible section.

2. we calculate the reactive component of its input admittance bin for the
length l which is found (see Table 17.6).

3. We select the type of loop which compensates for the component b1“. By
employing the condition ya (the sign of the susceptance bin is to be

bi
taken into account in the sormulasS‘, we determine the loop length from formulas
(17.16) and (17.17).

In the cir:uit depicted in Figure 17.22e, the characteristic impedance of the
line and the resistance R1 at the circuit input are the same and equal to o.

For this case. the calculation is carried out in a manner similar to that just
considered taking into account the fact that R1 - p. The line section length

1' can be arbitrary and can be chosen from the considerations of the convenience
of connection to the feed power transmission line. After determining the para-
meters of the microwave network components, it is expedient to estimate the
passband of this network. The estimation of the passband of the circuits shown
in Figures 17.22a - e is a rather cumbersome and labor intensive process, and
for this reason it is better performed on computers.

   

Figure 17.23. The equivalent circuit of Figure 17.26. The equivalent circuit
the microwave input net- of the output microwave
work for a transistor network of a transistor
oscillator or amplifier - oscillator or amplifier
(Figure 17.5a). (Figure 17.7b).

The Procedure and Examples of Design Calculations for the Microwave Networks of
Transistor Oscillators/Amplifiers Using Stripline Elements. we shall treat a
possible design procedure for some practical circuit configurations of microwave
networks for transistor amplifiers/oscillators using a single loop transformer.
He shall assume that the working frequency, the input and output circuit imped-
ances of the transistor at the working frequency, the impedance at the input

to the amplifier/oscillator and the load impedance are known. It is also assumed
that the microwave network configuration has been selected.

1. He draw up the complete equivalent circuit of the microwave network, without
taking into account the blocking elements in the amplifier/oscillator power
supply circuitry, assuming that they have no marked influence on circuit
operation. However, if the blocking elements perform definite functions in the
circuit. then they are incorporated in the equivalent circuit.

2. We select the type of loop, as well as the characteristic impedances of the
stripline and loop. One can also choose the type of loop after determining the

lengths of short-circuited and open circuit loops which provide for matching'
in the microwave network, taking the loop of the least length.

- 326 ‘

FOR‘OFFNJALIIHlONlY
FOI!0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY

3. We determine the length of the stripline and the length of the compensating
loop from the condition for complete matching in the microwave network at the
working frequency.

6. We calculate the bandwidth of the microwave network from the specified permis-
sible SHE or reflection factor F.

5. We carry out the structural design calculations for the stripline elements
(see Chapter 20 of this book).

We shall give as an example the procedure for design calculations for the micro-
wave amplifier/oscillator networks shown in Figures 17.5s and l7.7a.

Example 1. The circuit configuration of the input microwave network for a trans-
istor amplifier/oscillator is shown in Figure 17.5a. Assuming that the impedance
of the transistor input network at the working frequency is 21“ 1 I r 1 +
juLin, the impedance at the output of the amplifier/oscillator is equgl to the
characteristic impedance 9 of the transmission line which is connected to its
input. we draw up the equivalent circuit of the microwave network (see Figure.
17.23). We take the characteristic impedance of the stripline equal to o for
convenience in connecting to the transmission line at the input. We carry out
the design calculations for the circuit components using the procedure given
for the circuit of a single loop transformer. depicted in Figure 17.22e. The
loop length (Figure 17.5a), which is a radiofrequency choke, is chosen equal to
Alh. It is expedient to choose the characteristic impedance of this loop at

a high value (up to 100 ohms).

Example 2. The output microwave network of a transistor amplifier/oscillator is
shown in Figure 17.7a. The equivalent circuit of this network, taking into
account the impedance of the transistor output network at the working frequency,
which is represented in the form of a parallel resistance Rout 1 and capacitance
coat and load impedance, equal to the characteristic impedance 9 of the trans-
mission line which is connected to the amplifier/oscillator output, is shown

in Figure 17.25. The design procedure for this circuit is similar to that which
was used when designing the circuit of a single loop transformer which is shown
in Figure 17.22e. The short-circuited loop 1 h 1 (Figure l7.7a) performs the
function of a radiofrequency choke and has a fength of 1/5.

- 327 -

ms airﬂow. use ONLY
FINIIIFFICIA1.lEﬂE(MNLY

18. FREQUENCY NULTIPLIBRS USING NONLINEAR CAPACITANCE DIODES
18.1. General Information

In microwave band active phased antenna array modules. because of the fact that
the working frequencies of the transistor power amplifiers do not exceed a few
gigahertr at the present time, it is necessary to use frequency multipliers

as the output stages [1].

Despite the fact that frequency multiplication can_be accomplished using any
nonlinear elements, diodes with a nonlinear p-n junction capacitance are used

as the nonlinear elements in the microwave band: varactors and charge storage
diodes (0N2) [CSD's] [2]. These frequency multipliers are distinguished by a
rather high power conversion efficiency, good reliability, small size and weight,
the capability of operating at frequencies right up to submillimeter wavelengths
and a low power consumption.

Any frequency conversion (including multiplication) is accompanied by the appear-
ance of parasitic harmonic components in the output signal spectrum in addition
to the working frequency. For this reason. a filter must be installed at the
output of a frequency multiplier, where this filter segregates out the working
frequency and suppresses the parasitic harmonica. A filter which passes the
input frequency and prevents the output frequencies from getting through to the
input should also be installed at the multiplier input of diode multipliers.
Optisum power transmission from the signal source to the multiplier input and
from its output to the load is assured by the appropriate matching of the diode
impedance to the power source at the input and the load at the output respect-
ively. Thus, each multiplier with a nonlinear capacitance diode should contain
filter and matching networks at the input and output.

(1) (2) (3) (b) A distinction is drawn between parallel
' and series type frequency multipliers
according to the type of circuit
configuration of the diode with the
input and output circuits [3]. A block
diagram of a parallel multiplier circuit
is shown in Figure 18.1, where 801 [1],
01 [2]. SDn [4] and .n [3] are the
matching and filtering circuits at the
input and output respectively. In
multipliers designed in this circuit
Key: 1. Input matching network; configuration. the heat sinking of the
2. Input filter network; diode is facilitated, since one of the
3. Output filter network; diode electrodes can be connected to
4. Output matching network. the package. This makes it preferable
to use parallel frequency multipliers
in the high power output stages of transmitters and active phased array modules.
Because of this, only parallel frequency multipliers are treated in the following.

 

Figure 18.1. Block diagram of a paral-
lel type frequency multi-
plier.

- 328 -
FOI40IFKJA1.U§BINVLY
FOI1OFFKJA1.USEIMﬂLY

A specific feature of parallel multipliers is frequency conversion by virtue of
the nonlinearity of the volt-coulomb characteristic of the p-n junction capaci-
tance. For this reason, the filter networks of the multipliers should provide
for passing only two current harmonics through the diode and segregate the
requisite harmonic from the spectrum.

The following are usually known when designing frequency multipliers: the
requisite output power level, Pout! the output frequency tout . nf1n (n is the
multiplication factor; fin is the input frequency), the level of suppression of
adjacent harmonic components, the working bandwidth of and the overall dimensions
of the structure.

The choice of a nonlinear capacitance diode and its operating conditions are made
based on these data and the multiplication factor for one or more multiplier
stages is determined as well as the type of matching and filter networks; the
efficiencies of the input (n n) and the output (ﬂout) multiplier networks are
found approximately or speci ied.

Then the power design calculations are performed for the diode operating mode
based on the specified power at the output frequency Pdn - Pout/"out, as a result
of which, the following are determined: the diode conversion gain nd - Pdn/Pd 1
(where Pd is the input power to the diode), the input power to the multiplier
Pin - Pd 1}n1n, the multiplier conversion gain n.” - out/P n - n1nndn°uc, the
diode impedance at the input (21“) and output (200:; frequenc es. Then the match-
ing and filter networks of the multiplier are designed. The multiplier design
work is completed with working out of the structure with the requisite overall
dimensions.

18.2. The Selection of the Multiplication Factor for the Trequency Multiplier of
an Active Phased Antenna Array Module

The multiplication factor of a frequency multiplier intended for use in active
phased array modules [1] is governed by the requisite values of the output power
Pout and output frequency fout of the multiplier, as well as the working fre-
quency f"’ and power P” of the existing amplifiers preceding the frequency multi-
plier.

In this case, the multiplication factor is:
n ' fout/fw ' four/fin "=Im/fyﬁfmglfw (18.1)

Since the operating frequency range of transistor amplifiers is limited (at the
present time, to frequencies in the decimater band), then there is also a limit-
ation on the minimal value of the multiplication factor in a module for a fixed
frequency fout' This minimum value of n can be estimated based on the following
considerations. The power distribution of transistor amplifiers over a frequency
band can always be expressed in the form of some function:

P" ' .(fx) p, l“ ‘P (’1). (1802)

- 329 -
FOR o‘mcui use on“
Assuming that the conversion factor of the frequency multiplier is inversely
proportional to the multiplication factor, taking (18.1) and (18.2) into
account. we derive an expression which makes it possible to estimate the multi-
plication factor and make a preliminary choice of the final amplifier stage:

L"- 9(’—':¥-)> P“... (18.3)

where m is the number of amplifier stages operating off of one multiplier input.
It is obviously expedient to choose m g 2 for the nodule of an active phased
array because of considerations of structural simplicity and small size.

It can be roughly assumed that the efficiency of an active phased antenna array
module with frequency multiplication of n. is determined by the electronic
efficiency of the output stage of the transistor amplifier nv and the conversion
gain of the multiplier “mul' Since we have assumed that "mul e l/n, then n. I

nuln.

If nlg 3, then in making the transition from n - 2 to n - 3, a slight increase
in nIn is possible which is related to the increase in the electron efficiency
of the amplifier, n", because of the reduction in its working frequency. When
n > 3, the efficiency of the module falls off with an increase in the multipli-
cation factor.

The overall multiplication factor n, chosen from condition (18.3) when n z_b.
can be realized in one multiplier or in several series connected multipliers,
since n - n1, n2 ..., “k' where n1, n2, ..., “k are the multiplication factors
of the individual multipliers.

It is of course preferable to use a single multiplier to reduce the size. How—
ever, it is expedient in a number of cases to use several multipliers. This is
due to the fact that the utilization of individual multipliers with a low multi-
plication factor (n g 3) makes it possible to obtain greater values of the output
powers, as well as to substantially expand the working bandwidths of the multi-
pliers, something which is quite important when modules operate with wideband
signals.

In fact, the ultimate passband which can be achieved in single diode frequency
multipliers is governed by the values of the adjacent harmonics in the output
signal spectrum of the multiplier and amounts to:

Mm - fin] (n + 0.5). Alumulnl(ﬂ+0.5). (13.1.)
It should be noted that in multipliers with small values of n. passbands can be
realized which are greater than those determined by formula (18.6) if a combina-

tion configuration of two diodes is used in them. Thus. for balanced multipliers
and multipliers with opposing-parallel or opposing-series diodes:

Mun - 2f1n/(1 + n).

- 330 9
FOI1OIFKJA1.USB(N‘LY
IKIICHUHCIAL.USE(NNLY

Moreover, multipliers with diodes connected in combination make it possible to
approximately double the output power.

Drawbacks to these multipliers are a slight increase in circuit complexity (espe-
cially for the balanced multiplier), multiplication only by an odd factor (multi-
pliers with diodes connected in opposition) or by an even factor (the balanced
circuit), as well increased requirements placed on the identical nature of the
parameters of the diodes which are used.

Since the working frequency range of a multiplier should be less than the ulti-
mate, with an increase in the multiplication factor, its working band decreases.
This leads to an increase in the requirements placed on the frequency filters
(especially on the output filter), and as a consequence, to increased complexity
of their structural design.

It is also necessary to take into account the fact that with an increase in the
multiplication factor, the influence of the phase errors of the preceding stages
on parameters which characterize the directional properties of an active phased
array also increases [1] as well as the influence of the instability of the
source of the bias applied to the nonlinear capacitance diode to establish its
initial operating point on the phase of the output signals and their power [a].

The change in the phase of a multiplier output when the bias voltage deviates.
from the working voltage in frequency multipliers using varactors in a blocked

p-n junction is: _ .
I l-!! AU
Ao“?"‘QF(I-I-m)'u_:' (18.5)

where v is a coefficient which characterizes the degree of nonlinearity of the
blocked p-n junction capacitance and depends on the type of p-n junction (for
a sharp junction, v - 1/2; for a smooth junction, v I 1/3); “d is determined for
the working bias voltage U ; an is the deviation of the bias from the operating
value; Qd is the diode quagity actor at the operating bias voltage. The
quality factor can be calculated from the data sheet for a diode [6]:
f .
- “1: v . ’m l.”
Qd fin (“o/U!) Qt: ’08 (um) 0 (18'6)

 

 

where the frequency fu t is the parameter of the diode measured when determining
the bias voltage 0' an which designates the input frequency for which Qd . 1.

In frequency multipliers using charge storage diodes:

 

Amzl-Qll 1-3 san‘an—Ome) £2 .
a (l-l- e U. ' (18 7)

where 0 is the charge cut-off angle, which characterizes that portion of the
oscillation period during which the p-n junction is blocked, and which determines
to a considerable extent the conversion gain and output power [7].

- 331 -
roe cinnamon“
FOIiOFFKJAl.USE¢ONLN

Expressions (18.5) and (18.7) can not only be suitable for the analysis of the
stability offthe phase characteristics of frequency multipliers, but also for
the estimation of the possibility of employing frequency multipliers as phase

equalizers to reduce the systematic phase error in active phased array modules,
or as phase shifters.

The change in the output power which is due to the mistuning of the multiplier
microwave circuits can be found from the approximate expression:

1"... . «Ham
Pall: .. (44.1“:A?)[m.l.(|_w(|+o'25.v_°n2)'-'l. (13.8)

where Pant is the output power in the case of untuned microwave circuits (A0 -
0).

 

 

It follows from (18.8) that with an increase in A0, the output power falls off
more quickly, the smaller ha is.

If a frequency multiplier is used as a phase shifter, then the maximum deviation
of the output signal phase is IAOI --l80°. In this case, as follows from (18.8).
to reduce the range of variation in the output power when controlling the phase,
it is necessary that the multiplication factor be as great as possible. however,
with an increase in n the conversion gain falls off and the phase instability
rises. For this reason, it is recommended that n be taken as n - 3...5 in

phase shifter multipliers.

18.3. The Selection of Nonlinear Capacitance Diode and Its Operating Mode

Nonlinear capacitance diodes can operate in two basic modes: in a cutoff p-n
junction mode and in a partially turned-on mode.

In the cutoff p-n junction node, multiplication is possible at frequencies of
f1“ < fuli' Since fult reaches 400 on: and more in modern varactors, it is
n t

possible his mode to multiply any frequencies, right down to submillimeter
wavelengths.

In the partially turned-on mode, multiplication is possible only in a limited
range of frequencies [6]:

flower ‘ fin < fupper'

The lower limit of the frequency range is governed by the minority carrier
recombination time: f1 er = l/tr; the upper limit is governed by the recovery
time of the cut off p-n unction: f e - 1/‘rec° when f < ‘up er’ a turned-
on p-n junction introduces consideraggg losses and substant ly resuces the
conversion gain. when f1“ > fup , the nonlinear properties of the diode are
manifest only weakly, something thich also leads to a substantial reduction of
the conversion gain. For diodes being produced by our industry, fupper does

not exceed 63:. For this reason. in multipliers with an output frequency below

- 332 -

INDR‘OFFICIAl.lﬁﬂE(M€LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10 682, a diode can operate in both modes, while multipliers where fout > 10
08:, it can operate only in a cutoff p-n junction mode.

In a block p-n junction mode, the instantaneous voltage, u, across it in the
absence of a breakdown and with cutoff should satisfy the condition:

0 ,<_ u ,<_ “per Nagy”. (18.9)
however, in a partial cutoff mode, the voltage u should satisfy only the condi-
tion for the absence of junction breakdown:

u g ”P“ leg: Una, (18.10)

It follows from (18.9) and (18.10) that in a cutoff p-n junction mode, in con-
trast to the partially turned-on state, limitations are placed on the maximum
amplitude of the oscillations. This is also due to the greater working powers

of frequency multipliers using nonlinear capacitance diodes which operate in

a partial cutoff mode [7]. An advantage of partial cutoff is also the higher
multiplier conversion gain given the same multiplication factor and diode Q.

In this case, when operating in a junction cutoff mode, the conversion gain falls
off so sharply with an increase in the multiplication factor n, that n > 3 is

not used in practice.

It follows from what has been presented here that in multipliers with an output
frequency of fout < 10 Gﬂz, it is most expedient to employ vsractors in a partial
junction cutoff mode, and especially, charge storage diodes. the nonlinear pro-
perties of which are manifest to the greatest extent in this mode.

The power parameters of diodes are the following: the normalized power Pnorm
and the permissible diode power dissipation P er' The powsr P orm characterizes
the maximum output power without breakdown (2?: Pnorm - “per/g5: where:

as - 1/2'fultcwn) ‘Rs—I/znrmcw.) (18.11)
is the diode loss resistance.

The power P er characterizes the maximum output power without thermal breakdown
of the juncgion. since

Rd]: ; Ppernd/(l - nd). Pu<”w-"n’(""'ﬁ° (18.12)

It is well known [6, 7] that with an increase in the diode Q, the conversion gain
increases. tending to unity. while the output power of the multiplier falls off,
tending to zero. For this reason, when selecting a diode, one must be governed
by the conditions for assuring the specified power with a relatively high

conversion gain.

For a parallel varsctor type multiplier operating in a cutoff p-n junction mode,
a preliminary selection can be made by means of the expression:

Pap/POO“ < 1/50

- 333 -

lllltﬂﬂﬂC1A1.USl(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where a is a certain coefficient which depends on the type of the p-n junction
and the multiplication factor. A number of values of a are given in Table 18.1.

mm 18.1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 o. 65 0.44 16.25404 2:11 - In
2 0.132 0.406 9.!6-l0-' m us
3 0.82 0.476 . 0.7- l0" 1.240! I [3
Key: 1. 00 “x1119“.
The parameters of the selected varactor should satisfy the expressions:
Quin ‘ fun/fin ‘ Qua: Q.u.<lmlf..<Q.-x. . (18.13)
where: I I
Q __1/l—2aP +Vl—‘ lPao __L____GIL__EI_1; (18.110)
"“ own/pm”:-
inn‘“ 2P nan-la [3(1—m""‘)' (18.15)

8 is a certain coefficient, the value of which is given in Table 18.1; nd .1“ is
the minimum value of the diode conversion gain.

A charge storage diode is initially selected with respect to frequency in
accordance with the condition flu," < fin: < fupper' and then with respect

to power [6]: ,
Pun/P” > 80 —coc 9)”: (8). (18 . 16)

Here:
=1 sln(n—l)0_sln(n+l)0
MS) ---[—-——,‘_I ——.+,

is a coefficient which takes into account the nonlinear properties of the charge
storage diode capacitance [8, 10]. At optisal cutoff angles of 6° - kiln, it
takes on the maxim values:

2un --——~‘ ("'4’

8
1.(9.)- Wk” .k-l.2....,n.—1 (18.17)

 

Since naxinun values of the conversion gain can be obtained at optimal cutoff
angles [7], then taking (18.17) into account, condition (18.16) is represented
in the following fora with the realization of elevated conversion gains:

-334- ,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY

V§(ut-I)(I—'-m-§-) -, 1:

PM" I
P“. > “n k“(ﬂ—l) _ e —‘.2.I.u.n—‘.

It is well known that with the ease Q in a charge storage diode multiplier, the
greatest conversion gain is realized at cutoff angles of 8..x - s/2 in the case
of even values of n, and:

e~‘=%(n...l) m' emg=—;(n.l I)

 

 

in the case of odd values of n. It follows from (18.17) that for cutoff angles
of e < 6.3 , greater powers can be obtained at the multiplier output than when
8 - 6.3x, gut in this case, the conversion gains are lower.

Increasing the working powers and increasing the conversion gain can lead to a
substantial rise in the power dissipation, and for this reason, it is necessary
to check the condition of the permissible power dissipation, which is more
conveniently represented in the following form taking (18.12) into account:

 

 

 

The final choice of a diode is also made using fornulas (18.13) - (18.15), in
which the value of yn(0) is to be substituted instead of 8. We will note that
when selecting the type of charge storage diode. one must also specify the cutoff
angle 8 at the sane time.

Thus, the following parameters become known with the choice of the diode: the
breakdown or permissible inverse voltage 05,, the varactor nonlinearity exponent,
the recombination time tr and the recovery time treco the maximum frequency fult-
the permissible power dissipation P er» the p-n junction capacitance for a
definite bias voltage C(U'), the bias voltage U, at which C(U') and fult were
measured as well as the loss resistance r.¢r (18.11) and the cutoff angle 6.

18.4. The Power Design Calculation Procedure for the Operational Mode of a
Diode in a Parallel Type Multiplier

The design calculations for a diode operating mode are carried out based on the
output power for it:

Pdn - Pout/“our PM " Plullnllll'

Here. he“: is roughly specified in a range of 0.8 to 0.95. The type of diode
is selected based on the known values of Pan, font and n.

The power design procedure for a diode for both modes is practically the same.

however, because of the difference in the volt-coulomb characteristics of the
p-n junction in these modes, the conputational relationships are different.

-335-
qussomv
l-‘OROFFICIALUSEONLY

The Cutoff p-n Junction Mode. l. we calculate the operating bias voltage "0
with which the specified diode output power Pdn can be obtained based on the

following expression: -
P - ( U )' 0:“ | | +0
" ' “Rs (I +VH-a' ' (13'1”

 

 

U0 was

where a = [p [1"(gﬁrl‘ is the conversion paraneter; the values of u and 8

are taken from Table 18.1; 00 m is the aaximun permissible bias voltage, which
satisfies the condition for no junction breakdown (18.9). The values of Do u,
for different values of n and v are also given in Table 18.1.

The equation for Pdn (18.18) is uniquely related to 00. however, it does not
resolve in explicit form in the general case with respect to no and 110 can be
found either graphically or with a cosputsr.

In the special cases where a < 2, which occurs when “d < 0.25:

 

 

Hhena>lO-nd>0.5:

 

2. We calculate the varactor quality factor 0d for the voltage 00 using formula
(1806).

3. We determine the conversion gain:
nn=BQilll + V i'l'awn) J'-
15. We calculate the input power:

Pin ' Pdn/“in“d Pas“Pn 111.. ‘1» (18.19)

Here, n13 just as no“: is specified by working fron the frequency range and the
proposed type of uultiplier circuit.

5. We check the condition of permissible power dissipation in the diode using
formula (18.12). If this condition is not met. then it is necessary to either
choose a diode with a greater value of fult or PIN!" or to use addition circuits
or a multiplication circuit with two diodes [3].

6. We determine the varactor capacitance for the bias voltage "0‘
C(UO)’ C(Us, (”liver a

-336-

Formosan“
MWUSEONLY

7. we calculate the overall impedance of the p-n junction at the input frequency:

ztotal in ' ”total in + j‘totll in' tau-(aaa+]"ﬂ‘ .

Bare:

 

'u.-x='me‘-3
w————1/n-(.—::)'»-o+=:)=

where q is a certain parameter which characterizes the ratio of the maximum
permissible value of the a-plitude of charge oscillations to the constant charge
across the nonlinear capacitance (see Table 18.1).

8. We calculate the total inpedance of the p-n junction at the output frequency

ztot cu; ' rtot out + jxtot out' Here. rtot out ' rtot in and xtot out '
xtot in n.

The Partial Cutoff Mode Using a Charge Storage Diode. 1. He deternine the cutoff
angle 0 more precisely. Since it is practically always necessary in a frequency
multiplier to obtain the greatest conversion gain, then one oust choose cutoff
angles corresponding to the naxinun values of the conversion gain:

for even up ; ,1,‘
JL Innlueruux n.

2
8°- nil

’l
( . )T'EEL“3§':‘.““°

7.(8) = I sln(u—l)0 _sln(a+lzo I

:7!- n—l n+|

 

2. We calculate:

To facilitate the calculations, some of the values of 7n when a - 00 are given
in Table 18.2.

mm 18.2.

 

3. We determine the conversion paraneter:

”[m 7.(e)]’.

’0!

-337-

we miss oNLv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. We calculate the amplitude of the charge fundamental frequency:

4 . m: VT...
‘ War Ream;-
5. We calculate the maxim permissible value of the charge amplitude which
satisfies condition (18.10): ._ _ _
l
<11 m - ownvperuiu - men. - v'm‘fc(”o)”n°-._me'

 

6. We check for the condition of no diode breakdown: q < cu m- If this con-
dition is not net, then it is necessary to choose a diode with a greater value
of Up“. If there are no diodes with a greater value of up" in the specified
frequency range, then one can reduce the cutoff angle 0 down to a value which
satisfies the no breakdown condition. However, the conversion gain in this
case will be less than at the optimum cutoff angle.

7. We calculate the conversion gain:
mesa/(l + Vi + a)’.

8. We determine the input power fron (18.19).
9. He check the condition of the permissible power dissipation using (18.12).

10. We calculate the bias voltage:

U a O. . 3158—8”;
. cw.) a '

11. We calculate the total impedance of the pun junction at the input frequency
2m H rm+ lxm- [Ztot 1n - rm; in + ﬁt“ “1- Here:

"-u=Rs V 1+0 ;x""_ -mo-nnfmo .

12. We calculate the total inpedance of the pan Junction at the output frequency:
2"“! - rill“ + it"... [ztot out ' I"tot out + jxtot out]' 5‘“:

. I 0 .
’usus=’usxsxsws=-——'wm‘cw') “ -

18.5. The Design of the Microwave Input and Output Networks of a Multiplier

The structural design of a frequency multiplier depends on the range of working
frequencies and the electrical requirements.

Since the cross-sectional dimensions of the structure of an active phased array

nodule are limited by the spacing between the radiators. the input and output
microwave networks in nicrowave band multipliers are frequently made using

-3389
mommouu
FOI‘OFIIClAl.lEﬂi(H‘LY

microstrip lines. In this case, the matching devices provide for the matching
of the diode impedance at the input frequency to the characteristic impedance

of the line at the multiplier input and the diode impedance at the output fre-
quency to the characteristic impedance of the line at the multiplier output. The
characteristic impedances of these lines are usually 50 or 75 ohms.

The filters of frequency multipliers are made with either open-circuited or short-
circuited loops, or with low pass filters (PNCh) and bandpass filters (PPF). The
filters in the input and output microwave networks of narrow band frequency
multipliers with an odd value of the multiplication factor, the working band-
width of which is considerably less than the maximum, can be made from quarter-
wavelength open or short-circuited line sections [8]. In narrow band frequency
multipliers with an even value of the multiplication factor, there can be a
filter using line sections in the input microwave circuit, while there can be

a bandpass filter in the output circuit. Low pass filters are used in the micro-
wave input circuit of broadband frequency multipliers with any multiplication
factor, while bandpass filters'are used in the output circuit.

The insertion points of matching and filter networks relative to the diode are
chosen so that the impedance of the output microwave circuit at the input fre-
quency f1 nis considerably greater than the diode impedance Zia. while the
impedance nof the input microwave network at the output frequency is the diode
impedance zout'

The diode impedance is determined not only
‘l by the p-n junction impedance, but also by
6k tn the reactive parameters of the package:
the inductance of the leads LR and the
package capacitance ck. The diode equiva-
lent circuit is depicted in Figure 18. 2,
Figure 18.2. The equivalent circuit where z, is the impedance of the p-n
of a diode in a package. junction at the input or output frequency.
In accordance with Figure 18.2, the diode
impedance at the input frequency, taking into account the package parameters,
is 23x - rBx + ijx [21n - tin + 311“]. where:

..- _. 'n as ' ' ' l
m U ~28!» C. (lat-+28!“ L.)I’+(2ul., c. r. u)! (18 20) I (18.20)
I' —2‘Isr cm (la n "I 25/" Law-I’m," cu 'a an).

xal'. ‘

In the expressions cited here for an unpackaged diode with wire or tab leads, one
can assume that Ck - 0. and for a diode with a beam type chip structure (where
there are no wire or tab leads), ck - 0 and Lk - 0.

Expressions (18. 20) can be used to calculate the diode impedance at the output

frequency. if the subscript "BX“ [“in"] is replaced with the subscript ’bex"
[Iloutl']

- 339 -
FtHRGJFIICIAl.IISIICMULX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 18.3. Schematic of a parallel type frequency multiplier with
loops using microstrip lines.

One of the possible circuit configurations for a parallel type multiplier with
open loops is shown in Figure 18.3. The loop Shl compensates for the reactive
component of the diode impedance at the frequency f1“, figured from the point of
diode insertion (point C) to point A of the line.

The insertion point of the loop Shl in the input circuit is calculated by means
of the relationship:

um: B (”4/ l_“_—‘5’)ﬂ;%“££:9), (18.21)

M B'IH'W

 

Loop Shz provides for filtering the output frequency fro. the input microwave
network and decoupling the input circuit from the output circuit at the output
frequency fout‘ The length of the loop Sh is 12 - Allbn, where Al is the
wavelength of the output frequency in the ins, while its point of insertion is
found at a distance of 17 - 12 from the diode. In this case, loop Shz, in
shorting the main line connecting the input of the multiplier to the diode at
the point B prevents this frequency from getting through to the multiplier input
and provides for a close to infinite resistance of the input microwave circuit

on the diode side at the output frequency fout°

Here:

'sx(| “19%

 

a" .I a ‘ .
m‘l (tar-H’Mg)

I i
1!}, ll ‘5; -(l’—Xss u a)(lnr+ﬂ‘l1%)+‘¢2% Inn'l'l’“ 5;) (18.22)
pl 'r:.-l- x.;+o "27:“

are the conductance and reactive components of the admittance of the line at
point B.

The fact that the characteristic impedances of all of the line sections are the
same and equal to the characteristic impedance 9 of the input line was taken into
account in deriving this relationship.

9 360 -
FOI‘OFFK!AI.UBB(“HLY
FKHICMNHCIAI.USE(M‘LY

The length 11 of the loop Shl is determined from the expression:

21
28 p‘a‘l‘rh—(Bp-‘JﬂailJ (l‘-BP“§lg)
lr-1 vs---J--r-""'J""""“‘lh"'
i. ' '

2i i In 3
<.)(—)
The values of B and G are computed from formulas (18.22).

The loop Sh3 and line section 18 in the multiplier output circuit provide for
matching of the diode impedance at the output frequency to the characteristic
impedance of the line connected to the multiplier output. The connection point
of the loop and its length when the characteristic impedances of all the sections
are equal are chosen by means of the following relationships:

 

2.. a...“V—wnpv-u-r...(r:..+m~:..o
“Eh-IT; "3.23)

2mm

23
'{'(P—‘aus" T ‘0) (Inn-H," __n ‘0
2,. a

'L. + (‘sus‘l'P ts jl—u'o‘s)

The length of open loop Sh“ is 15 - Allb, which blocks the input frequency at

the multiplier output. The point of connection of the loop Sh‘ relative to loop
Sh3 is determined from the condition for obtaining a close to infinite impedance
of the output microwave network on the diode side at the input frequency. If the
characteristic impedances of all of the lines of the microwave network are equal
to the impedance of the line at the multiplier output, the length of the section

19 is determined from the relationship:

   
 

(18.23)

 

23 I
mil.” ‘ 21.1 +|‘2—u.1
l M s M 0

Note: In expressions (18.21) and (18.23), the sign in front of the square root
is chosen from the condition for obtaining the smallest microwave circuitry
dimensions.

Loop Shs with a length of 13 - A /4 is short-circuited for radiofrequencies
through the blocking capacitor (éb ) and serves to decOuple the microwave circuits
from the DC supply circuitry for the bias voltage 00 fed to the diode through

line sections 13 and 17. To expand the range of working frequencies of the
circuit which contains loop Sh and the blocking capacitor, the characteristic
impedance 9 h [9100 ] of loop 3h is to chosen substantially greater (by a

factor of t rse to give times) taan the characteristic impedance of the main

line 0. The maximum value of p is limited by the technological capabilities

of fabricating lines of small w! th and amounts to 150 to 200 ohms. The capa-
citance of the blocking capacitor is chosen from the relationship:

cb1 = (20...50)/2u£1npmp. Ca.§:(2o...ﬂm2u!..p... '

-341-

mommtusrouu
FOR4DFFKJA1.USE(NQLY

   

Figure 18.6. Multiplier circuit board. Figure 18.5. Schematic of a simplified
input microwave network
for a frequency multiplier.

One of the layout variants for a printed circuit board of the multiplier networks
designed in the configuration of Figure 18.3 is shown in Figure 18.6. To reduce
the dimensions of the circuit board, it is recommended that the conducting strips
of the microstrip lines be bent at an angle of 90’ and brought close to each

other, but no closer than three substrate thicknesses to preclude parasitic
coupling between them.

In a number of cases, the input nicrowave network of a multiplier is simplified
by providing matching of the diode impedance at the input frequency through the
choice of the characteristic impedances of the filter loop Shz and the section
17 which connects the loop to the diode. A schematic of a simplified microwave
input circuit is shown in Figure 18.5. The characteristic inpedances of the
sections 91 and 92 are calculated from the formulas:

 

where

 

when tin > 0, a plus sign is used, and when x1“ < 0, that sign which provides
for an acceptable value of p in terms of the structural design. If the values
obtained for 91 or 92 are diificult to achieve in practice, then matching must
be accomplished using the configuration of Figure 18. 3.

- 34.2 -
roe omcm.‘ use my
FOR Oﬂ-‘IGAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 19. MICROHAVB AMPLIFIERS AND OSCILLATORS USING AVALANCHE TRANSIT TIME
DIODES

L9.l. Basic Characteristics

Avalanche transit time diodes (LPD's) [MATT diodes] can be used to construct the
oscillator and amplifier stages of transmitting active phased array modules in a
frequency range from a few up to hundreds of gigahertr. As compared to other
microwave semiconductor devices, MATT diodes provide for a high output power in
s CH mode at frequencies above 10 GB: and greater efficiency in a pulsed mode at
frequencies on the order of a few Gilt.

The parameters and technical characteristics of microwave WATT devices such as
the output power, working frequency, efficiency, etc., depends substantially'on
the diode operating conditions. No less than five operational modes of IMPA'l'l'
diodes have been experimentally observed, which are realized depending on the para-
meters of the diode oscillatory circuitry and the power supply networks. for the
practical application of MATT diodes in microwave power oscillators and amplifi-
ers, there are two modes of significance which differ ini-the rate of drift of the
current carrier in the blocking p-n junction layer: the fast drift mode, in which
the rate of travel of the carriers is equal to the saturation rate for the given
semiconductor material, called the avalanche transit mode (in), and the slow
drift mode, in which the rate of motion of the carriers is significantly less than
the saturation rate, called the trapped plasma mode (82?). (In the foreign liter-
ature, these modes are called WATT and MATT modes respectively).

The working frequency for TRAPA‘l'l‘ devices falls in the decimeter band. In this
band, when a single diode is used, the pulsed power with an efficiency of 25 to
30 percent at frequencies around 1 Gila usually amounts to 100 to 400 watts, and
with CH operation, 10 to 40 watts.

The lMPA‘l‘T mode is a higher frequency mode. Its operating frequencies fall in the
centimeter and millimeter bands. The power delivered by a single diode in the
centimeter band amounts to a few watts with an efficiency of about 10 percent in a
CH mode and tens of watts in a pulsed mode. In the millimeter band, MATT diodes
make it possible to obtain a CH output power on the order of a few watts at a
frequency of 50 682 with an efficiency of 16 percent and 0.38 watts a frequency
of 99 CH: with an efficiency of 12.5 percent.

It can be anticipated that in upcoming years, the power of a single MATT diode
in a CH mode will reach 30 watts at a frequency of 10 car, 2 to 3 watts at a
frequenc of 50 GB: (avalanche and transit time mode)_and 50 watts at l 61!:
(TRAPATTg. The indicated powers can be increased by approximately an order of
magnitude when various methods of power additions are employed.

It must be noted that because of the technical difficulties in realising a
TRAPATT mode, it was discovered and studied considerably later than avalanche and
transit diode operation, and its theory is incompletely developed at the present
time. The lack of a simple mathematical model which permits the calculation of

- 31.3 .-
ma omcm. ‘05: our
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the diode impedance makes it difficult to design a MATT diode module, and the
design of such modules is accomplished at the present time by primarily an eqirical
approach. Because of this, the fundamentals of the engineering design of microwave

stages are set forth in this chapter for MATT diodes and only some of the major
features of MATT design are treated.

The use of mm diodes is most expedient in the output stages of modules where
poor noise characteristics are not of substantialziqortance and the governing
parameters are the output power and the efficiency. since output stages, as a rule,

operate with a power gain, the characteristics of MAT! power amplifiers are of the
main practical significance.

The properties of IMPA‘I'T amplifiers (ULPD) are qualitatively similar to the proper-
ties of the well known aqlifiers using negative resistance diodes (parametric and
tunnel diodes) as well as electron transport diodes (DPB's). In generalizing the
results of theoretical studies of such amplifiers, one can formulate the major
properties of MA?! diode amplifiers.

l. The maximum value of the gain is limited by the amplifier stability conditions
(the instability in the diode resistance, the nonideal nature of load matching,
etc.) and under actual operating conditions for an amplifier, should not exceed
20 dB in the case of low ‘input signal levels.

2. The maximuas output power and efficiency are realized at a certain definite input
signal level; in this case, the gain falls off by a factor of several times relative
to its small signal value. so that the actual values of the gain in a maxim output
power mode do not .exceed 10 dB.

3. The maximal output power and efficiency of an amplifier are approximately equal

to the corresponding parameters of an optimally tuned self-excited oscillator using
the sane diode.

lo. The bandwidth of an IMPATT diode anlifier is limited by the diode Q in accord-
ance with Panno's relationship:

 

(elf )I-mx : Ila—am I/IITF'

where (of/fond; is the ultimate bandwidth; Kp is the power gain; Qd is the diode
quality factor. It follows from this that for the actual values-of Q5 2 6--15 and
Kp _<_ 10 db, the ultimate passband does not exceed 15 percent.

5. The nonlinear distortions at the output of an WAT! aamlifier increase with an
increase in the gain and for small gains (Kp < 10 dB) do not exceed the distortions
in traveling wave tube amplifiers.

“us, the output amplifier an IMPA‘IT diode module can provide an output power on
the order of a few watts in a CH mode in the centimeter band and of several tens

-3lolo -

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of watts in the decineter band with a gain of around 10 dB. in a passband of approx-
iastely 15 percent.

In staructural terns, the MATT diode aaplifier or oscillator is aade in the fora:
of a nicrowave resonator (cylindrical, rectangular, toroidal, coaxial, stripline,
etc.), coupled to the load and the input signal source (in the case of an amplifier)
with the diode counted in it. An external view of an amplifier is shown in Figure
19.1.

 

Figure 19.1. External view of an MATT diode amplifier.

19.2. The Parameters of IMPA‘l'l' diodes and Specific Features of Their Applications
in the Modules of Active Phased 'l‘ransnitting Antenna Arrays

An avalanche transit time diode (Figure 19.2) is a cleex semiconductor structure
(1), which is mounted on a heat sink (2), housed in a hermetically sealed package.

The distribution of the electric field intensity 3(a) in the diode is shown in
Figure 19.3, where x is the distance figured from the plane of the junction.
Such a distribution is characteristic of all of the known types of IMPA‘I'!‘ diodes
[1-5], and for this reason, the essence of the physical processes occurringin
MAT! diodes is described by the same mathematical model regardless of the nature
of the internal structure of the diodes.

The aajor contents of this model reduced to the fact that when the inverse bias
voltage is equal to the breakdown value 115:, the electrical field intensity exceeds
the critical value 8 . Ber. corresponding to the onset of avalanche breakdown, only
in a small region of the barrier layer with a width of 6 (Figure 19.3), because of
which, the entire barrier layer of the p-n junction with a width w is broken down
into two regions: a narrow region of width 6 (6 << 11), in which the process of
inpact ionization and avalanche like multiplication of the number of carriers takes
place: the so-called multiplication layer (80) and a region of carrier drift of
width w - 6, where the carriers formed in the mltiplication layer move at a

-3105 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

velocity V. It is assumed that the electric field intensity in the barrier layer
during the tine of carrier drift does not fall below a certain value 33. correspond-
ing to the saturation velocity Vs, so that the drift speed is constant and equal

to the saturation velocity V - Vs.

+ Figure 19.2. The structural design of an IMPATT
. diode in a package.

 

+

Figure 19.3. The distribution of the electric
field intensity B(x) in an
WATT diode.

 

Based on the nodel considered here for a harnonic voltage of low enlitude applied
to the diode, the impedance of the p-n junction is deter-ined by the following
expressions [1]:

tre=R-a‘i'.x «a: I-"
l ' 3"]:cnsor. (19.1)

R'." u .—-—.A '

nCl—O’ on

X..=L(_L£ﬂ_;
' “c "I" m "5" (19.2)

 

 

Here, c . tS/H is the barrier layer capacitance of the p-n junction; s is the
junction area; m ' 21f is the frequency of the harnonic voltage applied to the
diode; 1 . (ﬂ - 6)/Vs is the drift region transit tine by the carriers;

”2:":“9 (19.3)

is a paraneter which characterizes the diode operating node; “A is the avalanche
frequency which characterizes the resonant frequency of the electron-hole plasma
in the multiplication layer. The avalanche frequency is determined by the proper-
ties of the seniconductor nterial and the technological and structural paraneters
of the p-n junction, in accordance with the expression [1]:

-366 -

mommiusaomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[2w l-y) I!s ]m (19.4)
Ma - _—

C866."

where 10 is the Dc current ﬂowing through the junction; I is a coefficient which
deternines the dependence of the inpact ionisation coefficient of the majority
carriers on the electrical field intensity for an approximation of this function

with a power fmction of the type 3‘; y is a coefficient which characterizes the
sharpness of the p-n junction.

When developing a circuit for an IMPATT diode oscillator, it is convenient to

treat as a two-pole network characterized the ilpedance 2d - rd 0 jxd, the resis- v-
tive rd and reactive Xd coaponents of which can be determined on the basis of the
simplified equivalent circuit [1] shown in Figure 19.6:

X}: (Rn-II " R8)

"" (R...-Rs)'4-(X...+xL—xc)' ' (”'5’
X a “' xclmi-n‘RSY'HXn-n+XL)(xs-a+xL ‘ x6” .
‘ . (Rn-s "' R,)‘-l-(X,.,, " XL'l' x6).
' (l9. 6)

where

Figure 19.4. The equivalent circuit of an avalanche
transit tine diode.

 

The expressions given here make it possible to ascertain the major properties of
an IMPA‘l'i' diode which govern the specifics of its applications in the design of
oscillator and anplifier stages in active phased antenna array modules.

The resistance of an MATT diode is negative when 82 < l, i.e., at frequencies of:

(u > “2 (19.7)

Physically, this means that when condition (19.7) is net, the alternating current

i(t) - Re 1.1310)“. flowing through the.diode is shifted in phase relative to the
applied harnenic voltage u(t) - Re 0.0”" by an angle of 90° < s < 270'. In this

~30 -

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

case, the diode can he treated as a source of oscillatory power. The average p0wer
delivered by the diode to an external circuit over an oscillation period '1‘ is
proportional to the negative resistance of the diode rd ' Ila/1,.

The negative resistance (NR) of a diode for given structural and production process
parameters depends, as follows fro. (19.1) - (19.5), on the frequency and direct
current of the diode. The nature of the frequency dependence of the negative
resistance of a p-o junction is deternined by the factor (1 - cosm)/ur in accord-
ance with (19.1), where this factor has a minus at a certain optimal value of
the transit angle so” - («1)09: I 2.2 rad. It follows fun this that for a
specified carrier drift tine, a definite frequency f“, called the transit fre-
quency, corresponds to the axiom negative resistance of a p-n junction:

ft: ' flun=0v35V$/(V_6)' (19.8)

Thus, the width of the depleted region of an MATT diode, intended for operation
at a specified frequency, should have a definite value, depending on the properties
of the semiconductor uterial. If the diode is intended for operating in a range
of frequencies, then the depletion region width is usually selected so that the
average frequency of the band is equal to the optimal frequency:

tour-0...... “p.022? (19.9)

In this case, the power delivered by the diode to the external circuit is a
InXiIIlIII at the center frequency of the hand and falls off towards its boundaries.

The negative resistance of an lHPA‘l'l' diode increases with an increase in the direct
current 10, as follows frcn (19.1) - (19.5). however, the working current 10 at a
specified frequency should always be less than the characteristic current 1;, for
which the avalanche frequency becomes equal to the working frequency, since in
this case, 82 - 1 and [Rpm] + u. The characteristic current is frequently used as
the IHPATT diode parameter in place of the avalanche frequency. In this case:

2
B - loll,‘ (19.10)

and as follows from (19.6):

' (19.11)
I, -—sr'r$6£.,l2(m l 1') Vs.

The maximum permissible diode working current Io P9? is limited in the case of a
specified ultimate temperature for the p-n junction, 1' per by the tenperature
of the heat sink To in accordance with the expression 5?:

-368-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOI10FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

10 Per - I.m=(TM”—TQ)IR‘»U.. (19-12)

where RT is the thermal resistance of the diode; no is the no voltage.
Thus, the diode power depends substantiall on its structural design (RT) and the

configuration of the microwave network (To . For modern IHPATT diodes, depending on
the structural design and material of the semiconductor:

‘r - zo ... 150 deg/H (19.13)

The greatest values of the thermal resistance are observed for diodes with a planar
structural design and mesa.structures. For an inverted mesa structure, Rt 3 35
deg/V; for 8ohottky barrier diodes, R1 I 20 ... 30 deg/H.

Douestic+induatry is producing silicon three-layer IMPATT diodes of the 2A706 type
vith a p ~n-n‘ structure having the following parameters:

Working frequency range, 68::

2A706A (red dot) 8.5 - 10
2A706B (blue dot) 10 - 11.5
2A706V (white dot) 8.5 - 10
2A7OGG (black dot) 10 - 11.5
Power, it:
2A706A 100
2A7063 100
2A706V 50
2A706G 50
Capacitance, de 0.2 - 0.5
Breakdown voltage, volts 50 - 120
Efficiency, percent 3.5 - 6

Package parameters:
Inductance, nanohenries 0.4
Capacitance, picofarads 0.6

Operating current, in nA, is indicated on the individual diode package.

 

The overall dimensions of the diode package are shown in figure 19.2.

The static differential diode resistance, no I dUo/dlo, determined on the basis of
its volt/ampere characteristics, amounts to approxi-ataly 390 ohns. Because of

qua-
Knmmaaummuy
F0R1OFFK1AI.USE1JNLN

power supply should have an internal resist
of such a supply, it is necessary to insert a
diode having a resistance of Rlim >> 300 ohms.

ance of hi >> 300 ohms.

In the absence
limiting resistor in series with the

To calculate the diode impedance from the data sheet values, it is convenient to

represent formula (19.11) in the form:

I: ': 05”,, cusp/fem

 
 

-— 21 7047.1
---?l7/M'I."

 
    

5 '; a .9 ‘m' 7/

Figure 19.5. The characteristic current of
an IHPATT diode as a function
of frequency.

range (about 20 Gas) of £1 < f < fl“.

1" - 0.5nrzcutr/t"

The small signal impedance as a func-
tion of frequency and direct current,
calculated from formulas (19.1) -
(19.6) for 2A706A and V diodes is
shown in Figure 19.6, where the
region of diode impedance values due
to scatter in the parameters are
indicated for various constant values
of 82. These regions are enclosed
between two curves (the solid and
dashed lines), corresponding to the
extreme permissible values of the
diode capacitance (the minimal is
the solid curve and the maximum is
the dahsed curve) for the same con-
stant value of the parameter 82 -

- const. The small circles indicate
the values of the impedance at
various fixed frequencies which are
specified in gigaherts alongside

the circles. Constant frequency

The resistive and reactive components of the impedance

.7 as a function of frequency for
As can be

The broad band response of the negative

resistance of the diode makes it possible to use it for the broad band output

stages of active elements of modules.

On the other hand, the presence of negative

resistance in a very wide band of frequencies can cause the excitation of para-
sitic self-oscillations at frequencies other than the working frequency, something
which creates definite difficulties in assuring circuit stability, all the more

- 350 —

roe oinmt’usc ONLY
FIHICMWNCIALIJSBINVLY

since in the region of existence of negative resistance, the diode equivalent
circuit (Figure 19.6) has two natural resonances: a series resonance at a frequency
of: --

~ 1
,m..?n(t..c,,) "

and a parallel resonance at a frequency of:
l C. C...
1 1— !_ ————
Ius 2n ( n Cn-ICM ),

where cptn is the equivalent p-n junction capacitance in the operating node. Both

frequencies depend on the diode direct current 10. increasing with an increase in
this current.

F, ,, M 017 M 7’) I!) 0

...-. —l“'"—T _.ﬁ. - .-

'___:gr¢no'
---’-3 "m ‘

    
    

Figure 19.6. The small signal impedance
of a 2A706 diode as a function

of frequency and the para-
aeter 82.

when IMPATT diodes are used in output power anplifiers, the dependence of the nega-
tive resistance of the p-n junction on the slplitude of the oscillations - the ampli-
tude of the current flowing through the junction 1., is of considerable importance.

In the case of large current amplitudes (II 3.1,), the average value over a period
of the parameters which deternine the inpedance of the p-n junction differs from

the corresponding small signal values which enter into expressions (l9.h) and (19.5).
which leads to a reduction in the resistive and reactive components of the p-n junc-
tion inpedance with a rise in the current snplituds. In this case. the impact of
the amplitude of the oscillations on the value of the reactive component of the

junction impedance, xp—n’ is considerably less than on the value of the resistive
component, Rp.n, since the slope of xp-n as a function of the current anplitude I.

- 351 -
FIHICMHWCIAI.USIIO*HUY
Figure 19.7. The resistive and reactive components of the
impedance of an MATT diode in a package as a
function of frequency for the maximum ( ) and
minimum (- - -) values of the capacitance.

 

is approximately an order of magnitude less than the slope of the corresponding
function for Rpm. This makes it possible when calculating the quantity KP.“ to
assume that it is independent of the amplitude of the oscillations.

The negative resistance of 'the p-n junction of an MATT diode as a function of
the current amplitude is described by the expression:

RM= Rﬂwwum), (19.15)

where Rp-n(0) is the small signal value of the negative resistance of the p-n
junction (19.1); MI“) is a monotonically decaying function. For practical designs
of microwave devices using MATT diodes, it is convenient to approximate the
function M I.) with a quadratic parabola:

¢(I_)=q—-cl:.. ' (19.16)

The approximation parameter q and c are chosen on the basis of existing theo-
retical or experimental curves of the negative resistance as a function of the

amplitude of the oscillations.

In generalizing what has been presented here, we shall note some specific features
'of the application of MATT diodes in microwave devices.

~352-

ma omen“. use ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The application of MATT diodes in the active elements of modules is possible at
frequencies from a few gigabertz up to several hundreds of gigahertz, where its
negative resistance is manifest. The negative resistance of an MA?!“ diode is
mnifest in a broad frequency range - about 20 Gila, which makes it possible to use
it for the realisation of broadband output stages of modules. 0n the other hand,
the broadband nature of the negative resistance leads to the necessity of taking
special measures to assure the stability of the stages.

The dependence of the maxim permissible diode current on the ambient temperature
leads to the necessity of a careful structural design of a good heat sink.

The considerable production process scatter in the parameters of the diode, as well
as the poor precision of existing methods of calculating their impedance makes it
necessary to employ a large number of control elements in the design of amplifiers
and oscillators.

19.3. Microwave Circuits of Oscillators Using WATT Diodes

Since the impedance of an MATT diode is characterized by a rather large reactive
component, the simplest microwave circuit with an IMPA‘l'l' diode can be represented,
as shown in Figure 19.8a, with a resonant circuit Lequiv cequiv with the load
resistance R“ and the negative resistance rd inserted in it, where cequiv is the
equivalent capacitance of a diode with a reactance Xd - («swam-1; Bequiv is
the equivalent inductance of the external circuit with a reactance of X10“ '-

' all-equiv.

The model given here for the simplest microwave circuit with an MATT diode is
justified not only when considering the circuit external to the diode terninals,
but also for the circuit internal relative to the "terminals" of the p-n junction.
In this case, the components of the impedance at the input terminals of the diode
rd and xd are replaced in the circuit with the corresponding components of the
impedance of the p—n junction Rp-n and x -n, while the reactive cosponents of the
package (Lk, Ck) apply to the elements 0 the external circuit. In this case, the
parameters Ru and X1; [1110“ and led] designate the resistive and reactive compo-
nents of the external circuit impedance, referenced to the "terminals" of the

p-n junction.

Such a treatment proves to be frequently the most- convenient one, since throughout
the entire range of frequencies where the resistance of the p~n junction is nega-
tive, its reactance is always capacitive. Taking relationships (19.15) and (19.16)
into account, we represent the expression for the voltage across the resistance

in the form:

n :-- —m'-I- 61’,

(19.17)

where u ' - IR,..,,(0)M'. b - - 4 IR,.,,(0)|¢/3o , and we derive the differential equation for

the current:

-353-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

fﬁ-‘w—nnmﬁ-pqlno.
(19.18)
Here:
Mn 1;: ; s.- “2",“ : «an hale... (19.19)
By designating the coefficient in front of the first derivative as:
a,,..--.-o.6uo.M(I-hn). (19.20)

He shall represent the resulting equation in the torn of Van'der Pol's equation
known fro. oscillation theory:

W all
7;; we...“ “also.

he solution of which is l-I..e"”"'l"(”s“-.Q)-

 

I)

Figure 19.8. Schenatic of a microwave device using an MATT
diode.

It follows frog this that the circuit stability (the absence of increasing
oscillations in the case of s rando- perturbation) is assured when the condition
sequiv > 0 is net, or as follows tron (19.18) - (19.20) for q - 1, when:

R. >|R,., (3)]. (19.21)

similarly, the excitation condition can be represented in the form:

Rn<IR'-n (o)l' (19 22)

-356 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FfHRCHﬂﬂCJAI.USEIDNLY

while the condition_ for steady-state self-excited oscillations (oscillation mode)

is: R - [Klogd] . RP-“ ('equiv - 0), wherek -n is the average value of the
negative resistance over an oscillation perios.

Since the value of RP-“ for each specific diode at a specified frequency is
governed by the value of the direct current (19.1), (19.3) and (19.5), then it
follows from (19.21) and (19.22) that the choice of the circuit operating mode
can be made by means of choosing the load resistance Rload or the value of the
direct current 10. The current corresponding to the excitation of self-oscilla-
tions for a specified load resistance is called the starting current, 13:33:. In

this case, the condition To > Istart corresponds to the oscillation condition and
the stability condition is 10 < Istart-

If an alternating current source is added to the simplest electrical circuit with
an IMPATT diode (Figure 19.8a), then when stability condition (19.21) is met, a
power gain is established in the circuit for the input oscillations, and when
condition (l9.22) is set, an external synchronisation mode is established for
natural oscillations, or a so-called synchronised oscillator mode. Both modes can
be used for the operation of the output stages of nodules. A free-running oscil-
lator,»as a rule, does not find practical applicationherebecause of the difficul-
ties of realizing the requisite phase distribution over the elements of an array.
however, the parameters of this mode must taken into account in the design work

so as to assure the sthbility of the primary operating mode, i.e., the absence of
amplitude and phase jumps in the output signals, which can appear as a consequence
of the excitation of parasitic self-oscillation.

The fact is that the realisation of the simplest microwave circuit shown in
Figure 19 8a in a range of frequencies where the negative resistance of an IHPATT
diode is manifest is not possible in practice. To create an external microwave
circuit, transmission line sections are usually employed (coaxial, waveguide,
stripline, etc ), which are coupled to the load. The oscillating systems which
are formed when an IHPATT diode is inserted in such line sections, as a rule, are
multiple resonance resonance systems, The appearance of additional (parasitic)
resonances is explained by the influence of the parasitic parameters of the diode
package, the occurrence of resonant volumes when mounting the diode, the impre-
cesion in the matching to the load, the presence of spatial resonances in distri-
buted systems, etc} In this case, the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 19.8 is
approximate and valid only in a small band of frequencies in the vicinity of each
resonant frequency, in the case where adjacent resonant frequencies are separated
sufficiently far from each other. The complete equivalent circuit in this case
should have the form shown in Figure 19. 8b, where the impedance, 23(00 - Ra(u) +
+jx3(w) designates the total impedance of the external microwave circuit.

Figure 19.9. Schematic of an IMPATT diode
[J:§%14 l~ amplifier with a stabilizing micro-
h

.'A wave network.

_. ____39"'

- 355 -
FIHICMHHCIAI.USE¢DNLY
IN)I40ITHC1Al.lﬁSEZ(H§LY

One can write the following based on Kirchoff's law for the reduced circuit in
the steady-state node: 294a) e 3(a) . 0, from which the equations for the
amplitude and phase balance of t e steady-state oscillations follow:

R. (a) + R,..(..) = o. (19. 23.)
XI") "' X...(<») 0- (19. 23b)

Thus, at the natural resonant frequencies of a circuit, which satisfy the phase
balance equation, parasitic oscillations can be excited in the case where the nega-
tive resistance at these frequencies is not equal to zero. For this reason, when
designing the nicrowave circuit of an THPATT diode oscillator, it is necessary to
take special steps to suppress parasitic self-oscillation. Among them, the use of
additional control elements and stabilizing circuits is of the greatest practical
significance.

Control elements can be made in the for. of short-circuited or open-circuited loop,
quarter-wave transformers, inductive or capacitive stops, stubs, etc. The regula-
tory control of a circuit.consiste in choosing the point of insertion of the control
elenents so that the natural resonant frequencies of the circuit prove to be shifted
relative to those frequencies where the inpedance of the diode exceeds its input
resistance. To realize such tuning, one must use several control elements, because
of which, the tuning process is extremely complicated. In this case, tuning does
not guarantee the stability of a stage with a sharp change in the operating condi-
tions and operating mode (for example, temperature).

The indicated drawbacks are elniniated when stabilizing networks are used. A
stabilizing network consists of a stabilizing resonant circuit Lccc which is tuned
to the working frequency, and a ballast resistor 35.1. The diode is connected to
the passive external circuit through the stabilizing network (figure 19.9). The
effect of the stabilizing network consists in the fact that at all frequencies, the
exception of the working frequency, the negative resistance of the diode is
canceled by the positive ballast resistance, and the active resistance, which is
connected to the external passive circuit on the diode side, is positive (for this,
the ballast resistance should satisfy the stability condition). At the working
frequency, the ballast resistance is shunted by the stabilizing tuned circuit and

has no influence on the negative resistance connected to the external circuit.

Thus, in the circuit which contains a stabilizing network, the coupling of the
negative resistance to the passive external circuit takes place only at the working
frequency. In this case, the possibility of the excitation of parasitic self-
oscillation is eliminated.

He will note that the schenatic of the stabilizing network shown in Figure 19.9 is
not the only one possible. At the present tine, several variants of such circuits
are known. Their structural design can-alsoube diverse.

- 356 -

morhaatusrontv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering what has been said above, as well as taking into account the fact that
the resistance of an active phased antenna array radiator. i.e.,of the load,
changes with a change in the frequency practically arbitrarily outside the range of
working frequencies, one can consider the circuit of a microwave network for the
output stage of a module using an lHPATT diode with a stabilizing network as the
most promising configuration.

19.4. Structural Design Principles

Based on the properties treated above for IMPATT diodes and the specific features
of their external microwave networks, one can formulate general requirements placed
on the structural design of an IMPATT diode oscillator (GLPD). These are: assuring
the specified working frequency, operational mode and operating stability, as well
as the transmission of the power developed by the diode to the load with minimal
losses in the specified range of frequencies, corresponding to the spectrum of the
transmitted signals.

It is correspondingly necessary to provide a resonator or transmission line section
in the structure which is coupled to the IMPATT diode and the load, as well as
elements for coupling the diode to the resonator, elenents for coupling to the
input signal source and the load, an impedance transformer and adjusting elements.

The structural design of individual components depends substantially on the type of
resonator used.

As a rule, a ferrite circulator (in reflective type amplifiers) or individual
coupling elements: capacitive stubs, inductive loops, diffraction holes, etc. (in
self-excited oscillators and through transmission type amplifiers) are used for
coupling to the load and the input signal source.

The correct fastening of the diode in the resonator is ef-considerable importance_
in the structural design. In this case, a good heat sink should be provided as
well as minimal contact resistance in the plane where the diode is joined to the
resonator. A special clasping terminal is usually employed to secure the diode,
where this terminal is fastened in a holder nut, installed in the most massive
wall of the resonator. The diode is inserted in the clamp so that the contact to
it is made along the lateral surface of the diode package. In this case, the
thermal conductivity of the clamp should no worse than the thermal conductivity of
copper. Examples of the structural design of diode fasteners are shown in Figure
19.10.

A diode is usually mounted in a resonator so that the number of parasitic reso-
nances is reduced. Resonators with a reduced cross-section are used for this
purpose or the dimensions of the resonator are reduced at the diode insertion point.

An IMPATT diode oscillator is realised most simply by using a coaxial resonator
[6] as shown in Figure 19.10a. The IMPATT diode (l) is installed in a gap in the
center conductor (2) close to the short-circuited wall which forms the heat sink.

- 357 -
son omcw. use ONLY
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

_—.._—..——_ _‘

J. ‘ 2

J; M. “W‘“\\\.::-

 

      
    
  

175/
' 'I/

 

4o emula
o (f)

—

Figure 19.10. Examples of ths structural design of nicrovave devices
using MATT diodes.

Key: a. Coaxial structure;
I). Toroidnl;
c,d. Waveguide structure;
e. Stripline; .
f. Structure with several control elements.

‘Ihe resonator is coupled to the load through a stop (3), and the length of the
resonator is chang ed and tuned to resonance by means of moving the short-circuit-
ing piston (6); the coupling to the load is adjmted by neans of changing the
position of the coupling stub (5).

The structural design of an DIPATI' diode oscillator with a toroidal resonator [1]
is shown in Figure 19.1011. The IMPA‘l'l' diode (l) is wanted in the center of the

-358-

l-‘OllOl'ﬂCMLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resonator (2), and coupled to the lead through the-coupling window (3). The
coupling to the load is adjusted by the positioning of the stub (lo). Tuning to
resonance is accomplished by means of the screw (6). Power is fed to the diode
through the microwave filter (5).

Waveguide structures of 3 cm band IMPATT diode amplifiers are shown in Figures
19.10c and d, [5, 7]. The cross-section of a rectangular waveguide for the 3 cm
band with a reduced height (1) and an IMPATT diode (2) inserted in if: is shown in
Figure 19.10c. The waveguide height is 1.27 am. The transition to a standard

10 x 23 mm waveguide (3) is made through an expanding conical section taper (4).
The coupling to the load is adjusted by means of a saving tuning screw (5). In
the structure shown in Figure 19.10d, the resonator (l) is formed by a rectangular
waveguide section, inclosed between two semi-reflecting inductive stops (2). The
lHPATT diode (3) is inserted in the center of the resonator, where the waveguide
height is reduced at the point of diode insertion. The coupling to the load and
the input signal source is adjusted by changing the width of the inductive stop
window. The tuning is accomplished by means of the fine tuning screws (10).

In the stripline structure [6, 8] shown in Figure 19.10e, the IHPATT diode (l) is
mounted in the heat sink plate (2) to which the microstrip line circuit (3) is
secured. The microwave resonator is formed by a section of 50 ohm line (4), to
one side of which the MATT diode is connected, while the elements for capaci-
tive coupling to the load (5) and the impedance transformer (6) which matches the
input impedance of the 50 ohm load line of the circulator to the diode impedance
is connected to the other side. The coupling to the synchronising signal source
and the load is accomplished through the input and output 50 ohm line of the circu-
lator. Bias voltage is fed to the diode through a low pass filter, formed by
elements (7 and 8) with stabilizing resistance (9). The circuit is tuned and
adjusted by means of the regulating loops (10).

Examples of structural designs of coaxial resonators with several tuning elements
in the form of movable quarterdwave transformers and short-circuited loops [9] are
shown in Figure 19.10f. The use of additional control elements makes it possible
to obtain several resonances in the microwave circuit of the diode, the natural
frequencies of which fall in a definite ratio, for example, 1:2 and for this
reason, such structures can be used to increase the diode efficiency either in an
IHPATT mode or when exciting oscillations in a TRAPATI' mode.

The structure of an IMPATT diode oscillator with a stabilising network [10] is
shown in Figure l9.lla, b. Here, the stabilizing resonator (l) which is also
simultaneously the load resonator, is formed by a section of rectangular waveguide
inclosed between the shorting wall (2) and inductive stop (3), through which
coupling to the load is accomplished. The IMPATT diode (6) is inserted in coaxial
line (5) which is coupled to the resonator through the coupling hole in the short-
cirCuiting wall. The matched load (6) which is used as a ballast resistor is
inserted at the other end of the coaxial line. If the impedance introduced into
the coaxial line from the resonator is represented as the impedance of a series

LC circuit with a load resistance R“, then the equivalent circuit of the oscilla-
tor can be represented as shown in Figure l9.llc. As can be seen from this figure,

- 359 -
FOR omcm. use ONLY
a...” ,. morncuwseouu

 

Figure 19.11. Structural design of an MATT diode oscillator
with a stabilising network and its equivalent circuit.

the circuit Intches that shown in Figure 19.9 if the LC network is treated as a
stabilizing and load network simultaneously.

Such a structure can be used as the major couponent in the structural design of a
sultiple diode output amplifier nodule using power addition.

19.5. Principles of Design Calculations of IRAN Diode Microwave Devices

The goal of the design is to obtain a specified output power Pa at the working
frequency fo. He shall analyze the dependence of the power delivered by the p-n
junction of an WATT diode on the Dc and ac currents flowing through the junction.
By ewloying the theoretical relationship for the negative resistance of the p-n
jmction as a function of the mnplitude of the current flowing through it [1]
(19.15) and (19.16), we determine the approximation paraneters q and c from
the condition for a satisfactory approximation of the function 0(1.) in the range
of large snplitudes (In 3 1‘). We define the parameter q as the value of 0(1.)
when I. - 1:: 0 lo (II/Ix - l + 82). The paraneters q and c depend on the
quantity 82 and are quite well approximted by functions of the forn:

q=0,8 (l—p'); c-o,g+'3(pt)s.' (19.24)

We determine the power delivered by the p-n junction, taking (19.15) and (19.16)
into account, as:

-360 -

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Px-0.51£IR;;(9)I(9461&)- (19.25)

An optimal value of the current amplitude I. - Iu opt corresponds to the maximum
value of this power, Pd max» where we determine this optﬂnal current amplitude by
differentiating (19.25) with respect to In and equating the derivative to zero:

1.....- 3,; , (19.26)

By substituting the value found for I. opt in (19.25), we find the maximum power:

_ (19.27)
P‘uu -0.125|R'.n(0) lq’l‘.

Expressions (19.25), (19.27) and (19.1) are justified with the assumption that
avalanche breakdown occurs simultaneously and uniformly over the entire area of

the p-n junction, something which is valid only for ideally uniform p-n junctions.
As a rule, actual diodes are not absolutely uniform. Nonuniform breakdown leads to
nonuniformity in the current distribution over the area of the p-n junction,
because of which, it is as if a portion of the area is cut off, which leads to a
reduction in the current flowing in the diode circuit and its output power.

It is rather difficult to take the actual current distribution over the p-n junc-
tion area into account, and for this reason, the integral effect of the inhomo-
geneity of a p-n junction can be taken into account if the concept of the effec-
tive or acting area of the p-n junction is introduced, defining it as:

5a - s/n s.-SIn. (19.28)

where the coefficient n depends on the degree of nonuniformity of the p-n
junction and can be determined based on a comparison of the experinental and theo-
retical values of the negative resistance and the maximum diode output power; n I
- 1.8 to 2.7 for 3 cm band silicon mesa structures.

Taking (19.28) into account and substituting the expressions for the p-n junction
negative resistance (19.1) and the approximating function (19.26) into (19.27),
we derive an expression for the maximum value of the diode output power:

M (19.29)

P .-A' v'
"" a 0.9+3(W

where ' l—ess-O

A-0.08-.-c- 0

 

o

- 361 -
ma omcuu. uszomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It follows fro-a (19.29) that an optimal value of the parameter 831,: - 0.325 or an
optimi- value of the direct current 10 o t - 0.325 corresponds to the maxim
delivered power. For MATT diodes whic are known at the present tine, as a rule,
10 opt exceeds the nexim permissible current 10 , and therefore, the power

Pg max is limited in practice by the pernissible egg.“ operating conditions of a
d ode.

For to < 10 r: the dependence of the output power on the direct current is close
to a linear unction:

d an: o ﬂush!“ \ (19'3”

where the coefficient k a 4.6 VIA for a 2A706 type diode.

The range of frequencies where the power does not fall below an indicated level,
for example, 100 I” for a 2A706A diode, is usually indicated in the data sheet.

In this case, the power delivered by the diode may also be greater in the center
of the working band. He will note that the use of a diode is pernitted in a wider
range of frequencies, however, the data sheet value of the output power is not
guaranteed in this case.

For a diode with set para-stars (A - const.), by solving equation (19.29) one can
determine the parueter 82, and consequently, the direct current 10 needed to

obtain the specified diode output power: '
ﬂ’as—-——-—"—"! ~V — . +1).
296+" (19.31)

where h. _-.

It follows from (19.31) that the maxim value of the parameter a is linited
by the condition a .<_ 0.18, which is physically explained by the limitation on the
maxim output power which can be obtained per unit area of the WAIT diode p-n
junction.

In the presence of losses in the external microwave circuit, the power dissipated
in the load is:

Plo‘d - Puap‘mn.p (19.32)

where n is the resonant circuit efficiency (the efficiency of the external
nicrowave circuit).

-362 -

roe omaAL use our
FOR OFFNJAI.USEloNLY

An optimal value of the p-n junction resistance corresponds to the taxi-as power
level produced by the an junction, where this resistance is defined as follows for
IIII . In opt taking (19.28), (19.15) and (19.16) into account:

RM»: == RMO) Ila/2. (19.33)

Since the amplitude balance condition (19.23a) must be met in the steady-state
self-excited oscillation mode, s definite load resistance corresponds to the maxi-

mum value of Pd u.,, where this resistance is transformed to the "terminals" of the
p-n junction:

81086 Opt Rp-ll opt R'”‘-ero:ul. (19.3“)

In the case of known diode package parameters Lg, Ck and R., this resistance can
always be referenced to the diode input terminals (19.5). Thus, in an osicllating
mode, the load resistance governs the amplitude of the current flowing through

the p-n junction, and is chosen so as to assure a maximum diode output power for a
specified supply current 10.

In this case, since the negative resistance of an IHPATT diode p-n junction is
rather low (approximately 10 ohms), while the load resistance also includes the
diode loss resistance Rs (a few ohms), the attainable microwave circuit efficiency
is usually low:

“k _<_ 0.5 -- 0.6 n'<0,5m0'5, (19.35)

The reactance of the external microwave circuit X“ [xlogd], transformed to the
"terminals" of the p-n junction, is determined from the phase balance condition
at the working frequency (19.23b).

The quantity X n (or X4) in the operating mode is drtermined by relationships
(19.2) - (19.5).snd (19.6) for a specified supply current of lo - const.

when designing an IHWATT diode oscillator, the working frequency f0 and the
requisite power Pload are usually specified Based on the relationships given
here, the following design procedure can be recommended for an oscillator:

1. We select a diode for which the output power at the specified frequency is
greater than (or equal to) the requisite value PH [Pleadl- We determine the
characteristic current Ix (19.14) at the specified frequency.

2. we determine the power delivered by the diode using formula (19.32), specifying

the efficiency of the external microwave circuit, "k' based on relationship
(19.35).

- 353 -

FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
3. He determine the value of the parameter 82 needed to obtain the requisite power
Pd ..; and the diode direct current 10 based on expressions (19.31) and (19.10).

If the diode operating current to is specified (for example, it is indicated for
the individual diode package), then the value of 82 can be determined from formula
(19.10). Usually, the value of the current corresponding to a definite indicated
input power Pa .‘1 is indicated on the data sheet. The current corresponding to
any other value of the output power, Pu glPa .‘3, is determined by relationship
(19.30), where the coefficient k is found for the indicated values of 10 and

P“ IIX'

we determine the maximum permissible diode current 10 pet (19.12) for the given
' temperature Tb, taking (19.13) into account, and we check for the condition that

10 < Io Per.

we determine the resistive component of the load impedance an using formulas
(19.34), (19.33), (19.28), (19.24) and (19.1).

5. We determine the reactive component of the load impedance Xn from formulas
(19.23) and (19.2).

6. We select the circuit configuration and structural design of the oscillator and
calculate the geometric dimensions of the oscillator microwave circuit components
for the known values of an, x“ and the diode package parameters Lg, Cu and as.

The design of an IHPATT diode amplifier coincides in many respects with the design
of an oscillator. We shall consider the specific the specific features of the
design calculations for a reflective type of IHWAIT diode amplifier, in which the
resonator containing the IMPATT diode is coupled to the input microwave signal
source and the load by means of a ferrite circulator as shown in Figure 19.12. If
the diode inserted in the resonator has a negative resistance, then the input
resistance of the resonator, which is the load on the line connecting the resonator
to the circulator is negative at the section a-a. In this case, the power of the
wave reflected from the resonator input exceeds the power of the incident wave,
which is equal to the power of the input signal source Pin, by an amount Py, which
is equal to the power delivered by the diode (without taking resonator losses

into account). In the absence of losses in the line connecting the resonator to
the circulator, and in the circulator, the power dissipated in the load, P3, is
equal to the power of the reflected wave, and consequently:

Pload ' Pin * Py " p..- ,,+P,. (19.36)

The power gain is the ratio:

“Wigwawi, (19.37)
I’ll . PM PI!
- 366 -

FOR‘051NC1AI.USII€NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J

Figure 19.12. A reflective type IHPATT
diode amplifier.

Key: 1' 1’incidenti
2- l’reflected'

l-

 

or, since the input signal source and the load are matched to the circulator:

KP"_P£L-IP.I'“ lo—g " (19.38)
Pm _ 8.1-0

Rere Pan and Pm are the reflected and incident wave power; 1‘. is the coefficient
of reflection from the reaonator input (at the section a-a); z. in the reaonator
input impedance; 9 is the characteristic impedance of the circulator input line.

If we neglect the losses in the reaonator, then the power dissipated at the
resonator input is equal to the power delivered by the diode:

P, n p” (19.39)

and the reflection factor from the resonator input is equal to the reflection
factor from the diode (at aection h-b):

P¢=P.Ia(2.—z‘)/(gn +1.). (19.500)

where z“ in the impedance of the-external circuit connected to the diode.

Taking (19.100) into account, we represent expression (19.38) in the fern:

K,._..l£u;'-.)'+ mu.» '-
(R.+r.)|+ux.+x,os '

From this we derive the following for the resonant frequency when the condition
Xload + xd ' °=

 

Km] “HI |'=|l:l-_“.|'.

RI+II '—a (19.41)

where a - «(l/1110.4 in the regeneration coefficient. (19.42)

'a 5". ”'niRn

~365-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uhen operating as an amplifier, the amplitude of the alternating current flowing
through the p-n junction, for a specified load resistance, increases with an
increase in the input signal power. In this case, since the diode resistance
decreases with an increase in the awlitude of the current, then the gain decreases
with an increase in the input signal power, as follows from (19.41). The power
delivered by the diode expressed as a function of the input signal power has a
aaxialum at a certain value Pin - Pin opt corresponding to the options: value of the
current amplitude I. I In opt (19.26).

To obtain the maximum output power, the amplifier operating conditions are chosen
so that Pin '- Pin opt. In this case, the power delivered by the diode does not
depend on the load resistance, as follows from (19.27), and this resistance is
determined from the condition for assuring the necessary gain at the requisite
output power.

The gain corresponding to the maxim output power is determined by the following
expression based on (19.41), (19.42), (19.33), (19.28), (19.24) and (19.1):

(19.43)

.-o, ..
Kpmu[(ll sol/REM! 0.60}

(I —0.5¢» VF; +0 +0.5.)

where
where Kpo is the small signal gain, defined by relationship (19.41) for low input
signal power levels (Pin << Pd 1.“).

It follows from (19.43) that the operating gain of an amplifier (the mode corres-
ponding to the maxim output power) is always less than the small signal value

and increases with an increase in the latter. When selecting the small signal
gain, it is necessary to take into account the fact that to assure amplifier stabi-
lity under actual operating conditions, the following condition should be met:

‘90 < 20 as 'Kp.<2o 115. (19.44)

We derive the expression for the power of the input signal source and the power
dissipated in the load resistance in the maxim output power output mode taking
(19.39), (19.34) and (19.37) into account:

Pm» - P. m.l(Kpm-l), (19.45)

pm, - p"... KWKKr m- 1)- (19 46)

when designing an awlifier, just as an oscillator, the values of f0 and P10“:
are usually specified. The following design procedure can be recommended for an
amplifier in a naximum power output node based on the relationships given above.

- 366 ..
son omcuL Us: ONLY
FOR‘OFT1C1A1.lEﬂECM9LY

1. Assuming Kp opt >> 1 and taking P10“ opt - Pd max based on (19.46), we select
a diode which assures the requisite output power at the specified frequency and
determine its characteristic current Ix, employing expression (19.14).

2. We determine the parameters 82 and q from fort-alas (19.31) and (19.24) as well
as the value of the diode direct current Io from formla (19.10).

3. Having specified the value of no in accordance with expression (19.44), we
determine Kp 0?; from formula (19.43) as well as the input signal power Pop: and
the power dissipated in the load, Pload opt from formulas (19.45), (19.46),
(19.4) and (19.27).

4. We determine the resistive component of the load impedance Rload from formlas
(19.42). (19.41), (19.33), (19.28), (19.24), (19.5) and (19.1).

5. We determine the reactive component of the load impedance X10“: from formulas
(19.23a), (19.6) and (19.2).

6. We calculate the structural design paramters of the microwave network from
the specified values of the load impedance.

- 367 -
son oméut use ONLY
Fint¢ﬂﬂﬂ(lAL|JSE(MVLY

MICROWAVE HARDHARB

 

szc'uou a

Chapter 20. THE STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF HICROHAVE HYBRID INTEGRAIED CIRCUIT

COMPONENTS
20.1. General Information

Elements with lumped parameters,
distributed paraneters.
lines are used in the microwave
frequencies above 300 H32.

The use of elements with lumped parameters in hybrid 16'

of the success of modern filn technology

inductance coils and capacitors as well as with
in the form of sections of unbalanced strip transmission
band in hybrid integrated circuits (618) at

s becane possible because

which makes it possible to assure a

high resolution when applying very narrow conducting strips on a dielectric

substrate.

     
 

0 (3) 55/” (1)
m K
an
an 2)
m
an
2
to (ﬂé;é$z3’;\\\
J”I J J 7 a
g/r
. Gal 0

Figure 20.1. The Q of the components of
nicrowave circuits as a
function of frequency.

Key: 1. C- l de (plate caps-
citor):

2. Stripline elements;

3 c - l de (film);

6 L - 1.1 nﬂy (small
strips);

L - 6.3 nﬂy (spiral).

5.

50 to 100, while it is 100 to 600 for £11
sufficient for any circuits of practical
wave amplifiers and oscillators.

losses in the elements also increase
surface of the conductors.

However,
the fabrication of the elements increase wi

Inductance coils and capacitors have

the properties of elements with lumped
parameters if their geometric dimensions
are small as compared to the working
wavelength x: approximately 0.05 to
0.01 l [1, 3]. If this condition is met,
then the well known procedure and for-
mulas for design calculations of coils
and capacitors operating at lower fre-
quencies can be used in the calculation
of the inductance of coils and the
capacitance of capacitors.

Planar printed circuit inductance coils
of various shapes and capacitors in the
form of plate (three-layer) or comb
(single-layer) structures are usually
employed in hybrid IC's using microwave
components with lumped parameters.
Ready-made outboard capacitors, for
example, niniature noninductive KlO-éz
capacitors, are rather widely used in
hybrid 16's.

The Q of flat inductance coils at fre-
quenciea of from 1 to 8 cu: amounts to
m capacitors, which is altogether
devices, for example, transistor micro-
the technological difficulties in

th an increase in frequency and the

where these losses are due to the small

- 353 _
momdaunaouu
FOI‘DFFEJAI.U$B(MVLY

   

     
   

    
   
   
  
   

..... —— _'/l_/I/Il[ ml

 

:LI ‘
'Qitiﬁiw

  
  
 
  

. 1‘ .
\\\

  
   

. _—.—-----~—._...
,' u

   
  
  
  
 

     

 

N
[I /\-o ..l
I ~o'\-w.-.«o/
ﬁ. //2".“.‘,‘."“"’

Figure 20.2. The hybrid integrated circuit for a decileter band,
two stage transistor power amplifier (3, 5, K are the
connection points for the leads of transistors T1 and T2
[the emitter, base and collector leads respectively1).

  
   
  

“"~\‘

8‘6
,k

\\

\ i

------

    

  

  

“"."“‘

    
 

   
   
   
   
 

M\\\\\\‘\\‘
7'7. I

c ‘‘‘‘‘ x§
I

  

  
 
    
     
  

:55} uneasy

a“ I

     
 
  

': \V“ ~ ’ é’l‘h ,0

    

 
 
    
  

a

1
I
&\\\\\\W\\V .\\\\\\\\\\\\V\

Figure 20.3. The circuit board atruc- Figure 20.6. The hybrid integrated

ture of a transistor power circuit of a transistor,

amplifier (Pout - 4 watts: deciaeter band power

f - 6H2). amplifier (Pout is 7 to
9 watts).

 

Figure 20.5. The circuit board structure of a power amplifier using
two transistors with power adding in the output circuit.

- 369 -

lill€ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sections of an asymmetrical strip transmission line - so-called stripline ele-
ments - are the most widespread microwave components of hybrid Ic's. Their
major advantages are the rather simple structural design and reliability. The
substrates of stripline elements usually have a high relative dielectric permit-
tivity (c > 7). Such elements have been given the name of microstripline ele.
ments.

Microwave elements using asymmetrical striplines at frequencies of from 1 to 10
as: have a Q of 100 to 400. Curves for the Q are shown in Figure 20.1 as a
function of frequency for stripline elements and elements with lumped parameters.
The graphs show that at frequencies above 3 to 5 GHz, the Q of stripline elements
is higher than the Q of elements with lumped parameters.

When designing hybrid IC's, the choice of elements with lumped parameters or

stripline elements depends on the requisite electrical and structural design

characteristics of the hybrid Ic's. Combinations of the various elements are
frequently used in practical microwave circuits.

The fine tuning of hybrid Ic's entails considerable technological difficulties.
For this reason. it is extremely important in the design of hybrid 10's to
execute the structural design calculations of the elements with the least error
so as to almost completely preclude substantial adjustments to the fabricated
circuitry. Examples of hybrid Ic's using microwave power transistors are shown
in Figures 20.2-20.S.

20.2. The Asymmetrical Transmission Stripline

In the fabrication of printed circuits with asymmetrical strip transmission lines,
the conducting strips and the metallised surface are made on opposite sides of
the dielectric substrate (Figure 20.6).

A mode close to the T mode propagates in an asymmetrical stripline. Since the
dielectric permittivity of the substrate is usually rather high, then the field
of the mode propagating along the line is primarily concentrated in the dielec-
tric under the conducting strip. The edge field which occurs during the
propagation of the wave in the line where this field is due to the finite
width w of the conducting strip, is partially in the air medium above the
dielectric. The presence of this field leads to radiation power losses and the
creation of parasitic coupling between the conducting striplines forming the
circuit of the microwave device. It is recommended [1] that the conducting
strips be spaced a distance apart equal to three times the thickness of the
dielectric substrate to attenuate this coupling.

To reduce the losses to radiation and eliminate the influence of the line radia-
tion field on the operation of adjacent microwave units, a device using asymmet-
rical striplines is frequently housed in a closed metal package, which plays

the part of a shield. The presence of a shield can exert a marked influence on
the operational conditions of a stripline, leading to a change in the wavelength
in the line and to the excitation of higher modes in it. In particular, a

group of surface waves is excited in a stripline having a substrate made of a

— 37o -
FOR Must use ONLY
FOI:OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY

material with a high relative dielec-

tric permittivity e. The critical fre-

quency of a low order surface mode [1]

is:

Figure 20.6. Cross-section through an
asymmetrical strip trans-
mission line.

_ " r—_'_75 57:1, (20.1)
Key: 1. Conducting strip; hwlrful 6/‘h a I I I t

2. Dielectric substrate; where c - 3 - 1011 III/sec is the speed
3. Hetalized surface. of light in free space; h is the sub-
-- strate thickness in mm.

 

for [63‘] '

it; A!

3 eff ' The substrate thickness for which a sur-
5; face wave appears at the working fre-

2

M quency f can be determined from formula
I J (20.1):
4/ «lat mm 2 w m
h...-75IIVe-l- (20.2)

Figure 20.7. The relative effective

dielectric permittivity In order to prevent operation close to

as a function of the the critical frequency, the substrate
ratio w/h for various thickness of a stripline should be less
values of t. than hmax'

The influence of a shield on the operation of an asymmetrical stripline can be
reduced by selecting the distance from the stripline to the walls of the shield.
Thus, the shield height 8 above a stripline should be considerably greater than
the substrate thickness. For a line where a > 7. it is recommended that H ;

6...th [01‘]. The side walls of a shield should be spaced from the edges of
the stripline at a distance at least equal to 3h.

When a nondispersive wave close to a T mode propagates in an asymmetrical strip-
line, the wavelength in the line is [2]:

X = *o/“ett' Kuhn/«7.. 00-”

where 10 is the wavelength in free space; t ff is the relative effective dielec-
tric permittivity. The quantity ‘eff depends on the ratio wih, the dielectric
permittivity of the substrate material c, the configuration of the boundary

between the air (c - l) and the dielectric (c > 1) media and can be calculated
from the approximate formula [31:

e.._ - 0-5 (a + I) + 0.5 (a — I) (I.+ Iowa-03. (2“)

Based on the estimate given in the literature [2], the error in calculating
lceff using formula (20.6) amounts to 1.11. Curves for Jeeff are shown in
';gure 20.7 as a function of w/h for various values of the relative dielectric
permittivity of the substrate material.

- 371 -
FOR‘0FFICIAI.UEIE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When designing hybrid IC's using asymmetrical striplines, the quantity leaf;
serves as a measure of the decrease in the geometric dimensions of the conducting

stripline. Thus, when the electrical length of a line section 0 I Zilllo -
2sle/A is kept constant, the length 1: of a stripline se t with a substrate
made of a dielectric where c > 1 falls off by a factor ‘af times as compared
to the length l of the line section with an air dielectric (a - l):

1 ' l/Veeff le=‘=’/V¢:- (20.5)

c
‘ ' The characteristic impedance of an

asymmetrical stripline can be calculated
as follows [2]:

...,y.;. (20.6)

Here, 90 is the characteristic impedance
of a stripline where c - l, in ohms.
For w/h ; 1:

Po 3 60 In (Sh/w -|. all/4h). (20.7)

while for w/h > 1:

     

m.
20.8
0’ ulh-l-2,42-~0.41Ialu l-(l—Inlmf ' ( )

   

a a.
a; a: 40 MM 2 o ”/0
The error in calculating s using these
Figure 20.8. The characteristic imped- formulas amounts to g_o.252 when wlh -
ance of an asymmetrical 0...10 and 1,11 when w/h > 10 [2].
stripline as a function
of the ratio w/h for Curves for the characteristic impedance
various values of c. p are shown in Figure 20.8 as a function
of w/h for various values of the relative
dielectric permittivity of the substrate, where these curves were calculated in
accordance with formula (20.6), using formulas (20.4), (20.7) and (20.8). It
was assumed in the calculations that the thickness of the conducting strip was
t - 0. In reality, t is a finite quantity. It is sufficient in practical cases
for the thickness t to be 3 to 5 times greater than the penetration depth A
(A is the distance from the conductor surface at which the amplitude of the
current density falls off by a factor of e - 2.718 times). The values of A for
various metals are given in Table 20.1, where the major characteristics of the
conductors are also shown. When w/h > 0.1, this thickness has little influence

on the characteristic impedance of a line. and for this reason, one can assume
t s 0 when computing it.

The characteristic impedance of an asymmetrical stripline (if it is not specified
in the design plan) is frequently chosen equal to 50 ohms for convenience in

- 372 -

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1kl.lﬂﬂ5(ﬂ¥LY
FOROFFICIALUSBONLY

TABLE 20.1.

     
   

Ag 6.| llnoxas p0°r

u. 6.8 0am Mons Very poor
Au Ll Ta ate -
M 3.72 llamas Poor

w 1.78 Xomsaa Good

M0 L7“

Ni IJO

(3 0J7 l meuxumuus VII? 9006
TI 0.64 | “.0 TI asc m W

Note: f is the frequency in as.

Key: 1. Conductor material; 1
2. Thermal coefficient of expansion, 10"6 'C'

[Conductivity o, 107 mho/m].

connecting the line to radiofrequency connectors and individual microwave units.
The use of line sections having a high characteristic impedance, and this means
with very narrow conducting strips, is not desirable because of the technological

difficulties in their fabrication and the increase in the attenuation in the
line.

The attenuation in an asymmetrical stripline, a (in dB per unit of length) is
composed of the attenuation due to power losses in the conductor at rsdiofre-
quencies o I, in the dielectric “d and the losses to radiation “rad- The attenua-
tion in a conductor. assuming that the rsdiofrequency current flows primarily

in a surface layer of thickness A, can be approximately determined from formula
[016, 3]:

artisan/bu}. (20.9)

while the attenuation in the dielectric is:

ac z: 2.73 Va" A" lg 45. (20. 10)

Here, R11 is the specific surface resistance of the current conducting layer in
ohms per unit area; tan6 is the dielectric loss angle tangent.

It is difficult to estimate the attenuation in a line due to radiation and it is
frequently determined experimentally.

In asymmetrical striplines where e > 7 and with low losses, the major source of
attenuation is the losses on. An analysis of formula (2Q.9) shows that to

- 373 -
son omn‘ms om!
FOIIHWHCUU.USE(NQLY

reduce the losses in a line, one must choose sufficiently thick substrates and
wide conducting strips. However. the thickness h in this case should not come
close to hmsx‘ Moreover, increasing h and w leads to an increase in the line
dimensions, something which is undesirable in the structural design of hybrid
IC's. To reduce the impact of the thickness of a conducting strip on the
value of 0., it is recommended that t be chosen equal to or greater than 3A to

SA.

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 20.2.
Substrate . _- | no .. I “II! -\ I '
"2'1"“ __ _ _.___ .. x" H w" “1“.” TKIlI-_ "—1
on new . . ' " "'
“mm _ " [.1I0 llu. 1-101. luv/(xx). m (2)7“?
POM-km: Imam... 9.11.9.3 140-! 25 31 7 75
e (.1 up 13.2 no“ 'é’ ' -
Sapphgitg Ca npllt 9.3...w.| I-IO" 2|..f2s $3"
on a)“ 3g”)? 5I0-w-4 13,4 a,
.. o. ...l.2 40-0 -
Broker-it I} mcpm 6,4...0,6 ((2...5).Io-‘ 2.23025 r
51'32-1 (: 324 I0 (mush-I04 Low 32
tTmLI k25u.L6 (2”.I)JO" L3L.J.4 m
cum-I 8.2 3540-0 an 5 so
run-2.8 0JIMI‘2.8 2.8 15-104 ' m
oJIAII1.2 7.2 1540-! m
oJIMIIo l0 1540-. an:
owl/um. w 1540-4 250

 

Key: 1. Coefficient of thermal conductivity, 10'3 H/ mm ' 'c);
2. Thermal coefficient of linear expansion. 10' 'C‘l.

When applying a conducting stripline to a dielectric substrate, the adhesion of
the metal to the dielectric is taken into account. Because of the fact that
copper, aluminum, gold and silver, which have a poor adhesion (see Table 20.1)
are most frequently used for the conductors, a thin film of metal having a

high specific resistance is initially applied to the dielectric substrate to
improve the adhesion. The presence of such a film (sublayer) of thickness t1,
which is comparable to the penetration depth A in this film, leads to an
increase in the radiofrequency resistance in the conducting strip. If t1 << A1
(tlldl < 0.2), which is typical of many asymmetrical stripline structures, then
the sublayer introduces neglectably low losses.

To reduce the losses in microwave elements using asymmetrical striplines.
materials are to be used for the conductors which have a sufficiently low
specific surface resistance (see Table 20.1) and dielectrics with low losses and
good thermal conductivity (see Table 20.2). The Q of such elements at frequencies
of l to 10 Gﬂz, without taking radiation losses into account, amounts to 100 to

600.

The permissible DC current density, 10 per: in a conducting stripline is deter-
mined by the thermal mode of the aicrowave circuit elements of the amplifier/

oscillator. During the design work, the following condition must be met: 30 per
> 30 op, where 50 op is the DC current density in the conducting stripline in

- 374 -
FOI!0FFNJA1.USBINVLY
INJI10FFICIAI.IIBE:(H‘LY

 

IABLE 20.3.

new“ of Fabricating the Feniasible Direct Current Density Almz
Conducting Strip Sitall Ceramic

Vacuum depostion 30 200

Electrolytic build-up 30 200

Foil application 50 400

 

[Sitall: ceramic glass similar to pyroceram]

the operating mode. The value of Jo er depends on the substrate material and
the method of fabricating the line. n order to increase 30 er' materials are'
to be used ftr the substrates which have sufficiently good thgrmal conductivity.
Some approximate data on the permissible DC current density, 30 per, are given
in Table 20.3 and in the literature [6].

20.3. Printed Circuit Inductance Coils

When designing microwave networks around elements uith lumped parameters, the
requisite inductances of the circuits can be obtained using sections of metal
strips with a rectangular cross-section: so-called strip single turn inductance
coils (Figure 20.9) or strips bent in the shape of a meander (Figure 20.10) and
in the shape of a spiral (Figure 20.11).

0
t
I? </' K33“, #1
-J L." 1* ' «'
,, (h) ‘\-'

I) (b)

 

Figure 20.9. Stripline inductance coils.

 

Figure 20.10. A meander type inductance Figure 20.11. Spiral coil.
coil.

Stripline single turn inductance coils (Figure 20.9b) have inductances from 0.5

to a nanohenries [1]. Flat spiral coils provide for greater inductances (up to
100 any), where square spiral coils (Figure 20.11b) make it possible to obtain

a greater inductance than in the case of circular coils (Figure 20.11a) for a
specified area of the coils on a printed circuit board. The inductance of a

coil in the shape of a meander (Figure 20.10) reaches 100 nﬂy. However, parasitic

- 37S -
FORGHHNCIA1.USEINVLY
resonances are observed in these coils at frequencies substantially higher than
the working frequency because of the linear sections s and b of a coil, which
at high frequencies then behave as line sections with distributed parameters.

The Q of stripline single turn and spiral coils at frequencies above 1 CH:

amounts to 50-100 (see Figure 20.1). Spiral inductance coils have a higher Q
than single turn coils. but also a greater interturn capacitance. The Q of

coils for a fixed inductance value increases in proportion to /? up to frequencies
of 5 to 6 Gus, and then falls off with an increase in frequency.

The inductance and Q of a coil depend on its geonetric dimensions. as well as

on the presence of metallisstion on the bottom side of the dielectric substrate.
even when the metallised side of the dielectric substrate is a considerable
distance from the plane of the coil. To preclude the influence of the metalli-
zation on coil inductance, the spacing to the netslliaed surface under the coil
for a substrate with c = 10 should exceed the width of the coil conductor w by

a factor of more than 20 tines [1]. In those practical cases where this require-
nent is not met for technological reasons, the calculation of coil inductance
must be made taking into account the presence of the netallised surface. Metalli-
zation in the same plane that the inductance coil is in has little impact on

its inductance, and it is sufficient in practice to sake the distance from the
coil to the adjacent metallised layer equal to 5 times the width of the coil
conductor [1).

As a result of calculating a coil for

a specified inductance, it is necessary

to select its geometric dimensions such
that they permit obtaining the requisite
inductance and which are technologically
convenient to realise.

Design Calculations of Coil Inductance.
Formulas are given in Table 20.4 for
calculating the inductance L or the per
unit length inductance L1 of coils, n2?
shape and designation of the dimensions
of which are given in Figures 20.9 -
20.11.

 

Figure 20.12. The per unit length
inductance L1 as a The curves for the per unit length induc-
function of the ratio tance L1 are shown in Figure 20.12 as a
l/w for a single turn function of the ratio l/w when t - 0 for
inductance coil without a single turn coil, calculated using the
taking the strip thick- for-ula given in Table 20.4. Values of
ness into account. the coefficients Cn used in the calcula-
tion of the inductance of meander type
coils are given in Table 20.5. The error
in the determination of the inductences
for these coils on the order of tens of

nanohenries anounts to 3'21, while it runs up to 62 for inductances of about
80 to 100 nﬂy.

Key: 1. L1, nay/mu;
2. Lower scale;
3. Upper scale.

- 376 .-
sos omaat'uss ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 20.10
I
' s lusty-nu “(Wilt-I My" Rana “I‘m
Co 1 Shag Design female WWn
Single m I . ”mm"
L. :0.2(ln |-l.l93 l-
(wmnmmas I H l L
«rm 20-9- “- 6) , . cl l I..
rig. 20.94:, . " “2*" —)
Oh I I '
(1) ')'2'"u"32(h)]'
[lpswyronums .L'. (1 (=0.
FIJI-.13 nan urtaa- Ic I.
.uwponamu-R no- I“ -. 0 6% l ,T.
twsocrun _'_._____, 4
(pet. 20.9. a) ul2ll+0.9 [-0.3IB In (um-l.
—.___ . '2' "2, ‘30
-I 0.94) In
Meander (2)," 0.10m In'zu/m -C,.). (:0.
Mum: n-uucno ”cannon ucmupomﬁ nu- .1 1, -. .
«w: mm; .'..... Mnml b ' " l (n "(a a)

Pig. 20.10 C. ~tu. 1.60. 20.5

 

L- - 5(0 |-J)'u‘l(l51)—-7nl). (20.

“mun upyraas
aqua. Dr.-d l~(2n—l)s-|~b. L—M [d+0.53(2n—l)|

""" 20"" ‘0 n-—-mcan “non n i! umber
0 turns

 

 

[Lu-(‘13:) uun- I“ ‘6“; +2; 2:05: "I12; (z 0’ (—4.. [.1 ‘.
Flu! run I. _-. . _ g . .
lr-r. mug?) n—mo comma -l-0.5s(2n—I.5)|

niethenmlberotturns

[lpuuur-nnuulle. Bee nmﬂuuc new” unmet supammcn n Inna-m-
M. uluyuramm L — s nammpu. mmusu suntan-n L.—-n ”mm-up»

ll DWINTP .

 

 

All of the linear dimensions of the coils are expressed in millimeters;

Rate:
the inductance L is in nanohenries and the per unit length inductance L1
is in nanohenries per millimeter.

Key: 1. Rectangular strip above a metslized surface (Figure 20.9c);

2. n is the number of elements of s meander line of length to; Cu - see

Table 20.5;
3. A flat circular spiral (Figure 20.113);

1.. A flat square spiral (Figure 20.11b).

- 377 -
l-‘OI! onion us: ONLY
FINICIHHCIAI.IEIICHVLY

TABLE 20.5.

 

...———

.. -..

||2|3 4

Ca IL?“ '3.” I 6.22 I 7.60 I 9.70 l0.9¢ll3.38|

  

  

l2

  

”ml “3.83

 

The determination of the geometric dimensions of flat spiral coils for a
specified inductance L is made using successive approximations, in which certain
geometric dimensions of the coil are specified based on structural design and
production process considerations and the missing dimensions are determined using
the formulas for L and D. For example, having specified the ratio D/d and using
the formula for L. the number of turns n is determined. Then the conductor
width u is chosen based on production process considerations and the requisite
coil pitch s is found by using the formula for D. If it is convenient to realize
this pitch, then the design calculation is terminated at this point.

In order to be able to change the inductance of a coil, part of the coil conduc-
tor is subdivided into sections having contact pads for the connection of tap
conductors to them (Figure 20.11b).

Design Calculations of the Q of an Inductance Coil. The quality factor of a coil
Q - erL/r for a specified frequency f and inductance L is determined by its
resistance r, which reflects the actual radiofrequency power losses in the induc-
tance coil. This resistance is composed of the coil conductor resistance for

the radiofrequency current, rm, the resistance introduced by power losses in

the dielectric substrate rd, the resistance introduced by radiation power losses,
etc. It can be assumed in practice that in a properly designed typical structure,
the power losses in a coil are determined primarily by the resistance r.. In
this case, the coil Q is:

 

42.”; : _.4-nI.I.-(m+l)l;
o.‘ m l0 —"ue..1 (20.11)

Here, k is a coefficient which takes into account the degree of nonuniformity in
the current distribution at the edges of the conducting strip. The value of k
is determined from the graph shown in Figure 20.13.

Figure 20.13. The curves for the
coefficient k which takes
into account the degree
of nonuniformity of the
current distribution at
the edges of the conducting
strip.
IKIICIHHIIA1.USE(HVLY

Expression (20.11) can be used to calculate flat inductance coils of various
shapes made from a conductor in the form of a metal strip with a rectangular
cross-section (Figure 20.9).

The Q of a single turn coil (Figure 20.9) increases with an increase in the

ratio w/l. while the per unit length inductance L1 decreases. It is frequently
desirable when structurally designing such a coil to obtain a sufficiently large
value of L1 at a quality factor of Q ; 50...100. For coils intended for opera-

tion at frequencies up to a few gigahertz, this condition can be met when w/l I
15...20.

when designing spiral inductance coils, one must consider the fact that the
increase in the conductor width w leads to an increase in the coil Q. If it is
desirable that the external diameter of the coil 0 be rather small with a high
value of the Q, then it is necessary to reduce the spacing between the turns.
This leads to an increase in the interwinding capacitance of the coil. An

analysis of the formulas for the Q of flat spiral coils shows that the maximum
Q is obtained when D/d - 5.

20.4. Capacitors

Primarily film plate capacitors (Figure 20.16), capacitors formed by a short
section of an asymmetrical stripline with a low characteristic impedance (Figure
20.15), comb capacitors (Figure 20.16) and outboard miniature ceramic capacitors
find applications in hybrid integrated circuit structures.

To tune a circuit by means of varying the capacitance. a block of parallel low
capacitance capacitors is made instead of a single capacitor of the requisite
nominal value. A structural design of a tunable film capacitor is shown in
Figure 20.14b. The upper plate is fabricated in the form of strips of different
sizes, the resoldering of which makes it possible to change the capacitance of
the capacitor [5].

3 [laws-4'00!” Iii-Olmtiic -- I ; -
in: s. m . he... . '
- ' a 12.! 1‘

Vﬂ‘."' ' ~ r ..
f a 43:”. gum/hm”
Akuewwww °1°°tr1°
a; (a) I) (b) ”(0)

Figure 20.14. Film plate capacitors.

The typical structure of a film capacitor. which is shown in Figure 20.14c, takes
the form of two metal plates. separated by a dielectric layer. The film capaci-
tors have a weak external electromagnetic field, and for this reason. can be
placed close to other microwave components.

The capacitance of film capacitors used in microwave circuits at frequencies of

up to about 2 GHz amounts from a few picofarads to hundreds of picofarads [4].
The Q of such capacitors changes depending on the nominal value and the quality

- 379 -
ma omcui. use our
FORIDFFKJALlEiIONLN

a in , é a rd FQ ’
+51% 4%— was?

'§
0) (a) 0 (b) a) (a) I) (b)

Figure 20.15. Capacitors formed by a Figure 20.16. A comb capacitor to
section of an asymmetrical obtain a series capaci-
stripline. tance in a microwave

circuit.

Key: a. With a fixed capaci-
tance;

b. With a variable capa-
citance (only the
conducting strip is
shown).

of the materials of the conductor and dielectric. To reduce losses in a capaci-
tor. metals with a low specific surface resistivity (see Table 20.1) and a low
loss dielectric are used for the plates. Aluminum is most frequently used for
the plates of capacitors. The dielectrics of film capacitors. besides a small
loss angle tangent, should have a high relative dielectric permittivity and
electrical strength. Silicon monoxide is most frequently used in the fabrication
of film capacitors (see Table 20.6).

A gap in a conducting strip (Figure 20.16a) produces a series capacitance in an
asymmetrical stripline. To obtain a considerably capacitance (more than a few
picofarads). the gap d should be quite small, something which is difficult to
execute in practice. Greater capacitances (up to 10 to 20 de) can be obtained
if a comb capacitor is used (Figure 20.16b). The capacitor formed by a gap in
a strip is a special case of this. Another capacitor structure intended for
creating a series capacitance in an asymmetrical stripline is shown in Figure
20.14a. The capacitor takes the form of two short sections of a stripline conduc-
tor which overlap lengthwise, where the sections are separated by a dielectric
layer. The overlap area of the plates in such capacitor structures does not
usually exceed 10 m2. '

To create a capacitance which is connected in parallel to an asymmetrical strip»
line. one can use a capacitor in the form of a short section of asymmetrical
atriplines (1 << A) with a relatively low characteristic impedance (less than
20 ohms) (Figure 20.15). The sectional structure of the capacitor shown in
Figure 20.15b makes it possible to change its capacitance.

Outboard miniature capacitors are convenient for applications in hybrid IC's
intended for operation at frequencies up to a few gigahertz. since the fabrication
of a circuit with such components does not require a complex technology. The

Q of miniature outboard capacitors is sufficient for their use in microwave
circuits of hybrid Ic's in the indicated band.

When designing capacitors, it is necessary to know the relationship of the
capacitance of a capacitor to its geometric dimensions and the relative dielectric

- 380 -

FINIIHNWCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 20.6. permittivity of the dielectric used in
its construction. A rigorous calculation
- -———-—— of the capacitance of plate capacitors

 

 

(1) 43.37.22 . u..." -1 an! 513' ”"3, taking the edge effect into account is
”‘"“W‘ (25 "' difficult, and for this reason, we shall
5.”6 l 0Jn0”_o£l| 1.“? litiznourselvee to an approximate calcu-
SIo, F.6...¢.2I0.0001...0.006| 3--.5, Film Plate Capacitor (Figure 20.14c).
-————--————— The capacitance of a capacitor is deter-
uco l lowlgl 0,005,,_o'o; hing; mined from the well known formula for
_ _ a plate capacitor:

n.0, l ﬂ..l9l mom I 8...10 C [del _

Key: 1. Capacitor dielectric; C “I‘M - 8.85 . 10" (3/4.

2. Tan 6 when f - l 101:;
3. BB§ [electrical ”may“, Here, e is the relative dielectric per
1

V In mittivity; s is the overlap area of the
' plates in m2; d is the dielectric
thickness in In.

(20.12)

Dielectrics with large values of e are used and d is reduced to increase the
capacitance of a capacitor. The minimum thickness dnin in determined by the
permissible electrical strength of the dielectric.

- Wé pm 1/.9-47
5J3 at" I _ .
u . ’— 5 . (-35 l 1.5m

 
 
  

    

C. pfd
__l__L__L__
0 II ‘0 6'0 00 40¢

Figure 20.17. 0n the determination of
the area of capacitor
plates taking the edge
effect into account.

For normal operation of a capacitor,
the thickness of its dielectric
should satisfy the condition:

Figure 20.18. The capacitance of a comb
capacitor as a function
of the geometric dimen-

d 1 ant“ ' %rk/N%r (20.13) Biona.

Here, “work is the working voltage between the capacitor plates in volts; 3

r
is the electrical strength in Win; N is a safety factor, taken equal to 03-
0.7.

Hhen designing a capacitor, the dielectric material is chosen first (see Table
20.6) and then the dielectric thickness d is determined from formula (20.13).

-3”-

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then, working from the specified value of the capacitance, the requisite overlap
area of the plates S is found from formula (20.12). Formula (20.12) yields a
somewhat overstated value of 3, since it does not take edge effects into account.
Because of this, a correction is to introduced into the calculated value in
accordance with the approximate graph shown in tigure 20.17, in which Se is the
area taking the correction into account.

It is reconnended that the plates be made wide and short so as to reduce losses
in the metal plates of a capacitor as well as losses to radiation.

A Capacitor in the Form of a Short Section of Asanetrical Stripline (Figure
20.15a). The capacitance of such a capacitor can be calculated by working from
the easily determined per unit length capacitance of an asymetrical stripline:

c1 [pm/m] - 3.33/eeff/p Cxln0luu1-3,33V;/p. (20.14)

For a specified capacitance of a capacitor C, the requisite length of a line
section is l . C/Cl.

Comb Capacitor (Figure 20.16b). The capacitance of a capacitor formed by two
"combs", arranged on a dielectric substrate (c > 1) can be conputed from the
approximate formula:

C [MD] 9.: 3.640464 1i ilx

x [I +mgr-W+3(m_l)(_:_)0.u(%)o.ma] '

(20.15)
where m is the number of protruding lugs on one side of the capacitor; 1 is the

length of a protruding lug in mm. The error in calculating a capacitance using
formula (20.15) does not exceed : 51. .An example of the capacitance plotted as

a function of the geometric dimensions of a comb capacitor is shown in Figure
20.18.

-382 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ithCHﬂﬂC1A1.USEIDNlN

CHAPTER 2l. MICROWAVE PBASING DEVICES (PHASE SHIFTBRS)

General Remarks

The development of microwave engineering is tied to success in the development of
high speed electrically controlled microwave devices. Thus, controlling the phase

of nicrowave signals in antenna equipment is accomplished by means of phase shif-
ters which are controlled by magnetic or electrical fields.

A conditional classification of phase shifters which make it possible to continu-
ously or discretely change the phase of microwave signals can be made using the
following criteria: the operational principle and function; the permissible micro-
wave power level (pulse, CW); the working frequency range (wavelength); the struc—
tural design (waveguide, coaxial, stripline or microstripline, e*c.).

The following requirements are placed on the parameters of phase shifters [l] a
working bandwidth of no less than 5 to 15 percent of the carrier frequency; a
pulsed transmission power of S to 220 RH and an average value of 5 to 50 w; a
switching time of 0.1 to 100 usec; losses of no more than 0.5 to 1.5 dB and good
matching (SHR .<_ 1.5).

Electrically controlled phase shifters can be designed using diverse controlled
elements: semiconductor diodes with various structures (p-n, p-i-n and n-i-p-i-n),
ferrites, ferroelectrics, etc. [l—h]. This is due to the function of the phase
shifters and the requirements placed on them: providing 1 high efficiency, high
electrical strength, stability of the characteristics, low control power and suf-
ficients operational speed.

There are three methods of phase control: continuous (analog), digital and swf'ched.
In the first, the phase shift changes continuously. however, this method is dif-
ficult to implement because of the necessity of supplying continuously changing
control signals. Moreover, time and temperature instabilities erert a marked
influence on the phase characteristics of the phase shifters. This deficiency is
also preserved in the case of digital phase control, when a number of operating
points are used on the operational characteristics of analog phase shifters, and
for this reason, the phase change takes place in a jump by an amount as (discrete
step). The influence of instabilities is practically eliminated in digitally
switched phase shifters [010], the phase of the electromagnetic oscillations at the
output of which can assume fixed values. The stability of such phase shifters is
governed by the fact that the controlled elements (ferrite rings or semiconductor
diodes) operate in a mode in which only the extreme regions of their operating
characteristics are used. This makes it possible to ease the requirements placed
on the time and temperature stability of the switchers of digitally switched phase
shifters and the controllers, since the requisite phase shift is not governed by
the value of the control voltage, but rather by its presence at particular
switchers.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Various controlled elements can be used in the construction of phase shifters
regardless of the manner of phase control. however, p-i-n diode phase shifters
with a continuous phase variation which make use of the change in the conductance
component of the diode admittance are of no interest because of the large conduc-
tance losses. For this reason, p-i-n diodes are used primarily for switched phase
control, for example, by means of turning transmission line sections on or off
which change the overall length of the channel. A characteristic feature of phase
shifters with a continous phase change is the use of controlled veractors: elements
with a controllable capacitance [3]. Ferrites are used both in phase shifters with
a continuous phase change and in discretely switched phase shifters [2, h].

The major parameters of an electrically controlled phase shifter are: the phase
control range Quin... .mzxi the losses introduced by the shifter L; the traveling
wave ratio at the input or the absolute value of the reflection factor P).
Moreover, specific requirements can be imposed, for example, on the shape of the
phase-frequency response (its linearity).

It is convenient to introduce a "phase shifter quality" parameter for the compara-
tive evaluation of phase shifters:

K. [deg/dB] - 0/1. Kama/n5! == mm.

Digitally switched phase shifters are completely characterised by maximum phase
shift values 0 and L as well as the smallest phase jump (discrete step).

In phase shifters using ferrites, controlled by an external magnetic field,
electromagnets must be used (in the majority of cases of considerable size and
weight), which have an operating speed of 10’6... 10-5 sec, something which limits:
their application. In this respect, microwave phase shifters designed around
semiconductor devices are more promising, in which the phase shift is controlled
with the action of an electric field. For this reason, we shall consider the
operational principle, major types and characteristics of semiconductor phase
shifters, as well as the procedure for determining their major parameters.

21.1. Semiconductor Phase Shifters

The change in the input impedance of semiconductor devices with the action of a
control voltage is used in semiconductor phase shifters. In this case, the semi-
conductor device can be inserted in the channel in series or parallel, as shown in
Figure 21.1, where Z and Y are the normalised impedance and admittance of the
semiconductor device for a series and parallel configuration respectively:

1.1“).

:1 :- ' 1:.a_ 1.": -
m N ”lay n+1“ 3H". (21.1)

- 38:. -
son oi-‘naAL use on“
F0!.0511CL§LI15£¢NULY

where R ' 1/6 and X I 1/3 are the resistive and reactive components of the imped-
ance of the semiconductor device; 99 t 1/? is the characteristic impedance of the

line in which the semiconductor devzce is inserted.

    

,l. (a)

Figure 21.1. Schematic of the insertion of s semiconductor device
in a line.

s. Parallel; b. Series.

The impedance of s semiconductor device can change with the action of the control
voltage Dean of the source (Figure 21.1). Decoupling the control circuits and
transmission channel is accomplished by network L51 and C51. If the lower fre-
quency u“ in the transmitted signal spectrum is considerably higher than the
maximum frequency neon in the control voltsgespectrum (which is usually the case),
then the values of L51 and C51 are chosen from the relationship:

‘ " (21.2)
wilds» 00)) “0.40““.

If the frequencies «a and neon are commensurate, then the control circuit and the
transmission channel should be decoupled by a filter network with a cutoff fre-
quency falling above neon and having an attenuation (i.e., a decoupling) no worse
than the specified value at the frequency 03- In this sense, the network L51 and
C51 which is shown in Figure 21.1 takes the form of a very simple low pass filter
(FNCh) and can be designed not only by working from expression (21.2), but also
using microwave filter theory. In this case, one can provide for the guaranteed
decoupling during phase shifter operation within the frequency band and in many
cases, reduce the dimensions of the circuit L51 and Cbl, by appropriately choosing
the cutoff frequency of the low pass filter.

Inserting the semiconductor device (a varactor or p-i-n diode) in the line causes
both a reflection of a portion of the microwave power by virtue of the mismatch
at the insertion point and its partial absorption in the semiconductor device

(ohmic losses).

Using wave transmission matrices, we write the resulting transmission matrix
It] for the circuit of Figure 21.1a:

- 385 -
INNI¢0FFIC1AIJLEIE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1' i -
[(|==[ u nlnlhlllzntslz ‘

,3 (|~Hl2)e“°-+°e’ y/2~ J

_y/2 . (I -y/2)¢~I(o.+0) (21.3)

where [t1] and [t3] are the transmission matrices of line sections having an
electrical length of 01.2 . 2111’2/K1inc, where In" is the working wavelength
in the line; I is the geolsstric length of the line; [t2] is the transmission
natrix of a four-pole network with an admittance y. The approximate sign in
(21.3) is due to the fact that we neglected the losses in the line itself as well
as the dilensions of the semiconductor device as compared to l.

we determine the losses 1. introduced by the semiconductor device into the
channel fro. expression (21.3):

‘- ' Pin/Pout ' L=PnIPm ”Manure-10mm+0.53)'+(o.5b)*1. ‘21-”
In this case, the absolute value of the reflection factor is:

r.-. (g +0.) (4... Lu»); (21.5)

Similar expressions can also be derived for the circuit of P‘igure 21.11:; in this
case, g is replaced with r and h is replaced with x.

21.2. Semiconductor Phase Shifters with a Continuous Phase Change

In phase shifters of this type, both the resistive and reactive components of the
iapedance of the semiconductor device change with the action of the controlling
voltage. For vsrsctors, the change in Ucon within the range of permissible values
(with the p-n junction cut off) leads to a change in prinarily the reactive coupo-
nent of the inedance. In this case, the change occurs in a relatively narrow
range and rather smoothly. This is responsible for the use of varactors prinarily
in phase shifters with a continuous phase hhange. At the sans time, the resistive
cowonent of the impedance changes in p~i-n diodes with the action of "can in a
wide range (changes in almost a jump), which limits their application in phase
shifters with a continuous phase change.

Semiconductor phase shifters with continuous phase change can be both transmissive
and reflective types.

A transmissive semiconductor phase shifter can be designed in the circuit config-
urations of Figure 21.1. Its operational principles consists in the fact that
with a change in the capacitive susceptance (Figure 21.1a), the electrical length
of the line in which this susceptance is inserted also changes. Neglecting the

-386-
MOWIBEONLY
F0810FFﬂﬂA1.USE(NVLY

resistive losses of the diode, one can write the following for the phase shift
introduced by the phase shifter:

‘1’ 2 ‘1’. -|- arclg (12/2). 0 3 0° 4' arctan(b/2) (21.6)

where 00 ' 01 + 02. -d)°=m’ + a,"

For the circuit of Figure 21.1b, it is necessary to substitute x for b in this
expression. A drawback to this circuit is the fact that in the process of control-
ling the phase, the phase shifter introduces considerable losses, which are caused
by reflection from the controlled element [see (21.6)]. when g < l, the reflec-
tion losses in a single element phase shifter are substantially greater than the
resistive losses. For this reason, the quality of a simple one element phase
shifter is poor: K. 3 15 deg/db.

An improvement in the parameters of a phase shifter is achieved by introducing
additional devices into the circuitry (two and four pole networks), as well as by
increasing the number of controlled elements.

A phase shifter circuit configuration with a compensating reactance is also pos-
sible, where an equivalent inductance in the form of a short-circuited line section
is inserted in parallel with the controlled capacitance c. This line section,
l,,¢,, can cancel, at a particular frequency, either the initial value of the
susceptance b, due to the minimum capacitance of the element (primarily the capaci-
tance of the package, Cu), or the value of b corresponding to the average value
of the controlled capacitance. In both cases, the result is an expansion of the
phase control range without increasing the insertion losses L, something which
leads to an increase in K9. The length 1s.c. is determined from the condition:

(DC/Yo - -cot(:211. c [X ) . w,y.=‘ctg(2’d”,)'u)v

line

where C is the controlled capacitance for the control voltage selected on the
volt-fared characteristic. To design a phase shifter with such compensation at a
fixed frequency, the resulting susceptance b, cot(2n1..¢./llin¢) is to be sub-

stituted in place of the susceptance b in the formulas for calculating the losses,
phase shift and reflection factor.

Multiple element phase shifters based on controlled capacitances represent a
cascade configuration of single element phase shifter circuits.

Increasing the number of controlled elements considerably complicates the calcu-
lation of the phase shifter parameters: the absolute value of the transmission

gain and the phase shift. In this case, it is expedient to use a computer employ.
ing the tools of wave transmission and scattering matrices.

- 387 -

IIHICHNNCIA1.USEICNNLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

tigure 21.2. Schematic of a multiple ele-ent phase shifter with a
continuous phase change (a) and its amplitude (solid curves)
and phase (dashed curves) characteristics (b).

     

  

I .L__J___L__.
- .5 o smx04wawuy
” 0 m a (c)

Figure 21.3. The amplitude-phase (a) and phase- frequency (b) character-
istics of e nine eluent phase shifter; the influence of
the resistive losses on the insertion attenuation and the
phase shift (c).

A general equivalent circuit of a phase shifter uith a continuous phase change
and an arbitrary nuuber of controlled elements is shown in Figure 21.2a. The

task consists in finding the insertion losses as the coefficient of the first line
"of the first row of the resulting trans-ission letrix [t] of the entire device:
It] - [tr] [:2] ... [tn], where [ti] are the trans-ission natrices of the sections
(the line sections 11, l and the controlled capacitance C(U) in the case of

ideal isolating networksg.

-388 -

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reflection factor from the phase shifter is also determined from the values
found for the coefficients of the resulting transmission matrix It]. Thus, the
characteristics of multiple element phase shifters are: a range of phase change of
°min ... emag, the insertion losses L and the absolute value of the reflection

factor r; these are defined as functions of the normalized admittance of the con-
trolled capacitance C(U).

In a phase shifter with n identical equidistantly spaced varactors, by virtue of
the change in their capacitance from 0min to c.,x;

Q_ ~ — n (arclg “32—?” -- atcl g 15%")

Here, the influence of multiple reflections between varactors on the phase shift
was not taken into account, which is permissible in a first approximation if their
reflection factors with respect to the absolute value of r l, ..., n g 0.25.

The formula cited here can serve as the basis for selecting the number of elements
in the design of a phase shifter. Characteristics of phase shifters with a contin-
uous phase change for various numbers of equidistantly spaced control elements

[3] are available at the present time which have been calculated on a computer and
plotted.

The case where the resistive losses in the controlled elements can be neglected

(g = 0) is of practical interest, and then the losses in a phase shifter are
determined only by the reflection losses. The amplitude and phase characteristics
of phase shifter with different numbers of elements are shown in Figure 21.2b for
this case. It follows from the figures that with an increase in the number of
elements, the phase shift is practically proportional to the reactive component;
the nonuniformity in the characteristics of the insertion losses increases with an
increase in the number of elements.

The influence of the spacing between elements on phase shifter parameters is
illustrated in figure 21.3a. Depending on this spacing, the slope of the phase
characteristic (the dashed lines) also changes as does the nonuniformity of the
insertion losses (the solid lines). Based on the curves of Figure 21.3a, one can
determine the attainable minimal insertion losses and their nonuniformity for a
specified 6 in a specified range of frequencies. The inverse problem can also be
solved: find the range of frequencies within which the permissible insertion
losses L are preserved with the attainable value of O. (In this case, it is
necessary to keep in mind the feasible range of change in b.) One can also
estimate the bandwidth of a phase shifter, comparing its characteristics for
various spacings between the elements, i.e., for different electrical lengths of
the line sections.

It can be seen from Figure 21.3b that in step with an increase in the normalized
capacitive admittance, the nonlinearity of the phase characteristic increases
within the passband.

— 389 -
son omcw. Us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"here there are resistive losses in the controlled elements, the phase relation-
ships in a multiple element phase shifter practically do not change. A practically
linear relationship exists between the insertion losses of s phase shifter and the

condugtance component of the admittance of the controlled capacitance (Figure
21.3c .

Some general requirements for the parameters of controlled elements can be formu-
lated based on the characteristics treated here and optimal circuit design
approaches can be found. These requirements can be reduced to the following. The
maximum capacitances of controlled phase shifter elements with a continuous phase
change should not have a normalized susceptance of b g 2.5 to 3. Otherwise, it
is impossible to obtain operationally acceptable values of the amplitude modula-
tion level during the phase control process in the frequency passband. If it is
necessary to have low values of the SHR for a specified change in the phase shift
0, then the number of controlled elements is to be increased and the maximum
capacitive susceptance b reduced. However, with a significant increase in the
number of elements (n > 9 to 10), the resistive lossec corresponding, for example,
to g = 0.1, yield too much attenuation.

with certain requirements placed on the working frequency range, a positioning of
the elements where l I Aline/b can prove to be optimal. Then the quality of the
phase shifter increases because of the increase in the slope of the phase charac-
teristic and the possibility of reducing the number of controlled elements.

Thus. while the quality of a single element phase shifter is primarily determined
by its reflection losses, the quality of a multiple element phase shifter depends
on the value of the normalized conductance g of the controlled element.

As a rule, the major components of reflective phase shifters with a continuous
phase change are short~circuited 1ine«aections with varsctors; reflecting sections.
They can be connected to the common channel either directly or through rultipole
networks (Figure 21.4). The controlled elements regulate the signal phase on the
path to the short-circuiter and back. The characteristics of a reflective multi-
element phase shifter:are calculated using the same method as for a transmissive
one, but the values of the parameters obtained as a result of the calculation are
doubled (with the exception of the phase shifter quality, K. I 20/2L).

A 3 d3 directional coupler (slotted and loop bridges) or some other multipole
network which posses similar characteristics can be used to segregate the incident
and reflected waves. The insertion of the controlled elements by means of the
indicated multipole network on the whole forms a transmissive phase shifter con-
figuration (see Figure 21.4). In the circuit of Figure 21.6a., the directional
coupler is loaded at the outputs (2 and 3) into reflective phase shifters, which
in the general case each contain one or more controlled elements.

In the case of identical reflecting sections with a single controlled element
without resistive losses and an ideal directional coupler, the insertion phase
shift is equal to twice the phase shift provided by a short-circuited line section
and the controlled element [3]:

- 390 -
son orhcm use ONLY
0=arctg alt—ﬂaunt.” '
Hub—dawn» '

where b - wc/Yo is the normalised capacitive susceptance of the varactor; l is
the distance from the element to the short-circuiter of the reflecting section.

'i
‘7

till)

     

a) (a) (bl I)

?igure 21.4. circuits of reflective phase shifters using a 3 dB
bridge (a) and a circulator (b).

Circulators can be used to separate the incident and reflected waves in reflective
phase shifters (Figure 21.4b). Such a phase shifter can also contain different
numbers of controlled elements. The insertion shift for a phase shifter with one
controlled element is determined in a manner similar to that for a phase shifter
with a bridge circuit. Two controlled elements (varactors) in a reflecting sec-
Cion are rufficient to change the phase shift from 0 to 360'.

It follows from the analysis of semiconductor phase shifter operation that they

have a comparatively poor quality K. and considerable nonuniformity of the inser-
tion losses within the range of phase change. The indicated drawbacks limit the

range of applications of these phase shifters.

21.3. Discretely Switched Semiconductor Phase Shifters

As is well known [1] p-i-n diodes can sharply change (with a jump) the resistive
component of the impedance in a wide range with the action of a control voltage
"can; however, the reactive composent is small and almost does not change at all.
The sharp change in the diode impedance is used in discretely switched phase
shifters*. In this case, the ohmic losses in the diode are small, since the fol-
lowing conditions are met (for the parallel insertion of the diode in the line):

 

*
In the following, we shall call a discretely switched phase shifter simply a
discrete [digital] phase shifter for the sake of simplicity.
FOR¢Hﬂﬂ€1ALI£ﬂBONLN

Y1 I ‘1 ' oo/rfor >> 1; Y2 = g2 - pqirigv << 1 (21.7)

y-lz‘l=ﬁolrnp >> ‘0 ’35-'33: "If“, < ‘0

where Y; and Y2 are the p~i-n diode admittances for the forward and inverse bias
modes respectively; no is the characteristic impedance of the line (see Figure
21.1a) in which the p~i-n diode is inserted.

In expressions (21.7), the reactive components of the diode admittance b1 and b2
are taken equal to zero. Hhen g2 from (217) is substituted in (21.4) and (21.5),
it is not difficult to convince onself thatthelosses in the diode and absolute
value of the reflection factor are small. This is explained by the fact that the
inverse resistance of the diode rinv is high and it practically does not shunt the
transmission line.

If the value of g1 from (21.7) is substituted in the same equations (21.4) and
(21.5), then we obtain greater losses and a higher value of P: practically all of
the power is reflected [this follows from (21.5) when g1 >> 1 and b1 8 0 are
substituted].

The nearly total reflection of the power from the diode in the case of forward
bias can be employed, for example, to design a reflective phase shifter. If a
radio frequency signal is fed to the input of the circuit of Figure 21.1a and the
output is short-circuited then such a reflective phase shifter provides for two
insertion phase delays: with forward biasing of the diode, the wave is reflected
from the diode, and with inverse biasing, it is reflected from the short-circuited
end of the line. The difference betueen the insertion phase delays is a discrete
step (jump) in the phase of such a phase shifter.

The series insertion of a diode can be treated in a similar fashion (Figure 21.1b).
In this case, the diode opens the line in the case of inverse biasing and allows

a wave to pass through low insertion losses in the case of forward biasing. By
using two or more diodes and the appropriate circuit designs, one can provide for
switching the microwave power from one line to another. This circumstance is also
utilised in digital semictnductor phase shifters.

Digital semiconductor phase shifters make it possible to eliminate the majority of
deficiencies inherent in continuous semiconductor phase shifters, specifically:
improve the quality factor (K. = 200 deg/d3), reduce the SUR (Kat [SHR] ; 1.5),
equalize losses for various phase shifts and control large microwave power levels
(especially in a reflection mode). The possiblity of obtaining the characteris-
tics enumerated above in a wide frequency hand (up to an octave and more) is also
important, something which makes it possible to use such phase shifters in phased
antenna arrays. The possibility of obtaining the requisite phase-frequency
characteristics and assuring stability also promotes this to no small extent.

The design calculations for discrete semiconductor phase shifters are carried out
using matrix analysis tools.

- 392 -
ma omcnt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operational principle of digital semiconductor phase shifters is rather simple.
The large number of circuit designs which have been realized at the present time is
due to the widescale use of phse shifters of this type. For this reason, primarily
the specific features of the circuit design solutions for digital phase shifters of
various types to obtain a requisite phase characteristic and the specific opera-
tonal features with such a characteristic are treated in the following, and where
necessary, the design equations are given. The treatment takes into account the
predominant application of digital phase shifters in phased arrays.

He shall initially consider digital phase shifters which make it possible to obtain
only one discrete phase step, and then we will show how by using them as component
elements in multiple element discrete phase shifters, one can obtain the requisite
number of discrete phase steps.

semiconductor digital phase shifters can be broken down into three main groups
according to the operational principle: with switched line sections (Figure 21.5a),
reflective with incident and reflected wave isolators (Figure 21.5b, c) and the
periodically loaded line type (Figure 21.5d, e) [5].

Phase shifters using switched line sections are the simplest and most obvious in
terms of the operational principle. The difference in the electrical length of the
line section corresponds to the phase shift of A0 - 92 - 01 (Figure 21.5a).

The following can be numbered among the advantages of phase shifters of this group:
the diodes have practically the same insertion losses for both values of the phase
delay (slight deviations are possible only by virtue of the change in the length of
the switched line sections); the circuit is convenient for microstripline fabrica-
tion; it is compact (especially for small phase shifts). The drawbacks are: the
relatively large number of diodes (up to four per phase shifter element); the
necessity of supplying control signals of different polarities; phase shifter losscs
do not depend on the phase shift, while in all other groups of phase shifters, the
losses fall off with a decrease in the phase shift [5].

Phase shifters of the second group have become widespread (Figure 21.5b, c). Both
reciprocal multipole networks (directional couplers, bridges) and nonreciprocal
(most often circulators) are used as the device to segregate the incident and
reflected waves. In this case, the energy reflected from the diodes falls entirely
in the output arm of the multipole network. The phase shift itself (discrete phase
step) at the output of the phase shifters of the second group is formed by virtue
of the phase change in the reflection factor when the diodes are switched in the
appropriate line section, which are connected to the separating device: A0 -

. arg(r1/r2).

Merits of phase shifters in this groupare the minimum nusber of diodes which are
used (down to one per element) for any phase shift, as well as the possibility of
separate optimization of the isolation device (with respect to decoupling and match-
ing) and the manner of inserting the diodes (based on the requisite phase function

within the passband, the balance of the insertion losses in the two phase states,
etc.).

- 393 -

FOI‘OIINCJAI.USIZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

¢p(s)

Figure 21.5. Circuits of discretely switched phase shifters.

Figure 21.6. The phase characteristics of switched
nondispersive line sections.

 

The operational principle of periodically loaded line type phase shifters consists
in the fact that the electrical length of a line increases when a shunting capaci-
tance is inserted and decreases when an inductance is inserted. To reduce reflec-
tions from inhonogeneities, represented by the shunting capacitance or inductance,
a pair of identical reactive elements is used, spaced at a distance apart approx-
imately equal to a quarter wavelength. For good matching, the shunting reactances
should be rather small, but this leads to small phase shifts (usually, no more
than AS degrees), which limits the application of the phase shifter. The phase
shift in the phase shifters shown in Figures 21.5d and e is determined by the
following relationships respectively: A0 . arctan(b1/2) - arctan(b2/2) and A0 -

. arctan(x1/2) - arctan(x2/2).

- 394 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.UEE¢HULY
F1)! 0Wﬂﬂ€1Al.lﬂ5El(ﬂﬁLY

Phase Shifters with Switched Line Sections. The great diversity of the phase
shifters in this group is due primarily to the requirements placed on the form of
the phase-frequency characteristic and the minimum phase shifter di-ensions for
large discrete phase steps. We shall consider the operation of the phase shifter
shown in Figure 21.a within the passband. The electrical length of the switched
nondispersive line sections are:

mu": 2111,3110, (21.8)

where A0 is the wavelength corresponding to-the center frequency of the specified
bandwidth (Figure 21.6).

The phase characteristics of the switched line sections, which take the form of
straight lines running through the origin. are depicted in Figure 21.6. In the case
of tuning off of the center frequency, as follows from Figure 21.6 there appears an
increment in the phase jump, 60, related to the frequency difference Aw/wo by the
ratio (we consider the diodes to be ideal switches):

- (21.9)
.IKD ==lVbAeVu~.

where A. - 02 - 01 is the phase shift at the center frequency. It follows from'
this that a phase shifter of the type shown in Figure 21.5a provides for a phase
shift which changes linearly with frequency, and consequently, a time delay which
is independent of frequency. For this reason, such a phase shifter is convenient
for use in wideband devices with a constant time delay. However, the bandwidth
and the maximum phase shift are limited by resonance phenomena which occur when the
length of a disconnected line section becomes a multiple 1/2. In this case, the
disconnected line section becomes in essence a high Q resonator, which is weakly
coupled to the connected line section by virtue of the capacitance of the diode
cutoff switches (Figure 21.7a). Because of this, the insertion losses at the
resonant frequency increase, and noreover, phase errors appear.

To increase the decoupling between line sections and the channels, one can use the
circuit shown in Figure 21.7b with a permanent structural connection of both
channels to the incoming and outgoing lines. The disconnection of one of the chan-
nels is accomplished by shorting its input and output to ground. In this case,
the length of the line sections from branch point A to the points of diode
insertion is X [4, where XP is the wavelength corresponding to resonance in the
disconnected channel. When a forward bias is supplied, the upper diodes (in
accordance with the schematic of Figure 21.7b) are turned on. In this case, the
quarter-wave short-circuited line sections have an infinitely high input impedance
at branch point A, which also creates increased isolation. The lower diodes are
cut off, and consequently have no influence on the operation of the channel with
an electrical length 01 (the channel length is determined by the length of the
line section between branch points A - A).

Phase shifters of the type of Figure 21.5a can also be used in systems where it is
necessary to have the phase shift independent of frequency. In this case,

- 395 -
FOR‘OFFKJA1.U§E(HULY
FI”!(HWN(JA1.UEIZ(MULY

expression (21.9) is the phase error 60 introduced by such a phase shifter. A con-
stant phase shift in a wide frequency hand (up to an octave and more) can be
obtained by using s dispersion line in a channel where this line has a shorter
electrical length and takes the fora of coupled lines connected to each other at
one end as shown in Figure 21.8a. The length of the coupling region is 10/4, where
)0 is the average wavelength of the working band. The phase-frequency character-
istic of such s coupled line is [5]:

mr:0.=am[_4__"+“"“—“)— 0”] (21.10)
(I 44")“I —a)+is' 00¢ '

-c/2o .
where a - 10 ; C is the crosstalk attenuation in d3; 906 I 0.5n10/A is the

electrical length of the coupling region.

 

Figure 21.7. Variants of phase shifters with switchable channels and
increased isolation between then.

The phase-frequency characteristic corresponding to expression (21.10) is shown in
Figure 21.8b by the curve 01. The phase-frequency characteristic .2 of a non-

dispersive line section is also shown in this sane figure. A schenatic of a phase
shifter using lines having the characteristics 01 and 02 is shown in Figure 21.8c.

If the length of a nondispersive line section is chosen so that its phase-frequency
characteristic 02 is parallel to a straight line passing through a point with

abscissas of 01 and 02 which are equally spaced from the point 906 . 11/2 (Figure
21.81)), then at frequencies corresponding to the point 01. 1/2 and 02, the phase

-396-

FOR oméuu. Us: ONLY
ItNICHﬂﬂtlAl.U5810NlN

shift introduced by the phase shifter is equal to a certain quantity 6., while at
the re-aining points which fall outside the range 01 < ’00 < 02, a phase error
appears which does not exceed 60.

The phaseofrequency characteristic 0; ' 7.00 is a straight line passing through
the origin, where y is an angular coefficient which is found from the condition:
when Ooc I s/Z, we should have 02 - a + 60. From this, 02 - 2(1 c AO/I)Ooc. The
points 01 and 02 are defined as the abscissas for which the discrete phase step of
a single stage phase shifter of the type shown in Figure 21.8c is:

‘=21 £2 @— (I+a)‘/(n_';z—w6,' ‘
A0 (-1- ‘) : arccos (l+¢)I(I-a)+'s‘°: .

where i - l, 2. By solving this equation for a and introducing the band coverage
overlap coefficient K.,- 02/0], we obtain:

I+a_ «+40 so .“ V
l—m "'dg’[ l-l-K. f7]w(l+x,)' (21.11)

 

 

 

The value of a found from (21.11) is used for the design calculations of a
network of the type of Figure 21.8a.

   

s) (a)

Figure 21.8. On the determination of the _. m
characteristics of a phase
shifter with a constant phase
shift within the passbsnd.

  

a) (c)
Phase shifters with switched channels, which are intended for operation in the
lower portion of the microwave band, have considerable dimensions. One of the
ways of reducing the overall diaensions of a phase shifter in this case is replac-
ing the switched line sections with reactive four-pole networks with lumped

elements [5]. As is well known, the transmission matrix of a uniform lossless
transmission line (Figure 21.9s) has the form:

- 397 -
ma omcm. (mom!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. -..-‘ .H.-. W_

c050 19.5w»
1"“ m2 m0 J (21.12)
as

Tie classical transaission lattices, [an] and lay] of n and T synnetrical four-
pole networks with lunped reactive eleaents (21 and 22 in Figure 21.91:, c) are

defined by the expressions:

li-ng, 2. (21.13)
[0.] " ,
2'34-1‘ Y: ”-2. VI
‘ I+Z.Y. 22.4.2: 1.
[0r]- .
Vs l'l-ans . (21. 1‘.)

where y"... ”2,; y,=uz,. ‘

The four-pole networks treated here can he considered equivalent to a transmission
line section in the case where the corresponding ole-ents of their transmission
Iatrices are equal (at a fixed frequency). Dy equating the elements of natrices
(21.12) and (21.13), we obtain the values of 21 and 22 of a ll four-pole network.

expressed in terns of the parameters on and O of a line section:

v,-3-‘£‘%”L, Lnjminm. a>0>0;

 

=_-_P~_ -_ ' ‘
2; ’tI(°/2) . Y; ,9.“n0 . 2!!)0)“. (21.15)

Similarly, for a T network:
" 2.=ioét¢(él2). halal}. u>o>o;

. (21.16)

=._ L

n; _;

 

Expressions (21.15) and (21.16), taking into account the symbols adopted in
Figures 21.91: and c, snake it possible to draw the conclusion that H and '1' four-

pole networks, which are equivalent to a line section of length at > O > 0 at the
working wavelength lo, have the structure of a low pass filter (PM) section; for

- 398 -
POI omcm. [MONEY
IN)I‘0FFICIA1.lEﬂ!(H‘LN

o——o - -
ﬂ , é’ . 69

Figure 21.9. The equivalent representation of a section of
uniforu transmission line.

 

Vh I t:

It, i c, t,
at); h
:71”? It

0 (b)

Figure 21.10. Bxsnples of circuits of discrete phsse shifters with
lusped reactive elenents.

2: > O > n, these four-pole networks have the structure of a high pass filter
(FVCh) section. Horeover. it follows from expressions (21.15) and (21.1!) that
one of these four-pole networks cannot successfully realise an equivalent line
section of length 0 I 1. Possible circuits for constructing a network for e line
section of electrical length 0 I s are shown in Figure 21.10. The series connec-
tion (Figure 21.10a) presupposes the use of two n four-pole networks, each of
which is equivalent to s section of line with a length of O I 1/2. It is obvious
that this networks reduces to the form of the network in Figure 21.10b. A phasing
section of a phase shifter for a discrete phase step of A0 I s using a network of
the kind shown in Figure 21.10b is shown in Figure 21.10c.

Another structural variant of a phasing section for a discrete phase step of AOIIs
is shown in FIgure 21.10d. Two n four-pole networks are also used here, one of
which, having the structure of a low pass filter section (c1, L2) is equivalent to
alline section with a length of 0 I 1/2, while the other, having the structure of
a high psss filter section (L1, 02) is equivalent to a line section with the
length of 0 I 31/2.

One elenent of a phase shifter for other discrete phase steps can he node in a

similar nsnner. He will note that the circuit configurations treated here for

the elements of discrete phase shifters can made using a T section four-pole
network (Figure 21.9c).

- 399 -

IKIICHHHC1A1.UBE(NHLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Reflective phase shifters with isolators are differentiated according to the type
of isolating devices used and the methods of obtaining the specified discrete
phase step. In contrast to phase shifters with switched channels, in reflective
phase shifters it is necessary to equalize the losses in both phase states, which
is achieved through different circuit design solutions.

The major requirement which should be satisfied by the mutual isolation device of
such phase shifters is that of assuring a 3 dB power division among the two arms
with a phase shift of 90 degrees. In line with s T node, primarily the following
isolating devices are employed: a loop bridge (Figure 2l.lla), s ring bridge
(Figure 21.llb) and a coupler with electromagnetic coupling (Figure 21.llc). In
waveguide phase shifters, primnrily a 3 dB bridge is used for these purposes, since
the sizes of other devices with similar characteristics are considerably greater.

we shall consider the methods of obtaining a discrete phase step in reflective
phase shifters. The first method is similar to that used in phase shifters with a
continuous phase shift change (see Figure 21.4a) with the only difference that the
diode resistance can assume only two values: either close to the resistance which
provides for a short circuit at the point of diode installation (in this case,
power is reflected from the diode) or close to a resistance which provides for a
no-load mode (in this case, the reflection takes place from the short circuited
end ofthe line in which the diode is inserted). The discrete phase step is no I

. 201, where 01 is the electrical length of the line from the point of diode in-
sertion to the short circuited end of the line. with this method, it is difficult
to achieve identical insertion losses in both phase states, since the reflection
occurs in one case from the diode and in the other from the short-circuiter. To
equalize the losses in both phase states and expand the working bandwidth, a loop
is inserted in the line coupling the diode and the isolating device [5]. In this
case, the requisite values of the reflection factors are determined by the point of
insertion of the loop, its length and characteristic impedance.

Ashasalready been noted, elements with multiple discrete steps, which are shown
in Figure 21.12, can be realized in reflective phase shifters. In this structural
design, two loops 01 and 02 are connected at a common point. The characteristic
impedances (91 and oz)-and the length of these loops are chosen so that when
switching the bias voltage of the diodes, the susceptance of the first loop at the
common point is equal to :jbl, and :jbz at the second point. The combination of
these susceptsnces yields four values of the total susceptance at the common point:
j(b1 + b2), j(b1 - b2), j(b2 - b1), -j(b1 + b2). Pour values of the discrete
phase step are provided in this case. The dimensions of such a phase shifter are
slightly larger than the dimensions of a single digit phase shifter with one dis-
crete step, since only one separating device is used.

A phase shifter with a nonreciprocal isolator - a circulator - operates just as the
phase shifter shown in Figure 21.5c does. The use of circulators provides for

smaller dimensions and a smaller number of diodes, which is responsible for lower
losses.

-1000-

IN)! OFFICIAlle5l:(HVLY
mommusso'mv

 

 

 

.—_——-——————_

     

Figure 21.11. Isolators for digital phase shifters.

.-.....

I ”n .
U
con
0

bl __ Figure 21.12. A:

   

, the isolator

m
e:
U sl
con
c0-
bl

 

Figure 21.13. circuits for obtaining the necessary sun
(a) and resctances (b) in a phase shift:
periodically loaded line type.

-401-
mumpmomr
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Phase shifters of the periodic loaded line type differ in the methods of realizing
the reactsnce inserted in the line to change the line's electrical length. The
reactive elements inserted in the transmission line can be made in the form of
loops. The length and characteristic impedance of the loops are chosen from the
condition for obtaining the requisite input susceptanee; usually b1 - b; I b,
where b is the shunting susceptance (Figure 21.5d). A shcenatic of such a phase
shifter with parallel loops is shown in Figure 21.13a. Phase shifters of the
periodically loaded line type with a series configuration of distributed resc-
tances also find application (see Figures 21.5e and 21.13b).

Multiple Element Discrete Phase Shifter. The najor requirenent placed on them

is the requirement of assuring a phase change with a discrete step M in a partic-
ular range of values from °nin to O." (in the general case from 0 to Zn). The
discrete step so is determined by working frost the requirement placed on the
characteristics of the device in which the given mltiple place phase shifter will
operate. Usually, a multiple digit phase shifter contains n1 digits. Each digit
can exist in only one of two phase states (a single discrete step digit): there is
no phase delay (or the insertion delay is taken as zero); or the insertion phase
delay is Mi, where i is the nusber of the digits.

The ninislun number of digits n1 in this case is assured through the choice of the
following values of an:

"8¢,:A¢n,"""" 5-
ND, = Ad). -|- A0 a 2A0.

A®,=A0,-| A¢.-|-A<b=—:4A¢l’.

........ . . . . . . (21.17)

Ao.=A¢+ 2 Ammo-mo.

(all

The range of phase change from 0 to 2! will be covered if the overall phase delay
introduced by all of the digits is:

«u Ms}; M}, ...",j_'...",{.}',. ,, 2“ '_ ‘70:- (21.13)
By using equations (21.17) and (21.18), we obtain:

"1 I'd I .-' Ina. (Tl/A‘D). (21.19)

It follows fron (21.19) that n1 is an integer with the condition M I "/2D is net,
where n are also integers.

Digital phase shifters which have already been described are used to realize the
discrete digits. The selection of the type of digital phase shifter is made

based on various criteria. For exanple, if minimal average insertion losses are
required, then one can enploy phase shifters of the periodically loaded line type

.. 1.02 ..
I'D! WOMAN ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as the lowest order digits (i.e., the digits with the small discrete phase steps),
and for digits with larger discrete phase steps, one can use phase shifters with
switched channels. In this case, a gain is obtained in the average insertion
losses both as compared to the case where all digits are realized using phase
shifters with switched lines as well as the periodically loaded line type.

 

Figure 21.14. The structural design of a three element nicrostripline
phase shifter.

55
~<

. Phase shifter housing;

. Stripline conductor;

. Dielectric plate;

PIN diodes;

. Power supply terminals for the PIN diodes;
. Blocking capacitors;

. Choke;

. Coaxial to striplina transition.

0

wuombwnw

This is explained by the fact that phase shifters using switched lines introduce
approximately the same losses for any discrete steps, while phase shifters with
periodically loaded lines have low losses for small discrete steps. At the sans

time, the losses in phase shifters of this type increase with large discrete phase
steps.

One of the possible structural designs of a phase shifter using switched line
section is shown in Figure 21.14.

- 403 -
Iron omcm'usa on“
F0! OHIO“. USE ONLY

CHAPTER 22. HICRWAVE FILTERS.

22.1. The Classification of Microwave Filters

Electrical filter is the ter- for a passive linear network with a sharply pronounced
frequency selectivity. Filters are very widely used in radio systems for the fre-
quency selection of the requisite signal against a background of other signals or
interference. A filter is frequently used to suppress interfering signals.

In the nicrowave band, a filter takes the for- of a transmission line which includes
inhoIogeneities, matched in a definite frequency band and sharply his-etched outside
of this band. In this sense, filter operation is similar to the operation of a
broadband mtching device. (A filter is sci-stiles used for broadband matching). It
is apparent that to reduce losses within a passband. a filter should be made of
reactive elements.

At the present tine, the most widespread procedure for nicrowave filter design is
the procedure in accordance with which the low frequency prototype of the filter is
designed initially. in this case deternining the inductances and capacitances for
the loaded Q's of the resonant circuits of the prototype. Then the question of
the realisation of the calculated elenents with the appropriate inhonogeneities or
resonant systeas in the selected transnission line is resolved. Thus, it is neces-
sary to have an equivalent circuit of the nicrowave filter for design calculations
based on this procedure.

The equivalent circuit isparts clarity to the design calculations and nakes it
possible to use techniques which have been well worked out in the theory of low
frequency filters for the design of a microwave filter. however, it must be relen-
bered that the equivalent circuit reflects the actual microwave device with only a
certain degree of precision. It frequently does not take into account various
parasitic :scattering fields, equivalent to additional capacitances and inductances.
It is also necessary to roaster that resonant microwave systens (volumetric
resonators, line sections) are multiple resonance systems, sonething which is not
at all taken into sccotmt in the equivalent circuit. The transient processes in
the equivalent circuit and actual device will also be different.

The main parameter of a filter is its frequency characteristic: the working attenu-
ation l.(f) or the reflection factor Hf) as a function of frequency. We recall
um I. - 1/(1-r2).

Filters are broken down into low pass (FNCh), high pass (Mb), bandpass (PP?) and
bandstop or rejection (P2P) filters.

Bandpass and bandstop filters are nost frequently used in the aicrowave band,
although, for example, low pass filters are used to filter the higher harmonics of
oscillators and frequencyaultipliers. Bandpass filters are sometimes used both as
low pass and as high pass filters. The right side of the frequency response is
used for a low pass filter and the left side for a high pass filter.

-606-

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following are usually specified in the design calculations for s bandpass
filter: the cutoff frequencies for the passband fpr and f r. the mismatch toler-
ances (fpr) or the insertion losses LP, within the passba , the stopband cutoff
frequency is f; and f-; and the minimum permissible losses within the atopband L;
or P2.

It is obvious that the optimal shape of the frequency response would be a rectangu-
lar form, in which the frequencies pass through and the blocked frequencies coin-
cide: fpr - f; and f-pr . f-g. However, such s response shape is obtained only
with an infinite nunber of filter sections. In actual devices, the slope of the
frequency response curve is determined by the kind of function L(f), which in

turn, depends on the number of sections and the Q's of the tuned circuits in the
sections.

with respect to the passband, bandpass filters are broken down into narrow band
for which the relative passband is less than 52 ([ZAf ,lfo] - 100 < 5), average
bandwidth filters (5 < 100 - 2Af lfo < 20) and broadband filters (IZAfpr/fo] -
- 100 > 20). Here, f0 - prrf.pr is the center frequency of the passband.

In low frequency filters, the filter sections are connected directly to each other
and there is strong mutual coupling between the sections. In microwave filters,
the sections can be coupled directly to each other by means of coupling elements
(such microwave filters are called indirectly coupled filters), or through quarter-
wave line sections (quarter-wave coupled filters), where the series resonant
circuits are transformed by line sections into parallel resonant circuits.

Microwave filters can also be classified according to the type of line which is
used to construct the filter: waveguide, coaxial and stripline filters.

22.2. The Design of the Low Frequency Pilter Prototype

The determination of the parameters of a filter prototype is a problem of para-
metric snslysis. i.e., the filter elements must be found based on the known fre-
quency response of the filter. In order to make the design procedure more general,
in which the numerical calculations for a specific sample are minimal, all of the
quantities are normalised. Normalizing ispedances consists in the fact that the
load impedances at both ends of the filter are considered equal to unity. For a
load resistance of R, all of the prototype resistances are increased by a factor
of R times; the frequency response of the filter does not change in this case.

If the filter is not matched within the passband at either end, then an ideal
transformer which provides for matching should be used.

Then the frequencies are normalized so that the normalised frequency at the edge
of the passband is equal to unity. We make the substitution:

v " klu (22.1)

If k1 is chosen from the condition that h1 - l/ r: then at the boundary of the
passband, the equality v - 1 will be observed. win this case, all of the filter
reactances should be multiplied by the actual cutoff frequency «pr.

- 1.05 -
ma OF'i-‘IGAL‘IISE ONLY
FOR<OFIICLAL.USEGDNLY

when solving a problem of parametric synthesis of filters, all of the types of

filters are reduced to s single prototype. Such a prototype is most often a lou
pass filter.

The transition from one filter to another is made by substitution of a frequency

variable. Thus, the transition from a frequency alto a frequency defined by the
equality:

v - 4400. (22.2)

Pisure 22.1. Schenatic of a
5% am prototype filter.

 

A substitution of variables of the kind:

v=k,~(¢/a._..,,.‘,)'f (22.3)

transforms a low pass filter into a bandpass filter. The values of the cutoff
frequencies for the bandpass filter and its passband can easily be derived from
formula (22.3):

8",”-.p =0}; m-.”—._"=v.olk,- l/k . (22.6)

here on is the center frequency of the passband.

To derive a stopband filter from a low pass filter, tuo conversions, (22.2) and
(22.3), must be applied sequentially.

Thus, any of the filters can be designed on the basis of a single low pass filter
prototype in the form of a ladder circuit (Figure 22.1).

When designing a filter, it is first of all necessary to have the frequency
characteristic specified, L(f), such that the filter can be realized, i.e., the
design calculations should not lead to quantities which are not physically
feasible.

Three types of filters have become the most widespread, categorized according to
the type of frequency response:

- 406 -
IOIIOIIHCIAI.IEI£(MNLY
ROIIOFI1C1A1.1EHE(H‘LY

1. Filters with a Chebyshew characteristic, the function of the working attenuation
of which is described by means of Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind:

La] +1913: (y/s), (22.5)

Here, v I f/fo - io/f is the frequency variable;

1...; nut/“r1412. .'"
[ml/m

is the amplitude coefficient; 8 is a scale factor which normalizes the cutoff
frequency; n is the degree of the Chebyshev polynomial; upr/s - l.

The frequency response of a three section filter is shown in Figure 22.2. A filter
with a Chebyshev frequency response (a Chebyshev filter) is optimal in the sense
that in the case of identical starting date, of all of the filters which can be
described, it has the smallest nunber of sections. The slope of the frequency
response is the maximum of all of the filters which can be used. A drawback to
the filter is the pulsation of the insertion losses within the passband and the
nonlinearity of the phase-frequency characteristic.

2. Filters with a maximally flat response (Figure 22.3):

 

”i';'r.;;.:(.;s,‘a‘-. ‘2“)

The insertion losses within the passband vary from the maximum values at the edge
of the bend to zero at the center frequency. A merit of the filter is the linear-
ity of the phase-frequency response.

3. Filters made of identical resonators are the simplest to fabricate and align.
The frequency response of the filter is described by a Chebyshev polynomial of the
second kind and has greater operations within the passbsnd, especially at its
boundaries. To reduce the oscillations, the Q's of the end sections are cut in
half. However, s major advantage of the filter is lost in this case: the identi-
cal nature of the sections. The phase response of the filter is nonlinear. The
filter finds fewer applications as compared to filters of the first two types.

we will note that a filter which has a frequency response described by a function
using a Zolotarev fraction has the greatest slope of the frequency characteristic.
The response has oscillations within the passband and within the stopband. The
filter has not found widescale application since special sections with mutual
inductances are required to make it. ' .p

In formulas (22.5) and (22.6), the degree of the polynomials n is equal to the

number of filter sections, and one can derive the expressions to calculate the
number of sections from these formulas.

-407-
mMmouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       

I

I

l

I

I
—t—

   

f../:., f, ﬁr’r 5.14;,“ gr

Figure 22.2. Frequency response of Figure 22.3. Hazinally flat response
s bandpass filter of a bandpass filter.

described by e
chebyshev polynomial.

For a Chebyshev filter, the hunter ofrsections is:
'A.&Iva——r—T——.— n .. -1) (22.1)
n ———L—P——.
> ' ‘Ardiﬂﬁl'ap’
For a filter with s maximally flat response:

‘ a > ‘ 5 var Iii—(1...: — I) (22 '8)
lam/v...) '

 

If in calculations using formulas (22.17) and (22.18) [sic] the number 'n proves
to be fractional, it is rounded off to the nearest whole value (usually the
greater one).

After'deternining the number of filter sections, the conponents of the ladder
circuit are found (Figure 22.1) as well as the loaded Q's of the bandpass filter
sections. This is the nost lsbor intensive part of the problem.

There are two known methods of overcoming the conputetionsl difficulties. In the
first, the general laws governing the distribution of the parameters of the
circuit conponents are ascertained. ‘lhese governing laws are studied and then
generalised. In the second approach, tebles and graphs are drawn up for the nest
frequently encountered cases of filter design.

The .sinplest distribution of the values of g can be successfully established for
a filter with a naxinally flat response, for which:

3. -2sinls(2k— 0/2“]. ' (22.9)

where k is the nuaber of the branch reckoned iron the filter input (Figure 22.1).

-403-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It follows from for-Ila (22.9) that when n I l, g1 I 2, when n I 2, g1 I g2 I 1/2 ,
when n I 3, g1 I g3 I l, g2 I 2, etc. The filter is symmetrical.

The transition to a bandpass filter is made by substituting variables in accordance

with formula (22.3). In this case, the loaded Q's of the resonant circuits are
determined from the formula:

q. C: Q. 3,121: Q, sin ”15.- l)/2--n‘]. (22.10)
Here: 0.:- 1717/8
(22.11)

is the loaded Q of the entire filter at the three decibel level.

For a Chebyshev filter, there is no fornuls as simple as (22.9). The coefficients
3 can be calculated from the following formlss:

swan/v. g. =4a.‘.."d,/b,;.g,_.'. (22.12)

a

where

a. = sin [M212 — mm; b. .. v' -'I: sin’ (uh/n); ? = sh ma.

8 I In [coth(!. [dbl/17.37)]

ﬂ = In [clh (L (nB)/l7,37)l.

The transition to a bandpass filter is also node by substituting variables in
accordance with formula (22.3). The loaded Q's of the filter resonant circuits
are determined from the formula:

Q‘”! /28_ (22.13)
In: a .

In filters with quarter-wave coupling, it is necessary to take into account the
influence of the frequency sensitivity and dispersive properties of the quarter-

wave line sections. The initial loaded Q of the filter sections is determined
from the formulas:

.. (center sections) (22.10
QR - Q. (Maw-«14 (cpunue ascnbs).
Q: =6 Qu (hlluP— n18 (xpaﬂaue sheen); (end sections) (22 . 15)

9e shall briefly deal with the problea of synthesizing a bandstop filter. A band-
pass filter is taken as the prototype here. By applying the transformation (22.2)

- 409 -
son oman. is: ONLY
FOR¢0FFKJA1.USE10NLY

to it, we obtain a bandstop filter. 'Ihe Chebyahev frequency characteristics of the
bandpass and bandstop filters are shown in Figure 22.4. As can be seen from Figure

22.4, the cutoff frequencies for the bandwidth and the insertion losses are the
sue for both filters:

Vnpllﬂoﬂvsp nae-S.- 9:.” nno=annae: (22. 16)
annne-iunse. Lsnne-Lmse. (22.17)

[mm I bandpass filter; nan: . bandstop filter].

The conversion (22.2) transforms the cutoff frequencies of the stopbands and the
loaded Q's of the tuned circuits:

(22.18)

' (v'. tune/S) (v; nae/£41. (22.19)

(Q: nnes) (Q. nae 8) =1.

Hhen equalities (22.18) and (22.19) are observed, the number of sections in both
filters is the same.

llet another type of filter is used in the microwave band which does not have any
analog at lower frequencies: the stepped filter. It consits of line sections of
equal length and different input impedances. In contrast to a stepped matching
transformer (taper), the change in the characteristic inedanca from step to step
takes place nonmonotonically here. ‘lhe design procedure for a stepped filter is
based on the use of a stepped transition as the prototype. The frequency response
of a Chebyshev stepped filter is described by the formla:

L414mﬂsﬁoﬁ' (22.20)
where 0 is the electrical length of one step.

A cowarison of the frequency responses of a filter and a transition show that
the frequency response of a filter is shifted by «[2, i.e., there where the transi-
tion has a stopband the filter has a passband. The length of the step amounts to

half the resonant wavelength. ‘lhe filter bandwidth is twice as narrow as the
bandwidth of the transition.

Thus, the solution of the problem of prototype synthesis of a bandpass microwave
filter is completed with the determination of the number of filter sections and
the calculation of the loaded Q's of the resonant systems of the sections.

At the present time, tables and auxiliary computed graphs are given in the refer-
ence literature for the parameters of filters which are encountered most

r410-
mohanuseouu
FEﬂICHﬂﬁCJAl.USE(MVLY

frequently in practice, for example, [1, ¢,u5, 0l6], because of which the design
calculations of a filter prototype are speeded up substantially.

Figure 22.4. The frequency responses of
Chebyshev bandpass and handstop
filters.

Key: 1. Bandpass filter;
2. Bandstop filter.

 

22.3. The Structural Execution of Hicrowave Filters

The execution of the structural design of the filters in the microwave band can
be extremely diverse.

A spatial resonator is used as a sicrowave resonator. With careful fabrication,
it has an extremely high Q: up to 15.000 - 20,000 in the centimeter band and
dimensions which are too large. For this reason, it is used in the short wave
portion of the centimeter band and the millimeter band as the resonant systems of
a filter for very narrow band filters.

The major types of resonators of microwave filters are the resonant sections of
transmission lines, which are open circuited, short-circuited or loaded into
IGICCII‘ICCI s

As is well known, short-circuited and open circuited line sections, the length of
which is a multiple of a whole number of quarter-wavelengths possess resonant
properties. Such systems, just as volumetric resonators, are multiple resonance
systems. The inherent Q of a resonant line section with a T-Iode is defined by
the formula:

' 0,-xyzma. (22.21)
where o is the coefficient of attenuation in the line.
The natural Q of coaxial and stripline resonators, filled with a dielectric,
amounts to 250 to 600 in the decineter band. For resonators filled with air, the

Q is increased up to 500 to 600. For waveguide resonators, the natural Q can
be calculated from the fornula:

Q. " (3%). (22.22)

“a "s

 

A waveguide resonator has an inherent Q of several thousand at centiseter
wavelengths.

- 411 -

FOR OIIWCIAI.IEHBCHULY
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

The topology of a half-wave resonator using striplines is depicted in Figure 22.5a.
The equivalent circuit of the resonator is shown in Figure 22.5h. when the center
of the resonator is shifted (Al), the anount of its coupling to the line changes.
i.e., the loaded Q changes. The greater Al, the higher the loaded Q of the
resonator.

The structural design of a three-section stripline bandstop filter with quarter-
wave coupling is depicted in Figure 22.6. The degree of coupling is adjusted
by means of hhe gap between the main stripline and the end face of the resonators.

As a rule, microwave filters are transmissiVe devices. For this reason, through
transnission resonators find the greatest application in then. We shall deal in
more detail with two types of transnissive resonators: a waveguide bounded on two
sides by reactive inhomogeneities, and a resonator made with coupled striplines.
These resonators find the greatest applications in microwave filters.

A waveguide resonator is depicted in Figure 22.7. It takes the forn of a waveguide
bounded at the end faces by reactsnces. in this case, inductive stops with a nor-
malized susceptance b. The resonant length of the resonator for the case of
inductive susceptances of h < 0 is determined from the formula:

2.. -_ .2 -'
1.: 2” (mt arclg m .n 1.2.3.... (22.23)

   

(bu)

Figure 22.5. A stripline resonator. Figure 22.6. A handstop filter.
Figure 22.7. A resonator in the form of a line
limited by inhomogeneities.

-412-
mommsomv
[a .0302? 0: Figure 22.8. A waveguide bandpass filter.

' ' Figure 22.9. A handpaas filter resonator using
"r coupled striplinea.

The loaded Q o: the resonator is:

 

q_ = ﬂ.(%)’(nn+ mtg I’Tl). (22.24)

For large and snall values of b, formula (22.26) can be siqlified. When Ibl > 50,

Q. -%‘¢:(L:.)'. (22.25)

and for call values of [1)], the quantity arctan(2/Ihl) -> 11/2 and:

Q',J;_|(AT..")9(M*%). (22.26)

For a filter with quarter-wave couplings, the spacing between adjacent sections ie
determined from the fertile:

. . I - -- -- (22. 27)
“a. n+1 "" (QM- 1) Mon—“no” +1.1..nl2. ’" ' 1- 2-

An array of inductive stubs and inductive steps is used as the reactive inhomo-
geneities in waveguide transmissive resonators. The natural Q's of centimeter

band resonators with inductive stubs anount to 1,500 to 2,000, and with inductive
stopa, 3,000 to 4,000.

A three-section bandpass filter with quarter-wave couplings is depicted in
Figure 22.8. The susceptance here is for-ed by the array of three inductive
Fill€lﬂﬂC1A1.lEﬂi(MVLY

stubs. The capacitive screws, which are placed in the center of each resonator,
are intended for the experiaental alignment of the filter.

d—O—

Figure 22.10. A bandpass filter.

Another widely used through transmission resonator is a resonator made with
coupled striplines. The resonant sections of line are coupled together with
distributed electrical and nagnetic coupling. tilters using such resonators sre
snall, structurally simple and their production can be auto-ted. The resonator
of a bandpass filter using coupled lines is depicted in tigure 22.9. In it, 0 is
the electrical_length of the coupling section, at the frequency equal to so I s/b.
The free area of the line can be short-circuited as depicted in Figure 22.9, or
open-circuited. The loaded Q of a resonator circuit using coupled striplines
is defined by the approximate fornula:

de ' 0."? 314,3." (22.28)

where r is the coupling resistance, deter-ined by the structural para-eters of
the line: the width and thickness of the strip, the spacing between the bases and
the spacing between the coupled striplines. The gap between the striplines
exerts the najor influence on r. Pornula (22.28) yields better precision, the
greater 010.5 is. The error in the calculation when Qloga > 20 does not exceed
12, and when Qlosd I 5, it increases up to 82.

The working attenuation function of a resonator using coupled striplines is:

- —--.—...._.., -.

.. ' _ H" s ' (22.29)
L ”("1” nine)” cqso.

 

 

It is convenient to calculate the coupling resistance r in terns of the cross-
talk attenuation of a directional coupler nude with coupled lines:

_ c-(1 {AMT , (22.30) ’

’ ‘1‘ .-
Im ornml. useomx
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

By means of series connecting the sections, one can obtain a bandpass filter. The
direct connection of the filter sections is depicted in Figure 22.10, where only
the conducting strip is shown.

A variant of s stripline bandpass filter is a filter using opposing stubs.

22.6. A Design Procedure for Microwave Filters

The technical requirements placed on microwave filters can be extremely diverse.
First of all, the frequency characteristics of a filter are important. Additional
requirements can be placed on filters which follow from specific operational or
production features. It is not always possible to meet all of the technical re-
quirements. The designer should have a clear~cut idea of the entire complex in
which the filter will be used.

The frequency properties of a filter are usually specified in terms of the para-
meters fpr, f-pr, Lpr, fz, f-z and Lg. Filter design begins with the selection of
the frequency response. we shall make one note: for a Chebyshev filter with an
even number of sections, the normalized output resistance Rout is not equal to
unity, but rather to tanh2(8/4), i.e., an ideal transformer is needed to match the
filter to the line. For this reason, Cbebyshev filters with an even number of
sections are rarely used: it is simpler to add one section.

In the following design step, the nuwer of sections is determinedby using fomlas
(22.7) and (22.8).

Then it is necessary to select the type of resonator coupling: direct or quarter-
wave. The length of a filter with direct coupling is less, and therefore, if
strict limitations are placed on the filter length, then a direct connection of
the sections is selected. Stripline filters are also most often direct coupled
filters, something which is explained by their structural compactness.

The length of quarter-wave coupled filters increases somewhat because of the
connecting line section. A merit of such filters is the smaller amount of coupling
between the sections, which makes it possible to independently tune the filter
section by section. The ohmic losses in filters with quarter-couplings is less,

and the calculated characteristics are in better agreement with the actual ones,
which is explained by the lower values of the loaded Q's of the individual reso-
nators. The fabrication tolerances are less stringent here. A drawback to quarter-
wave coupled filters is the considerable length and limited bandwidth, which should
not exceed 152.

The subsequent design consists in finding the loaded Q's of the prototype filter
sections. The calculations can be made using formulas (22.9) - (22.13), or what

is simpler, by making use of the extensive reference literature [1, S, 014]. Then
the problem of the practical realisation of the resonators is solved. In this case,
first the type of line, resonant frequency and passband are selected. The design

calculation procedure is governed by the specific type of resonator and is not
given here.

-415.

momanuseoutv
FIHICHNWCIAI.USE(H§LY

He shall limit ourselves to some recommendations are general guidelines. Very
narrow band filters with a bandwidth of 0.5 to 11 can be realized only by using
high Q systems: spatial resonators, waveguides and air filled atriplines.

Waveguide filters are used at frequencies 5 to 10 03:. The majority of these

filters are through transmissive resonators with quarter-wove coupling (figure 22.8).
If the resonator is formed by inductive stubs, then the filter bandwidth is limited
to 201. Rich a greater bandwidth, stubs are needed which prove to be too thin to
replace with inductive stops. The tuning screws of the sections make it possible

to change the resonant wavelength of a resonator by 3 to 51.

Stripline filters are used in very wide range of wavelengths from tens of deci-
meters up to 3 cm. At longer wavelengths, the dimensions increase greatly and at
shorter wavelengths, the requisite fabrication precision increases. Stripline
filters using resonators with end coupling are designed for wavelengths of 60 to
4 cm and bandwidths of 0.5 to 51. with a greater bandwidth, the gaps between the
sections prove to very small. Stripline filters using opposing stubs operate
well at wavelengths of 70 to S cm with bandwidths of 2 to 501. They are quite
compact and well suited for production, and for this reason have found very wide-
scale application.

A conmon drawback to stripline filters is the difficulty of experimental alignment,
which is accomplished by changing the dimensions of the conducting stripline.

Coaxial filters are used at decineter and meter wavelengths.

the geonetric dimensions of resonators and other filter components are calculated
based on their equivalent circuits and using reference literature ll, 3, 4, 7].

Yor transmissive waveguidel resonators and end coupled stripline resonators, the
length and loaded Q of a resonator can be determined form fornulas (22.23) -
(22.27).

Microwave filters are manufactured in accordance with the third precision class
with a purity of the current carrying surfaces of no worse than V6 ... V7.

If the ohmic losses o in a filter do not exceed 1 d3, then they have little
influence on the frequency response, shifting it along the ordinate.

We will note that literature has appeared in recent years which is devoted to

automated (computer) filter design. The use of a computer makes it possible to
vary the change in many filter parameters, optimizing its requisite characteristics

[6].

-ua-

ms orilcun. use ONLY
INJR‘OIIH(1AI.IEHE(NVLY

CHAPTER 23. DIRECTIONAL COUPLERS AND DIRECTIONAL TILTBRS USING COUPLED STRIPLINES

Stringent requirements for cost reduction, increasing reliability as well as
reducing size and weight are placed on microwave band radio equipment, including
antenna arrays, both with mechanical and electrical scanning.

These requirements can be met to a certain extent by using strip transmission lines
in the antenna arrays. They are used as the channelising feeder system in the
decimeter band, and serve as the basis for the realisation of individual feeder
channel components in the decimeter and centimeter bands (power dividers, direc-
tional couplers, filters, etc.); the use of lumped reactive elements make it pos-
sible to use striplines in the meter wavelength range also.

The use of striplines in antenna arrays makes it possible to realise structures
which are more suited for production and have low sire, weight and coat.

To be numbered among the drawbacks of stripline structures are primarily the high
losses (especially inkthe centimeter band) as compared to waveguide and coaxial
transmission lines.

when comparing the possibilities for using microstripline and stripline elements
in antenna equipment, one must keep in mind the following. The use ofumicrostrip-
line elements is expedient and justified when fabricating individual components
and assemblies for both active and passive antenna arrays (phase shifters, mixers,
converters, amplifiers, etc.). However, in excitation circuits for antenna

arrays (the simplest series and parallel circuits or more complex ones with a
large number of directional couplers and filters), the advantages of microstrip—
line construction are lost because of the considerable losses in a long feeder

channel.

Questions of design calculations and planning of directional couplers (NO) using
coupled lines as well as loop type directional filters (NP) designed around direc-
tional couplers are treated in this chapter.

Directional couplers are used in antenna arrays primarily for the following:

--To obtain the requisiteiamplitude-phase distribution in the radiators of an
array;

--To decouple the radiators of an array, something which is especially important
for correct operation of a phased array; .

-In compensating circuits to reduce the influence of the affect of the change in
input impedancea of radiators during electrical beam scanning of a phased
antenna array;

--As elements of more complex radio frequency assemblies (phase shifters,
amplifiers, etc.).

- m -
roe onion. usaomv
Directional filters find application in transceiving (reradisting) antenna arrays
for the segregation of the receive and transmit channels. '

23.1. The Classification of Directional Couplers and Filters and Their Operating
Characteristics

A directional coupler is an eight-pole systen. The directional coupler transmis-
sion line through which the greatest power flows is called the primary line, while
the line in which a part of the power is split off is called the secondary line.
Directional couplers with three types of directivity are shown in Figure 23.1.

The major characteristics of directional couplers are: the crosstalk attenuation,
the directivity, the decoupling, the snatching of the arms of the coupler to the
input feed lines (sue), the phase relationships for the voltages in the output )
one and the working attenuation in the primary line.

The crosstalk attenuation is defined as the ratio of the primary line input power
to the output power of the working arm of the secondary line. For example, for
the coupler depicted in l'igure 23.la, the crosstalk attenuation is:

G. 4 l0 E (IE/'55.. (23.1)

The directivity is the ratio of the powers at the output of the working and non-
working arms of the secondary line. For example, for Figure 23.1a, the directivity
is:

(3.. = 10'}: (ﬁg/9.)." (23.2)
The decoupling [isolation] is defined as the ratio of the primary line input

power to the output power of the secondary line nonworking arm. For the eight-
pole network of (Figure 23.1a):

. (23.3)
C“ F l0 I“ (Pg/Pg).

The working attenuation of the primary line is defined as the ratio of the powers
at the input and output of the primary line. For Figure 23.1a:

.. ..___ (23.6)
Cu - [0 lg (Pg/Pg).

The matching of the directional coupler arm with the input feed line is charac-

terized by a standing wave ratio which is measured from the input arm of the
directional coupler, when matched loads are connected to the remaining arms.

-618-
roeornaaimromy
POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY

To determine the band coverage properties
of directional couplers, the najor charac-
teristics are determined as function of
frequency (wavelength).

De ending on the crosstalk attenuation

lei, directional couplers are broken down
into devices with strong coupli (ICI -

- 0...10 dB) and weak coupling ( c| > 10 dB).
Directional couplers which have different
power levels in the output arns (lcl -

- 3.01 dB), fall in a special class of con-
figurations: hybrid or 3 dB directional

 

p (c) couplers.
Figure 23.1. Three types of direc- Of the small directional couplers used in
tional coupler direc- practice, the following have becoae the
tivity. most widespread:

l) Coupled line couplers are the not
connect broadband devices with respect to
the frequency characteristics of the work-
ing paraneters; they make it possible to
realize both strong and weak coupling;

 

Figure 23.2. A directional filter 2) Loop couplers are the simplest to fabri-
in the fore of an cste and provide for the sinplest topo-
eight-pole device. logical configuration of the output networks

in nixers, phase shifters and switchers for
active phased antenna arrays;

3) Cascade coupled line couplers snake it possible to increase the bandwidth of the
device with a slight increase in structural coqlexity.

Directional filters are eight-pole devices which are used for the frequency
segregation of signals. If s nicrowave power source is connected to one of the
filter arms, for examle, to an 1 (Figure 23.2), than at a certain frequency fo,
almost all of the power will go to are 2 (the directional coupling arts). with

a change in frequency, a redistribution of the microwave power flux takes place:
the power in era 2 is reduced, while the power in are 3 (the direct coupled arn)
increases. If a natched load is connected to the arse of the filter, then with a
change in frequency, practically no power is split off to arm lo (the isolated arm).

Directional filters are nade as loop :types', with capacitive coupling and with
quarter-wave coupling lines. He shall treat questions of the design calculations
and structural design of single loop directional filters which use directional
couplers with coupled lines.

The main characteristics of directional filters are: the insertion loss factor
for the directional coupling circuit; the attenuation factor for the direct
coupling circuit, as well as these factors as a function of frequency.

-419-
FORWUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The insertion loss factor (attenuation coefficient) for the directional coupling
circuit is defined as the ratio of the primary line input power to the output power
of the working arm of the secondary line (Figure 23.2):

l'di.r‘.coup. I Lu“ “Hum/Pr)- (23.5)

The ratio of the powers at the primary line input and output is called the attenua-
tion factor for the direct coupling circuit:

- ' " ‘ (23.6)

I'dir. coup. L“:- 10 lg (mm). H

The matching of a directional filter to the input feed line is characterized by the
SW.

The definition of the directivity for directional couplers and directional filters
coincides with (23.2).

Directional couplers and filters can be designed around two types of striplines:
syuetrical (Figure 23.3a-c) and asyuetrical (Figure 23.3d). A drawback to an
asymetrical stripline is the lack of shielding (the impossiblity of designing
"mnltistory" modules around them), and the elevated losses due to radiation losses
in the line where c < 10. The expediency of using asymmetrical striplines with a
high relative dielectric permittivity c .>_ 10 (they are called nicrostriplines) was
discussed at the beginning of the chapter.

Questions of the design of directional couplers and filters using coupled sym- )
metrical striplinea will be treated in the following. The major parameters of such
lines (characteristic impedance, attenuation, Q and ultimate power) are related
to the geometric dimensions (the thickness t and width w of the conducting
strip, thickness 1) and width a of the substrate) as well as its type (configur-
ation, dielectric permittivity, specific conductivity of the material).

A detailed procedure for calculating the geometric dimensions of a stripline for
a specified characteristic ispedance is given in [015, 015. 1-6]. Also given

there are the types of substrates and the limitations on the dimensions of a
symmetrical stripline with a transverse electromagnetic wave are treated.

23.2. The Main Design Equations for single Section ‘1' Mode Coupled Line
Directional Couplers

Parallel Coupled Lines. Lines of various configurations (Figure 23.4) can he used
in T-mode coupled line directional couplers.

-420-

roe orncm. is: ONLY
“WWWLY

    
  
  
 

r..-..... . 1.,
- 0.....e.o.0'0.0.0,0 O

7’19,

. , , - - . c - c
3.0, o‘.‘.'.'.'...‘:o:.

     

 

   

  

I 'e‘ 'e'e'e'e'e'e'e'o'e'o V

..........

0 (d)

 

Figure 23.1.. Coupled ny-etrical etriplinea of varioua
configuratione.

Primarily the following are used in directional coupler: with looae coupling:
atriplinea with thin conductor. (Figure 23.loa); atriplinee with thin conductors
coupled through a alot (Figure 23.01:); atriplinea with circular inner conductors
(Figure 23.1w). The following are uaed in directional couplera with etrong
coupling: otriplinea with two thin inner coriductora, parallel to the outer platea
(Figure 23.“); ainilar etriplinee with dieplaced conductora (Figure 23.“); an
insert type configuration with thin conductors (Figure 23.“); otriplinea with

-421.-

memoseouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with two thin inner conductors perpendicular to the outer plates (Figures 23.10g)
and those with thick rectangular rods (F'igures 23.1w).

‘lhe use of a line with a particular configuration depends on any factors. However.
configurations shown in Figure 23.1w is most frequently used for loose coupling,
directional couplers with sidewall coupling, while the figure of 23.“ for the

case of strong coupling is used for directional couplers with end face coupling.

b ' O * . ._...£ .. 1:! .. :

a) (a) J) (b) ”(c) "((1)

Figure 23.5. The electrical lines: of force in coupled striplines with
even and odd excitation.

Design Equations. Identical coupled lines represent a symetricsl eight-pole
network, the analysis and synthesis of which can be accomplished by neans of a
classical transmission matrix or using wave transmission and scattering matrices
with the syuetry analysis technique. In accordance with this nethod, the task
of studying a directional coupler using identical coupled lines reduces to the
description of the processes in the two pairs of four-pole networks for the case
of in-phase (even) and out-of-phase (odd) excitation (Figure 23.5).

The scattering matrix of an ideally matched directional coupler using coupled
lines with isolated arns (l and It in Figure 23.1a), where this coupler represents
a symetrical eight-pole network, has the form:

0 s.._s,. 0"“
‘ns' 0 0.310
5- '
II M o o m . (23.7)
0 $1. 3” 0
I Kslno
where 812"—J——_;
Messenﬁnno
“I—m—o '
- VF'RI- moHuno'
‘uﬂ'l: 314-0;
In this case:
Kim; «1......311 (23.8)
Pus'H'sn A '
- 622 .-

I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pm and 90,. are the normalized characteristic impedances for even and odd excita-
tion respectively; A . 1/54. the wavelength in the stripline; l is the length
of the coupling line; A is the wavelength in air.

It must be kept in. mind that the following relationships hold true:

IsuP-Hml’el (23.9)

is the unitary condition for the scattering matrix;

-u (23 10)
mouj=l

is the condition for ideal matching and isolation.

It follows from formlas (23.7) and (23.8):

1. The power distribution between inputs 3 and 2 of the directional coupler
(Figure 23.1a) depends on the electrical length of the coupling line 0. As a
rule, we choose:

1- AJ4 (0 =- 312), (23. 11)

where A0 is the center wavelength of the working frequency band, defined in the
transmission line (A0 is the center working wavelength; e is the relative
dielectric permittivity of the substrate). At this wavelength, the scattering
matrix element 812 (or the coupling) is naximua, while the absolute value of the
coupling coeffi ients between the lines at the center frequency when 0 - 3/2 is
equal to K . IS 2| and is defined by expression (23.8).

2. The phase difference in the signals at output 3 and 2 amounts to 90’, which is
easily established from (23.7):

8'8 ('1J9Is)'_‘-“/2'

where the signal phase leads at output 2, which follows from (23.7), (23.8) and
the inequalities go even > 90 odd and K > 0.

It is convenient to represent formulas (23.7) and (23.8) in the form:

Kain 0 e”.

Sum——
" l/LSRTEEYE ' (23.12)

VCR—n" "_'
_______I_ am em am. (23.13)

where
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

 

*"_°m‘( : ‘80) (23 24)
new +'K)/(I¥ E: g-VWL f/(‘I‘J’I I) .' (”'15)

At the center frequency of the passhand (l - Ito/lo):
.... .___-——_ (23.16)

liter"- l—lshP-K‘.

In accordance with expression (23.l)-(23.b), we write the rain characteristics
of coupled line directional couplers, assuming for the sake of definition that
an 1 is the input on (Figure 23.la):

The voltage standing wave ratio at the input:

 

.+..',.._ (23.17)
K“=——l-Ihll I
The crosstalk attenuation: ~ I n -
-lOl
c, a I‘m" ' (23.18)
_. _..._‘
The working attenuation . |
C -IOI ——
" 3 "up“: (23.19)
The isolation C IOI l
u .. g "“ . (23.20)
The directivity: " ' ' '
0 =1 J21 ‘
“ Olg l‘ul'. (23.21)

Bandwidth Properties. It follows fru expressions (23.12) - (23.15) that the
quadrature relationships between the voltages in the output arms of directional
couplers using identical coupled lines are preserved at all frequencies.

The elenents Sn and $14 of the scattering uetrix are equal to zero st all frequen-
cies if condition (23.10) is net, i.e., in this case the directional coupler is
ideally latched (sun; - 0) and possesses ideal isolation C11. 9 - (the directivity

cz'. e o).

-= AC
I F '- . (23.225)
where
- ‘2‘ up

FOIOFI'IGALUSEONLY
MWUSEONLY

 

Acu- 10|8l|+(l—K')ctg‘0I: (23.22:)
Cu-Cta+ACu: (23.23.)

I
Ch '0" l—K! ' . (23.233)
AC..- lolg(l—K'cos’0). (23 no)

In the expreeeiona given here, cg: and 693 are the directional coupler paranetera
at the center frequency of the band; 501; and A013 are the deviations in the direc-

tional coupler para-etera fro- their average value within the working frequency
band.

 

Figure 23.6. 'lhe frequency reaponeee of the croaatalk attenuation of
a directional coupler uaing coupled linea.

TABLE 23. l

The frequency characteriatica of the croon-
talk attenuation, calculated in accordance
with (23.22a) - (23.22c), are ahown in
Figure 23.6 and together with Table 23.1
(“0.5 and “0.2 are the handwidtha in
percent at the 0 5 and 0.2 dB levels of
deviation frat 0?; reepectively) nake it
poaaihle to eatinate the bandwidth proper-
tiee of very simple directi l couplera
uaing coupled liner. When 36; .. -, Mo's
tenda to the ultinte value of 1022.

 

Directional Coupler Operation with Unmatched bonds. A detailed atudy of the
impact of umtchcd loada with couple: reflection factora 1'1, 1'2, 1‘3 and 1‘...
connected to the correaponding arm 1—4 of a coupled line directional coupler

-625-
MWWMY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NNLY

on its major characteristics is made in [015]. A conclusion of practical import-
;1ce follows from [015]: that it is necessary to carefully fabricate the coaxial
to stripline (or waveguide to stripline) junctions, the points where the direc-
tional coupler joins other radio frequency assemblies, which are the major sources
of inhomogeneities, so that Iril < 0.05; in this case, all of the amjor character-
istics of the directional coupler will differ to an insignificant extent from the
nominal values.

23.3. Extended Bandwidths Directional Couplers Using Coupled Lines

The bandwidth of coupled line directional couplers can be extended by increasing the
number of sections of equal electrical length 0 which are cascaded together. Such
multiple section directional couplers, although they make it possible to obtain
multiple octave bandwidths, are nonetheless larege in size as compared to the
extremely simple directional couplers described in the precious sections. something
which makes it difficult to use them in antenna arrays. Design relationships are
given in this paragraph for a compact tandem directional coupler, in which a cascade

configuration of two directional couplers, R01 and H02 (Figure 23.7), is used to
widen the bandwidth.

iﬂth such a configuration, the production
process realization of a directional coupler
with strong coupling is also simplified and
the requirements placed on the tolerances
during coupler fabrication are reduced.
Generally speaking, several directional
couplers can also be connected in a similar
manner. When a signal is fed to arm 1, out-
put signals appear in arms 6 and 3; arm 2 is
decoupled. A tandem directional coupler

 

Figure.23.7. The topology of a [la] is a symmetrical eight-pole network
tandem directional with the coupling shown in Figure 23.1b; for
coupler consisting of it, we shall use symbols with a subscript
two directional. A -. "P': the crosstalk attenuation is c151, the
couplers. working attenuation is 613T, the directivity

is Caz: and the decoupling is 0121 (cf.
formulas (23.1) - (23.é)).

The parameters c.“ r are defined on analogy with (23.18) - (23.21), with the sub-
stitution of Sun I for sun, where S.“ r are the elements of the scattering matrix
of the tandem directional coupler, which are found by known methods in terms of the
scattering matrix s.n for 801 and 802 (Both Ho's [directional couplers] are assumed
to be identical: K1 - [2 I K, while the connecting sections are equal).

Then:

s,"-__’M—, (23.21.)
(«0+1Vﬁ-7aa 0)’

- 1.26 -
ma or‘nm’usz ouur
'u.

_ {—7-qu
- («no +1Vl'+-ﬂsln o)’ '

(23.25)

where r - K/Jl - K2; 0 is the electrical length of the coupling region of ROI and
802; K is the coupling coefficient at the center frequency for 801 (or 802).

At the center frequencies (0 I 1/2):

I I'r‘vl-Kq-zx’ [—120
ltfaP- i-ltlur- '

(23.26)

(23.26s)

Expression (23.26) defines the crosstalk attenuation of a tendon directional
coupler (Ky) haoed on the known coupling coefficient K for 801 (or 302); the
inverse relationship to (23.26), uhich takes into account the feasibility of the
directional couplers conprising the tanden configuration is:

 

4: 11,: a: w t:

Figure 23.8. The frequency character-
istics of the coupling
[coefficient] of tandea
directional couplers using
coupled lines.

- 627'

_k;;}.L—r5éfw/rz

(23.27)

The crosstalk attenuation as a function
of frequency is:

V:|%l-‘b_"—_ “— Rl‘ho (23.28)
l—K'+K'sin'0'
Then:
E;__::;___._u~r._;: .....h. _ u
3h 0" l.ufP-' C'Qt'i'ACu'.
(23.29a)
where cf""lo_"Ts'f:_,F'
.I (23.29b)

determines the coupling at the center
frequency (0 . 1/2);

roamimouu
FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY

m—— ' ' (23.29c)
AC =10] l-K'+K'sln'o:
W . “(——-...o }

is the deviation of the coupling of the tandsn directional coupler fro- the
average value in the working frequency band.

mm 23.2

 

The frequency characteristics of the coupling coefficient, calculated in accord-2
ance with (23.28)--(23.29), are shown in Figure 23.8 and in conjunction with
Tables 23.2 (“0.5 and “0.2 are the bandwidths in percent at the 0.5 db and 0.2
dB levels for the deviation from 0921' respectively) make it possible to estisste
the bandwidth properties of extrenely siaple tsnden directional couplers using
coupled lines.

It snst he kept in nind that the electrical lengths of the sections 2’-2" and 3'4",
which join the directional couplers (figure 23.7), are to he nsde identical.

23.10. The Characteristic Inpedances of Coupled Lines in the Case of in-Phase and
Out-of-Phase Excitation

It should be noted that the expressions cited in 523.2 are valid for directional
couplers using identical lines reandless of the configuration of the latter. The
structural (gee-etric) dimensions and the electircal characteristics of directional
couplers are related by neans of the characteristic i-pedances for the case of
in-phsse (even) 90 even and out-of-phase (odd) an odd excitation.

the determination of the values 90 en and 90 odd represents a rather conplex
nathesntical problen, for the solut of which three nain nethods are used: the
solution of Laplace's equation with boundary conditions, a solution min: the
technique of confornal upping and the precise calculation of the stripline capaci-
tance.

Coupled Striplines with Lateral Coupling (FigureuZSJoa). For a zero thickness
(t/b - 0), the precise value of the characteristic impedance 00 even is computed
fro. the fornula: '

I -E‘LNI _.- I (23.30.)
P" v; Kno‘

-628 -
moinmustouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where ﬂirt.) is a complete elliptical integral of the first kind;

{.mth %%}th(—} '2”); k€= V.i-' 1:2. (23.30»)

 

The precise value of the characteristic impedance ie:

 

Do ';_._'-__.‘ (23.31.)
where: ' n - ° .+s
h'aih (7 T)bth( 9 kn VI—il

(23.3lb)

One can employ the following fornulss with a high degree of precieion (en error of
less than 11 for w/h ; 0.35), when calculating no even and no odd for conducting
stripe of zero thickness:

 

. “'- Whig/v.- F‘ (23.32.)
{- + 7+7 "'['+“'(‘?)]
_4.I_~JL_.
P” _:'. + {1+ i—In[l+dh_(%)] (23.325)

The values of no even end no odd as a function of the geometric dineneions of the
coupled lines are shown in Figure 23.9 in the forms of nomogrems. A straight line
joining the specified values of no even and no odd- positioned on the outside

scales, will yield the value of wit: and 8/h at the intersection of the center
scale.

Striplines with Lateral Coupling.(Pigure 23.45. c and h). For coupled etriplines
with conductors heving a thickness greeter'thsn 0 (t/b 9' 0) (Pigure 23.6h), the
forwlee for the celculation of no even end no odd and the corresponding tables
and graphs are given, for exanple, in [1, 6]. The velues of no even and no d
ere calculated for the configuration of Figureuz3Joh using the formulas in [if 5),
end for the configuration in Figure 23.6c, using the formulas in [S].

- 1.29 '- .
ma omcm. us: on“
End Pace Coupled Striplinea (Figure 23.lod). The equations for 90 even and 90 odd
of coupled atriplinee of zero thickneu (t/h . 0) with end face coupling have the

font:
9° . a lma/Vo- ' (23.33a]
m" 9" u/(b-S)+(In4)/a+.cm. '
p." lammow‘
90 odd ' IIO—S)+Clu. '_ (23.3%}
C S b 8
—=—ln——ln(l———).
where: '0 - “5 3 ‘ ‘
These equationa are valid when
all) 3.0.35 - db>0.35. . (23.3»:
”For” ”Au-5" "Mar #0 - «$.95:
2‘. m - 0
3'0 are. L. I” v
e no
III
M
N
" w :2
so '3 .9
ﬂ 4’ U
3 m
" ' am
720 W .
W: M
, I”-
m 25 .

 

ﬁgure 23.9. Noaograno for the determination of. the distension: 8/1: (a)

and vb (h) in coupled atriplinea for opecified values of
"on [characterietic iqedance with in-phaae (even)‘excita-
non] and'pon [characteriatic impedance with out-of-phaoe
(odd) excitation]

-630_-

MOWUSEONLY
53......

I.§I!.wi.!
I'IIEI.I=I_=
IEIIEE-EI
I.'=I‘ili_l
iIIHISEUII

. 3 , .4
.g—qhwmp‘.
.l..=.' I.-V
.‘_.ji..-I__
"I-IsI.i‘
I-'!-.==-
"s.~»'.-~Q

III-IIIIIIHI .-
IIIIIIIIISII II

,‘ _
IIIIIIEIEIEII:

 

  

0/9

10. The ”metric Ghanaian; of coupled etripl

   

  

 

  

u

 

 

 

IIII-IIKIIII.I-:=—II
III-IEII=I!
III-IIIIIIII.II=
IIIIIIIIEII!
III-II...
III-IIIEI
III-II..-
III-II:

lung:- .-II 1.
liq-32.... R.
uni-=Ill
I. Iii-=3...
II.I:I:52=2III
IEII-I-==i=lllz
IIiE—illl a.
III-I:I:Il-Eilll
i=5=3IIII

Ile-

  

II:

IIISI!

IEIIIEIIII
III-II"_I!IE‘=-_IIII
EIIIEIIEIEI
.II
II LII .I
III-Illilli
IIIIII!
6I5IIIIE
# ¢

I... =IIII

Muhammﬁﬁnnu

I‘m-5.2.5....-

IIIIII=IIIII
IIIIEIESSSEIIIII
3. 2 . I 0

 

inee with end-face

coupling.

ﬁgure 23.

not

unity of the dimension!
10 u e functio

in Figure 23.

the precision of the conic

ietic {wedencee decreaeet.

one are not met.

If these conditi
to the character

excitation. To take

t in-phue

for the can 0

are shown

istic impedance no even

The dimensions of coupled striplinee

the characte:
the finite thickneaa of a conductor into

account (U!) 9‘ 0), one ahould uae Kon'e
correctione [5, 6].

Striplinee with End-Face Coupling (Figure 23.4e-g). To calculate 90 odd and

90 f3?” for the configuration depicted in 23.6e, one met make use of the reeulta
of ;

the characteriatic impedance of the lines ahown in Figure 23.“, g were
treated in [5].

Coupled microatrip lines with end-face c

oupling (a configuration similar to
Figure 23.1“) are treated in [014, 015].

23.5. The Relationship Between the Structural and Electrical Characteriatice

A Stripline Directional Coupler with Lateral Coupling (Figure 23.4a). The rela-

tionahip between the atructural and electricel characteriatice ia determined from
expreuione (23.32a) and(23.32b) after auhatituting no even and

(23.15) in then and after the appropriate tranafornationa. Then'

 

        
 
           

       
  

     

     
  
       
  
   

  
    
   
 

   
  

  
  
 

  

w , ' 3/»
I. III:
I. III
:5 555'
4‘ II a ' E
.1: ' ' :: 7.5:;
l‘ r“
a: E. 5': “342““!
I . n- wean-u
... xv '-:|§;!r=::.::::::
:E II. vﬁﬁii IIEIII:
I . "upgra-
4 II 43 III/94‘... : II:
:5- ﬁszngai. :5
.;_2. 5n... neg-ill:
«2’. lllllllll III I

         

 

5H3'5:'5:=:5“35*
i::::l:::::::l:::lw

'

- ::=!!!!!!El!!!ll!!m

_ iEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE'J
ow 20 :0 M so a:

  
      

Figure 23.11. 0:: the determination of th

e geometric dimension. of directional
couplere with aide couplin
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

s l N'ISuK (23.34)
—m—ln clh ' ,
b ' [ Po V0 Vi-K‘]

 

 

a 9¢J5 I- I
me I+K —-;ln[2(l+expx)|. (23.35)

Uh .
"2 x= —Iss.aump. 1/; V—mx .

l
I
II
II
SI
‘1.
ii
:~‘
.2
II
II

   

I Z J O J I 7 0 04d! t’ J! 445

Figure 23.12. 0n the determination of the geometric dimensions of directional
couplers with end-face coupling.

8

Values of the structural psruetere S/h and all) are nhown in Figure 23.11 as a
function of the coupling coefficient at the center frequency CY; - K for no I

- 50 ohm st values of the relative dielectric permittivity of the suberete e of
from 1 to 3.

It is useful to eoploy extensive material from graphs and tables (especially when
the ratio t/b f 0) in the calculations [6].

For K < 10 dB, the dimension 5 can become infeasible either structurally or in
terns of the production proceaa, and then it is preferable to eaploy end face
coupling (see Figure 23.“).

«633 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stripline Directional Coupler with End-Face Coupling (Figure 23.4d). The relation-
ship between the structural design and electrical characteristics is determined by

expressions (23.33a) and (23.33b):

 

._ %-V%[Vﬁ—%:%ﬂ_ ;. (23.36)
H3?“ gﬂ;(%)(n-%)]+a(n-%)x
3'"("%)+(%)m(%)l:_ -' (23.37)

Curves for the parameters s/b and w/b are shown in Figure 23.12 as a function of
the coupling coefficient at the center frequency c 2 - K for no I 50 ohms and for
various values of c. The limitations imposed on (23.36) and (23.37) as well as by
inequalities (23.33c) reduce the accuracy of the relationship of the geometric
dimensions and the coupling coefficient‘in the region falling below the dashed

lines.

To determine 5 from the ratio s/b found from (23.36). the following relationship
should be used (see Figure 23.6d):

8'- M. (23.38)

 

Figure 23.13. 0n the calculation of the geometric dimensions of a
3 dB directional coupler with in-phaae coupling.

Stripline directional couplers with end-face 3 dB coupling occupy a special place
in the design of antenna arrays; the curves for w/b and s/b are shown to these

couplers in Figure 23.13 as a function of the dielectric permittivity c for no -
- 50 and 75 ohms.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23.6. The Major Design Relationships for Single Loop Directional Filters Using
Striplines

A single loop directional filter using striplines can be obtained from two direc-
tional filters by connecting terminals 2' - l" and lo' - 3" (Figure 23.16).

The design procedure for such directional filters, which presupposes the design of
the microwave structure around a prototype filter with lumped parameters [5], has
a number of limitations and in some cases yields a perceptible error. and for this
reason, we shall give theoretical relationships, the basis for which is the tool

of wave matrices [7]. Such an approach nakes it possible to use the basic expres-
sions derived in 523.2.

The scattering matrix of a single loop directional filter uith equilateral loops
and identical coupling (K1 - K2 I K), consisting of identical directional couplers
with coupling sections (ROI and H02) of equal electrical length 0 (Figure 23.16)
has the following form (for the sake of determinancy, we assume that the first arm
1' is the input):

0 "“ "" 0- (23.39)

where 'au-FuKI-ih (23.40)

is the transmission gain of the directional filter from one line to another through
the directional coupling channel;

gm ';ll'.'-;:2 “in/(l _;:’) (23.41)

is the transmission gain of the directional filter from one line to another through
the direct coupling channel;

Samar”, ils‘ﬂa¢-'.; (23.42)

812 and 813 are determined by (23.12) - (23.110).

The frequency properties of the various filter networks are defined by the expres-
sion for the input losses 1. as a function of frequency. For the directional
coupling channel (l'-2" and 3'40") in accordancevith (23.5):

I‘di.r.¢:oup.'r Avg-:10" I . (23.43)
"no"

~435-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Then, taking (23.6) and (23.44) into account, we derive the following expression
for the attenuation of the directional filter in the forward circuit (l'-3', 2"-4"):

. _.. .-.—-.. ...—..- . ..-—_..“—

 

L.,..10lg|,u.,, IOI¢[1+(-——2VCR; ‘3‘”) J (23.4.6)

Thus, the frequency characteristics of the channels of the filter considered here,
without taking losses into account, are governed by functions (23.64) and (23.66).
By analyzing then, one can establish the frequency properties of directional
filters.

1. The directional coupling channel behaves as a bandpass filter with periodically
alternating passbands. The argu-ent of the frequency characteristic is cotO, and
for this reason, its zeros are located at the points 00 I (2n - l)w/2, while the
poles are located at the point 0. - ns, n I l, 2, 3...

2. The forward channel is similar in terns of its frequency properties to a stop-
hand filter. The stopbands alternate periodically, and in this case, the argument
of the frequency characteristic is tanO. The poles of the curve I."c [forward
insertion losses] are located at the points 0. - (2n - l)s/2, while the zeros are
located at the points 00 - n1, n . l, 2, 3, ...

3. With a decrease in the coupling
coefficient K, the passhands and the
stophands are narrowed, and vice-versa,
with an increase in K both bands widen,
where these functions are nonlinear.

Specifically, the indicated relationships
are established from the following
considerations. we introduce the approx-
imating function:

 

Figure 23.14. Outline drawing of a

325:: 1°” “mum“ ,i...£161};u'+I-'('cteolcts¢.m. (23.1.7)

- Q36 —
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 0,, is the electrical length corresponding to the edge of the specified
passband of the directional filter; h is a coefficient which defines the nonuni-
formity of the frequency response within the passband.

By equating the right sides of (23.104) and (23.47), and then solving the resultant
equality for K, taking into account the fact that K [0, l], we obtain:

K'I/F (my (23.1.8)

 

At the resonant frequency fo, all of the energy should be transmitted via the
directional coupling channel; in this case, in accordance with (23.64), Po I

- (2n - l)s/2. To assure the minimum loop dimensions (of the directional filter),
one is to set n - l, and taking (23.8) into account, we have:

own/2.- I';=I.'+'A'i.""o..:<i>.I:/i.;$.x./A.. (2M9)
1-A./4=A./4Va‘. (23.50)

where flu“) is the frequency (wavelength) corresponding to the edge of the
specified passband; Af is half of the passband.

'lhe design of a directional filter is completed with the plotting of the frequency
characteristics for Ldit,¢°up.’(23.6lo) and L“ (23.46), shown in Figure 23.15 for
one special case of the values of directional filter parameters.

23.7. The Influence of Tolerances on the Parameters of Directional couplers

Hhen fabricating printed circuit directional couplers and filters, it is important
to esimate the impact of the structural (geometric) tolerances on such parameters
as the crosstalk attnuation, isolation and standing wave ratio of the inputs

[014, 015, 8].

Curves for the change in the most iaportant parameters of a side coupled direc-
tional coupler (Figure 23.1“) are shown in Figure 23.16 as a function of the
tolerances for the geometric dimensions: the width of the conducting strip in
the coupling region w, the gaph s and the dimension b for various coupling
coefficients K. Increasing the width by Aw and the spacing between them by
As reduces the coupling in a directional coupler by Ac, while increasing the
dimension b causes the coupling to increase.

It follows from the graphs that with identical tolerances for Aw/wand ASIS,
changing the gap 8 has a great effect in the case of weak coupling and chang-
ing w does the same with strong coupling.

It should also be noted that making the gap 8 in directional couplers with
strong coupling IC°| < 10 dB with a precision of even 10 percent (AC 5 0.2 dB is
structurally difficult to do because of the small size of the gap itself.

- 637 9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 23.15. meoretical frequency responses.

f/fo ' 1.0068 (ZAfo/fo 8 11);

h " 0.5 dB.
The curves sh om

The curves shown in Pigure 23.17 make it possible to draw the conclusion which is
of practical inportance that it is possible to construct directional couplers
with s crosstalk attenuation of 2 to 8 dB only by changing the gap 8 (Figure

2%.“) with a constant width of the strip in the coupling region (designed for
c 2 - s as).

The tolerance for the coupling section length Z can be easily estimted, taking
(23.8) into account, by neans of the curves shown in Figures 23.6.

We will note that in the realization of directional filters, it is necessary to
specify such tolerances for the geometric dimensions of the directional couplers

(801 and B02 in Figure 23.14) that they are equal in terms of their absolute
value and opposite in sign.

   

0
4’ 40

MDGJs”

   
   
   

0)

' W
I)

Figure 23.17. 0n the influence of tolerances on the parameters of a
directional coupler with end-face coupling (90 - 50 ohns):

Solid curves are for CF-ZA substrate material;
Dashed curves are for PAP-lo substrate material.

0n the Precision of the Realization of Printed Circuit Directional Coupler
Dimensions. In the fabrication of microwave printed circuits using striplines

9439-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE1DNLY

made of foil materials, better precision in the reproduction of the circuit
dimensions is realized using photochemical technology: down to 39.025 an (I 0.1 am
when the drawing is«nade with Hhatnan's paper and 19.05 mm when the drawing is
made on glass).

The process of cutting out the conductors with the requisite configuration can be
used successfully in the case of nonseries production of striplines; in this
case, the precision of the reproduction of the major dimensions of a directional
coupler can be kept within :9.1 mm, and for couplers with end coupling, dielectric
inserts are used which nake it possible to change the gap size with s precision

of 19.03 mm and less.

23.8. The Structural Design of Directional Couplers and Filters Using Coupled
Striplines.

Some Recommendations for the Structural Design of Printed circuit Directional
Couplers and Filters. The correctness of the structural design of printed circuit
directional couplers and filters using couple. lines determines their electrical
characteristics to a considerable extent. Besides the limitations imposed on the
dimensions of striplines with the dominant node, the following recommendations
should be adhered to [0.14, 0.15, 1-6]:

1. The bend angle of a stripline a (see Figure 23.14) (the necessity of a
bend arises in the fabrication of a directional filter for the sake of conven-
ience in bringing the conducting stripline into a coaxial-stripline jucntion or
to a matched load, etc.), is to be chosen equal to 30...45°.

Fastening screws are to be provided for a tight contact between the upper and
lower circuit boards of directional couplers and filters, where these screws are
arranged at a distance of no closer than 2b to 3b from the conducting strips.
The fastening screws also serve to suppress higher nodes at the points of con-
nection of coaxial to stripline transitions and other inhomogeneities.

Figure 23.18. A directional coupler with
lateral coupling.

Key: 1, 6. Fastening boards;

2. Upper circuit board of
the directional
coupler;

. RF plug connector;

Conducting strips;

Lower circuit board of

the directional

coupler;

7. Roles for the fasten-
ing screws;

8. Fastening screws.

M599

 

- “b0 -

FOR'OFEKJAI.USB(HVLY
. A directional coupler with
end-face coupling:

Pas tening boards;

Upper board of the directional
filter;

Dielectric spacer;
Conducting strips;
RP plug connector;
Conducting strips;

Lower board of the directional
filter;

. Roles for the fastening screws;
fastening screws.

lb,” '
.22 Figure 23.20. Experimental characteristics of a
” directional coupler with end-face
”a” . coupling.

 

‘-

l’igure 23.21. Block diagram of a
transceiving module of
a phased antenna array.

Key: 1 . Radiator;

. NPZ - directional filter
filter 2;

B3

 

3. Directional filter I;
6. Directional coupler;
5- ftrans:
I... 6. freceive;
,2. 7. Hodule input;
._ 8. To the next nodule.
"in
IN
”or

3. When manufacturing a large batch of the elemnts considered here, it is expedient
to experimentally work out their corner sections using breadboarded models, since,
strictly speaking, corner inhooogeneities slightly change the equivalent length of
a line section; Another effective nethod of aligning a directional filter is the

use of four tuning screvs, arranged about the perimeter of the loop at intervals of
Act“, as shown in Figure 23.14 (the snail dark circles).

-441-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 23.22. A multilevel configuration of a transceiving nodule of a
phased antenna array.

Key: 1. Hatched load;

. Upper and lower boards of the directional coupler;
. Transmitting channel phase shifter;

. Multilevel UP transition;

Dielectric spacer of directional filter 1;

. Upper and lower boards of directional filter 1;

. Module output to the radiator;

e

2

3

a

5

6

7

8 Upper and lower circuit boards of directional
filter 2;

9 Receive channel phase shifter.

Structural designs of coaxial to stripline and waveguide to stripline transitions

are treated in [016, 015, 1-6]. An exaaple of the design of a luaped latched
lead is shown in Figure 23.22, while a distributed load is shown in [015, 015].

Practical Structural Designs for Directional Couplers and Filters. Structural
designs of directional couplers and filters are shown in Figures 23.18 and 23.19.
The construction of tendon directional couplers, designed in accordance with
‘Figures (23.7), is facilitated when the directional couplers are realised using
lines with end-face coupling; in the case of directional couplers with side
coupling, it is necessary to use layer to layer transitions (Figure 23.22).

The correctness of the design calculations and structural design solution, arrived
at in the planning stage, is evaluated during the process of laboratory tests.
Special cases of the appropriate frequency responses are shown in Figure 23.15
for directional filters and in Figure 23.20 for directional couplers.

A block diagren of a transceiving nodule for a phased array which is used in
directional couplers and filters is shown in Figure 23.21, while its realisation

~4429

FOI1OFFHJA1.DSB(HVLY
in a three-level design is shown in Figure 23.22. The conductors of the symmetrical
atriplines are made in the form of a meander to reduce the longitudinal dimensions;
the directional couplers and filters are made with end-face coupling.

The module (Figure 23.21) operates as follows: the signal at the transmit frequency
ftrans from the input of nodule (I) is fed through the directional coupler with

the corresponding division to the next module (II) and through the level to level
transition (4) (Figure 23.22) to the input (III) of the directional filter Nil.
Then thesignal(ftgans) is further fed through the forward coupling channel of NFl
to the input (IV) of the phase shifter of the transmitting channel, and following
the appropriate phasing, to the input (V) of N72 [directional filter 2], through

the forward coupling channel of which the signal (fgggng) is fed to the input (VI)
of the phased array radiator.

In the reception mode, the signal (free) is fed from the output (VI) of the radia-

tor via the directional coupling channel of directional filter 2 to the input (VII)
of the receive channel phase shifter, and following the appropriate phasing, is

fed to the input (VIII) of directional filter 1, and through the directional coup-

ling channel to the input (III) of the directional coupler and through the level to

level transition (IV) (Figure 23.22) and the directional coupler to the input of
the module (I).

23.9. The Design Procedure

When designing printed circuit directional couplers and filters, besides the re-
quirements placed on the major electrical characteristics, there are limitations
on the size and weight, temperature and radiation conditions, power handling
capacity, etc., which follow from the requirements placed on an antenna array.
Before setting about the calculation of the electrical characteristics.in the
general case, it is necessary to choose the type of stripline and its character-
istic impedance, as well as the type of coupling (side, end-face, mixed) for the
directional couplers and filters, working from an entire series of contradictory
requirements, where one is governed by the requirements of 523.2 and 523.9 as well
as [014, 015- 1-6]. We shall limit ourselves to the treatment of the simplest
cases, introducing the following symbols to facilitate the presentation: P is the
power (CR or pulsed) transmitted through the directional coupler (or filter) in
Kw; fo (or lo) is the center working frequency (or wavelength) of a directional
coupler or the resonant frequency (or wavelength) of a directional filter in MHz
(or cm); 6Af (or +AX) is the wozking bandwidth, in MB: (or cm); AC is the pernns-
sible deviation of the crosstalk attenuation of a directional coupler from the
average value within the passband, in dB; 092 is the crosstalk attenuation of a
directional coupler at the center frequency* in dB; 0941 is the cro‘gtalk .gtenu-
ation of a tandem directional coupler at the center frequency**, in dB; C.in is

 

For the sake of definition, we assume that arm 1 is the input (Figure 23.1a).

**
See Figure 23.1b.

- 443 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the minimum isolation (or directivity) in the working passband, in dB; Ker max
[swn.,x] is the maximum value of the standingwwave ratio within the working pass-
band at the input to a directional coupler (or directional filter); 2Af (or 2AA) is
the passbsnd of a directional filter, in an: (or cm); h - Lac (fa) is the attenu-
ation factor at the boundary of the passband in the directional coupling channel,
dB; in (or 13¢) is the frequency (or wavelength) of the sigml transmitted through
the forward coupling channel of a directional filter, in H3: (or cm); Lac (fuc) is
the attenuation factor at the frequency f'c in the directional coupling channel,

in dB; [Pi]. i ' l, 2, 3, 4 is the absolute value of the reflection factors fro-
inhomogeneities in the inputs of a directional coupler (for example, coaxial to
stripline transitions); on is the characteristic impedance of the supply feed lines,
ohms; b/2 is the dielectric substrate thickness, in mm; t is the thickness of a
conducting strip, in mm; and c is the relative dielectric permittivity of the
substrate.

We shall consider the variant of the specifications for the calculation of the
structural and electrical parameters f a directional coupler using coupled lines.
The following are specified: P, f0, C§2 (or 0941, :Af (or ac), c'ﬁn, SHRmnx, the
line is a symmetrical stripline, no, and the dielectric substrate: a, b/2, t and
the type of coupling in the directional coupling is either side or end-face.

The following design calculation procedure is recommended.

1. Determine the width of a conducting strip, wo (Figures 23.18 and 23.19), using
the procedure given in [1-6, 014, 015], and then determine the a dimension of
the stripline (Figure 23.3a), taking into account the limitations in this dimen-
sion [1-6].

2. Find the attenuation, Q as well as the ultimate power by using [016, 015, 1-6].

3. Using the graphs of Figures 23.6 and 23.8, and Tables 23.1 and 23.2, establish-
ing the agreement between the passband :Af and the permissible coupling nonuniform-
ity, giving preference to the simplest directional couplers because of their
structural simplicity.

Using formulas (23.18) and (23.16), determine the coupling coefficients K for
the specified 092. However, if a tandem directional coupler is selected, then we
find the coupling coefficient of a tandem directional coupler, Kr, for the speci-i
fied Cl“ using (23.29b) and (23.25). and then we find the coupling coefficients
K from 23.27).

4. Determine the coupling line length l of the directional coupler using formu-
las (23.11).

5. Using expressions (23.15), find so even and p0 odd'

6. Using the known values of go even and 90 odd: determine the dimension of the
conducting strip in the coupling region w, and the gap 5, using formulas (23.30)-
(23.32) or the graphs of Figure 23.9 for a directional coupler with side coupling

and formulas (23.33) or the graphs of Figure 23.10 for a directional coupler with
end-face coupling. One can also employ formulas (23.36) - (23.37%

- 444 -

FOR OlIlClA1.USE(MULY
For directional couplers where 00 - 50 ohms and c . l, 1.5, 2, 2.5 and 3, the

dimensions 8 and w are most simply determined from the graphs of Figures 23.11
and 23.12, plotted in accordance with (23.34)-(23.37).

It is expedient to use the curves shown in Figure 23.13 to determine the dimen-
sions of a 3 dB directional coupler with in-face coupling where no I 50 and 75 ohms.

Equation (23.38) is to be used to determine 5 in the ratio S/b in a directional
coupler with end-face coupling.

7. The frequency resonse C12 . 012(f) is plottedifor the simplest directional
couplers, or Cl“? ' Cle(f) is plotted for tandem directional couplers in accord-

ance with formulas (23.22) and (23.29), or the appropriate curves from Figures
23.6 and 23.8 are used.

8. where necessary, find the phase relationships at the outputs from formulas
(23.12) -_(23.14), (23.26) and (23.25) respectively.

9. Estimate the influence of the nonideal nature of the matched loads and the
corresponding coaxial stripline transitions (or other inhomogeneities at the out-
puts of the directiondl coupler) on K, cmin and SHRnnx from the specified values
of Iril. using 523.2.

10. Working from the requirements placed on the values of 692 (or Aclz), Cain and
swamax, set the appropriate tolerances for the precision in the realization of the
geometric dimensions of the directional coupler, as indicated in 523.7.

11. Draw the directional coupler (Figures 23.18, 23.19 and 23.22) taking into
account the recomlendations for the structural design of printed circuit direc-
tional couplers.

Notes: 1. If the type of stripline and coupling in the directional coupler are not
stipulated, then it is recommended that they be selected where is one is governed
in this case by the considerations indicated in the literature [01h, 015, 1-6].

2. If the passhand of the directional couplers considered here using coupled lines
do not satisfy the technical requirements, it can be widened by using multiple
section directional couplers or two or more tandem directional couplers [014, 015].

It must he kept in-mﬁnd that the use of a tandem directional coupler substantially
improves the isolation (or directivity) as compared to the simplest directional
couplers, for which because of structural and production process factors, the
decoupling does not exceed 20 to 30 dB.

We shall further consider the specification variant for the calculation of the
structural design and electrical parameters of single loop directional filters
using coupled lines. Required: design a directional filter which segregates the
receive channel (arm 2" in Figure 23.14) and transmit channel (arm 3') when working
into a common antenna (arm 1'); a matched load is connected to the free arm of the
directional filter (h").

- 445 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The following are specified: P, f0 - frec. 2Af, h I Lac (f.), f" ' ftrans»

Lac (fuc), the line is a synmetrical stripline, the value of e for the substrate,
b/Z, t, and the type of coupling in the directional coupler is either in-phase or
side coupling.

The following design calculation procedure is recommended:

1. Perform calculations similar to those in paragraphs 1 and 2 for directional
couplers.

2. Calculate the geometric length of one side of the loop I (Figure 23.14) using
formula (23.50).

3. Using formulas (23.49), find f.I and 0..
4. Determine the coupling coefficient K at the frequency f0 using formula (23.48).

5. The dimensions of the conducting strip in the coupling region and the gap are
determined using the procedure of paragraphs 5 and 6 for directional couplers.

6. Plot the frequency function Lac - Lac (f/fo) and Luc - an(f/fo) (see Figure
23.15) in accordance with expressions (23.44) and (23.46).

7. Hhere necessary, find the phase relationships at the directional filter outputs
from expressions (23.40) - (23.42) and (23.12) - (23.14).

8. Make the drawing of the directional filter (Pigures 23.14, 23.19 and 23.22),
taking into account the recommendations for the structural design of printed
circuit directional couplers and filters (523.8 and [014, 015 and 1-61).

notes: 1. The notes of paragraph ll for directional couplers also remain valid for
directional filters.

2. In single loop directional filters using coupled lines, the parameters h - u_

. an(fm) and an(f.¢) are not completely independent, and for this reason, in
satisfying the requirements for the attenuation at the boundary of the passband in
the directional coupling channel (h), one may not obtain an altogether satisfactory
value of an(fgc). One can partially avoid the indicated correlation by using
single 100p directional filters with different lengths of the loop sides [7], or
by completely using single loop tun section directional filters [5]. It is
recommended that dual loop directional filers be used to increase the directional
properties. -

-546-

ltllCﬂﬂﬂClAl.lEﬂi(MVLY
CHAPTER 20. STRIPLINE MICROHAVE POHER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS

24.1. The Function and Major Characteristics of Microwave Power Distribution
Systems

In a hole series of radio engineering systems for the microwave band, devices are
needed which make it possible to divide the power of the source in a definite

ratio in several channels or to add the power into a common load. Such functions
are performed by multichannel excitation systems for phased arrays which produce
the requisite amplitude-phase distribution of the field in the antenna apertures,
as well as by power adders for several generators. Two-channel power adders (or

dividers) find widescale use in modulators, frequency converters and other radio
engineering equipment.

As a rule, passive bidirectional (reciprocal)
devices are used for microwave power distribution.

A divider with a cannon input 0 and N outputs
(Figure 25.1) is a multiport network with 2(N+l)
poles and can be used as an adder with N outputs
and one common input zero by virtue of the reciproc-
ity principle.

 

Figure 24.1. A microwave

power distribution device The following requirements are placed on microwave

in the form of a multi: power distribution devices:

port network. ,
-Providing for a definite distribution of the
amplitudes and phases of the signals of the N out-
puts (or inputs) in a specified frequency range;

--Hatching the common input of the divider or N inputs of the adder in the
working frequency band;

--Providing for the isolation of the N outputs (inputs) within the passhsnd to
reduce the mutual coupling of the channels;

--A high system efficiency;

--A sufficiently simple structural design, small overall dimensions, high
reliability and low cost.

Stripline distribution systems based on hybrid integrated circuits (GIS) satisfy
the requirements enumerated above to a certain extent. Because of the fact that
the possibility for experimental align-eat is almost conpletely lacking in such
devices, the theoretical analysis of the circuits and conputer methods of analyis
and optimization of the working characteristics become of great importance.

The working characteristics of power distribution systems are uniquely defined in
terms of the elements of their scattering matrices in the following fashion: the
standing wave ratio at the i-th input is:

- 647 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

satll - Km? (1+I's..|)/(1 —,s,-, I): (25.1)

the crosstalk attenuation between the central input (0) and the i-th output is:
06501517871? W)

The nonunifornity of the crosstalk attenuation within the frequency band is:

. ..‘. .-__._._. (2‘.2&)
ACu-Cu—Ch

(cm is the crosstalk attenuation at the center frequency); the isolation between
the i-th and j-th channels is:

'7 ' l (24.3)

The place relationships of the signals at the outputs are deterained by the
arguments of the cleats of the scattering natrix.

2L2. The Comparative Performance of Various Types of Microwave Power Distribution
Systh

The atripline distribution systeas used in nicronve equipent are distinguished
by the nuaber of channels, structural configurations. working frequency hand,
power lundling capability and construction.

Nondirectional distributors turned by branching transmission striplines are the
sinplest in structural terns. A considerable drawback to such circuits is the
inpossibility of simultaneously cospletely matching all of the inputs and de-
coupling the channels.‘ Because of the finite anount of isolation, a change in the
load impedances of the distributor during seaming can lead to considerable devi-
ations of the signal nplitudes and phases at the outputs. This limits the
application of nondirectional devices. as excitation ayetens for phaed antenna
arrays.

Directional distribution devices (Figure 24.2) provide for natching all of the
inputs at the center frequency and isolating the channels. Both directional and
nondirectional distrihntion systems are broken down into series (chain) (Figure
26.2a) and parallel (Figure 26.21), c) types according to the principle for the
channelizing of the microwave power.

-668 .-

I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALUSIONLY

 

Figure 20.2. Series (a) and parallel (b, c) nicrouve power directional
distrilntors.

 

0

Figure 26.3. Circuit configurations of dual channel microwave
power dividers.

Series systems are distinguished by their compactness, however, they have a mint
of substantial drawbacks. First of all, the range of variation in the cross-

talk attenuation of the dual channel dividers incorporated in the device increases
with an increase in the number of channels, which limits the possibility of usim
certain types of dual channel dividers, and also generates definite technological

difficulties in the realization of the device. The unequal electrical length of
the paths from the canon input to each radiator leads to a different phase-
frequency response of the trans-ission gains of the channels. Moreover, the
distributor units which are closest to the central input pass the maxima- power,
and for this reason, they should possess an increased electrical strength.

The drawbacks emmerated above are inherent to a lesser extent in parallel
distribution systems. Distributors using quarter-save transmission line sections,

-lolo9..-

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
depicted in Figure 24.2b, find application in the case of a small number of out-
puts (less than 10). If resistances are used as the isolating four-port networks
[A1], connected in a star configuration, the device realizes an in-phase uniform
power distribution. The frequency properties of such distributors depends sub-
stantially on the number of channels, where the M of the common input as compared
to the SHR of the outputs is a more pronounced function of both the number of
channels and the frequency. Thus, within an octave range, the maximum SWR where
the nuaber of channels is N - 3 and N - 25 is 1.75 and 7.5 respectively, while the
SW of the outputs under the same conditions does not exceed 1.1. The efficiency
of a distributor likewise falls off with increasing N and in an octave shunts
to 0.93 and 0.61 when N I 3 and N - 25 respectively [1].

A cannon drawback to such power distributors is the increase in the characteristic
iapedances of the quarter-wave line sections with an increase in the number of
channels, something which makes their technical realisation difficult. Moreover,
the circuit topology cannot be represented in the form of a flat structure: inter-
sections of the conductors are unavoidable, which likewise represents an incon-
venience in the realization of stripline distributors.

A binary power distribution circuit ("christms tree") has become the most wide-
spread (Figure 24.2c). In this case, the device composed of 3 d3 power dividers
realizes an in-phase 2n-channel system with a uniform amplitude distribution of
the field at the outputs. When dividers are used which have a division factor

other than 1, one can design a system with a specified power distribution for an
arbitrary number of channels.

In the low frequency portion of the microwave band, the dimensions of devices
using distributed transmission line sections become impermissibly large. One of
the ways of reducing the overall dimensions-:is replacing each line section with
its analog using lumped elements [4]. In this case, the working bandwidth of the
devices is narrowed, however, within a 102 passband, they can successfully replace
systems using distributed elements.

The following can be used as the constituent assemblies of branched distributors:
ring configurations, loop quadrature bridges and directional couplers using
coupled lines, the isolated outputs of which are loaded into matched impedances
(Figure 26.3).

25.3. Calculating the Electrical Parameters and Characteristics of Two Channel
Power Distributors

Recomendations are given in this section for the calculation of the electrical

paramters of the equivalent circuits of distribution devices (the characteristic

impedances of quarter-wave transmission line sections and the parameters of

lumped elements), as well as for the elements of their scattering matrices.

Single section ring configurations (Figure 24.3a) assure that the signals at
outputs l and 2 are in phase when power is fed to the 0 input or provide for

-650r

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

summing in-phase signals fed to outputs l and 2 in the common 0 channel. They are
formed by quarter-wave line sections with characteristic impedances o; and D; as
well as a decoupling four-port netork (AP) between terminals 1 and 2. Dual channel
power dividers are inserted in the common circuit by means of connecting line
sections having characteristic impedances of do and 93 and d3.

, 3'02 ”31'. 2‘. 8‘51 0

”ha I I I‘ll) I” In" ”M
”an ”an - ”~21
W 0

Figure 2b.h. Dual channel (a) and multichannel (b) power divider circuits
with decoupling four-port networks.

In the simplest case, a ballast resistor Rbal inserted in series is used as the
isolating four-port network. If the length of all of the sections are equal to

x/a at the center frequency, then to achieve complete matching and isolation, the
parameters of the device are calculated from the following formulas:

 

0§=p{l/—R'—"': Rm=-'--%';-(m-I'l):

 

Ru
(24.4)
1: ' leak —_.R'R.m
P: PH”. Po 9; ”I“ .
where m-- P1/P2 is the power division factor. The characteristic inpedances pl

and d1 are chosen arbitrarily in a range of 25 to 150 ohns.

The maximum attainable power division factor of such devices in a stripline

design is limited by the feasible values of the characteristic impedances of the
lines and does not exceed five.

Dividers with an isolating four-port network (Figure 24.4s), comprised of four
quarter-wave line sections with characteristic impedances o" and resistances 35.1
which differ from the general case have a greater range of change in the coeffici-
ent n. One can use modifications of an isolating four-port network whch are
obtained by excluding the parallel resistances or shorting the series resistances
(with the exception of the last one). For example, a divider with one resistor
Rhal 2 (or 85.1 4) takes the form of a ring configuration with a length of 31/2
with a matched load at one output. Devices with symmetrically arranged decoupling
resistors have a more uniform frequency response of the working characteristics.

- 451 -

FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
It nust be noted that the presence of the additional line sections alt—pl: narrows
the working bandwidth of the devices as conpsred to a divider having only a resis-
tor as the decoupling four-port network.

The natching of all inputs and the isolation at the center frequency are achieved
when the following equations obtain [2].

The characteristic inpedsnces of the quarter wave sections:

01=V(m+l)§s§|/m.pg=l.V(m+l)Rng. (24.5)

The elements of the nor-aliied transnission natrix of the isolating four-port
network:

R R _ '
I‘m- Mﬁ-ﬁnr- "—5; Aw=“—:' Mam-.0. (24.6)

The parameters of the isolating four-port network, 85“, and p" are determined by
neans of equating the elenents of its transmission matrix at the center frequency
to the corresponding elements A119 and Amp (26. 6). In this case, there is the
possibility of a free choice of at least one of the parameters 35.1 or p", which is
used in the optimization of the frequency properties of the device. For exawle,
the transnission matrix of the isolating four-port network with one resistor R5,] 3
when of I p'j and p}; - of has the forn: _

(9'79“? :2 I
A _ 1 s Cass .
'" [ ° (or/w}

(24.7)

Consequently:

Rm 3 ' R...,..(... l WW. 9; -o;va/§:. (“-8)

The value of p! can be chosen arbitrarily in a range of 25 to 150 ohns.

An analysis of the working characteristics of ring dividers without connecting
sections can be made using the expresssions given in [2]:

e-The reflection factor at the i-th input is:

A; —1 (A +An—2)
p_ I I u
‘- 511+ '1 (Au-i-Au—m (216.9)

-452-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

-The working attenuation function is:
-. (24.10)
L =20, I Au-I-xu +Au-2) 2|
" ‘ 2( +1..) .. -.

where 2i and Zj are the normalized complex impedance of the load and generator
in the general case (i, j - 0, l,'2); [A], [A] and [ ] are the transmission
matrices of the cascaded four-port networks between the feed points and the load.
For example, in the case of the excitation of the 0 input

Ml- L491 m Mlezsl 1A.: 1.
When calculating L01:

[2] = [AM I: [7!] Hummus I-
Uhen calculating L02;
‘

[3] ~14» "Ara-W; 12] £3» i.

m “."'_L-'1 2,]

is the transmission matrix of the impedance inserted in parallel;

m]- cm paw: ]
9—! ”‘7‘ ch?!

is the transmission matrix of a line section with a length 1 having a normalized
characteristic impedance of p; y - o + jB is the propagation constant.

The transmission matrices for the case where inputs 1 and 2 are driven are com-
puted in a similar manner. This algorithm is convenient for machine analysis of
six and eight port bridge microwave circuits which are not ideal in the general
case (ring configuration, a dual loop bridge), which can be represented in the
form of a closed ring of elementary four-port networks with distributed or lumped
elements.

A multi-section divider (Figure 26.3c) has a greater working bandwidth than the
circuits considered here. The number of sections in dividers which are used in
practice does not exceed four.

For a divider with uniform power division, the normalized characteristic imped-
ances of the quarter-wave line sections with respect to 00 can be determined from
Table 24.1 as well as the isolating resistors of a n-section device as a function

- #53 -

IN3310FIHCIAI.thE2(HULY
of the requisite frequency coverage factor k . fglf“ [fupper/flower] and the
maximum values of the working characteristics at the edge of the band: the sun of
inputs 0, l and 2, and the isolation of the channels.

IABLS 2b.l

d-

35
27
38
27
26

.o.

 

 

Dual loop directional couplers (Figure 24.3d) are quadrature bridge configurations.
when the -0 input is excited, the power is divided between outputs l and 2 in a
ratio of n, where at the center working frequency, the output 2 signal lags the
output 1 signal by p/2 in phase. when the device is used as a power adder, the
signal at input 2 should be fed in with a phase lead of 9/2 with respect to input 1.

The characteristic impedance: of the quarter-wave line sections with loads equal to
no are chosen from the relationship:

m=0.VnT;pa=p.l/ml(vn+l)- (24.11)

In practical circuits, a does not usually exceed 3 - 6 because of the technolog-
ical difficulties of fabricating lines with a high characteristic inpedance.

The analysis of the operating characteristics of a dual loop bridge is made using
formulas (26.9) and (26.10). Dual channel dividers based on loop bridges have
a analler bandwidth than ring configurations.

? 454 -

Ftﬂltﬂﬂﬂ(1hl.0581WNlN
FOI:0FTW(1A1.[EHE(MVLY

Dividers using lumped elements are anlogs of devices using quarter-wave sections
(Figure 24.3b, e). Their electrical parameters, the capacitances and inductances
of n and T section filters are calculated from the formulas [4]:

L =- man: 0 a mm». ‘2‘“)

where p is the characteristic impedance of an equivalent quarter-wave transmission
line section; f0 is the center frequency.

The analysis of the operating characteristics is also made using formulas (24. 9)
and (24.10).

A directional coupler using coupled lines takes the form of a quadrature bridge,
the characteristics of which are determined by the parameters of the coupled lines.
The electrical design and analysis of the working characteristics of such devices
are given in Chapter 23.

Dual channel dividers, designed around directional couplers using coupled lines,
have the greatest working bandwidth of all of the devices considered here. How-
ever, there are serious technological difficulties with the realization of
dividers with strong side coupling because of the strict tolerances for the
dimensions of the striplines.

2h.6. The Calculation of the Electrical Parameters and Characteristics of Multi-
Channel Power Distribution Systems

N-channel distribution systems using quarter-wave transmission line sections
(Figure 24.2b) realize the requisite power distribution at the outputs if the
characteristic impedances of the line sections are determined by the expressionIZ].

("Fl/WI (24-13)

where no is the internal resistance of the generator; R1 is the load resistance of
the i-th output; Pi is the normalized power at the i-th output and N

2,P.=-l.

l-l

To achieve ideal matching of all inputs and isolation between the channels at a
fixed frequency, the transmission matrix [A1] of the isolating four-port networks
should have the form:

 

+l/PR 4‘" l—"RR
w-u 4m PAR. p. 1' "

o A" I VP; PUP; R.

 

(2.14)

- 455 -

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFHJAL.USE(NULY

These four-port networks can be realised in the form of the circuit depicted in
Figure 24.4b, as well as its simpler variants, obtain by eliminating or shorting
one or two of the 35.1 resistances. The impedances of the quarter-wave sections,
oli and 92i, as well as the resistances Rba1 i are determined by means of
equating the transmission matrix of the four-port network; and the [A11 matrix
(Figure 24.14). For example, for a circuit with one resistor Rb.1 1i:

 

' ‘9' P. R
Ronni-Rn; Pu ”'33: Pa VF”? '

The impedances dl, oh and 02i can be chosen arbitrarily in a range of 25 to 150
ohms.

In the special case of uniform power distribution among the channels (Pl I P; I
... I P“ I 1/8) and identical loads 30 I RI I at I ... I Rn I so, the character-
istics impedances of the line sections and the isolating resistances are equal and
are determined by the equations: p1 I 0i I ... I on I 90/5, Rbal 11 I Rbal 12 I

I ... I 35.1 IN I so. In this case, the resistances Rb.1 21, R531 3i and the

line section impedances p11 and Dzi are absent and the circuit of the distributor
is the most wideband circuit of the multichannel dividers of this class.

It is expedient to perform a computer analysis of the operating characterstics
of N-channel distribution systems using quarter-wave impedance transformers by
neans of reducing the multiport network to a six-port network and then make use
of expressions (24.9) - (24.10).

The calculation of the parameters of multichannel systems (Figure 24.2a, c) re-
duces to the determination of the power division factors of each individual two-
channel divider and the subsequent calculation of the parameters of its compo-
nents in accordance with the recommendations of 524.3.

In series type dividers (Figure 24.2a), the power division factor of the individ-
ual branches are defined by the expression:

N
I
In: =3; 2 P» (24.15)
l-l-f'

In particular, with uniform power distribution among the N outputs, the division
factors of two-channel dividers incorporated in a chain circuit configuration are
equal to:

m. a: N— l. i” L2. .... N— l. (24.16)
\

Chain type circuits are conveniently realized using quadrature bridges. In this
case, the signals at the outputs are made in-phase by inserting phasing sections

- 4S6 -

F(”l(ﬂﬂﬁC1A1,USElﬂVLY
with a length of 31/4 between the adjacent chain components. Where dual loop
bridges with striplines are used, the overall number of circuit outputs is
limited: N 3 10. When directional couplers with coupled lines are used, one can
construct circuits with a greater mnber of channels. However, difficulties arise
in this case with the realization of the last assemblies of the device having a
factor I close to unity.

For 2n-channel parallel systems (Figure 210.2c), the power division factor of each
i-th branch of the j-th stage is determined by the expression:

a (‘II— I m.

'3
at = ‘ P ‘ P, (2&1?)
u i—a‘l%l)+l . /s-.%'—Im+i

where .
i=- 1. 2....,- a: in l. 2...., 21";a-2‘V'H".

In the case of uniform power distribution, all dual channel dividers have a
division factor of m - 1 among the outputs of a binary system and are quite well
realized using ring and dual loop configurations.

The operating characteristics of N-channel binary divider are defined in terms of
S-parameters in accordance with (24.1) - (210.3). In this case, the scattering of
the device can be obtained by topological or matrix methods [3]. In the case of
large values of N, iterative methods of calculating complem microwave networks
are more optimal from the viewpoint of the efficient utilisation of the inanediate
access memory of a computer, and sometimes also the machine time as well.

It should be noted that the reco-endations given here for the electrical design
of microwave power distributors are valid for systems with low dissipative losses.
In the short-wave portion of the microwave band, besides taking losses into
account, it is also necessary to estimate the impact of inhomogeneities in '1' or
Y configuration lines, the bending of a line, etc. [016, 5].

24.5. An Approximate Design Procedure for Power Distribution Systems

The design calculations for the parameters of a microwave power distribution
system can be broken down into the electrical and the structural design calcula-
tions.

Initially, by working from the specific requirements placed on the number of
channels and the working frequency band, the structural configuration of the
device is selected taking the reconendations of 524$ into account. Thereafter,
in the course of the electrical design calculations, the parameters of the
equivalent circuits are determined: the characteristic impedances of the line and
the lumped elements. For branched series and parallel type systems (Figure

26.21:, c), the power division factors of the constituent assemblies are calculated
beforehand, and then the parameters of the dual channel dividers.

-4S7-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
After calculating the electrical parameters of the circuit, the scattering natrix
is drawn up and the operating characteristics of the device within the frequency
band are calculated. To establish the production process tolerances, the working
charscteristics are studied where scatter is present in the parameters of the
circuit components: differences of the load and characteristic inpedances fro-
the normal values, as well as in the line lengths and parameters of the lulped
elements. In the case of unsatisfactory results, the circuit paraneters nust be
optimized, and possibly also the circuit structure.

The calculated paraneters of equivalent circuits serve as the initial data for the
structural design. In this design stage, the naterial and dimensions of the
circuit substrate are selected, and the structural dimensions of the transnission
lines and limped filn elements are calculated (see [0114. 015, 6], as well as
Chapter 8 in this book).

The concluding step in the design is that of working out the circuit topology.

~458-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BIBLIOGRAPHY

min Literature

01.

02.

05.

06.

07.

09.

010.

011.

012.

013 0

Markov 6.1., Sazonov D.H., "Antenny" ["Antennaa"], Moscow, hergiya Publishers.
1975.

Kyun R., "Hikrovolnovyye antenny" ["Micronnve Antennas"], Translation from
the German. edited by Md). Dolukhanova, Moscow, Sudostroyeniye Publishers,
1967. .

"Skaniruyushchiye antennyye sisteny wet: in 3-1111 1:." ("Microwave Scanning
Antenna Systena, in Three Volunea"], Translation fron the English edited by
R. Khansen, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1966-1970.

"Antennyye reahetki: Obeor zaruberhnykh rabot" ["Antenna Arrays: A Review of

Foreign Literature“], edited by L.s. Benenaon, Hoscov, Sovetakoye Radio Publi-
shers, 1966.

"Antenny i ustroyatva SVCh: Raschet i proyektirovaniye antennth reahatok i

ikh izluchayuahchikh elaentw" ["Hicrovave Antennas and Devices: The Design
Calculations and Planning of Antenna Arrays and Their Radiating Blunts”,

Edited by 0.1. Voskresenskiy, Moscow, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1972.

Drabkin A.D., Zusenko v.1... Kislov A.G.., "Antenno-fidetnyye uatroystva"
["Antennas and Peedlines"], Moscow, Sovetalroye Radio Publishers, 1976.

link 11.8., Molochkov Yu.B., "Proyektirovaniye antenno-fidernykh ustroyatv v
2-kh t." ["‘rhe Design of Antennas and Peedlinea, in No Volunes"], Moscow,
bergiya Publishers, 1966, Vol 1; 1973, Vol 2.

Anitey N., Galindo V., Vu Ch., "Teoriya i analiz fazirovannykh antennykh
reahetok" ("The Theory and Analysis of Phased Antenna Arrays"), Translation
from the English edited by 6.1. Markov, 1m. ctnpun, Hoscov, Mir
Publishers, 1976.

rum [PROCEEDINGS or me 1323]. 1968, Vol 56, No 11, "Antennyye reshatki s
elektrichaskin akanirovaniyaa" ["Blnctricsl Scanning Antenna Arraya"].

TRUDY MAI [PROCEEDINGS 01’ MSW AVIATION INSTITUTE), 1964, No 159, "Shani:-
uyuahchiye antenny" ["Scanning Antetmas"], Edited by LN. Deryugin.

TRUDY MAI, 1973, No 274, 'ﬁihovolnovyya skaniruyushchiye antenny" [”Hicrowsve
Scanning Antennas"), Edited by 0.1. Vosln'esenskiy.

Vendik 0.6., “Antanny a naekhanicheakin dvizheniyen lucha" ("Antennae with
Nonaechanical Bean Steering"], Roscov, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1955.

"Phased Array Antennas", Edited by A.A. Oliner, 6.3. Knittel, Dedhaa, Artech
Houae, 1972.

9459-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
016 .

015.

hloratskiy L.G., "Hilcrminintyurizatsiya 1315th i ustroystv SVCh" ["‘rhe

Hicroniniaturization of Microwave Components and Devices"), Moscow, Sovetskoye
Radio Publishers, 1916.

Halorstskiy L.G. ,- Yavich 1.. R., "Proyektirovaniye i raschet SVCh eluentov
na poloskovykh liniyakh" ("The thinning and Design Calculations of Microwave
Stripline Components”, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1972.

For Chapter 2

2.

Voskresenskiy 0.1., Ponourev 1.1., Pilippov V.S., "Vypnklyye skaniruyushchiye
antenny" [“00an Scanning Antennas") , Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers,
1978.

Vorob'yev V.V., "Ustroystva elektronnogo uprevleniya luchon PAR" ("Electronic
Bean Steering Devices for Phased Antenna Arrays”], ZARUBEZRNAYA RADIOELBRTRON-
ms (mama unmzwcmomcsl, 1976, No.1, pp 68-108.

For Chapter 3

l. "Shanirnyushchiye antennyye sisteny SVCh v Z-kh t." ["Hicrousve Scanning

2.

Antenna Systens, in 1‘90 Volunes"], Translation fro- the English edited by
G. 1'. Markov, A. F. Chnp1in, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1966, Vol 1;
1969, Vol 2.

Shnikin 3., "Electronically Scanned Antennas", MICROWAVE 3., 1960, No 12,
pp 67-72, 1961, No 1, pp 57-66.

For Chapter I.

1.

5.

Voskresenskiy 0.1., Pononarev I..1., Pilippov V.S., "Vypnklyye skeniruyushchiye
antenny" ["COnvex Scanning Antennas"], Moscow, Sovetshoye Radio Publishers,
1978.

Voskresenskiy D.1., "Konnntatsionmya antema s shirokngol'nyn elektricheskin
skanirovaniyen" (”A Switched Antenna with Wide Angle Electrical Scanning"],
IZV. VUZOV SSSR. RADIOTEKHNIKA [PROCEEDINGS 0? TR! HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTI-
‘nms or me ussn. mm Emmanuel, 1963, V01 6, No 6, pp 688-694.

Voslu'esenskiy D. 1., Cudzenko A. 1., "Diapazonnost' ostronapravlennykh dugovykh
antennykh reshetok" ("Bandwidth of Pencil Beam Arc Antenna Arrays"], 12V.
VUZW SSSR. RADIOELBKTRONIKA [PROCEEDINGS OF THE HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES
0? m3 USSR. RADIOBLBC‘I'RONICS], 1968, Vol 11, No 5, pp 441-651.

Stark J.L., Bell C.V., Notest R.A., et 01., "Microwave Components for widehand
Phased Arrays", PROC. 1338, 1968, Vol 56, No 11, pp 1908,4923.

Bogolyubov VAL, Yeskin A.V., Rarhovskiy 8.8., "Upravlyayemyye ferritovyye
ustroystva SVCh" ["Controllsble microwave Ferrite Devices"], Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers. 1972 (Elaenty radioelektronnoy spparatury)
[(de ioelectronic Equipment Components” .

-460 «-

l-‘OR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
l-‘OROFFICIALIBEONLY

6. Goebela r.c.. Roman B.J., Nonnuaeker 6.3., "Electronic Scanning of Linear

Slot Arrays Using Diode Iries lain)", TRANS. 1m, 1968, Vol AP-l6, No 1,
pp 8-16.

7. Khsrdnan, "Razvitiye RLS s fazirovannoy sntennoy reahetkoy :a posledneye
desyatiletiye" ("The Developaent of Radars with a Phased Antenna Array over

the last Decade"], ZARUBEZENAYA RADIOELEKTRONIKA [MEIGN RADIOWONICS],
1971, No 1, pp 39-58.

For Chapter 5

l. Pistol'kors A.A., "Obshchaya teoriya diffraktsionnykh antenn" ["‘l'he General

Theory of Diffraction Antennaa”], Zh‘l? [JWRNAL OF TECHNICAL PHYSICS], 19“,
V01 16, No 12, pp 693-702; 1966, Vol 16, No 1, pp 3-10.

2. "Posobiye po harmony proyektirovaniyu antenn" ("Textbook on Course Required
Antenna Design Work"), VZEIS [All-Union Correspondence Electrical Engineering
Institute for Comnications], Moscow, 1967.

3. Yatsuk L.P. , Snirnova N.V., "Vnutrenniye provodinoati nerezonansnykh ahcheley
v pryaaougol'non volnovode" ("Internal Aduittancea of Nonreaonant Slots in
a Rectangular Haveguide"], 12V. VUZOV SSSR. RADIOTEKENIKA [PROCEEDINGS OF THE
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES OP ‘1'!!! USSR. RADIO ENGINEERING], 1967, Vol 100,
No 10, pp 359-369.

6. Veshnikova I.Ye., Yevstropov G.A., "‘I‘eoriya aoglasovannykh ahchelevykh
izluchatelejr " ("Matched Slotted waveguide Theory"], RADIM‘EKHNIRA I
mmoum [RADIO ENGINEERING AND ELECTRONICS], 1965, Vol 10, No 7, pp 1181-
1189.

S. Yevstropov G.A., Tsarapkin S.A., "Iasledovaniye volnovodno~ahchelevykh sntenn
s identiclnyli rezouananyai izluchatelyani" ["A Study of Slotted Waveguide
Antennas with Identical Resonant Radiatora"], RADIOTBKBNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA,
1965, Vol 10, No 9, pp 1663-1671.

6. Yevstropov G.A., Taarapkin S.A., "Raechct volnovodno-shchalevykh antenn s
ucheton vzainodeystviya izluchateley po osnovnoy volne" ["‘l'he Design of Slotted
Waveguide Antennas Taking into Account Dominant Mode Mutual Coupling of the
Radiators"], mm‘momru I mmomn. 1966, Vol 11, No 5, pp 822-830.

7. thhsrin Yu.V., "Antenny averkhvysokikh chaatot" ["Minrowave Antennas"],
Khsr'kov, State University, 1960.

8. Shirnan Ya.D., "Radiovolnovody i ob"yunyye rezonatory" ["Radio Waveguides and
Spatial Resonators"), Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1959.

9. Reznikov 6.8., "Sanolstnyye antenny" ["Aircraft Antennas"], bacou, Sovetskoye
Radio Publishers, 1962.

~661-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For Cl’npter 6.

1'

10.

Yerahov L.I., Kruenetakiy 8.0., 108' V.P., "Slektrodinanika vzainovliyaniya
v nerezouananykh volnovodno-ehchelevykh reahetkakh" ("The Electrodynamics of
Mutual Coupling in Nonreaonant Slotted Waveguide Arrays"), IZV. VUZOV SSSR,
nanlontaxraourxa, 1978, No 2, pp 98-54.

1408' V.P., Koaodanianekaya N.S., "Hetod raacheta aplitudno-fazovogo
raapredeleniya polya v raakryve volnovodno-ahchelevykh reahetok e ucheton
vnutrennego vzainodeyatviya izluchateley" ["Hethod of Calculating the Anpli-
tude-PhaaeDietribution of the Field in the Aperture of Slotted Waveguide
Arrays Taking Internal Mutual Coupling of the Radiatora into Account"],
"Antenny" ["Antennae"], Edited by A.A. Pistol'kore, Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers,
1969, No 5, pp 211-32.

Baklrakh L.D., Yerahov L.I., Kresenetakiy S.D., Loa' V.F., "Blektrodinaniches -
kiye faktory vzainovli'yaniya i ratchet volnovodno-ahchelevykh reahetok" ["Blec-
trodynaaic Factors of Mutual Coupling and the Design of Slotted waveguide
Arrays"], DAN SSSR [REPORTS OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES], 1978, Vol 2103,

No 2, pp 315-317.

Repin V.H., "Difraktaiya elektronagnitnykh poley na eiatene ahchelay“ ("The
Diffraction of Electromagnetic Fields in a Syatn of Slote"], VYCRISLITEL'NYYB
KNOW I PROGRAWIROVANIYE [(1)me METHODS AND PROGRAM], Hoecov State
University, 1968, No 16, pp 112-121.

Yateuk I..P., Zhironkina A.V., Katrich V.A., "Vozbuzhdeniye pryanougol'nogo
volnovoda naklonnoy i kreatoobraznoy ahchelyani" ["kcitation of a Rectangular
Waveguide with Oblique and Croaa-Stnped Slots"), "Antenny", Edited by A.A.
Piatol'kora, Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1975, No 22, pp 46-60.

Pel'd A.N., Benenmn 1..s., "Antenno-fidernyye uatroyatva v Z-kh ch." ["Antenma
and Feedlinea; in Two Partd'], ﬂoecov, WIA [Air Force Engineering Academy],
1959, Part II.

Markov G.‘l‘., "Vozbuzhdeniye pryanougol'nogo volnovoda" ("Excitation of a
Rectangular waveguide”, TRUDY MEI [PROCEEDINGS 0? H0860" PM ENGINEERING
ISNTITUTE], 1956, Nb 21, pp 16-36.

Pridberg P.Sh., Garb Kh.l.., Levineon 1.3., "Uchet tolahchiny stenki v
shchelevykh zadachakh elektrodinaniki" ["Taking "all Thickneae Into Account in
810! Problems of Blectrodynanice"], RADIWIRA I ELBKTRONIKA, 1968, V01 13,
No 12, pp 2152-2161.

Yevatropov G.A., Tsarapkin 8.5., "Raechet volnovodno-ahchelevykh antenn a
uchetou vzainodeyatviya izluchateley po oanovnoy volne" ["1'he Design of Slotted
Waveguide Antennae Taking Dominant Mode mtual Coupling of the Radiators into
Account"], RADIOTEKHNIKA I BLEKTRONIKA, 1966, Vol 2, No 5, pp 822-830.
Breithaupt R.U., Hacomick G.T., "Traveling Wave Arrays of Himtched Elements”,
TRANS. 132:. 1971, Vol 12-19, No 1, pp 4-11.

- 462 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11. Bakhrakh L.D., Krametskiy 8.0., "Sintez izlucllyushchikh sist-" ["‘l‘he

Design of Radiating Systas"], Koscou, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1974.

12. Dayliz S.Yu., Akishin B.A., "Issledovaniye skhaay zaneshcheniya naklonno“

aeshchennogo volnovodno-shchelevogo izluchatelya" ("Study of the Equivalent
Circuit of an Obliquely Displaced Slotted waveguide Radiator"], in the hook,
"Antenny i SVCh uzly radioteklnicheskikh ustroystv" ["Antennas and Microwave
Assemblies for Radio Electronic Bquipnent"], Sverdlovsk, 1976, pp 16-23.

For Chapter 7 .

1.

2.

5.

Schwartmn l.., Stangel, 3., "The Done Antenna", HICRNAVB J., 1975, Vol 18,
No 10, pp 31-36.

Voskresenskiy D.I., Ponoaarev L.I., Filippov v.s.. "Vypuklyye shniruyushchiye
antenny" ["Convu Scanning Antennas"], Moscow, Sovatskoye Radio Publsihers,
1978.

Voskresenskiy D.I., "Ostronapravlennoye izluchaniye s vypuklykh poverkhnostey"
["Pencil-Bean Radiation from Convex Surfaces"], 12V. VUZOV SSSR. RADIOTEIGINIKA,
1966, Vol 7, No 3, pp 276-282.

. Yamaykin V.Ye., “Optimizatsiya anplitudnogo raapradeleniys na kruglon sinfaznon

raskryve s zatenennoy taentral'noy oblast'yu" ["Opti-ization of tha Amplitude
Distribution in a Circular In-Plnse Aperture with a Shaded Central Region”,
12v. vuzov sssa. RADIOBLEKTRONIKA, 1969, Vol 12, No 6, pp 578-599.

Yamaykin V.Ye., "Optimizatsiya periods PAR" ["Optinization of the Period of a
Phased Antenna Array"], "Antenny", Edited by A.A. Pistol'kors, Moscow, Svyaz'
Publishers, 1975, Vol 22, pp 20-35.

For Chapter 9.

1.

2.

Hanson 11.3., "Conformal Microstrip Antennas and Hicrostrip Placed Arrays",
TRANS. IEBB, 197a, va1 AP-22, pp 74—78.

Anders 6., Derneryd, "Linearly Polarized Micronrip Antennas", TRANS. 1m,
1976, Vol AP-Zé, No 11, pp 846-851.

Tiuri H., Tallqir'st s., Urpo 8., "Chin Antenna", Int. 1383 AP-s Symposium
Program and Dig. [sic], Atlanta, Ga., New Youk, 1976, pp 276-277.

Halter IL. "Antenny begushchey volny" ["‘l‘raveling Have Antennas"l, Translation
from the English edited by A.P. Chaplin, lbacou, Energiya Publishers, 1970.

Toknnaru Shinobu, Shibacaki Taro. "Pinsed Arrays, Composed of Parallel Fed
Tao Element Dipolea in a Rectangular Arrange-exit", TRANS. INST. ELECTR. AND
CW. ENG. JAP., 1976, Vol 156-3, No. 11, pp 521-528.

Stark 1... "Radiation Impedance of a Dipole in an Infinite Planar Phased Array",
RADIO SCIENCE, 1966, Vol 3, pp 361-375.

- 463 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

Chang v.w.n., "Infinite Phased Dipole Array", PROC. IEEE, 1968, Vol 56, No 11,
pp 1068-1070.

Galejt T., "Excitation of Slots in a Conducting Screen Above a Lossy Dielectric
11:1: Space"], mans. me, 1962, Vol AP—lO, pp 463-443 [sic].

For chapter 10.

1.

Indenbon M.V., "Algoritm analize i optinizatsii direktornykh izluchateley v bes-
koneci'noy ploskoy antennoy reshetke" ["Algoritha for the Analysis and Optiaization
of Yogi Radiators in an Infinite Planar Antenna Array"], INF. LISTOK/VIMI,
[INFORMATION SRBET OF THE VIM], Series ILT9-l3-11, 1%0, No 80-0599.

Indenbon M.V., Filippov V.S., "Anali: i optinizatsiya direktornykh izluchateley
v ploskoy antennoy reohetke" ["Analysis and Optimization of Yagi Radiators in
a Planar Antenna Array"], IZV VDZOV 888R. RADIOELEKTRONIKA, 1979, No 2, pp 34-41.

Walter K., "Antenny begushchey volny" ["Traveling thve Antennas"], kanslation
from the English edited by A.F. Clnplin, Moscow, Energiya Publishers, 1970.

Polak 3., "chislennyye netody optinizatsii" ["Nmerical Optimization Methods"],
Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1974.

Ganston M.A.R., "Sprevochnik po volnovyn soprotivleniyan fidernykh liniy SVCh"
["ﬂandbook on the Characteristic Inpedances of Microwave Peedlines"], lbscow,
Svyaz' Publishers, 1976.

11.8. Patent 3865690, NKI 343-821.
Vay Kaychen', "‘reoriya i proyektirovaniye shirokopolosnykh soglasuyushchikh

tsepey" ["‘l'heory and Design of Broadband Matching Networks"], Moscow, Svyaz'
Publishers, 1979.

For Chapter 11.-

1.

3.

Titov A.N., Sapsovich B.I., "Fazirovannaya reshetka kak antennaya sistena s
isknsstvennym dielektrikan" ["A Phased Array as an Antenna Systen with an
Artificial Dielectric"], "Antenny", Edited by A.A.Pistol'kors, Moscow, Svyaz'
Publishers, 1970, No 8, pp 67-80.

Nittel' 6., Khessel' A., Oliner A., "Nulevyye provaly v diagrams napravlennosti
elements fazirovaoooy anteanoy anteonoy reshetki i ikh svyez' s napravlennyni
volnani" ("Null Dips in the Directional Pattern of an Elaent of a Phased
Antenna Array and Their Relationship to Directed Haves"], TIIER [PROCEEDINGS OF
THE 1m], 1968, Vol 56, No 11, pp 71-88. - '

Elenberger A., shvertslnan L., Topper L., "Nekotoryye trebovaniya k geometrii
volnovodnykh reshetok s lineynoy polyarizatsiyey" ["Sone Requirments Placed on

the Geometry of Waveguide Arrays with Linear Polarization"], TIIER, 1968, Vol
56, No 11, pp 116-128.

-664-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

So

Borzhiotti C., "Analiz periodicheskoy ploskoy fazirovannoy reshetki netodon
sobatvennykh voln" ["Bigennode Analysis of a Periodic Planar Phased Array"],
111m [nocrrnmcs or me 132:], 1968, Vol 56, No 11, pp 132-150.

Chaplin A.P., Klmnalyan A.D., Ryakovskaya H.L., "Priblizhennyy spektral'nyy
analiz bol'shikh antennykh reahetok" ["Approxinate Spectral Analysis of Large
Antenna Arrays"), Moscow, Vysslnya shkola Publishers, 1%0, Issue 3, pp 101-121.

For Chapter 12.

1.

Lee S.H., Jones ".11., "On the Suppression of the Radiation Nulls and Broadband

Impedance Matching of Rectangqu Waveguide Pbaed Arrays", TRANS. 1283, 1971,
Vol AP-19, No 1, pp 41-51.

Sushkevich V.I., "Neregulyarnyye lineynyye volnovodnyye sisteny" ["Irregulsr
Linear Waveguide Systens"), Moscow, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1967.

. Pel'dshteyn A.L., Yavich L.R., alirnov V.P., "Spravochlik po elesentan

volnovodnoy tekhniki" ["Handbook on Waveguide Equipment Cunponents"], Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1967.

For Chapter 13 .

1.

2.

3.

Pel'd Ya.N., "shchelevyye antenny" ["Slot Antennas"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio
Publishers, 1948.

"Vychislitel'nyye Hetody i Progrsnirovaniye" ["Conputer Methods and Program-
ing"), I‘loscou State University, Moscow, 1973, Issue 20.

Il'inskiy A.S., Grinev A.Yu. Kotov Yu.V., "Issledovaniye elektrodinanicheskikh
kharakteristik rezonatorno-shchelevogo izluchatelya s istochnikani vozbuzhdeniya
v ploskosti shcheli" ["Study of the Electrodynamic Characteristics of a Slotted
Resonator Radiator with the Excitation Sources in the Plane of the slot"],
mm‘mmru 1 BLBKTRONIKA, 1978, Vol 23, No 5, pp 922-930.

Grinev A.Yu., Il'inskiy A.S., Kotov Yu.V., "Kharakteristiki skanirovaniya
rezonatorno—shchelevoy periodicheskoy antennoy struktury s dielektricheskim
pokrytiyen" ['"rhe Scanning Characteristics of a Slot Resonator Periodic Antenna
Structure with a Dielectric Coating"], IZV VUZOV SSSR. RADIOTBKHNIKA, 1978,
Vol 21, No 12, pp 1822-1833.

. Grinev A.Yu. Kotov Yu.V., "Mashinnyy netod amliza i chastichnogo parametri-

cheskogo sinteza resonatorno-ehchelevykh antennykh struktur" ["Conputer Method
for the Analysis and Partial Parametric Synthesis of Slotted Resonator Antenna
Structures"], 12V. VUZOV SSSR. RADIOELEKTRONIKA, 1978, Vol 21, No 2, pp 30-35.

Kotov Yu.V., ”Issledovaniye elektrodinanicheskikh kharakteristik rezonatorno-
shchelevykh strulttur" ["Study of the Electrodynamic Characteristics of Slotted

Resonator Structures"], CHISLENNYYE METODY ELEKTRODINAHIKI [NUMERICAL METHODS
OF ELECTRODYNAHICS], Moscow State University, Hoscow, 1978, Issue 3, pp 26-40.

was -

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
For Chpter 110 .

1.

"SVCh ustroystve na poluprovodnikovykh diodakh: Proyektirovsniye i rsschet"
["Microusve Devices Using Saiconductor Diodes: Design Calculations and
P1anning"], Edited by I.V. Mal'skiy,. B.V. Sestroretskiy, Moscow, Sovetskoye
Radio Publishers, 1969.

Vlssov V.I., Bemn Ya.I., "Proyektirovaniye vysohochsstotnykh uzlov radio-
lokatsionnykh stantsiy" ["‘l‘he Design of the Radio Frequency Assenblies of
Radars"], Leningrad, Sudprmgiz Publishers, 1961.

USSR Pstent No. 3587/00, Published in Bulletin No. 36, 1972.

Vosh-esenskiy D.I., Mikheyev S.M., Popov V.V.,“Ko—utatsionnaya skaniruyushchays
poluprovodnikovaya sntennays reshetka" ["8witched Suiconductor Scanning Antenna
Array"], TRUDY MAI [PROCEEDINGS OF MOSCOW AVIATION INSTITUTE], 1973, No 2710,

pp 5-15.

Popov v.v., "Issledovsniye rubrosa parametrov eluentov izluchatelya antennoy
reshetki" ["Study of the Scatter in the Parameters of the Bluents of an
Antama Array deiator"], TRUDY MAI, 1973, No 274, pp 79-90.

Kansreykin D.B., Pavlov N.P., Potekhin V.A., "Polyuizetsiya radiolokatsionnykh
signalov" ["dear Signal Polarization"), Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers.
1966.

Pel'dshteyn A.L., Snirnov V.P., stich I..R., "Spravochnik po eluentm
volnovodnoy teklmiki" ["Bandhook on Waveguide Equipment Components”, Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1967.

For chapter 16.

1.

Aronov v.1... Mazel' Ye.z.. "Sovreselxnoye sostoyaniye v oblssti rszrsbotki
loshchnykh VCh i SVCh trsnzistorov" ["‘l'he Stste of the Art in the Developsent
of High Frequency and Microuve Transistors”, in the book, "Poluprovodnikovyye
pribory i ikh primeneniye" ["Seniconductor Devices and Their Applications"],
Edited by Ye.V. Pedotova, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1971, No 25,

pp 7-29.

Ragsnov V.I., "Tranzistornyye rsdioperedatchiki" ["‘l‘rsnsistorized Radio Trans-
nitters"], Moscow, Energiys Publishers, 1976.

"deioperedeyushchiye ustroystva na poluprovodnikovykh priborskh" ["deio
‘l‘rsnnitting Equip-eat Using Semiconductor Devices"], Edited by R.A. Vslitov,
and LA. Popov, Moscow, Sovstskoye deio Publishers, 1973.

Chelnokov O.A., "Transistornyye generatory sinusoidsl'nykh kolebsniy" ("Trans-
istorized Sine Wave Generators"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1975.

"Proyektirovaniye rsdioperedayusychikh ustroystv SVCh" ["‘l'he Design of Microwave
Radio Trsnnitting Equipent'q, Edited by G.M. Utkin, Moscow, Sovetslnoye Radio
Publishers, 1979.

-lo66-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6. Kiyko 6.1., Lib Yu.H., et al., "Issledovaniye shirokopolosnogo tranzistornogo
usilitelys noshchnosti s rsspredelennyni paranetrsni" ["Study of s Broadband
Transistorized Power Amplifier with Distributed Parameters”, "Poluprovodni-
kovyye pribory v tektnike elektrosvyazi" ["Seniconductor Devices in Electrical
Canunications Bquipnmtﬂ, Moscow, mysz' Publishers, 1975, Mo 15, pp 19-26.

For Chapter 17 .

1. "de ioperedsyushchiye ustroystvs ns poluprovodnikovykh priborekh" ["deio Trans-
mitting Equipment Using Smiconductor Devices"], Edited by R.A. Valitov, I.A.
Popov, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1973.

2. Koptev G.I., Psnins T.A., "Rsschet uslilitel'nykh i unnozhitel'nykh Inshdov
transzistornykh peredatchikov" ["‘l‘he Design of Amplifier and Multiplier Stages

for Transistorized Tranmitters"), Moscow, Moscow Power Engineering Institute,
1975.

3. Kagsnov V.I., "Transistornyye radioperedstchiki" ["Transistorized Radio Trans-
nitters"], Moscow, Energiys Publishers, 1976.

lo. Petrov B.Ye., Tereshina G.N., "Trensistornyye ganerstory" ("Transistor Oscilla-
tors"), Moscow, M811”, 1975.

S. Chelnokov O.A., "Tranzistornyye generatory sinusoidsl'nykh kolebsniy" ["Trsns-
istorized Sine wave Generator-3"]. Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1975.

6. Kiyko G.I., Limb Yu.N., et al., "Issledovsniye shirokopolosnogo transistornogo
usilitelys moshchnosti s rsspredelennyui paranetrsni", "Poluprovodnikovyye
pribory v tekhnike elektrosvyazi", Moscow, Svysz' Publishers, 1975, No 15,
pp 19-26.

7. Granovsksya R.A., Petrov 8.3., "Proyektirovaniye svch tsepey transistornykh
generatorov s vneshnin vozbuzhdeniya, vypolnyaysnykh v wide gibridnykh
integral'nykh skhn" ("The Design of Microuve Networks of Transistorized,
Externally Excited Oscillators/Amplifiers Made in the Form of Hybrid Integrated
Circuits"], Moscow, Moscow Aviation Institute, 1977.

8. Sobol 6., "SVCh prineneniys tektnologii integrsl'nykh skha" ["Microvnve
Applications of Integrated Circuit Technology”, in the book, "Poluprovodnikovyys
Pribory SVCh" ["Seaiconductor Microwave Devices"], Edited by P. Brand, Moscow,
nu: publishers, 1972, pp 83-96.

9. Grey P., Grekhen R., "deioperedatchiki" ["deio Tran-sitters"). Moscow. Svyaz'
Publishers, 1965.

10. Atabekov G.I., "Osnovy teorii tsepey" ["Principles of Network Theory"]. Moscow.
Energiya Publishers, 1969.

11. Rsyev M.D., Shvarts N.Z., "Soglasovsniye kompleksnykh soprotivlmiyy v SVCh
nikroelektronike" ["Mstching Complex Inpedances in Microwave Microelectronics"],
12v. vuzov sssn. mxonmkomu, 1972, Vol 11, No 6, pp 728-737.

-467-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

For

8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mattey DJ... Yang I.., Dehons Ye.M., "Pil'try SVCh, soglasuyuahchiye tsepi
i tsepi avyazi, v 2401 t." ["Microuve Filters, Matching Networks and Coup-
ling Networks, in Two Volunea"], Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1971, Vol 1.

Chapter 18 .

Granovskaya R.A., Shhlikov V.N., "Osobennoati prineneniya v paedayushchikh
aktivnykh antennykh reshetkakh noduley s uanozheniyu chastoty" ["Specific
Features of the Application of Frequency Multiplier Modules in Active Trans-
nitting Antenna Arrays"], IZV. VUZOV SSSR. RADIOKLEKTRONIKA, 1978, No 2,

pp 69-73.

. Viael' A.A., Pi1'don V.N., "Metody rascheta optinal'nykh parametrov unnozhi-

teley chastoty na nelineynoy yankosti poluprovodnikovykh diodov" ("Methods of
Calculating the Optimal Parameters of Frequency Multipliers Using the Nonlin-
ear Capacitance of Semiconductor Diodes"], ELEKTRONIKA I Y!!! PRIMBNENIYB
[ELECTRGIICS AND ITS APPLICATIONS], 1974, Vol 5, No 7, pp 173-213.

Kaganov V.I., "'l‘ranzistornyye radioperedstchiki" ["Tranaiatorized Radio
Trans-ittera"], Moscow. Energiya Publishers, 1976.

shkalikov v.u., Lutin B.A., "o fazovykh.klnrakteristihkh vuaktornykh
uanozhiteley chastoty" ["m the Place Characteristics of Varactor hequency
Manipuersﬂ, RADIO‘I’EIGINIKA, 1973, Vol 28, No 10, pp 60456.

Lutin E.A.. Telyatnikav L.I., Shhlikov V.N., "F'azovyye kharakteristiki
Dvukhkonturnogo unnozhitelya ctastoty na diode s nakopleniyea zaryada"

[”The ”use Characteristics of a Two mned Section Frequency Multiplier Using
a Cl'nrge Storage Diode"), RADIO‘I'BKHNIKA, 1975, Vol 30, No 10, pp 52-60.

"Proyektirovaniye noduley SVCh: Diodnyye generatory, usiliteli i unnoshiteli
SVCh" ["The Design of Microwave Modules: Diode Microwave Oscillators, Ampli-
fiers and Multipliers"), Edited by G.P. Zantsov. Moscow, Moscow Aviation
Institute, 1973 (Sumry of Lectures).

"Radioperedayushchiye ustroystva na poluprovodnikovykh priborakh" ["Radio
Transmitting Equipment Using Suiconductor Devices"], Edited by R.A.
Valitov and LA. Popov, Moscow, Sovetsltoye Radio Publishers, 1973.

Bob Heirather, "Good Microstrip mltipliere Don't Just Happen", ELECTRONIC
DESIGN, 1971, No 3, pp 36-39.

For Chapter 19.

1.

Tager A.S., Val'd-Perlov V.M., "lavinno-proletnyye éiody i ikh primeneniye
v teklnike SVCh" ["Avalanche and Transit Diodes and Their Applications in
Microwave Engineering"] , Moscow, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1968.

-468—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

5.

9.

Koloaov M.V., Peregonov S.A., "SVCh generatory i usiliteli na poluprovodniko-
vykh priborakh" ["Microuve Oscillators and Amplifiers Using Saiconductor
Devices"], Moscow, Sovetakoye Radio Publishers, 1974.

Khaddad 6.6., "Printsipy raboty i osnovnyye mystva LPD" ["Operational
Principles and Major Properties of IMPATT Diodee"], ZARUBEZENAYA RADIO-
nmomu [Penman mimacrmmcs], 1972, No 1, pp 75-92.

”Poluprovodnikovyye pribory SVCh" ["Microuave Semiconductor Devices"],

Edited by P. Brand, Translated iron the English, Moscow, Mir Publishers,
1972.

"SVCh poluprovodnikovyye pribory i ikh priaeneniye" ("Microwave Saiconductor
Devices and Their Applications"], Edited by 0. Watson, Translated ﬁrm the
English, edited by v.5. Etkin, Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1972.

"Mikroelektronika i poluprovodnikovyye pribory" ["Microelectronics and Suri-
conductor Devices"], Edited by A.A. Vasenkov and Ya.A. Pedotov, Moscov,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1976, No. l.

Bouers 3., Midford T., Plants 5., "Inpatt Diode Multistage Transission
Amplifiers", ms. 13m, 1970, v. arr-18, No 11, p 963-9148.

Keyl F.N., Midford T.A., "LPD v integral'non iepolnenii" (”Integrated Cir-
cuit MATT Diodes"), 1'11le [PROCEEDINGS 01’ m 1333), 1967, Vol 55, No 12,
pp 130-132.

lbgalklnyes P.M., K. Kurrokova, "Perestrsivayeuyy generator dlya iznereniya
kharakteristik IMPA‘l'l' diodov" ["‘runable Generator for the Measurement of
IMPA'IT Diode Chracteristics"), TIIBR, 1970, Vol 58, Mo 6, pp 111-113.

For Cinpt er 20.

1.

Sobol G., "SVCh prineneniye tekhnologii integral 'nykh skhen" ["Microuave
Applications of Integrated Circuit Tecl'mologf'], in the book, ”Poluprovod-
nikovyye pribory SVCh" ("Microwave Sniconductor Devices"), Edited by F.
Brand, Moscou, Mir Publishers, 1972, pp 83-86.

Schneider M.U., "Microstrip Lines for Microwave Integrated Circuits", BELL
SYSTEI TECHNICAL JOURNAL, 1969, Vol 68, No 5, pp 1521-1466.

Sobol 6., "Ispol'zwaniye tekl'niki integral'nykh skhan dlya sozdayniya SVCh
oborudovaniya" (“The Use of Integrated Circuit Bardmre for the Design of
Microwave Equipent"], ELEKTEwIKA [ELECTRONICS], Vol 100, No 6, 1967,

pp 33.1.6.

Colton M., et a1., "SVCh integral'nyye skheny na elmentakh a" sosredotochenyni
postoyannyni i perspektivy ikh priaeneniys" ["Microvave Integrated Circuits

Using Elenente with lumped Constants and Prospects for Their Application"],
ZARUEEZENAYA RADIOELEKTRONIEA, 1972, No ’0, pp 106-123.

-469-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

basin V.V., Goreli‘mv N.I., Gotra Z.Yu., "Plenoclnyye nikroskheny i minia-
tyurizatsiya” ["711]: Integrated Circuits and Miniaturization"], L'vov,
Kaneuyar, 1972.

Dolkart V.M., Novik G.Kh., "Konstruktivnyye i elektricheskiye klnrakteristiki

Imogosloynykh peclutnykh plat" ["Structurs1 and Electrical Characteristics

of Multilayer Printed Circuit Eosrds"], Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers,
(Biblioteka radiokonstruktora) [(Radio Designer's Library”.

For Chapter 21.

1.

Se

"SVCh ustroystva na poluprovodnikovykh diodskh" ["Microusve Devices Using
Sasiconductor Diodes"], Edited by I.V. Mal'kiy.and EN. Sestroret‘skiy, Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1969.

Mikaelysn A.L., "Teoriya i prineneniye ferritov na SVCh" ("Theory and Appli-

cation of Ferrites st Microwave Frequencies"), Moscow, Energiya Publishers,
1963.

"Uprsvlyayushchiye ustroystva SVCh" ["Micronve Control Devices"], N.‘l‘. Bovs,
et a1., Kiev, 'rekhnika Publishers, 1973.

Uprsvlyaysuyye ferritovyye ustroystva SVCh" ["Controlled Microwave Ferrite
Devices"], V.N. Bogolyubov, et a1., Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1972.

Averbukh M.E., Bkhlokhin V.N. [sic], Miroelnichenko 5.3., ”Dishetnyye
nitropoloskovyye fazovrashchateli na p-i-n diodakh" ["Digitsl Microstrip Line
Phase Shifters Using PIN Diodes"), "Elektronika" Central Scientific Research
Institute, Moscow, 1976, No. 1.

For Chapter 22 .

1.

Fel'dshteyn A.I.., stich 1..R., Snirnov V.P., "Spravochnik po eluentan
volnovodnoy tekhniki“ ("Handbook on Microwave Equipment Couponents"],
Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1967.

Fel'dshteyn A.L., stich L.R., "Sintez chetyrekhpolyusnikov i vos'nipolyus-
nikov na SVCh" ["Design of Four and Eight Port Networks for Microwave Pre-
quencies"], Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1971.

Al'tnan 1)., "Ustroystva SVCh" ["Microwsve Devices”), Translated from the
English, Edited by I.V. Lebedev, Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1968.

Khsnzel I... "Sprsvochnik po rsschety fil'trov" ["Filter Design Bandbook"],

Translated from the English, edited by L.Ye. Znsnenskiy, Moscow, Sovetskoye
Radio Publishers, 1976.

Mattey D1.. Yang 1... Dahons Ye.M., "Pil'try svch, soglasuyushchiye tsepi i

tsepi svyszi, v 2-kh t." ["Microwave Filters, Matching Networks and Coupling
Networks, in Two Volunes"], lbscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1976.

-470-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Halorstskiy L.G., "Hibainiatyurizstsiya eluentov i ustroystv SVCh"
["Hicrouiniaturization of Microwave Components and Devices"], Moscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1976.

Kozlov V. 1., Vufit G. A., "Proysktirovaniye SVCh ustroystv s pouoshch'yu
Eva" ["conputer Assisted Design of Microwave Devices"]. lioscow. Sovetshoye
Radio Publishers, 1976.

For Chapter 23.

1.

5.

10.

Gsnston H.A. . "Soravoclnik po volnovyu soprotivlsniyiys- fidsrnykh liniy
SVCh" ["Rsndbook on the Characteristic Inpedances of Microwave Peedlines"),
kanslated from the English, Edited by A. 2. Prsdin, Moscow, Svyaz' Publishers,
1976.

"Konstruirovsniye i raschet poloskovykh ustroystv" ["Structursl and Design
Calculations for Striplins Devices"], Edited by 1.8. Kovalev, Hoscow,
Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1976.

"Poloskovyye linii i ustroystvs SVCh" [Microwave Devices and Striplines"],
Edited by V.H. Sedov, Khr'k‘ov, Vysshsys Shkola Publishers, 1974.

Kovalev 1.8., "Osnovy teorii i rasqheta ustroystv SVCh" ["Principlss of the
Theory and Design of Microwave Devices"], Minsk, Ranks 1 ‘rskhnika Publishers,
1972.

nattey DJ... Yang 1... Dehons YeH.1'., "Pil'try SVCh, soglamyushchiye tsepi i
tsepi svyazi v 2-kh t" ["Hicrouve Filters, Hatching Networks and Coupling
Networks; in Two Volumes"], l‘rsnslstion from the English edited by A.V.
Alekssyev and P.V. Kushner, Hoscow, Svyaz' Publishers, 1971, 1972 [sic].

Pel'dshteyn A.L., Yavich l..R., hirnov V.P., "Spravoclnik po eluental
volnovodnoy tekhniki", Moscow, Sovetskoys Radio Publishers, 1967.

. Hashkovets B.M., Thchenko K.A., "VoInovoy netod sintsra odnopetlevykh

napravlennykh fil'trov na poIoskovykh" ["‘rhe Rave Method of Synthesizing
Single Loop Directional Filters Using Striplines"], WSWAZ'. 1969,
No 6, pp 21-28.

Coyzhevskiy V.A., Levin A.P., Golovchsnko v.c., ”Vliyaniye dopuskov m
parnetry pechatnyllh napravlsnnykh otvetvitelsy" ["‘l'he Influmce of Toleran-
ces on the Parameters of Printed Circuit Directional Couplers"], 12V. VUZOV
sssn. mmauaxmoum, 1973, V01 16, No 3, pp 89-95.

Shelton J.P., "Inpedsnces of Offset Parallel Split Trsnuission Lines",
TRANS. 1m, 1966, Vol arr-1b, No l, p 7-13.

Metcalf 9.8., "Cascading Pour-Port Networks”, HICROBAV‘B 1‘. [sin], 1969, Vol
12, No 9, pp 14- 17.

um-

FOR OFFIQAI. use ONLY
FOR 0mm USE ONLY

For Chapter 2!. .

1. mallow V.I., "Trsnzistornyye radioperedstchiki" ["‘l‘rsnsistorized Radio
‘l‘rsnnitters"], Moscow, Buergiys Publishers, 1976.

2. Myaltishev .BYe., Solovtsov P.A., "Mnogohnnl'nyy SVCII delitel' noohchnoeti o
proizvol'nyu uplitudnyn rsspredeleniyen no vykhodskh" ["Multichannel
Microwave Power Divider with an Arbitrary Alplitude Distribution at the
mtputs"], 12V. WZW SSSR. RADIOEEKTRONIKA, 1978, No 2, pp 118-121.

3. $113er M.A., kysntsev C.P., "Prilozheniye astrits i grafov k onslizu
SVCh ustroystv" ['f‘l'he Application of Matrices and Graphs to the Analysis of
Microwave Devices”, Moscow, Sovetskoye Radio Publishers, 1970.

lo. Turenkov V.S., "Mnogoplechiye deliteli (mastery) noshclnosti SVCh no
soaredotochennykh elenontakh" ["mltiloop Microwave Power Dividers (and
Adders) Using Dumped ﬂuent-"l, minimum I WRONIKA, 1975, No. 5,
Vol 16, pp 943-948.

S. Nefedov 30.1., Fislkovskiy A.‘r., "Poloskavyye linii peredschi: Teoriye i
rsschet tipichnykh neodnorodnoetey" ["Strip Trsnaission Lines: Theory and
Design of Typical Inhomogeaeities'ﬂ, Moscow, Noah Publishers, 1971..

6. "Osnovy proyektirovsniys Iiktoelektronnoy sppsrotury" ["Pundonentsls of the

Design of Microelectronic Bquipuent"], Edited by DJ. Vysotskiy, Moscow,
Sovetekoye Radio Publishers, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Radio 1 svyoz'", 1981

8225
080: 8144/0181

.3”).

-1072.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY