FOR OFT“ "Ml. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10253
13 January 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 2/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itee originate with the source. Times within itens are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS COVBRNINO OWNERSHI’ 0'
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL U88 ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

JPRS L/102

13 January

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(POUO 2/8 2)

Coureurs

ASIA

AUSTRALIA

Police Charged Hith Conspiracy in Griffith Marijuana Case
(1H2 SYDIEY mums HERALD, 3 Nov 81)

Crown Says Sentences for No Cannabis Inporters Too Light
(THE WEST AUSTRALIAN, 3 Nov 81)..

Brie Es
Cannabis P rohib itions

HONG K016

Airport Customs Hen Reveal Methods Used To Snuggle Drugs
(SOUTH GINA mRNING PwT’ 7,16 me 81)....esnltosossaooato

Tactics Always (hanging
Heroin in Camera Bag

Police Raids Net Suspected Drug Dealers, Heroin Hauls
(SOUTH mINA MORNING POST, various dates)..................

narri tory-Hide Swoop

Swoops in Kowloon
New Territories Raids
NEPAL

Briefs

NEH ZEALAND

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Hashish Dealers Arrested

Australian Drug Inquiry Body Invited to New Zealand

(1N8 EVENING POST. 7, 28 Nov 81).............................

Move Tamed lhpreccdented
Police Association Protest
wellington 'POST‘ Cement, Editorial

Drugs Rnnd in Mail for Americans in Antarctica

(m2 NEW ZEALAND HERALD, 2. 3 be 81, 133 EVENING POST,

3 NC 81)..soon-esoc-o.tones.asooaoooooooooo-osooouooosooooao

Recipients Face Prosecution
Personnel Interviews Pending
wellington 'POST' Editorial
Auckland ’HBRALD' Editorial

Army Denies Drug 'Epidenic' Amng Troops in Singapore

(EVENING POST, 30 Nov 81)..so0.0.0.0..oooolaooooooooootoooooo

Australian on Trial for Importing Cannabis From Thailand

PAKISTAN

Brie fs

SRI LANKA

(m3 EVENING POST, 2 me 81)....saooo-ooooooooooaoooooooloaoo

Heroin Seized

Opiu- Seized

Drugs Seized by Customs

(hares Seized

Hashiah Recovered

Drug Seizure Reported

Heroin Struggling; Foreigners Held

Massive Operation Destroys 100 Acres of Ganja

THAILAND

(Sriml Abeyuardene; m! DAILY NEWS, 17 Dec 81)..............

unset Tribal Onieftain's Burma Narcotics Operations Noted

(Paul Jasmder; BANGCOK NET, 8 NOV 81)....ocosooonooos-eoo

Paper on Mtiopiul Campaign Amng llilltribes

(alonﬁkhadikit; PGT, 28 me al)s'aaoooooooooaosconce-soars.
-b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prem Gives Gray to Plan To Destroy Poppy Fields
(NATION my, a Jm 82)....000osssscsssooosossooossssesss

Drug Traffickers Set Up 'Death Squeds'
(NATION mm. 29 he 81)....O.ICCOCOIOI.....O...0.0......

Paper Cites Conflicting Views on' Poppies
(NATION REVIEW. 19 Dec 81)................................

Northern Governor Discusses Opium Problem
(mmgkhﬂdikit; erg 20 me 81).sosuosssssoosossossesooe

Briefs
Opium Subagents Arrested

Harden Jailed in Trafficker's Escape
'Phjor Trafficker' Arrested

Suspected Trafficker Arrested

LATIN “ERICA

RICA

Briefs
Drug Traffickers Arrested

3A

Brie fs
Ganja Plantation

Briefs
Drug Seizures

NEAR EAST AND uom AFRICA

Briefs
Shiraz Drug Discoveries

Khoresan Opium Haul
Drug Seizure in khshhad

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LEBANON

Briefs
Seizure of Heroin

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

Briefs
Coconut: in Drug Smuggling

NIGERIA

Use of Diplomatic Pouch for Hemp Smuggling haplored
(Editoria13NW “Ian“, I. NC 81).cocoon-oooooooonoooooooooo

WEST SURGE
CYPRUS

Police Seize Ship. 5.5 Ton: Indian new
(CYPRUS WEEKLY, 11-17 We 81)...............o.rr.\........o..

Officials Said To Seek Helicopter for Narcotics Control
(CYPRUS “MY, 11-17 me 81)....0I...OOOIOIOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOI

MG

Briefs
Drug Dealer Killed

unmzmns

Heroin Weighing 21 Kg Found in Shrilp Shipment
(BET mm VOLK, 17 NOV 81).ooonoocoo-ooooeooooooooooooooooo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLIéﬁ CHARGED WITH CONSPIRACY IN GRIFFITH MARIJUANA CASE

Sydney THE SYDNEY .‘(ORNING HERALD in English 3 Nov 81 p 3

[Tut] Four phlieeméh and u MM'RMMI“

[mu [m Grifﬁth. Antonio 'M '0‘" Ill... 9‘
Scry' W in Cancun»: Gil-quo-

Stree; Court at Penyﬁeuiom mmuwum

boa-nun. emu-«um
[008‘an
Mawdﬂw ”um-mu."
mum-um WWW“
macaw-um 0...:an
Mal/«albumen. Whammy".
“Bx-wd'w'h m.m»uwum
“*Wuﬂ- maﬁa-om
mumwdu I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020022-0

CROW SAYS SENTENCES FOR TWO CANNABIS IMPORTERS TOO LIGHT
Perth THE "851‘ AUSTRALIAN in English 3 Nov 81 p 18

[Excerpt] The crown yesterday contended in the Court of
Criminal Appeal that the sac]. sentences imposed on two

men convicted of. importing cannabis resin into Australia
were inadequate.

in the Supreme Court Yesterday. m- G. N.
in Angst. Donald and. Calder. tor the crown.
lord trance Wal submitted to the Court
:30), “~3me Criminal

Wayne 2" nub). oi' the aentene. impoeed
Brisbane. plea guilty did not take due if?”

C50: 5300/7518

to charge. at importin 'ot the seriousne- the
cannot: '

and poeaeaalnc

reein

Mr Justice Brinaden
gaoled Waldin for 12
montha and hlm
soon while Hemingwa-

reeled tor 15 months and
tined 36000.

The court heard that
when Welding arrived at
Perth Airport tron Sin-
gapore in May a aeareh
by cuetotna ottloera to
vealed 4.9 kiloe ot canna«
bia min in a auiteaee.

mrnr

Waldlnc said he had ‘

agreed to bring the drug
into Auatre"a tor an
other person whom he
knew only aa 'Nitty.”

"3°33“? Willi; p...
on n a a

fusion. :1: admitted malt;
n t arran

vn‘th Waldln‘. M
Both men worked In
Singapore on an on-
shore oil druid Pletnln
3“ he (or between
e crux

95.000
through another person.

The d had a street
value ota t$l00.000.

ouencee.

He aald immune
leglnthedlalrlbutlonol

MP waa importation
‘ tam-“v ”3:31
w eeeo
evermeedinwk
The two aeoueed
worked in W
earnln ood wagon.
a ﬂat loca-
tion to get drug and. aa
Aunt-aunt. were able
to get back into Austrao
lta without may.
He said that tthe deten-

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500020022-0
BRIEFS

CANNABIS PROHIBITIONs--State cabinet would never agree to relax prohibitions on
cannabis, the Premier, Hr Bjelke-Petersen, said yesterday. Cabinet's hardline
attitude followed a request from the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, seeking Queens-
land agreement that there should be no relaxation of laws "at this time." A
further request for Queensland's views on whether it would be appropriate to
set a time limit on the need to review the policy also met with a tough "no."
Hr Bjclke—Petersen said Queensland would never support a review as recommended
by the recent Royal Com-ﬁssion into Drugs. (The inquiry recmlnended there
should be a review of the legal prohibition of cannabis after 10 years.) "That
could create an expectation among cannabis users of a possible change in Gov-
ernment policy," Mr Bjelke-Petersen said. [Text] [Brisbane THE COURIER-HAIL
in English 27 Oct 81 p 10]

CSO: 5300/7518
AIRPORT CUSMS MEN REVEM’. WDS USE) TO SWGGLE DRUGS

Tactics Always Changing

Hong Kong 500111 CHINA MORNING P05? in English 7 Doc 81 p 28

[Text]
0

An excia oﬂ'xect. Mt
Szelo Che-wing. has but
a customs mun foe 2|
yam. but he am he in
33:! lemming how to do his

win. of taunt m by
cum am who have not
hall mm ammonia. w
hm ind madam;

at a ; Mod III
«prim were found «in.
mm or by with tub:

Mam

Custom ”Item and“
numb: of mm and [In
convict} then switched 3
carry". “mu
any inlmlly. m in
that «cinnamon-a.

Time hive ban a mi
0! man in such as. a
now. Mt Sm m the
course: may have gone back
to Inn; Med mom-
mm up

n: zoo men and women
who watt with Mr Sm

—.

mmmum
Tat m mud thi- oa uh
ground.

not «tubing tint than
m to In an “you limit-

'3

is.

5';-
a
x

53%;
Eli

al («it or *1
ch! MM “upped
loud lb woo. in am
up w in an body and
in and tooth mud in
W I‘actorics in
Thilud.

Cum ms Inc found
bean in «be of «loam
m hula at am in

can of mi ad in
"“°‘5. a. a a...
way out

long. archers check me-
d or have courier: end

arm from Kenchi be
cute anemi- ' m
“inhuman.”

Heroin in Camera Bag

W end within a con-
ple of web at the X~rey
machine here.‘ infalld. foet-

cf the calm the: II Kei
Tat have been tended by
themad‘Oeov-rien.

Mr Seeto at! his M
hope to boner th'n heather
mayhefmtheeadol
[unh 4. .._- «1-

Hong Kong SOUTH CRINA MORNING POST in English 16 Doc 81 p 26

[Text]

Police found a lune

eneeet of herein in a center:
etpmeet use atrial h e

leniut who errived at I
Tet airport on s n t from
Simeon. the Hi Court
was told yesterday.

Thee Lam-bond (33) is on
"a! beforeer {utice Better.
3 a 1- or alegedt m -
ﬁche. ittrya datum Jm‘f

Detective Inspector . ad
Owed Hermon told the
court that Thee arrived at the
airport on Apri! 3 «trying I
cue costume; center:
eqe' 1.

alone oﬂ'tcer! rho
arched the cur. (head it
hede wee bottom.

futile vere Ll l2.”
yum: e mammo-
mg‘lthl «heroin. -
I «won slit! thet
whee hurried Thee the
weaned told hint that he had
been headed the am ate
by a fut m at Singapore
Be tho and the men we:
the same ﬂinht lo Hog.-

reethentoldtolooh
.. {at an amine
m up
H It said he med: eo
elf to and this an alter
hey her! [need through the
he‘fgemmuoeuee.
trtelcentieeetwdey.

i?
i

333

.-
POLICE RAIDS NET SUSPECTE DRUG DEALERS, “BEGIN HAULS

Territory-Wide Swoop

Rang Kong some cam MORNING POST in august: 4 Dec 81 p 18

[Text]

Police carried out e mauve terrttory-tnoe swoop
yesterday or} more than 30 premisee believed to he
wooected wtth e syttdicete involved in the locel distri-

hetior. 0! drugs

The Io-hoer operetioe. which

heart at 5.30 am yeetmley.

nuaniedoet hydneeaotthe Neruda Dureeu uhovere
uttered by ol'l'teere from the Colony-wide divisional specie!

det nude.
errand )0

—24ttteeutdeixmea—eo¢

meetintorethent-olheol‘Nthetoieveleedetsmwo

oe the retell urea.

WthmeMDweuillheie‘deteioe-Hut ‘ t.
whiletheothen-eteeitherreleeeedoroeheil '

further inquiriee

Pdieeuidtheeedeteieeeereapectedtohecher’ed
toeeyoeverloeedewdrepdfm

A eeeier ND ofﬁcer eeitl
tut night thet Mitten-
mree we not ee hi; ee a.
peetee. het detectivee believe
thet the aide hed meshed
the heathen: o! the syndi-
eete.

leteeeive investigation

into the ' te ere
“tart...“ “m";
were t
Ior several of tt‘engen'ter etern-
here.
I» e raid on e decoration
compeny «1 Fe YeettStreet.
Mount. detectives teieed e
peetet of No } heroin-end
two the. were am.
at 0': urchin; ‘:w
t teee. t
«mm womo 7:

ash het m of the ie
the premises eleinm‘eer-
eht' oflhethooey.

' old they were
int/auntie whether the
eesh tree tom the eele of
drugs or from other «in.
eoeteuttetl recently.

NB officers. working

eederthedireetiet'nolSeeler
Wt Hei Ito-0e.
heve heee invertiaetiu the
syndicate for the peet m
tho-the

They aid heeeeee d the
syndicate territory-wide aet-
vork. itweeueetteee took
nee amendmehoen.

“ d heb dilftenlt u
eteethere t W I!“
tedio ne‘er: to eteke
treeeectioee tether them
teeteeetect vith the hem”
eeeeiorNBdetectmmd._

ND deteettvq were rege-

Thelletiehellevetltoheve
heeeeeeehythes ’. tea
a eed ' heme
centre or Teletehetetti eee

III-ll.

<
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020022-0

Swoops 1n Kowloon
Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA .‘tORNING POST in English 13 Dec 81 p 8

[Text] Polo- M

New Territories Paid:
Bong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 15 Dec 81 p 26

[Text] Narcotic- m. dune.-

tiva attend the: m and a
Thai noun utd triad I.)
of No J heroin in a sari:
_ aids in the Ne}! Tamra
. riayaterthy worm
A 32~ r-old man an: a
Sl-ynr Thai woman were
arrow in a but It Yr: Kok
temporary having no. at
Ting Kok Rood. Tripo. short-
ly before 2 pm folio-in the
seizure o! I.) k; of a 3
heroin.
Follow-u inquiriu led to
the mat another two men
— on: in Yum mad the
other at Ina Tm.

CSO : S 320/9107

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020022-0
BRIEFS

POPPY GROWING ZONES-410st of. the Lao Soung nationalities living in the mountains
of the north have a preference for and expertise in the cultivation of opium
poppies and do this for a livelihood. A great deal of poppy is grown in the
provinces of Phong Saly, Louang Nam The, Oudonsai, “one man, Xieng Khousng and
Vientiane (on Phou Khan Khouai). Host of the opium is used in the production of
medicine. In the past, the capitalists used the opium to nuke narcotics with
which to £03 the minds of the young people so that they would be mislead into
its use. [Excerpt] [Vientiane VIENTIANE MI in Lao 7 Nov 81 p 3]

050: 5300/ 4587
BRIEFS

HASHISI-l DEALERS ARRESTED-Joli“ have arrested red handed Rancha ‘l'hapa of Palung 1n
Hakwanpur district as he was trying to sell ﬁve kilos of processed hashlsh at the
rate of twelve hundred rupees per kilo. Also arrested 1s Shyan Bahadur hang of
Ranipuwa for similar ofences. He was trying to trade two kilos of hashish for
three thousand rupees. [Text] [Kathmandu m m in English 8 Dec Bl p 2]

C80: 5300/4911
AUSTRALIAN DRUG IWIRY 330‘! INVITE TO NE" W

Mov- ‘hmd Unprecedented

um Mm «mm». m m mm m w “Wmﬁm
mum. wmwu mmwmmm WWW“ «WW Wm WMMWWHWWWWWW mm
mm m a 3m. uWMu w. ”mum m u.
3 WWW WWW mmmwmwwmmmm. mmmsmm ﬁmmmmw
m p .m... ”In ,m n: mm ”mm
W mm mm WWW .WW Wmmwmﬁ SEW
mmm “Mm “WWW. MM» Wm .mwmummw Wmmmmm.
m. WM“ mmmm mwmmmme. mmmth—wW www.mmmmmwmm Tu «mm
m t. awn .m «me uwmmm mumem mmwm
mi? ﬂ, ammwmmmw
-. w.” m M u “mam: .
m $me mam; m a meﬁ wwwmmmwmwmmw
m m
m w...
Police Aseoclation Protest

Wellington THE EVENING P051: in English 27 Nov 81 p 8

unhappy about «remains the mental
at many gene"

as Ansttalun rowel com. and contused the public

mtSSIOIS at. concerned. mm

ﬁellington THE SVEIIING POST in English 28

[Edi torlal: "movable Comiss 1011']

(Text! mammmmmm

activities Wt a meet mweleome

mmoodncacunueeto allowed
to cross the Tasman :- dil-
terent altogether. a must invite some
man.

IT WAS outrageous that New Mud
in their own country, the secretary of

atiott. the Thomas com-

out executive 5 met mannvuadweceJed
land! allot!

11

cs'ton thaw-Geo mmuww
«eluumea WWM'I my
watmlmAmmm andtbeumeleuloaguu
mtmy'wmmwex- wwwwy

mt: ecuvi W the 1M
pmbyuemww
wmmwmw
mm: m mm
mm mmwmmmmummm mm
mmmm mm n W m mm.
mm ”mum ,. m Wm

Mm
mmmm. mammem mum“

12
DRUGS mum IN MAIL FOR WICANS I}! ANTARCTICA

Incipient: Face Prosecution

Hashish. cannn

found by Chrtstchurc
addressed to Ameri

Drugs had been hand Ill
more than parcels. ollen
concealed loodstutla to
hot (truss the mutant
collecto: cutouts lﬂ

some ol the American scien-
um. support. workers and
servicemen m Antarctica
and in Christchurch.

Some ot the Americana
could lace prosecution when
they returner! trom Arum
nca "depend“ on .the out
come of the imamews we
will have out]: than." said
Mr Kearns.

The linked States Govern-
ment. Including the State De,

Sclence Foundation. has
'lomed the New Zealann
authorities in investigating
rm Antarctic drug name.

I-ln a letter to a Nee Zea.
; land newspaper last month.
‘6! men and women 0! 'Opera-
uon Deep Freeu sold the:
the action 0‘ Christchurch
customs oltlclals had emhlt-
tered "hon
lnenrlly Americans and no
WM the friendly work-

bis and “magic mushrooms” have been

h customs office

cans in Antarctica.

rs in’ mail and punch

drcds ot .nlherwitc'

In; relationship between the A “9°" m
“'0 cwm- . Statinn in new
bound mall had been W all that me
matlcnlly . read. con- the . atbnat Sdet
ed.‘ a “in" dm- ttcn. which no
It! ‘ xnonslbtlh [or
HrKearnasaldhaknewd Statamle’lnAnt
onlyoneeaeelnwhtchaoar talkenottnovina
cel been sllchtlv am “on, 5.. to
need. The Custom Depart- am the coat
Ml hid pen to 0! mum}-
"569- “the Wool
H. “a M! C u d the cum c:
Antarctica-boom mall had mldermtneu n.
starteduamultntlndica uonauv close I
done that goods were being _m r
literally Inverted- M M and New 2m:
some Woe! m mun: nndv cl Antarctt
dutv and sale exemptions to The] ”a .15
whlch they were not entitled. anner and deg
.‘trKearna discounted as- rate" among I)
nations or the Americana WW
"'3‘“? '9‘“ "”3” 9" n: W
1;? III or tramtt cata- My“; “3":
! mall we: removed from ““9
an alrcralt m it landed in “W 9‘!
"er . . m Christchurch. .
rmwrmmnmm m- «a
lmnorted mto New Zealand ‘5" “59 aﬂalr ‘
Thernaﬂmto chi-kt- ‘ﬂm‘ﬂ'w
mmﬂgﬂmmw com:
a .'nvy . t .
arrives on commercial alr- ‘3 P“ ‘
mn is then erred my .°“'°Il
tom MMMM: anythmgnlthe
Force and United States 36’- 0" mm M"

Anurcttca.
Personnel Interviews Pending

wellington m WING POST in English 3 Doc 81 p 27

[Ton]

mm Doc 2 m «17 clout! up We woven, In! momma-rm
(PAL-mum madame-Ia." 3w anyhow human-Wm
«anew m Patch-1‘ cum memam' mama-pupa
uqvnululnunhnunNMA («ﬂ ) and u in drug. ht m£¢nioﬂthcuuat‘
tusuunnurlu «swan (hundnlSmnmnoﬂkvto 1i. cunﬂh
unuldh-ugundbawuy 4n 4hyb|::::unlvu! h.:::ﬁ::: “:3
d Wyn}- lhno-dmum mamum-udu. ”my“:
undal . alculnuslndhuuuﬂlmd nullrlnuusv nullnnmn .‘t, BMMJI

3:23.”ch “:1: PM “stau- cicadas-gm m a”'“”“
$334.,“ an, wmmm bung-tuna” MAM-dc
g "'“‘"" u“" 9"” “No IIIINII "'
um mam-incl» Unit-d Sm“. ” “W Coco-s u“ «and:

to n

Amago‘m mmﬁu'mmw‘mmum, lemma-.0!
mum 2:13“ to be m' «31' tan a: enu- cumin-r m m “‘3‘:

amedm W'wtolomo «gnaw w"

900 .0 who m" b. m. muwmm bun. urban-nit 1'30 4"le '"l N

TL“ m m a, mod Sam M w u gum” m rm?“

nial w mukal “"“u‘ onnuhounhnncumhd

ucmmmm “*WW mum-um mmmm

m at maWhW

"Sam“,“gmmlw “wafum'uw mg‘ “a“ hymns-MW

tweedtiymmsuﬂon D no": mum "cannula. gum-y

mums-mammar- necare w «mam chum”

bar: at the US military «w.mwmm ”um ”I... unmanned!“

m “noun" emu on man- uu- Whitman:
"Sanooluohom mummy. we! lay ,Mht WM

wellington ' P051" Editorial

Wellington ﬂu: EVENING P05? in English 3 Doc 81 p 2

[Editorial :

[Text]

MWDEPAR‘MENT In:
Maulynoumwfcdlnanyuy

Whytho Inma-

WWW human;

viilanct. -
mmmowcmncurm-

church of banish. cannabis and
' N: M” (which have

mmmmm.
manually .Iuncud
ammonium mm

14

"Drug Vigilance Is a Cmtou' Priority“)

MMu-hﬂthmm
aodthetactthattbeUnitcd

Wmmw'mwg

andnotsubjecttoseercbhyﬂowha—
land officials

But the customs enforcement ls
clear. all mail landed in New Zeelaod is

subject

tocbecta.

Auckland ' HERALD' Edi torts].

Auckland THE NEW mo HERALD in English 3 Dec 81 p 6

(Editorial:

[Text]

CSO:

"Narcotics an the Zoo")

l'President Roam ‘. recently
W police chiels a torsion
WM vigorously seeks to
tn, and eradicate illicit
drugs. wherever cultivated. pro-
cessed or transported." By inter-
“Pﬁns drugs bound for United
States "mun! in Antarctica.
the New Iceland Customs Depart-
ment must receive official back-
in: tron: Washington. ‘

The President recoznlses drug-
traftlcltinz for the scourge that
it is. Mrs Reagan is so concerned
about the eﬂects of drug abuse
that she personally launched on
antionarcottcs crusade last month.

Such a firm ofﬁcial stand
must ensure that those Amerioens
who have complained about their

5320/9108

15

‘mall W seuche‘l'can expect‘
no“ support from their owns!
Administration. Certainly it is
nonsense to suggest that Deep-

.Freae headquarters ' could he

moved from New Zealand ‘in
protest. To do so would imply

' that the use of hashish. cannabis

and “magic mushrooms” on the1
ice was tolerated or condoned.

. - New Zealand customs officers
hsve a statutory right to search
Antarctic-bound maiL Those re-
sponsible for the safety of the

United States polar community.
which line in n hazardous
natural environment. might be
thanktul that the powers under
the Customs Act are used.
ARMY DENIES DRUG 'EPIDEHIC' AMONG TROOPS IN SINGAPORE

wellington EVENING POST in English 30 Nov 81 p 9

[Text]

CS“:

A lawyer's claims 0! "a

m . . .,
w..“*- ESE '°'
been dent

g.
3. .

. 2‘
E

”ﬁning hanadn
luuaMn m ' pan h-
oevcr reached 'Iﬂ-

nun. 'bh nkndf
mi“ ’"’°

5320/9108

16

have totally W the
molambbJBmlam
umuoauwuwym
AUSTRALIAN ON TRIAL FOR IMPORTING CANNABIS PRO“ THAEMND

wellington THE WIN P05? in mqllsh 2 Dec 81 p 22

[Text]

Mr Rona lion ap-
. who was

pend an
nanny «on

Thu
tecuve Set can! Dnvl
Luca add
laced to have named
unease: coughing Db.‘
packages 0 can:
mm a local 0! m '
pm

The 08‘! were not
chimd and m and by;

Auckland

small

CSO:

ﬁlm" ... . Dec 1 (FAQ -
importing into New Zealand cannabis

5320/9108

he0n W M l
m to Bum

uoul Am a I rank at
Intommm received. and
watched “may check in mt
mm. 7m appeared

veranda.
eucuve Inspector
Brynn Jon Me. an omen-

In 0! the -
inﬂammﬁ‘uﬁ

17

mum «lane!
and value c! 81 mum in
total. I

"n u balm am an.

mum;

II o! m "M:
J53 “3’...“ '

Detective tummy!
may MSW aid at

 

'5
i

%
Ei

3"

u.

23 g
$35

.i

ﬁx.

[is
5&2

E

o.
I
8..

§

'3’

Ani'mnan" .. " append" 'in't'd'e District. ' Cad-t here‘cddayihargedmw "will!
plants said to have a street value of 81 mulled.

3-..?

5%
BRIEFS

HEROIN SEIZED—-About 109 kilograms of high quality herein has been seized in
Baluchiatan. The official sources in Quetta said that this heroin was being
smuggled from Pakistan to Iran. Five alleged smugglers have been arrested and the
cars used for this purpose confiscated. [Karachi Domestic Service in Urdu

0200 GMT 28 Dec 81]

OPIUM SEIZBD--Quetta, 31 Dec--Thirteen kilograms of opium valued at 26 million in
the foreign market has been seized by anti-smuggling squad of the central land
custom in Hangochar area of Kalat District. According to a custom press release
two alleged smugglers have been arrested and a truck used for smuggling has been
impounded. Further investigations are in progress--PPI. [Text] [GF041336
Karachi DAWN in English 1 Jan 82 p 5]

DRUGS SEIZED BY CUSTOHs-Customs air freight unit yesterday impounded l3 drums,
containing 625 kilograms of "seco-barbitel sodium.” valued at about Rs 312.5 million
in the underworld market. In the last week of November, the customs special checking
squad had seized 600 kgs of the same material valued at RS 300 million in the
underworld market. [CF041339 Karachi DAMN in English 31 Dec 81 p 8]

census sszzzn--ruo persons were arrested and over 110 neunds of chares were re-

covered from their possession by the Anti-Burglary Squad of City Division police
yesterday. Accused Nezir Ahmed and Rehnatulleh were caught, while they were trying

to load the consignment on e Hyderabad-bound passenger bus at aoulten Market.
[Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 19 Dec 81 p 10]

18
HASHISH RECOVERED-«ah Cantt. Dec. 24--The Customs and Anti-smuggling Squad No. 1
arrested two persons, Mohammad Iqbal and Abdul ﬂakim, and allegedly recovered two
lakh grams (five munds) of Hashish and motor spare parts.. The raiding party ex-
changed fire with the accused for about ten minutes as it chased the car which
turned turtle when its tyre burst on being hit. [Karachi mm: in English 25 Dec 81

p9]

Dims SEIZURE REPOM'EDnQuetta Dec 26--Narcotice worth an. 163.5 crore was recovered
at two different places within last 24 hours in the world's one of the biggest drug
haul. According to details, Acting on a secret information. the Custous Mobile
staff ambushed a Toyota pick-up No. 1180 near Pishok on Noahki-Dalbandin road last
night and recovered 59 kilograms of heroine from its concealed cavaties. [Kara-
chi MORNIm NEWS in English 27 Dec 81 p 8]

mom SHUGGLING; FOREIGNERS HELD—Two foreign nationals were arrested from Lahore
Railway Station on charges of snuggling heroin on Saturday. D. Brown. a Britieher,
was travelling to Karachi by leyber Mail with 150 kilogram heroin while Erwin
Dictor, an Austrian, keeping 30 gram heroin was going to India. Chara and opium
weighing 1282 grate was also seized by the District Exciae Staff from various
places in the city. Five persons were arrested under the offence. Three drunkard
were also arrested for drinking and making hooliganism in the Tibbi area. [Text]
[Lahore THE PAKISTAN TIMES in English 6 Dec 81 p 5]

C80: 5200/ 5580

19
MASSIVB OPERATIOR DESTMYS 100 ms @ GANJA

Coloubo tat: DAILY NEWS in English 17 Doc 81 p 1

[Article by Stiml Abeywardenel

[Text]

WWW,

.WWWW :me WWWWWnWWW

”WWW WWW. WWW WWWWEWW
Mm WW. W m mm 9.
WWW mWWwWWWWWW MWWWWWWWW WWWWWWWW
“WWWWWZW WWWHW
WWWWWWwWWWWWW WWWWW WW WWWW
WWW WWWWWWW WWWLWWW? W WWW
WWW WWW»: WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW WWWWW
ecm. «w mmmwmmmwmwm
WWW gamma WIW m
mmmw «mummmmm "Wammmm MW.» ”W
e n n... ...
WWW WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWTWWW . WWWm
WMWWWWWMWW“ WW?” WWW.
WWWWWWWEWW ”WWW
WWMWWWWWW mum“ MWWWWWWWWWWWWW

5300/4912

CSO :

20
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020022-0

MUSER TRIBAL CHIEF'IAIN'S BURMA NARCOTICS OPERATIONS NOTED
Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 8 Nov 81 p 21

[Article by Paul Jcsvinder]

[Text] “YOUwantNoif'ahnahyvoleed'

teen with ahitty eyee shed lo.
“I've got plenty. The price it
“.000 haht (or 100 gran-ea. You
pay In advance. Caeh only."

Welcome to Del Larng. the wild.
lawleae land where heroin and
gambling are the two preoccupa-
tlou of the reddente and where
(:ha Ue relgne'upreme. Thie la
Cha Ue’a territory. the leader of
the Mueer rehela. a iooeely-knit
army which follow! the rulea of its
leadera to the letter. Their goal?
To ﬁght the Bweee aoldlera to
the very end.

Doi Lam. located aome 80 ltllo
metres iron Fang District in
Chiang Bel. la «meted one oi
the major aupply routes oi heroin
to buyers lrom Thailand. Sourcee
say the drug is manufactured 30
kilometree deep undo the noun-
tainoua jungle irotn here. acceeal-
ble only to the linear eoldlera.

The inaln attraction of thu no
man's land. dividing Thailand and
Burma. are drugs. gambling and
moonahlne whialty — not necee
eerily in that order. The village ie
eltuated on the Burmeee aide hot
it acceeelble to Theta. although
lewdaretaltetherotr. ll‘tieﬁueot
the strongholds t e uaer
reheia and the dte o1 occeelooal
mlahea with Burmeee govern-
ment aoldlera.

Rard Drugs

.mile'eartnyiaheilevedtd
mainlynlpportedhyaaleeoth;
drop—mainly heroln.althot
lttaxeetraderatorenylnerch
dleehroughtintoltaterrltory.
Thedealer I talked to. wht
aho a well-known bane-u
hmuldhegeuherolnthrot
ltueereoidlere'ﬂ'heyaremyc
M”aldthedeal«.lleeald
unheaISpercentcontntlaeion:
from each aale. Demandior N:
heroiniahigh nowheeeuaehf
annclpatedhuntpercropotopi
tlu'ouhoutthereglon.
' Thedealereaolalnedthetoll
gag grocedurea {or each trant

on.

The dealer accept: the not
from the potential buyer I
giveeitand the order to the ﬂu
eoldlera (alter hie cut in
M). 3e aald once the ”goo
arrtve. ueuelly in one day. he
cot-ta the buyer to the neat
horderpolnt.

”Ban Tod la the heat point
value the druu out." aaid
dealer. referring to the her
about hall a kilometre from ht
“Ourloh uninhee there. Once:
are on the Thai aide. you are
youroam."

Asked ahout_ the maxim
quantlty a buyer can order.
dealer reviled: "Whatever
wantlcandellver. ‘l'heheet:
iaUenBrand No. e We made

21

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020022-0
of opium planted by the Burmese
whosell it to the Muser soldiers."

Asked what sateguarda the cus»
tomer has alter handing over the
money in advance. the dealer
replied: "book. i have been in this
business many years. My neck is
at stake. i wouldn't be here today
if X had betrayed my customers"
He added that betrayal may occur
once the herein is smuggled out to
Thailand because oi the huge
amount of money involved.

The dealer said he is in ”big
business" and prelers large or
ders. "Forget about the 700
grammes. why not place a 7.000
grammes order? Better yet. try to
smuggle the drug out oi the coun-
try. lt takes only once. and you'll
be a rich man."

No. 4. That's what they call it
here. The word “heroin" is rarely
mentioned. Says the same dealer:
"There are many kinds of heroin
available in Dot Lung. but the
best lsNo.e Lion Brand. in easy to

diiierentiate it irom other brands.
Most brands are soft and powdery.
but No. s is crude. like detergent.
because his fresh." ‘

About a block away trotn the
drug dealer's shop is the morning
market where gambling is a daily
occumnceCailed "casinos". the!
consist oi a few makeshift tables
located inside the market. a huge.
barn-like compound in the centre
oi the town. Every day. hundreds
oi gamblers form a big circle
around the tables. eagerly clutch-
ing both Thai and Burmese bank-
notes.

Blackjack

Two Chinese sit at the centre of
each table: One takes care oi the
money while the other spins the
dice inside a black tin box and
immediately covers it with a lid
betore gamblers put down the
money on numbers oi their
choice. Various games. such as
blackjack and other card games.

also draw crowds nut”!- ..
”They get sucked in every day. ~
said an drus enter it"

head slowly.

Casinos are open until very late
at night as many gamble alter
their day's work is done. A large

number of gamblers. surprisingly.
IN women.

'Women in Dot Larng are as
rough as men." said one gambler.
"litany women here are also drug

There is a huge sign in Thai.
Burmese and Chinese on the wall
directly above one gambling table
in one corner. warning gamblers
to strictly observe house gambling
rules. with- heavy penalties tor
cheaters.

'“i‘hst's really a ioke because
the ‘house niles' are made by the
Us" remarked one gambler. “And
his rules mean he wins and you
lose."

Another bold sign neat to the
gambling sign says. “Those found
in possession of white or black
powders will be automatically
lined 10.000 baht and sentenced to
six months in jail or both lined
and Jailed or will be at once eit-
pelled lrom Dot Lsrng or will be
executed."

"No one pays any attention to
the sign." said one man and

wants no one in possessi
oin except himsstt."

Market morning dominates the
social lite and is the gathering
place (or the planters. drug deal-
ers and gamblers it is the only
hub of Dot Larng's activities
where transactions at all kinds are
carried out openly. '

One drug dealer and gambler
said that Cha Ue makes 40.000
baht a month irom gambling coir
cessions witholt even coming
here. In addition to gambling pay-
oiis. the source added that the

from production of moonshine
whisky in the village.

Peanuts

“But that's peanuts.” be said
"lie makes millions a month from
herein to support his men." ‘

Opium smelting ls prohibited
here. he said. adding that a mater
bulk oi the yield is delivered dl
rectly to the lduser soldiers who
use it to manuiacture heroin.

it is impossible tor a visitor to
come into this rough land without

22

arousing the curiosity among the
local residents. particularly the
gun-coming young soldiers. lwas
having lunch inside the market'
the day l arrived when two Muaer
soldiers. armed with mu. sud-

denly appeared at the table and
glared at me. One was short and
swarthy and the other tail and
thin. both in their late teens. l
plucked up courage and asked
both to join me tor lunch. They
ignored my invitation and walked
all towards the gambling table.

My second conirontation with
the Hours came shortly before i
boarded the bus back to the Thai
side when a man with a weathered
lace and in civilian clothes with a
gun dangling loosely on his hip
stopped me.

”Are you a Thai or American?"
asked the man. giving me a search-
ing look. That. i answered. "Good
lor you." he said and slowly
walked back towards the market.

 

'Law and Order'

' twasChaDermneoiChs
Ue's sons." the bus driver told the.
as the vehicle began to descend
the muddy road. "He comes here
to keep 'law and order‘ ".

illicit business. whether It is
drugs. gambling or moonshine.
does not only exist but is encoun
aged by the Muser leaders with
visions ol money in mind. Produc~
tion of home brewed whisky.
called Lao Kao. (white whisky) is
rampant.

One and the bus
driver walked out of the raucous
market place and passed along
subterranean passages oi mud
the! most have stretched 200 feet
before we came to a big smoke-
tilled thatched but made out of

tioned us to step inside. The small
room reeked oi strong alcohol and
sticky rice. in one corner oi the
room wu a huge tank with water
bubbling under the hot stove.

.- “This is 40 degrees proof alco-
hol." said the soldier. holding a

bottle at lreslllyobrewed whisky
in his hand and proceeded to ego?

plain to us several methods oi
making the moonshine whisky.
(One method was to add Fab
detergent “it's stronger." said
the soldier.)

Although casinos and drugs
dominate daily life here. Doi
Larng‘s legitimate economy is
based on tea production. Most oi
the women in the village work at
the nearby tea plantations.

Tea

"Tea is ietching a very good
price this year." one tea planter
told me as our bus sloshed
through the ﬂooded road leading
back to the Thai side. "We're sell~
ing ior as much as 80 baht per
kilo." Most oi the tea planters
supply their products to tea iacto-
ms in Fang District where it is
manuiactured and sent to Bang-
kok. _

Once i asked a gambler how
easy it is to obtain mariiuana in
Dot Larng. He didn't answer. but
took me to a iruit vendor. a trail.
hetcl~chewing old woman.
"Mama." the gambler said to her.
"canl have live baht worth oi
kania? ( marijuana)" The woman
hurriedly accepted the money and
disappeared inside the house. She
returned quickly and gave him
a handlul oi kanja neatly wrapped
in a small paper bag.

"Strong stuii." said the gam-
bler. studying the marijuana in his
hand. He discarded the tobacco
from his cigarette and reiilled it
with marijuana and Ill it. "Strong
and very good." he said. deeply
inhaling. "i can have 30 smokes
ior the money! paid."

"Where did she get the slut!
from?" i asked. The gambler es
rotted me to a small garden at the
hack oi the woman's wooden
house and pointed at some green
plants.

There probably are more guns
in Del Larng than the whole pow
iatton combined. Everyone seems
to be carrying one: The soldiers.
the gamblers and the civilians out
in the street.

The handling oithe guns by the
young soldiers appears to be more
symbolic than practical. Soldiers

C50: 5300/4585

24 hours a day and never leave
without it in- case oi “an
attack by the enemy." So it was a
common sight to see the soldiers
having their lunch inside the mar-
ket place with one hand iirmly
clutching the Mad.

"We want to be ready iust in
case." said one sarong-clad sol.
dier. Ready ior what? i asked. The
soldier looked startled. probably
uniamillar with such a question
irom a stranger. He did not re-
spond but inept on eadng.

One long time resident said
that the majority oi the soldiers
are unable to grasp the conﬂicts
and political ideology existing be-
tween Maser and Burmese lead-
era.

"they (the soldiers) are lust

too naive to understand the crux.

oi tub; pattilem." said the resides:
ad at many young men w
no education decide to iein the
army either because oi boredom
or a determination to carry guns.
"they are bored suii with the
society that has no diver-allied cul-
ture and oiiers no socialisation."

continued the man in his late 40s..

a tuner laser soldier hinaeii.
“Once they iolh the army. they
Immediately begin to play the role
oi the deiender. Carrying guns

gives them a ieellng oi supreme-

power.

"hiuser youths are brain-
washed by the army to display
hatred. There is nothing more
dangerous than giving the young-

sters guns and telling them they'
can shoot anybody they ieel is

suspicious."

Threat

Does the iiiuserBurma conﬂict
poseathreatto Thailand?

in private conversations. Thai
oiiiclalssay that except ior the
ﬂow oi drugs. they don't see any
danger posed by the Muaer sol«
diers. "Muser soldiers don't
bother us because they don't hold
any grudge against Thai people."
explained the official. "We'll start
worrying when they begin en-
croaching upon our territory."

Fighting between Muser sol-
dlers and the Burmese at present

23

is more or less a «tend-mouse.
aliair. According to one career
soldier. the situation has reached
a automate because oi the lack oi
clear cut issues involved in the
conﬂict. except repeated com-
plaintsby the Muser leader. Cha
lie. that his people are being op-
pressed by the Burmese. though
no speciiic charges have been
made by him.

Other sources say the stale
mate will continue unless a major
conirontation between the two
parties takes place. which they
believe is highly unlikely.

Talking to the Maser rebels one
iails to understand their aim. Two
answers were given in conversa-
tions:0neis "we want liberation"
although only a iew can inteill~
gently discuss what the word-
means. and two "It's up to our
leader." meaning Cha Ue. whose
whereabouts remains as much a
mystery as the man himseli. even
to his ”constituents. "

Money

From personal observation
here in Del Larng. it seems the.
maior preoccupation with Cha Ue
is making money. and lots oi It.
through the heroin trade.

One can't help aympsthislng with
the Muser people. most oi whom
don't seem to comprehend the
conﬂict with the Burmese.

Shortly beiore l ieit i had a
briei conversation with a young
soldier who couldn't have been
more than 17 and was holding on
tohhi'sulidd ior dear liie. Asked
w y was carrying the weapon.
the soldier answered: "Libera-

on."

"What liberation?" i asked. ile
blushed and looked down at his
gun. Then he slowly turned his
head towards his colleagues None
moved or uttered a word.

“i don't know." the young soiv
disriinaliy answered
PAPER 0“ ANTIOPIUH CAMPAIGN AMONG HILLTRIBBS
BK290701 Bangkok POST in English 28 Dec 81 pp 1, 3
[Article by the Chongkhadikit]

[Text] The National Security Council has launched a concerted campaign to get
the hilltribes to voluntarily destroy their own opium poppy plants in exchange
for rice supplies and substitute cash crops.

NSC Secretary General Prasong Sunsiri said that he personally saw hilltribes
in Doi San Hun. in Chiang Dao District of Chiang Rai Province, tear out poppy
plants with their own hands last week.

He has also ordered that people from the plains who supply the hilltribes with
poppy seeds be arrested.

He called upon agricultural, forestry, public welfare, public health. education
and other ministerial officials working with the hilltribes to cooperate with
the office of the Narcotics Control Board to help reduce or elilinate the culti-
vation of opiun.

Squadron leader Prasong cited instances where forestry officials destroyed hill-
tribes' coffee plantations during work to carry out a reafforestation programme.

After inspecting poppy fields in the north. particularly in Chiang Rai and Mae
Hong Son provinces, he said the government must aim at:

--providing the hilltribes with a scans of obtaining income that they would be
giving up by destroying their poppy fields.

--helping the hilltribes understand the necessity of ending the cultivation of
opium.

-—severing the connections between opium seed suppliers and the hilltribes by
rounding up the suppliers.

-—providing medical facilities for rehabilitating drug addicts among the hill-

tribes and educating their young people against sucking opium in order to stop
then planting opium for their own consumption.

26
Sqd 1dr Prasong was accompanied on his inspection tour by police Major General
Chawalit Yotmani and police Colonel Koson Limpichat of the ONCE and represents-
tives of various ministries and government departments. He also took with him
several hilltribe youths who are students at Ramkamhaeng University to act as
interpreters.

The NSC secretary general said that he inforned the hilltribe peoples about
the evils of narcotics derived from opium and told them what the government,
with international assistance, would do to help then find another source of

income once they switched from cultivating opium.

He said the government would provide seeds for each crops to replace opium and
also supply them with rice which cannot be grown in the harsh, hilly terrain
that the hilltribes inhabit.

The rice would be supplied to villages through cooperatives. These would be
promoted not only to provide channels for distribution of official aid and
essential materials but also for marketing of the replacenent crops.

Following sqd-ldr Prasong's lecture the hilltribes at 001 San Hun walked out to
the fields and plucked out the poppy plants by the roots.

Obviously impressed by this reaction. sqd-ldr Prasong said it showed that the
hilltribes would cooperate with the government if they were given reasonable
treatment.

He added: "The plains people who supply the hilltribes with poppy seeds are the
culprits. They are taking advantage of the belief that the government would not

dare take drastic action against the hilltribes for fear they would becone
insurgents or join the Conunists. We must get them."

080: 5300/6584

25
PREM GIVES OKAY T0 PLAN TO DESTROY POPPY FIELDS
BKOAOSll Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 0 Jan 82 pp 1, 10

[Text] Prime Minister Gen Prem Tinsulanon has switched on the green light for
the long-delayed plan to destroy poppy fields in 10 villages in Chiang Mai,
deputy secretary general of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE)
Pol Maj Gen Chaowalit Yotsani said.

However. he said the premier wanted the plan to be "executed gently“ so that it
would not offend the hilltribe people.

The plan to wipe out over 140 rai of poppy fields was initially scheduled to be
implemented in November but was postponed because the premier did not endorse it.

More than 1,000 border patrol policemen and defence volunteers are expected to
be employed in the controversial plan.

Pol Haj Gen Chaowalit said Prem recently gave approval to the plan but instructed
authorities responsible for it to implement it in gentle manners.

"The premier prefers to see the authorities be gentle in executing the plan.
He wants the authorities to try to persuade the hilltribe people to cut down
the poppies themselves," he said.

The authorities were instructed to destroy the poppy fields on a case-by-case
basis to lessen the chance of offending the local people.

Informed sources in ONCB said the plan was temporarily shelved because the
government was afraid that it would antagonize the hilltribe people.

Pol Haj Gen chaowalit said Prem had given an instruction that poppy fields in
areas where substitute crops were introduced should be destroyed first.

Economic assistance sh0uld be extended to areas where their inhabitants were
poor before their poppy fields were to be destroyed, he said.

Premier Pres ordered the plan to be suspended on grounds that he needed to know
more information about it.

26
The 10 villages where poppy fields will be destroyed are under a United Nations
crop substitution plan. The fields cover a total of 160.2 rsi.

The 10 villages are Khun Chang Kisn, Bunk Chan. Hse Susi, Khun Yusng, Ben Phenom,
Ban Hinfon. Ban Puitsi, Hse Tho, Doi Mum and Ben Bup.

0808 had initially planned to invite representatives of ms media to witness
the destruction of the poppy fields.

CSO: 5300/6585

27
DRUG TRAFFICKERS SET UP 'DEATH SQUADS'
BK290114 Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 29 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Chiang Hai-Anti—drug agencies here claimed to have evidence suggesting
that big-time drug traffickers in the north have set up "death squads" to deal
with anti-drug officers. informed sources in the police department said.

The sources said that the traffickers set the price for each of the anti-drug
officers to he killed at between 15,000 and 20,000 baht.

They said anti-drug officers with good performance record are potential targets
of the death squads.

According to the intelligence reports, the traffickers normally pooled their
money among themselves when they wanted to have any of the anti-drug personnel
terminated.

The reports also said that the traffickers sometimes set up traps to kill anti-
drug officers who were lured to a place where they were told some drugs were
being delivered.

Armed men would ambush the officers at the scene. according to the reports.
The sources said that anti-drug agencies. the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) of
the 0.5.. the civilian-police-military unit five of Chiang Mai. and the drug
suppression centre of the border patrol police here were working out counter—
measures.

Meanwhile, a report from the police department yesterday said that since the
armed caravan of Khun Sa clashed with Thai rangers from Pak Thongchai on
September 29-October 8. all trafficking activities were temporarily suspended.

The clash resulted in heavy casualties on both sides.

cso: 5300/4584

28
PAPER CITES CONFLICTING VIEWS ON POPPIBS
BKl90467 Bangkok NATION REVIEU in English 19 Dec 81 p 13

[Text] "D-day" was set and more than 1,000 border patrol policemen and defence
volunteers were ready to be mobilized to chop down over 140 rai of poppy fields
in 10 villages in Chiang Mai.

But suddenly words were passed down that Preaier Prem Tinsulanon wanted the plan
to eradicate the poppy fields to be put off until he was given adequate informa-
tion about it.

The objection raised by the premier-as seen by officials of the Office of the
Narcotics Control Board (ONCB)--means that the plan has automatically been
shelved.

One of the officials said the plan was from the start opposed by the National
Security Council (NSC) which had expressed fears that it would antagonize hill-
tribe people in the villages.

"The NSC apparently did not want the hilltribe people to be angered by the eradi-
cation of their poppy fields and turn against government officials operating
along the border," he said.

It is no secret that some of the hilltribe men owning the poppy fields have
been working as informers for government authorities. They have reportedly
been feeding the government with intelligence information on the movements of
the Communist insurgents and Chinese haws.

A rough study based on experiences shows that if one of the hilltribe people
becomes an insurgent the government would need as many as 50 men to destroy him,
an informed source said.

For these reasons. NSC apparently feels it unwise to anger the hilltribe men
who are serving as a bulwark against Communist influence. the source said.

For practical reasons. opium is still something the hilltribe people find it
difficult to live without. Those belonging to the older generation are mostly
addicted to opium smoking as a means of relaxation while the poppy is undeniably
an economic crop of the hilltribe people.

29
Opium is also widely used by then as effective pain-killer since public health
service in the areas is almost non—existent.

Officials of the ONCB said that now is the poppy harvesting season and is
definitely a wrong time to move against the poppy fields.

"The hilltribe sen pin their hope on the poppies as a source of income to repay
debts they have accumulated over the year,” one of them said.

he said in fact there were reports that hilltribe people in some of the target
areas had been told by insurgents to resist the campaign.

”He don't understand why they chose to do it during this time of the year."
complained one anti-narcotic officer who said Communist insurgents had already
begun making propaganda out of the campaign in Khun Vang and Hae Samai villages.

However, government authorities in favour of the campaign claimed that the hill-
tribe people had not kept their words.

"They have been saying that they will stop growing poppies next year. But they
still do it." one of then said.

He said the yields of the poppies this year are three times higher than the
previous year.

Officials of the office of the prime minister reportedly believe that an eradica-
tion of the poppy fields will in a way give a good image for Thailand.

"At least, it will show to the United Nations. the United States and the rest
of the world that Thailand is serious about suppressing narcotics," one of them
was quoted as saying.

Looking at the problem from another perspective, however, officials of the ONCS
said the lack of coordination among the agencies carrying out their separate
crop substitution programmes has also made the matter worse.

The Thai-United Nations project reportedly envisages an immediate end to poppy-
growing in the north without regard to the fact that it had been a century-old
tradition of the hilltribe people. Its crop substitution programme has not been
very successful because of marketing and transportation problems for substitute
crops introduced.

however, the government programme under royal patronage puts more emphasis on
attempts to promote the hilltribe people's professions rather than putting an
end to poppy-growing.

"The people behind the programme apparently understand that poppybgrowing is
still a basic and necessary way of living of the local people and that the crop
substitution programme will take years before it will yield results," said an
official of the ONCB.
So it was natural that people behind the two programmes of different philosophy
had conflicting views on the aborted plan to eradicate the poppy fields last
week.

"But whatever the conflicts may be, national security must come first." observed
one anti-narcotic officer. "He should not worry too much about pleasing the
UN or the Americans who do not really understand our problems."

The hilltribe people themselves were reportedly not very happy with the news

that government authorities were planning to destroy their poppy fields though
they were promised assistance for substitute crops.

Local officials have already tried to convince them of the necessity to give up
poppy-growing and even distributed them with seedlings of alternative crops.

But the hilltribe people were not very responsive. Not many of them were willing
to exchange their poppy seedlings with those of typical crops.

In the end. government authorities were able to obtain only al.76 kilogranmes
of poppy seeds from then.

Host of the hilltribe people claimed that their substitute crops did not produce
the yields they desired. Some argued that they had already invested in their
poppy fields and wanted to make something out of them this year.

officials of the ONCE pointed out that the government needed to prove to the hill-
tribe people that growing substitute crops can be more rewarding before it can
"convert them."

But what is more important is that the government must crack down on the drug
traffickers that have been serving as the narket for the poppies grown by the
hilltribe people.

The drug traffickers. who normally provide the hilltribe men with financial
assistance in their poppy-growing. buy the yields at the spot.

"50 if the government can deprive the hilltribe people of the market of their
poppies. all of its efforts to put an end to poppy-growing will certainly work,"
one of the officials said.

C80: 5300/4586

31
NORTHERN GOVERNOR DISCUSSBS OPIUM PROBLEM
BKZOOSOS Bangkok POST in English 20 Dec 81 p 7
[Article by the Chongkhadikit: ”Getting to the Root of Opium Problems"!

[Text] As next year's opium harvest promises to be a bumper one, even bigger
than this year's, the governor of Chiang Mai is concerned over the fact that
suppression of the narcotics traffic is less than effective because of the lack
of an adequate crop substitution programme.

The concern becomes deeper as the Burma Communist Party links itself up with
Chang Si-Eu or Khun Sa, drug kingofthe Golden Triangle, and other heroin dealers
using routes across the Thai border.

Minorities trading in opium not only for their own livelihood but also to finance
independence movements have compounded the problems in the north. [as published]

About 40,000 to 50,000 rai in northern Thailand is cultivated with the opium
poppy. The hill tribes use slash-and-burn methods. destroying large areas of
forests.

Governor Chaiya Phunairiwong asks, "Let's get rid c? the opium, but how will
the hill tribes live?"

This is where crop substitution comes in but "it always comes in too little and
too late."

Suppression operations cannot succeed if unaccompanied by crop substitution.

"As long as people plant opium. there is a source for heroin. It's not much
use to catch the smugglers because where there's opium there is a way to take
it out and there's someone ready, willing and able to take it out."

Foreign governments alarmed over the spread of consumption of Golden Triangle
heroin in their countries put too'much emphasis on suppression and not enough
on crop substitution, it is felt by the governor.

"Too much emphasis has been placed upon suppression of traffic in narcotics

after they have crossed borders from the opium fields. Foreign support for
crop replacement has been very weak," commented the governor.

32
"It's easy to destroy the poppy plants. They are planted in areas totalling
h0,000 to 50,000 rai.

"However, the government is concerned over the problem of how the hill tribes
are going to live when their poppy plants are destroyed.

"At the same time, Thailand has common borders with Burma and Laos where opium

is growing. The Burma Communist Party has taken control over the northern portion
of Bums.

"The most influential group in the Golden Triangle is that of Khun 8s or Chang
Si—fu.

”Behind the cultivation of opium there are definitely people who put up capital.

These people are mainly from the minority groups. These groups could be residing
within our country or in neighbouring areas.

"The destruction of opium plants, therefore, is a most sensitive matter. We
have to find reasons for such a measure. We have to look after the welfare of
the hill tribes before we destroy their means of livelihood.

"If we destroy the plants before we do anything to help the cultivators, it is
going to bring about a difficult situation. If we say that we are driving the
hill tribes into the arms of the Communists, we will be accused of being alarmist.

"I don't think the Communists will infiltrate, I think the more likely infil-
trators are the minorities. There are four such groups. One is indigenous which
wants to set up its own independent state. Another group does not care much and
is easily led. The third group is the Chin Haw (Yunnanese) who migrated from
Yunnan after the 93rd and the l93rd nationalist Chinese armies had retreated

from China into Burma and northern Thailand. The fourth is the 93rd army itself
which has come into our northern areas before. It is this army which brought

the Yunnanese along to serve as supports.

"Since the first group concerns the Burmese Government, it is the last three
groups which constitute a threat to Thailand. Communists have infiltrated the
second group.

"It is from the third and fourth groups that narcotic bans like that of Khum
83, actually a Yunnanese, come.

"There are at least 300,000 hill tribes people in northern Thailand, with 100,000
of them being in the Chiang Mai area.

"These are people without nationality. If we push them. they will be used by
other groups for their own purposes. In this way, suppression is a two-edged
sword.

"We cannot eliminate opium planting 100 percent. When we move against the hill

tribes in one area, they go to another. The frontier has no boundaries. We have
to help them change to a new means of livelihood."

33
Governor Chaiya is advising the Ministry of Interior to formulate a new policy.

"If we continue like we have been doing, we will not see the end of the tunnel.
He must have a stage-by-stage planned programme.

"Several million rai of our forests and watersheds have been destroyed by the
hill tribes. It should be possible for us to allow the hill tribes to cultivate
those areas already denuded.

"The areas must be arable. We go in and set up infrastructure. The most impor-
tant thing is to introduce administrative machinery which will ensure that these
hill tribes remain in those areas. If we don't set up administrators we won't
be able to stop them from their nomadic wanderings to destroy more forests.

"If there is no administrative setup. it's going to be a difficult business.

"Even in areas which have been developed the hill tribes continue to grow opium.
They don't do it in the villages but at a distance from the villages, probably
a day's walk away. They go away from the villages for one week and return.
Then they go away again for the harvest.

"I asked them if their opium had never been stolen. They told me they had an
honour system.

"The American suppression officers don't understand. At one time when opium
was a national problem causing us many difficulties no one was interested.

Look at the opium wars of the past and the interests of foreign countries which
the opium trade served.

"Great interest is now shown in opium because heroin which is derived from opium
has become an international problem. The foreign governments are interested
only in how to prevent heroin getting into their countries.

"They don’t see what the effects of destruction of the poppy fields would have
on Thailand. He would like them to be sympathetic with us.

"we are appealing to then to help correct the problem at the roots within our
society. Suppression only attends to the end results of the problem. The way
to attack the problem at the root is to assist us in crop replacement.

"A crop replacement programme cannot succeed if the foreign governments look
at economic problems from a narrow viewpoint. They set up tariff barriers
against our commodities. They know we are an agricultural country. we have
surpluses of rice, maize. tapioca, sugar and other produce. We need these
surpluses in order to sell to the world's markets. Hhsn barriers are set up
against our products, it adversely affects our national economy.

"The foreign governments who are pressing us about suppression are looking at
only one side of the coin,

34
"When we produce potatoes as crop replacement, restrictions are placed upon then
by foreign governments.

"Japan and the United States are producing rice to compete for our narkets. If

these and other countries want us to destroy the poppy plants and continue these
kinds of trade policies, they'd better forget it.

"They can also forget the few millions they give us as aid for suppression.

"We don't want such aid which is actually self-serving. All they have to do is
eliminate their restrictions against our agricultural products.

"They have to look at our problas from our point of view—our side of the coin."

CSO: 5300/1684

35
BRIEFS

OPIUH SUBACENTS ARRESTED-—A joint team of narcotics and crime suppression police
arrested three men with almost 10 kilogrammes of prepared opium at a Commerce
Ministry silo in the Phrs Prabaeng area, Samut Prakan. yesterday afternoon.
Thongmuan Simanorom (40). leader of the silo workers. Charoen Phoncharoen (50),
a guard, and Sam Phanpi. 35, were initially charged with illegal possession of
opium following their arrest in a 4:30 p.m. police raid. Police claimed the
men were subagents of a trafficking ring and had been distributing the drugs

to labourers and workers in the Phra Pradaeng area for some time. The police,
led by deputy commander of crime suppression division, Col Chalo Koetthet,
searched the silo located by the chao Phaya River and found 10 packages of opium
weighing 9.2 kilogrammes. [Text] [3K250753 Bangkok POST in English 22 Dec 81

DZ]

“ARDEN JAILBD IN TRAPPICER'S ESCAPB--Former commander of Bang Khwang maximum
security prison Han Phansombun has been given a 20~year jail sentence for aiding
the escape from the prison of convicted heroin trsfficker Siri Sirikun. The
sentence was handed down yesterday in the Nonthaburi provincial court. Han was
charged in September 1979 with malfeasance in office, exercising his power as
the prison commander to illegally release Siri and with conspiring with an
accomplice to forge a criminal court seal and release warrant. Siri, who had
been sentenced to jail for life, was released from jail on June 30, 1977. But
his disappearance was not uncovered until about 2 years later when he failed to
appear in court to hear a verdict on his appeal against the life prison term
handed down in the Dika (supreme) court. A subsequent investigation into Siri's
disappearance implicated Han and two lower-ranking wardens. Siri was arrested
in Butterworth. Malaysia, in September 1979 and was later extradited to Thailand
to serve out his life sentence. He also received a 21-year sentence after being
found guilty of having escaped from prison. [Text] [BK250753 Bangkok POST in
English 25 Dec 81 p 3)

'HAJOR TRAFFICKER' ARRESTED—-Thai and Australian anti-narcotics officers have
arrested a man they believed to be a major international drug trafficker operating
between Thailand, Australia, Europe and America, officials of the Narcotics
Control Board announced last night. They said Suppha-at Chsoduli was nabbed

while he was allegedly on one of his trips to deliver heroin in Melbourne on
December 24. Suppha-at, 33, had earlier delivered an amount of heroin to his
customers in Australia on December 3. Suppha-st allegedly operated a textile
store and a guesthouse in Chiang Mai to conceal his real business, the officials
said. Following Suppha-at'e arrest, anti-narcotics officials in Chiang Hei
arrested a police official, Pol Sgt Haj Surasak Phaonphan, who they accused of
being a courier for the alleged international drug trafficker. They also seized
3,235.8 grammes of No 6 heroin and 230 grammes of No 3 heroin from Suresak.

The drug was reportedly to be smuggled out of the country to Australia. [Text]
[Bangkok NATION smsw in English 1 Jan 82 pp 1, 10]

SUSPECTED TRAFFICKER ARRESTED--Police yesterday arrested a suspected drug
trafficker at a checkpoint on Pahonyothin Road after he failed to deliver alnost .
10 kilogrammes of No 3 "red rocks" heroin to a prospective customer. Kittikon
See Tang, 28, reportedly aduitted that he was to have delivered the drugs to a
Malaysian man in the Central Plaza Shopping Centre in Lard Prao earlier in the
morning. However, the man. whoa he identified as Peter Robert, failed to show
up. A police team, who had set up a checkpoint near 801 no So Pho Niwet to
search for illegal weapons. stopped Kittikon'evolvoseden as it was heading
towards Kasetsst University at about 1:30 an. while searching the car. police
allegedly found 9.6 kilogram-es of heroin in a large bag on the back seat.
Kittikon reportedly told police that he had delivered drugs to Malaysian clients
several tines before. He was charged with possessing drugs with intent to sell.
[Text] [Bangkok POST in English 1 Jan 82 p 1]

C80: 5300/4586

37
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--San Jose, 23 Dec (AFP)--'l‘he Costa Rican authorities
arrested two members of an international drug traffickers band operating in
Colombia. Costa Rica and the United States. They are Carlos Perez Espinal,

a Nicaraguan who is allegedly the chief of the drug traffickers, and

Hernando Ibarra Quezada, a Costa Rican who worked at the airport as an
immigration official. Ibarra had 2 kilos of cocaine at the moment of their
arrest. [PA251425 Paris APP in Spanish 2134 GMT 23 Dec 81 PA]

.

CSO: 5300/2114

38
BRIEFS

-_ .~—- .—..

GANJA PLANTATION--Bighteen acres of ganja, including fully-grown plants and
seedlings along with 152 crocus bass of the used, were destroyed by the police
in operations in Belvedere district, in rural St Andrew. on Friday. In a sixP
hour operation, the police also destroyed 68 tins of ganja seeds. [Text]
[Kingston THE SUNDAY CLEANER in English 29 Nov 81 p 2]

C80: 5300/7519

39
BRIEFS

DRUG SBIZURES--During 1981. the narcotics depertnent of the Ministry of Finance
and Treasury seized $93.2 million in drugs at the Our Torrijos Herrera airport.
Among the drugs seized were "mothsqualon" ($90 nillion); 26.5 has of cocaine

($3 million); and 220 mm of heshish ($200,000). Authorities disclosed that

38 persons were arrested in connection with drugs, including 16 0.3. citizens
and 7 Colombians. [PAOll658 Panama City LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 30 Dec 81

pp 1. 10 PA]

CSO: 5300/2116

40
BRIEFS

SIIIRAZ DRUG DISCOVERIBSu-Shirs: Isleuic revolution guards have seized 16 grass
of heroin and 16 kg of opium juice from s number of persons. [03291258 Shire:
Dosestic Service in Persisn 1500 our 28 Dec 81]

KHORASAN OPIm HAW-A nan has been arrested in (7Ssrsvsn) for possession of 1
kg of opium. Two persons have been arrested in the Quchsn ares for possession

of 1 kg of opiul. [GP311755 Hashhsd Do-estic Service in Persian 1630 cm 31
Dec 81]

DRUG SEIZURE IN MSW-The Neyshebur sntidrus squad has seized 17 kg of opium
from a number of persons. Sinilsrly, the Mashhad Islamic revolution guards
corps have seized 31.7 kg of opium and 2 kg of heroin fro- s nunber of persons.
(GPOloNlb Hashhsd Dooestic Service in Persisn 1630 GUT 1. Jan 82]

680: 5300/5342

41
BRIEFS

SEIZURE 0P HEROIN--The security authorities et Beirut Airport arrested two persons
who were trying to snuggle 1 kg of heroin to the United Staten. [Text] [NCZIZZIS
Beirut Voice of Lebanon in Arabic 1215 GMT 21 Dec 81]

C80: 5300/1070?

102
cocouu'rs m DRUG SWING-a manaian Indian hup smuggler recently held British
Customs Officers spell-hound for the clever way in which he tried to snuggle into
tendon a quantity of the drug. Benet ma, a 27-year-old clerk. hid the drug in
coconuts which showed no signs that they had been tapered with. reports Ben Asa-
mosh. Ghana News Agency Correspondent in London. The officers described the ruse
as a "notorious feat in the world or woolen." At a nondon Court. Hr Ian Cal-p-
bell. a customs officer, prosecuting. told the court that but for the extrs vigil-
ance of the custus officers on duty at the Beathrow Airport, Anots, a clerk of
the Ministry of Bducation, would have got sea with his specimen because "it was
so cleverly done thet it was not possible to detect any foul play.‘ It Cupbell
said the towcoconutsuouldheksptbyhisdspertnentandussdaatrainingnater-
ial. not. was givnn a three-nonth suspended sentence and fined 5300. Earlier.
Mr Peter Copley, counsel for more, had asked the court to consider the present
congestion in British Prisons and not to send his client to prison. as suggested
that in future foreign offenders like Mata should be given suspended sentences
and deported as a nave to ease the current prison acoa-odetion crisis in Britain.
[Text] [Accra mm! aware in ”ﬁsh 10 Dec 81 p 1)

C50: 5300/5618

43
USE OF DIPMTIC POUCE FOR m SWIM 0mm
Kaduna NEw NIGERIAN in English 4 Dec Bl p ll
[Editorials “Scandal at Our iondon Mission“)

[ancerptl Tales about scandals in our nissions abroad are legion, and like all
tales ought to be taken with a pinch of salt-«onetime a whole spoonful. But af-
ter what happened at our nigh Omission in london, it would take a fool to dismiss
the tales entirely with the wave of the hand. At any rate given our seningly con-
genital disposition to abuse privilelenand what can be more privileged than a bag
that is imam from the prying eyes of the security forces under normal circu-
stances?--eone degree of credulity is certainly perdonable.

still to think that anyone would went to and actually succeed in loading any of
our diplomatic bags with heap despite all the safeguards against abuse! It really
beats one hollow. It does however prove ecoething which is obvious. This is that
a well-organised syndicate traceable to Nigeria met have been involved probably
with a little help from none top ”Pr-obviously, very irresonsible persons.

'00 trade in hup is bad enough and deserves the stiffeet penalties. But to use our
diplonatic bag as a cover-up for such nefarious trade. with all its implications
for our image, and more important still, for our security is sinply the limit. And
nobody who is discovered to have anything to do with this, no matter how highly
placed should be allowed to get away with it. It: expenses should be spared to
identify such culprit (s) and once identified must be nade to face the entire ri-
gours of the law. In other words nothing short of public prosecution in addition
to internal disciplinary sesame by the Hinistry of brternal Affairs. will do.

C80 2 5300/5617

lolo
some: 51-:sz sun, 5.5 ms new be
Nicosia cmms my in English No 114, 11-17 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Cyprus police yesterday made what is believed to be the biggest success in
their anti-narcotic campaign so far, uncovering a record giant haul of 5-1/2 tons
of Indian heap stacked on board a rebanese-owned cargo ship off Cape Kiti. The
vessel was sailing from the tebanese coast to an undisclosed port in Europe.

An official announcement said the “Esperanto“, flying the Qprus flag, was stopped
by two police launches, the "Kinon' and the "Aphrodite“. and a search on board
brought to light the all-tine record cargo of drugs, worth several million pounds
at street prices in Europe.

Disguise

The captain of the ship, a Greek national, and the eight-nan crew--four Turks. two
Egyptians and two Lebanon-were all taken to larnaca police station where they
were being held in custody last night. Officials did not disclose their names.

Reports from Larnaca said the nane of the 275-ton cargo ship had been painted over
in white on the bow and a nuaber of the letters on the stern had also been painted
over in a apparent attempt to disguise it.

The 'Bsperants' was henned in by the two police launches-under the mend of Mr.

Panicos aadjiloirou, the senior officer of the police anti-narcotics squad. and a
top Interpol official who has been in lemon since last Thursday.

Plaques

Officials said that neither the captain of the cargo ship nor any of the crew of-
fered any resistance to the police, and no arms or munition were found on board.

The huge quantity of heap was found neatly packed in half-kilo plaques wrapped in
plastic and sewn into what officials described as 'tidy bags.‘

Ono official was overheard to remark: "This is the first case of Greco-‘l‘urkish

cooperation I have seen for quite sane time," as the captain and his crew were
brought ashore and driven to the police station.

Court

Last night the ship was docked in Larnaca harbour and under heavy police guard.

The detainees are due to appear in court today.

cso: 5300/5341’ 1. 5
OFFICIALS SAID TO SEEK HELICOPTER ton NIBCOGICS CONTROL
Nicosia CYPRUS mm! in anglish No 114, 11-17 Dec Bl p 2

{Text} Cyprus Police need a helicopter or small aircraft to help then in their
fighr; against drug smugglers using the island as a transit centre, the Chief of
Police Hr Savvas Antoniou has said.

The police already deploy launches and radar-equipped vessels bought from France to
patrol the island's coasts and to shadow or intercept vessels suspected of being

engaged in smuggling.
Specially trained dogs are also at hand to sniff out hidden narcotics.

But Hr Antonicu, in an interview with 'hgon' newspaper. said: "there is no doubt
that a helicopter or a small plane would greatly facilitate the job of the police
and help the. follow suspicious aovenents on land or in the see.

"we have to apron the means and equip-ant at our disposal, especially since drug
smugglers have all the noney they want to get the most nodern equipeent to carry
out their illegal trafficking".

Mr Antoniou said the efforts of international snuggling rings to use Cyprus as a
transit stage for channelling narcotics was of ”particular concern". ‘rhe situation

had worsened following the. events in neighbouring lobanon.

"It is true that because of its geographical position Cyprus is used as a centre
for the channelling of narcotics to Burope and Anerica from the countries of pro-
duction. such as has-key and Lebanon", he said.

In cooperation with Interpol and other national police forces, the Cyprus Police
are striving to locate ant neutralise such gangs and have had significant succes-
ses, he said.

The police (:hief repeated that there was no concern about the spread of narcotics
among the Cypriots themselves.

“Isolated cases. nainly involving young people and aliens. cone to light frcn ties
to tine, but the neasures taken by the police are a strong restricting factor.

”In view of the traditich abhorrence of our people to narcotics. spread of this
evil habit in future is not anticipated", he added confidently.

CSO: 5300/5341 66
BRIEFS

DRUG DEALER KlLLED——Paris, 5 Jan (APP)-A gunman carrying a United States pass-
port who was killed in a shootout with police in the Paris metro (underground
railway) last night has been identified as a known drug dealer with contacts

in Thailand. He was provisionally identified as Paris-born Michel Bernard
Naddef, 33, living in a suburb here, police said. He was registered in the
Interior Ministry files for drug trafficking. his 0.8. passport appeared to be
genuine and showed frequent travel between Europe and Bangkok. The drug squad
was inve;tigating his background to see if they could trace his narcotics contacts.
Naddef was stopped by police when he leaped over a metro entrance to avoid paying
for a three-franc (50 0.8. cents) ticket. They frisked his and found a pistol,
but he broke away andthenopened fire with a second pistol he carried. A police
officer fired one shot and killed his outright. Police have been checking the
identities of young men in the metro in an effort to control growing violence
there. Pickpockets, said to be aainly drug addicts, hold up an estinated 250

to 500 passengers weekly. A young nan who refused to part with 100 francs (about
18 dollars) was stabbed in the abdomen on Sunday night, and other passengers

made no attempt to help his. [Text] [NCOSlZlS Paris arr in English 1119 GMT

5 Jan 82]

C50: 5300/2113

47
HBROIN NEIGHNG 21 KG POND IN SHRIMP SHIPMENT
Rotterdam HET VRIJE VOLK in Dutch 17 Nov 81 p 5

[Text7 The Hague--The police in The Hague dealt the drug trade in
the Netherlands a crushing blow with the confiscation of 21 kilograms
gfkheroin concealed in a shipment of deep frozen shrimp from

a istan.

The heroin (market value 2.5 million guilders) was found yesterday
afternoon in a raid on a house on Daguerre Street. All the 12 occu-

pants of the house were arrested. The principal resident was known
to the police as "small scale drug dealer."

Yesterday evening the police arrested another five Pakistanis in
various hotels in The Hague.

The heroin was transported in an airliner from Pakistan to Schiphol.
The shipment was picked up there by a messenger service and delivered
yesterday afternoon in The Hague.

At the moment when the shrimp (70 foam rubber cases with 42 pound
packages) were brought in the house, a team of 20 detectives struck.
According to a police spokesman in The Hague "the cases were scattered
about the whole house, in the living room and even on the stairway."

By way of precaution, all residents of the house in question, 12 men
ranging in age from 17 to 52 years, were taken into custody. This
morning only a few of them were questioned. They are detained at
various police stations in The Hague, to prevent them from contacting
each other.

In June of last year the police in The Hague also confiscated a large

shipment of heroin from Pakistan. A Pakistani diplomat appeared to

be involved then in this matter and shortly afterwards he was expelled
from the Netherlands. The police in The Hague confiscated the largest
amount of heroin a year and a half ago when many tens of kilograms of

herein were found in a shipment of Buddah statues.

The Amsterdam narcotics unit tipped off the police 2 months ago about
the drug shipment intercepted yesterday. No resistance was offered
during the raid on the house in The Hague.

END

8490 as
cso: 5300/2107