FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10329
17 February 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/IOJ

17 Februa:

NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(Pouo 6/82)

CONTENTS
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Briefs
Libya-Morocco Diplomatic Ties

AFGHANI STAN

Political Sociology of Traditional Hierarchy Studied
(Pierre Centlivres, Micheline Centlivres-Denont;
CWTAIRB. "inter 81-82) ano.caseseoooecoseaeeoeeoseaees

LIBYA

Increased Investments in Italy Described
(“ARMS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS. 11 Dec 81) .........

Briefs
Pakistani Horkers Repatriated
Produce Packaging Plants
Pasta Plants

SUDAN

Electricity Projects Reviewed, Expansion Noted
(HARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS, 11 Dec 81) . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Real Estate Development
FOR OFI'N'IAI. l'SF. UNIS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

LIMA-MOROCCO DIPLOMATIC TIES--A simple question of language is delaying the
arrival in Rabat of a Libyan diplomatic mission. Tripoli calls it a "fraternity
office." For the Moroccans, the head of such an office could not have contacts
with the palace where only recognized ambassadors are received. The most difficult
problem, however, has been surmounted since all sides are in agreement that Libya
reestablish its diplomatic representation in Morocco. [Text] [Farts J20“!

APRIQUE in French No 1092, 9 Dec 81 p Mo] [COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.]
8796

050: 4519/73

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFF“ 1“. USE ONLY

AFGHANISTAN

POLITICAL SOCIOIDGY 0P TRADITIONAL HIERARCKY STUDIED
Paris OOMMBN‘l'AIRE in French Winter 81-82 pp 514—525

[Monograph by Pierre Centlivres and Micheline Centlivres-Demont; July 1981:
"Village in Afghanistan")

[Text] Afghanistan is baffling, particularly the situation created by the Soviet
intervention on 27 December 1979. He are far from having simple models with
clearly identifiable elements: occupation, resistance, liberation movements.
collaborators, progressives, conservatives. The number of Afghan refugees in
Pakistan is considerable--perhaps the largest number in the post-war period, but
it is often not known who they are, what they are running away from, or why. The
resistance defies analysis because of its many factions, divisions, and inability
to portray itself as representative of the country as a whole.

Moreover. the information from Delhi, Moscow, Kabul or border crossers reveals
little about the real situation in the countryside, the villages, or the

peasant communities in what is sometimes called the "liberated areas." Also, the
insistence among information professionals on intelligibility prompts them to
employ some strange analytical concepts. We sometimes hear about the Afghan
peasants being oppressed by a feudal system operated by the big landowners, tribal
chiefs, and fanatical mullahs; and at other times about democratic, egalitarian,
and semi-autonomous village communities.

Give Up Preconceived Notions

The 13 million Afghans are not just emerging from the Middle Ages; most of them
are not members of nomadic tribes, but of a peasant society mobilized for centur-
ies by powerful and bureaucratic states, and consolidated around urban centers
containing garrisons, markets, and administrative bodies.

Study of the authority-dependence relationship of the village communities and the
administrative centers, and of the recent changes observed just prior to the 1978
coup d'etat, makes it possible to put in perspective the questions being raised
about Afghanistan .

How can we describe the government's activity and its representation in the
northern Afghanistan villages? The peasant communities are only partial entities

and are dependent. we have therefore decided to treat as a study unit. in the

2
F0l.0l1ﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR 0511C1A1.USEIDNLY

following pages, the network composed of the administrative center of the provin-
cial subdivision and its dependent villages, the network which is the context for

the direct confrontation among the peasants, prominent individuals, and the adminé 1
istrative representatives sent by Kabul.

The subprovincial administrative center is usually at the end of the passable
vehicle road. It is also the site of the weekly or semiweekly market, of the
large mosque which gathers the people from surrounding areas on Friday or major
feast days, and of the district officials' building.

Since unification of the country by the Mohammadzai dynasty in the 19th century,
the Kabul government has controlled, through a hierarchical administrative and
political system, an extremely diverse collection of ethnic, linguistic, and
religious groups. This ethno-cultural complex includes speakers of Tadzhik, Arabic,
Pashtu, Hangol, Uzbek, and Turkmen, to cite only the main languages. The communi-
ties are not autonomous and do not appear anywhere in the organizational pyramid
diagram of the provinces, subprovinces, 0: districts; there are no formal ties be-
tween them except dnough their common administrative center.

The modern means of communication: roads and official vehicles, telephone and
telegraph connections, as well as the omnipresent, earth-colored soldiers' uniforms
confirm the broad spread of Kabul's authority; one can say that Afghanistan is a
centralised state governed by telephone instructions from Kabul to the government.

The Afghan society is fragmentary, including elements who are qualitatively dif-
ferent in language, ethnic origin, andalso in the basis of their sense of
identity: genealogical for some, territorial for others, religious for some
minorities within Islam, and for the people of the north and south a separateness
of the whole community due to the way in which they became part of the Afghan
state. The north, like the center and east, were conquered and "pacified" for
the Emir of Kabul by the Pashtun tribal alliances in the second half of the 19th
century. The state and its officials are still regarded by many as the envoys of
a conquering power, formerly foreign and today still viewed as radically separate.
charged with maintaining order and raising the tribute payment in men and money.

The Afghan sociopolitical system exhibits the dual character of centralization of
the state apparatus and heterogeneity of the local cosmmnities. The state has

an extensive coercive power of which it has sole control. The centers of decision-
making are "interlocked," from the top all the way down to the smallest adminis-
trative units. The positions of command, in particular in the aray, police, and
among high officials, are occupied by a political elite with its own clientele.
This elite, which has both an ethnic and regional basis, is of Pashtun origin and
has its own divisions and factions, for example between the Durrani of the south-
west and the chilzai of the east. Finally, the loyalty of the civil servants is
one of clientele and ethnic ties, whereas the loyalty of those administered is
based on acceptance of the legitimacy of the rule and not on identification with a
national entity.

Failure of the Nation State and Pashtunisation

Following the example of the European states of the past century, the Kabul rulers
had one objective, a national state of Afghan people, with a conmon political goal.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is clear that at the beginning of the 1970's Afghanistan was more a feudal
state than a nation state. The sub-national identity, belonging to an ethnic
community, and the supranational identity, belonging to Islam, were much stronger
than identity with an abstract national entity. Open claims to regional identity
are a recent phenomenon dating from the last years of the monarchy, and resulted
only, and that only intermittently, in some radio broadcasts in languages other
than the so-called national tongues, Paahtu and Dari (Persian and Afghanistan).

For most of the farmers, farmer-herdsmen, and craftsmen of northern Afghanistan,

the state is, to use Olivier Roy's expression, in exterior location; it constitutes
a radical alterity. Its officials are considered to speak a foreign language,
Prshtu, even though it is the official language and there have been repeated
efforts to impose it on petty local officials and secondary school students. Pashtu
is the language the police chief and governor use when they talk, the languages of
decrees broadcast over radio, the language of official documents, and the language
of the notations on the identity card which all adult males have to carry.

The Pashtun control over the non-Psahtun areas of Afghanistan, and particularly
the north, was achieved in two stages. After the conquest of the north and the
pacification at the end of the last century by Emir Abdur Rahman, the Kabul govern-
ment settled Pashtun elements from the south and southeast-~people of turbulent
reputation and some only recently pacified-~on cultivable, itrigable, and fertile
land which was supposedly state land but was in fact often seized from the local
farmers. This process of Afghanization has continued into recent years. By so
doing, the government wanted not only to take them away from their environment of
origin and end any diasidence, but also to establish in Tadahik, Uzbek, and Turkmen
areas "naqelin" colonists speaking the same language and of the same origin as the
ethnic group in power and tied to this group by having received land from the
state. This creation of Pashtun pockets in the north has caused, and still causes,
many problems of an intercthnic nature. Tadzhiks. Uzbeks, and Turkmens regard
these Pashtuns, even those who have been there a long time, as alien people in
league with the Kabul government, and as usurpers of land which they feel was
stolen from them.

What is called Pashtunization is of more recent date; it is a result of the cen-
tral government's desire to impose on the whole country the Pashtun administrative
system, language, way of life, and ideology.

The national radio, even though it transmits its official broadcasts in Dari,
the lingua franca of the country, uses abstract and administrative language which
is incomprehensible to the rural people. Finally, the officials have received

an education—-at Kabul, in secondary schools, and at the university--of a
"modernist" type; they are not scholars in the Islamic sense of the word, but
Uesternized elitists, whatever their political tendency. The signs of the

power: concrete administration buildings, and the clothing and uniforms of
officials, are in full evidence, but the power's words and its goals are not in-
telligihle.

This unintelligibility of the ruling power seems to us to be a general phenomenon
in Afghanistan. The peasants do not understand the laws, regulations, or measures
which are applied to them; no effort is made to inform them, and what information
is approved for the public is incomprehensible; figures on taxes, duties, and fees

h
FOR‘OFFKJALIﬁﬂEONLN
FOR OFHUAL USE ONLY

due from citizens are outside the people's understanding. The peasants and the
administration literally do not speak the same language, since inte.preters are
necessary to disseminate information. The villages' only access to the state
employees is through the channel of these intermediaries: and conversely,

the officials are unable to do anything without these local mediators. Any
change in this pattern of relations among the state servants, peasants, and local
prominent people thus has an impact on the functioning of the system as a whole.

A power is not illegitimate merely because it is unintelligible; the legitimacy
does not depend on prosperity of the citizens or the honesty of state officials,
but to the Afghans on the government's ability to achiewe certain objectives, among
them the exercise itself of authority, the capability to win respect for the
government's autonomy and autochthony, the capacity to successfully maintain
equilibrium among the elements we have described, and, finally, of being able to
claim Islamic orthodoxy.

Minimum Unit of State Administration

Afghanistan in the 1970's counted 70 provinces and 325 "uluswali" and "alaqadari,"
plus Kabul city. The "uluswali" is a subdivision of the province, and the
"alaqadari" a subdivision of the "uluswali." Each province is composed of several
"uluswali," but only a few "uluswali" have subsidiary "slaqadari." "Uluswali"
refers to both the district and its administrative center. Many of the latter
barely qualify as large villages, containing a small bazaar with perhaps only a few
shops and a long mud-brick building with beaten earth floor, next to the telephone
office. The long building is imposingly called the "hokumat," :r government seat.
It has four or five rooms accommodating the district's administrative services.
The rough furnishings include wooden cabinets and chairs covered with record

books and sewed-binding files. In one corner is a cast-iron stove with

stovepipe joints daubed with clay. The doors to the outside are almost never shut.
and the temperature in the offices is close to freezing in winter. The office
workers bundle up in European overcoats of the 1950's bought at secondhand cloth-
ing shops in Kabul or the provincial capital. Two of the rooms do not open to the
outside but only a waiting room; these are the rooms of the district chief, the
"uluswal." usually called the "hakim." and the "gendarmerie" chief, the "kumandan-e
amnya," or his deputy the "zabet-e amnya," responsible for public order. The
"uluswal" serves both as magistrate and representative of Kabul; he shares with
his deputy the "maimur-e maliat," who is responsible for taxes, the executive
authority over the region. The other officials have the role of implementing, or
are specialists. Although several ministers: finance, army, justice, communica-
tions, acd agriculture, make a contribution in local administrative management, it
is the interior minister who has the deciding voice in choosing officials and
priority in use of the media. The secretaries and other employees are spread
among several offices: the "hakim's" office includes an office chief, a secretary
for civil law, and in particular an employee handling statistics and conscription.
It is the latter that the male villagers have dealings with for their identity
card, the "taskira," and the compulsory military registration card, which the
father of the family must fill out for his son. More often, it is the employee,
the "sarkateb-e ehsaya," who every 2 years makes the rounds of the villages of the
“uluswali” with a photographer to prepare the "taskira" of children beginning

from age two or three.

5
won 0mm]. us: ONLY
“DR (”11(1AI. USE 0Nl.\

The office of the gendarmerie commander includes an employee handling imposition
of penalties, a secretary to draw up the orders for gendarmerie missions, and a

jailer-~if there is a prison. Under the office's control are about 30 gendarmes
drawn from among the soldiers of the contingent.

The office of the director of taxation is particularly well-staffed: employees
handling payments overdue, employees dealing with real estate, the treasurer, etc.
There is also the office of the judge, the "qazi," with his deputy and assistants,

as well as a number of officials who report directly to the province or to Kabul:
an employee for communications and his telephone operator, a secretary for educa-
tion, and an employee responsible for forests, in summary, a total of some 15 to
20 employees and officials, supplemented from time to time by development program
representatives: vaccinators, agricultural advisers, veterinarians, teachers,
and, if the center includes a lycee, s~veral secondary school officials.

Those in charge of these service are poorly paid and have the feeling of being

in exile. They are transferred often, every 2 or 3 years. Most of them have left
wife (or wives) and children in Kabul or in one of the country's major towns. But
a stint in an "uluswali" increases prospects of a promotion or at least the
chance to "live off the land" through a system of tariff levies.

The "mamurin," the collective term for officials, are the target of an almost
physical distrust by the local people. An official's very appearance shows that
he is not "one of us." he bears the negative marks of a city person and a lay
person: he wears the Astrakhan hat, the "hula," and not a turban; his smoking

habits: cigarette and not the hookah; the behavior of his wife, who does not wear
the red veil of the village woman but rather the chadri of the town or even a

scarf; or his bachelor status.without family, which arouses mistrust and suspicion
of moral violations-~alcohol or use of concubines-and corruption.

The cultural separation between the rural people and the officials is very wide.
It is this separation that is the major obstacle for the teachers and development
workers dedicated to public service, because by their manner, clothes, and speech
they are lumped together with all the "mamurin." Public service as such is not
understood by the villagers, who consider that all service has a price.

Also for the "mamurins," the distance which separates them from the local people
is immeasurable: they themselves are educated citizens who are familiar with the
means and ends of authority; they show some contempt for the way of life, the
ignorant sluggishness of the peasants. Their duty is to administer them and
collect what they owe to the state: work duty, money, and army service; but also
to try to instill in them something of the rational and urban way of life, respect
for authority, and a sense of progress. The "uluswali" officials therefore subject
the local people to a condescending and often brutal pedagogy.

Dcasant Society Versus State

The term "dehqan" applies to the peasants in general, but particularly to small
landowners and peasants without land. The rural population is 85 percent of the
total population. Afghanistan ignores "absentee" owners, with the exception.
during the period we are discussing, of certain "khans" in Herat Province and

6
F0!.0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY
H)! "Fl-1‘1.“ INF 0N! \

members of the royal family. Few properties are larger than 300 hectares: this
is small compared to other Middle East countries but large when you consider that

the average size of units is less than 2.5 hectares and that more than one-third
of the peasants do not own the land they cultivate.

It is the small landowners and tenant farmers who are on the receiving end of the
"pedagogy" from the state officials and who oppose the dusty offices with a resis-
tance composed of exaggerated sluggishness, silence, and an oafish and awkward
physical bearing; they endure in silence, the abruptness and irritation by those
they encounter: "straighten up, get up, don't move, answer, who is your "arbab"
(village chief), animal reply. what is your name?" Authority is reportedly exerted
in a rude and severe manner; instead it should be sensitive and clear.

Deliberations, questioning, discussions and audiences are public. There is no
chance for closed-door discussion or private conversation in the offices, whose
doors are always open onto the corridor or the street, which anyone can enter at
any time, and which are full to overflowing on market days. The officials make
public show of their advantages and their superiority before the local people,
whose humiliation is thus also public. Moreover, everyone knows what is going on;
the public knowledge of bureaucratic decisions at least provides more oral inforu
mation. Conversation is not shielded from public criticism.

As we have said, communication between the representative from Kabul and the
farmer is difficult: the latter is there to renew his identity card, because he
has been summoned for labor duty. because his brother or son has failed to report
for conscription, or to lodge a complaint. He cannot cope with the stilted
office language or, above all, having to write. Thus, for all his requests he has
to go through the professional writers: the letter-writer in the market or
literate village head.

Regularization of Rural Land

One of the most effective government measures and one which has contributed most

to "regularization" of the rural community has been the application, in the last
few decades, of agrarian land registry to "lalmi," or rainy-season, land. Formerly,
this land, on which crop-raising is high-risk, could in principle be freely acquired
by anyone who wanted to grow on it, and there would be no tax. These government
measures have thus decreased the unauthorized exploitation of pasture land--a
practice which has often been the result of expropriation of the best land for the
"naqelin." These measures have thus subjected to tax, and thus control, the land
necessary for small farmer subsistence; in summary, the measures have brought under
the registry system land which had previously been free of any strict control and
whose value had depended on investment of labor time, effort, and quantity of

seed sown. The 1978 coup d'etat and the gestures at agrarian reform have only
increased this surveying trend, including control over unregistered land, which

has of course caused farmer resistance.

For the peasants, the government presence is felt not only through the "uluswali"
office building; there are also the periodic expeditions by its agents to the
villages: the "mamur-e maliat" to check the land registry records for agricul-
tural revenue, the employee for conscription and statistics coming to issue the

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"taskira, and the gendarmerie commander at prosecutor for criminal investiga4
tions. The word expedition is not too strong; officials always travel in a group,
which includes soldiers, orderlies, guide, surveyor, and photographer. These
trips last several days, or even several weeks; they involve requisition of
horses, billeting requirements, taxes, and other charges.

The village reacts with a unified and defensive attitude; an expedition not
directly connected to the "uluswali," such as a vaccination team (smallpox,
cholera), can be put off quite easily by a sum of money collected by the village
chief and presented, after keeping a percentage, to the chief medical officer.
Other visits. bv the tax collector or the census-taker, are unavoidable; all one
can do is limit toe inconveniences, by pretending a horse is foaling or by sending
the horses to pasture before the visit, and above all by having taken care to
select an “arbab” capable of negotiating with the visiting officials in regard to
information to be supplied and the customary payments.

Itinerant Soldier

0n the other hand, the people the villagers see on the roads all the time are the
soldiers; couriers assigned to requisition or to summon individuals to the
"uluswali." Soldiers for the gendarmerie are normally detached from the regular
army; these are covered asaignemnts, far from the harrassments of the barracks
and providing more freedom. You have to be the son of a small or medium landowner
to get such an assignment, because of the need to pay the captain several thousand
afghanis for assignment to a provincial administrative center. However, the fate
of a "gendarme" there is not much more enviable than being in the regiment; he
serves as orderly in the offices or prison guard, an unpleasant duty since if
thereiis an escape it is the guard who is imprisoned in place of the person he was
guarding. A present to the commander can finally gain for him the privilege to be
transferred to the "uluswali." It is true that he will not get his pay, which
will be accepted in his stead by his commander or divided within the offices; nor
will he get the few kilos of wheat to which he is entitled, or the new equipment,
which his commander will sell for his personal benefit; but he will have lenient
discipline and the opportunity to recover his expenses from the local citizenry.
During his travels to the villages delivering summonses, he will stay with the
village head or at the house of a villager and be able to demand that for a day or
two he be served meat and be given a fixed sum of money, "kharchi."

However, the system is made less burdensome by a whole set of implicit rules.
The soldier is himself from a modest peasant background; he "knows how it goes."
He is not armed, except for a baton; but even though this baton is used more for
keeping dogs away than hitting people, it is nevertheless a sign of authority:
"be suta askar namesha," no baton, not a soldier. Considering the 10 to 15
Afghans on whom he imposes and the chicken he usually gets. the soldier is more
an extortioner than a plunderer. Sometimes he is even fairly well received to the
degree that he brings news from the administrative center.

This informal news is valued; knowledge of personnel changes in the regional ad-

ministration, possible application of anticorruption measures, grain prices in the
.large city food markets, and rivalries and standing of officials all serves for

defensive measures in the tactics to resist authority.

8
IN3R10IlﬂClAl.USIi(MVLY
H‘R (WHHU l SK UNI \

Villagers Against Progress?

It is not reforms or progress as such that the peasants of northern Afghanistan
Oppose; they refuse to put their confidence in the personnel and system seeking to
implement them. The Afghan peasants have the profound intuition that their envir-
onment offers only limited assets to the community, and that any change in the
balance, any advantage given to some, is done to the detriment of the others. A
long experience in failed schemes, in expensive rural medicine campaigns, expro-
priational land improvement projects, and schools without qualified teachers tends
to support their view.

In fact, the villagers regard the teachers and lycee instructors of the adminis-
trative center as hardly different from all the "mnmurin," to whom they are cul-
turally related and whose manners, customs, and languages they share. In the
situation, they are trapped by their status as members of the intelligentsia,
despite the sincerity and desire for reform of many of them. They often join
the officials in a contemputuous pedagogic attitude toward dense and illiterate
peasants. In "objectives," they are the opponents of the village Koran school.
They are the "bare heads," the "sarluchi," spreading ideas contrary to Islam.
Finally, they do not always avoid the temptation, being very poorly paid and living
far away from their families, to accept presents from local prominent persons at
the time their children are taking exams.

Men of Influence in the Village

The peasant community. which stands together in its defensive shell, is far from
being homogeneous: it includes men of influence; mullahs; "aeyed," descendants
of Muhammad; "hadji," Moslems who have made the pilgrimage to Mecca; and prominent
persons who are mealthy in land. called "khan" or more often "bey." To be a "bey"
it is not enough to be a landowner, one must be both rich and influential, be
member of a "family" in the genealogical sense--the "bey“ is often the "elder"

of a local ethnic group--and in the sense of the strength of numerous relatives.

His influence assures the "bey" a clientele, and sometimes control of a hamlet
where he has built the mosque. The "bey" derives also some symbolic capital as a
servant of Islam. By building a guest house he gains prestige from his
hospitality and welcoming of noted guests. The "hey" has friends in the "uluswali"
to whom he presents favors without strings attached, for example a cow loaned to
the "qazi," or a horse placed at the disposal of the gendarmerie commander. Above
all, the "bey" appoints the "arbab" of the village or the ethnic col-nunity, or

at least manages his appointment, which is made by the assembly of "gray beards"
"rish-e safi ," or heads of families.

The small farmers and peasants are dependent on the "bey“ first of all in their
sharectopper relationship, but also for a loan of money or grain to get them
through the spring. To the peasant, the "hey," powerful as he may be. and however
unjust his power may be perceived. is "country"; he is predictable, a known
quantity; he is the last resort in case of need for money or food. or a major
problem with the commander, when the "arbab: is not enough. Even though the "hey“
is at the center of a network of mutual services which he uses to his advantage,
using for profit the community institutions or collective labor, the peasant

9
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regards him as a person necessary to the good order of things, relating to the
cycle of seasons and the perpetuation of society. There are good and bad "bey";
but one could not imagine a village without them. In contrast to the arbitrari-
ness of the state personified in the "uluswali" officials, he is part of a world
that is comprehensible, interpretable; he is an integral part of the peasant
col-unity's image of itself.

The role of the "hey" and village personalities was strengthened following the
1966 constitution, because the candidates, "wakil," for the "shura," assembly,
were recruited primarily from their ranks. The "wakil" has numerous privileges.
He can directly contact the Kabul offices regarding the issues inI-his constituency.
For the average, comfortable peasant, for anyone involved with the law. or for
etl'nic conunities in conflict, the importance of having a representative in Kabul
is enormous; it is essential to have "one of us," an "elder" of the comnity.to
defend our interests in the capital, particularly in case of conflicts arising
over ownership of the so-called state lands for the "naqelin." Election of the
"wakil" has usually reflected the ethnic solidarity groupings which, far more than
the almost nonexistent parties, reflect the major interests of the communities.

Should we include the "mullahs" among the prominent people? The word signifies
any educated man, educated in the sense of knowledge of the Book, the Koran, as
opposed to the knowledge acquired at a government school. The person who leads
the Friday prayers in the main mosque is the mullah imam; in the village he often
teaches the fundamentals of the prayers to the children outside the mosque. Also,
many ethnic or local communities have "pit" or spiritual intercessors, theaselves
often "seyed," descendants of the prophet. These "pir" are small or average
property-owners who periodically visit their protegea and by prayer for a fee,
assure the success of the harvest and prosperity c.‘ the family. The mullah, "pir"
and mosque fall within a frame of reference for the peasant which is distinct from
that of the "uluswali." the public school, or pol itics; they are part of a separate
design of society, more social than clerical in nature, which is the peasant's
View of the just Islamic society.

The more the state affects by its initiatives its fragile equilibrium with the
local prominent personalities and the Islamic design of society, the more the
government and its representatives become the target for resentment. Evidence

of this is the ever-growing rejection of the lay school, a creation of "parchami"
and "khalqi," and of its products such as the bachelors sent to the provinces to
“educate the people." The crisis of confidence in regard to intellectuals has
certainly worsened in the last few years. Some Western observers have used the
cliche of the confrontation between intellectual "progressives" and religious
"reactionaries." In fact, the former are rather "statiats" who have been seduced
by the myth of a totally effective intervention which will produce a change in
society, and the latter are far from all being reactionary and conservative; they
are the conveyors of real knowledge, and many have traveled beyond the provincial
center and have some knowledge of the world, and a deep curiosity about what exists
elsewhere: they are familiar with the peasant’s world yet keep their distance from
some village traditions. Certainly the duocratic mullah of Gudri who copied

this poem for us in 1973 was dreaming of another republic:

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"To the Glory of the Republic"

"May the republic last forever

In this country, which could then attain

And reintegrate the sphere of science with knowledge...
According to the teaching of the Koran, which spreads
Knowledge to the world, the best of men

Is he who does the most good.

Thus, we utter the cry: glory to the new system.

If you seek progress through joining with youth,

Keep vigilant, heroic, with face open and smiling."

Assigned Intermediaries

Between the "hey" and other local personalities who are part of the intelligible
world and the administrative authority in Kabul, between the sharecropper and the
official, there are established intermediaries. These are primarily the "arbab,"
also called "quaryadar" or "malek" in some regions, terms improperly translated

by the village head. The main function of the "arbab" is to serve as inter-
mediary between the village and the "uluswali," but also to provide a screen be—
tween the zeal of the officials and the big property holders. In principal he

is appointed by the assembly of heads of families meeting at the mosque, but he

is more often selected by influential "hey"; the selection is finally submitted
for the signature of the "uluswal." It is rare that a "bey" himself becomes
"arbab," but it can be a younger relative. He has a complex role: in a society
in which the peasant and the administration do not speak the same language, he is
the channel for passing information. On market days he accompanies those villagers
who have been summoned by the "uluswali" services. Conversely, it is he who
entertains the touring officials, at his guesthouse in the village. He also serve:
as a buffer, a screen between the authorities and the village. The "arbab" have
the task of moderating, in return for remuneration from the villagers, the demands
of the administration. He handles the requisitions for riding animals. He re-
ceives the teams of rural develOpment officials and other people who should be
avoided, and sometimes pays them off to shorten their visit. It is to the "arbab"
that a touring soldier turns to find out "who is who." The "arbab" thus play a

key role in the village defense system. It is up to the "arbab" to settle
matters in the village and prevent quarrels and internal disagreements from coming
before the "uluswal" or the "qazi," which would bring more visits to the village
and further payments. His function is thus ambiguous: he is feared and courted,
but his position is constantly in danger. In theory he has many duties and he

fits into the implementation of administrative activities; in fact, his cleverness
is often the key to the village resistance. In addition to his mediatory duties,
he keeps records of births and deaths, and alerts those who must obtain an
identity card. he represents the authorities at weddings, he countersigns land
sale contracts, and in general keeps the "uluswali" services informed of what is
going on in the village.

Certainly, the "arbab" derives some advantages from his position: first of all--
influence, and also in the form of a fixed remuneration; a few measures of wheat
per household and some fuel for the winter. But for each specific service-—

serving as witness, intercession at the "uluswali," or signingu-the "arbab" gets
paid in cash. For example, a peasant who has "forgotten" to send his son for

11
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

recruitment into the army could be sentenced to a heavy fine; through the efforts
of the "arbab" the fine may be reduced somewhat, but there will be a payment for
his services. When the "arbab" is assigned to collect fees or tax, he collects
more than is due (the individual does not know exactly what he owes the state)
and puts the excess in his pocket.

Prom Remuneration for Services to Outright Extortion

To the outside observer, the gratuities to officials like the "arbab," and the sums
extorted by soldiers, are elements of a corrupt system. However, the peasants
make a clear distinction between payments that are illegal, but customary and
fixed, and therefore tolerable--everyone has to make a living--and the violence of
unjust treatment, extortion, seizure without compensation, and false court
decisions. They call this kind of corruption tyranny and curse those responsible,
although they grant that service to the state lust give its officials some ad-
vantages over and above their inadequate salaries. In one sense, corruption is
reassuring; the corrupted person, by accepting the gift, becomes to some degree
"one of ours." His venality makes him predictable, brings him closer. At the
other end of the chain, the "uluswali," the sums obtained are shared and the net-
work is thus extended, tieing together those who benefit.

In performance of his functions, the "arbab" relies on a kind of consensus. If

he makes too many demands. if he has gone too far from the administration's

point of view, he loses his reason for being, which is precisely to keep disagree-
nents and quarrels from coming up to the center. In the administration's view, he
will no longer be considered useful to the degree that his flow of infornation

to the administrative center is reduced and his collection ability declines.

Some important "arbab" in the north do not represent villages but rather ethnic
groups. In such a case, the "arbab" may be responsible for the ethnic comnities
of five or six different villages and hamlets. If the "arbab" is powerful and

the communities are large, he may have a deputy "arbab" in each hamlet. The impor-
tance of this role can be seen in interethnlc relations. Some very influential
"arbab" are virtually "bey." Far from being regarded as "uluswali" cops, they
sometimes play the role of defenders of the community and enjoy a genuine
popularity. At any rate, when it is a question of the relationship with the outside,
the "arbab" is regarded as one of "ours."

Beginning with the first coup d'etat (1973) and following the Sawr coup d'etat
(1978), the revolutionaries wanted to get rid of the "arbab," those "suckers of
the people's blood," in order to establish ”forthrightness" in the relations
between state and peasants. It was a purely abstract measure aimed at eliminating
the intermediaries who obstruct the communication of the center's orders. But the
reaction of the peasants was that a flagrant injustice had been committed, their
spokesman had been removed, even if he was expensive. This measure could only
increase the rift between the peasants and the state. Later, under Taraki, the
"arbab" were restored almost everywhere.

Divorce Completed Between State and Peasantry

From 1978 on, the state's representatives in the country have been from that
intelligentsia to whom the USSR has offered the model of a different society.

12
liliCIﬂﬂCJAl.U3£(HVLY
FOR OHM 1AI. “SI-Z UNI."

They have envisaged an even greater integration of the peasant communities into
the state system. They have operated through the school, agrarian reform, and

the army; they have even replaced the municipal officials with Khalq and Parcham
people. They have thereby continued and worsened that bureaucratic and authori-
tarian policy of the previous regimes. The brutal measures which have been taken
have strengthened the peasants' hostile image of an outside and abstract state.

By imprisoning and driving out the local and traditional leaders, the Kabul repre-
sentatives have eliminated the element in the power set-up that was comprehensible
and known, and linked inseparably to the autochtony and the perpetuation of the
peasant society. By causing a sharp break between the "hokumat" (government),

the prominent persons and the village, by damaging the implicit or explicit design
of an Islamic society, and by putting itself under the protection of the foreign

occupier. the present government only appears more arbitrary and less legitimate
than the regime which preceded it.

On each occasion, an increase in the flow of refugees followed the Saw: coup
d'etat, Amin's emergence, and the December 1979 Soviet invasion. It has been
said that the dependent and conservative peasants followed their khans and big
landowners into exile. But it would be more accurate to say that they could not
tolerate the break inflicted on their relationship to their symbolic and human
environment, and rejected a society which was not their own.

COPYRIGHT: 1982: S.A. Commentaire.

9920
C80: 4619/40

13
FOR 0F11C1AL.USEIDNLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAI. [Isl-f ()NI.\'

LIBYA

INCREASED INVESTMENTS IN ITALS DESCRIBED

Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRKANEENS in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 3300

[Text] Libyan officials are reported to be currently negotiating to repurchase
the Haraldi group. a large Italian steel and sugar company, for around 500 billion
lire or approximately $450 million. This repurchase will be made through the
Libyan Arab Investment Company. The Haraldi group (with some 35,000 employees)
has been in trouble for several years and owes the Italian state several tens of
billion lire in unpaid social security contributions.

The deal now in progress is part of an increasing penetration of the Italian
peninsula by Libyan capitals, an example of which is the acquisition of a minority

partnership (9.1 percent due to go up to 13.6 percent by the end of 1982) in the
FIAT group.

Libyan investments in Italy, according to official figures, amount to 370 billion
lire ($350 million approximately) but, in the view of observers, this figure does
not correspond to the many Libyan acquisitions in that penisula.

The Libyan penetration of Italy which, as pointed out by the AFP is economic as

well as political and ideological, started on a small scale following the "green
revolution" with the purchase of a hill on the very small island of Pantelleria,
the southernmost point of Italy.

In 1975, Tripoli purchased many hotels and plots of land in that island and was
even instrumental in improvements made on an airfield in Pantelleria. an airfield
where conmercial and military aircraft can now land.

The next step in this Libyan northward "advance" was Sicily where the Tripoli
regime has holding now in three sectors: agriculture, real estate (mainly luxury
hotels in Palermo, Catania and Siracusa) and fishing. Libya owns 10 percent of the
fishing fleet of Hazara Del Vallo (Sicily's major fishing port) and these vessels
are the only ones which are allowed to sail into the territorial waters of the
Libyan Janahiriya.

In Sicily, the economic penetration goes hand-in-hend with a strong Libyan
"cultural" effort. In this large island, Libya owns, among other things, a
television network (Telesicilia Color), a radio station and even a bimonthly
magazine SICILY TODAY. In addition, the daily ORA regularly publishes an Arabic
language supplement.

1h
FOR‘OF11C1A1.lEHZ(MNLY
I-OK UI'HCIAI. USE ONLY

In the political sphere, Tripoli has good relations with representatives of the
Italian political parties. Naturally, Italian leaders do not forget that, beyond
political considerations, their country is heavily dependent on Libyan petroleum
(Libya was the peninsula's second largest supplier in 1980 with 13 million tons)
and that even Italian industry does quite well out of Libya where 17,000 Italians
are established. Not counting the EEC, Libya is today the second largest exporter
of Italian goods behind the United States. In 1980. Italian imports of Libyan
goods, unatly petroleum. amounted to 3,000 billion lire (about $2.7 billion) and
Italian exports to Tripoli totaled 2 billion lire (about 11.8 billion).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
050: 4519/73

15
ron omcut use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. US}: ONLY

LIBYA

The Pakistanis were hired on condition that they would not be employed in military
or paramilitary tasks. They were only employed to guard key Libyan installations.
In October. the Pakistani press reported that these workers had been forced to

undergo guerrilla training. It was also reported that 150 of them had been sent
to Syria from which they would be sent to fight the Israelis in Lebanon. [Text]
[Paris MARCHBS TROPICADX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1882, 5 Dec 81 p 3238]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux st Cie Paris 1981.] 8796

PRODUCE PACKAGING PLANTS--Libya has issued a call for bids to set up several fruit
and vegetable packaging plants (cardboard boxes with plastic lining, cellophane
and net bags to pack potatoes, onions, oranges). The bid must also include
technical assistance. The company awarding the contract is the General Company
for Marketing and Agricultural Product. Tripoli. Closing date: not specified.
For information in Paris apply to the CPCE [Council of Commercial Federations of
Europe]. (Telephone: 505-37-86, Miss Clergeau; No 1025). [Text] [Paris HARCBES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1882, 6 Dec 81 p 3238] [COPYRIGHT:

Rene Horaux st Cie Paris 1981.] 8796

PASTA PLANTS-~The CPCB [Council of Commercial Federations of Europe] announces in
Paris that the National Company for Semolina and Products, e Libyan national
company. wishes to establish direct contacts with French companies specializing
in the construction of pasta manufacturing plants (macaroni, semolina and so on).
Address: National Co for Semolina and Products, P.0. Box 12852; Telex: 20634.

[Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEZNS in French No 1882, 6 Dec 81 p
3238] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Karen: at Cie Paris 1981.] 8796

080: 4519/73

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

ELECTRICITY PROJECTS REVIEWED, EXPANSION NOTED
Paris HARClIBS TROPICAIIX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1883. 11 Dec 81 pp 3299, 3230

[Text] Sudan's electric power generating capacity, which was 165 megawatts in
1978-79, jumped in 1981 to 280 negawetts. 90 percent of which (270 megawatts) is
generated by just the Blue Nile Grid (BN6). Moreover, the BN6 is being expended
with the Power III and Power IV projects which will make it possible to provide
additional supplies of electrical power: 120 hydraulic megawatts (turbines S, 6

and 7 in Roseires); 120 thermal megawatts (mostly free the diesel-operated power
station of Burri); 60 thernal megawatts (mostly from the diesel-operated power

station in Khartoumrﬂorth).

The current expansion program, scheduled to continue until 1984-85. will progress
as follows (figures given in megawatts):

hydraulic Thermal Diesel Total

Installed Capacity in 1981 1‘5 85 60 270
Power III Projects
1982 - - 10 280
1983 50 60 30 610
1986 60 - - 450
Power IV Projects
1985 - 60 - $10
1986 00 - 20 570
Total 265 205 100 570

The current development program also includes many projects of a sneller ecele such
as the project in Port-Sudan: 15 megawatts in phase A (1980-81), 15 megawatts in
phase C (1982-83, with Prench financing).

Por the long tern, that is to say with the year 2,000 in nind. the Sudanese Govern-
ment will map out a hydroelectric power progrel based on two studies conducted by
the British firm Alexander Gibb and Partners (White Nile Study Long-Term Plan) and
by the International Science and Technology Institute of the United States (Long
Range Electricity Futures for Sudan. Two Scenarios 1982-2000). According to these
studies, by the year 2,000 Sudan will have an installed capacity of eleoet 1.000
negewatts fron various hydraulic sources.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm: (OH-“1“ l \1' (‘VI \

Its hydroelectric power capacity at the moment is only around 160 megawatts from
three dams (Roseires and Sannar on the Blue Nile and Khashm al-Qirbah on the
Atbarah). The Roseires Dan was built with room to house seven groups of turbines.
Three 30-megawstt groups are now in operation; their number will increase to 6 when
3 other bO—megawatt groups are installed before 1985.

This will bring the total hydroelectric power capacity to 360 megawatts by the year
2,000 a totally insufficient amount of power in view of the projected needs. This
is why a project to build another dam on the Nile is under consideration. Various
preliminary studies on this subject have established that of the various possible
locations (the sixth. the fifth and the fourth cataracts), the last one is the
most suitable for the project. This expansion project could be implemented
following one of two plans: either building dams at Harawi and 90 kilometers up
river at Shirri, or else building a single large den at Harswi. These dams could
generate 600 megawatts.

We should mention that the following consulting firms have been preselected to
conduct the technical studies for the Power IV project (a seventh turbine in
Roseires: 40 megawatts; expansion of the diesel-powered Burri plant: 20 megs-
watts; new thermal power plant in Kosti: 60 megawatts): Sir Alexander Gibb and
Partners, and Herz and Hechley (Great Britain); 0 Bank (Great Britain); Lahmeyer
(PRC); SCI and Motor Colombus (Switzerland). The name of the successful tender
should be known very soon. Let us also mention that Lahmeyer is already acting as
a consultant for the Power III project.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
C50: 6519/73

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT—The Modem-Africa Construction Cowany, a Sudanese-British
joint venture company which is a subsidiary of the John Howlem Company of Jersey
and of Africa-Construction of Khartoum, has obtained from Sudan a contract worth
10 million pounds to build a real estate development in Khartoum for the Sudan
Development Corporation (SDS). The development will comprise 3 major buildings:
a 6-story high building for the SDC offices, a comercial building with 8 shops
and a 7-story high residential building with 27 apartments. The development,
located in the new part of the Sudanese capital, will cover a total floor area of
190,000 square meters. It is scheduled to be completed around July 1983. [Text]
[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEHIS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3238]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux st Cie 1981.] 8796

C50: 4519/73 END

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY