FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10158
3 December 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 63/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 63/81)

CONTENTS

TERRORISH

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Arrest. of Neonazis Reveals International Collaboration
(Rupp Doined, Tyll Schoeneunann; STERN; 29 Oct 81) ............

ENERGY ECONOMICS

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Petroleum Industry To Dismantle or Hodernize Reﬁneries
(HanS'Josef Joest; CAPITAL) Get 81) oooooooooooooooooooooooooo

POLITICAL

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Soviet Peace Movement Ties; Disinformation Activities
(Philippe Krasnopolaki; VALEURS ACTUBLIBS, 19-25 Oct 81)......

Effects of German Pacifism on Alliance, France
(VALEUM ACTUEIJBS, 19-25 wt 81) 00.0.00...IDOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOO

ITALY

PSDI's Longo on Future Alliance with PSI
(Pietro Longo Interview; II. MONK), 16 Oct 81) ................

Opinion Poll on PSI Craad's Strategy, Popularity
(Bruna Bellonzi, Roberto Ippolito; IL HORN, 30 Oct 81) ......

10

12

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Daily Press Listing by Political Pressure Group Control
(Vittorio Borelli, et a1.; II. HORN, 30 Oct 81) .............

GENERAL

I TALY

Profile of Merging nc Leader Quarta in Pa 113
(Paolo Passarini; IL MONK), 16 Oct. 1) ......................

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

TERRORISM FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

ARREST OF NEONAZIS REVEALS INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
Hanburg STERN in German 29 Oct 81 pp 20, 27-28, 32
lieport by Rupp Doinet and Tyll Schoenemann: "Our Hour Has Struck27

[Texg7 Cerman neonazis aim to destroy the state. They have
allied themselves with right radical groups in France and Bel-
gium. From then they obtain weapons, noney and training. The
Munich terrorists also lived in Paris before their planned
crime. Is an international wave of right terrorism innit-lent?

The white Citroen 65 travels from France toward the German border post. At the
wheel a young Frenchman, Pascal Coletta from Paris. Passengers in the car are four
young Germans, hair cut short in the military style. The five are allowed to pro-
ceed without closer inspection.

They are unaware that they are expected. Nor do they notice that they are being
followed from this point on. Officers from the Cologne Federal Office for the Pro-
tection of the Constitution (BfV) in unmarked radio cars shadow them in turn-~all
the way to Munich.

In the Munich suburb of Neubiberg the white Citroen stops in the courtyard of the
building at Brunhildenstrgsse 23. One of thgrings the bell marked "Druckerei und
Verlag Friedhelm Busse" [Printing Shop and Publishing House Friedhelm Bussé7.

Among his neighbors Herr Busse enjoys the reputation of being a quiet tenant. On
the odd occasion when he starts up his printing press in the garage at night, he
apologizes: ”I am printing romantic novels. It is a rush order." That particular
evening. Tuesday last week, a rather lengthy conference is taking place in printer
Busse's living room with the people from the white Citroen. Shortly after

20.00 hours the guests load up their car, take their leave and drive off.

Both the meeting and the loading operation are observed from beginning to end by
the SEK [special unit] of the Munich Police. The code name of the operation is
"Bavaria." Eight officers in two armored and heavy BMW limousines pursue the
white Citroen for two kilometers through the residential district. At the wide
Putzbrunner Strasse one of the BHH's overtakes the French car. The stop Sign

is extended from the window. The Citroen driver tries to ran the police car. At
that moment the other BMW turns up, pushes the Citroen to the side and stops. The

eight SBK officers jump from the car. They are armed with automatics and wear

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bulletproof vests. The five occupants of the car slowly emerge, two being-~with
some hesitation-to raise their hands. At that very moment someo ne throws a hand
grenade. It explodes under the Citroen. Shots follow. The police shoot back.
Seconds later the uproar is at an end. On the pavement lie two dead, two seriously
injured, one of them a policeman.

From the white Citroen the police extract seven hand grenades P1 of Soviet origin,
three automatics. one Smith 6 Henson gun, a rifle and a shotgun with a sewn-off
barrel. smoke bombs. tear gas and ammunition.

Three quarters of an hour later criminal police officers carry eleven strips of ex-
plosive and several boxes of mnition from printer Busse's garage. Busse, the
host of the shooting quintet, is arrested as the leader of a right radical terror
association.

By that time two of his young comrades-st-arms had already died in hospital: Kurt
Eduard Holfgram, 21, and Klaus Ludwig Uhl, 24. Peter Pabel, 18, lies in the inten-
sive care unit. Peter Hamberger, also 18, and Frenchman Pascal Coletta, 19, are in
jail. The following day the investigating judge at the Federal High Court issues
an arrest order for them and Busse, for membership in a terrorist association.

The coup at Munich brings evidence that the Nazi terrorists have long enjoyed the
aid and assistance of political friends in France and Belgium. There they find
money, weapons, training and hiding places.

The wirepuller of the right terror international is 52-year old printer Priedhelm
Busse. In the guise of a decent citizen he is really the head of the Popular
Socialist Movement of Germany/Party of Labor (V830). Busse comes from the Ruhr.
In Boghum, during the 1960's, he joined the "Resistance Action" and later the

NPD lﬂational Democratic Party of Germani7 In 1970 he was their top candidate in
North Rhine-Vestphalia's Bundestag election.

However. he considered the HPD too soft and proceeded to establish his own party,
the V880. In 1975 he moved to Munich. He published brochures on racial hygiene,
blood and soil. He celebrated Adolf Hitler as an "outstanding historical figure."
Busse's aim: "The establishment of the first radical-democratic and anti-imperial-
ist state on German soil.“

He intended to achieve by violence that which he and his party failed to achieve in
elections. Later he lectured to the terrorist "Hoffmann Military Sports Group."

At the funeral of his follower 7rank Schubert who had killed a Swiss customs offi-
cer and a policeman in December 1980, subsequently shooting himself, Busse said-
”He must revenge ourselves, break the powers that be. He must be ready to die, to
save our honor. He must hate our foes just as they hate us. The storm will be
raging until, eventually, the Reich rises anew."

For this storm Busse sought allies in Belgium and France. He found them in the
Order of Flemish Militants (VMO) and the European Federation of National Action
(FANS) .

In August 1980 Bussc follower Klaus Ludwig Uhl took refuge with FAME in Paris.
This 24-year old tax counsel trainee from the wine village of Heyher near Landau

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Palatinate) had already put up Hitler pictures on the walls of his room while at-
tending secondary school.

Toward the end of 1979 Uhl was sentenced to 2 years in prison for incitement to riot
and Nazi propaganda. Before proceedings began at the appeals court, he fled to

France.

In exile he became a key figure on the right terror scene. His cover name in Paris
was "Bormann"--the name of Hitler's deputy. Uhllnormann posed as the "head of the
propaganda echelon" of a "NSDAP" domiciled in America and used the pseudonym.
"Herdorf" to write for the VOBLKISCRE BBOBACHTER, a neonasi hate magazine which was
smuggled from France to Germany. From Paris he entered into contacts with the
Hoffmann Military Sports Group and organized military exercises in the Ardenne
forests. Moreover he founded right radical “werewolf platoons" in Austria and the

Federal Republic.

Neonazi Uhl negotiated with representatives of the American Ku Klux Klan, with
Spanish fascists and the VMO regarding a worldwide right alliance of action. His

target was "the march on Germany." It was Uhl who recruited Pascal Coletta, l9,
PANE member, to drive the Citroen.

On Monday of last week Nazi internationalist Uhl was classified as an "exceptional-

ly dangerous extremist" at a situation conference on internal security in Bonn's
interior ministry.

The discussion paper in Bonn was an anlysis by the Cologne va. The experts sum-
marized the situation as follows: "At no time in past decades were relations be-
tween German neonasis and their political friends abroad so intensive as now. At
this time we are quite justified in speaking of international neonaaism." At many
meetings of right terrorists at home and abroad "weapons, ammunition and explo-
sive procurement and the planning of attacks" are said "to have been discussed."

Klaus Ludwig Uhl and Kurt Eduard Holfgram, 21, the two dead "popular socialists“
of Munich, are accused by the federal prosecutor's office of having operated already
a month ago--to get money. On 23 September 1981 the two are alleged to have at-

tacked the branch of the Nassau Savings Bank in Rennerod (Hesterwald). Their loot:
DM72.000.

The police ascertained that the Rennerod savings bank was to be the target of the
Munich quartet once again. As far back as ll August last two heavily armed men

had attacked the district savings bank in Neuenstadt near Heilbronn and carried off
DM90,110. The police belieVe to recognize Klaus Ludwig Uhl as one of the attackers

from the photographs taken by the automatic camera installed in the lobby of the
savings bank.

Peter “amberger, 18, arrested in Munich, was a member of the Hoffmann Military
Sports Group. Last year, after the attack on the Munich Octoberfest, he and his
chief Hoffmann went to ground in the PLO camp "Bir Hasaan" in Lebanon. Last spring
he fled from there, gave himself up to the German authorities and incriminated

Hoffmann. Thereupon he was discharged. The judge imposed several conditions, one
of them being avoidance of contacts with right radicals.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hamberger got a job as an unskilled laborer with Nazi printer Busse. An ideal ear
ployer with the very best contacts in Belgium. Hamberger used them to so under-
ground. In Antwerp he quickly found friends among the fascist VHO. Their leader.
Bert Erikson, welcomed him to his headquarters. the "Cafe Odal." The slogan of
Hitler fan Brikson: "we must walk on corpses if we want to liberate Flanders."
Hamberger had himself photographed with Flemish comrades on military sports exer-
cises in the Ardennes.

A few hours before the shots in Munich a bomb exploded in Antwerp's Jewish quarter,
in front of the diamond bourse. The bomb had been hidden in a car. Two people
died, a hundred were injured. Shortly thereafter s neonazi organization, the
"Action Directe," claimed responsibility.

Thursday of last week the Belgian antiterrorist unit Diana struck in Ghent and ar-
rested four German right extremists. Three of them were sought per international
arrest order by the federal German prosecutor general: The couple Klaus and Kristin
Hewicker and Ernst Balke, 38, from Celle. Allegation: Membership in a criminal
association. The Bremen prosecutor's office sought the fourth man, Gerard Tbepfer,
25, for incitement to riot.

The quartet had crossed the Belgian border from France at Lille. The Belgian auth-
orities had been alerted by their French colleagues and pursued the Germans to
Ghent by way of Antwerp. The four took up quarters in the home of a right radical
in the suburb of Sint Martens. Hhen the police stormed their hiding place, they
found rifles with silencers, blank drivers licenses and blank passports. They also
discovered more proof of international neonazi collaboration: Notebooks with con-
tact addresses of fascists in France, Belgium. Spain and Ireland.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner * Jshr AG 5 Co.

ll698
CSO: 3103/85

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY ECONOMICS FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

PETROLEUM INDUSTRY T0 DISHANTLE 0R HODERNIZE REFINERIBS
Hamburg CAPITAL in German Oct 81 pp lb-lS
[Article by Hans-Josef Joest: "When the Flame Goes Down"]

[Text] Esso chief Wolfgang Oehme finds that the advertising slogan used by his
company is catching up to him. "There is a lot to do. Let's get down to wet ."
According to Oehne's oracle the petroleum industry is facing a shrinking process
"that this industry has never seen before." As homeowners throttle their oil tanks
and companies abandon heavy oil and go over to coal, the 31 German refineries are
working at their minimum technical capacity. Therefore the Esso chief wants the
scrap metal collectors to take over. "About one-third of our refining capacity is
no longer needed."

There are two trends making the situation tight for oil companies: A decrease in
consumption, and obsolete equipment. Last year petroleum sales decreased 11.4 percent
to 118 million tons. The refineries, however, are designed for 150 million tons of
crude oil. In addition the refineries which are technically not up to date turn out
products which are not in demand. Instead of producing sought-after gasoline (sales
plus 1.8 percent) they concentrate on yesterday's demands and supply light heating

oil which is difficult to sell (17.6 percent drop in sales) and heavy oil (minus

9.3 percent).

It is obviOus that the oil magnates lack foresight and therefore do not like to talk
about these facts. The bill is being paid by the consumer at the filling station.

1he large petroleum companies strain his pocketbook in order to be able to sell their
products which are difficult to sell. particularly heavy oil, at dirt-cheap prices.

An insider concedes that "the bestsellers have to support the sickly products."
Improved calculations will not be possible until the processing capacity is drastically
reduced. A smaller number of modernized refineries working at full capacity will
enable the oil companies to again defend themselves in price competition on the market
which continues to dwindle.

For the time being. however, study groups in the management echelons of the oil
companies are selecting the plants to be modernized. reduced in operation, or dis-
continued. Only those refineries will remain unaffected that produce special products.
0.3., bitumen, an insulating medium, or greasing agents, as Oelwerke J. Schindler
GmbH. Hamburg. a B? subsidiary.

S
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The investment plans reveal which refineries are given a chance to survive by oil
magnates. As early as 5 years ago, Shell, Veba Oel and Hintershall already had

plans of highly modern cracking plants on their shelves, so-called hydrocrackers.

These plants crack hard—to-sell heavy oil and convert it into gasoline which is in

high demand. At that time, however, only Hintershall AG, a BASF subsidiary, ventured
to go through with this costly investment and has since been operating Germany's most
modern refinery in Lingen. Now, 5 years later, Messrs Veba Oel, Gelsenkirchen.

and Shell. Cologne-Godorf, are following suit. Cracking plants of this type for heavy
oil residues also give the planners an idea of the size which even modern refineries
must shrink down to. In the future, the refineries are to process only as much crude
oil as the cracking plants are capable of cracking down to sought-after gasoline. Then
no heavy oil would have to be subsidized by car drivers. Experts calculate that almost
20 tons of crude-oil capacity will be eliminated in refineries with cracking plants.

Those refineries which supply mostly chemical companies with their products also have
a chance to survive, e.g., Deutsche Marathon Petroleum GmbH, Burghausen. Their future
will only be secured, however, if the plastics producers co-own the refineries, e.g.,
BASF which has an interest in the Mannheim CmbH crude oil refinery through Uintershall,
or Hoechst with its interest in the Union Rheinishche Braunkohlen Kraftstoff AG,
Hesseling. The best example for this theory is the uncertainty of the fate of the
Raunheim Caltex Refinery owned by the Deutsche Texaco AC and the Chevron Erdoel Deut-
schland CmbH. Up to the present it supplied Moechst with refinery products, but the
agreement is about to expire, and Hoechst's demand can be filled by its Hesseling
subsidiary. Caltex has already announced a reduction in its capacity by one—third.

Finally, problems of location make the discontinuation of 9 plants with a total of more
than 30 million tons of volume a difficult undertaking. Large corporations require
sales networks which cover large areas. Small suppliers must retain at least one
refinery in order to exchange gasoline for other areas. Old plants cannot be shut

down until these cooperation agreements have been concluded. The oil companies are

not worried about their employees finding other jobs, however. Refinery workers are
highly qualified specialists and can be utilized in the chemical plants of the multi—
national oil companies, like the workers of the Cologne Esso refinery which is about

to be shut down. Other oil companies have ambitious plans for former refinery workers
of theirs: They will be employed in the refineries converting coal into gasoline.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 Co

9544
CSO: 3103/42

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL IMERNATICNAL AFFAIRS

SOVIET PEACE swarms TIES: DISINPORHA‘I‘IGI ACTIVITIES
Paris VALBURS ACTUELLES in French 19-25 Oct 81 pp SC-SS

[Article by Philippe Krasncpolski: 'The man's Pigeons. ﬂow the Soviets Are

Operating in Disguise in Europe. By Manipulating the Respectable Peace Movements
Animated by Christian or Youth Organizations”]

[Text] "The pacifist movement...“ regaining strength and spreading especially in the
countries of Western Europe. that are the reasms for this? On one hand, the people
are greatly preoccupied with American politics: on the other hand, the pacifist
initiatives of the socialist countries have had their effect. The diverse political
forces have joined the pacifist movement: the munist parties, the major sectors of
social democracy and of the ecology movement."

Mr Boris Ponanarev, member of the Soviet Camunist Party Politburo and head of the
"international relations' section. is drawing up this report in the October issue of

the "New International Review," one of the communist movement's theoretical publicatials.
It is also a balance sheet. A year ago, tn 20 Septeﬁer 1980, the World Council for
Peace decided to organize a widespread campaign against rearmament of NATO members and
against the emplacement of the American Pershing 2 rockets in Europe.

This World Council has its headquarters in Sofia, Bulgaria. It is an organization
of obedience to the Soviet Union. in France, it is represented by the Movement for
Peace, whose secretary general, Hr Michel Langignai. is a member of the Coamnist Party.

Mr Poncmarev can appreciate the work it has acccnplished: Three hundred thousand
demonstrators “for peace and disarmaeent' in Bonn on 10 October. Last April, there
had been only 25,000 protesting agath the NATO sessions in the capital of the Federal
Republic.

Other demonstrations are anticipated: in London on 24 October; in Brussels and Paris
(:1 the 25th; at the Hague the following mmth.

'The struggles waged by the pacifist forces of Western Europe are converging,‘
affirms the daily L'HUHANITE.

The culmination of the campaign will be a great international demonstration in Brussels
on 6 December, the eve of the NATO council meeting.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Germany, the agents of the Soviet Union are moving about in disguise. At the
source of the assembly were two pacifist organizations with Christian tendencies: the
'Expiation Action' and the "Action Movement in the Service of Peace.‘ In reality, the
idea for this demonstration belonged to a Dutd: organization, "End the N Bomb,‘ created
in 1977 at the Netherlands' initiative and headed by the International Relations office
or' the Soviet Conunist Party's Central Committee.

The decision for this was. nevertheless, made in Hamburg on 20 June during Kirchentag,
at the synod of the German Evangelical Church, after the first demmstration had
brought together 80,000 people in the city streets.

On 24 August, the plan received the blessing of the central comittee of the Ecmenical
Council of Churches which met in Dresden in the GDP, and that of Mr arid: Hmecker,
East Germany's head of state.

The small communist party [DKPI of the Federal Republic of Germany thus placed its
men.

One of the organizers of the 10 October demcnstraticn is a certain Fritz Teppich.

He has ai ready been at the forefront of the disturbances against General Baig's visit
to Berlin on 13 September. In the sixties, Hr Teppich activated the German leftist
movement within the Apo, the extra-parliamentary opposition.

Previously, he lived in East Berlin, where he was working for the western division of
$80. the Communist Party of East Germany, before beconing correspondent for ADN, the

GDR's news agency, in the city's western sector. There he belonged to saw, the 53's
western branch. But he soon left the movement (after a falling out with its head) to
rejoin the pacifists.

Another communist infilt rator is Mr Achim Masks, presently the secretary general of the
Conmittee for Peace, Disarmament and Detente. He is a former director of the columnist
group, Spartakus.

A report of the Bundesverfassungsschutz, the office to protect the Constitution (the
DST [Directorate of Territorial Surveillance] of the Federal German Republic) , was for-
warded to Mr saxmidt. It reveals this comunist infiltration of the pacifist movements.
According to this report, the European canunists will be drawing up a 3-year plan

of action against the NATO rearmament. with 1981 being the first phase.

For the first 6 months of 1982, this plan would provide for direct action agath
military installations in the h‘ATO countries, sud: as taking over the barracks. 0n 5
August 1982 (the eve of the anniversary of Hiroshima), demonstrations would take
place in all of Western Europe. accolpanied by hunger strikes. At Christmas. the
churches would be occupied.

In January 1983. the pacifists would call for civil disobedience (refusal to pay taxes,
etc.); strikes against industry would be launched. Finally, again in August, on the
6th, there would be new mass demonstrations. The Pershing rockets are due to be
installed in Europe in 1983.

8
FOR OFFICIAL liSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The report likewise sheds new light on last February's publication in the weekly
57mm of a map showing the site of American nuclear missile installations in the
Federal Republic of Germany. This domnt had been furnished to the journal by the
830 [expansion unknown, an ecology movement, mich itself proceeded from the Ca-
munist Party of the PIC.

These docments were furnished by Section A of the KGB. the famous 'diainfornation"
department. Thus, in June 1980. a 'Pentagon dowment' began to be circulated in
Great Britain, showing the American static ueapm targets in the Soviet Union and the
Warsaw Pact countries. But it also included the mes in the neutral countries and
even NATO members (in the case of Russian occuption). This document arrived in the
Netherlands the following December. Today it is being circulated along the Scandi-
navian countries. A 'pecifist" majority was elected to the Hague last May.

Photo Captions

l. p. 54. Mr Egcn Baht. One of the only German political figure, along with Mr
Willy Brandt, to receive praise from PRAVDA.

2. p. 55. The arguments of German pacifism are unmarked in the text of this
poster: ‘Bill for the PCB. Items delivered: packages of food, Marshall Plan, Star-
tighters. Paid to date: loyalty to the alliance. military bases. Balance due:
battlefield.“

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs actuelles'

9475
C50: 3100/67

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PCLITICAL INTERNATIWAL ”PMS

”PMS OP GERMAN PACIPISH on MIME, FRANCE
Paris VALEUIS MUELLBS in French 19-25 Oct 81 p 53

[Article: 'Disarmament at a Distance; Mr Brezhnev Did Enough By Deploying His 88 20
Missiles for 'German Pacifism' To Develop']

[Text] ‘There is no greater art," said the Chinese philosqmer Sun Tan, "than to destroy
the enemy's resistance without fighting on his territory." The deployment of Soviet

SS 20 missiles (directed exclusively against Western Europe) is already achieving its
objective: disarmament at a distance. In a few months, Chancellor Schmidt's capacity
for resistance will be known. But part of his public opinion has been won: ”Better

red than dead,” stressed the demonstrators in Bonn, folloting those in Berlin.

The Federal Republic of Germany is nevertheless the country which has received 15
million witnesses: the refugees of occupied Europe. The Communist Party has no
representation there: even access to public office is forbidden to its members.

The goals of Soviet foreign policy in Europe are at the same time permanent and
inunediate. They date from the Potsdam Cmference (August 1945) which was aimed at
dismembering and disarming Germany. General Gehlen, who was the head of the German
secret service, recalled in his Memoirs 10 years ago: 'The disintegration of the
Western alliance and the subversion of the Federal Republic are two complementary
aspects of the same Soviet strategy.‘

At present, it is a matter of slowing down the installation of the Pershing rockets
and NATO cruise missiles, capable of restoring to Europe an equilibrium of nuclear
forces which has been endangered by the use of the movable launch pads of the Soviet
ss 20 rockets for 2 years.

Because of the range and precision of these nuclear missiles. added to that of their
Backfire bombers, the Russians oculd aim at Western Europe and neutralize its prin-
cipal means of defensenon condition that neither the Pershing nor the cruise missiles
are deployed in Germany and elsewhere, since that would force the Soviets to reckon
not only with the Europeans but also the Americans. This is the reason for the present
Soviet activism toward preventing this emplacement.

The policy of detente, the departure of Mr Nixon, and the weakness of Mr Carter have
allowed Hr Brezhnev to make up for his strategic delay. Be is in the position of
daninating his rival. This superiority will be gained in 1985, i.e. in little over

3 years. But not for long. because Mr Reagan is authorizing a formidable recovery
effort in putting 180 billion more dollars into American defense over the next 5 years.
Mr Brezhnev therefore is hoping to stall for tine.

10
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Germany he depends on two levers. One is the Lett's nee-nationalism: it is in the
name of "German national interest." of "patriotism,' that the spokesmen of the pacifist
demonstration have expressed themselves. By treating the American army as the
“occupier," Mr Egon Bahr (fwnder of Ostpolitik) makes himself understood.

The other lever is the Polish crisis. That poses many disadvantages for the Soviet
system (especially the risk of spreading), but by not intervening for a year in

Warsaw, the Kremlin let the German leftists spread the idea that the “Polish renaissance"
would show the possibility of a “liberated“ socialism, 'managing itself' in the East.

“France is not confusing pacifism with peace,‘ said Mr Hitterrand on 24 September.
He cannot deny that France will not be spared the campaign being waged in Germany,
just as it would become involved in any armed aggression against Germany.

Photo Caption

l. p 53. Hr Bhrard Eppler. "In the Pershing matter, German national interest is
identical to Moscow's."

COPYRIGBT: 1981 ”Valeurs actuelles'

9475
C50: 3 100/67

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ft”l(HﬂWCJAI.lﬂﬂE(NVLY

POLITICAL ITALY

PSDI'S LONGO 0N FUTURE ALLIANCE HIT" PSI
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 16 Oct 81 pp 23-25

_[Interview with Pietro Longo, secretary of the P501 [Italian Social Democratic
Party], by Donato Speroni: "Pietro Longo Speaks: United with the PSI [Italian
Socialist Party] Against the DC [Christian Democratic Party]"]

[Text] his most recent exploit was last week, when he refused to budge from the
position that the governing majority should put to the vote a joint foreign
policy bill, thus heading off at its inception a looming convergence between
socialists and communists. During the same week, he praised to the highest the
work of Giovanni Spadolini but he also took the government to task, harshly
criticizing Minister Rino Formica's tax proposals. In sum, PDSI Secretary Pietro
Longo continues being a dark horse and a threat even to his allies. Why and with
what strategy in mind? IL MONDO put these questions to Longo hImScIf.

[Question] Your role in ltalian politics is being likened to that of a priva-
teor. One is never certain where and when you will attack next. ﬁve: the
governments being supported by your party never feel secure in that respect. why
this behavior?

[Answer] Do we convey that impression? We may at times lack the necessary
subtleties of style or adroitness of maneuver. But from the standpoint of basic
substance, we have never been wrong. If anything. it is the others who are now
coming round to the viewpoints of the social democrats.

{Question} With respect to this government, you started out by immediately
attacking Spadolini in depth. Now. you have changed tone. th?

innswcr] I am convinced that our first laic government must be characterized

by determinative action. Spadolini should not be mediating between social groups
like his Christian democratic predecessors. In the beginning, I had the impres-
sion that he was becoming involved in too many mediations.

[Questionl And now?

12

FIHICNﬂﬂCIAI.IEﬂ!(MVLY
FKHI()F11(JAI.USEICNVLY

[Answer] it appears to me that our proddings have been useful. This is the
reason for the great satisfaction I have expressed recently and in my meeting with
the prime minister as well.

[Question] The P501 has always favored the interests of certain categories with
respect to the overall objectives of the fight against inflation. But now that
Spadolini has put the absolute limit of the public deficit in the fight against
inflation at 50,000 billion lire, are you not concerned that this policy line
may pull the rug from under your feet?

[Answer] We too recognize the basic objective set by the government, although

i do not believe $0.000 billion lire of public deficit is necessarily the absolute
limit. just as 1 do not believe in the magical effects of the lb-percent limit on
the rise of prices. We have always defended the weaker categories, like the
retirees, opposing a freezing of automatic indexation that would make them the
sole victims. But we have also proposed that a study be made aimed at rebalancing
the accounts of the lNPS [National Social Security Institute] with new revenues
to come from self-employed workers.

[Question] Your criticisms of the government are presently centered on the
internal revenue service. Why?

[Answer] There are two points of major concern to us. First of all, we are con-
cerned over the intent to restore taxing authority to the municipal administra-
tions. especially as regards the imposition of direct taxes. I can understand
the levying of taxes by a municipal administration in relation to the services it
renders, but 1 believe the overall tax reform criteria should not be touched.

[Question] And the second point?

[Answer] That of the proposed tax on wealth, which upsets the basic concept of
the Italian tax system. wherein taxation is tied to income. Moreover, it would be
a further blow to the housing sector, which is today already in dire crisis.

[Question] But Finance Minister Rino Formica says exactly the opposite. He says
the tax on real property sources of income could in fact have an indifferent
effect on tax revenues, replacing as it would heavy taxes like the INVIM [communal
tax on increases in real estate value] and the registration tax, which restrict
the freedom oi movement of the market.

[Answerl indifferent tax effects exist only in books. Paraphrasing George
Orwell. i would say that there is also psychological taxation to be considered.
The mere announcement of a tax on wealth is sufficient to lower the Italian pro-
pensity iorsaving and investing. A much wiser approach instead might be to reex-
amine all tax rates and revise all tax legislation affecting the housing sector.
But the tax system cannot be based on the institution of a wealth tax, and even
less on such high levels of it, in that, what is being talked about is no less
than 0.50 percent of the building‘s worth, while countries that have this kind
of tax have stopped at 0.10-0.20 percent.

13
FOR OFI-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR(MHH(1A1.USE(NNLY

[Question] There is a feeling that the housing problem will be the PSDI's war-
horse in the months ahead. is that true?

[Answer] 1 would say it is our most pressing concern. Minister Franco Nicolazzi
(Editor's note: Public Works, P801) is fighting like a lion to revive the national
housing sector and mortgage credit facilities, and for a revision of all the
related legislation. Housing is one of the focal points of our party's action and
the reason for our presence in the government.

[Question] What are the major dangers the government will face in the next several
months?

[Answer] Certainly. the passing of the budget bill, which will require unshakable
solidarity on the part of the majority, despite its many emendable provisions, as

the prime minister has also said. It will take political courage. and political
courage we. for our part. have.

[Question] What others?

[Answer] Once the fog has lifted, there may be other reefs ahead. But we must
fight against the psychosis that a government must last not more than 1 year. I
say that a government is based on an agreement among the parties and must con-

tinue tor the duration of this agreement. '

[Question] Who tends to seek early elections?

[Answer] Until now. the majority parties--the DC and the PCI [ltalian Communist
Party]--have always benefited from the climate of radicalization generated by
early elections. This time round, moreover, there is a crisis within each of the
two parties that may induce them to seek internal unity through elections.

[Question] What do you think will come of the presumed renovation of the DC?

[Answerl i don't believe it. The Christian democrats make a lot of noise. talk
a great deal, dress in the sackcloth of Jacopone da Todi and flagellate themselves
continually. But they cannot undo the structural aspects of their problem.

[Question] And what are they?

[Answer] The DC is the Western party that has been in power for the longest per-
iod of time and has exercised it in the most constant manner. Then. the DC has
always represented and tends still to represented the old rural world, the same
world in which the Italian Catholic Church is rooted and which has compelled the
DC to wage the rear-guard battles of the last several years. The DC has not begun
yet to retrieve the laity of our industrial civilization, in which religious
sentiment as well takes on another meaning.

[Question] Is that an irremissible sentencing?

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁORiOFFTCIAL USIICH‘LY

[Answer] I would say it is an objective judgement. For some time to come, and
pending a profound cultural renewal within itself, the DC will have to resign
itself to a no longer preeminent role.

[Question] And what do you think will come out of the PCI's internal debate?

[Answer] A return to that process of revision that has come to a halt in the last
2 years. When we read that 90 percent of the PCI's militants are pro-Soviet, we
can only deduce that the leadership group has lacked the needed courage in the
internal debate. The Polish communists are giving a great example of how debate
can be carried on openly. It is incredible that the PCI cannot do the same in
ltaly. where not even the physical courage of those who have the Russian tanks in
their doorstep is needed.

[Qucsiiun! Within a few months. your party will be holding its congress. Do you
intend to run again for the secretaryship despite the rising internal opposition?

lAnswer! The congress is sovereign, of course. But it is my intention to pursue
the course of the last few years, which has given us, among other things, a not
ephemeral increase in our share of the votes.

[Question] On what do you base that?

lAnswer] He grew even in 1980, when we were not in the government. Our votes are
solidly rooted, as certain forecasting institutes that systematically err in their
accounts where we are concerned should know by now.

lQuestion] But will be your policy proposal to the congress?

'Answer] That we go from words into action. That our consultation pact with the
PSI. which is open to other laic parties as well, be concretized in operative
alliances.

[Question] However, the consultation pact has had poor results to date...

[Answexl That is not true. It has helped to resolve the government crisis and

to bring the laic presidency to maturity. In foreign policy, we have signed, in
Paris. a joint detlarntion within the ambit of Socialist international. Within

the last lew days. economic committees of the two parties have drawn up a joint

document...

Question} But many things still divide you; suffice it to cite the Rome coun-
cil.

:Answer! If we were identical, we would not comprise two different parties.
Now we must address together the issues of the institutional reform.

lonestion] With what proposals on the part of your party?

15
ron OFFICIAL use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

{Answer} We are prepared to discuss everything. From the parliamentary pro-
cedural reiorm, which the Chamber could be addressing now, while the Senate is
debating the uudget bill, to the problems of the magistracy. which contains sec-
tors that are dangerously politicized.

[Question] And the electoral reform?

[Answer] Re are in no way opposed to a revision of the electoral laws-even if
it were a matter oi introducing a S-percent barrier. provided they permit elec-
tion alliances among homogeneous forces. each preserving its own identity. I
know. however, that this proposal is not to the liking of the DC and the PCI,
both of which have everything to lose by way of an electoral law that permits
new groupings... .

COPYRlGHT: lL MONDU 1981

9399
(:50: 3106/30

16
FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
FORIOFFNJAL.US£(MNLY

POLITICAL ITALY

OPINION POLL 0N PSI CRAXI'S STRATEGY, POPULARITY
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 30 Oct 81 pp 12-14
LArticle by Bruna Bellonzi and Roberto Ippolito, with Luca Ciarrocca]

[Text] Opinion poll: Do you like Craxi? The charm of arrogance.
Has setting off polemics and exploiting it so as to stay
at center-stage helped or hurt the socialist leader? IL
MONDO interrogated businessmen, union members, and lear-
ned men, who replied that...

His direct appearances and intervention are rare and preferably deal
with issues of broad international interest. Whatever he says, though,
gets top billing, and anyhow his own team works to keep public atten-
tion centered on him, with sometimes unpredictable results.

Over the past several months,.PSI party secretary Bruno Craxi has ini-
tiated action on a number of fronts. Without going so far as to break
with the communists over the issues of peace and Bast-West relations,
he has brought them under pressure in local coalitions where the PSI
and PCI govern together. When he was charged with being soft on the
socialists whose names appeared on the P2 membership lists, his reac-
tion was to pillory local magistrates for conniving with local powers.
Too)nekicked a dissident group headed by Elie Veltri and Franco Bas-
sani out of the Party, even though they had made the moral issue theirs.
Facing charges that the socialists had been behind offers made by
financiers Orazio Ba asco and Giuseppe Cabassi to take over an inte-
rest in the Rizzoli publishing] group, Craxi's reaction was to level
charges against the company's president, Bruno Visentini, who in con-
cert with other private sector industry figures wanted a piece of the
publishing combine himself. Not even the presiding officer of the
Chamber of Deputies, Nilde Jotti, escaped the socialists' slings and
arrows: the charge: interfering with the work of Parliament.

To what extent, though, doCraxi'scontinually feisty attitude, these
foinings and thrusts that apparently spare nobody, help the PSI? It
is common knowledge that Craxi wants to be prime minister in the wake
of an electoral turnabout that would swell his party's ranks. Is that
goal closer or more distant now than it was 2 months ago? To find the
answer to this question -- a critical one in Italian politics, IL
MONDO questioned a sizable sampling of our opinion leaders: intellec-

l7
FOIIHFKJALlﬁiEONLY
F03¢M$KJAL|HHEONLY

tuals, university professors, communications experts, businessmen, and
labor leaders. The result is clear -- at least from one angle: whe-
ther or not the interviewees shared his views, whether or not they
applauded his behavior, Craxi is perceived as the current season's
top political star, as the one man who can alter the balance of power
between the two major parties and actually manage to update our insti-
tutions. [Wen those who are not sure that Craxi has succeeded -- in
the space of 2 months (September and October) -- in checking every ad-
versary move, and thus won consensus in his Party again, will admit
that being in the limelight can be very advantageous. nThey say it's
better to badmouth somebody than not to say anything. And so both
supporters and detractors, but also those who are non-partisan but
merely relay the news, give him exposure whether or not they are con-
scious of it," says historian Piero Melograni.

Sociologist Franco Ferrarotti, though, has no doubt about it: "Craxi's
popularity is unquestionably on the rise." There is a specific reason
for such certainty: "This is partly due," argues Perrarotti, "to the
unpredictability of Craxi's next move. The surprise factor always
gives you the edge."

The notion that publicity automatically endows the product with confi-
dence, however, has yet to be proved. Demonstrating that fact is the
disparity of views that emerges from IL HONDO's poll, and finds full
confirmation in the Opposing analyses of two well-known Italian publi-
cists. Says Armando Testa: "I find that Craxi works. As a public
figure, he knows how to put himself across. I think that he has been
losing support recently, but he's the type who can quickly win it back."
There are, however, those who argue the negative effect of message
overkill. One such is Giulio Cesare Italiani, who maintains: “The
image is unquestionably tarnished. The continued public presence, the
unvarying attitude, always the same arrogance and cocksureness even-
tually tend to erode credibility. The mushrooming attention from the
mass media eventually gets irritating.”

In spite of the fact that Bettino Craxi has been a front-rank leader
for a number of years, he has just recently been perceived as some-
thing new on the Italian political stage. The Socialist Party secre-
tary, according to Republican Giorgio Liverani, national secretary of
the UIL, "has given the PSI a new image." ano Vigano, leader of the
independent civil service union, UNSA, calls him "a man of courage
who has breathed new life into the political dialectic"; Socialist
publisher Adelina Tattilo finds him "the new man in Italian politics:
he's a leader who has both charisma and chutzbah.“

Some argue that the novelty lies mainly in the way Craxi plays politics.
Massimo Severo Giannini, ex-minister for public administration, for one,
says: "The political parties must play politics for real money, and

Craxi has already struck out along that road; pragmatism is one of
his dominant traits."

This is a point in his favor admitted even by those who are not on his
side. Textile magnate Giancarlo Lombardi avers: "Right now Craxi's

18
FOI(MTﬂ3ALlEE1MNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the man who is getting down to cases on all the issues, and so all
the criticism lands on his head, making him the victim of a typical
Italian contradiction: we are hesitant to go along with overly
abrupt ways of managing things -- Ronald Reagan- style or Craxi-style
-- but then we turn right around and complain that nobody makes any
decisions."

The president of Federexport, Celso Battiston, adds: "No question but
that the PSI and its people in government, the ministers, have shown
themselves very accessible, very attentive, and determined to do their
jobs to the best of their ability, and the business community likes
this."

And indeed it would appear from the results of IL MONDO'S poll that
the nation's board-rooms are watching with interest a kind of politi-
cal behavior that has all the earmarks of efficient management.
Attilio Viziano, president of Confedilizia, says: "Its behavior may
look pretty brassy, but if it manages to fill the roles of respon-
sible and efficiency-minded European socialists, it can only be a
help." Felice Mortillaro, director of Federmeccanica, adds: “Craxi
has a remarkable flair for striking at the heart of political issues,
even though one cannot share all his views.’I

0n the other side, Gastone Sciavi, national secretary of the United
Federation of Chemical Workers, takes a dim view of Craxi, because "he
comes on like some kind of political manager, thereby making the whole
concept of politics the poorer." When it comes to strategy, there

are several schools of thought on the innovations Craxi has made.
Renato Buoncristiani, former vice president of Confindustria, says:
"Aside from a few excesses, Craxi has made a major contribution to a
return to equilibrium in the political system." And Salvatore Vali-
tutti, a university lecturer, believes that "Craxi has got the right
idea, because he is trying, through a reform program, to stem the

tide of ungovernability." To Giuseppe Agostini, the Social Democratic
secretary of the UIL, "tying in with the tradition of the European
socialist parties gives the PSI a real chance to run the government."

Gianni Baget 00220, a card-carrying socialist priest feuding with the
Curia, feels that "while it is a good thing to make a clean break with
. political stagnation, the starring role Craxi wants the PSI to take on,
while it is winning sympathy and votes for the Party in new areas, is
in conflict with the Party's historical roots, which reach down into
the left. II

Another to point out the inherent contradictions in Craxi's strategy

is Giorgio Liverani. In his view, Craxi combines independence with a
determination to get the secular area into line behind a turn-taking
government. But in fact "this turn-taking notion is postponed inde-
finitely, thanks to the excessive conflict and belligerency Craxi is
stirring up on the left." Decidedly negative were the opinions voiced
by still another spokesman for organized labor: Silvano Risi, regional
COIL boss for Campania, and by Communist intellectual Giuseppe Vacca.

19
FORCWTKJALIEHBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As Ridi sees it, “Craxi is aiming at moving the PSI into the power
position thus far held by the DC, thus assuming socialist hegemony and
thereby shattering the leftist front, meaning that the entire left
could, in practical terms, grind to a halt." Vacca holds that "the
swing position the PSI holds between the DC and the PCI is being
sapped by too much on—and-off-again operation, and is shifting the
Socialist Party too far toward terrain which does not traditionally
belong to it."

There is no shortage, either, of people who believe they can see wav-
ering in the political line. Gianfranco Pasquino, publisher of IL
MULINO, says: "If the strategy means restoring balance on the left
for a government of left-wing parties, I am for it. But I get the
feeling that it is not quite so clearcut, after all, and I would not
rule out the chances that it might be just a smokescreen to cloak a
moderate stabilization plan that would freeze the PCI out." Accord-
ing to Melograni, the people who need to comb out their fuzzy think-
ing are the voters, and particularly the Socialist rank and file.
Businessman Paolo Buffetti complains that Craxi did not stick to his
Original plan, but has switched to stealing votes from the DC with an
eye toward heading up a moderate government.

Even Craxi's aggressiveness evokes conflicting responses. For Agos-
tini "the unseemly haste to speak out on certain isaues makes subse-
quent changes of course inevitable." Ecologist Fulco Pratesi maintains:
"Looking for an opening and trying to give the Party a burst of speed
is certainly right and proper; but when it comes to the way he does
it -- elbowing the other runners out of the way —- well, there I say
no!"

"The factOr that concerns me most deeply,“ Pasquino adds, "is the

way the Party is silenced, both in internal debate and in its rela-
tions with the broadest reaches of socialism.ll According to Liverani
there is in Craxi "an overdose of sectarian zeal, of brashness, and

a lack of the layman's mindset: he never has any doubts." Even more
outspoken is the cerrcspondent far EL PERIODICO of Barcelona, Possend
Domenech, who sees Craxi's offhandedness making him "the leftist
version of Andreotti." But from Craxi's supporters, Adelina Tattilo
and Giuseppe Salcmi, president of Confesercenti, comes the retort that
of course Craxi draws a lot of criticism: "It happens to anybody who
makes it big," they say.

The problem, however, is not merely one of style. Craxi is charged
with having built a power machine alltoo reminiscent of the one the

DC had. Lucio Dc Carlini, a top communist labor leader, waxes a

bit ironic over the results of this offhand behavior: "I don't be-
lieve Craxi's game is worth the candle. It's all very well for him
to set up shop in competition with the DC, but when it comes to cer-
tain relationships between politics and high finance, between govern-
ment and the economic powers that be, the DC certainly has more exper-
icnce and more capital."

20
F03<ﬂTﬂJALtBE(MﬂX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Worrying a lot of those interviewed by IL HONDO are three recent spi-
sodcs: economic ties with banker Roberto Calvi, the P2 scandal, and
the CORRIERB DELLA SBRA case. "Of course,” argues Maria Delfina Bonada,
a correspondent for the French weekly LE MATIN, "Italians are used

to seeing their governing class involved in shady deals. This time,
though, those deals involve the secretary of the Socialist Party, and

it is only proper that public opinion should not be quite so forgic-
inn.“

More than one of those who, in response to the pollsters' questions,
maintained thatCraxi's popularity was on the wane, backed up their
answers with explicit references to the moral issue. Baget Bozzo
stated that, in Liguria, the link between P2 and the appointment of
socialists Lad made a negative difference. And two spokesmen for or-
ganized labor, from opposite sides of the fence, Luca Borgomeo (CISL)
and Silvano Ridi (CGIL), also citing their personal experience, main-
tain that Craxi came out of the 92 scandal weakened.

Specifically, on the untoward effect of the Socialist Party secretary's
alleged involvement in the controversial attempt to take over the Riz-
zoli publishing house, a lot of businessmen take a very dim View in-
deed. De Tomaso, for one, says: "Whatever becomes of IL CORRIERE is
indeed extremely important, but this in no way justifies taking steps
in conflict with the law on publishing to make it come out right."

A sizable share of those polled, however, is of the opinion that,

aside from any momentary shadow over his reputation, Craxi's stock is
not slipping. In fact, when you add up the pro and con columns,the
forecasts for a Craxi decline and a Craxi boom work out just about

even, no matter how you slice them.

How the Poll Was Conducted

These were the questions:

1. 0f recent weeks Bettina Craxi has been at the eye of a storm of
controversy erupting over several issues: the magistracy, the P2
scandal, relations with the PCI, local government coalitions, govern-

ability, and Party management. What is your Opinion of the Socialist
secretary's behavior and his political strategy?

2. In your view, has Craxi gained or lost popularity and consensus
among the voters over the past several months?

This was the result: 0n the matter of popularity and consensus:
Lost: 14 Gained: 12 About the same: 6 Don't know: 1

Who responded to the poll~takers7

Giuseppe Agostini, national secretary of the UIL; Gianni Baget Bozzo,

priest, historian for the DC; Celso Battiston, president of Federex-
port; Maria Delfina Bonada, correspondent for the Paris MATIN; Luca

21
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORCW?KJALUEE|NVLY

Borgonco, CISL provincial secretary; Claudio Bruno, FIOM/CGIL pro-
vincial secretary; Paolo Buffetti, businessman; Renato Buoncristiani,
vice president of ANCE (building contractors); Carlo Cassola, presi-
dent of the League for Unilateral Disarmament; Lucio De Carlini, sec-
retary of the CGIL Transport Workers; Alejandro De Tomaso, businessman;
Rossend Domenech, correspondent for the Barcelona EL PERIODICO; Franco
Ferrarotti, sociologist; Giancarlo Ferretto, vice president of Confin-
dustria; Ermanno Gorrieri, author of ”The Earnings Jungle"; Giulio
Cesare Italiani, publicist; Vito Laterza, publisher; Giorgio Liverani,
national secretary of the UIL; Giancarlo Lombardi, vice president,
Federtessile; Luigi Lucchini, president, Brescia Industry Association;
Piero Melograni, historian; Felice Mortillaro, director, Federneccanica;

Gianfranco Pasquino,mana3ing editor, IL MULINO; Fulco Pratesi, re-
sident of the Italian World Wildlife Federation; Silvano Ridi, GIL

regional secretary; Giovanni Salemi, president of Confesercenti;
Gastone Sclavi, national secretary, Chemical Workers; Adelina Tattilo,
publisher; Armando Testa, advertising; Giuseppe Vacca, director of
RAI; Salvatore Valitutti, lecturer on the history of political doc-
trines; Enzo Vigano, secretary-general, National Independent Labor
Union; Attilio Viziano, president of Confedilizia.

...And Who Did Not

Alberto Aleotti, president of Farmunione; Guido Arton, vice president
of Confindustria; Enzo Badioli, president of ConfcoOperative; Marzio
Bastianoni, national secretary, CISL Government Employees Union;
Adriano Buzzati Traverso, scientist; Francesco Cingano, managing di-
rector, Banca Commerciale Italiana; Augusto Del Noce, professor of
history of political doctrines; Enrico Filippi, Vice president of the
Istituto San Paolo; Luigi Frey, president of the Banca Popolare, Milan;
Manlio Germozzi, president of Confartigianato; Nine Pagani, national
secretary of the CISL; Onelio Prandini, president of the Cooperative
League; Cesare Romiti, managing director, FIAT; Lucio Rondelli,
managing directorof Credito Italiano; Domenico Rosati, president of
ACLl; Pietro Scoppola, historian; Giuseppe Spinella, president of
Confapi; Antonino Zichichi, physicist.

corvkzunr: IL MONDO 1981
0182

C80: 3104/38

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtﬂmﬂﬂALI£ﬂ50NLV

POLITICAL ITALY

DAILY PRESS LISTING BY POLITICAL PRESSURE GROUP CONTROL
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 30 Oct 81 pp 20-29

[Article by Vittorio Borelli, Davide Paolini, Renzo Rosati, and Sandro
Seccianni]

[Text] Mapping the Fourth Estate. Who really controls the press?
The big chains control a majority of the big dailies. But
who shares the rest of the pie? IL MONDO has drawn the
first map of Italy's newspapers, of their owners, and
of their circulation. And it turns out that....

D-day was set for Thursday 15 October. By that deadline, every pub~
lishcr in Italy was to have turned in to the government a set of data
to which only a few insiders were privy: who were the real owners of
the papers, what their press-runs and paid circulation were, and the
current state of their finances. This is a clearly stipulated exer-
cise which must be performed in order to qualify, under publishing
law, for the eagerly awaited government subsidy. Despite the dead-
line, not all these documents have as yet hit the desks at Palazzo
Chigi. 0n the other hand, the political parties are warring more fu-
riously than ever for control of the press, charging each other with
trying to raffle off publishers and editors, and invoking both old
and new economic potentates.

Does this mean that it is impossible to draw the map of publishing
power in Italy? It MONDO has conducted an unheard-of inquiry: it
set out to put together the ownership aspects of all the daily news-
papers (exccpt the sports press and the foreign-language papers); it
set about pinpointing their political orientation and their strategy,
questioning their managing editors to that end; it noted their cir-
culation figures, and then it probed into relations with the adver-
tising agencies (see box, p. 25). From these data IL MONDO recon-
structed the corporate identities of the five major publishers.

However, precisely because in the present circumstances the statements
of those directly involved (managers and editors) do not invariably
bear any direct relation to the facts, IL MONDO, in order to come up

23
FORCWTKJAleﬂEONLY
HNIOFFKJALUSECWHN

with as realistic a map as possible, also sought the opinions of a
panel of experts: George Armstrong, Giorgio Becca, Mario Isnenzhi,
Stefano Passigli, Marco Sigiani, and Francesco Siliati (see box, p 21).
On one point their opinions were unanimous: it is always harder to
prove direct ties between newspaper mastheads and the traditional
political alignments. The splintering and the intricate connections
that typefy the Italian political scene are directly reflected in the
press. In other words, it would be impossible today to duplicate the
1968 analysis done by such a scholar as Angelo Del Boca who, in his
essay entitled "Newspapers in Trouble," sorted all the dailies into
five categories: right (eight of them, or 11 percent of the total
press-run), center-right (27 papers, or 18 percent), center (18 pa-
pers, or 26 percent), center-left (17 papers, or 26 percent), and
left (5 papers, or 5 percent). Del Boca also noted that the Catholic
area, then the voice of the Christian Democrats (DC) held ten papers
(the equivalent of 8.2 percent of the total press-run).

The experts agreed that newspapers today are not tied so much to one
party or one clearly defined alignment, but tend to run with factions,
splinter-groups, and special-interest groups that overlap party lines.
So pervasive is this behavior that Sigiani and Siliato, of the Index
research institute, believe that the only valid criterion for inter-
preting the flood-tide of news and for singling out the interests be-
hind it is to check on its behavior day by day, on every single issue.
This is certainly a different approach, but even so it is not of it-
self sufficient to provide us with a political X-ray of the press

or to clarify the real meaning of the operations now afoot among the
newspaper chains, the economic power groups, and the political parties.

Besides the CORRIERE DELLA SERA, recent comment has centered on IL
GLOBO, the business daily that was scheduled to appear in January 1982.
Ownership of the new daily, which will be run by Michele Tito, re-
portedly will be distributed as follows: 30 percent to Callisto Tanzi,
owner of Parmalat; 11 percent to Francesco Caporossi, a building
contractor; 10 percent to Milan's Ipsoa publishing house; and smaller
interests to be held by real estate tycoon Giuseppe Cabassi, National
Agricultural Bank board member Aurelio Merle, builder Vincenzo Romagnoli,
industrialist Alfredo Mignini, and socialist financier Sergio Cusani.
Newspaper business insiders, however, argue that the GLOBO operation
was conceived and supported with pressure on the banks by Leonardo

Di Donna, vice president of ENI, and that therefore Di Donna's party,
the PSI, is the real godfather of the new business daily.

This active role played by the political parties in the ownership of
newspapers may add some particularly helpful overtones to the recon-
struction —- sketchy though it is -- which IL MONDO, with the help of
the experts, has put together to show the political leanings of the
major newspaper chains and of their papers (Rizzoli-CORRIERE DELLA SBRA,
Caracciolo-Mondadori), as well as our effort to show graphically (see
page 23) those of the major nationally distributed dailies: LA STAMPA,
IL MESSAGGERO, IL GIORNALE NUOVO, IL RBSTO DBL CARLINO, LA NAZIONE, IL
SECOLO XIX, IL TEMPO, IL MATTINO, LA GAZZETTA DEL MBZZOGIORNO, IL
GIORNALE DI SICILIA, and IL GIORNO.

2h

FOR(”WKJALIH“EONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[BOX, page 21]

The Five Umpires”

To try to give an unbiassed answer, and one that would at the same
time reflect a broad range of opinion, IL MONDO thought it would be
helpful to call in five experts: Giorgio Boca, journalist, column-
ist for LA REPUBBLICA and L'ESPRESSO; George Armstrong, correspond-
ent in Italy for THE MANCHESTER GUARDIAN; Mario Isnengh1,who lectures
on the history of journalism at Padua University; Stefano Passigli,
who teaches administrative -science at Florence University; Marco
Sigiani and Francesco Siliato, research workers at Index, a Milan-
based institute specializing in analysis of the mass media (actually
it is a left-wing cooperative which has worked for, among other
clients, RAI (the radio and TV corporation) and the editorial board
of CORRIERE DELLA SERA).

The five experts gave us their views on the major publishing groups
and on the major Italian dailies on the basis of various evaluation
criteria. Becca, particularly, ran an analysis on the strategy of
owners and publishers, citing concrete examples of their political
backgrounds. Becca, too, as a news veteran, tried to adduce evidence
for the trend in relations between editorial staff and political
parties. Isnenghi, as an outside observer, concentrated on the his-
torical analysis of the daily newspaper as a political and cultural
product. Siliato and Sigiani, from Index, assessed the way the papers
take sides on specific issues.

Passigli (who was one of the experts called in to give an opinion in
journalist Ernesto Bettiza's suit against CORRIERE DELLA SERA, then
run by Piero Ottone, for an alleged change of political line), in-
stead of coming up with the traditional broad-area political analysis.
gave us a sociological survey: the capacity of daily papers and also
of groups to perceive social changes, and the level of adherence to
the values of an advanced industrial society.

Armstrong, applying the handbook of British journalists to the letter,
chose to talk about newspapers and newspapermen on the basis of purely
professional standards: completeness of information, reliability of
stories.

25
ron 0mm]. we ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Carraciolo Chain - L'ESPRESSO publishing Co.

Here we find seven dailies, one weekly, and two wire services: it

has grown into no puny empire under Carlo Caracciolo, through L'BS-
rassso publishing. The "Editoriale' [publishing house] owns L'ESPRESSO
and its 300,000 paid circulation. Here, though, are its interests in
other dailies: 50 percent of LA REPUBBLICA,100 percent of TIRRBNO in
Leghorn, 100 percent of PROVINCIA PAVBSE and of GAZZETTINO DI VIGBVANO,
48 percent of Padua's MATTINO and Treviso's TRIBUNA, and 48 percent of
the Sassari-based NUOVA SARDBGNA chain.

The chain also owns 100 percent of AGL, a Rome-based clearinghouse for
local papers, and 50 percent of QUOTIDIANI ASSOCIATI, a marketing and
features syndicate run by the former deputy managing editor of SECOLO
XIX, Vittorio Bruno. The other 50 percent interest in QUOTIDIANI ASSO-
CIATI is held by Giuseppe Gorjux, a minority shareholder in the GAZ-
ZETTA DEL MBZZOGIORNO. In all, Caracciolo controls -- through his
holdings -- 340 million daily paper sales a day. -

EDITORIALS announced an increase in its corporate capital from 1.5

to 4 billion lire. The operation does not contemplate any influx of
new partners. Here are the share-holdings and the new tab for each
shareholder: Carlo Caracciolo, 51.5 percent, 1,287,500,000 lire;
Eugenio Scalfari, 22.8 percent, 570 million; Aldo Bassetti (through
Padana Investments, in which financier Orazio Bagnasco is a partner),
5.4 percent, 135 million; Vittorio Olcese (a Republican member of
Parliament), 5 percent, 125 million; Claudio Cavazza (owner of Sigma
Tau), 5.5 percent, 130,500,000 lire; Mario Ciancio (Sicilian publisher)
3.8 percent, 95 million; Lio Rubini, 1 percent, 25 million; the Busi
estate 5 percent, 125 million.

The capital increase, however, still has some rough edges to be rounded
off. Missing are the requisite government permits. And the board of
directors is still mulling over the channels and timing of payments.
There will be spread-out payment plans (there is talk of 2 to 3 years)
for the major stockholders.

Some new moves are under consideration, others have apparently been
shelved. The plan to start a daily in Perugia is still afloat, and
there are those who predict an expansion into the South, aimed more
or less toward the Naples daily MATTINO and the GIORNALE DI SICILIA:
there is, however, still pervasive perplexity.

What do the experts think about this chain? On one count, they all
agree: it is aiming at a more homogeneous and more progressive concen-
tration. Passigli thinks that "Caracciolo is throwing all his weight
behind a reformist plan, and consequently the orientation of his pa—
pers will be clearer." A few distinctions among the chain's papers
come from a man who has actually worked with Caracciolo for years.
Giorgio Bocca says, in fact: "If Eugenio Scalfari, managing editor

of LA REPUBBLICA, still shows that he believes that the PCI is evolving

26
FORIOHHCJALIEHEONLY
INMROFFKJAI.USElMNLY

in the direction of democracy, that's one thing: but Livio Zanetti,
who runs L'ESPRESSO, has never put much stock in that notion. Zanet-
ti's brand of socialism harks back to Antonio Giolitti." The experts
from Index note that even LA REPUBBLICA occasionally blurs its line:
"This paper, which hews to a line closer to the PCI than to the PSI,
is trying, for instance, in its Milan insert, to lean toward the So-
cialists, maybe because in the capital of Lombardy it is Craxi who
holds the high ground."

Armstrong's opinion of the paper's professional calibre, though is de-
vastating: "The letters to the editore are a string of denials. In
our shop there would already be a few editors' wigs on the green."

Rizzoli-CORRIERE DELLA SERA.

Following the Treasury decision last August that authorized the capi-
tal expansion (for a total of 153 billion lire), while denying Centrale,
which holds 40 percent of the stock, the right to vote it, ownership
now is split this way: Angelo Rizzoli, 40 percent; Bruno Tassan Din's
Fincoriz, 10.2 percent; Rothschild Bank of Zurich, 9.8 percent, and
Centralc Finanziaria 40 percent. But just the other day we witnessed
the start of a fight among the political parties and the money inter-
ests over control of CORRIERB DELLA SERA and the biggest newspaper
chain in Italy. Actually, aside from CORRIERE DELLA SBRA, the chain
includes: IL CORRIERE D'INFORMAZIONB, L'OCCHIO, and IL CORRIERE
MEDICO; some of the major Italian periodicals: LA DOMBNICA DEL COR-
RIERE, L'EUROPEO, OGGI, AMIGA, ANNABELLA, IL MONDO, and CAPITAL. In
addition, through LB NUOVE EDIZIONB SPORTIVB, wholly controlled by the
chain, it manages LA GAZZETTA DBLLO SPORT and owns all the shares in
the Trieste daily PICCOLO. CORRIBRE DELLA SERA Publishing [Editoriale]
also owns 51 percent of Edime (publisher of the Naples MATTINO), 100
percent of Cima Brenta (owner of the Bolzano ALTO ADIGE) and 60 per-
cent of Ligure Publishing (whose flagship is Genoa's daily IL LAVORO.

The experts agree again on the Rizzoli-CORRIBRE chain: "It's an ex-
panding galaxy," says Passigli: "A contradiction aggravated by fac-
tions." Bocca sees it as a "chain that has come a long way in the past
10 years. IL CORRIERE favored [Berlinguer's] historic compromise with
Piero Ottone, went pro-socialist with Franco Di Bella, and now is in

a sort of moderate, safety-net limbo." In Isnenghi'seye,IL CORRIERE
"has its own ephemeral line, which is a lot less clear-cut than when
Ottone was running the paper. The readers, though, are slow in grasp-
ing the changes.n

And what does the foreignyness corpsthink? "I1 CORRIERE swooped down
on the P2 scandal like a tornado," replies George Armstrong: as of
now, the CORRIBRE is untouchable. Of course it lost a lot when Ottone
left, but its coverage of Rome is absolutely tops in the country."

Mondadori

Even with its 559 billion lire a: billing that makes it the second
biggest chain in Italy, after Rizzoli, Mondadori has kept its family

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centered corporate structure. Its managing director is Mario Formenton,
53, married to Cristina Mondadori, and control of the chain is in the
hands of Arnoldo Mondadori's two daughters: Cristina and Minna, but
tied up in a trust. Their holdings, divided into two equal packages,
represent 57.9 percent of the common stock (the company's stock is
split about 50—50 between common stock which carries voting rights,

and preferred stock, which does not).

Up to now it has been impossible for anybody outside the family to get
a toehold in the management of the publishing house, to the point
where Giovanni Fabbri, president of Fabocart and the biggest paper
mills in Italy, even though he had acquired 28.7 percent of Giorgio
Mondadori's shares, gave up trying to get one of his own people a seat
on the board of directors. The paper king was treated almost like a
burglar, and rumors which we could not confirm have it that Fabbri's
shares were turned over to Roberto Calvi. Other holders of common
stock have likewise been relegated to a role several removes from the
decision-making process: La Pas di Jody Vendor, which controlls 10
percent, Mediobanca, which holds 2.8 percent, and the estate of Bruno
Mondadori, which holds only 0.6 percent.

The chain's great strength lies in its magazines, which cover every
available inch of the market and bill an annual 87.5 billion lire. To
this is added 86.8 billion in advertising revenues from various papers.
For some years, though, Mondadori has been moving cautiously into the
daily newspaper field: first with its purchase of 50 percent of the
stock of the REPUBBLICA publishing company, and last year with a buy
into the GAZZBTTA Corporation, of which it controls 75 percent: this
company publishes the GAZZETTA DI MANTOVA, the GAZZETTA DI REGGIO
EMILIA, and the GAZZETTA DI MODENA. For the time being this move has
yielded results not quite so brilliant as expected: as against the
7,000 to 8,000 guaranteed circulation in Reggie as well as in Modena,
as of now they have not passed the 4,000—copy barrier per city. Some
reports put the figures still lower: never more than 2,000 copies in
Reggie.

These shakedown problems do not seem to have scared the people in
charge of the daily sector: already registered with the courts in
the proper places are the mastheads of the GAZZETTEs of Porli, Fer-
rara, Rimini, and Rovigo, and plans are already afoot for Novara.
Also on the boards is a plan for another printing plant, in addition
to the one already rolling in Modena.

"Even though some of the papers are different from one another and
circulate in disparate areas," says Gaetano Tumiati, right-hand man
to Piero Ottone, general manager of the daily paper division, “I
think we can define ourselves as non-confessional, rooted in the
western area, and ready to look at anything new that turns up."

Not all the experts IL MONDO questioned, though, would share that view.
"As a whole, Mondadori is a conservative chain, with the exception of
PANORAMA," says Passigli. "The chain, for instance, does not use its

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enormous influence in the women's press to report on social changes
and to spread them on a broader scale." To Isnenghi,though, "Monda-
dori is sensitive only to market stimuli." Becca's opinion was
just the same: "The chain tends to make deals with the political
parties it thinks it can do good business with: right now it has a
watchful eye on the communists.“

Rusconi

The publishing empire is shared by Edilio Rusconi Publishing (the com-
pany that owns CENTA, EVA EXPRESS, GIOIA, GOIELLI, RAKAM, GBNTE MOROTI)
and Rusconi Associated Publishers (who publish GENTE VIAGGI, SCIBNZA,
and VITA NUOVA, SUPERBASKET, and TUTTOMOTO). The chain's interests
include a book publishing house, commercial television, and film-
making.

“When I got started, back in 1957, all I had was 50 million lire in
cash as severance pay from RizzOIL,"says Edilio Rusconi, the latest
big publisher—owner, out of the Mondadori, Rizzoli, and Longanesi
stables. Ownership of the chain is held entirely by the family. Son
Albert, 37, is managing director and vice president, and is also in
charge of financial matters for all the chain's operations.

"The Rusconi magazines," says Passigli, "are decidedly conservative
in tone: order and stability is their platform. They are suspicious
of any and all social change." Becca goes further: nRusconi is
everything middle-of—the-road: it IS the DC."

Confindustria-AGA. The paper empire run by the federation of indus-
trial leaders has shrunken considerably over the past 10 years. Its
AGA chain (a daily wire service that provides political coverage from
Rome) has shut down several dailies (GIORNALE DI BBRGAMO and GAZZBTTA
DI FERRARA), while others no longer subscribe to AGA. Right now
Confindustria owns, through Aedificatio (a corporation whose managing
director is textile tycoon Giuseppe Bordogna): 1. IL SOLE-24 ORB
publishing, which puts out the daily IL SOLE-24 ORE (more than 100,000
sales daily); 2- the Semi Corporation (a minority block is held by
Assolombardo, the Federation of Tuscan Industrialists,'and the Federa-
tion of Veneto Businessmen), whose director is Corrado Notari, who
publishes the weekly MONDO ECONOMICO; the SIPI corporation, which owns
75 percent of the AGA wire service (whose managing director is Aldo
Diamanti). The remaining 25 percent of AGA's stock is held by nine
provincial dailies: LA GAZZETTA DI PARMA, L'ARENA DI VERONA, LA
GAZZETTA DI MANTOVA, IL MESSAGGERO VENETO, IL GIORNALE DI VICENZAL
ESPRESSO SERA in Catania, ALTO ADIGE in Bolzano, and the other 81x
papers using the same registration) with local distribution and the
advertising production and placement monitored by IL MONDO for all

S8 dailies.

ALTO ADIGE (Bolzano). Corporate name: Seta. Shareholders: 100 per-
centRizzoli-CORRIERE through Cima Brenta. Director: Mine Durand.
Politicalstance: "It's a daily newspaper that gives space to every-
body, from the right to the far left." Paid circulation: 35 thousand

29
FOR(IWKJALI£HEONLY
FOR(XTKJALlﬂﬂEONLV

[Box, p 25]
The Advertising Barons

Every year our daily papers and magazines split up more than 600 bil-
lion lire (revenues cover from 40 to 60 percent of their costs). But
this extra income is not used solely to cover part of their costs:

in some cases it is the advertising space buyers who make it possible
for a newspaper to publish, by means of an advance and guaranteed
minimum buys; in others (as the scandal over Sipra, which has a mono-
poly over TV advertising, showed) space- and time-buyers keep papers
alive that could not possibly make it in the open market.

592 (Societa per la Pubblicita Editoriale). This company belongs
entirely to the family of Oscar Maestro, whose holdings include shares
in IL RESTO DBL CARLINO and LA NAZIONE. In 1980 it did 78.2 billion
lire worth of billing. In addition to CARLINO and NAZIONE, it handles
IL GIORNO, IL TEMPO, IL HATTINO, LA GAZZETTA DBL SUD, L'ADIGE, and

IL GIORNALE DI BRBSCIA.

PubliKompass. Itcdi holds 51 percent of its shares, and IFI holds 49:
both are members of the Agnelli group. In 1981 it did 45 billion lire
in billing. In addition to LA STAMPA and STAMPA SERA, it serves ALTO
ADIGE, IL PICCOLO, NUOVA SARDBGNA, and the GAZZBTTA trio: Mantua,
Modena, and Reggio Emilia.

SIPRA. RAI owns it in toto. In 1980 its billing for dailies and pe-
riodicals was 129,271 billion lire. Among Sipra's biggest clients:
L'OCCHIO, AVANTI, AVVENIRE, GIORNALB NUOVO, PABSB SBRA, LAVORO, MANI-
FESTO, POPOLO, ORA, UNITA, UMANITA, and OPINIONS.

SPI (Societa per la pubblicita in Italia). 90-percent controlled by
Lausanne-based Publicitas s.a., which in turn is controlled by somebody
else -- nobody knows exactly whom-n-it is sole owner of SIP, another
space-time outfit formerly owned by Montedison. In 1980 it ﬁlled

75 billion lire. Among SPI's big clients are LA GAZZETTA DEL MBZZO-
GIORNO, BRESCIA 0661, IL GAZZETTINO, IL GIORNALE NUOVO, L'UNITA, PABSE
SERA, IL MESSAGGBRO, LA norms, and IL SOLE-24 one.

MANZONI. Controlled by the Caracciolo conglomerate, it billed $8.4
billion in 1980. In addition to LA REPUBBLICA and other in-family
papers, it serves L'ARENA, L‘ECO DI BERGAMO, and LA GAZZETTA DI PARMA.

The Rizzoli group handles its own advertising (in 1980 it billed 210.5

billion), as does the Mondadori group (86.5 billion), which also owns
the CPS, which in 1980 billed 23.5 billion.

30
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FORCFFKJALLSE(NHN

in Trentino and Alto Adige. Advertising: Publixompass.

ARENA (Verona). Title: Athesis. Shareholders: the publishing com-'
pany is controlled by a group of Verona and Vicenza businessmen. The
major packages are owned by Pilade Riello, Giancarlo Ferretto, Gian-
carlo Ferro, and Guglielmo Bertani. Director: Gilberto Formenti.
Political position: "Somewhere in an area ranging from the (liberal)
center-right to the center-left." Sales: 40,000 copies distributed
in Verona and throughout the province. Advertising: Manzoni.

AVVENIRB (Milan). Title: Nuova Bditoriale Italians. Shareholders:
the corporation is wholly controlled by the Church and the president
is Monsignor Ersilio Tonini, Archbishop of Ravenna. Director: Pier
Giorgio Liverani. Political position: Catholic. Average daily
circulation: 79,908 copies distributed all over Italy. Concessionary
agent: Sipra.

BRESCIA OGGI (Brescia). Title: Cooperative 28 Luglio. Shareholders:
74 members of the July 28 Cooperative (all are reporters and typogra-
phcrs who work on the paper). Manager: Sergio Milani. Political po-
sition: "Left. The paper speaks to a readership ranging from the DC
left to the PCI left." Circulation: 18,000, with distribution in
Brescia, throughout the province, and in neighboring areas. Adver-
tising: Spi.

CORRIERE DEL GIORNO (Taranto). Title Edital spa. Shareholders: 100
percent held by the Christian Democrat Party (DC). The title is leased
to Edital, headed by Paolo Sela, president of the Taranto Chamber of
Commerce. Director: Vittorio Pollini. Political position: "Chris-
tian Democrat." Paid circulation: 16,000 copies, distributed in

the city of Taranto and in the province, with offices in Lecce, Brin-
disi, Matera, Potenza, Bari, and Calabria. Advertising: Spi.

CORRIERE D‘INFORMAZIONE (Milan). Title: Editorials del Corriere
della Sera - Gruppo Rizzoli. Director: Lorenzo Pilogallo. Politi-
cal position: "We do not cater to any specific political readership.
Our columns are open to all parties except the fascists. We never
write political editorials of our own." Average daily circulation:
49,948 copies sold in Milan, Lombardy, and small numbers sold through-
out northern Italy. Advertising: in-house.

CORRIERE MERCAKTILE-GAZZETTA DEL LUNBDI (Genoa). Title: Cooperativa
giornalisti e poligrafici. Shareholders: 100 percent of the title
and plant is owned by the cooperative. Director: Mimmo Angeli.
Political position: "The five-party area.’I Paid circulation: 25,000
for CORRIBRE MERCANTILE and 140,000 for GAZZETTA DBL LUNBDI; both

are distributed in Genoa and throughout the province. Advertising:
Sipra.

CORRIERE DELLA SERA (Milan). Title: Editorials del Corriere della
Sera - Gruppo Pizzoli. Director: Alberto Cavallari. Political po-
sition: "An independent daily newspaper." Average daily paid cir-
culation: 575,446 copies all over Italy. Advertising: in-house.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORCNVKJALLBE(MHN

ESPRESSO SERA (Catania). Title: Sem. Shareholders: 50 percent inter-
cst held by Mario Ciancio, the other 50 percent by the Cosentino family
of Apulia. Director: Giuseppe Simili. Political position: "Ours is

a liberal paper." Paid circulation: 6,000-7,000 copies distributed

in Catania and Siracusa. Advertising: Spi.

1L FIORINO (Rome). Title: Bditoriale Esedra. Shareholders: lOO-per-
cent owned by the D'Amato family, through the Etefin holding company.
Director: Luigi D'Amato. Political position: "Favoring protection

of the market economy.'' Paid circulation: 31,000, nationwide. Adver-
tising: in-house.

GAZZETTA DI MANTOVA (Mantua). Title: Societa delle Gazzette. Share-
holders: 75 percent Arnaldo Mondadori Editore, 20 percent Citen (a
journalistic staff cooperative of GAZZETTA writers), 5 percent Rino
Bulbarelli. Director: Candide Bonvicini. Political position: "Laic
and progressive." Paid circulation: 4,000 copies in Reggio Emilia
and throughout the province. Advertising: Manzoni.

IL GAZZETTINO (Venice). Title: Societa finanziaria Veneto-Friulana
spa, which is backed by ranking members of the DC and financing from
the Banca Cattolica. Director: Gianni Crovato. Political position:
“Center-left, although we should prefer to call ourselves a newspaper,
plain and simple." Paid circulation: 120,000 copies distributed in
Venice and throughout the Veneto . Advertising“ Spi.

IL GIORNALE DEL SUD (Catania). Title: Editrice Rspa. Shareholders:
a majority of the stock is held by a group of private citizens of Ca-
tania, while the minority share is held by Giuseppe Recca,.owner of a
commercial TV station. Director: Giuseppe Pava. Political position:
"Laic-lcftist." Paid circulation: $,000-6,000 copies in Catania and
throughout the province. Advertising: Manzoni.

IL GIORNALE DI BRESCIA (Brescia). Title: Bditoriale Bresciana.
Shareholders: Banco San Paolo di Brescia and Credito Agrario Bres-
ciano. Director: Giovanni Battista Lanzani. Political position:
"We reach an area ranging from center to center-left." Paid circu-
lation: 40,000 copies in Brescia and in the province. Advertising:
Spe.

IL GIORNALE DI SICILIA (Palermo). Title: Bditrice i1 Giornale di
Sicilia. Shareholders: the Ardizzone family, 50 percent; Piero Pirri,
29 percent; Mario Ciancio, 8.33 percent; Carmelo Costanzo, 8.33 per-
cent (the shares are registered to son-in-law Daniele Rodogno), and

the rest to small shareholders. Director: Pausto De Luca. Political
position:"Laic, moderate, progressive.“ Paid circulation: 75,000
copies in Sicily. Advertising: Spe.

IL GIORNALE D'ITALIA (Rome). Title: Editorials Esedra. loo-percent
owned by the D'Amato family through the Etefin holding company. Direc-
tor: Luigi D'Amato. Political position: "Independent democratic."
Paid circulation: 200,000 copies, nationwide. Advertising: Spi.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IL GIORNALE DI VICBNZA (Vicenza). Title: Athesis. Shareholders: the
company is controlled by a group of Verona and Vicenza businessmen.

The largest interests are held by Pilade, Riello, Giancarlo Ferretto,
Giancarlo Ferro, and Guglielmo Bertani. Director: Giuseppe Brugnoli.
Political position: "We might be placed in the middle of a fairly
broad area, running from the liberals to support for some of the so-
cialists' positions." Paid circulation:30,000 copies in Vicenza

and in the province. Advertising: Manzoni.

IL GIORNALE uuovo (Milan). Title: Societa Europea di Bdizioni.
Shareholders: 35 percent of shares are held by FIED (an editprial
staff cooperative); 13 percent by Indro Montanelli, Gian Galleazzo
Biazzi Vergani, and Gianni Granzotto; 37.5 percent is controlled by
Silvio Berlusconi's Pininvest, while smaller packages are held by SVED
which is in turn controlled by the De Agostini branch of the Boroli
and Drago families. Political position: center-left. Average daily
paid circulation: 180,052 copies nationwide. Advertising: Sipra Spi
Associate.

IL GIORNO (Milan). Title: Segisa. Shareholders: Segisa is wholly
controlled by Publiedit, which in turn is controlled by ENI (49 per-
cent), AGIP (13 percent), SNAM (12 percent), SNAMprogetti (12 percent),
SAIPEM (12 percent), and SOFIM (2 percent). Publiedit also owns the
Same printing plant and the Italian wire service. Director: Guglielmo
zucconi. Political position: "Center-left." Paid circulation:
180,000 (in recent months the paper has announced a 50,000-copy rise

in circulation) nationwide. Advertising: Spe.

IL LAVORO (Genoa). Title: Bditoriale Ligure spa. Shareholders: 60
percent Editoriale Corriere della Sera-Gruppo Rizzoli; 40 percent
SOFIS, a financing company with ties to the PSI, and which has its
corporate headquarters in the same building as the Party on the Corso
in Rome. Director: Ferruccio Borio. Political position: "Left,
with special attention to the Socialists. We are, however, open to
all democratic parties, and that excludes those unrepresented in Par-
liament." Average daily paid circulation: 22,170 in Genoa and its
province. Advertising: in-house.

IL MANIFESTO (Rome). Title: Cooperativa il Manifesto. Shareholders:

a group of the paper's editorial staffers. Directors: Rossana Rossanda
and Luigi Pintor. Political position: left. Paid circulation:

20,000 copies, nationwide. Advertising: Sipra.

IL MATTINO (Naples). Owner of title: Banco di Napoli. Title of man-
agement: Edime Spa. Shareholders: Rizzoli-Corriere della Sera group,
51 percent, while a minority holding is owned by Affidavit, a DC party
company which deals in newspapers. Director: Roberto Ciuni. Politi-
cal position: "From the center to the left." Paid circulation:
135,000 copies, all over Campania. Advertising: Spe.

IL MESSAGGERO (Rome). Title: 11 Messagero spa. Shareholders: Monte-
dison, 100 percent. Director: Vittorio Emiliani. Political position:

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIﬁ$ﬂJALI£ﬂEONL¥

"Lain, with attention to civil rights; cultural area liberal-demo-
cratic, combined with sensitivity to the Catholic area. Politically
in favor of the turn and turn about plan for government, and of
dialectic between the leftist parties and defense of the pro-western
option. The P51 is a point of reference, but we have no ties with the
Party.“ Paid circulation: 220,000 copies, distributed mainly in Rome
and in Central Italy. Advertising: Sip.

MESSAGGBRO VENETO (Udine). Title: Sve. Shareholders: there are 28
of them, and the biggest packages are held by Ms. Zanussi and Carlo
Melzio, who owns a steel mill. Director: Vittorio Meloni. Political
position: "We occupy a political area that ranges from the DC to the
PSI." Paid circulation: 42,000 copies in Priuli-Venezia Giulia and
in the eastern Veneto. Advertising: Spi.

IL PICCOLO (Trieste). Title: Societa Bditrice Triestina. Sharehold-
ers: the paper is 100-percent owned by Nuove Bdizioni Sportive, which
in turn is controlled by the Rizzoli-Corriere della Sera group.
Director: Luciano Ceschia. Political position: "I have an agreement
with the publisher to make this a lay-oriented, democratic, anti-fas-
cist paper." Paid circulation: 48,000 copies in the Priuli-Venezia
Giulia region. Advertising: Publikonpass.

IL RESTO DEL CARLINO (Bologna). Title: Poligrafici editoriale spa.
Shareholders: Attilio Monti, 50.2 percent; Oscar Maestro, 35 per-
cent. Busi family, 10 percent, and the rest scattered among small
shareholders. Director: Tino Neirotti. Political position: l'Cen-
tor-left, which means in the Liberal-Labor area.“ Average daily pdid
circulation: 203,936 copies distributed through Emilia Romagna, the
Veneto, and the Marches. Advertising: Spe.

1L SECOLO XIX (Genoa).Title: Societa Bdizioni e Pubblicazioni. Share-
holders: the Perrone family, distributed as follows: 33 percent to
Carlo Perrone, 33 percent to Cesare Brivio Sforza (son of a sister

of Alessandro Perrone and father of Carlo Perrone), 33 percent to
Giulio Grazioli (son of another of Alessandro Perrone's sisters).
Director: Tommaso Giglio. Political position: "What the English-
spcaking countries would call liberal." Paid circulation: an average
35,000 on weekdays and 200,000 on Sundays. Ninety percent of its cir-
culation is in Liguria, the rest in the lower Piedmont. Advertising:
national accounts: Publirama; classified: Gbp; both are staff-run.

IL SOLE-24 ORE (Milan). Title: 11 Sole-24 Ore editrice. Shareholders:
title is held by Aedificatio (a corporation loo-percent owned by Conf-
industria). Director: Mario Deaglio. Political position: "We are

an independent newspaper vis—a-vis Confindustria. We are advocates of
the positions of freedom that stem from the laws of the free market,

but we temper that stance with support for a modern economy and with
the utmost respect for different views." Paid circulation: 135,000.
Advertising: Spi.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢HWRJAL|HHEONLY

IL TEMPO (Rome) Title: Societa Editorials Rosana srl. Shareholders:
83.39-percent owned by Spe (a holding company controlled by Carlo
Pesenti through Italmobiliare), with 16 percent of its stock divided
between Tepro (owned by the Renato Agiolillo estate) and Comainvest.

A redistribution of shares is under way, however, and there will prob-
ably be a change in the ownership of Spe: there is talk of a move
into the company by banker Roberto Calvi. Director: Gianni Letta.
Political position: "Catholic, liberal, center-democratic." Paid
circulation: 200,000, distribution in Rome and on South, with deal-
ers nationwide. Advertising: Spe.

IL TIRRENO (Leghorn). Title: Societa Editorials il Tirreno spa.
Shareholders: loo-percent owned by Editorials L'ESpresso. Director:
Franco Magagnini. Political position: "Open left, laic, with input
from any democratic source." Paid circulation: $5,000, distributed
in Leghorn and Pisa, with some in Lucca and along the Tyrrhenian coast
from Carrara to Grosseto. Advertising: Manzoni.

L'ADIGE (Trento). Title: Societa Editrice Trentina. Shareholders:
wholly owned by Affidavit, a DC Party company. Director: Gianni
Faustini. Political position: "This is Alcide de Gasperi's and
Flaminio Piccoli's paper. Clearly, it is Christian Democratic." Paid
circulation: 15,000 in the city of Trento and its province, with

some in the city and province of Bolzano. Advertising: Spe.

LA CITTA (Florence). Title: Editorials La Citta. Shareholders: 45
percent of its shares are held by the P77 corporation, controlled by
Mauro Ballini, a communications entrepreneur (and owner of Telelibera
Firenze). Ballini also owns another 14 percent of the paper, while

11 percent is held by Carlo Fusaro, the corporation's general manager.
Director: Giordano Goggioli. Political position: “From the center-
left (Republicans) to the left (PCI and PSI).“ Paid circulation:
13,000 in Florence and its province. In summertime, all over Versilia.
Advertising: P77 press for local accounts and SP1 for national (the
contract will be signed within the next few days).

LA GAZZETTA DEL MEZZOGIORNO (Bari) Title: Edisud. Shareholders:

a 93-percent interest is held by Finedi, of which Stefano Romanazzi,
a Christian Democrat, owns 27 percent; Giuseppe Gorjux, an indepen-
dent and the paper's general manager,'owns 27 percent; Ludovico
Fontana, of the DC area, owns 27 percent; Raimondo Coga, of the PCI
area, owns 9 percent; and Francesco Totarello, of the Socialist per-
suasion, owns 10 percent. Director: Giuseppe Giacovazzo. Political
position: I"l‘hc paper has always followed the [regular] Morotea line,
and even today it has its roots in the DC, although it is open to the
left." Paid circulation: over 80,000 with distribution through Apulia.
the Basilicata, parts of Calabria, Molise, and Abruzzi, and Upper..
Irpinio. Advertising: Spi.

LA NAZIONE (Florence). Title: Poligrafici Bditoriale. Shareholders:
Attilio Monti, 50.2 percent; Oscar Maestro, 35 percent; Busi family,
10 percent, and small shareholders, 5 percent. Director: Gianfranco
Piazzesi. Political position: “Liberal, in the American sense. "

35
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
FORlﬂWKJALlEﬁEONLY

Paid circulation: 195,500 copies in Tuscany, Umbria, and Liguria.
Advertising: Spe.

LA NOTTE (Milan). Title: Siem spa. Shareholders: 100 percent held
by Carlo Pesenti's Italmobiliare. Director: Livio Caputo. Politi-
cal position: "This is predominantly a newspaper, and the only one
who engages in politics is the director, who you might say is a middle-
of-thc-roader and is a member of the national council of the Liberal
Party." Paid circulation: 110,000 in Lombardy and the Veneto.
Advertising: Spi.

LA NUOVA SARDEGNA (Sassari). Title: Societa Editrice La Nuova Sar-
degna. Shareholders: Editoriale L'Espresso, which also manages it,
48 percent; Sir Finanziaria, 4 percent; the remaining 48 percent was
made over to the Caracciolo group, which owns L'Bspresso publishing,
for redistribution, under the supervision of the Sardinian regional
government, to local businessmen or others primarily interested in Sar-
dinia. 0f the total package, 35 percent was bought by Carboni Con-
struction. The remainder is now up for bidding by local businessmen
and others. Director: Luigi Bianchi. Political position: "we are

a regionally-oriented newspaper, Iaic and progressive. We supported
establishment of a united regional government." Paid circulation:
38,500 in Sassari and Nuoro. Advertising: Publikompass. ‘

LA PREALPINA (Varese). Title: Societa Editoriale Varesina. Share-
holders: the majority interest is held by Stefano Perrario, a textile
and plastics operator in Borseno (Busto Arsizio). Director: Mario
Lodi. Political position: "we have our own political line, which
lies along the center-left, and we are not insensitive to carnations
[the socialists]." Paid circulation: 20,000 to 22,000 throughout the
province of Varese and in the Legnano area. Advertising: Publis-Preal
for local accounts, and Manzoni for national. -

LA PROVINCIA (Como). Title: Bditoriale La Provincia di Como. Share-
holders: there are around 80 of them, none of them holding more than
10 percent. Even the director is a shareholder. Director: Gianni

Dc Simoni. Political position: "The line is the Lib-Lab line.“ Paid
circulation: 27,000 in the Larian area and in Brianza. Advertising:

Spi.

LA PROVINCIA (Cremona). Title: Societa Editrice Cremonese. Sharehold-
ers: wholly owned by the Cremona Farmers Association. Director:

Mauro Masone. Political position: "Center." Paid circulation: 15,000
in Cremona and in the province. Advertising: Mansoni.

LA PROVINCIA PAVESE (Pavia). Title: Editorials Provincia Pavese.
Shareholders: loo-percent owned by L'Espresso. Director: Gaetano
Rizzuto. Political position: "we are a progressive, democratic news-
paper. We are concerned with that is happening locally." Paid circu-
lation: 15,000 in Pavia and the province. Advertising: Manzoni.

r

FORCWFKJALUEEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LA SICILIA (Catania). Title: Domenico Sanfilippo, publisher. Share-
holders: Mario Ciancio (99 percent), and his wife (1 percent). Direc-
tor: Mario Cancio. Political position: "This is a middle-of-the-
road paper." Paid circulation: 55-60,000 in Sicily, lost of it in
Catania and Siracusa. Advertising: Spi.

LA STAMPA (Turin). Title: Editrice La Stampa Spa. Shareholders:
Wholly owned by the FIAT group's Itedi. Director: Giorgio Fattori.
Political position: "Center." Paid circulation: 335,000, nation-
wide. Advertising: PubliKonpass.

LA TRIDUNA DI TREVISO (Treviso). Title: Bditoriale Quotidiani Veneti
di Giorgio Mondadori c Associati. Shareholders: 48 percent, Edito-
riale L' Espresso, 48 percent Giorgio Mondadori, and 4 percent local
businessmen. Director: Pabbio Barbieri. Political position: "Pro-
gressive, laic but not anti-Catholic, with concentration on local is-
sues." Paid circulation: 14,500 in Treviso and through the province.
Advertising: Manzoni.

L'ECO DI BERGAMO (Bergamo). Title: Societa Bditrice Sant'Alessandro.
Shareholders: Wholly owned by a holding company owned by the Bergamo

Curia. Director: Mgr Andrea Spada. Political position: "Catholic,

but without ties to the DC." Paid circulation: 42,000 in Bergano and
its province. Advertising: Manzoni.

L'ORA (Palermo). Title: Giornale L'Ora srl cooperative editorials.
Shareholders: The paper is owned by L'ORA spa, which, 6 years ago,
turned its management over to the editorial staff cooperative. Nego-
tiations are now under way to extend that arrangement to 1992. Direc-
tor: Nicola Cattedra. Political position: "Left." Paid circulation:
20-25,000 throughout Sicily. Advertising: Spi-Sipra.

L'ORDINE (Como). Title: LCA (Associated Communications Workers);
LCA is the new owner since 3 July, and the shareholders are Piorenze
Ligabue, Mario Saporiti, and Paolo Sciume- The group is closely tied
to the LCA cooperative, which publishes the weekly SABATO, an organ
of Communion and Liberation. Director: Gigi De Pabiani (who is also
director of SABATO). Political position: “We are a Catholic newspa-
per." Paid circulation: 10,000 in the provinces of Como and Sondrio.
Since 3 November, it has been distributed in Brianza as well. Adver-
tising: Manzoni.

L‘OCCHIO (Milan). Title: Nuove Edizioni Popolari spa. Shareholders:
wholly owned by Rizzoli-Corriere della Sera. Director: Pier Augusto
Hacchi. Political position: "We try not to be identified with any
one political area. We are a service daily with popular orientation,
that fights for the common people.‘I Paid circulation: 90,000 nation-
wide. Advertising: Sipra.

L'UNIONE SARDA (Cagliari). Title: L'Unione Sarda. Shareholders:
the paper is owned by the Paisania company, which in turn is owned by
a consortium of Cagliari building contractors. Director: Gianni
Filippini. Political position: "It is the Sardinians' newspaper. It
therefore supports those political parties which, in a practical way,

FOR OFFICBXL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and with an independent approach, are working for the island's econo-
mic development." Paid circulation: 65,000 in Sardinia. Advertis-
ing: Spi.

LIBERTA (Piacenza). Title: Stabilimento Tipografico Piacentino.
Shareholders: The Prati family has held complete control since 1883.
The Prati's also own the printing plant. Director: Ernesto Prati.
Political position: "The paper's line is center-right, close to the
Liberals." Paid circulation 22,000 in the province and in lower Lo-
digiano. Advertising: Spi.

MATTINO DI PADOVA (Padua). Title: Editorials Quotidiani Veneti di
Giorgio Mondadori e Associati. Shareholders: 48 percent Bditoriale
L'Bspresso, 48 percent Giorgio Mondadori, and 4 percent local business-
men. Political position: "Progressive, laic but not anti-Catholic,
focussing primarily on local issues, beginning with the university."

Paid circulation 22,000 in Padua city and its province. Advertising:
Manzoni.

PAESE SERA (Rome). Title: Bditrice Il Rinnovamento. Shareholders:
wholly controlled by the PCI. Director: Giuseppe Piori. Political
position: "Left." Average daily paid circulation 11A,334 in Lazio,
Tuscany, and Campania. Advertising: Spi-Sipra.

QUOTIDIANO DI LECCB BRINDISI E TARANTO (three editions, one for each
province). Title: Edisalento srl. Shareholders: 65 percent Gerolamo
Manisco, who owns SIMI, a plant and assembly company serving industry,
with headquarters in Brindisi; 30 percent Francesco Flacassovitti, at-
torney, and a friend of the minister for the Southland Fund, Claudio
Signorile; 5 percent by small holders. Director: Beppe Lopez. Poli-
tical position: “0n the left.“ Paid circulation: 10,000 in Lecce,
Brindisi, and Taranto. Advertising: Manzoni.

LA RBPUBBLICA (Rome). Title: Editorials La Repubblica spa. Share-
holders: 50 percent Editorials L'Espresso and 50 percent Arnaldo
Mondadori. Director: Eugenio Salfari. Political position: "Inde-
pendent and liberal." Paid circulation: 210,000. Advertising: Man-
zoni.

STAMPA SERA (Turin). Title: Editrice La Stampa spa. Shareholders:
100 percent held by FIAT's Itedi. Director: Michele Torre. Politi-
cal position: "Center." Paid circulation: 29,000 weekdays, 330,000
on Mondays when LA STAMPA does not appear. It is distributed in Pied-
mont and Liguria. Advertising: PubliKompass.

VITA (Rome). Title: Editoriale Esedra. Shareholders: 100 percent
by the D'Amato family through the Etefin holding company. Director:
Franco Simeoni. Political position: "Democratic centrist." Paid
circulation: 25,000 in Lazio. Advertising: Sipra.

38
ms omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISIi ONLY

Du sinislru a desire (1)

 

mNmrn‘
(7)

ESIREHA
SINISTRA

The pie—chart shows the circulation percentage
ratings for Italian dailies by political posi—

tion. The breakdown was

made on the basis of

statements by their directors and of the opin-
ions of experts IL MONDO consulted.

Right (6)
(7)

3r-Right (8)
(9)

(10)

39

Extreme Right (1.22)
Left
Center-Left-Left
Center-Left
Center-Center—Left

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Party on Page 1

Distribution of Italian political leaders writing or speaking between 5 October

 

and 1 November 1980 in each medium. {in reent}
1'31 ‘1'g2 Corriere Giornalo Giorno :ﬁ‘c’rscma
Government 56.5 23.1 21.0 -— 18.2 23.6 21.0
Dc 17.3 15.4 26.2 50.0 36.3 16.7 21.0
Pci 8.6 19.2 21.0 - 18.2 63.3 21.0
Psi 4.6 11.5 5.3 20.0 -- 10.0 10.6
Psdi 4.6 7.7 5.3 10.0 -- 3.3 10.6
Pri 6.6 -- 5.3 - -- - 5.3
Pr -- 11.5 - -- -- - --
P11 6.6 7.7 - 20.0 9.1 -- 5.3
M31 -- -- -- -- -- 3.3 --
Svp - 3.9 5.3 -- 9.1 -— -
Dp - -- 5.3 - -- -- --
Independent Left - -- —— -- - - 5.3
Independent Center -- - 5.3 -- -- -- --
New Alto Adige Left -- -- -- -- 9.1 - -

Note: Telegiornale-l [TV] is the only medium where government spokesmen are
encountered oftener than all the parties put together. In the GIORNALE. though,
the government as such is missing. The DC gets top billing in the CORRIERE, the
GIORNALE, the GIORNO snd--efter the government-on both TV news shows. In
REPUBBLICA the star billing goes to the PCI. In LA STAHPA the government, DC,
and PDI share the spotlight. (Source: Index)

__—_—_—_————-—————————-_

ho
son omcm. use ONLY
uswﬁm ARV
dnwux “mucoo AoV

                 
  

poucoo Amv

:3 .3300 A3

“we; Anv

.co«u«moa
unsu scum Ania mwcaam 015m :uouuunH
Imoa 305w awn—.2323 any “:33 98. 93
25.3.23.— uqmwn 95 $53 .aehﬂﬁﬂﬂﬁu we wuouoaouan
LEE“ 3053 9E. 63.22.. 28.5.3.3. Gas-.32. amouuuaom of. AC

ucnwe any we mwcﬁcmvﬁ Ana: isms-fiasurdnuﬂ. = Amy
-ﬁﬁoa gnu macaw auamﬁu one ANV

 

 

25?; .3

 

a;

 

wuuoua
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Dailies: Circulation Standing

__—___—__—_———————————-—————-

Circulation Circulation

(in th1980 1978

{in thousands} gin thousands)
CORRIERE DELLA SERA 575 5‘3
LA STAHDA 333 362
STAHPA SBRA (del lun.) 327 88
GAZZETTA DELLO SPORT 287 155
1L HESSAGGERO 208 233
IL RESTO DEL CARLINO 203 197
LA NAZIONE 192 194
LA REPUBBLICA 191 112
IL GIORNO* 180 189
IL GIORRALB NUOVO 180 179
IL TEMPO 1‘1 164
IL SBCOLO XIX 131 125
IL SOLE 24 ORE 119 90
PAESB SERA 114 131
GAZZETTA DEL HBZZOGIORNO 69 76
*The figure for IL GIORNO is for 1979.
Party dailies are not rated. Source: ADS

________—___________—-———————————

The Grabber Groups
Distribution of daily newspaper ownership

_——____—___—_——————-————————

Circulation
percentage
1961 1968 1961 1968
Publishing and industry groups 37 18 60 b4
AGA Chain (Confindustris oriented) 6 11 6.2 5
Political parties 6 11 8.3 11.3
Catholics 7 10 5.9 8.2
Communist-leaning 2 2 2.6 3.3
Partially State-owned 1 lo 3 9
Miscellaneous 9 20 5.9 12
Sports 4 4 10.5 8

Source 1968: Angelo del Boce's "Newspapers in Trouble." Aede. Turin, 1968

_—____________—__———————————————

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1981

6182
cs0: 3104/38

ha
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL ITALY

PROFILE OF EMERGING DC LEADER QUARTA IN PUCLIA
Hilan IL MONDO in Italian 16 Oct 81 pp 27-29
[Article by Paolo Passarini: "The lron-Willed Prefect"]

[Text] A former civil servant, he rose to power through an
error among rivals within the DC [Christian Democratic Party]
and has not taken a back seat since. Decisive and aggressive,
he is now aiming toward...

Within a couple oi weeks. the conquest of Puglia by Giulio Andreotti will be an
accomplished fact. The percentages are now set, and when the delegates to the
DC's regional congress will have finished packeting up their votes, the list

"For a New Frontier" (this is the label of the Puglian Andreotti-ists) will have
garnered 35 percent of the party, a relative majority. The heirs of Aldo Moro,
on the other hand. will have to settle for less than half the Andreotti-ist total
(around 16 percent), a lesser percentage even than that of the D'Oroists (22 per-
cent). And in fact it was the break-up of the horoists that paved the way for
the rise of the man who. in just a few years, has succeeded in becoming the
Paglian DC‘s leading figure, the president of the regional junta, Nicola Quarta,
of Lecce.

In a book titled "Vilipendio di cadavere [Contempt For a Corpse]," a young Bari
journalist, Federico Pirro. has reconstructed the truculent story of the Puglian
DC in the days following Moro's death. In less than 1 year after the finding of
the corpse of the president of the DC, the mayor of Bari (Horoist), the provin-
cial secretary oi Bari (Moroist), the head of the youth movement (Horoist), the
editor of the GAZZETTA DEL MEZZOGIORNO (Moroist). and the president of the region-
al ccnncil (Morolst), were all bounced. This "massacre" of the Horoists was
organized by the lollowers of Vito Lattansio (former minister, former Andreotti-
ist, and now a D'Oroist boss). The operation was marvelously successful, indeed
too successful, to the point where toward the end something finally went wrong.
Nicola Rotolo, a Moroist and at that time president of the regional council, real-
izing he was in danger, tried as a last resort to come to an agreement with
Lattanzio and thus lost the support of his own followers, who transferred it
to an Andreotti-iat regional alderman, not too well known at the time, a newcomer
to politics. but very resolute: Nicola Quarta, to be exact. That was on 23 De-
cember 1978. Since then, Nini, as he is known to his friends. has not left the

b3
FllllﬂﬂﬂCIAl.UlliﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ambit oi Vlale Capruzzi, and everyone says (including himself) that when he does
(which iurthermore will be soon) it will be to move into one of the ambits of
Rome--that of Montecitorio, for certain. and perhaps also one of the ministries.

According to statistics compiled by political observers, 80-85 percent of Italian
politicians entered party careers between 16 and 18 years of age. Nicola Quarta
pertains to the remaining 15-20 percent, having been until 1970 the assistant
prefect of Lecce, with no party membership cards ("That is correct," he says.
"because 1 was and still am of the opinion that party militancy is incompatible
with a public function."). More probably. until 1970, Nini Quarta had not really
given any serious thought to a political career. When, on the eve of the re—
gional primaries, he was offered their candidacy by not only the Christian demo-
crats but also the republicans and the socialists, the assistant prefect of Lecce
decided that what he terms “a more incisive experience" would not be to his dis-
like. But to understand how he found himself at this crucial crossroads, we must
go back a bit.

Born in Campi Salentino, in the province of Lecce, on 23 September 1927, Nicola
Quarta was the scion of a well-to-do farming family. in its two land holdings
(that of Campi and that ol Carmiano, brought as the wife's dowry), Nini's father
grew mainly grapes and produced wine. The future president of the regional coun-
cil was put into classical studies in a religious institute in Campi. From there
he went to the university in Rome and, in 1950, earned a graduate degree in
jurisprudence, with a thesis on criminal law. laundiately following this, Quarta
finished first in the competitive examination and began his career in the state
apparatus with a position in the Ministry of Interior. Two years went by in
transfers, first to Reggio Emilia, then to Hatera, and finally. in 1954, a much-
desired return to Lecce. Entry into the upper social circles of Lecce (tradi-
tionally tightly closed) was not easy and even Quarta had to work hard for it.
But he was an attractive young man and had a way with people. He was a good
dancer. and his performances of the tango at parties in the prefecture are still
remembered in Lecce. Finally, Nini was introduced into what, in a broad sense,
is considered the most beautiful home in Lecce--Villa Reale (Reale like Oronzo,
the former republican minister).

But his most fruitful cut-in was being actualized by Quarta in another field--the
government administrative one, through his work in the prefecture. Gradually,
his responsibilities increased: Administrator of municipalities and hospitals,
administrative judge in the provincial council of Lecce and, above all, special
provisional administrator in the council of lecce and in innumerable urban cen-
ters in Salento. in actual practice, over a period of some 15 years, Quarta
pvriormod the functions of mayor as well as administrator, not as a politician
but us a high official of the local prefecture. And in this capacity, which
vested him with oversight authority, he came into contact with the local politi-
cians and became known and even feared by them. This was the fundamental link.
Once in politics, Nini continued to deal with his party colleagues as one vested
with a considerably higher level of authority, as one accustomed to judging
others and net to being judged. He continually reminds those who seek to throw
a wrench into his plans that he is not compelled to live on politics and that he

hb
F0l.0i1ﬂC1Al.US£i0NLN
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can always go back to being a prefect, even in some large northern city. And to
further make clear how he regards himself in relation to the others, he says,
"Politicians, just to stay in the saddle, will accept just about anything. Hot
i." It is just this way of his own of staying in the saddle that has enabled him
to build up a solid power base for himself. Nini unsheathes this sword not only
in local games. but also when he operates in the Rome arena. when he formed the
most recent center-left council. Quarta did not want to include the social
democrats. From Rome, Fiaminio Piccoli ordered him to do so. He replied, "You
never show any interest in Pugiia, except in these cases. If you are really
interested. then you must give me the presidency of the Fund for Southern Italy."

At the DC's most recent national congress, Franco Evangelisti communicated to
him: ”They are giving us four seats in the direCtorate; that is. one more.”
"Then the fourth one is mine," Nini replied. And so it was.

Substantially tree of political adversaries capable of worrying him, Quarta, who
is well thought oi and occasionally helped by the PCI [Italian Communist Party],
uuifaws openly when the vice president of the council, Mimi Romano, a socialist,
oi whom he has a not very high opinion, speaks. 0n the other hand, Quarta, like
a good Andreotti-ist, openly shows his preference for the communists over the
socialists and says. "if i had my own choice regionally. I would bring the com—
munists as well into the council. I would have no problem with this--either
from the political or the human standpoints." Massimo D'Alema, the PCI regional
secretary since 3 months ago, met the council president at a debate held 2 weeks
ago during the festival of L'Unita of Lecce. He was impressed by the latter's
shrewdness: "After the serious defeat they suffered in 1980, the Puglian commun-
ists are nervous. Quarta was quick to avoid being hooted. He stated that
goernance is impossible without the communists, he attacked the PSI [Italian
Socialist Party], and thus won applause for himself, deflecting the heats toward
the sacialists."

A "nuclearist" of unshakable faith, Quarta has managed in such a way that Puglia
was the iirSt ltalian region to decide to accept the installation of a nuclear
power plant. He ieels he must confront Home with something big behind him: "I
cannot just remain here managing the region's few pennies. I do not want to be
merely the president of a regional budget."

Frequently accused of personalism, Quarta justifies himself maintaining that "if
one is going to be a president, he must take on responsibilities." Beppe Lopez,
editor of the QUOTIDIANO Dl LECCE, who sees in Quarta the emergence of a new
Christian demucrat political breed for Puglia, a more aggressive one than in the
past, tells an anecdote. when the regional council deliberated on the location
0! the new coal—fired power plant, it was 13 August, and the industrial adviser,
an Andreotti—ist. was not even present. Everything was decided in 10 minutes, at
the end of the meeting, as if the matter was simply an item of "other business."
The next day, a QUOTlDlANO Dl LECCE reporter interviewed a socialist adviser,
Leonardo Morca, for more details. "There is no truth whatever in it," the latter
replied. "i can tell you that from firsthand knowledge. I was there.“ But un—
fortunately for him, it had been decided after he left the meeting.

COPYRIGHT: lL MONDO 1981

9399
C30: 3l04/30 END
hS

H0!‘Nﬂﬂ€1Al.UBI(MULY