FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10049

14 October 1981

USSR Report

LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

(FOUO 13/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also.from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
LIFE SCIENCES

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(rouo 13/81)

CONTENTS

BIOCHEMISTRY

Decentralized Control Systems for Periodic Microbiological

synthesisoooooooooooesoaaoooosooocanoaaoosoooooooooosooososooaoo

BIOTECHNOLOGY ~

Biomechanics of Human Visual Apparatua............................
ENVIRONMENT

Dispersion of Animal Population Density...........................
HUMAN FACTORS

Biorhythns and Hork...............................................
PHYSIOLOGY

Effect of Hyperbaric Medium on Man and Animals....................
RADIATION BIOLOGY

Biochemical Fundamentals of the Action of Radiation Protectors....

PSYCHOLOGY

Psychomuscular Training-a Method of Mental Self-Regulation.......

- a - [III - USSR - 21a

POI! OFFIPHI "SF, 0N] V

16

22

26

33

38

S&T F
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Medical and Psychological Problana of Civil Aviation Pilot
Rel1.bn1ty (umber 1)....OOOOOOOI.IO...O...QOOO.'COOOCCICOOOOOOO

Medical and Psychological Problena of Civil Aviation Pilot
Reliability (Nullber 2)ooa0.00000000000000'Coooooooooooooooovoaoo

Medical and Paychological Problala of 'Civil Aviation Pilot
RG11.b111ty(N‘nber 3)....ooaooaotooa00000000...otvooaooooova'oo

-5-

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

59

77

100
BIOCIIHISTRY

UDC: 615.012.6

DECENTRALIZED CONTROL SYSTEMS FOR PERIODIC MICROBIOLOGICAL SYNTHESIS

Moscow KHIHIKO-FARHATSEVTICHESKIY ZHURNAL in Russian Vol 15, No 6, Jun 81 (manu-
script received 19 Jun 80) pp 98-102

[Article by A. A. Oprishko, V. V. Aleshechkin, A. V. Babsyanta, V. P. Davydov,
Ya. A. Khanukayev and S. H. Cherner, All-Union Scinetific Research and Design
Institute for Automated Systems of ControlofContinuous Technological Processes,
Groznyy: "Principles Involved in the Design of Decentralized Systems for Control
of Periodic Processes of Hicrobiological Synthesis")

[Text] Host technological biosynthetic processes in the microbiological and
chemicopharmaceutical sectors of industry are periodic.

Figure 1 illustrates the general block diagram of the technological process of
biosynthesis. The number of elements in the groups is shown by the alphabetic
subscripts. For most processes bsz, c§2, dsZ, k§2, 152, msz, nSlk, pslb, qS30,
r<3, s - t - u - v - w - 2. Nutrient media are transferred from tanks through
continuous sterilization units to inoculators, culturing apparatus and fer-enters.
Increasing volumes of microorganism cultures are successively raised in the
inoculators and culture apparatus. In addition to build-up of culture, in the
fermenter there is the direct process of biosynthesis, which is associated with
accumulation of antibiotic. Sterile foam suppressor, solutions of nutrients and
titrants pass into the fermentation units from tanks.

The main distinction of periodic processes is intermittent treatment of the product
by means of performing the required sequence of technological operations. Periodic
processes are run in gr¢ups of units connected in parallel and sequence. In each
of the units, the technological operations are performed in the established order,
implemented by means of discrete control actions on the shut-off and adjustment
fitting of the unit. The base products and semi-finished products are transferred
from unit to unit in batches. During several operations, there is also forma-
tion of analogue control action directed at stabilizing specific technological
parameters of the process or change therein according to the specified law.

The operation of the units is characterized by a high degree of autonomy. Host
technological operations in a unit are performed regardless of operation of other
units, and their operation is coordinated only when products are transferred.

In Soviet plants of microbiological synthesis, automation is usually represented
by local systems of regulating individual technological parameters. The time-con—
suming and important operations of sterilizing apparatus and nutrient media,

1

FOR¢OFFHJA1.USE(NVLV
FOR 0FFﬂJA1.US£IDNLY

loading, unloading, etc., which are of a logical-program nature, are performed

by hand. For example, to perform such operations in only 1 fermenter requires

that service personnel handle more than 40 units of shut-off fittings, which must
be done in a strictly defined order. Even an insignificant change in this order
impairs sterility of the process, which lowers activity of products of biosyntheais,
and often leads to utter rejects. Analysis of production reveals that the loss is

rather high due to infraction of the procedures for switching the fittings in the
case of manual control.

 

 

Nutrient medium Foam suppressor

1W2 =9

I
Nutrient medium

I

Nutrient medium

E...

  

Cultule fluid . .
Figure 1. General block diagram of technological biosynthetic process

Key:

CIICM, CﬂCl'l, CHCO, CKX, CI'I, CKl, CK2, CK3, CI“) tanks of nutrient medium
for inoculators, culture apparatus, fer-enters, culture fluid, foam suppres-
sor, nutrient components 1 ... 4, respectively

YHCH, YHCH, VHCO) units for continuous sterilization of nutrient media for
inoculators, culturing appratus and fer-enters, respectively

H, 11, ¢) inoculators, culturing apparatus, fermenters, respectively
Inoc.) inoculation

It is possible to raise substantially the technical and economic indicators of
biosynthetic processes only by automating the aggregate of functions of logical

program control, regulation of technological parameters, as well as optimization
of technological mode.

In addition to the above functions, it is imperative to have centralized display of
technological information, information about deviation of the technological pro-
cess from the specifications and impaired operation of different elements of the
automatic control system for technological processes (ASU TP), as well as central-
ized input of corrections by the operator-technologist.

FOI.0FF1CLAI.USE40NLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060026-3

ton OFFICIAL use on“

In Soviet practice, ASU TP, which partially perform the above functions, have
been developed for the chemical and other branches of industry [1]. He also know
of several foreign systems for the control of processes of microbiological syn-
thesis. For example, a system was developed and is operating in Japan for logical
programmed control of the fermentation department in production of acid glutamate,
which controls more than 1000 valves and 15 electric motors [2]. The Biolafitte
Firm has developed a control system for fermenter units based on a minicomputer
T.2000/20. This system also contains devices for handling fermentation sheets
[strips?]. The system provides automatic control of sterilization of units,
fermentation and other operations. He also know of systems for the control of
biosynthetlc processes developed by other foreign firms [3, 4].

The above-mentioned systems (with the exception of [2]) are based on one central
minicomputer. Such a structure cannot fully meet the requirements of control
systems for biosynthetic processes, in particular those referable to reliability
and flexibility.

In view of these circumstances, it was necessary to search for new designs that
were based on the principle of decentralized control [5]. The actual construction
of decentralized systems became possible thanks to the advances in Soviet micro-
electronics and microprocessor technology.

The following are advantages of decentralized systems [5-7]: simplified programming
because of distribution of programs among several microcomputers, as a result of
which it is immeasurably simpler to organize program interaction than in AC" T? with
one processor; greater reliability of the control system; ease of building up the
computer capability of the system by connecting additional microcomputers: ease of
change and distribution of the programmed provision of materials during the entire
period of system operations; possibility of placing the system in operation in
parts; linear correlation between the cost of the system and volume of functions
performed.

The decentralization principle implies distribution of the aggregate of monitoring
[checking] and control functions referable to different departments, units, parts,
stages of the technological process among different units of the control equipment.

In the ASU T? for biosynthesis of antibiotics, we can single out two groups of
control tasks: control of one technological unit and control of a group of units
(technological stage).

The following functions must be performed for the task of controlling one techno-
logical unit (inoculator, culturing apparatus, fermenter, etc.):

a) Primary processing and display of information about the values of
technological parameters, regulator settings, number of program in
progress, operations and time of their performance, position of
actuating mechanisms (gates, valves, electric motors).

b) Detection and reflection of information about disruption of techno-
logical mode and malfunction of system elements.

c) Action by operator-technologist.

d) Exchange of information with equipment on the higher level.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e) Logical programmed control in automatic and semiautomatic modes.

f) Regulation of technological parameters.
3) Remote control of actuating mechanisms and regulators.

In view of the fact that the units interact with one another by means of transfer
of material over common pipes (collectors), steam sterilization of the latter and
the need to maintain a specified temperature in them to preserve sterility, it is
necessary to solve problems of coordinating the operation of the units and control-

ling the collectors. The functions required for these tasks coincide with the
functions for control of the unit.

The above-mentioned independence of operation of technological units serves as the
objective basis for distributing the most important functions of control of the

units among the control instruments according to the technological feature. The
functions of monitoring and controlling each unit are implemented by a separate
control device. It is also expedient to have a specialized coordinating device to
perform coordinating functions. The aggregate of self-contained means of controlling
units and coordinating units forms the bottom hierarchic level of the ACU T?. The
following should be listed among the main tasks on the second level of control:
estimation of technical-economic and operating parameters; evaluation and forecasting
the course of the technological process; optimum control of the technological stage
and units on the basis of an overall [generalized] control criterion; inediate
[operational] display of recommendations on running the technological process;
unaealing the fermentation sheets.

As we see, the list of tasks for the top level includes control of the technological
stage, as well as control of a unit. The reliability requirements for these tasks
are less rigid than for those referable to the lower level of the A80 TY, since

loss sustained due to failure to perform these tasks is relatively small. More-
over, to implement many of these tasks, the computer must have a large memory and
well-developed software, and for this reason they are performed in a centralized
manner, by means of minicomputers (SH-EVE series).

Figure 2 illustrates the block diagram of a set of equipment in a decentralized
system for controlling periodic biosynthetic processes, which was developed on the
basis of the above-mentioned principles.

The operator’s control console implements functions of centralized display of in-
formation and input of control actions from the technological personnel.

The exchange unit performs procedures of exchange of information between unit
control devices, coordination devices and the operator's console.

Each of these devices is based on a microcomputer with its own program.

The main advantages of the developed structure of the ASU T? are its high reliability
and functional viability. Decentralization of monitoring and control functions,

as well as a back-up for sone main functions, reduce drastically losses due to mal-
function of hardware in the ASU TP, and make it possible to use technological per-
sonnel efficiently as a means of operational reservation of performance of

l.

FOR.0FFKJAI.USE¢DNIY
functions. This is attributable to the fact that the probability of simultaneous
failure of several independent units of equipment is low. and if one unit is
reserved the volume of control functions additionally performed by the operator-
teehnologiat does not exceed his mental and physical capabilities.

mun-why

WEED!!!)
0 00
5:1

‘

       
     
 
 

      

m

mammalian:
‘2: Q 0
mm m

Figure 2. Block diagram of the set of hardware of the AS!) 1'? for biosynthesis

    

Key:

DC) nutrient medium

KI) culture fluid

CﬂC; CK!) tanks of nutrient medium and culture fluid

H, II, 0) inoculators, culturing apparatus, fermenters

0K1, 0K2, 0K3, 0K4, 0K5) common collectors

YﬂC, YC, WI, VII, 90, YKC) individual control devices for nutrient medium
tanks, continuous sterilization unit, inoculators. culture apparatus,
fermenters, tanks of culture fluid, respectively

K1, K2, K3, K4, K5) coordinating devices

YOl. 3’02, 5'03, 3’06, VOS) exchange of information devices

n0) operator-technologist's console -

VP) recording device

UFTDeolored graphic terminal

If there is a malfunction of the control console, the operator does not lose contact
with the technological process because there is duplication of functions of display
of information and input of control procedures by the devices to control the units
and for coordination. In this case, there could only be partial worsening of

the quality of operator performance due to worsening of working conditions, and in
the case of automated control this does not have an appreciable effect on the
quality of running the technological process.

In the event of failure of one of the sensors of technological parameters and re-
tention of efficiency of other elements of the ACU 1?, while this transformer is
being repaired the operator implements remote control of the corresponding actuat-
ing mechanism, providing for regulation of the technological parameter measured
by the transformer that failed. Information about this parameter is read from a

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

local measuring instrument. If this parameter is part of the conditions for chang-
ing operations, the transfer of the device to the new operation is effected by the
operator with the logical program control unit in a semiautomatic mode.

If the monitoring and control unit fails, logical programmed control is effected in
the semiautomatic mode. Monitoring of the readings of technological parameters

is effected by means of the spare display unit on the basis of a multichannel.
secondary measuring instrument.

If the logical program control unit fails, the operator effects control with
shut-off actuating mechanisms by means of the remote control unit. Failure of the
regulating channel is also compensated by remote control of regulatory actuating
mechanisms.

The above principles of structural organization were implemented in the hardware
for control of groups of units that operate periodically in the fermentation
departments under the name of Biocycle, which is the basis of the hardware for the
ASU T? for biosynthesis of microbiological and chemicopharmaceutieal products.
Experimental production testing of this complex on a 63 cubic meter fermenter con-
firmed the efficiency of its operation. Analysis of the results of industrial
operation thereof for 1 year revealed that the time spent on preparatory and final-
izing operations was reduced by a mean of 672, overall duration of the cycle of
fermenter operation decreased by 1&2 and activity of the product increased by 5-101.
Operation of this complex also demonstrated its high reliability, as well as ade-
quate reliability of the remote-controlled shut-off and regulating fitting.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Koval'akiy, B. I., et a1. "Automated Control Systems for Technological
Processes (ASW-Technology-74. Central Scientific Research Institute of
Information and Technical and Economic Research Referable to Instrument
Making), Moscow, 1974, pp 83-86.

2. Mori, M., and Yamashita, S., CONTROL ENG., No 7, 1967, pp 66-70.

3. Nyri, L. K.. Toth, c. M., Rishnaswami, C. 3., et al., in "workshop Compute;
Applications in Fermentation Technology, 1976," New York, 1977.

4. Meskanen, A., Ibid.

5. Val'denberg, Yu. 6., in "Kiberneticheskiye problemy ASU tekhnologicheskimi
protsessami" [Cybernetic Problems of Automated Control Systems for Technological
Processes], Moscow, 1978, pp 65-68.

6. Davidenko, K. Ya., bevin, A. A., and Shenbrot, I. M.. IZHBRENIYA, KONTROL',
AVTOMATIZATSIYA, No 3, 1978, pp 55-65.

7. Idem, lbid, No 2, 1979, pp 56-65.
COPYRIGHT: "Khimiko-farmatsevticheskiy zhurnal", 1981.

10,657
C80: 1840/269 6

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
BIOTECHNOLOGY

UDC 62-50:53l.3

BIOHECHANICS OF HUMAN VISUAL APPARATUS

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: TEKHNICHESKAYA KIBERNETIKA in Russian No 3.
Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript received 30 Jan 80) pp 56-62

[Article by Ye. V. Aleksandrovich]

[Text] This work uses the methods of human mechanics [1] to study certain eye
movements in the visual process. The study was brought to computation of the
efforts made by the eye muscles in the framework of the adopted model.

We will model a system consisting of a head and two eyeballs with the help of
three solid bodies, and we will assume that the eyeballs have a spherical shape
(fig 1). He will consider that the head has a fixed center of rotation A or one
which is moving in an assigned manner in relation to the system of fixed Axes 0x1.
Points A and A which are located in the geometric centers of the eyeballs are
fixed centers of eye rotation in relation to the head. If D is a point which can
be fixed by the eyes. then A20 and A30 are called visual axes of the left and right

eyes respectively.

We will designate through CZko and c3ko the coordinates of points A2 and A in
relation to the system of axes Al‘li associated with the head. We assume hat

xA11=b1(t). in particular. it may be that bi-conat. Then the equations of contact
of the examined system of bodies are written as follows:

San-bl. Iaaa-b«+¢uc§u.. Sau'h+¢w€u°. (1)
where a --matrix of orthogonal transform consisting of guide cosines of the axes

Al‘li' 1here a‘k1--constants if the head is at rest or moves progressively. while

they are assigned functions of time if the head makes an assigned rotating movement.

As the reference coordinates 5P (p-l.2,....18) we will select the coordinates
xAui (u.i-l.2,3) of the rotation centers A“ and Euler's angles .ui of each of the

bodies in the system, and as the generalized coordinates nl (X-l,2.....9) we will
select Euler's angles *ui' Then the contact equations (1) can be rewritten in the
following compact form:

E’=‘E’(n‘.l)- (2)

The motion equations of the system of three free bodies are written in the form

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

u ac. . .
(mi..). + (cm). + (—L m.) ' -.- n...

 

a9.
(0.2“). I‘(I..$.).+ [( “f: _%L)Di..§p.]_ + (a)
[(———)1

With each fixed value of the index u. equations (3) are Lagrangian equations of
the second order of movement of a free solid body with number p. Here I" is the

weight of a body with number u. while qui and Hui* are the main vector and thr
main moment of the assigned forces which are acting on the body with number p. It

 

Figure l.

is easy to show that Juinguki' The elements of the objects cpik and Juik depend

on the geometry and distribution of masses of the examined system of bodies and
are easily computed. It is easy to see that the system (3) can be written in a
compact form
b,:§'+8,, «Pf-X, (Pr 90 r-" 2’ ' ' ' ' 18) '

The motion equations of the linked system of solid bodies of the structure det-
cribed above in the reference coordinates EP will be

'oat'+8..«ve'-X.+z~ (0

where ZP designates the forces qui and the moments Lui,‘ of the reaction forces.

The reaction forces act on each of the bodies in the system at the sites of their
connection with other bodies. i.e.. at points A”. Since all the moments in the

motion equations must be computed in relation to the corresponding points A". the

moments of the reaction forces Lu1*. thus computed. will equal zero.

We now assume that the examined system of solid bodies makes a movement in
accordance with the program

Maw-0 (A-i.2....,9; o-i,2,....S). (5)

These equations can be viewed as additional bonds placed on the system. They are

called control bonds. Then additive control forces Px 1 and moments N 1* are
introduced into equations (lo). They are designated together through 5:. Therefore

we have

bué'+Bv. «g'é' -X,+Z,+S,. (5)

 

Figure 2.

The equations of the programmed movement of the examined system of solid bodies
in the generalized coordinates are obtained by the convolution method [2]. We
multiply (6) by aEP/an with convolution according to the index p, and we use the
axiom of the ideal bond. We obtain

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

OE' .. 5V . .' a" at:
b" an.§'+Bp.'l an‘t'g -T'I';XD+'a—n"s"

As a result of replacing the variables in the case of reonome bonds (2) we obtain
equations :f programmed movement of the system in generalized coordinates in the
following form

chi-w. urn-+6.. .n'+C.-:Y.+m. (7)

where, in particular. ﬂk-degﬂwn‘. With bi-const (fixed head) equations (7) will
look like

chﬁ.+cl. 0'1"], “ Yl+ "A. (8)

These equations are given in the simplest case in [3]. If program (5) is complete.
then it can be used to determine the programmed law of movement. i.e.. the
relationships n‘=n*(t). and from equations (7) or (8) we immediately find the
generalized control forces “Aunx(t).

In modeling, the head was considered fixed. With this condition. it

is sufficient to view movement only of one, for definiteness the left, eye. The
motion equations of the left eye in the reference coordinates are obtained after
asssuming in (3) that u=2 and flamianHO. It is easy to show that in this case.
the last three equations (3) will be equations of natural eye motion in generalized

coordinates. Consequently, the equations of programmed motion of the left eye in
generalized coordinates will look like

-. a1... 1 a)... . . ’
+ __———_ -u .+N .' 9
JmVu (a ' 2 a ‘)W’ha u u . ()
where Nu'-wn-Nu- Here N --components of the main control moment according to

the axes of the system assoélated with the left eye, ¢k1--certain matrix whose

elements are known. Hith complete program. we immediately find from (9) N21*-N21*(t)
and this means that "Ak'NAk(t)'

The eyeball is moved by six muscles. The areas of attachment of the muscles on the
eyeball have fairly significant dimensions. Therefore individual fibers of the
same muscles do not at all have the same directions of action. However. a number
of authors [4] consider it possible to replace the body of the muscle with a line
of action of muscle stress. and this line passes approximately in the center of

the corresponding muscle. Therefore in modeling. each muscle is replaced by a

thin thread. The muscle stress is simulated by tension of the thread. The

adopted model of the muscle apparatus is depicted in figure 2.

0n the next figures. the curves which refer to the eye muscles are numbered as
follows: l-nm. rectus lateralisz 2--m. rectus medialis; 3-m. rectus superior;
6--m. rectus inferior; 5--m. obliquus superior; 6--m. obliquus inferior.

In order to find the quantities of muscle stresses that we designate through Q

(p-l,2.....6). and Q so, it is necessary to express the components of the main
control moment NAk(t§ through the quantities of muscle stresses. We have

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
b i.‘

s
‘r
.5
5 .
0
J
z u
' - -
I r' Zr Jr Ur
I '8 .
Figure 3.
NAAU) 'hnom (k-‘o-zv 3; P-i. 2"“! 0) ‘ (10)

where each of the coefficients h depends on the coordinates of the contact point
between the muscle with number pphnd the eyeball , and the guide cosines of force

acting on the eyeball from the side of the muscle with number p. All the /'
quantities are assigned in the system of coordinates linked to the left eye.

Equations (10) are a system of three linear equations in relation to six unknown
quantities Q . Thus, the laws of mechanics result in a smaller number of
_equations thgn there are unknown muscle stresses. The muscle apparatus of the

eye is superfluous from the viewpoint of dynamics. Therefore additional hypo-
theses are necessary to determine the forces of all six eye muscles.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

§
r__—__ .. -

 

 

Figure 6.

As the simplest, but not the only possible hypothesis. it was assumed in the
modeling that at each moment in time, only three of the six eye muscles are working,
and for the remaining three muscles we have Q -0. As another. more complicated
hypothesis. we can assume that certain correlgtions exist between six Q . In

this hypothesis, all six muscles will always be working. The final aelgction of
the most probable hypothesis must be made in accordance with the experiment. Un-
fortunately. these experiments have not yet been set up. Mathematical modeling

in any case does not represent difficulties, however. the results presented in

this work refer to the indicated simplest hypothesis.

we will examine eye movement in by-psssing a certain rectangle with apexes 1-4.
The beginning of the fixed system of coordinates 0x is placed in the geometric
center of the left eye. Points 1-5 have the following coordinates in centimeters:
l--(10. -20. 100), 2--(10, 20. 100). 3-(-10. 20. 100). 6--(-lo, -20. 100). The
program of motion between each two points was adopted in the form

3-3. + %(:.—:.) [ i +sln%(t-%)] .-
1-1. + -‘2—(x.-x.)[1+.sn“7(:— 12.)], (u)
o-o.+%(o.-o.) [a +sin%(t-—;-)].

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 5.

Here a-BD (fig 1); and. and him 5- --starting and final values corresponding
to the starting and final angular points.o£ the trajectory. At the angular points.
the six quantities s..xa.5-v‘~ I. 6. were switched. and without stopping. motion
on program (11) began with new parameters. It is known from experience [5] that
in the examined case, the trajectory of the point of intersection of the visual
axes of the eyes between the angular points of the contour is a straight line.
This means that in all three equations (11). the quantity 1 must be selected the
same. The parameter 1 was evaluated by empirical formula for duration of the

jump presented in [S]. and selected equal to 0.06 s.

The presented program is not the only one possible. This program was adopted
because it is apparently closest of all to the experiment.

In computing the muscle stresses. the computer made a reselection of all 20 possible
realizations of the generalized control moment with the help of three out of six
muscles. Of these realizations. the permissible are considered those for which

'the efforts of all three muscles are non-negative. As a rule,.oa each-section of

motion, more than one triplet of muscles was obtained for which all the Q are not
negative. Since it is still impossible to say precisely which of these tgiplets

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

man uses to realize the actual motion. the presented graphs of muscle stresses
refer to the triplets with minimum stresses. We note that the stresses of muscle
triplets thus selected are less than the stresses of other triplets for which all
quo. as a rule. by one-two orders.

Figure 3,a shows the obtainmdd¢9¢ndeﬂC1eBof the muscle stresses on time. In the
time interval from 0 to r. the eye moves between points 1 and 2. In the time
interval from 1 to 21. the eye moves between points 2 and 3, etc. It should be
noted that the presented relationships are a direct consequence of the adopted

motion program. In another program. these relationships will be considerably
different.

Figure 3,b shows the corresponding plan for switching the muscles. In this pl1n.
the dark line designates the time intervals in which each of the six muscles is
working. i.e.. those time intervals where the corresponding Q is positive. It is
apparent from this plan that at each moment in time. only one of each pair of
muscles (pair of horizontal straight muscles. pair of vertical straight muscles.

pair of oblique muscles) is working. i.e.. each pair of muscles acts as a pair of
"muscles-antagonists."

Figures 4 and 5 show thedependenciesof the muscle stresses on the length and

rate of contraction or elongation of the corresponding muscles. 0n the curves for
thedependenciesof length and rate of change in the muscle length on the time, the
dark line isolates those time intervals where the corresponding muscle is working.

It is apparent that the muscles can work both during contraction and during elonga-
tion.

we note that the results presented in this work agree well with analogous results
obtained for purposeful movements of the human hand [6].

It is impossible tc assert that the eye muscles work precisely in the way shown
on the graphs. These results should be viewed only as one of the actually possible
methods of operation of the muscle apparatus. This indefiniteness is a consequence
of the dynamic excessiveness of the muscle apparatus of the eye and the lack of

experiments with stresses of the eye muscles.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Korenev. G. V. "Vvedeniye v mekhaniku chelovek." [Introduction to Human
Mechanics"]. Moscow. Nauka. 1977.

2. Korenev. G. V. "Tselenapravlennaya mekhanika uprsvlyayemykh manipulyatorov"
["Purposeful Mechanics of Controllable Manipulators"). Moscow. Nsuks. 1979.

3. Aleksandrovich. Ye. V. "The Human Eye as a Link in the Biotechnicsl System of
Control." IZV. AN SSSR. TBKHN. KIBBRNET. No 2. 1978.

6. Ruete. Th. ”Bin Neues Ophthalmotrop.J'Leipzig. 1857.

5. Yarbus, A. L. "Rol' dvizheniy glaz v protsesse zreniya" [Role of Eye Movement
in the Visual Process]. Moscow, Nauka. 1965.

14
6. Korenev. G. V., and Pridvorov. V. 5. "Conditions of Muscle; 1n Purposefui
Movements." IZV. AN SSSR. TEKHN. KIBERNE‘I'., No 10. 1977.

oonntca'r: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Tekhnicheakaya hiber-
netika". 1981

9035
080: 1860/286

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENVIRONMENT

UDC 591.5

DISPERSION OF ANIMAL POPULATION DENSITY
Moscow DOKLADY AKADENII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 259, No 3,198] pp 759-762

[Article by A. L. Borodin. A. N. Severtsov Institute of Evolutionary Morphology and

Ecology of Animals. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow. presented by Academician
V. Yc. Sokolov on 26 March 1981]

(Text) Distribution of animals in place and time is generally in groups. The
mathematical model which corresponds to this case has been known for a long time
[1]. However. ecologists gained possession of a negative binomial distribution
comparatively recently [2. 3]. It has the following dispersion

.2 - i + ail/1. (I)

where

k - §2/s2

- i .

Here 52 and § are the dispersion and sampling mean respectively. k isthepsrsmeter
of distribution which depends on their density and the size of the calculated unit
[4.5].

Exceeding by the dispersion of the average (32 > i) is a characteristic feature
of aggregate nonrandom distribution. The accuracy of the sampling studies with
this distribution is extremely low. This precisely determined the development [6]
of a method to optimize the size of the calculated it. Its author convincingly
proved that a small sample in the situation where s > i is always more effective
than a large. although the sampling from them is of a somewhat greater volume.

With random (Poisson) distribution. the samples of different sizes are the same in
effectiveness. Studies [7.8] have confirmed this fact.

The presented method [6] for optimizing the size of the calculated unit is equi-
valent to the calculations from formula (2) with the same plan for setting up the
ecological experiment ( a number of standard_samples are set which are divided into
small samples; for each size of sample. s . x and k are computed)

2 2 2
3m, h; a snp' (2)

where a--constant showing how many times the small sample fits into the standard
(m2. ha). while sﬁnp is the dispersion of this sample.

16

FOB 0FFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Conversion of the dispersion by (2) into a standard sample using estimates of
small samples yields strong positive systematic displacement of s2. This dis-
placement occurs because of the significantly curvilinear bond [7, 9—11] between
sz and i. and results in a solution with the inevitable conclusion that for equal
accuracy of computation of the small samples. one should use more than of large
samples.

Resolution of the problem of evaluating dispersion for large samples based on small
ones was so tempting that a number of studies appeared [12-14] which attempted to
derive a common formula for its change with a change in the size m of the unit of
calculation (32 - amg. g > 0). From a theoretical viewpoint. this formula is not
without reproach [15] since with an increase in the sample size m. the dispersion
also rises without limit.

However. this conversion is possible [9] if a careful study is made of the tendency
to change in the dispersion of animal popu ation density in samples of successively
larger size whose limit is the standard (m . ha). The existence of aggregations

in animals reveals the fact (fig 1) that points noticeably deviate from the
straight line a2 - i which is typical for Poisson's distribution. and are arranged
around the parabola s2 - i + i [R corresponding to the negative binomial distri-
bution. This also explains the exceeding of s > i.

g - . .._ __._-‘.. . .._.

 

” w am «I: w w an (:7: w w w 47: w w w a); to

Figure 1. Link between Dispersion (92) and Average (2) in Populations

:a. fox (Vulpes vulpes)
b. small ground squirrel (Citellus pygmaeus)
c. red pine saw fly (Neodiprion sertifer)

ground beetle (Calatus melanoceghalus)
- x

d.

1. random (Poisson) distribution s 2 2 2 l

2 negative binomial (nonrandom) distribution with dispersion sct - a inp(E +
l

5§-). Here for comparison of the populations of different animals, 32 and

x are presented for a single scale and are given in the figure in fractions
of a unit.

Formula (I) has little information for the ecologist. therefore it is expedient
to study it in terms of an optimal (small) sample. Dispersion of the sample
equals 52 - i + izlk. and its area (u) is a times £const) smaller than the stgndard
so that a - l/u and u - l/a. Then sip - l/k(u§n2) + uimz. we will remove u from

the parentheses and we have
17

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2 _ 2 l -2 §m2
snp u (k x "2 +7).

We will add and will subtract imz in the parentheses of the last equation

2 _ 21-2 - £1112..-
snP u (kxm2+xm2+T xm2)°

2

The first two terms in the parentheses are 5 m2. and expanding them. we obtain

2 22 -_2-
u s m2 + uxmz u 02'

snP

Now we replace u by I/a

2 .1 22.1- .1.-
snp :2 s m a “m2 - 82 Xuz.
Freeing ourselves from the fraction by multiplying by a2, and transferring ssz to
the left side. we obtain
2 2 2 - -

5 m2 a a snp - a xnz + xmz.

but

xmz - axnp.
After substitution and simple procedures of transforming the latter equality, we
finally have

2 2 2 - -
3 m2 ha - a (snp — xnp) + axﬂp. (3)
Equation (3) is the optimizing calculation of the formula which permits direct
conversionusings "P. x and k of the sampling of the estimate of dispersion
(s2 ) from a small samgle into successively larger ones. or immediately into the
stagaard. Estimates of dispersion from the sampling and those computed from
formula (3) practically coincide (the Kokren test did not show significant
differences). The conclusion is exceptionally important for practice. since a
real possibility is afforded for calculation by small samples in a quantity that
is approximately equal to the large (m2. ha). In this case. the area of examina-
tion is significantly reduced (iO-l6-fold) as previously reported [9].

In formula (3). the term a2(sznp- inp) is the component of dispersion which evalu-

ates the cunditions (temperature. degree of illumination, humidity. properties of
soil. macro and microrelief. etc.) of small sections. In these sections, groupings

of animals of varying density are observed. Hhereupon. s npminus xnp’ random

(Parason) distribution. represents the dispersion of the negative binomial dis-
tribution. The second term in (3) axnp is random (Poisson) distribution of groups

of animals on a large, ecologically uniform section of space (forest, field with
different crops, etc.).

18

Ff”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is impossible to evaluate directly from formula (3) the percentage contribution
to the total variation which is made separately by the random (Poisson) and
negative binomial (nonrandom) distribution. However. this separation of the

distributions can be obtained by transforming the formulas for parameter k as
follows. "a have

 

After reduction to a common denominator. we obtain for a small sample

-2 2

HS2 - §) I x and s - x - lek.

For a large standard sample, the latter equation is written as:

2 2 2-2

a (sap - xnp) - a x W/k.
Consequently. the right side of the equation has the same ecological interpre-
tation as the first term in formula (3). This equation not only proves once more
the correctness of formula (3), but also confirms the fact that if the distribution
is approximately random. and this situation is encountered fairly often in samplings
,made of natural animal populations. then dispersion of an ecologically uniform
section does not make a significant contribution to the general variation.

He will rewrite (3) as

52 --—32+a§

After reduction to a common denominator. removing a2§ip and k from the parentheses .

we obtain a final version of the optimizing formula (5)

2 ”2;2(__1___)

s
m2 ax
.ha "P

The obtained equation is equivalent to (3) and has the same ecological interpreta-
tion. However, (4) has a significant advantage over (3), since it permits separate
computation of the percentage contribution to the general variation of the nega-
tive binomial (ilk) and the random (l/ax ) distribution. This percentage is
immediately evaluated for the standard sagple. All the discussions presented

above are based on the hypothesis that k is constant. In actuality, k can change
in fairly broad limits.

For the practical appligation of formulas (3) and (4). it is sufficient to know
the mutual changes of s . x and k for a sample of any size which was made by the

sampling. Then. by using the corrections given below for nonrandom distribution.
and by having information of only one aamp ing, one can compute the dispersion

evaluation from a sample of any small size for successively larger areas. or
‘directly for the standard

19

I1HICNHNCIAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Case 1.

$2 = ;, 32 < x, x < 1. k - 0, k + 0.

a: I a2(s - gap) + a§np
Case 2.

k < 0.5.

52cc - [a2(s - § ) + a; )k.
Case 3.

0.5 < k < I.

sit - [a2(s:p - iﬁp) + a§nplk2.
Case 4.

l < k < 3.0.

8:: _ [42(32n -§ )+ a; 1.

k

Case 5.

k > 3.0.

2

2 2 - -
sct a (sup xnp) + axnp.
All the procedures listed for formula (3) are also correct for formula (5).
One should stress in particular that the described link between s2 and i was
established for animals that are distant both ecologically and taxonomically.

Nevertheless, formulas (3) and (A) are suitable to optimize their calculation.

These formulas have a sufficiently general nature. since they are based on strict
mathematical theory [1-5] of random and negative binomial distribution.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Greenwood, H., and Yule. G. U. J. ROY. STAT. 3°C.. V01 83. No l. 1920.
2. Fisher, R. A. ANN. EUGENICS. No ll. 1941.
3. Haldane, J. I. B. IBID.

4. Bliss. C. I.. and Fisher, R. A. BIOMBTRICS, No 9. 1953.

20

FOR 0i1ﬂCJAl.lﬂﬂB(NVLY
7.
8.

9.

10.
ll.
12.
13.
16.

IS.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Haters. H. E. J. EOONO. £81.. Vol 52. No 6. [959.
Finney. D. I. BIOHETRICS BUL., No 2, 1946.
Borodin. A. L. EKOLOGIYA. No 3. 1975.

Lyons. L. A.CANAD.ENTOMOL.. Vol 96. No 11. 1966.

Iuao. S., and Kuno. E. In "Statistical Ecology. Spatial Patterns and Stati-
stical Distributions." 1971. pp 561-513.

Taylor, L. R. NATURE. Vol 189. No 6766, 1961.

Guppy. 1. C.. and Harcourt. D. C. CANAD. ENTOMDL.. Vol 102. No 11. 1970.
Jessen. R. J. IOWA ACR. EXP. STA. RES. BULL.. 1942. p 304.

Hendricks, H. A. J. AMER. STATIST. ASSOC.. No 39, 1945.

Hahalanobia. P. C. PHIL. TRANS. ROY. SOC. LONDON B. 1966. p 32!.

Kokren. U. "Metody vyborochnogo iseledovaniya" [Methods of Sampling Study].
Moscow. 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

9035

C80:

1860/282

21

FOItOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HUMAN FACTORS

UDC 612 "735" : 613.6
BIORHYTHHS AND HORK

leningrad BIORITMY I TRUD in Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Feb 80) pp 2-5. NZ-
163

(Annotation. foreword and table of contents from book "Biorhythm and Work", edited

by A.D. Slonim, USSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Nsuka". 5,500 copies.
144 pages]

[Text-] The book examines the features of rhythms, work actions and work capacity
in man. along with changes in biorhythms in the work process. as part of the
general study of biological rhythms and at the same time as a section on the
physiology of work and ergonomics. A special chapter deals with methodology in
the study of rhythms associated with work activity. and there is also an appendix

in which some of the mathematical aspects of rhytlns in work processes are
described.

Foreword

work activity is engaging the attention of physiologists as the basic form of
active behavior in man. At the same time research on the physiology of work is

of great applied significance. The condition of the working man and the features
of his work activity must be taken into account in all measures implalented to
make production healthier and more efficient. Physiological findings are used
extensively in ergonomics, the organization of labor. and labor hygiene and safety.

Among the large amount of information of this kind. the links between biological
rhythms in man and his work activity occupy an important place. Work alters the
rhythm of many physiological processes. Therefore, information on biorhytlns

is now considered in the resolution of the most varied problems in the field of
labor organization and education and general behavior in man. This interest has
undoubtedly been aroused by the great successes and rapid development rates in

the study of biological rhythms during the latter half of this century. Biological
rhythm are now of interest to broad circles of researchers as a promising subject
and as important aspect of scientific research.

The links between biological rhythns and work activity are of considerable interest
in theoretical research on human physiology. Work is for people a most important
exogenous factor influencing the formation and restructuring of rhythms in the
various physiological processes. In addition to restructuring and synchronization,
under the influence of work. impairment of many rhythms is also possible; this

is :sometimes transient and insignificant and in some cases prolonged and seriously
affecting the health.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nature and conditions of work constitute a powerful factor influencing man's
condition and his health and development. These influences affect the broad range
of rhyttms from the high-frequency rhythms in the electrical activity in muscles
and the brain to the circadian, and even monthly and annual rhytlns in the activity
of the entire body. Rhytlans changes are frequently early, and sometimes the first
sign of the effect of work on a person. At the same time. periodicity is observed
in the work activity itself. The duration and other parameters of isolated work
actions and hmnan work capacity do not remain constant in the same work process
but are all the time varying, and it is in these variations that the periodic
component--the work rhythm—is seen. Special interest is being evinced by the
links between the rhythm of random work actions and the changes they cause in
the rhythms of the various processes in the body of the working operator.

Information on biological rhythm is essential for substantiating decisions on
many questions of production practice. The study of the various biological rhyths
is opening up prospects for evaluating both the effect of work on man and the
effect of the entire aggregate of factors in the way of life-work, everyday
activities and leisure. A consideration of the biorhythms reveals important
features in human behavior in production, namely its effect in the man-machine-
production mediua system. Determination of the rhythm in work actions is becoming
a special task in the optimization of work that takes place in conditions in which
an external rhythm is imposed by technological processes such as conveyer lines
and semiautomatic: technical devices. Planning of the regime of work and rest

is associated with a consideration of the periodic variations in human work
capacity. The organization of shift work and night work is determined from
information on circadian variations in the condition of working people. Although
it is still attracting less attention. the significance of low-frequency rhythms
with periods measured in days, weeks and months is considerable. Such rhytlns
have significance. for example, for planning days off and holidays, especially
when it is not possible to observe a standard duration for the working week or

to organize regular days off because of the production condituns prevailing.

The progression of rhythns in arbitrary work actions and changes in the high-
frequency physiological processes are of significance as indicators that characterize
the level of functional work stress and the degree of fatigue in an operator.

The term stress is used to describe the entire aggregate of changes in an operator's
condition caused by work activity. Like work capacity. work stress as characterized
by the features in the progression of and changes in high-frequency rhytI-s varies
depending on the phases of the slow rhythm, on the time of day and to.some

degree or other on the day of the working week and lunar and seasonal rhythms.

The fact that a link exists between biological rhythms and huaan work activity

has been known for a long time. During the last decades a systematic study has

been initiated on these problems. particularly the question of the role of the
circadian rhythm as a factor to be considered in the organization of labor. Gener-
alizations of research work have been published on circadian rhythm and its connection
with work both specifically on the physiological plane and in the field of ergonomic
applications for physiological information. The start made on the study of biorhytlms
in aviation and space physiology and medicine was a significant step in development
along this avenue. Changes in high-frequency rhythms and in various processes

when affected by work activity and in laboratory modeling of various kinds of

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

work are now being studied quite extensively. It is therefore fitting at this

time to review the links between work activity and the entire spectrum of biological
rhythns feund in man. In terms of spatial ideas, the spectrum of biological rhytlua
is a single whole, a complex subsystem in the total system that regulates
physiological processes in the body. This provides grounds for thinking that

a review of information on biological rhythms in working people can be both of
theoretical interest and useful in production practice.

The brevity of this book lus induced us to present only the most important findings
on the problem. Various biological rhythms are examined as they apply to problems
of labor organization: the rhythms of random work activity, the high-frequency
rhythms in the electrical activity of the brain and heart, circadian rhythm. and
finally, low—frequency rhythms. The material is divided into chapters on the

basis of the existing classification of rhythms according to frequency (duration

of period). The presentation of all findings is prefaced by some of the theoretical
considerations and a sumary of the main requirements of the methodology in research
on biorhythms in the Study of work activity in man. Taking into account the
significance of mathematical methods for processing results from biorhythm

research. some questions of the substantiation and selection of such methods are
reviewed in an appendix.

Because of the small size of the book it has been necessary to omit a review of
the role or' biorhythms in aviation and space physiology and medicine. There was
no intention of merely mentioning these questions in a cursory manner but no space
was available for a detailed presentation. The published sources on the problem
have not been fully examined. Wherever possible the authors have tried to use
Soviet sources and have also referred to reviews and sun-cries instead of their
own experimental research. Nevertheless, all illustrative material has been
presented with references to the original work. The main aim in presenting all
the information selected has been to examine it in terms of ergonomics with a
view to using it in the organization and improvement of labor. The individual
chapters and sections 0: chapters have been compiled by different people. Authors'

names are given in the table of contents. The collective of authors recognizes
the imperfections in the work presented and will be glad of criticism.

Contents

Foreword (K.M. Smirnov) ......... . .............. 3

Chapter 1. General Questions in the Study of Biological Rhythms
(K.H.Smirnov) ............................................... 6
1.1. Rhythmicity in vital processes 6
1.2. The spectrum of biorhythms and their classification ............... 8
1.3. Physiologists' ideas on the mechanisms of biorhytlns 10
1.4. Approximation of biorhythms with periodic functions ............... 13
1.5. Instability in the parameters of biological rhythms ............... 15
1.6. Desynchronization ...... ...................................18
Chapter 2. The Study of Biorhythms in Human Work Activity (KAI. Smirnov) . 21
2.1. Problems and organization of studies .. ..... ...... ..... ............ 21
2.2. Methodology in taking readings 23
2.3. Processing the results of readings ...... 27

2!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 3. Cyclic Movements and Rhythms in Work Actions (K.H. Smirnov) ... 32
l. The role of muscular movememnt in human work activity ............. 32
2. The cyclic nature of many muscular movemsmnts 33
3. The formation of rhythms in movements........................... 36
4. Optimum work rhythms ............................................. 39
S. Rhythms in monotonous work ....................................... 40
6. Rhythms inherent in human activity and the rhythms of

technological processes ........................................ 46

Chapter 4. Changes in high-Frequency and Some Ultrsradian Rhythms in
Functional Stress During Work ............................... 51
4.1. Changes in periodicity in cerebral electrical activity
(K.M. Smirnov) ... ...... ........................................ 51
4.2. A consideration of variations in the duration of cardiac contractions
in the evaluation of functional working stress
(V.I. Kudryavtsev) ............................................. 54
4.3. Periodic structure of cardiac rhythm in the minute and hour ranges
and its connection with the activity of the hormone systems
(A.0. Navakatikyan, A.P. Kapshchuk, A.I. Kovsleva, A.V. Karpenko). 57

Chapter 5. Circadian Rhythm and Work ..................................... 72
5.1. Circadian rhythm in human work capacity (K.H. Smirnov) ............. 72
5.2. Changes in circadian rhythm under the effect of labor activity

(K.H. Smirnov) .................................................. 79
5.3. Changes in circadian rhythm in mariners during a round-trip voyage

from Leningrad to Australia (A.S. Poroshenko, A.A. Sorokin) ...... 87
5.4. An ergonomic evaluation of shift work and night work

(8.11. Gambashidse) .............................................. 90

Chapter 6. Low-Frequency Rhythms and Human Work Activity ................. 97
6.1. Weekly work schedules (Ye.V. Osipova) ............................. 97
6.2. Rhythms with 20-30-day periods (K.H. Smirnov) .................... 101
6.3. Seasonal (annual) rhythms in the condition and work capacity in

man (Sh.A. Khamzayev) ......................................... 103
6.4 Rhythms with periodicities greater than one year in human
physical and creative activity (K.H. Smirnov) .................. 105

Chapter 7. Conclusions (K.H. Smirnov) ................................... 107
7.1. Research prospects in biorhythms and the physiology of work ....... 107
7.2. Body time "readings" and the rhythm of random actions . . . . . . . . . . . 108
7.3 Changes in biorhythms in functional work stress and fatigue .......111
7.4 Biorhythms and ergonomics .........................................113

Bibliography .............................................................. 116
Appendix. Mathematical Aspects in Detecting Rhythms in Work Processes

(N.V. Khovanov) ............................................. 126

1. Formal description of rhythm and periodicity ....................... 126

2. Spectral expansion of a time series ................................ 133
3. A stochastic model for generating a time series ..................... 13S

MMMﬂ»Mfmawmﬂx.”Hunuuuunnunnuuununnuun.M0

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1980

9642

C50: 1840/275 25

Flﬂl(”ﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHYSIOLOGY

UDC 613.693
EFFECT OF HYPERBARIC MEDIUM 0N MAN AND ANIMALS

Moscow PROBLENY KOSMICHESKOY 81010611. TOM 39: DEYSTVIYE GIPERBARICHBSKOY SREDY
NA ORGANIZH CHELOVEKA l ZHIVOTNYKH in Russian Vol 39. 1980 (signed to press 20
Oct 80) PP 4-7, 254-259

lAnnotation. foreword,coaclusion and table of contents from book "Problems of
Space Biology Vol 39: The Effect of a Hyperbaric Medium on Man and Animals“.
edited by academician V.N. Chernigovskiy, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 900 copies, 260

Pages}

[Text] The book contains results from research on basic problems in underwater
biology and medicine. Special attention is given to questions of tissue saturation
and desaturation by inert gases in changes in atmospheric pressure and the composition
of the gaseous medium, the function of respiration in a dense medium. the toxic

effect of elevated oxygen pressure, the effect of inert gases on the nervous

system in hyperbaric conditions, and heat exchange in humans underwater in

elevated pressure. The authors have not set themselves the task of discussion

these questions comprehensively.

The book may be of interest to a broad range of biologists. physicians and
specialists in the field of underwater and space medicine.

Foreword

A new field in the natural sciences has now been firmly established; it is
underwater biology and medicine, which studies the functional status of the

bodies of man and animals when acted upon by the complex of adverse factors

arising under load in water. The goal of this research is to find protective
methods that make it possible for man not only to work successfully under conditions
of high pressure but also fully to maintain his health.

Underwater biology and medicine came into being on the basis of classic physiology
during the second half of the 19th century when man began to engage in a special
type of work activity. namely work under pressure in caissons and underwater.

Under conditions of raised atmospheric pressure a range of factors affects the
body and these had not been encountered before in hunan evolution: high hydrostatic

pressure, elevated partial pressure for oxygen and other gases in the medium
being breathed and increased density 05 the sales in the YCOPiratory mixtures

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most complete information on this was first presented in Paul Bert's classic
work "La pression barometrique" (1878). Human physiology was enriched with new
data on the toxic effect of oxygen, the processes of tissue saturation and
desaturation of body tissues with inert gases in changes in atmospheric pressure.
and impaired bodily functions during and after decompression. Hyperbaric physiology
was subsequently supplemented with the ideas on the narcotic effect of inert gases
(nitrogen, argon. neon, krypton), the specific effect of helium, the safe limits

for the use of nitrogen and helium under pressure. and the possibility of man's
adaptation to the prolonged effect of a hyperbaric median.

The possibility of mastering the world's oceans depends on the successes of
underwater biology and medicine. The growing interest in hyperbaric physiology
is also connected with the development of new therapeutic methods, as for example
oxygen barotherapy, and man's possible flight to the planets of the solar system.

such as Venus where the atmospheric pressure on the planet's surface is about
96 kg/cm2.

The most complex biological problems now impeding man's descent to great depths
are those of overcoming impairments in the respiratory function and the neurologic
disorders occurring when the air pressure is raised to more than 6 kg/cmZ, that
is, at depths greater than 60 meters. At these depths. when divers breathe air

- the condition of nitrogen narcosis occurs; this is characterized by lowered work
capacity. drowsiness. hallucinations and loss of temporal and spatial orientation.
Host researchers consider that the main cause of this condition is the specific
effect of increased partial nitrogen pressure; however. it has also been shown
that there is a potential effect from increased oxygen and carbon dioxide pressure
and the general cooling of the body on the initiation of nitrogen narcosis. One
of the main factors promoting the buildup of carbon dioxide in the body and the
increased cooling properties of gases under hyperbaric conditions is the increased
density of the gases. which affects gas diffusion in the lungs and heat exchange.

when the breathing mixture contains a less dense gas-~heliun--instead of nitrogen.
it is possible to eliminate the phenomenon of nitrogen narcosis. and thanks to

this. to increase the depth considerably. However, if submersion.1s too

rapid, at depths of 300-350 meters neurologic disorders occur that are different
from the condition of nitrogen narcosis. These neural disorders are characterized
by a set of symptoms that indicate increased excitability in the various structures
of the central nervous system (tremor. hyperkinesia and so forth). The occurrence
of a condition of increased excitability under hyperbaric conditions while breathing
helium-oxygen mixtures is now known as high-pressure nervous syndrome [HPNS].
Possible reasons suggested for this condition include the pressure itself, the
effect of helium under pressure, thermal stress. and the buildup of carbon dioxide
in body tissues under conditions of the increased density of the breathing mixture.
0n the basis of studies of HPNS several researchers have concluded that the maximum
depth to which man can descend when using a mixture containing helium is 300 meters,
similar to the way in which the maximum depth is 60 meters when a breathing mixture
containing nitrogen is used. However. it appears that it is possible to create
conditions that eliminate the adverse effects of high pressure. Thus. it is
possible that HPNS can be overcome in man and animals at depths greater than 300
meters.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this book the findings are presented from research done by the authors the-selves
to study the effect of high pressure breathing mixtures on the body of man and
animals. in the discussion of research material. it is mainly the findings of
foreign researchers that are used.

The collective of authors expresses its heartfelt gratitude to USSR Academy of
Sciences academician V.N. Chernigovskiy, USSR Academy of Sciences academician
Ye.M. Kreps, professor I.A. Sapov, professor G.L. Zal‘tsman, professor A.G.
zhironkin, professor v.3. Halkin, professor v.s. Parfel' (deceased). doctor of
medical sciences i.S. Breslav. candidate of medical sciences 2.5. Gusinskiy,
candidate of biological sciences G.A. Kuchuk, and candidate of medical sciences
A.l. Selivra for their useful comments and help in the preparation of this book.

Conclusion.

During the past century it has been possiole L0 increase from 10-30 meters to

501 meters the depth to which man can descend, and to increase the duration of

the stay underwater from several minutes to a month. This has become possible
thanks to the work of Paul Sert on the toxic effect of oxygen and the causes of
decompression sickness; the research of John Haldane on the processes of saturation
and desaturation of body tissues with inert gases in hyperbaric conditions and

the causes of decompression; the work of collectives headed by L.A. Orbeli in

the USSR and Albert Behnke in the United States on the specific action of nitrogen,
helium and other inert gases under conditions of increased atmospheric pressure;
and the research conducted during the last 25 years in the USSR and abroad that
has shown that it is possible for man to remain for long periods under conditions

of high pressure.

Despite the successes that have been achieved. the "physiological barriers" that
prevent man from descending to great depths still exist. Of these barriers, the
most significant is the set of symptoms known as high-pressure nervous syndrome
lavn51. To prevent hrdS when they were making their record descent to oiu n-.e:s
the French research workers from COMEX had to lower the divers very slovly so

that total compression time was 265 hours. Reducing the rate of compression
during descents to great depths is now the most extensively used method for
preventing the development of HPNS at depths greater than 200 meters. However.

in the search for new methods of preventing HPNS research is also being conducted
along other avenues. For example, a considerable reduction in the compression
period for divers going to a depth of 575 meters was obtained without marked signs
of HPNS by the use of breathing mixtures made up of antagonist components. namely
helium and nitrogen in the ratio of 10:1. Of late, much attention has been given
to the prevention and treatment of hPNS with the use ofdruss. Using gas anatagonista
and drugs it has been possible for higher animals (primates) to descend to depths
down to 1,000 meters without marked signs of HPNS. In recent years at the
Department of Underwater Medicine at the USSR Ministry of Health Scientific

Research Institute of Water Transport Hygiene successful neurophysiological
research has been conducted with the aim of detecting the early signs of HPNS
with the aid of a rapid diagnostic system for determining the conditions of animals

at various rates of compression and. in the future, of controlling the parameters
for hyperbaric chambers on the basis of these data. Many researchers have suggested

that a major role in solving the problems of overcoming HPNS will be played by

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the selection and training of people who are most resistant to the effects of
hyperbaric conditions. Studies on the mechanisms involved in the development

of HPNS and on ways of preventing it are now advancing so rapidly that most a ecialists
working in this field think that the problem can be solved in the next 5 to 1%
years. If the problem of HPNS is solved. real opportunities will become available
for humans to make descents to great depths using gas mixtures containing helium
as a breathing mixture. Until recently this kind of prediction was not possible
because of the lack of convincing experimental data on the possibility of humans
overcoming another "physiological barrier"~*thehigh density of the gas mixture.

As shown earlier in the book, until recently it was supposed that the function

of respiration in man both at rest and particularly under physical stress with

gas exchange, while the density of helium-oxygen mixtures was likewise inadequate
at a depth of 600 meters. 0n the basis of data on the -hysical patterns involved
in the diffusion of gases under conditions of increased density, and also on the
basis of results from experimental studies. a theory has been formulated, according
to which hypoxic states under hyperbaric conditions are associated with inadequacy
in the function of respiration. However. stu ies have been conducted in which
when divers in a pressure chamber at 37 kg/cm switched to-breathing gas mixtures
containing neon they showed no signs of hypoxia either at rest or during heavy
muscular exercise. In these studies in which gas mixtures containing neon were
breathed, the density of the medium was more than 28 times greater than normal
density. Thus, the possibilities of the human respiratory system to successfully
insure gas exchange when the density of the breathing mixture is tie equivalent

of breathing a helium-oxygen mixture at a depth of 1,500 meters have been modeled.
The problem of overcoming the toxic effect of oxygen in hyperbaric conditiions
still remains important and complex. increased oxygen content in breathing
mixtures for divers and caisson workers was first used by P. Bert. He used
hyperoxic mixtures to prevent and treat decompression sickness occurring after
work under high pressure. Later. the oxygen content in gas mixtures for divers
was increased in order to reduce the amount of inert gases contained in them and
reduce decompression periods. The safe limit was established for the use of high
concentrations of oxygen under pressure for short periods. However. in deep and
prolonged descents under hyperbaric conditions the adverse effect of the prolonged
action on man of relatively small increases in oxygen concentrations in breathing
mixtures. essential to maintain gas exchange in a high-density medium, became
apparent. Whereas before an increased oxygen content of up to 0.35 hg¥c32 was
considered acceptable in a gas medium under hyperbaric conditions. and a content
of l kg/cmz in a diving bell, it has now become clear that the oxygen content

in a diver's breathing mixture should be as close as possible to the normal. It
has been shown that as a result of hyperoxic effects in hyperbaric conditions,
both at rest and particularly during muscular activity, hypercapnia and respiratory
acidosis develop as a result of changes in the sensitivity of the respiratory

of €02 and a drop in the efficiency of pulmonary circulation. Thus, one of the
main questions that must be resolved is now to determine the lower limit of
oxygen's toxic effect. particularly in prolonged action in the medium in
increased atmospheric pressure. in this respect, in our view, one promising
avenue of research is the study of the possibilities of the enzyme systems and
the body's biological antioxidants.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

temperature homeostasis in the body under load in a barometric chamber, especially
when divers exit into the surrounding water. It is now known that as pressure
increases the zone of temperature comfort is increasingly constricted, approximating

of rest and work. It depends largely on the level of energy generation in a human.
that is. on the nature of his activity. In this connection, as barometric pressure
rises or depth increases the problem of evaluating the true thermal condition

Despite the more than one hundred years of study, the problem of decompression
has still not been solved. It will evidently remain urgent while man dives under
conditions in which breathing takes place under pressures corresponding to the
depth of the dive. The first studies done on the possibility of breathing liquid
mixtures were greeted with enthusiasm. but their realistic use by humans remains
for off. In this conneCtion, research aimed at reducing decompression periods
after being under pressure and tin early diagnosis, treatment and prevention of
decompression sickness remains urgent. In the search for ways to reduce decompression
periods, studies have been made of body tissue saturation and desaturation in
hyperbaric conditions with the aim of working out regimes that move smoothly and
close to the physiological curves. Great attention is being given to studies
of the possibilities of reducing the decompression period by periodically switching
.‘the diver's respiration to different inert gases. Research aimed at developing
equipment that makes it possible to monitor the course of the desaturation in
individuals. with subsequent correction of the decompression conditions, is also
urgent. The latter is also of great significance in the prevention and early

Thus. summing up the results of available information on the functions of the
human body and of animals under hyperbaric conditions. as found in the Soviet
and foreign literature at this time. we may conclude that the possibilities for
the body's biological systems to overcome the factors involved in hyperbaric
conditions are far from exhausted.

Foreword 5

one...- oomauooowoomoeoooeocme oooooooooo o eeeee

Chapter 1. Dynamics in the Exchange of Inert Gases between the Body
and the Environment in Compression and Decompression ........ 8
Gas equilibrium in the body ............................................. 8
Gas saturation of the human body in a medium of constant composition
am meaum'..u.. ..... ..u.u.n.n.n.n.n.u.u.u.u.u.n.n.u. 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Solubility of inert gases in physical systems and body tissue ... ........ 22
Rate of diffusion for inert gases in liquids ........................... 26
Haldane' s theory on inert gas saturation processes in the body and

desaturation .......... . ........ .......................... ...... ..... 29
Existing models for body saturation and desaturation in isobaric
conditions .................. ............... .......................... 31
A comparative evaluation of the rates of saturation and desaturation of
various inert gases in the body ...................................... 40
Features of desaturation from inert gases in decompression ........ ..... 41
Conclusion ...................................... ........... ............ 42
Bibliography ................. ......... ...... ........ ................... 43
Chapter 2. The Human Respiratory Function in Conditions of Hyperbaric
Density .................................................... 48
The physical bases of respiration in a dense medium ..... ............ ... 48
Oxygen cost in respiration ................ ....... ...................... 53
Ventilation mechanics . ........ ......................................... 55
Ventilation response to carbon dioxide ................................. 62
Alveolar-arterial gas exchange ................................... ...... 65
Minute volume in circulation ......................... ............... ... 79
Conclusion .............. ......... . ..... ................................ 81
Bibliography ...................................... ................ ..... 83
Chapter 3. The Toxic Effect of High Partial Oxygen Pressure ... .......... 90

The acute form of oxygen intoxication .................................. 97
The chronic form of oxygen intoxication ............................... 102

Oxygen intoxication combined with other effects ........... ...... ....... 107
The mechanisms of oxygen intoxication ................................. 110
Conclusion ............ ..... ........................................... 120

Bibliography .......................................................... 122

Chapter 4. Neurophysiological Research and the Clinical Signs of the Effect
of Inert Gases under High Pressure ...........'............. 130

Hyperbaric narcosis .................................... ........ ...... 131
General clinical signs of narcosis and their connection with the gas
composition of the breathing mixture .................. ..... .. ..... 131

The narcotic action of inert gases on the central nervous system .... 134
The motor tunction in hyperbaric narcosis ............................ 147

High-pressure nervous syndrome ........................... ..... ........ 164
The clinical picture of high pressure nervous syndrome and its
etiology ..... ..... ........................................... ..... 164
The central nervous system in conditions of the development of high
pressure nervous syndrome .................................. ........ .170

Change in excitability of the neuromotor apparatus in the development
of high pressure nervous syndrome .................................. 176

Conclusion ..................................... ..... ................... 181
Bibliography ............ . ..... ......................................... 182
31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 5. Features of Heat Exchange in Man under Conditions of Increased
Pressure in a Gas Medium and Underwater ......................
Heat exchange in man in hyperbaric chambers .............................
Features of the microclimate ..........................................
Features of heat exchange by convection ...............................
Changes in the heat protection properties of clothing in the

hyperbaric medium

nascent-00.0.000.to...OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIUOO

Heat loss through respiration .........................................
Heat exchange by evaporation under hyperbaric conditions ..............
Heat generation in hyperbaric conditions ...............................
The thermal balance in man in hyperbaric chambers .....................
Regulating the comfort of the microclimate in hyperbaric chambers .......
Heat exchange in man when working underwater ............................
Mathematical modeling of heat regulation systems in man in hyperbaric
chambers and underwater ..... ........... . ..... ........................
Conclusion ............. ...............................................

Bibliography ...............

Conclusion ............

0000...-

ooa-oooaeooouun-uo ..... coo-ocouuooonoaooooo

IOOOOOOOOUOOOIIOOOcolon-000.000.000.000...

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1980

9642
080: 1860/277

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

192
193
193
198

202
204
209
212

213
215
£22

239
264
245

254
RADIATION BIOLOGY

UDC 535.23:577.1:S91.643
BIOCHEMICAL FUNDAMENTALS OF THE ACTION OF RADIATION PROTECTORS

Hoscov BIOKHIHICHESKIYE OSNOVY DEYSTVIYA RADIOPROTEKTOROV in Russian 1980
(signed to press 3 Jul 80) pp 2-5. 167-168

[Annotation. list of adopted abbreviations, foreword and table of contents from
book "Biochemical Fundamentals of the Action of Radiation Protectors," by Yevgeniy
Fedorovich Romantsev. Vera Dmitriyevna Blokhina. Zoya Ivanovna Zhulanova. Nikolay
Nikolaycvich Koshcheyenko and Igor' Vladimirovich Pilippovich. Atomizdat,

1190 copies, 168 pages]

[Text] This book covers an analysis of the mechanism for the action of radiation
injury modifiers on a molecular level. It focuses a lot of attention on an
examination of molecular interactions between radiation protectors. radio sensi-
tizers and biologically important endogenous macromolecules. It develops an
original concept regarding the complex biochemical mechanism for the action of
radiation injury modifiers. It focuses especial attention on processes of
temporary inhibition of replication processes and stimulation of the DNA.repara-
tion processes. It analyzes data on the importance of temporary formation of
mixed disulfide bonds between the radiation protectors. aminothiols. and protein-
enzymes that have a sulfhydryl group. The existing hypotheses on the mechanism
of action for the radiation-protective resources are critically examined.

The book is designed for radiation biologists. biochemists. physicians and
students of senior courses in biological VUZ's and medical institutes.

One table. 16 illustrations. 570 bibliographic entries.
List of Adopted Abbreviations

cAHP--cyclic adenosine-3' 5'-phosphate
APAETP--aminopropy1aminoethyl thiOPhOSPhate(gammaphos)
ATP—-adenosine-5'-triphosphate

AET--2-aminoethy1isothiouronium
BSA--bovine serum albumin

GTP--guanosine-5'-triphosphate
GED—-guanidoethy1disulfide
dATP--desoxyadenosine triphosphate

dGTP-odesoxyguanosine triphosphate
Diamide-bis-(N.N-dimethyl amide)--diazene dicarboxylic acid

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

DTNB--S.5'-dithiobis-(Z-nitrobenzoic acid)
DNA--desoxyribonucleic acid
DTT--dithioerythrite
dCMP--desoxycytidine monophcsphate
dCIP--desoxycytidine triphosphate
mRNA--messenger RNA
MPA--B-mercaptopropylamine
HEA--8-mercaptoethylamine
MEG-~2-mercaptoethylguanidine
NADN--nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADPN -nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
0HP--3rotidine monophosphate
PGPS--prostaglandin-like compounds
PPS--peroxide-like compounds
PCHB--n-chloromercury benzoate
RNA-~ribonucleic acid

rRNA--ribosomal RNA

nRNA--nuclear RNA

TMP--thymidine monophosphate
TTP--thymidine triphosphate
UHP--uridine-S'-monophosphate

Foreword

The problem of changing the body's radiation sensitivity uith the help of
various chemical compounds. modifiers, continues to remain one of the most urgent
and intensively worked-on in modern radiobiology.

The Soviet Union is concentrating a lot of attention on this problem. The first
monograph which analyzes the state of the question of chemical protection of

organisms from ionizing radiation was published by Ye. P. Romanisev and A. V.
Savich in 1958. Since then. many books have appeared which cover aspects of

the modification of radiation injuries using chemical compounds (Yu. 3. Kudryashov,
P. G. Zherebchenko. A. G. Sverdlov. N. N. Suvorov. V. S. Shashkov, S. P. Yarmo-
nenko. L. Kh. Eydus. A. s. Mozzhukhin, F. Yu. Rachinakiy and others).

However. radiobiology is developing so intensively that there is an urgent need
for periodic coverage of the achievements of this field of natural science in the

form of generalizing works. This book presents the concept worked out by the
authors on the complex biochemical mechanism for the action of modifiers of
radiation injury and analyzes the state of the whole problem.

Study of the molecular mechanisms for the action of the radiation injury modifiers
has fundamental importance for an understanding of the trigger effects of radiation.
At the samt time. interpretation of the molecular mechanisms for the radiation
effect on the cell affords an opportunity for new approaches to search for effective
radiation protectors and radiation sensitizers. In this respect. we consider it

expedient to cover a number of basic sections of radiation biochemistry. concen-
trating attention in this case on the biochemical mechanisms for the interphase

death of irradiated cells. Modifiers actively interfere practically in all bio-
chemical processes that define the individual and species radiation sensitivity.

34
Therefore the appropriate chapters analyze data on the effect of radiation pro-
tectors and radiation sensitizers on DNA metabolism. biosynthesis of ribonucleic
acids, processes of :eplication and reparation of DNA, protein synthesis in the
animal body. and energy processes in the cell. It was acknowledged that it is
necessary to briefly cover the state of the question regarding the possible role
of cyclic adenosinc monophosphate and prostaglandins in the mechanism of radiation
protector action. A lot of attention is concentrated on analyzing molecular
mechanisms for the manifestation of activity of radiation injury modifiers.
questions of temporary inhibition of the replication processes and optimizing of
the conditions of DNA reparation. The end of the book presents certain general

laws governing the molecular mechanism for the effect of radiation injury modifiers
and presents a :hart of the individual stages of their biological activity.

It has happened historically that radiation protectors have been studied as
compounds that are designed to protect eukaryotes from absolute minimum-lethal
doses of ionizing radiation ("hemopoietic form" of radiation sickness). At the
same time it is already clear that there is a basic possibility of protection
from penetrating radiation in considerably large doses. This increases the

interest in the modifying of radiation effects with the help of chemical
compounds.

Modern molecular radiobiology and radiation biochemistry are developing very
quickly. We therefore realize that by the time this book is published. new data
will have appeared on the mechanism for action of the radiation injury modifiers.

The authors will be grateful to all readers for critical remarks.

Contents Page
Foreword 4
Chapter I. Radiation-Biochemical Processes in Mammalian Tissues 6
Basic possibilities of modifying radiation-sensitive mammalian cells 6
Direct and indirect action of ionizing radiation on living cell 8
Target molecules 9
Effect of ionizing radiation on biochemical processes in culture of
mammalian cells 11
Biochemical mechanisms for interphase death of cells 12
Change in structure and function of nucleic acids and nucleoprotein
complexes 12
Disruption of bioeoergetics 22
Ionizing radiations and permeability of membranes 22
Biochemical mechanisms for reproductive death of cells 26
Bibliography 25
Chapter 2. Role of Endogenous Thiols in the Action of Radiation
Protectors 3‘
Bibliography 39
Chapter 3. Role of Functional Groups of Protein-Enzymes in Bonding
Aminothiols and Disulfides 43
General concepts on the role of SH- and SS—groups in biological
activity of enzymes 63
35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Reaction of thiol-disulfide metabolism
Formation and properties of mixed disulfides between proteins and
low-molecular thiols and disulfides
Formation of nixed disulfides between radiation-protective amino-
thiols and disulfides
Enzymology of thiol—disulfide metabolism

Bibliography

:hapter 4. Effect of Protectors of Aminothiols on DNA Synthesis
General concepts on the interrelationship between intensity of
metabolism and radio-sensitivity of the body
Effect of aminothiols on certain aspects of DNA metabolism
Mechanism of inhibiting effect of aminothiols on DNA synthesis

Bibliography

:hapter 5. Molecular Fundamentals of Biochemical Mechanism for Radi-
ation Protective Action of Aminothiols
Evaluation of the role of formation of mixed disulfide aminothiols
with proteins in radiation-protective action

Aminothiols as resources preventing the formation and realization of
primary damages in DNA molecules

Bibliography

Ihapter 6. Moelcular Mechanisms for Radiation-Protective Effect of
Protectors on Biosynthesis of Ribonucleic Acids
Introduction
Possible mechanisms for the action of aminothiols and disulfides
Certain information on the effect of indolyl alkylamines
Antiradiation effectiveness of ATP and its derivatives
Effect of exogenous nucleic acids on RNA metabolism after irradiation
Concept of the mechanism for the effect of antibodies for single-
helix DNA on the process of transcription after irradiation
Bibliography

:hapter 7. Effect of Radiation Protectors on Protein Synthesis in

the Animal Body
Isolated protein-synthesizing systems and effect on their radio-

protectors (experiments in vitro)
Effect of protectors on protein synthesis in nuclei of spleen and

thymus of intact rats
Effect of radioprotectors on protein synthesis and other biochemical

indicators of irradiated animals

Effect of protectors on protein synthesis in splenic nuclei of rats
irradiated with different dose power

Bibliogrnnhy

Chapter 8. Effect of Means of Chemical Protection on Energy Processes
in the Cell
Bibliography

Chapter 9. Role of Cyclic Adenosine-3:S-Monophosphate (CAMP) in the
Radiation Protective Action of Aminothiols

Bibliography
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 10. Prostaglandins and the Mechanism for the Effect of Radiation

Protection Resources 152

Bibliography 155
Chapter 11. General Laws Governing Molecular Mechanisms for the Effect

of Radiation Injury Modifiers 157

Bibliography 165

COPYRIGHT: Atouizdat. 1980

9035
CSO: 1840/299

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCEOWY

PSYGiOHJSCULAR TRAINIW-A MOD OF MENTAL SBLPREGJLATION

Moscow PSIKHOHYSBECHNAYA TRBNIROVKA--ME'IOD PSIHIICEBSKOY SWREGILYATSII in Russian
1979 pp 1-28 '

[Book "Psychomuscular Training-ma Method of Mental Self-Regulation'. by Anatoliy
Vasil'yevich Alekseyev. 1‘sentral'nyy ordena Lenina institut usovershenstvovaniya
vrachey Ministerstva zdravookhraneniya 8851!, 3,000 copies, 28 pages)

[Text 1 Introduction

me intensity of the struggle at athletic cospetitions is rising continuously from
year to year. It reaches its madman in the most ilportant competitions of our
times -the Olympic Canes. Experience has shown that the natal factor-the ability
of the conpetitors to become and be the sort of people needed in the rivalry of
sports is paramount to victory. The strength contained in autosuggestion can be

of great assistance to athletes in setting their mind to fight without quarter and
to give their all. ‘mere are many variants of this method of mental self-regulation
today. Most of them were created for therapeutic purposes. It is only since the
1960's that we have started developing autosuggestion systems taking account of the
unique features of athletic activity.

The 1970's are now drawing to a close. Sports today differ in many ways from the
way they were 10-15 years ago. Thus new require-ante are also imposed on the methods
of mental self-regulation employed. ’mey must be silpler, easy to assimilate, and
highly effective.

Considering these requirements, a new technique of mntal-self-regulation--'psycho-
moular training" (Pink-was devised in the course of 5 years of work with sportsmen.

About Mental Self-Regulation

Mental self-regulation (HSR) is defined as influence of the individual, upon himself,
by means of words and by mental images corresponding to these words.

It is a consnonly accepted fact that words and natal images corresponding to them
are capable of a purposeful influence upon body functions: If, for exasple, one
were to say (aloud or to one's self) . ”a juicy. sour slice of lawn" and think about
this slice in one's mouth, saliva would begin to flow involuntarily-ﬁre copiously
as the mental image of this lemn slice becomes clearer.

38

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using words and the mental images corresponding to then, we can also elicit many
emtional reactions, for example fear or joy, and thus alter the activities of various
systems, including respiratory and cardiovascular. We know that both in the presence
of fear and in a mment of joy, breathing becomes deeper and the heart beat quickens.

It is universally recognized today that words may be associated, via conditioned
reflexes, with many body functions, and that they are capable of having both a useful
and a harmful influence upon them. Most methods of mental self-regulation are based
on the positive influence speech has on the way an individual feels and acts.

When in the second half of the last century doctors became interested in the possi-
bilities of mental self-regulation, it came into use mainly for therapeutic purposes.
Many different we systems were proposed at that time and later on, but I'autogenic
training"--a method created by the German psychiatrist J. G. Schultz in the late
1920's and early l930's--acquired the greatest popularity. Different variants of
autogenic training are used today as well, lainly to normalize various fmctiomal
disorders of tin nervous system.

As we know, the last few decades have been distinguished by an ever-increasing flow
of information, which is having an extremely tangible effect upon the nervous system
of healthy people. Because of the difficulties of life, the mind finds itself rather
often in a state of extreme stress, elicited by some stressful situations or others.

High loads are also imposed on the nervous systems and minds of modern athletes as
well, especially ones who participate in top-level competitions. Statistics show

that the nunber of persons with certain functional disorders (disharmnies) in the
activities of the central and autonomic nervous system is rising from Olyupics to
Olympics. Consequently the need has arisen for developing, specially for athletes,
a system of mental hygienic and preventive measures by which to shield their nervous
systems and minds from the traumatizing influence of stressful situations, which are
so frequent in the "major leagues".

Along the methods by which athletes can shield their minds from harmful influences

and set their minds to surmount the difficulties of coupetition, mental self-regulation
should be in first place. Armed with its possibilities, the athlete would be able

to help himself better than by any other means, considering that the situations in
competitive struggle change so quickly. It is precisely with the assistance of HSR
that the athlete can most effectively achieve the main goals of regulating his mental
state, the ones most important to athletic activity:

1. Relaxing oneself, if mental overarousal occurs.

2. Mobilizing oneself to the required level of activity when it is insufficient for
some reason or another.

3. Recovering strength by means of autosuggested sleep-rest, the time of which may
be of any length--from a few seconds to several hours.

'mus IBR is the easiest and most convenient way to arrive at that optimum mental state
at which all physical, technical, and tactical possibilities accumulated through
training and from previous competitions are realized in the best fashion.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.US€1)NLY

Practice has shown that in view of a large number of reasons, Schultz's classical
variant of autogenic training is ill-suited to athletic activity. This is why other

MSR methods are used in modern sports, many.of them being unique modifications of
autogenic training.

This training aid for athletes suggests an HSR method created in 1973-1975 (by
physician-psychotherapist A. v. Alekseyev). one which has come to be called “psycho-
muscular training" (PET). Creation of this method was dictated by the following need.
As we know, the ages of athletes has decreased noticeably in recent years. Today:
athletes begin preparing for many forms of serious competition as boys and girls

8-10 years old. They also experience certain nervous and mental disharnonies on
occasion. It would be difficult for young athletes to use “adult" methods of mental
self-regulation to combat these disharmonies--they would be too complex for them.

This circumstance served as an impetus for creating a “children's“ variant of mental
self-regulation. Thus psychomuscular training came into being as a result.

It became clear rather quickly that adult athletes also prefer psychomuscular training
over other methods of mental self-regulation. This can be explained by the fact that
PMT is significantly simpler than other MSR methods, it requires less time for its
mastery. and its effectiveness is high. Psychomuscular training has been employed
most often in recent years for psychological preparation of both juvenile and adult
athletes.

We need to distinguish two basic directions in aental self-regulation—self-peruasion
and autosuggestion. These differ in the following way. In persuading hiaself of
something, the individual relies on certain logical arguments. Suggesting something
to himself, meanwhile. the individual may act even in avoidance of logic, using mainly
those possibilities which are contained within unquestioning faith-s powerful mental
process.

Thus for example if we are in a room. there is no way that we can persuade ourselves
that at the given moment we are lying on the beach beside the sea. even through the
most distorted conclusions of logic. But we can achieve this effect through auto-
suggestion. In the same way. we cannot persuade ourselves that an injured organ is
not hurting. But suggestion to ourselves that there is no pain is not a difficult
task. In this manual we will be referring only to the possibilities of autoauggestion.

The method of autosuggestion presented here-psychomusculsr training-wae developed

in conjunction with the training of both juvenile (10 persons) and adult (12 persons)
gymnasts, juvenile (15 persons) and adult (10 persons) swiamers. coapetitors in
different styles of wrestling (15 juveniles and 35 adults), target shooters (7 persons)
and aarksmen (8 persons), weight lifters (10 persons), and divers (10 juveniles and

30 adults). Thus 162 athletes with different qualifications-froa second rank juve-
niles to masters-underwent instruction in psychomusculsr training.

To determine the effectiveness of psychomuscular training, we objectively recorded
the states of individual body functions during work with the athlete; this involved
tremorometry. pulsometry, recording of electrocutsneous resistance. measurement of
the tone of skeletal muscles and skin temperature. and maintenance of medical and
psychohygienic observation of the state of persons undergoing instruction in mental
self-regulation.

40

FOHtOFHKJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Experience showed that one can master the basics of PM? in 5-7 days. During this
time, athletes study the abc's of the method, and from then on they use the obtained
knowledge both when reconnended by their trainers and at their own discretion. It
stands to reason that the degree to which autosuggestion is metered depends on how
seriously, systematically and purposefully the athlete utilizes the possibilities
embodied within the suggested method of mental self-regulation.

In order for the sequence of learning the habits of PHT to become more mderstandable,
we should first acquaint ourselves with some of the premises from the science of
nervous system functions.

the Main Mechanisms in the Action of Autosuggestion

Life has long suggested, and science recently confirmed, presence of the following
phenomenon: When the brain is in a drowsy state, a very ilportant property appears
within in--it becomes highly sensitive to words and to mental images associated with
them. Consequently in order that words would acquire their maximum force, they
must act upon a brain in a drowsy state. It is mainly because of this feature--
the action of words upon a passive, drowsy brain--that autosuggestion differs from
sel f-persuasion .

Drowsiness is defined as a state in which the brain is no longer active, as in
daytime, but it is not yet asleep, as at night. In other words this is a transitory
state between alertness and sleep in the course of falling asleep, and between sleep
and alertness in hours of awakening. 'Ihe duration of these periods of naturally
arising drowsiness varies in healthy people-~from seconds to several minutes.

But for the purposes of autosuggestion, the drowsy state must persist as long as re-
quired to achieve a certain end. Thus we must know how to control drowsiness--its
duration and depth, without "falling“ from it into sleep and without returning to
normal alertness.

Placing himself in a drowsy state, the individual acquires a possibility for influ-
encing, with words, body functions which do not yield to willful orders directed

at oneself in a normal, alert state. ’Ihus for exanple, were we to instruct the

heart: "Beat slower,“ its rhythm would not change. But if we first innerse ourselves
into drowsiness and mentally say (and correspondingly, mentally 'see“): "n, heart

is beating slower and slower.. .," the heart beat would in-fact become slower. 'nius

the possibility arises for acting, :n a drowsy state, upon the autonomic nervous
system, the functions of which are known to be consciously controllable.

And so, the first main mechanism at the basis of autosuggestion is as follows. In
order that words and the mental images corresponding to them would acquire the
greatest force, they must influence the brain in a drowsy state. Consequently the
first step in mastering the habits of autosuggestion is to learn to place oneself
in a drowsy state, while remaining under the control of one's own consciousness.

no second main mechanism in the action of autosuggestion entails the ability to
maximally concentrate our sharpened attention on that which we are doing at the
given nonent. We all know that the more intensively we do something, the more

successful we are at it and the greater is the efficiency of our work. When we

concentrate intensively upon some one thing, our brain automatically turns itself
off from all other things, and everything else is sinply unable to "enter" our
41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consciousness. 'mis explains, in particular, the fact that by absorbing our atten-

tion conpletely with an interesting book, we can forget about everything, for angle
an important appointment.

Being maximally concentrated, in autosuggestion the attention lust nevertheless
remain relaxed. It is only when the attention is calm and relaxed that a drowsy
state can be maintained. Any mental tension, including that caused by attention,

disturbs drowsiness and causes us to slip from it into a state of some sort of
activity.

mese two main mechanisms (a drowsy state and concentrated, relaxed attention) lie

at the basis of most autosuggestion methods. the only difference isin the paths
leading to both drowsiness and concentration, in the methods used to master these

mechanism. In order to understand how a drowsy state can be achieved in psycho-
muscular training, we would need to acquaint ourselves with those mtual relation-
ships that exist between the brain and skeletal moles-muscles which cloak the bones
and power the whole diversity of mmuof which man is capable.

Brain and Muscles

We are built in such a way that at a time of mental arousal, our skeletal muscles

involuntarily contract. And on the other hand when the brain is calm, the skeletal
muscles involuntarily relax.

'Ihe relationship between the brain and the muscles is two-sided. signals from the
brain control the muscles, and impulses passing from muscles to the brain inform it
of the state of the given muscle or the given joint. ’ihus for examle, it is not
difficult for us to state, without looking at our hand, what the position of our
fingers is--straight or clenched into a fist.

Biological impulses passing from the muscles to the brain not only carry information
about the state of the "body's periphery". but they are also unique stimuli which
generate activity in the brain, arousing it. he sure the muscles are tensed, and
the more active they are, naturally the more ilpulses pass from them to the brain
and the greater is its activation. This in particular is what happens in morning
drill, where through physical exercises the brain, which had calmed down and rested
during the night, is actively turned on. ‘me warming-up exercises performed by
athletes in preparation for both training and coapetition have a similar arousing
action.

And on the other hand, the less active and the more relaxedthemuscles are, the
fewer impulses pass from them to the brain. But when the brain begins receiving
fewer and fewer stimulatory signals from the body's periphery, it begins to relax,
dropping first into drowsiness, and then into deep sleep. 'lhis physiological law
is what we capitalize on in peychomuscular training to consciously achieve a drowsy
state, and to control it. Consequently in order to achieve drowsiness, we would
need to learn how to relax our skeletal uncles to the appropriate degree--such is

the path to mastery of the first main mechanism of autosuggestion. But before we
can relax our muscles well. we need to how how to 'see" this process, to get a
mental picture of it.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Visualization and Imagination

'mese two mental processes play an extremely important role in the mastery of auto-
suggestion. Iuportant because words used in autosuggsstion must always be accompanied,
as was mentioned earlier, by the corresponding mental images. And these mental images
are realized mainly by visualization or imagination.

'me difference between visualization and imagination is as follows: If we look at
a pencil for example, and then, looking away, we elicit its mental image in our
consciousness, this would be a process of visualization. And so, a visualization is an

image arising on the basis of information reaching the brain from real phenomena or
objects.

But if we were to mentally see the same pencil, but bent into a ring (our brain is
capable of this and more), this image would now be the fruitof imagination. Conse-
quently imagination is a mental process in which mental images are recreated in that
form in which they cannot be perceived in reality by means of our senses (vision,
hearing, olfaction, and so on).

Let us suppose that we have decided to make ourselves warm by capitalizing on the
possibilities of autosuggestion. By first immersing himself into a drowsy state and
saying to himself: "I am becoming warm", an individual who is calmly concentrated
should either visualize himself in a situation in which he had once been warm before,
for example in a steam bath, or he should imagine himself to be somewhere he had
never been but where it is always known to be very warm, for example under the
scorching sun of equatorial Africa. And the more precisely and clearly visualization
or imagination is used, the sore distinctly the autosuggested warmth would be felt.

me First Practical Exercise

For learning convenience, all muscles of the body are divided into five groups in
psychomuscular training--musc1es of the anus, legs, torso. neck, and face. Imagine
that you are in a room with five large lamps suspended from the ceiling and a small
dim night lamp in the corner. The ceiling lamps are the groups of muscles, and the
night lamp represents control by calmly concentrated consciousness. When you relax,
or turn off the power from the arm muscles (in the same way that you would turn off
one lamp) , it becomes somewhat darker. When you turn off the leg muscles--a second
lamp shuts off, and it becomes even darker. without hurrying, by gradually relaxing

the muscles of the torso, neck, and face, we in a sense turn off one lamp after
another and drop into a pleasant darkness-—drowsiness, which is kept under the control

of relaxed consciousness--the small night lamp that remains lit.

The hardest thing to do in this procedure is to weaken your muscles without losing
control over the developing drowsiness, without "dropping off" into sleep. There are
two ways to do this: Either weaken all muscles to some point below maximum, or com-
pletely turn off one or two groups of muscles while leaving the rest normally but

not conpletely relaxed. This difficulty may arise only in the first while. Later on,
a student will find his own optimum method for achieving drowsiness. controlled by
relaxed consciousnese.

A student of autosuggestion usually assumes one of three postures. 'me most comfort-
able is lying on the back, with the arms, slightly bent at the elbows, lying palms

(.3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

downward alongside the body, and with the feet 20-30 cm apart. mm and long-armed
people may sometimes find it more comfortable to place the arms palm upward. me
second position is assumed in a soft chair with a headrest and armrests, upon which
the individual places his relaxed arms. The third is the met uncomfortable at first
glance, but it is possible to assume in most situations. Schultz, the creator of
autogenic training, called this position the "waiting coachman's posture". since

this posture was brought into being through the centuries-old experience of the
numerous army of coachmen who have been coupelled to wait for passengers, for ex-
tremely great lengths of time on occasion. snoozing in their coach-boxes. It is

namely in this position that mastering the habits of autosuggestion is the most re-
liable of all.

'me essence of the "waiting coachman's posture" is as follows: sit down on the edge
of a chair without resting on its back. Place the feet flat on the floor, slightly
forward so that a 120-140° angle would form between the back of the thighs and the
calf nuscle. Place the hands on the thighs, which should be spread in a relaxed
position, so that they would not hang down between the thighs (otherwise the fingers
will swell). Tilt the head forward slightly, turning it neither left nor right.

But the most important thing is the position of the torso. Bend the back in such a
way that the shoulder joints are precisely above the pelvic joints of the thighs.
Were the shoulders to lean forward, the body would begin to fall toward the knees
when a drowsy state is achieved. And if the shoulders are behind this imaginary
vertical line. the body would begin to fall backward. when the position is correct.
as the muscles weaken the back will siuply bend more and note, and the body will re-
tain its vertical posture.

The content of the first practical exercise boils down to the following. First assume
one of the basic postures. Then close your eyes--this will help you to concentrate
on yourself better. Now relax all muscles as much as you can: ”shake them loose".
men start turning off the first group of muscles--the muscles of the arms. These
muscles are the met "obedient", and it is easier to master the abc's of psycho-
mscular training with them. This is done as follows: me students take an average
bmath, slowly draw their fingers into a fist, and contract all muscles of the hands--

from the palm muscles to the shoulder mscles, or deltoids--to half of maxim power.
'Ihey maintain this tension for 2-4 sec while holding their breath, and then they
quickly release the muscle tension and exhale slowly and calmly. If after this the
student "heeds" the muscles of his area, he may sense a mique feeling of relaxation
drifting from top downward. 'lhis preparatory. purely physical exercise--tensing the
muscles while holding the breath and subsequently relaxing the tension while calmly
exhalingushould be repeated two to four times. After the physical actions are
mtered, the mental elements-~the words and the mental images corresponding to them--
are added to them.

'lhe words of the first Ph'r formula are used as follows: While inhaling and tensing

the arm muscles, think: "Hy arms. ..", and after they are relaxed in the course of
leisurely inhalation, continue the formula with just two words: '...are relaxing...":
these words must be thought very slowly, and still better, in syllables—"are re-
lax-ing...". 'Ihe mental images Inst correspond to the words of the formula. Saying

“My arm..." to yourself, mentally 'see" your hands. together with all of the unique
features of their structure. And while saying "are relaxing...", visualize or imagine
complete, maximum relaxation of the arm muscles to the consistency of "rubber” or

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Jello“. Initial tensing of the muscles helps to visualize such maximum relaxation;
after it, it is easier to sense relaxation proceeding to its maximum. And of course,

the clearer the mental image accompanying this process, the more pronounced re-
laxation would be.

To go on. As we know, when it is told we tighten up our body into a compact posture,
while when it is warm, on the other hand, we relax and open up. This is why the
word 'warming...", together with its accompanying mental images, is added to the
autosuggestion formula as an aid to relaxation. This word may be associated with
many pictures. 'Ihe simplest is warm water ﬂowing along the arms from the
shoulders to the fingers, as if in a shower. Whoever finds it hard to visualize
this should stand beneath a warm shower in such a way that the water would flow along
the arms, and memorize this sensation well enough that it could subsequently be re-
created by purely mental means, by visualizing a shower. Of course, other mental
images associated with experienced sensations of heat may be used as well--being

in the sun at the beach. going to a steam bath, and so on.

People who know anatomy and physiology may imagine-wand not just visualize--that
the muscles are permeated by numerous blood vessels, arterial in particular, through
which warm arterial blood is coursing from the heart to the periphery. When the
muscles are tense, the vessels contract, and after relaxation they dilate, allowing

warm arterial blood to begin flowing freely through them from top downward, warming
the arms, and especially the fingers.

Now let us bring the elements of the first formula together. Take an average
breath, slowly tense the muscles to half of their power while inhaling, and think
to yourself: “My hands...". Perform these three elements simultaneously. 'men
maintain muscle tension at the peak of the inhalation cycle for 2-4 seconds, after
which quickly release the tension while simultaneously exhaling calmly and slowly,
and at the same time mentally pronouncing the words ”are re-lax-ing...", accompanying
this with the idea of well-relaxed muscles in both arms. Heading the sensations in
the arms, persuade yourself that theyhave in fact relaxed. Only after this, while
inhaling gently, say the conjunction "and...", and while exhaling calmly and slowly,
the word "warming...", accompanying it with a mental idea of warmth flowing along
the arms, or imagining it.

mroughout the entire time, concentrate calm, relaxed attention on both arms simul-
taneously, and slowly "look" at the different parts, ”verifying" their degree of
relaxation and warming: then fix your attention on the relaxed and warmed hands and
fingers of both arms together. In autosuggestion, the attention process can be com-
pared with the beam from a pocket flashlight, which moves at times and remains still
at others, and the light spot it creates on the surface toward which the beam is
pointed. me role of the flashlight in this comparison (more precisely, flashlights)
is played by the eyes of the individual undergoing autosuggestion--his "mind's eye".
If for some reason attention "slips away" from the hands at the moment the formula
is being used and if other incidental thoughts appear, the individual must return
the "light spot" of attention to its previous place calmly, without irritation, and
then calmly continue the autosuggestion procedure.

'me formula "My arms are relaxing and warming" is a preliminary one. In order that
the effect of switching off the arm muscles would be maximally full, the formula
should subsequently be expanded somewhat; in its final version it would be: "My

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arms are completely relaxed..., warm... motionless...“, in which case a mental im-
pression of a pleasant nunb sensation in both arms should be associated with the
word "mtionless'.

Here is a detail you should consider: In the preliminary varth of the formula, the
process of relaxation and warming is only in motion ("my arms are relaxing and
warming"), while in the final version it is already finished, and the needed state

is asserted--"my arm are completely relaxed..., warm... motionless...". After the
initial inhalation and subsequent slow exhalation, breathing should be very calm and

shallow. When the final formula is used. it should no longer require special control,
and it should proceed spontaneously.

Do not go on to the final version of the formula until the preliminary version begins
to elicit a clearly pronounced effect (without the assist provided by tensing of the
muscles). After mastering the final version of the preliminary formula--"my arts are
relaxing and warming", it can be dropped completely, using only the final version--
"my arms are completely relaxed..., warm... mtionless...'. ‘Ihe words in this
formula are separated by ellipses in order to recall to the student that he should
not go on to the next word (and the mental image associated with it) until the pre-
viously uttered word produces a distinct effect. But if a very deep degree of arm
muscle relaxation is not required, the student may limit himself to just the pre-
liminary formula, and even abbreviate it by removing the word “warming".

The ability to turn off the arm muscles, to make them relaxed, warm, and motionless
is the first, mst important stone in the foundation of psychomuscular training.

It must be laid extremely securely. Only after this will everything else proceed
easily and successfully.

Most students of autosuggestion are able to both relax and warm their arms quite
distinctly in the very first exercise. But in order to develop and reinforce this
result, they must practice every day-~they should play with their muscles and the
appropriate mental processes (words, visualizations, imagination, attention) for at
least 3-5 minutes three or four times a day. the last time being in bed, prior to
night sleep. Here the word "play" is used deliberately, since Pﬂ'l‘ exercises mast
always proceed as a game, and not as dull, boring work. And of course the more fre-
quently the student plays this game and the more consciously he tackles it, the

sooner it will provide not only the desired results but also a unique sense of
pleasure.

It should be pointed out that appearance of a sense of pleasure as a result of auto-
suggestion exercises indicates that mental self-regulation has already started
I- ving its useful, harmnizing influence upon the body.

Subsequent Practical PHT Exercises
'-laving mastered the formulas for the arms, the student can now proceed to turning

off his leg muscles. The principle of using preliminary muscle tension, breathing,
worth, visualizations, imagination and attention is exactly the same here.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tense the leg muscles as follows: While inhaling, slowly tighten the muscles of
the feet, and simultaneously tense the muscles of the calves, thighs, and buttocks
to half of maidm power. As you do this, thin): the following: “My legs...", and
keep their image within the field of your calm attention. While exhaling slowly.
quickly release the tension and begin mentally pronouncing the words ”are re-lax-
ing...". 0n seeing that at least some relaxation occurred, inhale gently, think the
conjunction "and...". and then. while calmly exhaling, add the word “warm-ing...",
acconpanied by the corresponding mental image (visualised or imagined).

With every subsequent exercise. the preliminary auxiliary tensing of muscles should
start becoming weaker and weaker, and later it should be excluded comletely from

the autosuggestion procedure. Only after this should the student go on to the final
variant of the formula, which is used as described earlier ("Hy legs are completely
relaxed..., warm..., motionless...‘). Thus the second group of msclesnthe muscles
of the legs--are switched off precisely in the same way as the muscles of the arm

are switched off. All other muscle groups are switched off in the same way as well.
Thus the procedure of psychomuscular training is extremely simple, and students master
it rather easily.

Having mastered the formulas for the legs, the student can go on to muscles of the
torso. These are switched off in accordance with the principle described above.
Auxiliary tensing of the muscles, which is needed only in the initial period of
training, is performed in the following fashion. While inh ng slowly, tense the
muscles of the back, abdomen, and chest, as in response to command "Attention",
and then quickly relax the muscles while exhaling calmly and slowly, as following
the command "At easel". 'lhe idea of warmth may be visualized in the most diverse
ways depending on personal experience-~as everything from heat enveloping the body
in a steam bath to the burning rays of the sun. Movement of warm arterial blood can
be imagined through the muscles of the torso. 'lhe attention, which is calm and
relaxed as always, should slowly "survey" the muscles of the back, the lateral sur-
faces of the torso, the abdomen and the chest, promoting their relaxation. warming,
and then their motionlessness as well.

me formulas for the torso muscles are as follows: "My torso is relaxing and
warming...", "My torso is fully relaxed..., warm... mtionless...". One quick note:
Despite the word "motionless", the breathing movemnts of the rib cage and abdomen
should persist, though only to the most negligible degree. In tern of the muscles
of the back surface of the torso, however, the sensation of motionlessness may be
quite distinct.

The neck muscles are switched off after the torso muscles. Por the purposes of Pm
their boundaries are: in back--from the hair line to the top of the shoulder blades,
and in front--from the chin to the collar bones. 'nense the neck for subsequent re-
laxation as follows: Draw the head in toward the shoulders, which should be raised
a little toward the ears. After this tension is released, the sensation of creeping
relaxation is extremely clear. 'lhe idea of warmth is selected from individual ex-
perience. In particular one might recall the sensation created by streams of water
beating against the back of the head, shoulders, and neck, or the warmth of a furry
scarf covering the back and front of the neck. We might also imagine arterial blood
coursing through dilated vessels in this region.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Relaxed as always, the attention "surveys“ the entire neck. And the formulas follow
the previous pattern: The preliminary formula is: “My neck is relaxing and warming",
and the final version is: "My neck is fully relaxed..., warm..., motionless...”.

his neck muscles are isolated as a separate group because in mental fatigue (as re-
search conducted by Moscow State University showed) these muscles are extremely

tense. Consequently by relieving their tension we provide the tired brain a possi-
bility to rest.

And finally, the last group--the muscles of the face. Although they are smaller in
size than all other muscle groups, a very large flow of inpulses passes from them to
the brain. After all, most of the sense organs are located about thezface, and we
"aim“ them by contracting certain muscle fibers and relaxing others, for example when
we squint or when we open our eyes wide. But the muscles of the lower part o.‘ the
face are the most active during eating and sleeping. And because we are thinking
almost constantly while not sleeping and our thoughts are shaped by words. muscles
participating in word pronunciation, even "silently", are in almst continuous acti-
vity. sending abundant impulsations to the brain. This is why it is very important
to know how to relieve the tension of this group of muscles, if we are to achieve a
relaxed state.

Facial muscles are tensed insignificantly in PM! training: While inhaling, furrow
the brow slightly, squint the eyes, and clench the teeth and lips slightly. During
subsequent relaxation while slowly exhaling, smoth out the muscles of the forehead
and around the eyes, and release the tension on the teeth and lips slightly. Thus
we arrive at the "mask of peace", which must sibsequently be made warm and motionless
with the help of the appropriate words and mental inages. The formulas used here
retain their former structure. 'lhe preliminary formula is: "My face is relaxing and
warming", and the final formula is: "My face is fully relaxed..., warm... notion-
less...“.

Visualizations of a wanting face may be extremely diverse. thus one of the subjects
thought of the warmth of a steamed whisk in a bath, another thought of a heated
towel after shaving, a third thought of the warmth from a campfire, a fourth thought
of the warmth produced by steam rising above a boiling teapot when its top is re-
nnved, and so on. Of course, the face can become warm, and it may even redden, if
we recall a previously experienced sense of shame, but the use of negative emtions
is prohibited in ma practice, since they are harmful. As with other muscle groups,
the face may also be warmed by imagining dilation of arterial vessels in this region.

In cases where the individual is unable to remenber useful images eliciting warming
of the face, or when mental recall of such images does not produce the needed effect,
he should proceed as follows: Closing his eyes, he should bring his face near a
table lamp (or bring the leap near the face), close enough to experience the sensa-
tion of pleasant heat; then, after moving away from the lamp, he should recall
(visualize. this heat. After several such training sessions, the needed sensation
will appear simply through mental recall of the heat emitted by the lamp. Its image
will subsequently become the source of the required sense of pleasant warming of

the face .

‘mere is one extremely important thing to consider when “playing“ with muscles of the
face: Learn to warm the face area by area-warm the forehead separately from the

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lower half of the face beneath the eyes, since sometimes situations arise, for
example in the presence of high blood pressure, when it would be useful to elicit
even the opposite sensation of coolness in the forehead. m formula for auto-
suggestion in this case would be as follows: "My face is relaxed..., the lower part
is warm..., notionless..., the forehead is pleasantly cool". In other situations,
for example in the presence of certain variants of migraine associated with spasm
of blood vessels. a sensation of warmth~-a rather distinct one at that-must be
elicited in both the forehead and in those areas of the head in which the pain is
concentrated. 'lhe "light spot" of relaxed attention must be fixed in this case on
the place of pain. and at first, the autosuggestion formula should be as follows:
”My face is fully relaxed.... warm..., my attention is fixed on the painful area...,
the feeling of warmth is growing strong here..., growing strong..., the blood vessels
are dilating..., dilating..., the pain is decreasing..., decreasing..., it's going
away..., the pain has stopped...“.

But we should not forget, however. that in every case we must ”see“ the mental
images corresponding to each of the words we use. mus when thinking the phrase
"the forehead is pleasantly cool..." we must visualize either a cooling compress

on the forehead or the wafting of a cool breeze, or some other phenomenon of similar
action. It is only when words are firmly associated with the images corresponding
to them (it would be useful to recall this on more than just one occasion!) that
the desired effect may be achieved. And finally, before using such formulas, ones

having a therapeutic nature, the student should master those that make up the basis,
the abc's of PM.

As we know, the word "motionless“ is contained in the final formula for facial muscles.
The idea of motionlessness is associated here with a sensation of pleasant numbing of
all facial muscles upon which the "light spot" of calm, relaxed attention is fixed.

When switching off one group of muscles after another, follow this rule: After
switching off the arms, for example, proceed to the legs in such a way that the arm
muscles would remain completely relaxed, warm, and mtionless. moee mscles which
are already relaxed, warmed, and rendered motionless should not be tensed, even a
little, or moved during "play" with the next group of muscles. And here is something
else that should be remeubered: Do not go on to the next group of muscles until the
previous one is truly "obedient”, until it is sufficiently well trained.

Practice shows that within just a week of regular exercises, most athletes find it
no longer necessary to cause preliminary tensing of the muscles or to hold their
breath after inhaling: The muscles begin to relax and warm up well in response to
just the mental resources of influence alone (the words of autosuggestion and their
accompanying mental images). But if for some reason a long break in PM? exercises
occurs, on resuming them, in the first few days it would be better to tense the
Insoles and hold the breath at least a little--these physical elements will help
nuke the sensation of subsequent relaxation of muscles and their warming clearer.

After switching off all five muscle groups, as a rule students begin experiencing

a state of pleasant calmness. ‘lhis calmness is reinforced by a special formula:

"A state of pleasant (complete, deep) rest". We use the concepts "pleasant“, ”com-
plete", or "deep" rest depending on the quality of the relaxation.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But as was noted earlier, all words used in the autosuggestion procedure must be
acconpanied by the corresponding nental images. What sort of images may be used for
this "rest formula"? We suggest it would be best of all to 'see" (visualise or
imagine) a smooth, mnochromatic surface of gray, light blue, or soft green color.
As we know, these colors have a soothing effect on us. ‘me screen of a television
that is switched off is an example of a monochromatic surface appropriate to our
needs. looking at it and mmrizing its appearance and color, we can subsequently
use this visualization together with the formla "state of pleasant rest".

One can visualize, as if viewing a slide, some sort of pleasant, soothing, panorama
before the mind's eye. Various interference arising during the use of the "rest
formula'--spots, dots, and lines on a colored background, especially if they are
mving, and unexpected distortions in the selected panorama indicate that the brain
has still not achieved a true state of rest, and the centers of arousal hindering
rest still persist within it.

It is very important to master the "rest formula" well--in such a way that when it

is said to oneself it would lead the brain assuredly to a necessary degree of
passiveness, to a strength-recovering state of rest. 'lhis passive state is the
basis of the first main mechanism in the action of autosuggestion. It is experienced
subjectively as a pleasant drowsy state that retains under the control of calm atten-
tion.

And now that all muscles have become "obedient', now that a drowsy state is firmly
maintained under the control of calm consciousness, the time has come to learn that
PMT formula which, although it is assimilated last, subsequently becomes the first,
and remains so forever. This formula reads as follows: "I am relaxing and quieting
down". We can of course begin the training with it, but then the process of master-
ing Pm begins to be perceived rather frequently as something cosplex and difficult,
especially by a little athlete. But when students acquaint themselves with this
formula at the end of the series of exercises, they assimilate it easily and simply.

Use it in this way: While saying to yourself "I", take an average breath and simul-
taneously tense all of the mscles of the body to half their power,

as if stretching. After keeping the muscles tense and holding your breath for 2-4
seconds, relax all contracted muscles instantaneously and think the words ”an
re-lax-ing...“ while exhaling calmly and slowly. 'lhen think the conjunction ”and“
while inhaling gently, and then the words ”quieting down...” while exhaling calmly
and slowly.

Distribute your attention here as follows: Concentrate it on the face during the
word "I". men survey all muscles with it during the words "am relaxing", checking
the degree of their relaxation. Return the attention back to the face with the
word "and", and during the words "quieting down" direct it toward that point in

the body which is causing the greatest disturbance at the given moment, leaving it
there as you would a light spot from a flashlight. If you have a toothache for
example, focus your attention on it, and by simultaneously thinking the words
"qui-et—ing down..." you could reduce the sense of pain. But in cases where there
is nothing specific that is disturbing, keep your attention on the heart area or on
the forehead.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In PMT training practice, the first formla is usually thought out twice-without
preliminary tensing of the muscles the second time. Later on amng well-trained
people, the first formula-“I am relaxing and quieting down'--in a sense “absorbs”
all of the other formulas, and the individual can use just it to place himself

in the needed state of consciously controlled drowsiness within a few seconds.

Now let us bring all of the formlas of peychomuscular training together. Here
they are:

l. I am relaxing and quieting down...

2. My arms are relaxing and warming...

3. My arms are conpletely relaxed..., warm... motionless...
4. My legs are relaxing and warming...

5. My legs are completely relaxed..., warm..., motionless...
6. My torso is relaxing and warming...

7. My torso is completely relaxed..., warm... motionless...
8. My neck is relaxing and warming...

9. My neck is completely relaxed.... warm..., motionless...
10. My face is relaxing and warming....

ll. My face is coupletely relaxed..., warm..., mtionless...
12. A state of pleasant (complete, deep) rest...

During mastery of PMT, each preliminary formula eliciting the two sensations--
relaxation and warmth-quay be thought out two, four, or six times in succession.
breover this should be done with the least possible haste, even at a deliberately
slow pace, and of course with the appropriate intonations. If for exanple the words
"quieting dam" are pronounced quickly and with an alert tone, there would be no
useful effect. If for some reason the desired result does not com about, think
calmly, without changing your body position, about what might hinder attainment of
the needed sensations, and then think out the formula two to four times once again.
'Ihe usual cause of failure is insufficient concentration of attention, in view of
which the association between the words of the formula and the needed mental images
breaks apart.

Exercising four to six times a day for S to 10 minutes a session is recomded.

As was mentioned earlier, going on to the final versions of the formulas, the ones
calling for all three sensations--relaxation, warmth, and mtionlessness--is per-
mitted only after the preliminary formulas produce a well-pronounced result, since
there is no sense saying, for example, "My arms are oonpletely relaxed..., warm...
motionless..." if they are still having a hard time "relaxing and warming". Experi-
ence shows that it would be reasonable to use only the preliminary formulas for the

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first 3 or 4 days, adding to them the first and 12th. It is only after feeling that
they are well assimilated that the student should go on to the final formlas.

As soon as the preliminary formulas begin to distinctly elicit the needed sensations
(without the need for tensing the muscles and holding the breath), using each of them
once would be sufficient. And those students who are finding it easy to master
mntal self-regulation may drop all of the preliminary ferrules and begin using just
the final formulas after just a week.

'Ihe twelve formulas of the complete variant of M, when said to oneself without
haste, require 7-10 minutes, while the abbreviated variant consisting of seven
formulas requires only 4-5 minutes:

1. I am relaxing and quieting down.. .

2. My hands are completely relaxed..., warm... motionless...
3. My legs are completely relaxed..., warm..., motionless...
4. My torso is coupletely relaxed..., warm... motionless...
5. My neck is completely relaxed..., warm..., motionlesss...
6. My face is coupletely relaxed..., warm..., mtionless...
7. A state of pleasant (couplete, deep) rest...

It would be good to know how to work with just two formulas: me first--"I am re-
laxing and quieting down"--followed immediately after by the last--"A state of
pleasant (deep, etc.) rest'.'. his variant requires not more than a minute and, for
a highly trained person, 10-15 seconds.

If there are no special objectives to be reached, as will be discussed later, the
psychomuscular training exercise should be ended after the formla "A state of
pleasant rest" as follows: while maintaining a state of rest, think out the follow-
ing formulas: "I have rested and quieted down...", ”I feel well...'. After this,
stretch out the entire body in leisurely fashion, take several deep breaths, stand
up, and go on about your business.

'mat sums up the entire course on the abc's of psychomuscular training. Athletes
taking it master both of the main mechanisms at the basis of mental self-regulation:
l) 'mey learn to place themselves into a consciously controlled drowsy state and
2) they acquire the capability for maintaining relaxed, concentrated attention on
the words they are using and on their mental inges. It is only after metering
these main mechanisms that they can go on to all of the tasks arising before them

during mental preparation for competition.
Piguratively speaking, "a state of pleasant (complete, deep) rest“, of drowsiness
remaining under the control of the consciousness and calm attention, is in a sense

the launching pad. From it, using the rules of autosuggestion, we can shoot for
the most diverse objectives. This possibility is based on the phenomenon which,

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as we said earlier, entails: heightened sensitivity of the drowsy brain to words
and their mental images. After achieving a drowsy state, the second main mechanism
in the action of PUP-relaxed, concentrated attention--assumes the forefront. A
task brought within the scope of concentrated, calm attention is subsequently com-
pleted with much greater ease and speed than in a state of ordinary alertness. let
us now examine those tasks which are most isportant to athletics.

Mental Desensitization

”Desensitization" is defined as reducing or eliminating unpleasant feelings and
certain negative emtions, such as pain, fear, hunger and thirst. Because with auto-
suggestion the needed result is achieved simly by mental msans--through the power of
words and their-mental images--desensitisation is called 'msntal' in PM: practice.

let us assume that we need to reduce a feeling of pain caused by injury of the left
shoulder. The first thing to do is to calm down the brain by relaxing the muscles,
or still better by entering into a drowsy state; than the calm attention should be
focused on the point of injury. If the injury is recent, after relaxing the muscles
of this area, do not visualize warmth in any event, since this would elicit addi-
tional hemrrhaging. Consequently, visualize that the injured area is becoming cold,
that a bag of ice is lying on it. for example. 'me autosuggestion formula for this
case would be: “My left shoulder is becoming motionless..., motionless.... It is
becoming cool..., cool..., cold.... 'ihe pain in it is decreasing..., decreasing...,
passing. . . , passing. me pain has passed. ... passed. ..".

Each formula has to be repeated slowly, two to four times, accompanying the words
with the corresponding mental images, and in a minute or two the feeling of pain will
in fact begin to vanish. Of course, the better the individual has mastered the
habits of mental self-regulation and the more firmly he can maintain a state of
drowsiness controllable by the consciousness, and concentrate his relaxed attention
on the needed mental images, the faster this will happen. Naturally at times when
the symptoms of chronic injury become acute, the idea of warmth should be substituted
for the idea of cold.

'lhe next task is to relieve the sense of fear and anxiety prior to an event. In
this case it is very important to relax the skeletal muscles to the limit. his
process alone will soothethe brain, from which excessive pre-event arousal will begin
to drain through the relaxed nuscles, as if through a lightning rod. 'Ihe self-regu-
lation formulas for this case may be: "My attitude toward the event is calm...,
calm... I am fully confident of my strength.... blerything will be O.K..... My
attention is completely concentrated on the forthcoming event.... ally on it....
Nothing can distract me...“. It would be very useful to add another formula, one
which should ”activate” athletes with the sale certainty and inevitability as a
bullet shooting from a rifle after the trigger is squeezed. 'ihis formula, which
every athlete should use, is: “All obstacles, all difficulties only mobilize me

for actionl".

Mental self-regulation may «1150 be very useful to athletes needing to lose weight.
'lb keep from experiencing the acute sensations of hunger and thirst, imarse your-

self into a drowsy state, focus relaxed attention on visions of all that you would
want to eat and drink, and use these formulas: "I am indifferent to food and water....
Entirely indifferent... . Food and water are absolutely indifferent to me.... Complete
calm.... I feel well...". 'Ihis same principle can also be used by persons who want

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to quit snaking. me formula here is: "I an indifferent to cigarettes.... I have
no desire to smoke.... Smoking is very bad for me...‘. ‘me mental images arising
in connection with such formulas generate the needed attitude-~first an indifferent

one, and then a negative attitude toward the given stimulus. After this, the urge
to satisfy the interfering desires disappears.

Athletes prone to excessive anxiety will find it very useful to include the follow-
ing exercise in their mental preparations for colpetition: Imersing themselves
into a drowsy state. they should concentrate their calm attention on visions asso-
ciated with the concrete circumstances of the forthcoming event. mus for exasple,
a boxer must mentally see the ring in which he will appear, and the opponent he will
have to fight. A diver must "see' the specific swimng pool, the equipment, and
the particular dive which produces the greatest apprehension. 'Ihe main thing in
this mental exercise is to maintain a calm attitude toward the forthcoming event

that causes this anxiety. Such mental training lasts 2-4 minutes, and it is per-
formed five or six times each day. If it is started several days before the event,

it may help the individual to maintain the required self-control in the hour of
reckoning.

A situation requiring special discussion may arise when using the foruulas of mental
self-regulation: when an individual concentrates his attention on the needed mental
images, his brain may become activated. mic is felt subjectively as disappearance
of the feeling of drowsiness, as quick awakening and "clearing“ of the head. If
this happens, the individual should once again relax his nuscles, without irritation,
imerse himself in a drowsy state, and reconcentrate his relaxed attention on the
needed mental images. this may happen several times, especially at first. But
gradually even situations that cause very high anxiety will cease to activate the
brain; this, by the way, will be an implication that the needed effect is being
achieved, and that a correct, sober attitude toward that which had previously caused
anxiety, and which served as an obstacle, has been developed.

Regaining Strength

’me loads--both physical and mntal--of mdern sports are such that one can simply

not do without regular and timely replenishment of spent energy. Mental self-
regulation offers considerable possibilities for doing so. Just the "state of

deep rest” alone is able to produce the sensation of being rested, were one to remain
within it for 5-10 minutes. But it would be still better to recover strength through
autosuggested sleep. merefore it is very important for every athlete to learn how
to immerse himself into such sleep for a certain, previously prescribed time, and

to emerge from it on his own, rested and alert.

'me duration of autosuggested sleep may vary considerably. It may even be used for

30 second: such as during the minute break between rounds fought by boxers and by
wrestlers, who fight three 3-minutes rounds with 1-minute breaks. Of course, during

this time the athlete was not sleep in the usual sense of the word, but he calms
his brain down to such an extent that both his nervous system and his entire body
are allowed to rest. Fbreoverin these laments of drowsiness, during which the brain
becomes highly sensitive to words, the athlete can better perceive the instructions
of his trainer.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

Autosuggested sleep lasting 20-40 minutes recovers strength especially well. Before
immersing himself in such sleep, the individual should first note his intended time
of arousal. Assume that you need to fall asleep during the day for a half hour,
from three to three-thirty. In this case, before falling asleep with the help of
PM? formulas, visualise the clock dial with the arrows pointing to three-thirty, and
say to yourself: "Wake up at three-thirtyl", and repeat this thought as you pass
into the stage of drowsiness, before dropping into autosuggested sleep. After this
your biological clock, which was placed in our bodies by Mother Nature, will wake
you up at the appointed time. of course, you may be off by 2 or 3 minutes either
way. As in everything else, your precision will depend on your degree of training,
and on your proficiency in the techniques of rental self-regulation.

'lhe formula for autosuggested sleep should follow imediately after the last Pm
formula, ”a state of deep rest". ‘Ihe order of the formulas is as follows:

1. I am beginning to feel drowsy...

2. I am getting drowsier..., drowsier...

3. Drowsiness is getting deeper... and deeper...
4. My eyelids are getting pleasantly heavy...

5. It is getting pleasantly dark...

6. Deeper and deeper.. .

7. I am going to sleep... sleep..., calm sleep (until such-and-such a time-at this
moment, think the desired time of awakening) ..., deep sleep..., continuous sleep...,
sleep..., sleep...

Each of these "soporific" formulas should be thought out very slowly, mnotonously,
several times, accompanying them with the same sort of unhurried mental images that
generate the onset of sleep.

me duration of restorative autosuggected sleep-rest and its depth depend on any
factors, particularly the way the athlete feels and the specific features of the given
sport. During half-time, for example, soccer players could relax themselves well
and snooze for 8 or 10 minutes, which will doubtlessly increase their strength. In
target shooting, there is a possibility for resting with autosuggested sleep between
series; in this case the sleep can be deep, and much longer--up to 30-40 minutes.
"Sleep breaks" of the needed duration may be repeated several times throughout the
day. ‘mis would restore strength well in cases where the training process continues
from morning until evening with occasional breaks, as well as in all-around oospeti-
tions. 'lhus for exasple, expert divers are able to imrse themselves into refresh-
ing drowsiness for the needed number of minutes, even after each dive. 'Ihis gives
them a feeling of freshness and lightness, which is so necessary in this form of
sports, and especially in competitions. A similar state of "clear-headedness", as
some athletes call it, and of maximum concentration may be created in other forms of
sports as well, for example before each shot in "slow" sharpshooting. But do not
think that this ability can be acquired in just a week or two, though some people
are able to do so. It is only through systemtic, daily use of the possibilities

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

offered by mental self-regulation inthecourse of about one season that the desired
results may be. and will be, attained. A long break in mental self-regulation
exercises also has a detrimental effect on mental preparations for events. in the

same way that interruptions in physical training affect the athlete's sense of
physical well-being.

Activation

In a nusber of cases a distth feeling of alertness does not arise right away after
emerging fro: autosuggested rest. A feeling of reduced activity and weakness
persists for some time after, -as following ordinary sleep. ‘1!) get rid of it, we
need to use special autosuggsstion formulas that have cone to be called activating
formulas. It would be best to begin the activation procedure while the brain is

still in a drowsy state--this would mean that the return to high activity would occur
faster. Here are the formulas aimd at achieving this goal:

1. ﬂy whole body is resting...

2. And gaining strength...

3. me feeling of weakness and sotionlessness is vanishing from my arms....
from my legs..., torso..., neck..., face...

4. All of the muscles of my body are rested.... light..., strong...
5. My breathing is getting deeper...

6. Ever deeper and deeper...

7. My drowsiness is dissipating...

8. ﬂy drowsiness has completely dissipated!

9. My head is rested and clear!

10. I feel great!

11. I am looking forward to going about my business!

After this. the individual should stand up and perform a few warm-up exercises
for a minute or two. .

Sometimes at the end of a relaxing and calming procedure, in the course of reaching
'a state of pleasant (deep) rest”, the Insoles may acquire a sense of heaviness.

'Do relieve it, add one more formula to the activation procedure: "me feeling of
heaviness is leaving such-and-such moles". Use it inediately after formula 3 above.

In opposition to calming formulas, the ﬁormulas of activation mast be thought out
at a gradually quickening rate, with growing alertness, with an intonation aimed at
achieving the desired state. he nuisar of repetitions of each formula depends on
the way the individual feels. Usually thinking each formula once is enough.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Activation returns the individual to nothing more than ordinary, run-of-the-mill
alertness. In sports, however, extreme mobilization of all strengths-~both physical
and nental--is often required. Mental self-mbilization is a special topic.’

It may be approached only after mastering the “foundation" of mental self-regula-
tion, as is represented, for example. by this manual.

In conclusion, a few words about the rules of making up autoeuggestion formulas to

be applied to the drowsy brain: may must not have an active tone, and moreover

they should be made up with a positive, affirmative tone, avoiding negative stateuents
where possible. Thus for example, it would be incorrect to suggest: “I do not want
to smokel”; it would be proper to say: “I an indifferent to smking...". The latter
formula has an affirmative tone, rather than an active or negative one.

Any person who seriously studies mental self-regulation will be able to gradually
handle the most diverse individual tasks. But there is one task column to all
athletes. Its essence is as follows. We know that athletes are able to tense and
relax their muscles well. they should also know how to both arouse and calm down
their brain and their nervous system just as easily. 'lhe unique features of modem
sports require this most urgently.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Alekseyev, A. V., "Psikhoreguliruyushchaya trenirovka" [Psychoregulatory
Training] (Part I--"Relaxation"), a letter of instruction, VNIII-‘K, Moscow, 1968.

2. Alekseyev, A. V., I‘Psikhoreguliruyushchaya trenirovka" .(Part II--"Mobilization"),
a letter of instruction VNIIFK, Moscow, 1969.

3. Alekseyev, A. V., “A Variant of the Relaxing Phase of Psychoregulatory Training."

in "Voprosy sportivnoy psikhogigiyeny" [Problems of Athletic Mental Hygiene],
4th Edition, VNIIFK, Moscow, 1976.

4. Bortnik, ‘1'. L., "me of the Variants of Schultz's Method," in 'Voprosy
psikhoterapii" [Problems in Psychomerapyl. Moscow, 1966, pp 32-34.

5. Gissen, I.. 0., "Psikhoreguliruyushch‘aya trenirovka' (“Relaxation and Variants
of Concluding a Relaxing Bxercise"--supplement to Part I), WIIPK, Ibscow, 1969.

6. Kleynzorge, 101., and Klyunbiyes, 6., “'nekhnika relaksatsii" ['lhe 'nechnique of
Relaxation), translated from German, Moscow, "Meditsina", 1965.

7. Levi, V., "Iskusstvo byt' soboy" [me Art of Being Yourself], I‘bscow, "alaniye',
1973.

8. Mirovskiy, K. I., and Shogam, A. 13., “Some Clinical and Physiological Indicators
of Psychotonic (Autogenic) Training for Neuroses,‘ in I"Trudy 4--go Vsesoyuznogo

s“yezda nevrcpatologov i psikhiatrov' [Proceedings of the Fourth All-Union
Congress of Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists], Vol 5, Moscow, 1965, pp 392-397.

*Alekseyev, A. V., "Sebya preodolet'l' [Overcoming Yourself”, Moscow, 'Piakul'tura
i sport", 1978.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Panov, A. 6., Belyayev, G. 5., lobzin, v. 5., and Kopylova. I. A” ‘Antogennaya
trenirovka" [Autogenic Training], Leningrad, "Ihditsina',1973.

Svyadoshch, A. 11., and Roman. A. 5., "Autogenic Training and Its Significance
to Understanding the Pathogenesis and menpy of Neurosis,” in ”Trudy 4-90
Vsesoyuznogo s‘yezda nevropatologov i psikhiatrov,” Vol 5. Moscow, 1965,

pp 385-392.

Pilatov, A. '1'” 'Bmtsional'no-volevaya podgotovka velosipedistov' [Elational-
Vontional Training of Bicyclistsl, Fiev, “Morov'ya‘, 1975.

Schultz, J., 'Das autogene Training," 10 Anti. Stuttgart, 1959.

COPYRIGHT: 'rsentral'nyy ordena Lenina institut usovershonstvovaniya vrachey

Hin’isterstva zdrawokhraneniya SSSR. 1979

11.004

CSO:

8144/0441

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 613.693.001.S
629.7.072:658.3-057.6.009

MEDICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF CIVIL AVIATION PILOT RELIABILITY (NUMBER 1)

Moscow MEDIKO-PSIKHOLOGICHESKIYEPROBLEMY NADEZHNOSTI RABOTY LBTCHIKOV SOVREHENNYKH

TRANSPORTNYKH SAHDLETDV GRAZHDANSKDY AVIATSII (VYPUSK PERVYY) in Russian No l,
1968 (signed to press 10 Sup 68) pp 1-32

[Complete translation of pamphlet "Medical and Psychological Problems of Reliability
of Pilot work in Modern Transport Aircraft of the Civil Aviation (Number 1)", by
Levon Saakovich Isaakysn, candidate of medical'sciences, USSR Ministry of Civil
Aviation, State Scientific Research Institute of givil Aviation, Department of
Scientific and Technical-Economic Information, 32 pages}-

[Text] Introduction

This work is a brief version of the author's monograph-dissertation 1n the form
of several issues that correspond to different chapters.

It contains the results of the author's original research and that of the team he
supervises in the Department of Aviation Medicine (branch) of the State Scientific
Research Institute of Civil Aviation covering a period of 10 years (1957-1967).

In the first chapter, published in this issue, he deals with the problem of relia-
bility as it relates to a human operator, in particular, the work of a pilot; after
validating the use of this term, analysis is made of the possible means of quanti—
tative evaluation of reliability, including several original approaches; there is
brief discussion of factors that depend on man and determine his reliability: at
the end of the chapter the general order of presentation of the work as a whole is
described.

The second chapter deals with the technical characteristics of the system, in
which the pilot is one of the most important elements; in addition to discussion
of the general tasks of the crew, there is description of the display equipment,
controls and main systems of landing approach.

The third chapter deals with the professiographic description of pilot work and,
in particular, describes pilot action at take-off and landing; a general hypo-
thetical scheme is proposed for the work. as well as one of the possible variants
for algorithmizingpilotwork at the final stage of a landing.

In the fourth chapter, pilot work is analyzed from the standpoint of the psycho-
physiological reactions observed under actual take-off and landing conditions, the

59

FOR1OFFKJA1.USE¢NVLY
F0!‘0FﬁK]A1.USE(MVLY

latter being varied from simple to extremely complicated conditions. The study of
such reactions makes it possible to demonstrate more clearly the higher nervous

system and emotional stress in pilots and advance new hypotheses concerning the
intimate mechanisms of this state.

Thus, the second, third and fourth chapters shed light on pilot wrrk from the
standpoint of the tasks, equipment and "tools" of flight work (second chapter),
then from the standpoint of specific professional activity (third chapter) and,

finally, as it relates to the study of psychophysiological reactions of pilots
under normal and complicated take-off and landing conditions (fourth chapter).

The next four chapters (5-8) discuss in detail specific groups of factors that
impair pilot reliability. Such factors of pilot unreliability include the following:

psychophysiological, engineering design, work schedule and some sanitary and hygienic
factors.

The concluding, ninth chapter lists and interprets the most important conclusions
derived from this work.

The work as a whole is intended for aviation physicians in different specialties,
pilots and other crew members, aviation engineers and designers, as well as manage-
ment personnel of relevant departments, institutions and enterprises.

Reliability of Pilot Work

In spite of the close ties between aviation medicine and engineering psychology,
the term, "reliability," as it applies to pilot work has not yet gained broad
use in aviation medicine.

In engineering psychology, this term has long since gained the legal right to

be used extensively (V. D. Nebylitsyn, l964d; G. V. Sukhodol'skiy, 1964; H. Bobneva,
1961; M. A. Grodsky, 1962; 5. Lincoln, 1960, and others) with reference to operator
work or simply an operator (the corresponding two expressions are "reliability of
operator work" or "operator reliability").

The expressiveness and conciseness of this term were appreciated by neurophysiolo-
gists and industrial physiologists (B. A. Asratyan, P. V. Simonov, 1963; K. S.
Tochilov, 1964, and others).

Nevertheless, it is important to us to demonstrate the validity of using this term
in aviation medicine as a convenient synonym of such cumberameexpressions as, for
example, "retention of high level of efficiency [work fitness] under different
working conditions,“ "high quality of performance of professional duties,“ "ade-
quate reactions under complicated conditions," etc., in the first place, and, in
the second place, as a means that settles, to some extent, the question of quanti-
tative evaluation and forecasting of flight work performance.

In view of these circumstances, we must dwell in greater detail on validation of
the use of the term, "reliabilityJ'in engineering psychology and demonstrate that
the same considerations are involved in using this term in aviation medicine as well.

In addition to technical elements, every manual, semiautomatic or automatic system
also has a human element. Although the operation of the technical elements is

60

FINI¢HWHCJAI.USE(MVLY
basically incomparable to the qualitative content of the work of a human operator.
which is notable for being unusually integrated and flexible, there are many ana-
logies between the two types of work, which pertain to both the general patterns
of control and special mechanisms of regulation.

Let us recall that the science dealing with the most general principles of function

of qualitatively different classes (living organisms, machines, society)-cybernetics-
emerged expressly as an extremely fruitful means of studying the same laws of regula-
tion in living organisms and technical equipment.

We are justified in using the same qualitative and quantitative gauges as to other
technical elements for the study of a system that has a human operator as one of
its elements, already from this point of view.

0n the other hand, if system reliability is determined by the reliability of its
components, reliability of the human element becomes the most important object of
investigation, since expressly the unreliability of this element causes unrelia-
bility of the entire system in at least 251 of all cases of malfunction.

In the system of aircraft control, the pilot is a typical example of an operator

in a complex control system, and it is more complex than any ground-based system
with a control console; consequently. everything that has been said about an
operator, in particular, the validity of using the term “reliability" with reference
to him can be used to refer to a pilot as well, with complete justification.

Having recognized that this term can be used, we should provide a qualitative defini-
tion thereof and analyze methods of making quantitative evaluations.

M. I. Bobneva (1966) believes that the definition of reliability of operator work
should be analogous to the technical definition of reliability, as "... the ability
to perform the functions assigned to him without failure under specific working
conditions and for a specific time.” This definition is indeed no different from
the ones we encounter, for example, in describing the reliability of radio-
electronic equipment: "... reliability of radio-electronic equipment refers to its
ability to perform without failure its specified functions under specific operating
conditions and in a specific time"(Ya. H. Sorin, 1961; L. G. Tkachenko, 1966, and
others).

v. D. Nebylitsyn (1964), who digresses somewhat from the technical definition,
proposes to define reliability of operator work as "... the ability to sustain the
required work qualities under conditions of possible complication of the situa-
tion or, in brief, as preservation, stability of an individual's optimum work
parameters.”

In this definition, the author stresses one aspect of reliability-retention of
optimum work qualities under extreme conditions, deliberately disregarding another
aspect of reliability-~retention of a high level of efficiency [work fitness] over
a specified period of work under ordinary conditions.

6. V. Sukhodol'skiy (1964) assumes that it is possible to offer a broad interpre-
tation of reliability, observing that "... in the general case, reliability is the
ability to perform certain work functions in accordance with certain criteria."

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. s. Tochilov (1964) tends to equate reliability with efficiency, disregarding

the very aspect of the problem that was specially stressed by V. D. Nebylitsyn;

B. F. Lomov (1966) correctly views two aspects to reliability: the existing one,
pertaining to operator efficiency under normal working conditions and potential,

or reserve reliability, which pertains to noise immunity [imperviousness to inter-
ference] of an operator under complicated, extreme conditions.

In our opinion, the qualitative aspect of reliability of a pilot-operator can be
defined as the ability to sustain a high level of efficiency for a specific period
of time under ordinary working conditions and to react optimally under complicated
and extreme conditions.

This definition does not differ in any way from those quoted above, and it coincides
with the definitions of foreign authors (H. a. Grodsky, 1962; D. Heister, 1962; M. A.
Grodsky, C. C. Luthman, 1965).

It is apparent from the qualitative definitions of reliability that, in order to
elaborate quantitative criteria, it is imperative to clearly explain what should
be interpreted as "failure" [breakdown] and make proper use of methods of theory
of probability, statistics and information.

In the technical aspect, breakdown refers to a defect [fault] without elimination

of which it is impossible for the equipment to perform all or at least one of its
main functions.

By analogy with such a definition, pilot failure should refer to complete or
partial removal from piloting due to loss of consciousness, intolerable pain,
effects of extreme factors, etc. In this connection, V. D. Nebylitsyn correctly
observes that "... However, it would be better to take a broader definition of
failure, as an action that leads to worsening of the effectiveness of the work
process. In this case, the entire range of erroneous pilot actions performed under
the influence of diverse causes and resulting in the wrong final action would

fall into the category of breakdowns." 0n the basis of this broad interpretation
of failure, the author divides it into two groups: final breakdown covers the
cases where work is stopped, transient failure refers to all cases of operator

error in the area of calculation, control, interpolation. etc.

In our opinion, the classification of pilot failure may be the most varied, but it
is important for it to help to the utmost extent in describing the main content

of work. we can offer that failures be divided into the following categories,
from this point of view:

1) Direct failure due to erroneous decisions and actions of pilots under

the influence of various causes depending primarily on the pilots themselves
(judgment, attention and memory errors, flaws referable to emotional and
volitional aspects, moral and characterological flaws-athoughtlessness,
carelessness, excessive self-assurance and others). In turn, such failures
can be divided into severe, moderate and simple, depending on the end
result.

2) Indirect failure, unlike direct failure, does not have a direct adverse
effect on the process of controlling the aircraft; it consis s of synchronous
deterioration of a number of physiological characteristics 0 pilots, which

62

FOI.0i1ﬂC1AI.USIAONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080026-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lowers efficiency under ordinary conditions and could be the cause of
inadequate reactions under complicated conditions. Usually, this refers

' to the consequences of marked fatigue during long-term flights, in
flights involving numerous take-offs and landings, when physiological
studies show diminished lability and sensibility of the pilots' visual
analyzer, longer latency periods of visual and motor reactions, decline
of muscular endurance, drop of arterial pressure and other changes of
this sort. These failures are called "indirect," because they create only

1 the potential danger of a real failure; indeed, in the absolute majority
of cases, indirect failure does not change to real failure, due to the
abilities inherent in man with regard to volitional exertion, emotional
upsurge, "final dash," etc.

But it would be a great mistake to disregard these states of decline of
physiological functions, because expressly they are the sources of a

number of direct failures that would be difficult to explain and comprehend
from the standpoint of common sense.

3) Forced failures, unlike direct and indirect ones, are not significantly
4 related to any psychological or physiological state of the pilot; the chief
cause of failure is referable to exogenous factors, such as poor design,
device or location of controls, displays or other equipment, the effects of
such extreme physical factors as acute hypoxia. intolerable accelerations
and vibration, and finally prior worsening of general health status under
the influence of acute diseases or gross infraction of preflight regimen.

Depending on the exogenous factors that play the leading part in occurrence
of forced failure, the latter can be divided into design-related, physical
and pathological forced breakdowns. Strictly speaking, as the last feat of
failure, we should list piloting breakdown due to sudden exacerbation of

' chronic disease leading to syncope, collapse, shock, intolerable pain,
unsurmountable sleepiness, disorientation, as well as the consequences of
acute poisoning (nicotine, drugs, bad food); however, this special,
strictly medical category of failures, which does not have great practical
significance, shall not be discussed in the following. In this regard, it
is opportune to note that chronic diseases, which do not hinder performance
of professional duties of pilots, could have an adverse effect on pilot
resistance to the categories of failure discussed, as shown by our and
foreign studies (L. S. Isaakyan, 1966; C. A. Harper, 1964).

Before investigating the possibility of quantitative evaluation of reliability in
the technical and engineering psychological aspects, it is expedient to give
brief information about the methods of quantitative description of operator work,
which are being developed intensively in engineering psychology for the last few
years.

These methods are based almost entirely on the most important branches of cyber-
netics (theory of automated regulation, information theory, theory of algorithms,
electronic computers, etc.), and the leading role belongs to theory of probability
and mathematical statistics, as well as information theory. In cases where the
sperator's role is to detect and eliminate a mismatch between input and output sig-
nals, between which a certain relationship is demonstrable that can be described
mathematically, the quantitative expression of operator performance is described,
within certain limits, by means of a complex dynamic coefficient, which is called

a transfer function.

63
FORtDFFKJAl.USE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Broader use is being made of information theory software [mathematics] to describe
the performance of the human element. In this case, operator work is compared to
the operation of a communication channel between the receiver and source of informa-
tion, and it is characterized by a bandwidth, discrimination and throughput.

If an operator's work consisted, for example, of reading an instrument, the bandwidth
determined the instrument scale, discrimination determined the scale division and
throughput determined the maximum amount of information (in binary digits [bits])*
received and processed by the operator per unit time. Consequently, the three para-
meters that characterize operator work quantitatively are the range of absolute sen-
sitivity, resolution and, the most important characteristic, speed of choosing
alternatives or speed of determining probability.

Mathematical models based on theory of games and statistical solutions (choice of
optimum lines of behavior in conflict situations with consideration of the possible
effects of the antagonistic system),queueing theory (search for optimum forms of
information processing in the case of group operator work), theory of dynamic
solutions [or decisions], which serves to describe the processes of isolation by

the operator of threshold signal out of noise, with due consideration of prior ex-
perience, etc., are used for quantitative evaluation of different aspects of operator
work.

All these theories and the formal models corresponding to them reflect the quanti-
tative aspect of only some strictly limited aspec: of operator work and, furthermore,
they occur under specific conditions. They cannot be modeled and, consequently,

there cannot be quantitative expression of such complex and purely human abilities,
such as foresight [anticipation], emotional reaction, adaptability, goal orientation,
creative and logical thinking, imagination, etc.

These theories, which have greater limitations than areas of application, no

doubt operate with elements that correspond to crrtain psychophysiological mechanisms
of behavior and operator work. For example, there is no doubt that the cerebral
mechanism of evaluation of current occurrence of some process is based on a certain
calculating instrument, which takes into consideration and stores in memory the
probability of different events of a given process and, consequently. the parameter
of throughput, which takes into consideration the speed of evaluation of different

*lnformation that eliminates vagueness of choice of 1 out of 2 possible outcomes
is taken as the unit of amount of information. The amount of information contained
in a communication about one event equals the binary logarithm of probability of
occurrence of this event (Ix. . log: P). The amount of information contained in
communications about many events with different probabilities of occurrence equals
the sum of the products of probabilities multipled by their binary logarithms:

n
(I; -+ Kin?“ log P“)

Throughput of the system element is deﬁermineg by the speed of undistorted trans-
‘ I
fer of information per unit time (R - _$£l_¥__nll , where 8(x) is information

inputted in the element, “(y) is information lost in the element, T is transmission

time and R is speed of transmission.
[Translator's note: the "K" may refer to quantity, but formulas are not perfectly

legible in source]
66

FI”!(HWW(JAI.USEINVLY
probabilities, which conforms well with the psychophysiological bases of mental
activity.

Thus, at the present time, our ability to express quantitatively operator per-
formance in a control system is rather limited, and this applies to an equal extent
to objective description of reliability. Let us consider the possible means of
quantitative evaluation of reliability of the "human" element of the system from
the standpoint of probability theory and intonation theory, bearing in mind, in
particular, the known criteria for reliability of technical equipment. As we know,
these criteria are referable either to a piece of equipment as a whole, or to
similar elements constituting its structure. In view of the extrane complexity

of the system element, we are justified in using any type of reliability criteria.

1. Mean up time per failure shows the time of normal operation of equipment
(operator) between two successive failures.

Hean up time per failure is expressed by the following formula:

t
T I n

where t is service time or equipment (operator) work time, in hours, and n is the
number of failures per work time. This criterion is used in engineering to compare
and assess the reliability of similar equipment operating under the same conditions.
In principle, it could be used to describe operator-pilot reliability as related

to any category of failures, but provided working conditions are identical to the
utmost degree.

When evaluating immediate forced failure, the difficulty also refers to the need

to find only comparable failures (severe failure should be compared only to

severe, design-related forced should be compared to appropriate failures, etc.); in
assessing indirect failures it is no longer possible to make an individual evalua-
tion of operator reliability since, according to the definition of indirect failure,
it can occur only once per flight.*

Thus, the criterion of mean up time per failure can characterize rather approxi--
mately individual and collective pilot reliability according to the parameter of
direct failures with due consideration of their detailed categorization and

maximum degree of identity of aircraft types, flight courses and other conditions;
the same criterion can be used to assess reliability according to the parameter of
indirect failure referable to two groups of pilots flying under identical conditions.
We shall sub-it data that we calculated with the use of this criterion, on the

basis of foreign statistics referable to the United States Air Force (A. Zeller

and H. Moseley, 1957, and others).

During the early years of operating transport jet aircraft, up time per failure
of the direct failure type (severe [s] and moderate-simple [ms] constituted:

Ts - 95,000 hlfailure has - 51,900 h/failure

 

*In rare instances, the decline of functions is repeated twi-e.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In subsequent years, due to the increased collective experience in operating these
aircraft, the parameters increased appreciably:

'l's - 250,000 h/failure he - 110,000 h/failure

As for up time per indirect [ind] type failure, which characterizes pilot resistance
to fatigue, our data indicate that indirect failures in the form of combined decline
of several physiological parameters were noted in 22 cases (22 crew members of all
flights) among those involved in five 8.5-h flights (total of 8.5-5 - 1.2.5 h),
consequently:

42.5

Tind I «72—. 1.9M—

failure

When the same crew members participated in five 6-h flights, the up time was:

30 hour
T104 E 2 ' 5 failure

Consequently, reduction of flying time by 2.5 h increases reliability (in the sense
of resistance to fatigue) by 1.3 times.

In spite of the demonstrativeness and simplicity of this criterion, there is
limited possibility of using it to evaluate and compare pilot reliability because
of the difficulty of identifying failures and flight work conditions.

2. The probability of equipment (operator) work without failure over a specific
period of time is the most integral criterion of reliability, which takes into
consideration both the mean up time per failure and specified time for operation
without failure. This criterion, which levels off to a significant extent the
different operating conditions for the tested equipment (operators), is expressed
by the following equation:

-t

p _

where P is probability of flawless operation; a is the base of natural logarithms,
which equals 2.71, t is the time in hours during which the equipment (operator)
must function without failure according to prevailing standards and T is mean up
time per failure (in hours).*

In this equation, which represents the law or distribution of Poisson, 2.71 is
raised to a negative power, which is the ratio of normally set work time to its
actual duration, which did not cause a failure.“ Consequently, the lower this
negative ratio, the closer the probability of work without failure -P comes to 1.
If, for example, the operator should work at the console for a lo-h shift according
to prevailing standards but actually worked without failure for 16 h or else

*If the operator continues to work without failure, one should use total time
of failure-free work instead of '1‘.
**Or else it equals the mean up time per failure.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

there was a failure at the end of this time, the probability of failure-free
work during this period equals: P - 2.7l.{% - 0.7738.
If the up time for the operator up to a failure or work without failure constituted,
for example, 7 h, instead of 16 h, the probability of failure-free work would be:
0

p - 2.71‘7 - 0.4630.

Let us discuss the possibility of using this criterion with reference to the para-
meter of direct failures referable to the category of moderate and simple ones.
Here, it is possible to use the criterion to characterize the reliability of a

specific pilot and to evaluate the reliability of a group of pilots united by some
common conditions.

It is obvious that the negative numerator of 2.71 should be a constant number charac-
terizing up time per failure inherent in specific pilots or a group of pilots with
the same tenure in flight work who work under approximately the same conditions (type
of aircraft, route, meteorological conditions, etc.). Indeed, no gauge other than
mean up time per failure can fulfill function t. The negative denominator should
consist of a number characterizing the duration of failure-free work or specific

up time per failure referable to a given pilot or the corresponding means for a
group of pilots.

0n the basis of foreign data (D. L. Urschel, 1963; R. 8. Sell and S. P. Chunn, 1964),
it can be arbitrarily considered that numerator t equals a constant of 2000 h,
then the equation

has - 2.71 @,

where "x" " individual or group up time per failure or duration of failure-free
work-m-would reflect the probability of failure-free work by a pilot or group of

pilots.

If, for example, a pilot who has logged a total of 13,000 h had 5 simple or moderate
failures in the first 2000 logged hours, 2 failures in the next 6000 h and l in

the last 5000 h, the dynamics of reliability according to this criterion would be
expressed as follows:

iirst stage of flight work P - 2.711%3ﬁg - 0.0067
second stage of flight work 9 - 2.71'% - 0.5016
third stage of flight work P - 2.71'2';09 - 0.6703
5000

This example is also interesting because it shows how pilot reliability changes in
a typical case in the course of flight work: unlike the reliability of equipment,
which is low at first, then increases and again drops drastically at the end of
the work period, pilot reliability increases progressively in most cases with

increase in hours logged, experience and conditioning.

67

INDR 0F11CLAL.USEiDNLY
FINICMNHCJAL.USE¢0NLY

The probability of failure-free work, as a criterion of reliability, can also be
used to evaluate indirect failures with consideration of several conditions: in the
first place, duration of flights, for which the criterion is to be calculated must
be at least 7-8 h, since with shorter duration the number of pilots with combined
adverse changes would be small (no more than 501); in the second place, in-flight
studies would have to be made hourly in order to have sufficient information about
development of failures.

Having taken an arbitrary quantity of 2 h as t (see p 8), we obtain the following
equation, which is suitable for calculating the criterion according to the para-
meter of indirect failures:

--2

11.51””—

where' 'x" is duration of flight after which an indirect failure occurred. Having
calculated with this formula the values of P3, P2, P3, ..., Pn for different pilots
performing similar flights, we can use the following formulazn

z Pinddlndiv

ind n
steep

P.

to calculate the probability of failure-free work by a group of pilots.

3. The statistical parameter of reliability or mean percentage of failures* shows
the number of elements (operations) with failures related to total number of ele-
ments (operations) and time of per'ormance thereof in hours, expressed as a per-
centage. This criterion is determined with the following formula:

r, - 5“}? . 100:,

where d is the number of elements (operations) with failures, 8 is total number of
elements (operations) and t is operating time for all elements (operations), in
hours.

This parameter can be used to describe reliability referable to any category of
failures; however, it is particularly convenient for evaluation of individual and
group reliability of performance of experiments simulating the conditions of
forced breakdown (for example, design-related or physical forced failures), i.e.,
those for which the time and repetition factor is quite important to occurrence
of the breakdown itself. If, for example, pilot action "a", performed to turn
off one switch [tumbler] accidentally turns off a system that is important to

the flight (action "b") due to a flaw in construction, in the simulating experi-
ment the .esult would depend on the number of experiments and time of each
action of the "a" type.

*This criterion is similar to another criterion, which is called the intensity
of breakdown A(t); A(t) is the ratio of number of operations-failures to
their performance time and to number of successful operations.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4. Haintainability [accessibility to repair] is assessed by a distinctive parameter
of reliability, which shows how the equipment is adapted for rapid restoration of
operability after a breakdown; as it applies to an operator, this criterion shows
the portion of work time spent on testing. The quantitative evaluation of this
criterion of the "rest-work" ratio is made with the following formula:

treat
twork

 

K;-

where treat is the time required to restore fitness for work (rest) and twork is
the time specified in the standards for performance of work. It is apparent
that, with reference to equipment, a reduction of K means that its profitability
increases. whereas with reference to a pilot this ratio must be as large as
possible and in any case no smaller than 1.

During some trips-~of long duration or with many intermediate landings and take-offs--
p110t work time is up to 15 h per day; consequently, the "rest-work" ratio would be:

9 -
K E 0.6

At the same time, under ordinary conditions when the work period does not exceed
11 h per day, the "rest-work" ratio is 13:11 - 1.18. Unquestionably, this para-
meter can find application as a unique criterion of pilot reliability according to
the parameter of optimality of work and rest schedule.

In our opinion, probability and mathematical statistics theory also offer other
possibilities for evaluating pilot reliability.

If some parameters are recorded which characterize the quality of pilot performance of
operations that are important to their occupation or the current state of their psycho-
physiological functions under laboratory or working conditions, such experiments are
apparently aimed at determining the reliability of subjects. The importance and

value of such an approach are particularly apparent when the experiments have

goals such as determination of general and professional behavior of pilots in

simulated difficult or accident situations or degree of efficiency [fitness for

work] in the course of long-term flights;

In aost cases, the results of such experiments are governed by the law of normal
distribution or, at least, they present distribution curves that are similar to
the curve of normal distribution, and the numerical description of the results is
usually described satisfactorily by the formula for probability densities,* of

the following appearance:

_(x-x 2

1
ﬁx) ' 375 ' exp ‘71!

where x is a random quantity, ; is mathematical expectation thereof and o is its
standard deviation.

*Probability density refers to the product dF(x)/dx of integration distribution
function F(x) of a continuous random quantity.

69

INDR OFFICJAI.lEﬂE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the experimental results pertaining to determination of reliability are governed
entirely or to a significant extent by the above equation and, consequently, the

law of normal distribution, one can set the maximum permissible range of reliability
with the desired level of exactingness by using the well-known rule, "H120" or "H130."

If, for example, numerous experiments performed to determine the speed at which

pilots take instrument readings show that “+20 equals 18 s, the concrete result

of 30-40 a obtained for pilot N. is indicative of inadequate reliability in his

performance of this complex function, which is important to the pilot. we could
cite analogous examples to explain the meaning of range of fitness for work.

At the same time, if the adverse changes in different physiological functions, which
are demonstrated in pilots and other crew members in the course of the work day,

are governed by the law of normal distribution, the rule of "two-three sigma," as
well as the known rules of probability theory and linear interpolation can be used
for quantitative evaluation of different degrees of fatigue.

As the duration of flights increases from 2-4 h to 8-10 h, the number of pilots and
navigators in whom adverse changes in physiological functions are found due to
fatigue increases, and this is associated with an increase in average severity of
the changes themselves. Since the distribution of negative changes is normal, the
dynamics of fatigue can be expressed in the form of three degrees of fatigue, each
of which is characterized by certain incidences of ... [illegible] degrees of
adverse changes in the form of Him. Viewing these physiological functional changes
as independent events occurring with a probability that equals the incidence of
their occurrence and using the rule of multiplication of probabilities, as well

as linear interpolation, we can elaborate a rather effective method for quantitative
evaluation of fatigue in a group of flight personnel (L. S. Isaakyan, 1967).

A quantitative determination of reliability of any element in a closed control
system, including the human element, can be made from the standpoint of information
theory.

If we consider that there is some analogy between the operator-pilot and communica-
tion channel in the sense of information processing, the functional reliability of
the operator can be defined as “... The degree of conformity between the operator's
ability to process information C and the amount of information R that he must
process per unit time...."* Consequently, functional reliability is defined as

the degree [measure] of loss of information according to Shannon's formula:

um - H(x) - c

where H(x) is mean rate of production of information by the source of the communica-
tion, C is throughput and H(X) [sic] is unreliability of transmission of informa-
tion in b;:s (reciprocal of functional reliability).

Determination of unreliability with this formula involves great difficulties, so that
it is expedient to use reaction time (Tr) as a quantity that is strictly related

to difference H(x) - C.F. This link is determined by various formulas, in parti-
cular the formula of Hyman (1953):

*Department of Scientific and Technical—Economic Information othhe Ministry of
Civil Aviation and State Scientific Research Institute of Civil Aviation, No 8-9,

1967. H. ?, Sheynin.
70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3
Ir T + c

where T is simple reaction time, B is amount of information that the operator must
process per unit time and c is throughput.

It is obvious that the greater the H-C difference. the lower the operator's reliability.

However, when measuring Tr under actual flying conditions, major difficulties are
encoutered and, for this reason, it is expedient to require “a special parameter

to judge changes in Tr, i.e., the quality of coordinating aircraft control ("economy"
and promptness of moving rudders).

This discussion of the possibility of using information theory to determine the
efficiency and reliability.of pilots was taken from the work of H. P. Sheynin,

who has been successfully developing theory and methods of experimental-analytical
and instrumental approaches to this problem for the last 5-8 years.

To assess pilot performance when making a landing approach (in the sense of reliabi-
lity and efficiency), H. P. Sheynin uses such objective experimental characteristics
as parameters of accuracy. quality of coordination and levels of the main physiolo-
gical functions that are recorded synchronously. In spite of the fact that some
initial theoretical theses are debatable, the difficulty of pursuing the studies

in practice and of popularizing this method among aviation physicians, the
instrumentation and analytical method developed by H. P. Sheynin is the only one
thus far and a rather promising means of making a quantitative assessment of

flight work.

Heretofore, we have discussed the possibility of quantitative evaluation of reliabi-
lity from the standpoint of various nonbiological theories; we were able to conclude
that a number of concepts and methods used in theory of reliability of technical
equipment and information theory can be used beneficially in evaluating the human
element of a control system, provided several assumptions are made, without which

it would be impossible to use these theories.* Indeed, aside from the rather
validated and tested quantitative parameters of reliability in the method of H. P.
Sheynin, it can be assumed that such criteria as probability of failure-free work
(P), static coefficient of reliability (Kl), ratio of rest time to work time (K2)
and permissible range of negative reactions will also play a useful part in con-
ducting tears simulating work operations of professional importance or the extreme
range of adverse changes in physiological functions associated with marked fatigue.

Let us now consider the qualitative criteria of reliability, which are factors upon
which depend somatic, psychophysiological and purely psychological mechanisms, which
form this complex trait--reliability.

The three following groups of factors determining the reliability of an operator
were singled out as a general scheme in the works of V. D. Nebylitsyn (1961, 1966):
1) quality of equipment; 2) operator training and conditioning; 3) personal factors.

 

*These assumptions include the assumption that linearity of changes, discreteness of
processes, independence thereof, etc., are applicable to psychological functions.

71

FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The last group of factors is divided into three subgroups: medical factors; proper-
ties of higher nervous activity and subcortical brain structures; actually psycho-
logical factors and characterological distinctions (together with volitional ones).

The author justifiably believes that the last two subgroups are the most important
items in the study of reliability, and he examines in detail several properties
referable to man's higher nervous activity under the name of "certain characteris-

tics of reliability." V. D. Nebylitsyn includes among such properties "long-term
endurance," "endurance of extraordinary tension and stress," "imperviousness to

noise [interference]," "spontaneous distractability," "reaction to unforeseen stimuli,"
"flexibility [ability to switch from one thing to another)" and "resistance to

the effects of environmental factors."

The author uses unique terminology to refer to these characteristics and offers a
distinctive interpretation thereof, and this applies in particular to the first
three characteristics, for which reason we shall discuss them in greater detail,
particularly since experimental evidence of the validity of the hypothetical
explanations of these features was offered in the author's subsequent works (1966).

Long-term endurance of fatigue in the course of prolonged work is, in the opinion
of the above author, determined by the strength or resistance of the nervous system
to excitatory and inhibitory processes.

Endurance of extraordinary tension or stress (adequacy of operator's reactions to
sudden stress conditions) is viewed as an indicator of resistance [stability] of
the central nervous system to the process of excitation or as a function of
equilibrium of the main nervous processes.

Immunity to noise or ability to create and strengthen dominant foci (in the
case of exposure to distracting stimuli) is also considered to be a function of
equilibrium of the main nervous processes.

The hypothetical theses advanced by V. D. Nebylitsyn are upheld in the works of

H. I. Bobneva (1961,, 1964, 1966), and she calls attention to the general features
of operator unreliability such as shortage of time, shortage of information, large
number of sources of information and signals, and hazardous situations, which

are mentioned by H. I. Bobneva along with some foreign authors (C. H. Baker, 1963;
J. C. Larson, 1955, and others).

On the basis of the importance of comprehensive analysis of the concept of "failure,"
M. I. Bobneva devotes much attention to the unusual failures that occur from time

to time in "a healthy, untired, experienced, emotionally stable operator under
ordinary, normal conditions."

Such random cases of failure, which constitute 1-22 of the total number of opera-
tions and are. perhaps, related to vigilance and composure of operators (P. H.
Pitts, 1962), have a generally unclear origin, and they ahOuld be the subject of
special investigation in the process of operator screening.

Referring to foreign data (M. A. Grodsky, 1962; c. H. Baker, 1963), M. I. Bobneva
demonstrated that the dynamics of a change in operator reliability in the course of
prolonged work differ from the dynamics of reliability of technical components in

that reliability is much greater, in spite of the repeated duplication of equipment
operation.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060026-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. F. Lomov (1966) observes, with reference to the qualitative criteria of reliabi-
lity (phasic changes in efficiency, level of incoming information, immunity to
various extraneous stimuli, particularly in dangerous situations, synchronous per-
formance of different activities, etc.), that "... These data do not yet enable

us to determine exactly the criteria of operator reliability. However, they do
point the way toward searching for them. Evidently, future studies must be pur-
sued in two main directions in order to define the coefficient of operator relia-
bility.”

"0n the one hand, it is important to measure the time, during which an operator can
perform specified functions without failure, and study the distribution of errors
at different times of day. In this respect, the problem of efficiency [fitness for
work] is the central one. On the other hand, it is necessary to analyze the dis-
tinctions of operator work in the presence of interference. Here we are confronted
with the 'noise iammnity' problem, which implies that there must be studies of
gnostic (speed and accuracy of perception, speed of coumnucation, ability to
extrapolate, etc.), volitional (decisiveness, composure, restraint, etc.) and emo-
tional (primarily emotional stability) traits of man. however, these directions
are not isolated from one another. Moreover, it can be assumed that efficiency

and 'noise immunity' have the same basis and emerge from the same or similar
properties of the human nervous system."

Among the numerous foreign works dealing with engineering psychology, with reference
to special problems of theory of reliability of the human element of control systems,
there is none containing any unified system of theoretical views that would permit
prediction of the results of concrete studies. Host works repeat the theses that

we read about in the above-mentioned works by Soviet authors. Several experimental
studies pursued by Jones (1962. 1965), and Dodson (1961, 1963) and J. Szafran
(1963, 1965, 1966) are of some interest with respect to establishing relationships
between the degree of an operator’s nervous and emotional stress and, in the first
place, build-up of two components of this state (emotional and motor) and, in the
second place, quality of performance of moderately difficult tasks. These studies
revealed that, as nervous and emotional tension builds up, the emotional component
increases much faster than the motor one, while moderately difficult tasks are
performed the most easily when there is a specific level of nervous and emotional
tension, which is the optimum level of tension, from this point of view.

In concluding this survey of work dealing with qualitative analysis of reliability
criteria, let us mention that the operator-pilot involved in a special system of
control unquestionably has some specific distinctions which will be discussed in
detail in a future publication. At present, let us define the main factors, upon
which reliability (or unreliability) of pilots depends, on the basis of these
distinctions.

The following are factors that disrupt pilot reliability (or cause unreliability
of their work:

1. Psychophysiological factors:

a) Emotional instability.

b) Inadequately performed professional operations (general instrument reading,
choice of correct decision in an emergency situation, determination of
nature of breakdown and necessary action, simulation of typical flight
accidents on a simulator).

73

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c) Negative typological features.
d) Inadequate level of some psychological functions.

2. Factors referable to design and equipment:

a) Affecting the motor field.
b) Affecting the sensory field.
c) Affecting different systems in landing approach.

3. Work and schedule-related factors:

a) Fatigue in the course of the work day.
b) Fatigue occuring the course of the work year.
c) Acute diseases or special instances of violation of work and rest schedule.

6. Certain sanitary and hygienic factors:

a) Vibration.
b) "Altitude" in pressurized cabins under ordinary and emergency conditions.

Discussion of these unreliability factors is based primarily on analysis of our
own experimental data and relevant literature sources, and in most sections we
have submitted diagrams of original equipment, which was developed for the studies.

In discussing the factors of unreliability, attention was addressed not only to
analysis of their causes, development and internal content, but effective means
of detecting, predicting and setting standards for them in the sense of setting
the maximum permissible ranges.

while this approach is new and may seem debatable with regard to psychophysiological
and work-schedule-related factors (determination of maximum permissible ranges),

it is quite justified with regard to the sanitary and hygienic parameters (vibra-
tion, reserve time of retaining consciousness at high altitude).

The work of a pilot is very specific operator work; for this reason, discussion

of these factors of unreliability will be preceded by a description of general
tasks for the crew, its interaction with the air traffic control service (UVD)
and,the most comprehensively, the technical specifications of pilot work, including
a description of indicators, controls and systems for making a landing approach
(second chapter); the next two chapters preceding discussion of unreliability fac-
tors deal with the professiographic characteristics of pilot work (third chapter)
and analysis of pilots' physiological reactions under simple and complex-emergency
conditions of take-offs and landings (fourth chapter). Unlike the second and, in
part, the third chapters. which are essentially descriptive and analytical, the
fourth cautains concrete experimental data characterizing the psychophysiological
reactions of pilots under different take-off and landing conditions, which offer
a clearer idea about the mechanisms of marked nervous and emotional stress.

On the whole, the three chapters preceding discussion of unreliability factors
constitute the logical foundation for understanding the material that follows them.

76

FOR‘OFINCJAI.USIZCMNLY
7.

8.
9'

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Asratyan, E. A., and Simonov, P. V., "Reliability of the Brain," published
by the USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow 1963.

Bobneva, M. 1., "Engineering Psychology," Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1966.

Idem, "Study of Psychological Aspects of Reliable Human Performance During
Space Flights," VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII, No 2, 1963.

Idem, "Some of the Directions of Research on 'Man-Machine' Systems in the
United States," Ibid, No 3, 1962.

Idem, "The Question of Man's Reliability," "Tezisy dokladov na teoreticheskom
seminare v MAPI" [Summaries of Papers Delivered at Theoretical Seminar at
MAPI (expansion unknown)l. Moscow, 1965.

Idem, "The Question of Man's Reliability (Patterns and Random Failures in
Operator Performance)," "Problemy inzhenernoy psikhologii (Materialy l-y
Leningr. konferentsii poinzh.psikh. iyun' 1964 3)" [Problems of Engineering
Psychology (Proceedings of First Leningrad Conference on Engineering Psychology,
June 1964)], Leningrad, 1964.

lsaakyan, L. 5., "Quantitative Evaluation of Fatigue in Flight Personnel of
Commercial Aircraft," "Aviakosm. Meditsina. Trudy sektsii av. i kosm. medits.
Mosh. fiz. Ob-va" [Aerospace Medicine. Proceedings of Section of Aviation and

Space Medicine, Moscow Phys. Society], Moscow, s-t [expansion unknown] No l,
1967.

Lomov, B. P., “Man and Technology," Leningrad, 1963.
Idem, "Man in Control Systems," Moscow, "Znaniye", 1967.

Nebylitsyn, V. 0., "Studies of Operator Reliability in Automatic Systems,"
VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII, No 6, 1961.

Nebylitsyn, V. A., "Collection of Problems of Engineering Psychology," Moscow,
1964.

Nebylitsyn, V. 0., "Main Properties of the Nervous System," Moscow, Izd-vo
"Prosveshcheniye", 1966.

Sorin, Ya. M., "Reliability of Radio-Electronic Equipment," Leningrad,
Gosenergoizdat, 1961.

Sukhodol'skiy, G. V., "The Question of Man's Reliability," "Teziay dokladov
na teoreticheskom seminare v MAPI," Moscow, 1965.

Idem, "Transient Processes in Man," "Problemy inzh. psikhologii (Materialy
l-y Leningradskoy konferentsii po inzh. psikh. Iyun', 1964)."

Tkachenko, L. 6., "Reliability of Radio-Electronic Equipment," Izd-vo Znaniye,
Moscow, 1966.

75

FOR 0F11CJAI.USE¢DNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17. Solon, P. A., "Problens of Reliability of Aviation Equipment." Voyen. lad-v0
M.O. SSSR [Military Publishing House of the USSR Ministry of Defense], Moscow,
1965.

18. Sheynin, M. P., "Instrumentation Method for Analysis of Flight Work," MGA,

Cos HII ONTEI [Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Scientific Research Institute'a
Department of Scientific and Technical-Economic Internation], No 8-9, 1967.

19. Baker, C. N., "Consistency of Performance in Two Visual Vigilance Tasks," in
"Vigilance," Symposium, D. N. Buckner and J. J. Masrath, 1963 [year illegible].

20. Carper, C. R., "Physical Defects of Civilian Pilots Related to Aircraft Acci-
dents," AEROSP. MBD., V01 35, No 8, 1966.

21. Grodsky, H. A., "Risk and Reliability," AER. ENGINEERING, No 1, 1962.

22. Grodsky, M. A., and Lutnan, C. C., "Pilot Reliability and Skill Retention for
Space Flight Missions," AEROSPACE MED., Vol 36. Ho 10, 1965.

23. Larson, J. C., "The Human Element in Industrial Accident Prevention," New York,
1965.

24. Lincoln, 5., "Human Factors in Attainment of Reliability," New York, 1960.

25. Meister, D., quoted in [2].

26. Pitts, P. M.. quoted in [2].

27. Hyman, quoted in [2].

28. Sell, H. S., and Chunn, S. P., "Summary and Evaluation of Aircraft Accidents
and Fatalities," AEROSPACE MED., Vol 35, No 6, 1966.

29. Uracel, D. L., "Medical Factors in Non-Fatal Aircraft Accidents," Ibid,

Vol 34, No 5, 1963.

30. Zeller, A. P., and Moseley, H. L., "Aircraft Accidents as Related to Pilot Age
and Experience," AEROSPACE MED., Vol 28, No 2, 1957.

31. Jones, H. 6., "Should Colonel Glenn Try Again?" NEH SCIENTIST, 13, No 273,
1962.

32. Yerkes and Dodson, quoted in [31].

33. Szafrsn, J., "Limitations and Reliability of the Human Operator of Control
Systems to Process Information," AEROSPACE MEO., Vol 37, No 3, 1966.

10,657

050: 8146/0637

76

FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
INJIIOFIICIAL.USISCMVLY

UDC: 613.693.001.5
351.814.3
629.735.33.05/.06

MEDICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF CIVIL AVIATION PILOT RELIABILITY (NUMBER 2)

Moscow MEDIKO-PSIKHOLOCICHESKIYE PROBLEMY NADBZHNOSTI RABOTY LETCHIKOV SOVREMBNNYKM
TRANSPORINYKR SAMOLBTOV GRAZHDANSKOY AVIAISII (VYPUSK VTOROY) in Russian No 2,
1969 (signed to press 1 Nov 68) pp 1-40

[Complete translation of pamphlet "Medical and Psychological Problems of Reliability
of Pilot work in Modern Transport Aircraft of the Civil Aviation (Number 2)", by
Levon Saskovich Isaakyan, candidate of medical sciences, USSR Ministry of Civil

Aviation, State Scientific Research Institute of Civil Aviation, Department of
Scientific and Technico—Bconomic Information, 60 pages]

[Text] Technical Specifications of Pilot work

1. General description of air traffic control in the civil aviation and
in-flight crew work

One of the main structural entities of the air traffic control service (DVD) is
the airport control center-ADP.*

The ADP manages all organizational problems related to flights, it plans and
coordinates the schedule of the Air Corps and Air Defense, schedules rest periods
for crews at preventoriuns and grants permission for flights.

In addition to the ADP, there are other structural entities that are involved in
operational management of air traffic. They include, first of all, the control
centers of the landing system (DPS?) and take-off control oenters-SDP.

The controllers at these centers are equipped with landing radar [scopes2] and
couumnd radio equipment, and have an adequate range of vision, which they use to
control aircraft that are taking off and approaching for a landing. The SD?
controllers grant permission for take-off and inform the creu about runway condi-
tions, wind, altitude of clouds and horizontal visibility.

After receiving permission to take off, the crew of the departing aircraft effects
operations required for the take—off run, aircraft take-off, retracting the landing
gear and flaps.

All of these operations are performed in strict order, at specific speed and
altitude of take-off run and climb.

__________T______
*Translator a note: For the reader's convenience, expansions of all abbreviations

are also furnished at the end of this pamphlet.

77

FORIOFFNJA1.USB(MVLY
IW)R‘OFF1C1AI.USEZCM§LY

After the flaps are retracted and an altitude of 100-200 m is reached, the crew
alters the flight conditions from take-off to nominal, balances the aircraft and
reports that take-off has been completed to the SDP controller.

The controller instructs the crew on the procedure for leaving the airport area
and to establish direct contact with the next (third) structural entity of air
traffic control, and the SDP terminates entirely communications with the crew
of the airborne aircraft only after it makes sure that the next structural

unit is monitoring the aircraft.

This structural unit is the approach control center (DPT), and previously it was
called the command control center (KDP) [control tower].

In addition to radio communication, the DPP has high power surveillance radar
stations with a range of up to 350 km; the task for DPP controllers is to monitor
accuiacy and safety of gaining altitude and check the prompt transfer of air
traffic control to the next control point, the RDP.

The RDP--atca control points [or centers]—-are the fourth structural unit of air
traffic control, and their duties consist of monitoring the correct course of the
aircraft. specified echelon and prompt bypassing of dangerous meteorological condi-
tions.

The RDP, which performs these operational tasks in a coordinated fashion, provides
information to the crew abOut meteorological conditions along their route and
weather forecasts at the destination airport and alternate airfields. When the
aircraft passes from the area of one RDP; to the next RDPz, the crew informs RDP;
that contact has been established with RDPz, which the latter confirms over special
channels.

In the course of gaining altitude and in level flight. the pilots are busy

with flying the plane, the engineer monitors the aircraft systems, the navigator

in close collaboration with one of the pilots and radio operator establishes
communications with the above points in the control service, and concurrently

solves problems of navigation. The RDP), in the area of which the terminal airport
is located, instructs the crew (navigator) on the procedures for brhuﬁngthe aircraft
down to the starting point (I?) for making an approach for landing. This starting
point is usually located at an altitude of 6000, 1500 or #00 m above the outer
marker beacon (DPRH).

The navigator calculates the time when the descent should begin in order to
reach the indicated 1? altitude; however, without permission from the RDP3, the
captain. to whom the navigator relays his estimates. does not begin the descent,
and he informs the RDP: about any of his actions undertaken in the course of
descent.

Transfer of control of the descending aircraft from the RD? to DPP (KDP) takes
place at an altitude of 6-5 km, after the crew and DP? confirm to the RDP;
controller that two-way communications have been established. Having received
from the crew (captain) the report that they have entered the airfield area and
identified the aircraft with radio equipment, the DP? controller informs the crew
of its exact location, meteorological conditions and descent conditions in the
area of the airfield.

78

FOR OFTICJAI.USE(NVLY
nding may vary: in
some cases, the aircraft may head for the runway "in a straight line," in others,

the aircraft travels over a more or less rectangular trajectory; in other cases yet, it
turns at a specified angle, etc. Having indicated the specific descent maneuver,

This trans-
fer takes place, as usual, by repeatedly informing the 0?? that the DPSP has taken

over control, and that the aircraft crew has established comunication with the
DPSP. Knowing the maneuver performed by the crew (from infatuation given by the DPP),
the DPS? controller gives the crew the specific landing pattern, altitude and shape
of lower edge of clouds, horizontal visibility, wind velocity and direction near
the ground, atmospheric pressure and condition of the runway. Having relayed this
information, the DPS? controller starts to monitor the maneuver for the landing
approach. As we have noted, this maneuver may vary, but the most important and
typical variant is to guide the aircraft to a course that is the reverse of the
landing pattern on the DPRM beam at asteady altitude of 1000 m. At this point,

the crew releases the landing gear and, after flying in a straight line for 60-70 a,
makes a 90° turn (to the right in the case of a right landing circle or to the
left, with a left circle); after this turn (which is usually called the third

turn, if it is contained in the large rectangular route) the crew starts to lower
the flaps and begins the next, last 90° turn (fourth turn) to pull into the

straight line that coincides with the bearing of the runway. After the last turn,
the crew lowers the flaps completely and shifts the aircraft to descent, simul-
taneously decelerating. In the interval between pulling out of the fourth

turn and flying over the DPRM, the crew (captain) requests permission of the DPS?

controller for landing. Having received permission, the crew flies over the DPRM,
BPRH [inner marker beacon] and the 500 I marker (between the BPRM and end of the

runway) at a specified altitude and speed, levels out and holds the aircraft, touches
down, effects the landing run and taxiing. After flying over the DPRH, the crew
has the right to give absolutely no answers after listening to the commands and

After flying over the BPRH 1000 m from the end of the runway, control of the landing
and touchdown is transferred to the SD? (SK?) controller, since he has a visual

The above-described general scheme of air traffic control and some of the most

commonly used landing procedures, including the final element of the maneuvers--
the route from the DPRM beam to the runway, are illustrated in Figure l.

2. Instrument systems for landing approach

The landing approach procedure, from the starting point on, is very seldom per-
formed visuall ; as a rule, the crew either does not see the ground at all, or
else sees it periodically through the haze or a break in the clouds. For this

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

.Dpnﬂ
rectan la:
tong: beam

“suai' 5': ’
line" appgoach'

General diagram of UVD [air traffic control service] and some

Figure l.
landing approach procedures

Key:
80?) take-off control center [or point) DPRM) outer marker beacon

SK?) flight command post DPSP) landing system control center

0??) approach control center KP) check point
KDP) control tower KVP) expansion unknown [typo for KDP?]

RD?) regional control point [center] DPR,BPR) expansions unknown
BPRH) inner marker beacon

The radio compass landing approach system or instrument landing equipment--OSP-—

is the second system that the crew is guided by, according to the course angles of
two radio stations situated 4 km (DPRH) and 1 km (BPRH) away from the end oi the
runway;the automatic direction finder [radio COUP835]”'ARKF‘1B the instrument
indicator of this system aboard the aircraft, and it shows the course angles (angles
read clockwise from the bearing of the flight to the line that connects the air-

craft to the location of the DPRH or BPRH radio station)(Figure 2b).

magnetic bearing 0

flight, read clocku
craft to the landing line on the basis

gyromagnetic compass], GPK [directions
instruments.

ise from the meridian), the crew can easily maneuver the air-
of the readings of the DGHK [distant-reading

l gyroscope] and other course [bearing]

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2. a) Ground-based SP-SO system equipment
b) Diagram of changes in readings of the main flight instruments
of pilots when making a landing approach by the OSP-48 and
SP-SO systems from DPRH cross beam
[some inscriptions are illegible]

The instrument landing system-SP or ILS abroad-is quite universal and more re-
fined than the OSP. While in the latter case the sources of the signals for opera-
tion of radio compass indicators are radio stations situated along the landing

path at the DPRH and BPRH points, in the SP the radio-range-beacon (KIM, situated
right behind the runway) and glide-path beacon (can, just infrontof the runway)
serve as these sources of radio emissions in the form of equisignal areas (Figure 28)-

The emissions from the KRH and GRH are received by the aircraft as it approaches
the fourth turn, they are transformed into electric signals that deflect two
needles onthe PSP [instrumentlandingsystenlindicator (Figure 3b). If the air-
craft has entered the range of the KKK, which corresponds to the start of the 4th
turn, the course blinker on the front of the instrument is shut and the vertical
needle, which represents the runway, moves away from the stop and starts to

come closer to the middle of the horizontal marks (Figure 2b, positions 4-6). If
the needle, as it slows down, approaches the circle representing the aircraft, it
means that the aircraft is exactly on the runway course in the equisignsl area of
the KRH; if the needle deflects, for example, to the left, to the first or second
horizontal marker, it means that the aircraft is to the right of the runway at a
distance of 25-50 m from its axial line (Figure 3b). The horizontal needle of the
PSP shows the mutual position of the equisignal area emitted by the glide path beacon
(GRM) and aircraft flying in the vertical plane. "hen the aircraft is on the last
straight line, the glide-path blinker is shut off on the PSP instrument and the
horizontal needle, which is deflectcd upward to the stop, starts to move down,

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIONLY

intersecting four marks, and comes close to the circle representing the aircraft.
Slower movement of the horizontal needle and itsstopping above the circle means that
the aircraft is descending precisely on theglidepath (Figure 2b, positions 6-7);

if the aircraft is above the equisignal glide—path area, the horizontal needle will
be above the circle representing the aircraft (Figure 3b).

  
  

(c) and

right bank!
ho d this bank!
left bank!

a.. 4) right on course!
“” '""' 5) reduce descent

  
  

<..——' eed
4x.:--' 6)3:congiiao
pa

   

GPK u

OAK

 

Figure 3. Diagram of flight and navigation instruments, and principle of
display of readings on some of them

Two circumstances must be stressed. In the first place, none of the three systems
discussed can assure a landing approach without the use of other indicators (course
instruments--GPK, DGHK, UK [course indicator], artificial horizons-u-AGB [bomber
aircraft gyro horizon], ACD [azimuth gyro sensor?], AGI [fighter aircraft gyro
horizon], speed and altitude indicators-KUS [combined airspeed indicator], VAR
[rate of climb indicator], VD [barometric altimeter], RV [radio altimeter] and
other instruments); for this reason, in an actual landing approach piloting in-
volves the combined use of all three systems, or the last two systems (05? and SP).
Consequently, we are usually dealing with readings not only from the PSP and two ARK,
but the 5-7 instruments that were mentioned above. Such continuous monitoring of

a process that is essentially discrete is the most complex element of the pilot's
analytical and synthetic activities, required to form an image of the flight,
eliminate and prevent accumulating errors, as well as to complete the landing

uneventfully.

The second circumstance that is important to comprehend the entire complexity of
an actual landing approach using the combined SP and 08? system is that when
meteorological conditions are poorer than a specific minimum none of the three

82

FOR 0F11C]A[.USE‘MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems or any combination thereof is capable of assuring the safe completion of
the landing.

Minimum weather refers to the minimum ceiling [cloud base] and horizontal (inclined)
visibility, at which a safe landing can still be made. For most aircraft with gas-
turbine engines, this minimum (No l) constitutes 80-100 m (for the ceiling) and
1000—1500 m (for inclined visibility). This minimum is acceptable for highly
skilled pilots who have much experience in instrument flying. For less qualified
pilots, a simpler minimum (No 2) is set, where the ceiling and visibility are

1.5-2 times greater.

According to the foregoing, if a crew at an altitude of 80-100 m or at a distance

of 1000~1500 m from the end of the runway does not see the "start" [starting line?],
approach lights or runway, they must immediately stop the descent, gain altitude and,
together with the SDP controller or flight controller, determine subsequent tactics
(a second landing approach on the same or opposite course, going to an alternate
airfield, etc.). Some pilots have great moral and psychological difficulty in
adhering to this important rule, which is also related to rapid and significant
increase in nervous and emotional tension [stress].

Figure 2b illustrates instrument readings in a landing approach from the DPRH beam
with the combined use of SP and OSP systems; it also helps comprehend the dis-
cussed principles involved in approaches using different systems. Figure 3

is a graphic illustration of the main flight and navigation instruments, as well
as the principles of displaying information on PSP, ARK and other instruments.

In addition to the three systems for landing approaches we have discussed (RSP, OSP
and SP), in recent years an automatic landing approach system has gained wide

use; it operates in directorial (semiautomatic) and automatic modes.* In order

to detect differences in interaction between the pilot and aircraft when landing

by the combination of OSP and SP systems, on the one hand, and in the directorial
and automatic modes of the new system, on the other hand, let us refer to the
diagrams in Figure a.

This figure contains two diagrams, showing interaction between the pilot and air-
craft in a closed dynamic system when making a landing approach by the OSP and SP
systems; this diagram corresponds to the combination of five instruments: ARK No 1.
ARK No 2, A63, UK, VAR for the OSP system, and four instruments-~PSP, AGB, UK and
VAR for the SP system. Under real conditions, both systems are united, forming a
combination of six instruments that are shown on the pilot's panel (Figure 4,
diagram A).

According to this diagram, ground-based radio equipment (KRM, GRH and radiostations
situated at the DPRH and BPRM) implement operation of the PSP and ARK instruments;
all other instruments on the pilot's panel (AG, US, revolution indicator, etc.)
receive signals from sensors (only the bank and pitch sensors are shown in Figure 4),
which pick up the aerodynamic reacrions of the aircraft due to the controlling
movements of the pilot. In this closed system, the PSP and ARK instruments play a
leading, but not decisive part, since their readings answer the pilot's question of
"what to do?" but not "how to proceed to reach the goal?" The pilot also needs the

*This system is called the BSUZP--onboard landing approach system.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

readings of such instruments as the AGB, UK, VAR, etc.. to obtain such concrete and,
at the same time, integral evaluation.

[Be—FIR

1§§§°

 

Aircraft reactions Aerodynamic aircraft
reactions
Figure lo. Diagrams of "pilot-aircraft" systems for landing approaches by
the OS? and SP-SO systems (A) and BSUZP (B)
Key:
3) DGHK c) (comutator) e) comunications unit
b) autopilot d) ARK, PSP, DGMK

From this point of view, the pilot can be perceived in the closed system of diagram
A as the element which, having a relatively complex specified program-goal,
eliminates mismatches between actual instrument readings and specified program
readings, by means of diverse forms of tracking (compensation, pursuit, advance);

let us mention that preservation of the required program and evaluation of the
extent of mismatch are entirely determined by the pilot.

Digram B of Figure 4 illustrates the interaction between the pilot and aircraft
in the case of an automatic system operating in automatic and semiautomatic modes.
This diagram corresponds to one or two instruments: one of the PSP type, but with
comand, directorial functions and A63 (early version of semiautomatic system) or
AGD with romand functions (DPlcomand flight instrument]) and combined navigation
instruments consisting of an ARK, ordinary PSP and course indicator, for example,

the DGHK (a more recent variant that can operate in semiautomatic and automatic
modes).

Diagram B differs from diagram A in that the signals of sensors of bank (course) and
pitch (movement of the aircraft on the glide path) are inputted in the SD!) [system
of directorial control) computer concurrently with the Kim-cm signals, which
characterize the equisignal areas of the course and glide path. Command signals

8!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

are outputted by the computer, which first move the course command needle on the
directorial PSP instrument (corresponds to starting the fourth turn), then the
command glide-path needle of the same instrument (corresponds to start into glide
path at 8-9 km away from the start of the runway).

If the course needle on a usual PSP is deflected to the left, it means that the
runway is to the left of the aircraft and, in order to guide it on the landing
path (the course needle to be set in the middle of the instrument) the aircraft
must be turned in the direction of deflection of the needle (see Figure 3b), and
this is done by relying entirely on the readings of the course instrument, and
selecting the course by banking according to A63 to hold the aircraft in the
equisignal area.

In a command instrument, for example, the PSP (which is referable to an early
version of the Privod [drive] system of directorial control), deflection of the
needle to the left means that the pilot must bank to the left as far and as long as
necessary for the course needle to come to the middle and not be in vertical posi-
tion, and there is absolutely no need then to take a bearing and select the bank.

when entering on the glide path, the horizontal needle of an ordinary PSP starts
to move from t0p to bottom, toward the middle of the instrument, and the pilot's
task is to set the needle opposite the center on the basis of AGB-pitch and

the rate of climb indicator.

In the command PSP, it is sufficient to set the glide-path needle,over the middle
by altering the pitch and without the guidance of other instrument readings
(Figure 3f).

Ultimately, the differences consist of the fact that in the command instrument
deflections of needles are a function of several parameters, which the pilot

takes into consideration in the SP system by means of several instruments (UK, AGB,
VAR); for this reason, in the directorial and automatic modes of operation of the
BSUZP, the command needles are in the middle of the instrument (at zero), not only
if the aircraft is in the equisignal areas of the course and glide path, as is the
case when flying by the SP system, but also when the aircraft makes the correct
approach to equisignal areas (4th turn and at the time of starting on the glide
path).

Heretofore, we were referring to one of the early systems (Privod) in our discussion
of the directorial mode of landing approach; as can be seen in Figure 3e, this
system consists of a command PSP and type A63 gyro horizongin the more recent
directorial system (Put’ [routc]), a type AGDgyrohorizon is united with the
command PSP into a single combination flying instrument--the KPP (command piloting
instrument), which together with other combined HP? or NKP instruments (navigation-
blanning instruments which give information about the relative position of the
runway and aircraft, course and course angle of the radio station) constitutes the
onboard part of this system (Figure 3e). Of course, all that we have stated

about flying in the directorial mode by means of a command PSP and A63 also
applies fully to a KPP; however, it is obvious that when using the KPP to fly in
the directorial mode, the pilot has to spread his attention less, since the
command needles andgyrohorizcn are in the same instrument.

It is apparent from the foregoing that in a closed system illustrated in diagram 8
(Figure A), the pilot can be conceived of as an element which performs the

85

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

relatively simple function of compensatory tracking, without needing a complex pro-
gram or searching for any mismatches.

The BSUZP can operate in directorial and automatic modes. 0n the example of opera-
tion of two versions of the system of directorial control ("Privod," "Put'"), we
learned about the work of the 8802? in expressly the directorial mode. The same
diagram 3 in Figure 4 gives us an idea about the operating principle of this system
in automatic mode. Diagram B shows that, when the V! is turned on, the command
signals pass through the communication unit to the autopilot also, which starts to
control the bank-course and pitch-glide in accordance with these signals (they

also permit flying in the directorial mode as they pass to the KPP from the computer),
and provides for an automatic landing approach down to an altitude of 30—60 m. For
this reason, flying according to diagram 8 without using the autopilot is sometimes
(and not quite correctly) called the system of directorial or semiautomatic landing
approach, in contrast to the automatic control system, when the autopilot does

the flying to certain limits (VK turned on).

The BSUZP system, which allows flying in directorial and automatic modes, is gaining
broad use on well-assimilated aircraft with gas-turbine engines, reducing by almost
one-half the minimum ceiling and horizontal visibility; it would be difficult to
overestimate the importance of this circumstance in increasing the safety and
regularity of flights.

3. Instruments and signaling devices on pilot panels

Indicators are divided into several types, regardless of their purpose. The

first and most widespread type is referable to measuring or quantitative indica-
tors (Yu. A. Petrov, 1963; V. G. Denisov and R. N. Lopatin, 1962). Instruments of
this type merely give information about a given parameter; as a rule, this informa-
tion is quantitative and static, in the sense that there are no directorial ele-
ments. Most instruments of pilots, as well as other crew members, are referable

to the first type. However, this is not a homogeneous type, and its representatives
can be divided into two subtypes, which combine the usual informative-indicating

properties with either graphic, imaged features or pictography, or else with
some directorial elements.

The first subtype refers, for example,tosyro horizons of different types (A63,
A60, A61), the radio compass (ARK) and scopes of onboard radar equipment. Each of
these indicators gives not only a quantitative description of parameters, but
facilitates comprehension of the meaning of these parameters because of the graphic
display. If one were to observe the readings of the ARK and A63 on the diagram

of a landing approach by the OSP and SP systems (Figure 2b), one could note,
placing oneself mentally in the place of the pilot, that the needle of ARK No l

and ARK No 2 always shows the pilot the direction of the DPRH and BPRH, whereas

the horizOu line of the AGB instrument deflects just like the real horizon when

the aircraft makes turns. The image on the radar scope yields diverse quantitative
information about the movement of the aircraft (range, speed, deviation from
specified path, etc.), but for an experienced operator reception and interpreta-
tion of such information are easier because it is so graphic. There are also
elements of graphic display in other instruments, in particular the course
instruments, rate of climb indicator, altimeter, etc. Their graphic nature
consists of the fact that the movement of the needle-pointer coincides with the
actual direction of movement of the aircraft (the course instruments-DAR [remote

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reading astrocompass], DCMK), movement of the earth's surface observed from the
aircraft cabin (GPK [directional gyroscopel), and in some cases graphic visualiza-
tion is effected by the coincidence of changes in the parameter on the instrument
and the customary symbolic indication (for example, movement of the needle up or
clockwise on the rate of climb indicator, or speed and altitude indicators are
readily associated with an increase in the corresponding parameters).

The instruments referable to the first subtype constitute the group of the most
important flight instruments, and for this reason we shall discuss them in greater
detail, referring to the drawings of the dials of these instruments in Figure 3.

The combined speed indicator (KUS) is a two-needle instrument that shows two
parameters:air or true speed of the aircraft in relation to air masses (narrow

needle) and instrument speed, which measures the actual thrust [dynamic head?]
(wide needle).

The machmeter (M) shows the ratio of true speed to the speed of sound. The
readings of this instrument are very important when flying at high speed (in hori-
zontal flight or emergency descent), when exceeding permissible speed endangers

the aircraft. For this reason, there is a light signal next to the Mach indicator to
show "high speed."

The radioaltimeter (RV) shows the true altitude of flight over a given locality,
and it has two ranges, 0-1200 m and 0-120 m, as well as audio and light signals
to show that the altitude set by the pilot in advance has been reached. The
disadvantage of the RV, which limits its use, is the variability of its readings
when flying over a locality with irregular topography.

The barometric altimeter (VD) shows the relative altitude of flight in the range
of 0-20 km, the small needle showing kilometersand the large one hundreds and tens
of meters. The pilot uses a special rack gear to set barometric pressure on the
altimeter that equals atmospheric pressure at the descent and landing point;

the altimeter readings change in accordance with the set pressure. If the aircraft
descends in a high-altitude region, the instrument being adjusted to standard
pressure. the altimeter will show a higher altitude than in actuality, and this,

of course, is a great threat to flight safety. The rate of climb indicator (VAR)
shows the vertical speed of aircraft descent or climb (VAR-30) or the speed of
change in altitude in the cockpit (VAR-10).

The three types of gyro horizons are intended to determine the position of the
aircraft in space as it turns about the longitudinal and transverse axes; the
instrument shows the angles of bank and pitch, as well as the direction and degree
of sideslip (Figure 3c). In a gyro horizon of the AGB type, the display of banks
and pitch angles simulates well the movement of the natural horizon and does so
just like the pilot sees it from the aircraft cockpit. If, for example, the
aircraft is gaining altitude with a right bank, the pilot sees the horizon and
surface of the earth as being tilted to the left, and as he gains altitude the
horizon gradually descends, "underneath the aircraft." This happens at the

time when the angle of pitch of the aircraft changes in the direction of pitch-up.
This evolution of the aircraft, the visual picture observed by the pilot and

the associated readings of the three types of instruments (A68, A60 and A61) are
illustrated in Figure 3d. It should he expected that in a visual flight such
conformity between what is observed directly and indirectly on the A03 will not

87

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cause any difficulty for the pilot with regard to understanding the readings of
this instrument; the situation may differ in the case of instrument flying,

if the pilot stops monitoring the bank on the A63 dial, for some reason; in such a
case, the pilot will associate his actions more with the movements of the aircraft
than concomitant movements of the artificial horizon on the AGB instrument. If,
for example, while flying by instruments the pilot sees that the instrument hori-
zon starts to drop (climb!) in relation to the motionless silhouette of the
aircraft and, at the same time, banks to the left (right bank!), the first reading
is readily associated with the fact that he is gaining altitude, while the second
is associated worse with the conception that the aircraft is banking to the right.
The first investigators of this matter demonstrated that an instrument, in which
the symbol for the aircraft moves and the horizon is stationary, which creates the
direct image of aircraft movement, yields the best results, at least with regard
to showing banking (Braun and Louks, 1965; Greter, 1947; Pitts, Hilton, 1946, 1952).
Subsequently, this opinion was confirmed (T. I. Zhukova, Ye. M. 01'shanskaya, 1956;
K. K. Platonov, 1960) and, at the same time, seriously questioned (Hatheney,
Daugherty, Hills, 1963).

As can be seen in Figure 34 the reading on the A08 makes full (for both bank and
pitch) use of the principle of view "from the aircraft to earth," whereas in the
ACD type gyro horizon this principle is applied only to show pitch, which is quite
acceptable from the standpoint of the hypothesis that we have expounded that it
is expressly indication of pitch that is well associated with the actual and
exhibited movement of the aircraft. A seemingly more valid principle is used to
show banking in the ACD-—view "from earth to the aircraft" (the moving silhouette
of the aircraft banks in relation to a stationary line-depicting the horizon-
just like the aircraft and synchronously with its movement). Perhaps, in the
case of visual flight, when the pilot periodically checks the gyro horizon, such
an instrument could cause some difficulties, since the inclination of the natural
horizon will have to be correlated with the opposite direction of inclination

of the silhouette of the aircraft.

The last type of gyro horizon, the ACI, does not differ in any way from the AGB
with regard to showing banking (view "from aircraft to earth"), but it gives the
opposite indication of pitch, as compared to AGO and A68. This means that as
the aircraft gains altitude the horizon line does not move down, as seen from
the aircraft and used in the A63 and A60, but up, and this does not conform
with either of the above principles. The revolving sphere of the AG! has picto-
graphic and display elements; the bottom hemisphere, which is light blue and

has the inscription "climb," turns upward when gaining altitude, showing an
apparent increase in the blue, sky part, while the top hemisphere, which is
brown and inscribed "descent," rotates to the back, and the visible area of this
hemisphere diminishes when gaining altitude. Moreover, there is a warning

sign near the A61 to tell the pilot that the pitch readings on the A01 are the
opposite .f A68 readings.

Resistance to accelerations caused by strong bumps of aircraft in a turbulent
atmosphere is a rather important indicator of the quality of gyro horizons.

At the present time there are tested reports that the A60 instrument, which was
first installed on the AN-Zé aircraft and subsequently contained as a combined
element of the KPP (command flight instrument), is more resistant to accelerations
than the A08.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ron omcl'AL use ONLY

The electric turn indicator (EUP) shows the direction of a turn (when the aircraft
turns about the vertical axis) and sideslip. When the turn is made in a coordinated
manner and at specific speeds, the EU? measures banking up to 65'.

All of the course instruments (DGMK, DAK, UK, GIK), with the exception of the CPR,
show the direct magnetic or true flight course. Unlike the above-mentioned instru-
ments, the CPR can show not only the actual course, but any other preset value.

The GPK is superior to other instruments, particularly magnetic course indicators,
in that it is not susceptible to interference at northern latitudes and operates
with greater stability. The principle involved in reading and interpreting the
data shown by all course instruments, with the exception of GPK, is simple, and it
is graphically illustrated in Figure 3c: if the pilot mentally visualizes a heading
to the north over the meridian, it is not difficult to associate the direction of
the aircraft on the course with the movement (rotation) in the same direction of

a needle indicator or needle-airplane (view "from land toward the aircraft").

The GPK uses the opposite principle (view “from the aircraft toward land"), in
which the symbol for the aircraft is a stationary triangle, while the movable

scale moves just like the plane of the earth's surface. Although with such display
there is infraction of the rule that the movement of the indicator must coincide
with movement of the aircraft (Pitts, 1952, and others), the CPR is apparently
rated highly by flight personnel.

The second subtype of quantitative or measuring indicators gives not only quanti-
tative but directorial, command information. The PSP instrument is a typical
example of this subtype, and we have already discussed the purpose and use thereof
(p 12 [of source]). As we have already noted, the PSP is a relatively directorial
instrument, since the cmmmands it issues cannot be implemented without simultaneously
checking and interpreting the readings of 2-4 other indicators (AGB, UK, VAR and
other instruments*). In other words, the commands received by the pilot from the
PSP contain a distinct element of "what to do" and rather vague indications as

to "how to do it." It should be noted that the same directorial principle is
contained in many other instruments, where the dial has a mark for the target or
when there is critical, inadmissible exceeding of a parameter (indicators of
operation of various systems).

The second type of instruments includes directorial or command instruments. In

the civil aviation of our country and foreign countries, these instruments appeared
relatively recently, and there has obviously been insufficient experience in use
thereof for the pilots to be able to evaluate them comprehensively. Directorial
instruments are intended primarily to facilitate the pilot's work during landings,
and further refinement and introduction thereof will solve the problem of semiauto-
matic landings (see pp 17-19 [of source]).

*It is particularly complicated to interpret and generalize all these indicators
if, as is sometimes the case, the readings of the main PSP instrument do not
agree with the expected readings of the course indicator and non. For example,
the aircraft should pull into the landing path within the next S-lO s according
to the PSP readings, whereas the course indicator shows that the turn should
last much longer.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As we have already mentioned, at the early stages of development of directorial
control systems, the command P8P and ordinary AGB were the typical directorial
instruments; the command PSP did not differ outwardly in any way from the usual
P8P. but in actuality its readings gave the pilot detailed information as to what
he should do and how he must do it for proper piloting in making a landing approach.
In the more recent and complex system of directorial control, which subsequently
served as the foundation of the BSUZP system, the command P8? was combined with the
A60 into a single command flight instrument, the KPP; there was a combination NKP
instrument, containing a usual PSP, ARK and course indicator next to the KP? so
that the pilot could monitor the flight in the automatic mode of landing approach
or fly by the SP system.

The third type of instruments, which have gained wide use in recent times, are
combined instruments. They include, for example, the instruments to monitor

engine operation and related systems. In some cases, an instrument gives readings
of the same parameter for two engines (revolution indicator, indicator of position
of fuel throttle, etc.). In other cases, one instrument displays readings of
different parameters for the same engine (three-needle fuel pressure, oil pressure
and temperature gauge for one engine). Such combinations are convenient and based
on logic: in the first case, checking one instrument yields information about two
parameters of two engines and, since we are dealing with a common parameter, the
pilot's job is merely to eliminate a mismatch between the readings of one instru-
ment; in the second case, monitoring one instrument makes it possible to immediately
assess the main parameters of one engine. The principle of meaning-related, logical
combination has gained wide applicatio- as well in the design of flight and
navigation instruments. An example of such combinations is the unification in

one KPP instrument of a command PSP and A60, or combination in the “KP (NPP)

of such instruments as PSP, UK and ARK, which we have mentioned repeatedly. Let

us note that such combinations are expedient from the standpoint of concentrating
the readings of different, but functionally related instruments in the pilot's
central field of V18i0n, which reduces angular eye movements and, consequently,
results in faster perception of instrument readings.

The three types of instruments we have discussed--informative, director and
combination-~are suppkmwntedwith appropriate signals (lamps, panels, audio signals,
etc.). In addition, there are electromechanical signals on the instruments

that report to the pilot in the event of malfunction of the instrument; most often,
they consist of blinkers or flags, the closed or open position of which gives
information about the efficiency of the instrument.

Informative signals can be divided into three types. The first type refers to
signaling equipment that informs the crew about a normal mode or normal operation
of various systems and units. Such signal systems include the signals of passing
over markers, turning on control of front wheel, automatic brake, turning on and
normal operation of deicing system, hydraulic pumps, fuel pumps, remove
propellers from stop [7], release and eject brake parachutes, etc. The first
type of signal lamps have white, blue or green light filters.

The second type includes signaling equipment that informs the crew about an impend-
ing undesirable or dangerous situation. Such signals include: "aircraft speed is
high," excessive engine power, fuel and oil supplies are close to minimum permissible
levels or allow for only 30-60 min flying time, etc. The light filters of these
signals are yellow, orange or red.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third type of signals inform the crew about presence of an emergency situation
and efficacy of steps that are performed automatically in this situation or under-
taken by the crew. The third type of signals report malfunction [failure] of engines,
generators, feathered prepellers, fire in the engines, triggering of firefighting
system, icing of different parts of the aircraft, depressurization of cabins, etc.
These signals have red light filters, intermittent signaling and, not infrequently,
they have an audio signal back-up. Expressly these complex and important signaling
elements, which combine different modes of signaling. should be classified as com-
bined signals.

The director signals have limited significance and consist of audio and light
stimuli, which must call the crew's attention to signs, such as "start TG [expansion
unknownl," “lower landing gear,” etc.

in order to offer a more graphic idea about instruments on pilot panels, Figure 5
illustrates photographic mockups of the left, middle and right instrument panels
of the early TU-lZé aircraft. The captain's panel on the left contains the
following equipment: cabin rate of climb indicator [variometer] (l), parachute
release-eject signal (2), Hach indicator (3), "high speed" indicator (6), radio
altimeter switch (5), radioaltimeter (6) and the signal related to it, "dangerous
altitude“ (7), barometric altimeter (8), speed indicator (9), rate of climb indi-
cator (10), NR? (11), A03 (12), AG! (13), EU? (14), ARK (15), CPK (16), instrument
and signals of-tha "dome" navigation system (17), air flowmeter for cabin pressuri-
zation (18), outside air thermometer (l9), signals for up-down landing gear posi-
tions (19a) and position of trim tabs (20).

The middle panel, which is primarily the concern of the flight engineer contains

the following: revolution indicator of the two engines (21), engine flowmeters (22),
"30-min fuel left" signal (23), temperature gauge for gases behind turbines (2b),
three-needle combination indicators showing high fuel pressure, temperature and

oil pressure for each engine (25), pressure gauges and signal lights of the hydraulic
system (26), flap and tab position indicators, signals of airtight closure of
hatches and doors (27), low pressure gauges (28).

The right copilot's panel contains, in addition to the indicators present on the
left panel, the following instruments and signals: fuel gauge and corresponding
controls (29), deicing system indicators and controls (30), altitude system
indicators and controls (31).

We have discussed various instruments and signals installed on pilot panels chiefly
from the technical point of view. From the psychophysiologicai point of view,

each indicator can be studied in different aspects: readability under stress condi—
tion and when time is short, psychological validation of instrument dial design,
difficulty of identifying malfunctions [failures] and changing to back-up instru-
ments, etc.

These interesting questions, which are the subject of investigation of many re-
searchers (V. A. Pupov, A. H. Nikovskiy, Yu. V. Krylov, 1966; V. A. Ponomarenko,

A. c. Shishov, 1966; Forbes, 1946, and others),will be touched upon to some
degree in our subsequent presentation.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo . Pilot’s controls

The location of pilot controls in relation to his work place and panels is of
exceptional importance.

The opinion has been voieefl 1n the English and American literature of recent years
that optimum placement of controls must be based on separating them into the
main ones, which the pilot uses constantly, secondary ones, among which a dis-
tinction is made between those placed near the hand (hand fixed), those used by
the free hand (hand free) [sic] and emergency controls.

The arrangement of all controls must conform with the anthropometric and psycho-
physiological distinctions and requirements of pilots, with consideration not
only of their work during flights, but rather rapid preflight checks (Horsnt and
Smith, 1947, 1957; Rolfe, 1965).

K. K. Platonov (1960) observed, with reference to questions of psychological
rationalization of aircraft cabins, that "designers divide controls
into the following groups according to usage conditions: main, used regularly;
main, used during different segnents of flight; auxiliary [ancillary]; emergency;
those used on the ground during prefligh: preparations.

The author singles out the controls in accordance with the specifics of work
movements performed: first group (control wheel, pedals, engine control levers),
second group of controls that supplement or replace those of the first group'
(trimer, autopilot control, etc.) and lists among other controls (third and
fourth groups) various levers, adjustment and setting knobs, as well as button and
tumbler control of the "on-off" type.

In our opinion, a quite acceptable classification is one that takes completely

into consideration the functional principle, i.e., frequency of pilot use of various
controls. Evidently, this factor must be taken into consideration for the

most complicated phases of flight--take-off and landing.

From this point of view, the control wheel, pedals and throttles should be
considered the main controls.

Trimmer, autopilot and ultrashort-wave (UKV) station controls should be considered
additional controls of the first order.

We can list among additional secondary [second order] controls those used to
lower and retract the flaps, landing gear, interceptors, spoilers, setting and
removing propellers from the stop, etc.

Let us briefly discuss the main and auxiliary controls at the work places of
pilots of civilian gas-turbine engine aircraft, on the basis of the above classi-
fication principles. As we have already noted, the main controls are the control
wheel, pedals and engine (throttle) control levers.

The control wheel [stick]: When the control column is pulled toward or away from
the pilot it causes the aircraft to rotate about its transverse axis due to
aerodynamic reactions of the elevator. These control movements change the
angle of pitch of the aircraft and put it in the climb or descent mode.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 

_Fi e s 8
9“ 9° 4 3n... n ski-10 *
Idlin I“ .am 3mm.
\ ““- H997 oontroi
n. ' 2’? . km»)
8 Windsh. ch Mtg gency
Automatilt wiper we we n“ e ISL-62 battery .

- ' é;}up - .. '3 J‘P ab
‘9’, me 6%: NW
eme enc ﬁne enc ' Lockin Tu-
teathggingy brag. 13311 elever: _ 12-18 “124
ll: 15 '9 13 Shut-011M 20
‘ 53“,?" Automatic
‘pim-dgtyag not 8cold
pm“? Emergency manual
brake valve
ejection

  

Figure 6. Drawings of acne controls [LG—~1anding gear]

   
  
 
 
   

O C o 0
C091 lot —. :3: 3g
Navigator _. #32 AA
1
01553;?“ """ "' 7-:

Engineer" " 1:“: I!

36 . factor

~

Locks [stops]

Figure 7. Arrangement of some controls and work places of crews aboard
10-106, Tu~125 and Tu-lllo aircraft

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8. Lecation of some controls and work places of crews of the 11-18
aircraft

Moving the control wheel [stick] to the right or left causes the aircraft to turn

about its longitudinal axis due to the aerodynamic reactions of ailerons, and the
aircraft makes a right or left bank.

Pedals: Pressure on the pedals, which causes them to deflect, causes the aircraft
to turn about its vertical axis due to aerodynamic reactions of the rudder. Control
of the brakes and front landing gear wheels during take-off and landing runs is
usually caupled with the pedals; however, the nature of pedal movements changes

for control of the brakes: instead of exerting pressure, the front_of the foot

[toe] is used for separate depressing movements.

Movement of the control stick toward and away from the pilot, to the right and left,
and application of pressure to the pedals with the feet require some static
exertion by the pilot, which may reach significant levels, even under ordinary
flying conditions (at low or high flying speed); under more complicated and diffi-
cult conditions, these exertions may exceed the physical capabilities of the pilot.
Trimmers are installed on the control sticks to reduce exertion, and they are
moved by the pilot mechanically of electrically. The corresponding controls (which
are called elevator, rudder and aileron trimmers) are located in the immediate
vicinity of the control stick, and they constitute an additional group of first-
order controls used less often than the control stick, pedals and throttles; in the
same group. we should include the automatic pilot with its adjustment and setting
controls, as well as control of the command radio station (UKV). The additional
group of secondary controls includes, in addition to landing gear and mechaniza-
tion controls (flaps, tabs, interceptors, spoilers), numerous levers, lights and

buttons, valves that serve to stop or start the engines, move propellers from the
stop, feather them, etc.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFK]A|.USE!0NLX

Engine control: There are engine control (RUD) levers or throttles that regulate
engine thrust. These main controls are situated on the left and right pilot
panels (on TU-lOé, Tu—lZé and Au—lo aircraft) or on the flight engineer's panel
in the middle (on Ilr18 and AN—Zb aircraft), or else on both the pilots' and

engineer's panels (TU-114 aircraft).

Some of the most typical controls are illustrated in Figure 6; Figures 7-9 show the
location of various controls and work places of crews for five types of aircraft
with gas-turbine engines.*

 

Figure 9. View of some controls and work places for crews of the An-Zb
aircraft

List of controls illustrated in Figures 7~9:

1) control stick

2) radio control (UKV)

3) rudder and brake control

6) engine controls (RUD)

5) mechanical control for elevator trimmer
6) electrical control for elevator trhmmer

*TU-lOé, TU-le. ru-114, IL-18 and AN-26 aircraft. The right sides of Figures 7 and

8 show the different controls under the names of 1st, 2d, ..., 5th factors, and
the meaning and purpose of these factors will be made clear in our next

publication.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7)

8)

9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)
20)
21)
22)
23)
24)
25)
26)
27)
28)
29)
30)
31)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)

aileron triuer control

rudder trimmer control

front wheel control

emergency automatic pilot turn-off

landing gear lowering and retraction control
flap control

interceptor control

engine control

autopilot

UKV station

parachute release and ejection control
emergency landing gear control

deicer systel control

engine stopping control

oxygen

intercom

fire-extinguishing system control

fuel system control

engine starter for use in the air

emergency brakes

control for release and turning on headlights
location of power generator aboard the TU—124
location of generator aboard the ru-Ioa
controls and work place of flight engineer aboard the TU-llb
emergency battery charger

adjustment of instrument illumination
hydraulic system control

oil cooler flap control

control buttons to feather propellers
control for altitude [pressurization?] system
emergency feathering
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
1“.

15.

FOI‘OFFNﬂAl.USB(MVLY

Sheynin, M. P., TRUDY VAD GVP. Nos 8, 16, 16, 1962.

Denisov, V. 0.. and Lopatin, R. 8., "The Pilot and the Aircraft," Oborongiz,
1962.

Idem, "Flying and Navigational Instruments," Voyenizdat, USSR Ministry of
Defense, Moscow, 1962.

Kaganovich, N. A., "Aircraft Radio Equipment," Oborongia, 1962.

Petrov, Yu. A.. "Some of the Principles Involved in the Construction of
Flying and Navigational Systems," "Aviatsionnaya i kosmicheakaya meditsina"
[Aviation and Space Medicine], Moscow, 1963.

Geratevol', 2., "Human Psychology in an Aircraft," Foreign Literature
Publishing House, Moscow, 1956.

Braun and Louks, Creter, cited in 9.

Mathew, U. Q., Daugherty, D., and Willis, J. M., "Relative Motion of
Elements in Instrument Displays," AEROSPACE MEDICINE, Vol 34, Rb 11, 1963.

Pitts, P. M., "Psycho1ogica1 Requirements in Aviation Equipment Design,"
.1. AV. MEDICINE, V01 17, No 13, l9é6.

Milton, J. L., "Analysis of Pilots' Eye Movements," Ibid, Vol 23, No l, 1952.
J. M. Rolfe, "Textbook of Aviation Medicine," Chapter 37, 1965.

Morant and Smith, cited in 16.

Abbreviations

ADP
AGB
ASD
ARK
BPRM

airport control center
bomber aircraft gyro horizon
azimuth gyro sensor [?1
radio compass

inner marker beacon

BSUZP onboard 1anding approach system [also encountered as BSU ZP]

DAR
DGHK
DPP
DPRM
DPSP
EU?
GIK
GHK
CPK
GRH
IP
KDP
KP
KPP
KRH

remote—reading astrocompasa
distant-reading gyromsgnetic compass
approach control center [control tower]
outer marker beacon
landing system control center
.1ectric turn indicator
gyro induction compass
gyromagnetic compass
directional gyroscope
glide-path beacon
starting point
command control center
check point
command flight instrument
radio-range beacon

98

FOI‘OFIICIAI.IEHE(NVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00060R000400060026-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KUS combined speed indicator

H machmeter

NKP

NPP) navigation system instruments

OSP instrument landing equipment

PSP instrument landing system indicator
RDP area Control points

RSP landing approach radar system

RUD engine controls '

RV radioaltimeter

SDP take-off system control center

SKP flight command post [?]

SP instrument landing system

UK course indicator

UKV ultrashort Have [station, radio]

US speed indicator

UVD air traffic control service

VAR rate-of-climb indicator, variometer
VD barometric altimeter

10,657

CSO: 8144/0637

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R0004000800264
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 613.693.001.5

MEDICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF CIVIL AVIATION PILOT RELIABILITY (NUHBCR 3)

Moscow MEDIKO-PSIKHOLOCICBESKIYE PROBLEHY NADBZHNOSTI RABOTY LETCHIKOV SOVREHBNNYKH
TRANSPCCINYKH SAHOLETOV GRAZHDANSKOY AVIATSII (VYPUSK TRETIY) in Russian No 3,
1969 (signed to press 13 Feb 69) pp 1-31

[Complete translation of pamphlet 'Hedical and Psychological Problems of Reliability
of Pilot Work in Modern Transport Aircraft of the Civil Aviation (Number 3)" by
Levon Saakovich Isaakyan, candidate of medical sciences, USSR Ministry of Civil
Aviation, State Scientific Research Institute of Civil AViation, Department of
Scientific and Technical-Economic Information, 31 pages]

[Text] Professiographic Description of Pilot Work
1. Professiographic analysis of flight work

A description of pilot professiograms with reference to educational systems and

general psychological analysis is given in the works of K. K. Platonov in relation
to piston-engined aircraft (1957, 1958, 1960).

In this respect, flight engineering studies and official documents describing
and regulating the order and nature of pilot actions at different stages of

a flight, as well as frequently encountered errors and inaccuracies, are of
great interest.*

3. S. Alyakrinskiy (1958) makes_a distinction between voluntary control movements,
correcting automatic or reactive and correcting voluntary movements) in addition,
the author makes a distinction between movements without visual monitoring and
special movements in emergency situations (when there is a clash between concep-
tions and perception, with sudden change of sensory field, etc.).

K. K. Platonov (1960) discusses the movements of pilots from the standpoint of
their accuracy, balance, smoothness, force ["vigorousness”], speed and other
properties, in the belief that all psychomotor processes can be conceived of in

*Textbooks on operating various types of aircraft with gas-turbine engines, com-

piled by the staff of the State Scientific Research Institute of the Civil

Aviation, as well as records of flight tests of this institute together with
other organizations.

100

Flll(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(HVLY
the form of three reactions (simple and complex sensorimotor reactions, and
sensorimotor coordination).

Several studies involved registration of pilots' control movements during flights
aboard different types of aircraft (Ye. A. xarpov, I. A. Kamyshev, 1958; N. 0.
Zavalov, 1958; T. Kh. Gurvich, Ye. A. Derevyanko, I. A. Kamyshev, 1958, and others).

These works made it possible to characterize control movements of pilots from the
standpoint of speed, minimum possible exertion. trajectory and some elements of
psychophysiological organization. Analogous studies were pursued in the West by
Jenkins (1968), Bertel deBerlel, as well as Tufts College (1952), Orlansky (l9b8)
and Ely et a1. (1956); however, the scope of these studies was somewhat narrower,
and they were limited to investigation of optimum and maximum static and dynamic
force applied to various controls of piston-engined aircraft.

Professiographic analysis of flight work can be made in different ways: in one

case, it can amount to determination and description of the most impor1nnt work opera-
tions of pilots, with indication of their order and logical correlation; in another
variant, analysisconaiatsof step-by-step determination and description of various
elements of the sensory field and control actions corresponding to them. We have
used both approaches, and since the second requires comprehensive description of
control actions, we found that it was necessary to also find quantitative parameters
that would describe these actions fully enough.

Analysis of 843 dynamunetric tracings of pilot exertion referable to the control
stick (control of elevator and ailerons) and pedals (directional [rudder] control)at
take-offs and landings under simple conditions convinced us that any control actions
can be described quantitatively by the three following parameters (Figure 1):

F-static impulse of force [exertion]-is the ratio of the geometric area of
the figure circumscribed by the envelope of the force tracing and time line
to duration (time) of the phase under study. The dimensionality of this
parameter is kg-s/s, while its physical and, in this case, physiological
meaning consists of the fact that it shows how great the average static
force is within one second (kg/s). We shall designate this parameter as

Fe, Pa and Frv keeping in mind that the subscripts "e," "a" and "r" refer to
the controls to which the given static force is applied (ﬁg-static force to
deflect elevator. which is applied to the control stick, F,-static force to
move rudder, which is applied to the pedals, etc. [F.-same for aileronsl).

A--mean amplitude of dynamic force-characterizes the magnitude (in kg) of
separate impulses in excess of 0.3 kg lasting no more than 2 s. The physio-
logical meaning of this parameter is that it shows the mean magnitude of

dynamic force per impulse, which the pilot exerts upon the controls against

the background of a certain static force characterized by the preceding
parameter (F). Parameter A may refer to different controls: the control sticke-
for deflections of the elevator (Ac), pedals-for deflection of the rudder and
the control wheel-for deflection of ailerons (Ar and An).

n--frequcncy of dynamic exertion-characterizes the number of impulses or
exertions per 10 s of the phase under study. The meaning of this parameter
is rather clear: it shows how many times exertions occur within 10 a (ne, 5,

n!) e
101

FOR(MﬂﬂClALlﬂﬂEONlY
Figure 1.

    

“L.

D
8 .‘1-'f'1"=-1r'nr‘: 5
Phase I'

FOR(MﬂﬂC]Al.USE(NNLY

.rlme n I

F ‘3“:Ihu“u"uk on
err-.00 ““8 8

Aer ""1“" “‘2'. k8!
"e: “U: 3 =1?- 3

"ﬁr-a-1t-1r1s

Tracing of force applied by captain of 11-18 aircraft when moving
control stick at take-off, as an example to explain the principle

involved in determining static force (F).

The calculations of

parameters Fe, Ae and ne are given at the botton of the figure
[portions of inscriptions illegible in source]

Figures 2 and 3 illustrate samples of original tracings of exertion applied to the
control stick and pedals during take-offs (An-10, An-24) and landings (An-10,

11—18 aircraft).

Such tracings are processed by the nethod indicated in Figure l

to obtain the three parameters characterizing the control actions of pilots for
deflection of each of the three controls (elevator, rudder and ailerons).

Take-off segmentsAn_10

I t
Pr %.;s4;l“ __

k8”

Fe O... - .__;‘

! I ~11.
Take-of f segmenm An-Zb

:1

Pa 54

..I—- .-

6 (M‘

t Y -
Fr new Mir

..
P '1 I-....‘.'.'._ ._’
a ‘0
L—I-O—s 0
an.-. a. to
Figure 2.

Synchronous tracings of force applied
to control stick (to nove elevator and
ailerons) and pedals (to move rudder)
in 3 phases of take-off of An-lO and

An-Zb

#21:“ﬁf
15.,

.“c
- _._z~”4~a

3 pm; or 1min; 9M“ 1'

102
FOI(Nﬂﬂ(1Ale§!0NlY

      

I . All-10

Figure 3.
Synchronous tracing of force applied
to pedals (to nave rudder) and control
stick (to move elevator and ailerons)

in last (IV) phase of landing of An-lO
and 11-18
Bearing in mind the foregoing, let us discuss pilot activity in the sensory and
motor fields, referring to the entire aggregate of dynamic sources of afferent
stimuli that are important to the activity and that determine the specific control
movements and actions.

aircraft during the take-off run, are the sources of pilot perception. Perception
of the last source is based on the increasing intensity of perceived vibration of
the cabin and struts of the front wheel, force applied :v the controls and frequency
of flickering of terrestrial landmarks included in the peripheral field of vision.
The geometric correlation between the line of the real horizon and bottom edge of
the headlight is another important source 0f Perception;during the take-off run

of perception is the navigator’s report about current speed reached during the
take-off run. At this stage, the pilot's main task is to maintain the proper
direction of the run and, at the same time, obtain the required aircraft speed-
acceleration to take off fralthe runway. For this reason, the controlling actions
consist of applying impulsed force to control the brakes or smooth low force to
control the front wheels; when the speed of the take-off run comes close to 150-
170 km/h in the middle of the first segment and the rudder becomes more effective,
the direction is maintained with the rudder. For this reason, during the first
segment, the force applied to the pedals according to parameters Fr, "r and Ar

(Fe 8) and dynamic ("e and he a) force applied to other controls remains quite
ins gnificant, althougha

Thus, the speed of flickering of ground-based landmarks, kinesthetic sensation of
vibration and force applied to the controls, correlation between headlight edge and
horizon and reaching a specific speed constitute the signals that determine the
control actions of the pilot for lift-off of the front wheel during the run.

The second segment of the take-off is from the start of lift-off of the front
wheel to complete lift—offer theeircraft (7-15 3). All of the sources of per-
ceptions inherent in the first segment remain unchanged in their significance to

*The landing approach phase includes the actual landing.

**Translator's notes: Ihese are new letters for control tower, literally, approach
control center [or tower), whereas KDP was used in the past-—command control
center for tower]. For the reader's convenience, expansions of all abbreviations
are also furnished at the end of this pamphlet.
FOR|JFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

the pilot, but the edge-horizon, force applied to the stick and vibrations of the
cabin and struts of the front wheel gain special significance. At the moment of
separation of the front wheel from the ground, vibration decreases and the exer-
tions are well perceived, while the edge-horizon space narrows down. As soon as
the front wheel has separated from the ground, information about speed, retention
of direction and force applied to the control stick move to the fore. After 5-10 a,
during which the sources of information remain unchanged, the aircraft lifts

from the ground (second deflection and immobilization of the control stick), and
it moves into the third segment.

During the second [sic] segment of take-off, typical changes occur in the pilot's
motor field: in the presence of unchanged or slightly increased force applied

to the pedals (to control the rudder), the pilot starts to gradually pull the
stick toward himself with low dynamic force, controlling the elevator (Figure 2).
The static force (Fe) constitutes 7-23 kg/s, the number of dynamic exertions

(ne) is in the range of 8-11/10 s and their mean amplitude (As) fluctuates in the
range of 3-15 kg/impulse. In the case of a normal take-off (usual centering,
take~off weight, wind and runway condition), more force is applied to move the
stick to the right and left, according to all three parameters (Fa, na and A,)
than in the preceding segment, but still it is rather low. The force applied

to the pedal to move the rudder (Pr) reaches high values, but according to para-
meters Ar and "r, lcss force is used than in the preceding segment.

The third and last segment refers to the period between lift-Off of the aircraft
from the ground and time it reaches an altitude of 150-200 m (20-30 5).

As soon as the aircraft starts to climb, all of the pilot's attention is concen-
trated on the following instruments:8yr0 horizon (AGB [bomber aircraft gyro horizon]
and A50) used to eliminate banks and hold the required pitch angle, rate of climb
indicator (VAR), which serves to determine that altitude is being gained at a
specific vertical spccd (7-10 m/s), the KUS-—combination indicator of acceleration,
which informs the pilot about instrument and air speed or, more precisely, the
changes in these parameters during the climb, and, finally, after the turning
altitude is reached, one of the course instruments is in the area of the pilot's
attention (DGMK [distant-reading gyromagnetic compass], UK [course indicator],

GPK [directional gyroscope], etc.).* During the last segment of take-off, the
captain issues orders to the flight engineer or copilot to retract the landing
gear, flaps, switch the engine from take-off to nominal mode, he checks the proper
operation of the corresponding systems and carefully observes the aircraft’s posi-
tion in space in connection with gear and flap retraction, change in mode, etc.
Usually, at the same time the pilot maintains command radio communication with the
SDP controller. The typical control actions of the pilot in the third segment

of take-off amount to the following: vigorous force applied to the stick to
dcflecttheailerons and.prevent banking (P, 0.5-1.5 kg/s, "a 1.3-0.9/10 s and

A8 2-10 Rulimpulse); decreasing static force to pull the stick toward himself,
against the background of which dynamic force is exerted (Fe -5.3-26 kg/s, "e 2.7-
0.9/10 5 and Ae 1.5-7kg/impu15e);some decrease in dynamic and static force

*In aircraft with a high thrust-weight ratio, which have a wide pitch angle when
they gain altitude (for example, Tu-lOé, Tu-lSé and 11-62), the horizon is not

visible after separation from the ground, and altitude is gained by the
instruments.

104

FOR 0F1WCJAI.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
applied to the pedals to control the rudder. The last segment of the.take-off
phase ends at the time when the pilot receives instructions from the 0?? controller
about the procedure for leaving the airport area and follows these instructions.

Let us consider the professiographic characteristics of pilot work during take-off
in the schematic form illustrated in Figure 4, which shows the sources of per-
ceptions, control actions and main tasks at each segment of take-off; in addition,
it illustrates the specific changes in force parameters (F, n and A) during the
entire take-off, calculated for work intervals of 2-6 s as they relate to movements
of the elevators, rudder and ailerons.

The second and third phases of flight--gaining altitude and level flightr-

as, incidentally, all subsequent phases (descent and landing) are performed by
the instruments up to the last landing segment, regardless of meteorological con-
ditions.

During the period of gaining altitude and -level flight, the pilots concen-
trate alternately on the following instruments:gyro horizon, speed indicator,

rate of climb indicator, instruments that control engine operation and various
course instruments. The distribution of attention among these instruments depends
largely on the selected mode of climb (cruising mode, maximum distance or duration
modes). In general, the pilot tries to hold within a specific range the gradually
decreasing vertical speed, instrument speed and increasing air speed. Special
attention is given to the course instruments (DGHK, GIK [gyro induction compass],
GPK), radio compasses (ARK), radar monitoring and specific instructions from the
navigator pertaining to course correction.

At the third phase of the flight--horizontsl flight-the autopilot controls the
aircraft if there is no turbulence, and the pilot's work is limited to Ionitoring
the course, speed instruments, radar observation of meteorological conditions
(thunder, oncoming aircraft) and making the appropriate adjustments in the
autopilot (aircraft) control. If the autopilot is malfunctioning, the relatively
calm work of pilots in level flight is drastically disrupted-~they change to
manual control which requires increased attention and considerable physical
exertion.

The next to the last, fourth phase of flight-descent-is characterised in most
cases by turning the autopilot off and changing to manual instrument control; the
level and nature of work in this phase are comparable to the climbing phase, but
mentally it elicits greater and, moreover, gradually increasing tension (aware—
ness of the impending landing approach). Since descent to the initial point and
subsequent attainment of the DPRH [outer marker beacons] beams involve frequent
turns (course change) and breaking clouds. instrument flying, monitoring

the operation of engines and the pilots' close communication with the navigator
acquire special importance.

The last, fifth phase of the flight is the approach landing, which was discussed

above (p 9, No 2 [of this series of pamphlets]) as it relates to the main prin-
ciples of using the OS? and SP landing approach systems: here. referring to the
figure already familiar to us [from No 2], it remains for us to trace the main
elements of sensory and motor fields of pilots while performing this most difficult
phase of flight [Figure 5).

105

FOR OFIWCLAL USE<MHLY
Key:
3)

b)
C)

d)

e)
f)

s)
h)
1)

J)

k)

m)

n)

IN)R‘0FF1CIAI.lﬁSEI(ﬂVLY

@ @

/{ at! mama-tn q“,- ' ”I " -

- nu...- ”w. u? "M film. new mum-

WW "no":I “PL”. ‘9 . ' . I- ”l "(I - «van only.

G m1 M, ,~,§~fm;3w1”4¢:?-§§.z§!“z "‘ mm"...

      
  
 

1&-
b:
3
l

6"Jp‘b fI'A'.~I'_- “.5 .‘. ‘PI . . A... ____.~

LkOul A-ulq. m I I "g?" ” n '
ecu .,...,...,, - 7." . .. “alumni,“

“fig-E? ___ ‘

     
 

  
 

he room-lane... M “Mu-u pg Lle gm

I» train - . u .

'I-“rmeht 17:" 'arssr‘ﬂr 3‘3"“an ;
mum-w.

mv';«;- ® Out-o m pm.-
I ' .' /). ‘ ‘ . - . '5' ..

 

Figure 5. Explanation given in the text

to retain di'ertion, control front wheel, brakes, rudder. Visual-
kinesthetic monitoring of speed-acceleration

pull stick toward pilot at V I 0.8 V... [subscript illegible]; lift-off,
second movement of control stick, elimination of bank

commands: retract landing gear, flaps, switch engines to nominal mode; hold
course, climbing speed and other parameters

motor field

kg/inp o) retraction of landing gear, flaps,
imp/10 s elimination of bank, hold course
kg°s and speed of climb, etc.

sensory field (sources of information) p) segment

tasks

1. axial runway line

2. speed-acceleration

3. "ibration, landmarks flickering on the ground, force applied to controls,
etc.

a. space contained between edge of image of headlight and horizon

5. information about speed

Same as above, but particularly items 2, 3 and h in (j)

1. A53, A60, VAR, Kuslcombined airspeed indicator]

2. course instruments

3. signals (... kinesthetic) of landing gear and flap retraction

hold direction; achieve speed for lift-off of front wheel

lift-off of aircraft, pull control stick toward pilot

106
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
Figure 5. a) Ground-based SP-SO equipment

b) Diagram of changes in readings of the main flight instruments

of pilots when making a landing approach by the OSP-loB and
SP-SO systems from DPRH cross beam

This entire phase can, like the take-off phase, be arbitrarily divided into segments.
The first is from the DPRM cross beam to approach into the fourth turn. In

Figure 5, it corresponds to positions 1-4. In position 1, the copilot or flight
engineer lowers the landing gear when so instructed by the captain; in position 1.
they start to lower the flaps. Both actions are feasible when the velocity of

the aircraft does not exceed a certain limit; while the landing gear and flaps

are being lowered, as well as during the turn, aerodynamic aircraft reactions

take place, as a result of which there is change in both the spatial position of the
aircraft and, particularly, its speed. For this reason, the pilot's activity in

the motor field is limited at this segment to control of throttles (RUD) (which is
sometimes done by the engineer when so instructed by the captain) and reactive

force applied to the control stick for compensation of aerodynamic reactions—changes
in spatial position of the aircraft.

In positions 1 and 2, the pilot is governed primarily by the ARK readings; if ARK
No l and ARK No 2 show a change in positions from 90-100' to 120-130‘ (for a right
circle), the aircraft is maneuvered into the third 90° turn by the course instru-
ments. After completing the third turn and changing to straight flight, course
angles of the order of 85—90° change to readings of 70-75°, which is a signal to
begin the fourth turn. In addition to the ARK, GPK, DGHK, altimeter and speed
indicator (VD and KUS), in the first segment of this phase the pilot monitors

the readers of engine, flap, landing gear, etc., indicators.

107

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second segment of the landing approach covers the period between maneuvering
into the fourth turn to entry of the aircraft in the glide-path area. Positions
5 and 6 in Figure 5 correspond to this segment.

As we have already indicated, the readings of the ARK (70-75°) serve as a signal to
start the fourth turn; performance of the fourth turn is monitored by means of

the above-mentioned instruments, A68, GPK, DGHK, [US and others; the readings of
the course instruments (DGHK, GPK), P3P (course needle approaches the center-
aircraft symbol) and ARK (needle in the vicinity of the zero mark) are the signal
of completion of the fourth turn. At the end of the second segment, the pilot
still concentrates on the PSP, GPK, AGB, ARK and KUZ. and movement of the glide
path needle of the PSP down in the direction of the center-—aircraft symbol--is the
signal to issue the order to lower the flaps again and switch the aircraft to the
descent mode (when the needle occupies a middle position), which is monitored by
the VAR. At the second segment of landing, there is some increase in flow of in-
structions from the DPS? to the pilots, particularly if the controller turns on
the radar system for monitoring the landing approach (RSP).

The third segment goes from the start of descent on the glide path to flight past
the BPRM. In Figure 5, it corresponds to only one position--7. Before flying
past the DPRH, the pilot's attention is concentrated, in the first place, on
holding the rate of decline at 2-4 m/s on the variometer, holding the magnetic
course selected according to the GPK and selected course angle according to the
ARK, without banking and witllmaintenance of a specific pitch angle (AGB or A60);

in the second place, as he flies over the DPRH and BPRH, he must maintain quite
accurately specific altitude and speed as shown by the KDS, VD and RV; for
example, in the case of jet aircraft, speed of flying over DPRM should be 300-

250 km/h at an altitude of about 200 m, and over BPRM--230-250 km/h at an altitude
of 60-80 m, depending on its landing weight, position of center of gravity and other
variable factors. In the third segment, there are fewer instructions from the DPS?
and the pilot has the right not to respond to the controller's instructions..

The fourth and last segment of landing, from the BPRM overflight area to the start
of the run on the runway, involves mandatory change to visual flying under the
prevailing minimums at the present time (see No 2, p 13). In this brief segment,
the elements of the sensory field include visual perception of distance to start
of runway, lateral displacement of the runway, glide angle, speed of flashing of
terrestrial landmarks, equalization point, kinesthetic and vestibulomotor sensa-
tions evoked, in particular, by the force applied to the controls, G forces,
pressure to the hip region, etc. During this segment, there is discrete delivery
of auditory infonnation to the pilot from the navigator (about current speed) and
flight engineer (about altitude, according to radioaltimeter readings).

The pilot's work in the motor field at the climb, level flight, descent and landing
approach .hases, with the exception of the last segment of the landing, cannot be
submitted to the same analysis as was used for the take-off phase. This is attri-
butable to the fact that the control actions of pilots at these phases are epi-
sodic (relatively rare movement of controls, seldom use of automatic pilot,

use of actions unrelated to physical exertion--button-toggle-switch control of
lowering landing gear, flaps, attenuation or elimination of exertion by means of
trimming, etc.).

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the last, fourth segment of landing, when pilots cannot make full use of trimming
(analogously to the situation during take-off) due to the limited time spent on the
airborne segment of the route (10-15 a), their motor activity is of some interest
from the standpoint of the parameters we have developed.

If we were to arbitrarily divide the last segment of landing into three parts, each
of which is of approximately the same duration-5-10 s-(first part from the start
of changing to visual flight to leveling out; second part is the period of leveling
off and touching the runway and third part is the first segment of the run) and
analyze typical curves of pilot exertions in all three parts of the fourth segment,
we would detect several patterns.

Static force (Fr) applied to the rudder over the entire segment turns out to be

about the same--lS-35 kg/s, whereas the force applied to the elevator control (Fe)
obviously reaches a maximum at the moment of leveling out and touchdown, constituting
5-24 kg/s for the segment; however, the static force applied to control the ailerons
(F3) is very small--O.2-2.2 kg/s. The frequency of dynamic force applied to all
three controls (ne, "a and n ) has a tendency toward increasing in the second part

of this segment (to 2-10 imp710 s). Hean amplitudes of dynamic force applied to
rudder and aileron controls gradually diminish over the fourth segment (from 10-

13 kg/imp to 3-5 kglimp), but the same parameter for the elevator control (Ae) usu-
ally reaches a maximum during the second part of this segment.*

The curves reflecting typical changes in static and dynamic force applied by pilots
to the control stick and pedals in the course of the fourth segment aboard An-lO and
11-18 aircraft are illustrated in Figure 3. The professiographic activity of
pilots in the last segment of landing, including sources of perception, control
action and objects determining them, is illustrated in Figure 6. The same figure
illustrates the curves of changes in the three parameters of force used to move

the rudder and ailerons.

We shall ultimately return to a more general analysis of these data, which charac~
terize the psychomotor activity of pilots during take-offs and landings.

If we try to classify the activity of pilots in the sensorimotor field during an
entire fligh; on the basis of the most general criteria, we could refer to three
types of work operations.

Active visual flying ["visual monitoring") isthe first type of work operations. This

type is used by the pilot during the take-off run and lift-off, as well as in the
last segment of landing; in the third segment of take-off (climb to 150-200 ml and
different segments of landing, with the exception of the last one, this type of
work operations is used relatively seldom.

Active instrument flying ["instrument monitoring"] isthesecond type of operations

which, unlike the first type, is based on interpretation of symbolic, second-signal
[signaling system?] information, rather than first-signal, graphic information.
This type of work operations is used by pilots in the last segment of a take-off,
when gaining altitude, in level flight in bumpy air (when the autopilot is turned
off) and all'segments of landing, with the exception of the last one.

*Description of changes in force applied to rudder and aileron control inherent in
landings under calm conditions or in the case of head wind.

109

FOR OFFKJAI.U8510NLN
,_ ..... o. c9 @
J: dunno way-damn. Q. I»... u...” .37" ”me.- I;
@Mﬂ If M anuba» I4 a. ;:.'nb.wv; figun-rtwat ‘ n
1 ’1',” For] in, "duty.
«45.92 " '-

M ‘

    
  
 

   

     

' , ,0" . .. ‘
,2 Igl.‘ I: out-3‘ ”3:05:37” a
m-u ,_-/ 7-W- ~31 .. 1'3"- -
aircraft and hazardous meteorological conditions) and with the use of instruments
(to hold specified course, altitude, speed, etc.). Let us note that, with appear-
ance of the slightest complication, such a flight changes into an active instrument
flight (autopilot is turned off).

If one so desires, in addition to the above-mentioned three types of work operations,
one could distinguish several other types, which are transitory, but there is no
need to do this, since transitory types are not often encountered in real flights.

2. General hypothetical scheme of psychophysiological activity of
pilots in flight (during take-off and landing)

It is known that the process of sensorimotor coordination, which should be construed
as organization of control actions that are corrected upon perception of their
results, is the psychophysiological basis of piloting.

The concept of sensorimotor coordination is very broad per se, and if we were to
try to classify it we could refer to visual and instrument sensorimotor coordina-
tion. There are some serious differences between the two, which consist of the
fact that for visual flying the control actions are organized by a few acts of
concentrated attention, mainly in the first signaling system, on the basis of
continuous perception with all of its inherent specificity and clarity, with the
use of well-fixed systems of conditioned associations as systems of afferent syn-
thesis and action acceptor. In the case of instrument flying, control actions are
organized by many acts of concentrated attention, mainly in the second signaling
system, on the basis of discrete perceptions, with all of its inherent abstraction,
with the use of less fixed systems of conditioned associations as afferent synthesis
and action acceptor systems.

These differences explain why visual flying is much simpler than instrument flight,
and why it is so complicated to switch rapidly from the former to the latter.

In spite of the above-mentioned differences between types of sensorimotor coordina-
tion, they can be disregarded in constructing a general scheme of pilot activity
in the sensorimotor field.

It is obvious that pilots who control flights and particularly their most complex
phases (take-off and landing) possess a sum of basic knowledge and automated skills
that program pilot actions in a strict and stable fashion (in the sense of con-
stancy). This program contains actions that are performed in the form of condi-
tioned reflexes and stereotypes in the presence of certain triggering and situa-
tional stimuli (for example, pulling the control stick back during the take-off

run or leveling out during a landing, start of turns, lowering the landing gear,
flaps, etc.). All these actions are performed by pilots in the presence of spe-
cific situations and with appearance of specific triggering stimuli; actions of
this type per se are largely automatic and take place on the basis of a number

of mental ["thinking"] and motor stereotypes. Indeed, not to mention such basic
control actions as making turns, lowering and retracting the landing gear, flaps,
etc., even an insignificant change in flight course on the last line is an action
that is strictly determined by a specific situation and specific signal. At the
same time, any operation performed by the pilot under normal flight conditions,
starting with slight turn corrections and ending with lowering or retraction of the
landing gear and flaps, elicits more or less standard aerodynamic reactions of

111

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the aircraft, for the compensation of which the pilot has developed firm motor skills
that effect a series of stereotypic control actions.

We propose the name of stable program for the program of such principal actions
and principal [main] actions for the actions themselves (in Figure 7, where the

overall scheme of pilot work Is illustrated, the corresponding names and abbrevi-
ations thereof are shown in the rectangles and other figures).

Letusnote that, since the stable program is carried out by means of mental and motor
stereotypes, as well as automatic skills, in direct association with the afferent

synthesis and action acceptor systems, all of these functional structures are united
in a single system.

in IE.-
.. was...

q annnm AW! Iumlo
Lit—mi! AA.

 

   
   
   
     
  

   

Figure 7. General hypothetical scheme of pilot work in flight (take-off and
landing) [several inscriptions are illegible]

Key:

a) stable program (SP)

h) action acceptor system (AAD) [top], afferent synthesis system (ans) [bottom]
c) unstable program (NP)

d) single on-hand image of flight (ENOP)

e) single predicted image of flight (EPOP)

f) main control actions (000)

3) sources of perception

h) corrective control actions (KUD)

1) controls

The availability to pilots of only these rigidly programmed and stereotype elements,
which are merely the basis of their strategy or general outline for their work, is
utterly inadequate to perform a specific flight and, in particular, a take-off or
landing. This is attributable to the fact that the stable program of the main

control actions virtually never takes into consideration specific flight condi-
tions that are unlike prior conditions.

These conditions, which refer to the entire sum of perceptions of pilots, for
example, during one of the periods of a landing, include the following: force
applied to controls, glide angle, movement in horizontal plane in relation to the
axial line of the runway, readings of certain instruments, estimation of speed-
accelerations, etc.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Regardless of how the flight is being performed-~visually or by instruments-the
perceptions or conceptions the pilot gains from the above sources apparently form
two solitary [single] images of the flight in relation to three measurements of
space. the runway and terrestrial landmarks--topography of the region: a single
on-hand image of the flight (ENOP) and single predicted image of flight (BPOP).

Each of them apparently arises as a result of synthesis of two intermediate images
characterizing flight of the aircraft in the horizontal and vertical planes. of
course, this synthetic process acquires special importance when making a landing
approach, when the image of the flight in the horizontal plane signifies estima-
tion of the aircraft's course, while the image of the flight in the vertical

plane enables the pilot to assess the precision of maintainig the glide path.

Thus, the single, for example, on-hand image of flight at the landing stage is

the product [derivative] of two intermediate on-hand images of flight with regard

to course and glide path (PNOK and PNOG), while the single predicted image (EPOP) 18
the result of synthesis of intermediate forecast images with regard to course and
glide path (PPOK and PPOG).

The synthesized single images of flight (ENOP and EPOP), entering into the
hypothetical system of afferent synthesis and system of acceptor of action, serve

as the basis for constructing precise, corrective control actions in functional
structures containing an unstable program. The unstable program, like the stable
program and action acceptor, is probably governed essentially by the laws of

dynamic stereotypy and conditioned reflex switching over; however, the unstable
program, particularly its unique [unusual] subprogram, is characterized by immediate
construction of new and frequently disrupted dynamic stereotypes and active in-
volvement of mechanisms of emotional reaction (L. S. Isaakyan, 1963), which apparently
does not occur in the functional structure of the stable program.

He can make a distinction between usual and unusual subprograms in the unstable
program; apparently, the probability of prior use of the latter subprogram is
immeasurably lower than the probability of having used the former subprogram and,
consequently, use of the unusual subprogram is characterized by the need to

process large flows of information and necessity of a high throughput, in addition
to the above-mentioned distinctions. Thanks to the usual subprogram, which has a
set of tactical decisions-actions, the pilot performs a broad range of fine

control actions, which are called corrective actions (KUD) on the general diagram
[scheme]. Under ordinary take-off or landing conditions, expressly these corrective
actions, which are of a compensatory, tracking and anticipating nature, meet

all of the pilot's needs for piloting. Expressly they are the delicate [fine]
pattern that is applied to the general canvas [outline] of pilot actions and
constitutes the most complex and creative part of his activities in flight, and pri-
marily landing. It may he assumed that under such simple take-off or landing con-
ditions, the entire scheme of pilot activities (Figure 7) is functioning, with the
exception of the unusual unstable subprogram. As we have already indicated, the
latter, unlike the usual unstablesubprogram, has considerably fewer tactical
decisions, ready elements for rapid construction of new and complex dynamic stereo—
types and tonic conditioned reflexes, as well as much greater activation of the
mechanism of emotional reaction. Evidently, under more complicated and difficult
take-off or landing conditions, when the pilot encOunters a situation unlike all
that he encountered heretofore, the most intensive element of the activity scheme
is theunstahle program with its unusual subprogram. Probably, under such take-off

113

FOR OFFKJA1.USE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or landing conditions, the corrective control actions (KUD) are determined, to a

significant degree, by the unusual unstable subprogram contained in the unstable
program.

From the physiological point of view, the proposed scheme does not have sufficient
functional and structural grounds for most of its elements. There are no precise
physiological data concerning organization of images, let alone images of flight;
the views that are being developed in recent years by I. S. Beritashvili concerning
the image-related activity of animals as an independent form of nervous activity

of animals (along with conditioned reflex and unconditioned reflex activity)
cannot, of course, serve as serious grounds for the detailed elements of our
scheme. There are even less concrete physiological grounds for the hypothetical
system of afferent synthesis proposed by P. K. Anokhin, although it is unquestionable
that such a system must exist. The action acceptor system (P. K. Anokhin), stable
program and usual subprogram of the unstable program probably contain some complex
conditioned reflex associations, dynamic stereotypes and tonic conditioned reflexes
(in the interpretation of E. A. Asratyan, 1962) that occur on the level of the two
signaling systems. It is more difficult to conceive of the physiological mechanism
of the unusual unstable subprogram, which functions mainly under complicated flying
conditions. Probably, here too the same mechanisms are in effect to some extent

as in the structure of the usual subprogram, but their expression is complicated

by several circumstances: in the first place, there are too few conditioned

reflex elements, on the basis of which new and complicated dynamic stereotypes and
tonic conditioned reflexes should be constructed; in the second place, the motor
components of these elements are notable for being very little conditioned and
fixed; and in the third place, we cannot rule out the negative induction effect

on performance of the entire unusual subprogram and corresponding corrective
actions on the part of a markedly stimulated [excited] mechanism of emotional reac-
tion. Since adequate pilot performance under complicated conditions is often
instantaneous and, so to speak, subconscious, it may be assumed that some of the
elements of the unusual subprogram function on the order of "first second reaction”
(P. K. Anokhin, 1949; R. G. Zeval'd, 1963), which occurs with the shortest latency
period (Forbes and Morisson, 1939; Horuzzi and Hagoun, 1949, and others).

The hypothetical general scheme of pilot work that we propose has something in
common with the psychophysiological scheme of information processing and decision
making, the conceptions of which have been developed in recent years by engineering
psychologists (D. Yu. Panov, V. P. Zinchenko, 1964; V. P. Zinchenko, N. I. Mayzel'
and L. V. Fatkin, 1965; D. N. Zavalishina, 1965; V. V. Davydov, 1960; A. Newell,

J. C. Shaw and Simon, 1958, and others).

According to these conceptions, which are based on the results of psychophysiologi-
cal studies, the first steps of information processing consist of singling Out the
adequate signals among numerous others, transforming them by means of comparison

to standards-engrams into primary images of signal identification, which can
ultimately be used via two channels or two types of conversions. The automatic
type of converting information implies comparison, in the presence of a triggering
signal, of primary images or models-images, first into a model-goal (or program)
and then to the set of decisions-instructions [commands] present in memory, among
which one decision~instruction is readily selected. The retrieval [search] type

of converting information consists of induction of secondary models-images as a
result of interaction between the model-goal (program) and primary images or models.

116

FOR OFTICIAL USEibNLY
comparison of which yields the decision model. It is believed that the automatic
["automated") type of conversion occurs entirely, not counting the triggering signal,
without reflection in consciousness; the searching type of conversion is usually
realized, although in some cases we cannot rule out the possibility of unconScious
execution thereof (V. N. Pushkin, 1960, 1965; N. S. Bernshteyn, 1961, and others).

mena. In the future, we shall demonstrate that the general scheme of pilot activity
in the sensorimotor field is a useful tool for analyzing errors made by pilots in
the course of a landing.

l. Professiographic analysis of pilot performance in flight enabled us to describe
three types of work operations of pilots: active visual flying, active instrument
flying and passive visual-instrument [monitored] flight.

2. Professiographic analysis of pilot activity in flight enabled us to construct

a general hypothetical scheme of their activities, which is applicable primarily

to take-off and landing conditions. This scheme is based on the idea that pilots
form single on-hand and predictable images of flight, by means of sensations, per-
ceptions and conceptions, each of which is the derivative of two intermediate

images of flight (for course and glide path). The single images of flight activate
systems of afferent synthesis (search for an answer to the question of "Hhat to do?")

unstable subprogram, the stable program forming the main control actions (OUD), while
the usual unstable subprogram forms corrective control actions (K110) and, to some
extent, activates the mechanism of emotional reaction. Under complicated and diffi-
cult take-off and landing conditions, in addition to these functional structures,
there is vigorous activation of the unusual unstable subprogram as well. From the
physiological point of view, its activation is characterized by the following
features: limited number of conditioned reflex elements, on the basis of which

there must be hmmediatc organization of new and complex dynamic stereotypes and

tonic conditioned reflexes; insignificant conditioning and consolidation of motor

cated (chain, complex and others) conditioned reflex reactions with a short latency
period and without direct reflection in consciousness.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the standpoint of engineering psychology, activation of these structures is
characterized by the following: drastic increase in flow of information related to
the effect of a situation, the probability of occurrence of which is infinitesimally
low; need for maximum expansion of throughput (amount of information processed per
unit time); presence of only some tactical decisions that are actually made very
seldom; extremely intense mental and emotional stress (or nervous-emotional stress).

On the whole, activation of these functional structures, which are responsible for

the unusual and unstable subprogram, is manifested by various autonomic, somatic,

behavioral and other reactions, which are perhaps governed by certain patterns that

depend on the stressfulness of external conditions (at take-off or landing).

He shall discuss in our next chapter [pamphlet], in detail, these pilot reaczions

during take-offs and landings under simple, complicated and difficult conditions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Alyakrinskiy, B. 5., "Aviation Psychology," VK TsIUV, lectures (manuscript),
Moscow, 1958.

2. Anokhin, P. K., "Key Issues in the Study of Higher Nervous Activity," in
“Problemy vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti" [Problems of Higher Nervous Activity],
Izd. AN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences], Moscow, 1949.

3. Idem. "19th Conference on Problems of Higher Nervous Activity. Sumaries
and Abstracts of Papers," Leningrad, 1960, pp 176-178.

4. Asratyan, E. A., "Lectures on Some Problems of Neurophysiology," Izd. AN SSSR,
Moscow, 1959.

5. Idem, "Tonic Conditioned Reflexes as a Form of Integral Brain Activity,"
ZH. V. N. 0., Vol 13, No 5, Moscow, 1963.

6. Bernshteyn, M. 8., "Psychology of Scientific Creativity," VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII,
No 3, 1965.

7. Beritashvili, I. 8., "Figurative Neuropsychological Activity of Animals,"
"3-1 Sechenovskiye chteniya” [Third Sechenov Lecture Series], Moscow, 1966.

8. Gurevlch, T. Kh., Derevyanko, Ye. A., and Kamyshev, I. A., cited by K. K.
Platonov in "Psikhologiya truda" [Industrial Psychology], Hoscow, 1960.

9. Karpov, Ye. A., and Kamyshev, I. A., Ibid.
10. Derevyanko, Ye. A., and Zavalova, N. D., Ibid.

ll. Davydov, V. V., "Analysis of the Structure of the Act of Thinking," DOKL. APH
RSFSR, No 2, 1960.

12. Zeval'd, R. 6., "Mechanisms of Erroneous Reactions Occurring Hith Disruption
of the Dynamic Stereotype," 2H. V. N. 0., Moscow, Vol 13, Ho 3, 1963.

116

FOR 0511C!AI.USE¢MVLY
FOR(MHWCJAI.USE!ONLY

13. Zavalishina, D. N., "Problem of Forming Strategy in Solving Discrete Operator
Problems," VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII, No S, 1965.

14. Zinchenko. V. P., Mayzel', N. 1., and Fatkin, L. V., ”Quantitative Evaluation
of Operator Performance Referable to Information Retrieval," Ibid, No 3, 1965.

15. lsaakyan, L. 8., "Evaluation of Degree of Stress in Pilots Making Landings in
Different Types of Modern Aircraft Under Ordinary Conditions,“ in "Aviatsionnaya
i kosmicheskaya meditsina" [Aviation and Space Medicine], Moscow, 1963.

16. Platonov. K. K., "Man in Flight," 2d edition, Moscow, 1957.

17. Idem. "Oral Reports at Meetings of the Moscow Society of Aviation Physicians"
(November-December 1958).

18. Pushkin, V. N., "Distinctions and Means of Upgrading Controllers' Consoles,"
VOPROSY PSIKMOLOGII, No 6, 1960.

19. Idem, "Interpretation of Heuristic Activity in Cybernetics and Psychology,"
Ibid, No l, 1965.

20. Jenkins, cited by 2. Geratevol' in "Psychology of Man in Flight," Moscow, 1956.

21. De Berlel', Gertel'; lbid.

22. Forbes and Morisson, Ibid.

23. Orlansky, "Textbook of Aviation Medicine.”

24. Ely et al.. Chapter 40, 1, 1965.

25. Newell. A.. Shaw, J. c.. and Simon, H. A., "Elements of a Theory of Human
Problem Solving,“ PSYCHOL. REV., Vol 65, Mar 1958.

26. Moruzzi, 6., and Magoun. H. H., "Brain Stem Reticular Formation and Activation
EEG,” EEC CLIN. NEUROPHYSIOL., 1949.

Abbreviations

ADP airport control center

AGB bomber aircraft gyro horizon

AGD azimuth gyro sensor [2]

ARK radio compass

BPRM inner marker beacon

BSUZP onboard landing approach system [also encountered as BSU ZPJ

DAK remote reading astrocompass

DGMK distant-reading gyromagnetic compass

DPP approach control center [control tower]

DPRM outer marker beacon

DPSP landing system control center

EUP electric turn indicator

GIK gyro induction compass

GMK gyromagnetic compass

GPK directional gyroscope

117
FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060026-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GRH glide-path beacon

1? starting point

KDP command control center

KP check point

KPP command flight instrument

KR“ radio-range beacon

KUS combined speed indicator

M machmeter

NKP

NPP) navigation system instruments

OSP instrument landing equipment

P8P instrument landing system indicator
RDP area control points

RSP landing approach radar system

RUD engine controls

RV radioaltimeter

SDP take-off system control center

SKP flight command post [2]

SP instrument landing system

UK course indicator

UKV ultrashort wave [station, radio]

US speed indicator

UVD air traffic control service

VAR rate-of-climb indicator, variometer
VD barometric altimeter

10,657

CSO: 8144/0637 - END -

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060026-3