FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10172
9 December 1981

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 25/81]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes widain the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
CYBERNETlcs, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY
(9000 25/91)

CONTENTS

HARDWARE

Ministry of the Electronics Industry Produces Electronic

m‘eSoooaeoooeoaooaaoooooooooooooooooooooooossaoeoonoooooooeooa

Processing of Information Represented in Matrix Porn on
Computer With Rearrangeable Structure..........................

Some Evaluations of Efficiency of Parallel Computations..........
Function]. nat‘ ProceswraOOO0.0QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOQOOOOOOOO
Cylindrical Magnetic Domains in Computer Hardware Blements.......

Microprocessor, Microcomputer Applications in Instrument
HakiJlg. ResurchtoooI...'09000IOOOIOOOOD.OOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOOIOOC

Bit-Slice Microprocessors........................................

Sixteen-Bit Microprocessor Parameters............................
SOFTWARE

Handbook on Standard Simulation Progrens.........................

Microprocessor Process Control Computer Complex for Overhead
Thrust conveyeroooooﬁtil300.000.00.000000IOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOOOOOJO

Extension of Algorithmic Language PORIRAN IV.....................
Abstracts From the Journal 'ALGORITEMS AND PROGRAMS'. May 1981...

More Abstracts From the Journal 'ALGORITHMS AND PROGRAMS',

my 198100000....IO.QO0O0.00.00.00.000IOIOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO0.0I

- a - ' [III - ussa - 21c sa'r

can hm" A I IICI' “NI V

19
24

28

31

33

36

38
60
£7

69

PCXKD]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Additional Abstracts Pron the Journal 'ALGORITIMS AND PROGRAMS',

my 198109sooooso.ooaoooossoosaosossssssssosaasoaoaoosssssosoas

Assembler Language Programing on Unified System of Computer»...

WALKING ROBOTS

Detersining Energy Expenditures for Six-Legged Moving
AWQCU. when It 1‘ 1n MotionﬁtOC'IOOOOOIOOOOOIOO...0.0.0.0...

Mechanics and Motion Control of Robots With Artificial
Intelligence cmentao'aoooooooooooovosoooooooossoasoasncoaos

PUBLICATIONS
Methods for Automating Geophysical Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Abstracts From the Journal "l'ECImICAL CYBMTICS',
July-August: 1981..ooooao-ooooooooooooooo-aoooooosoooosoaooocoos

Table of Contents Fran the Journal 'Imcmmms CYBERNBTICS'.....

Systus and Methods for Automating Scientific Research...........

Principles of Constructing Col-on Memory Module in Multimachine
Systems Based on Microcomputers With Co-on Line.... . .. ..... ...

cab-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

56
S7

68

7b

111

118
121
123

126
WWWONLY

MINISTRY on THE MRMCS mm m. mo cums
Moscow SOVETSCAYA ROSSIYA in Russian 18 Sep 81 p it
[Article by 1'. Manama]

[Text] "Any electronic game. including those which we are developing. is a dis-
tinctive smll computer in the home.” the conversation was begun by G. S. Klisskiy.
chief of the laboratory of the USSR ninistry of theElectronics Industry. "Here are
our latest two noveltiesuths "Bksi-wideo"and the 'Videosport." They both work as
attach-ems to a television set.

”Very likely mny have seen such genes on store counters. or played them. Renenber
how a sports field burns on the screen. how the electronic "blip” darts across the

glowing screen. M such gene. strictly speaking. represents a set of games:
football. hockey. tennis. basketball...”

"I have heard lore than once the opinion.” continues Genadiy Senenovich. "that
electronic genes give nothing to the player. In playing with an unreal puck you

do not develop your Insoles. You develop your reactions instead. And not worse
than in other sportsnen.

“'Eksi-video.'for ample. was created in such a way ttnt the complexity of the
game can be constantly increased. as if you are playing with a partner who is al.-
ways growing stronger. The gale also develops the intellect. for the winning situ-
ation must be rapidly calculated and the position on the field weighed. He who
thinks that the conputer plays nunotonously is mistaken.

”But these genes are not the liait of develop-ent of electronic gases. We are now
developing new variations. These games do not need a television set. they work by
themselves and in addition thenselves assign a play progran and logic. For em-

ple. electronic chess. which is played with the power of a third-rank chess-player.
And besides. chess. checkers. sea battle... All these gales will be conﬁned in a

single electronic system... The style. variations and technology of game-type con-
puters are praotically unlinited."

2176
C50: 1863/13

“MANNY
I’UK 0"“.th UDI'. UNIJ

PROCESSING OF 110081“le REPRESENTED IN KARI! FORM 0“ COMPUTER WITH
REARWGEABLB STRUCTURE

Tbilisi TBKHNICHESKAYA KIBERNE‘HRA in Russian lo lo (225), 1980 (manuscript
received 17 Dec 79) pp 29-33

[Article by K. N. Kamkamidze and A. S. Papandopulo]

[Tat] Automated systeas for management and control of various industries, organi-
cations and power networks are currently being implanted.

Large arrays of information circulate in a power system which includes a large
number of transducers located at power retransmission stations, substations,

Gus, 1'38, 638 [state regional, thermal and hydroelectric power stations]. and
enterprises-power consumers. Processing of these arrays of information under the
conditions of on-line control of the power system requires development of new high-
speed algorithms and programs that support issuance of control co-ands in real
time. Representation of the information in matrix form is convenient for a number
of on-line calculations. Let us examine a method for accelerating calculations
with information in matrixform when a fourth-generation computer with rearrange-
able structures (P5) with paralleling of computations is used to control the power
systea conditions. In solving power problems, the problem of inversion of real ‘and
complex matrices of a large order often arises. As a rule, iterative methods are
used to solve a system of linear equations of a large order in contemporary third-
generation computers. Since it is difficult to invert matrices of a large order
(greater than or equal to 60) in one procedure, a number of artificial methods
((diokoptika), various types of equivalence) that allow solving a problem pieceaeal
has been developed in porter engineering. It is necessary to note that, as a rule,
iterative methods are inadequate for paralleling. nut direct (precise) methods to
inner: , matrices of a large order require much machine time which is not feasible
due to technological reasons. This is why it makes sense to find new algorithic
solutions that would make it easy to parallel the computation process applicable
to the new machines. These algorithmic solutions must preserve or increase the
speed obtainable with iterative methods. To this end, we have developed a series
of algorithms that allow representing real and complex matrices in the form of
hypercomplex matrices similar to them. To perform operations on hypercomplex
matrices, it is necessary to have a program that performs matrix hypercomplex oper-
ations. As in conventional matrix algebra, the operation of matrix multiplication
of a hypercomplex matrix is central. The cited algoritln for multiplying
hypercomplex matrices has been compiled in such a way that the operation of compu-
ting each hypercomplex number is divided into four independent operations that

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
compute the real and imaginary parts of the hypercomplex numbers. To realize this
method, the desired hypercomplex matrices are represented as sinple matrices with

a fourfold greater number of columns, where both the real and imaginary parts of
the element of the hypercomplex Iatrix are represented as an independent element of
a simple matrix. Computation is performed in a loop; computed at once in each loop
are the four elements that are the real and imaginary parts of an element of the
hypercomplex matrix. Power engineering problems that asks use of this algorithm
are solved in real time and require fast methods of solution. In View of the high
orders of the matrices being calculated. the existing program for multiplication of
hypercomplex matrices, written in FORTRAN [2]. requires a large amount of machine
time (an order of 1000 requires 30 minutes on a Yes 1033 computer). In this case,
one would expect a significant effect from using a computer with parallel execution
of operations. The technique of the algorithm fully satisfies paralleling of the

simultaneously in the different branches (fig. 1). The capability of paralleling
at the level of branches is supported by nodules for processing without calls to
the operating system, consequently, without additional loss of time spent by the
operating system. Used as the program are compound statements for processing
scalar operands and compound statements for processing vector operands; buffering
of intermediate results is provided for. and system throughput is enhanced by re-
ducing storage requests. The homogeneity of program instructions imposes no
special requirements on the dynamic allocation of computing resources.

Shown in fig. 2 is the flowchart where the initial matrices are not input. but are
generated in the program itself for any order. The very program for computation of

computation of each branch are the final result of a specific part of the matrix.
The main branch waits for the and of the other three branches only before the print-

intermcdiate results in the execution of the branches. Bach branch consists of
nested loops: branches main. II and III of three loops, and branch I of two loops.
Encountered in the main branch is the statement for processing of the vector oper-
snds, being realized sequentially instruction after instruction on the elements of
the vector, multiple addition and multiplication. It performs the calculation or
the real parts of the elements of the hypercomplex matrices. The first block per-
forms the basic operation of execution and the following blocks are transitions

puted precisely in this branch. Branches I, II and III compute the imaginary parts
of the elements of the hypercomplex matrices.

matrices, which is also not great because of their rero structure. The parallel
structure of the algorithm can be tracked by the steps of the algorithm for inver-
sion of a hypercomplex matrix (the formula was derived especially for this method)
[1].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK 0"“.th use. UNLY

 

Pig. 1. Flowchart of parallel connotations of inversion of a symmetrical real
matrix by using the BPU [multiplication program]

My.1. Derivation of hyperconplex matrix
2. Derivation of hyperconplexsparselyfilled matrix by using the BPU
3. Block inversion ofspnrsely filled hyperconplex matrix
a. RedUCtion of inverted hyperconplex matrix by using the BPU
5. Reduction of inverted real matrix

FOR 0F11CJAl.lﬁﬂ£(NVLY

run UtraLIAL bar. URL!

Let Q be a hypercomplex matrix consisting of components with bases at quaternions
that have a sectioned structure with fixed positions of zeros. The matrix

derived by the above indicated method making use of the B?!) [multiplication program]
has the form:

Q'A'PiB-jC'I-kb.

ThenQ -r-v+x-

1. A
2. A =- (A-t- M'ln)’1
1 -1

3. Bl " AIM

lo. Fl-A+CA1 10-DAID

5. V ' 8+ DA1C+CA1D + 0311) - C310

6. r1 - (r + W‘IV)‘1
1

C + 031C + CB

7. V1 - F1VF

3. X I PICA1 + VIDA). + F1031 - VICBI

9. Z " Vl'l'm1 - FDA1 + V1CA1 +PCB

-1

l
10. Q

It can be seen from this that the most laborious operatioas 4. 5. 8 and 9 can be
executed conpletely independently of each other.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Burdzhsnadze, D. A. and Kmkanidze, It. N., "On a New Class of Matrices in the
Theory of Coding." TRUDY CPI DEM V. 1. mm. lo 2 (150), 1972.

2. Papnndopulo, A. 8., "Multiplication of ﬁyperconplex Matrices 'S'l'R-77',"
REPUBLIKANSKIY POND GSSR F00113, 1977.

8565 I
C80: 1863/266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOIE EVALUATIONS OF EFFICIENCY CF PW WATICNS

Hoscow AVTOHATIZATSIYA PROYEXTIROVANIYA SISTN MAMA in Russian N0 3. 1981
(signed to press 5 Feb 81) pp 88-100

[Article by a. A. Trakhtengerts from book “Control Systels Design Autoutiai", issue
3 of a collection of articles, edited by V. A. Trapemikov (chaimn of the editor-
ial board). I. v. Prangishvili. v. 1.. spshteyn. A. c. Mikonov. I. c. Dnitriyeva
and D. H. Berkovich, based on papers presented at the All-Union Conference on ASU

Design Automation held in Suzdal' in April 1979. Indatel'stvo 'Finansy i statis-
tika". 12,500 copies. 208 pages]

[Text] The first computers executed a single operation (instruction) in each given
moment of tine. The need to accelerate the oonputing process suggested a quite
obvious idea, that of reducing the time required to execute a program by sinultane-
oue (parallel) execution of several operations (instructions or parts of then .
This is not a new thought. It was expressed by Babbage almost 150 years ago 1].
In spite of its obviousness. the practical implementation of parallel conputations
ran into serious technical difficulties. However. the appearance of multiprocessor

computers making parallel computations has solved the question of the practical pos-
sibility of effective execution of the conputing process in parallel.

A multiprocessor systea includes several informtion processing devices. They can
be processors or processor elelents (arithmetic-logical elenente. mlti 11ers. ad-
ders, shifters, decoders. instructions for address coeputation, etc) [2 . Processor

units are included in a proceeeOr. In that approach. eyetens with main-line pro-
cessing also enter the ranks of lultiproceesn. systels.

Multiprocessor conputing systeas usually are subdivided into two large groups [3]:

"systems with a single flow of instructions. which process a mltiple a“ ofa data.
These systems have only one control device and several. sometimes tens of. processor
eleaente. Therefore at each given mutant of tine they can process only one flow of
instructions, executing one operation on various operands with parallelprocessing
of several inetructi one. In that case each Operation can beaubdivided into several
conponent parts:

"systems with a multiple flow of instructions. which process a Iultiple flow of
data. They have several control devices and arithmetic devices. Therefore several
flows of instructions can be processed simultaneously. The structure of systole

MWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a multiple flow of instructions makes then more flexible and effective in

solving a broad class of problems. but the presence of sevenl control devices con-
plicates the system itself.

In the comparison of multiprocessor and single-processor oouputing systens the ques-
tion of whether the expenditures on hardware in sultiprocessor systels are Justiﬁed
always arises. It is well-known, the productivity of s nultiprocessor system con-
sisting of n processors is smaller tlnn the total productivity of n single-processor
machines using the sons processors’. We will use p to designate the number of pro-
cessors or processor elesents. and T the tile required to execute conputations with
the use of p processors. "Co-putatign steps" often are estinted, tint is. the nu-
ber of operations executable in a given tine quant. If the sequence of colputstions

is represented in the form of a tree. a conputstion step can correspond to a trees:
branch.

The mean acceleration of cosputation thrwgh the use of p processors is deteninable
from the correlation [is l in T.

. S,--‘a'—o

where the value S is the mean acceleration. or the width of execution of instruc-
tions in parsllelp(henceforth the width).

Example. Let on a serial machine the coaputation tine be T1 = 100 units of time.
and on a mchine with the number p 8 8 the cosputation time 1‘8 = 30. Then

M
3-";"r'lTo"?v&

Through the use of 8 processors a 3.3-fold acceleration was obtained. Such arith-
setic is usually considered convincing proof of the economic insdvissbility of the
use ofmultiprocessor systems. If the concept of efficiency [It] is introduced

55.1}.

that is. the ratio of the total loading of the processors (in relation to a single-
processor machine) then in our emsple

59-13'i-OAI.

The value of n can also be smaller in my cases. but this does not always lean
that it is disadvantageous to use multiprocessor system. The fact is that the
control device is the dearest part of the processor. and the processor elenents.
as a rule. are far less expensive. Therefore if one control device is combined
with several aritkuetic-logical devices. and very any lultiprocessor oouputers
have such a combination. then even a relatively snll value of E can prove econom-
ically advantageous. p

Finally. Iultiprocessor computing systems are finding application in cases where the
necessary speed is not successfully achieved on single-processor computers.

 

‘*In the further discussion input-output operations are not taken into account.

POI OHIO“. [SE ONLY
Let us note that the nunber of operations executable on a single-processor systen
in solving one and the same problel does not coincide. as a rule. Operations use-
less in solving a problem on one processor can prove effective in solving the tad:
on a multiprocessor system. For sample. four computation steps are required for
computation of the expression a(b+cde) on a single-processor mchins. that is.
1‘1 = Li. To compute the expression transfer-ed to the torn ab+sodo. only three
steps can be required on a multi-processor nohine, that is. T = 3. although the
number of operations has risen to 5. Thus in the process of processing inform-
tion in parallel. operations often redundant from the point of view of dequentisl

colputations actually load the processors or processor ole-ants but have no inﬂu—
ence on the value of the criterion Ep.

In 10st cases the "width” of the processing in parallel, that is. the number of
operations which can be executed in the system in parallel. varies in the process
of counting. Let 0S3k< 1 be the portion of the steps requiring k processors for

their oonputatiot; k<p. 11hen life is the portion of the steps requiring a number
of processors smaller than p for their conputatimm Ji'g.)is the portion of the
hl

steps requiring for their computation p processors. (In these as ions the values
of Tp. SI) and Ep can be obtained from the following correlations 4 a

”I 5 To . .I '
Tr-Tl z ++T.(l-E ﬁn); (n

hl'
Tl - l '
5"77'W3 .. (2).
P l§| T+1- .a. " -~
3» l - I
5"Ta'fTW—e' ~- .- (a).
' P 2 T+'- 2’! .
‘-| ADD

--conflicts as regards nenory and other resources, arising in nulti-processou- sys—
tens;

"transfer of data between processors;
--synchroni nation of processes.

ber of processors or processor ole-ents does not lilit the possibility of execution
of the computing process in parallel; in that case any

operation. The tine required for the execution of all
is identical and equal to the unit of time.

FOR OFFICIAL {BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

executable on several arguments. If the tine of execution of all nicrooperations
is equal. then during breakdown of operations into n steps (nicrooperations).

(n+1: -l)t units of tine are required for n operations. In our hypothesis the tile
for execution of an operation T = I i-t. without min line processing the tins of
the cospcsition of two vectors consisting of n elelents each is equal to nnt uni s.
Thus the acceleration due to win line processing in the ideal case is equal to 6]:

,. - S, I .
EFT-M.-.

 

Since in our case n = p. then

 

-(II+a-l)l Hun—I '

Factors sharply reducing the efficiency of systens with min line processing are
instructions of conditional and unconditional transitions and the informtional de-

pendence of operands. These two factors interrupt the slain line processing and by
the ease token lower its efficiency.

A substantial influence is also exerted on the carrying capacity of a systen of main
line processing by the difference in data processing tine by each device. Actually.
the carrying capacity of a main line is determined by that of its slowly working
link. and that in turn influences the acceleration of the conputing process which
can be achieved through main line processing.

At the present tile in many conpugv systems various nethods of win line process-

ing are used. for example in the 360. m/ 0. A86. sun-100. mom and
CD066OO models. in Burroughs machines. etc [2.6 .

It was noted above that the efficiency of main line processing dininishes during
fairly frequent interruptions. the reasons for which are: modification of instruc-
tions. the absence of an operand in the register and/or in the min Ienory. and

interruption of the flow of main line processing on account of using of the types
of operations.:

For partial elininaticn of the reasons for breaks in the translation systels. leans
must be provided for:

«transposition. if possible. of the modiﬁable and/or modifying instructios so that
the execution of the latter instruction will be conpleted at the Ionent the pro-
cessing of the Iodifiable instruction starts:

--loading of the necessary infatuation (when that is possible) in the corresponding
registers or nesory cells:

«transposition of instructions independent of one another to obtain chains con-
sisting of operations of the same kitd. -

Then the linear sections of the program lust be deterained (see. for example. [7.
8,91) and establish the independence of operators within a linear section. that is.
establish whether the result of one operation is not the operand of another.
whether one instruction does not compute the address of the operand of the follow-

ing instruction. etc. Then the informtionally independent instructions are trans-
posed.

10

FOIOFI'ICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Systems with Single and Multiple Flows of Intonation. Parallel Processing

These systole include matrix and vector processors and also processors with several
arithmetic-logical devices. The idea of constructing processors with several arith-
netic logical devices consists in the creation of special devices for the execution
of various operations. for maple, addition. multiplication. Boolean operations and
arithmetic with doubled precision. etc. Each such device works more rapidly than a
universal arithmetic device. Since the devices are few. various operations can be
executed in parallel.

The main line principle of processing is widely used in systeas with several arith-
netic devices, as a rule. One of the most typical eon-plea of such a system is the
cocséoo [2]. It includes the following processor ale-ants: addition, division.
addition with double precision. drift. Boolean operations. transnission of control
and two each lultiplicaticn and increment processor elements.

In systems with several arithnetic devices parallel execution of operations of dif-
ferent kinds is allowable. Therefore the programmer's tad: of mad-issues of the

mean nunber of operations executable in parallel or minimisation of the nunber of
coaputation steps is necessary for them.

Let us note that in each computation step both different-type and sans-type scalar
operations can be executed (the latter on far frcl all machines). For example.
parallel execution of only two multiplications and two increments is possible on the

CDC6600. and parallel execution of both same-t and different-type operations on
some newly developed multiprocessor systems [135?

At the present time fairly many algorithms for processing arithsetic expressions in
parallel have been developed which perut using systems with multiple arithmetic
devices for parallel counting [ll-l6]. Such prccessing in parallel can be done by
either the pregamer or the translator. But to iaplement it efficiently. parallel
execution not only of the different-type but also of the sane-type operations is
necessary. Exclusion of the latter possibility (it is lacking in systems of the
(966600 type)lowers the efficiency of the processing of arithmetic expressions in
parallel and does not permit executing sons operations in parallel. The efﬁciency
of the processing of arithnetic expressions in parallel will depend to a consider-
able degree cn the type of expression and the applicable algoritlns.

Let us consider only estimates determining the efﬁciency of processing in parallel
for various classes of arithmetic expressions. without describing algorithas for
processing in parallel. In [11] it was shown that an arithmetic expression without
brackets can be computed for not more than ‘1‘!) = [loanJi' 1 steps. where n is the
nuaber of enterings of operands (for example, in the eotpressicn a+a+a the number of
enterings of operands is considered equal to 3). [x] is the nearest whole number
larger than x. If the expression contains brackets. then the nuaber of cclputaticn
steps T? = 1 + 2d + [log m]. where a is the nulber of bracket pairs. Without pro-
cessing in parallel an arithmetic expression can be colputed in n -1 steps. Thus

the acceleration of ccnputations for the first and second cases will be respectively:

n-l

M .
8" [logaﬂ-ﬂdH

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In most on:- es this estimate also is strongly understated Better estimates can be
obtained for specific arithmetic expressions.

Of interest is the estimation of the efficiency of parallel cohputations in which
the time required for execution of various operations is taken into account. The
time of computation oi‘ an arithmetic expression without brackets is [12]

rpal,‘1(C+Y)Iow-{-D,

where c.- Y and D are the execution tines of the operations of additim, multiplica-
tion and division respectively, and n is the number of additions and mltiplications.

Let us note that these estimtes also are rather strongly understated.

The tine required for computation of an arithnetic expression without processing in.
parallel is
T|=C..+Y..-!-Da.'

Thus the efﬁciency of parallel computations for this case is
C. l+YI.+DI.

8’- |,«(Z+Y)loul+5

Now let us amine estilates determining the efficiency of processing in parallel
for some n-equently encountered classes of arithsetic expressions. He will start
with polynomials. When there is an unlimited number of processor elements the nun—
ber of steps for computation of a polynomial of power II is equal to [13]:

r; -log,N+12_log,N+-lz- -

If only p processor elements are available, then the minimum number of steps after
which a polynomial of power II can be cosputed is equal to [13]:

' T,:—2Nlp+logap+ll2.

Therefore the efficiency of colputation of a polynosial for p processor elements is:

‘8 . 2N ' ___'_:N
”'7'." 2N/p+logap+I/2 '

s, 2"
’-—-

P (Maﬁa-”W .
Table 1 shows the value of Sp for various values of II and p.

Let us note that these are upper estimates. The actual values ofS for specific
algorithms can be considerably better. The value of inthis oasep can be readily

computed by dividing the value of 31) by the nunber of ocessor elements.

For linear recurrence of the type x1 = b1x1_ 4’ a an interesting result was obtained

in [:lls'lnsp is a mnction only of p and 8p actually is a constant:

59-2/3P'H/3. 89'2”-
12.
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONO“. USE ONLY

Table 1

 

Table 2

 

The efﬁciency of paralleI comtations or linear recurrenceduring use of p proceeeo
elelents can be detenined fro: Table 2.

Let us examine sore conplex recurrent correlations:

' l-l
» x‘-c;+‘2'o¢m ‘

To estimate the efficiency of processing of operations in parallel. in [16] the fol-
lowing estinate of the number of steps of parallel computation was obtained:

T,- "2 lom+3l2 logy:

provided that the nulber of processor elements in unlilited. Then the number of
operations executable in parallel is

S _s(n-l) .s' .
'>T/2 rogers/2' log—M "W'

Table 3 shows the nulber of operations executable in parallel for various values of
X8

Table 3

 

13

momnmomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, for recurrent correlations of the type

l-I

X C
'- mam

the number of operations executable in parallel when there is an unlilited number
of processor elements is [16]:

- ins-MAI“) . ' ~
3’3—(Iopm"+‘2)Iog‘7-—.-np('lo¢T+loun") '-
.. ‘ *9 . I _
~ lemmas ‘
where n is the number of equations;
In is the number of variables in an equation.

Table I} shows the acceleration which can be achieved through parallel executim of
operations for various values of n and m in the absence of limitations on the num-
ber of processor elements.

Table is

 

Thus in systems with several arithmetic devices a considerable acceleration of cm-
putations can be achieved through the processing of arithsetic expressions in
parallel. Such processing of operations in parallel is effectively accouplished by
software end/or Mrdware. particularly in the process of thin line processing.

Vector operations can be efficiently executed on vector or Iatrix processors. Among
mtrix processors the ILLIAC 1v is the best known [2. 17. 18]. Let us dwell on two
distinctive features of that system

1. Each processor element has its own intemsl storage. and this permits avoiding

conflicts with respect to storage during the simultaneous reference of several pro-
cessor elements to one and the same storage module. However. this structure also

has important shortcomings-«pedal software is required which assures loading of

the necessary operands into the storages of the corresponding processor elements.
In most cases this procedure considerably reduces the productivity of the system.

as a large nusber of additional exchnges arises between the storages of the pro-
cessor elements.

2. Especially effective for processors of the ILLIAC IV type are computations in
which a maximum of identical operations on different operands is executed in one
conputation step. Such operands include matrix multiplication. for example.

110

FOR OFFICIAL IRE ONLY
FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY

Example. Let us determine the efficiency of processing operations in parallel dur-

ing nstrix Iultiplicstion. The number oflm-allel operations which can be executed
during vector multiplications is equal to the number of precessor elenents p acted

Now let us deternine the acceleration of conputations of the product of two atri-
ces having the dilensions 1, n and n, q with the use of vector operations and
parallel computation of tie sums of the vector elements for 6% processors.

ILLIAC IV t it is necessary to execute lgfn/p] vector multiplications and
13 ([105 2,36" l) additions. (Provided tint 21$ p). The acceleration during exem-
tion of tgose conpuations is determined by the correlation
. . 21
s,,-——NJ~_.
Imp—Mummy

F01: p-64 n-64.S“z19, E..z0,3.

Thus, even in one of the most favorable cases for the systen the equivalent produc-
tivity of 64 processor elements is equal to only 19. It must be noted that the

ILLIAC IV processor elements are fairly costly-~they execute sons functions of con-
trol units and have their on storage.

 

 

Table 5
Group of Percentage of scalar Percentage of scalar Percentage of
problems operations not execu- operations executable vector operations
table in Mlel in Me].

No l 1+ 2? 69

No 2 8 0 92

No 3 9 18 73

No b 11 3 86

Operations of 00mm 3 are of different kinds in most cases. For maple. addition
and multiplication on a mtrix processor can be executed only successively. There-
fore foruulas (1) - (3) acquire the form,

1'
73-713!" (1‘01) 7‘:
' n

5,-314'0-911 ;

E'fm‘ -
15
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The percentage of scalar operations is deter-ined by the sum of colums 2 and 3 of
Table 51

Table 5
for group of pro ens ' _ . ' a”
' ' " ' “iF-Téié‘uaiat
O. U C - . ~
.. .. .. : 3:4 I.'-ows.s..~o.u. um

Evidently the complexity of the distribution of intonation along stores, the low
loading of processor eleaents and also the very high cost of the systen led to the
fact that the ILLIAC IV did not becone series produced.

The lack of success with the 1mm IV reduced interest in mtrix processors and
they began to be created only to accomplish a rapid Fourier transfers and similar
tasks which can be solved by processors of that type.

At present much attention is being given to vector processors. a distinctive feature
of which is the introduction of vector registers into the processor. These are the
ASC systems of Texas Ins runents [2. 5]. the STAR-100 of Gray Research Inc [19] and
the 33? of Burroughs [20 .

Vector instructions and a vector task of operands permit very effiodently organizing
main line data processing and readily calculating the addresses of vector elenents
in the process of executing the vector instruction. The use of the vector instruc-
tion instead of the cyclic execution of scalar insturctions reduces the number of
references to the internal store and the instruction processing tine.

Parallel processing of scalar values sharply increases the efficiency of prooessing
operations in parallel. If it is assumed tl’at in the 38? the processor for scalar
computations can process in parallel three operations and 16 processor elenents pro-
cess vector instructions according to farmlas (l) - (3). then when the data of
Table 5 are used we obtain the following results:

f0? group of probleas 3 I,“
' ' " " 3:3 33:? 83~M
. ~ " " ﬁ 0 Suﬂ , 8u~m
I II a u M ‘ Sp~38 BnUOSI

In conclusion. let us note that with parallel conputetions a substantial increase
in computation rates can be achieved by converting in the translation process cyclic
computations of scalars into vector instructions. At present. several algorithls
for such conversions have been proposed [21], their convergence ins been proven and
they have been implemented in translators. Those algorithm are couples: and do not
convert all types of loops.

In conputing systems with multiple flow of instructions. several sections of pro-
gnns can be executed simultaneously. As a function of the structure of conputer
systems. the interrelation of ﬂows of instructions nay vary since each flow of
instructions is a completely independent problem. Flows of instructions can form
subtasks of one problen. In the latter case, the association by data is preserved
between subtasks. but each subtask is. as a rule. a rather large program and is
poorly associated with the other subtadcs by control.

16

MWLMONLY
POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Finally, a program my be subdivided into relatively small parts. sufficiently
closely associated with each other by both data and control. Subdivision of progress
into these concurrently executable sections can be performed directly by the pro-
grammer or automtically by the translator. An algorith for formal subdivision of
programs into these sections is described in [22].

The emergence of concurrently executable sections of progress requires development
of special mechanisls to synchronize the conputing process. This problem arose
already in the stage of multiprogramning and to solve it there is a rather well
developed apparatus of semaphores and monitors that accomplish the task [23-27].
These facilities are relatively easily implemented in translators. and a large num-
ber of linguistic constructions has been developed to describe them [:28].

BI‘BIJQSRAPHY

l. Morrison. P.. and Morrison. 8. Charles Babbage and His Calculating Engines.
New York. Dover. 1961.

2. Hultiprotsessornyye sistemy i parallel'nyye vychisleniya [Multiprocessor Systems
and Parallel Computations]. F. c. Enslow. editor. Moscow, Mir. 1976.

3. Flynn. H. I. ”Some computer organisatims and their effectiveness.” 1m
TRANSACTIQIS ON COMPUTERS. Vol c-21. September 1972. No 9.

h. Kuck, D. I.. Harioka. Y.. and Chen. s.-c. "On the number or operations silul-

taneously executable in'FOR'I'RAN-like programs and their resulting speedup. 1m
TRANSACTImS ON CONPUTERS. Vol 0-21, 1972. No 12.

5. Kuck. D. I. “A survey of parallel nchine organization and programing. MIN--
COHPUTIKI SURVEYS. Vol 9. March 197?. No 1.

6. Homorthy. C. V.. and Li. H. F. "Pipeline architecture." COHPUTIIB SURVEYS,
V01 9. March 1977. No l.

7. Ronamorthy. G. V. ”Analysis of graphs by connectivity consideration." JWRNAL
OF THE ACH. Vol 3. April 1966. No 2.

8. Baer. J. L. "A survey of some theoretical aspects of multiprocessing." COMPUT-
ING SURVEYS. Vol 6, larch 1922. No 1.

9. Yershov. A. P. Vvedeni e v teoreticheskoye programirovaniye [Introduction to
Theoretical Programing . Hescow. Nauka. 1977.

10. Prangishvili. I. V., et a1. ”Organisation of computations on a uniform control
computing system with adjustable structure. VII VSESOYUZNOYE SOVESH YE PO

PROBLEM»! UPRAVLENIYA [Eighth All-Union Conference on Control Problems . Minsk.
197?.

ll. Kudt. D.. and Harioka. Y. ”Bounds on the parallel evaluation of arithmetic

expressiogs using associativity and commutativity.” ALTA IMTIGA. 3. 1971}.
pp 203-21 .

17

WWW“?
12.

13.
11b.
15.
16.

1?.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23'.

25.
26.

27s

28.

Muller. D. E., and Preparata. F. P. 'Restructuing arithaentic expressions
f0: parallel evaluation." JQIRNAL 01' THE AGE. Vol 23. July 1976. No 3.

Marnyana. K. 'On the parallel evaluation of polynouials.” I- TRANSALTIGUS
ON COMPUTERS, Vol c-22. January 1973. 110 l.

Hyalif. I... and Kung. H. 1‘. "The conplexity of parallel evaluation of linear
recurrences.“ JWRNAL 0!? THE acu. Vol 21+. July 1977. No 3.

Stone. H. S.‘ ”One-pass coupilation of arithnetic expressions for a parallel
processor.” COHPUTIIS Acu. Vol 10, April 1967. no 1..

Chen. 3.8. and Kuck. D. I. “Time and parallel processor bounds for linear
recurrence system." IEEE TRANSATIGIS (ll ems. V01 0-2“, July 1975. No 7.

Barnes, (id-.11., Brown, R. H., Kato. 11.. Kuch, D. 1.. Stotnic. D. I... and States.
R. A. ”The ILLIAC IV cmputer." In TRANSACTIOIS GI CW8. V01 0-17.
August 1968. No 8.

Korolev, L. u.. Struktura m 1 m. mtenatioheeknye obespecheniye [structure
of Computers and Their Software]. nosoou. mm, 1971..

Russell, R. H. "The CRAY-1 computer systel.” CWOATIOIIS as THE Mm. Vol
21. January 1978, No l.

Jensen. c. "raking another approach to superoouputing.” DATAHATIGI, February
1978.

Lanpcrt. L. "The parallel execution of Do loops." CMMTIGVS OF THE ACH.
Vol 17. 1971+. No 2. '
Ignatushchenko. V. V.. and Karavanova. L. V. "On one aethod of static process-

ing6of sequential prograns in parallel.“ AVTOIMTKA I WEAK“. 1976.
No .

Diykstra, E. "Interactim of sequential processes.” In book: Yazyki progres-
aircvaniya [Prommning Languages]. Moscow. Mir. 1972.

Hoare. c. A. R. "limiters: an operating system structuring concept.” commu-
CATIOlIS OF THE ACM. V01 1?. 1971;, No 10.

Efros. L. B. "On priority servicing of parallel processes in critical inter-
vals." PRmRAMROVANIYA. 1976. No 5.

Hirenkov. N. I. “On synchronisation of processes." Siberian Department,
USSR Academy of Sciences Preprint ova-oh. 1978.

Korncyev. V.V.. and Khoroshevdtiy. V. 6. "Architecture of computing system

with programmable structure." Siberian Department. USSR Acadenw of Sciences

Hansen. P. B. "Phe SOLO operating system a concurrent PASCAL prograa." SOM-
HARE menus AND EXPERIEICE. Vol 6. 1976. pp lid-1&9.

COPYRIGHI‘: Izdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika". 1981

2171.
080:

anus/079 18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0130 681.586
PUNCTIWAL DATA PMSSORS

Leningrad PUNXTSIWAL'NYYB NEWARK WOMEN: in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 25 Feb 81) pp 2-3, 244-247

[Annotatiom foreword, conclusion. bibliography and table of contents from book
“Functional Data Processors", by Vladimir Borisovich Smolov,
Energoizdet (Leningradskoye otdeleniye), 9,000 copies, 248 pages]

[Text] ANNOI'ATIGI

This book contains the first (from a general vieirpoint) of the design techniques
and construction principles for the digital, hybrid and analog data processors that
are used extensively in modern cybernetic systels with different operating princi-
ples and purposes.

It is intended for developers of computational, measuring and control systems that
process physical signals in both homogeneous and heterogeneous forms.

This book will also be useful for teachers. graduate students and students, as a
textbook for the study of the computational devices of automatic systqss. ‘

FOREWORD

Functional data processors (PP!) are the soot widely disseminated, specialised com-
puter technology facilities that are used in modern systems and instruments for the
automatic processing of information.

Getting right to the point, in most computational, measuring, control, monitoring
and diagnostic, geodesic and other automatic systems, 991's are the basic means for
the nonlinear processing of analog, digital and pulsed analog inforeation, and in a
number of cases perform the role of peripheral processors (functional enlargers of
highly efficient computational systems. Therefore, a large nuwer of publications
in foreign and Soviet scientific and technical journals are devoted to questions
concerning the theory. design and systems engineering realisation of l'PI's, al-
though books concerning these questions are few in nulber, extremely specialized
and, at the present time. are a bibliographic rarity.

This book, which is offered for the reader's judgment, is a first attempt to cor-
relate the material on electronic PPI's that has been gathered by the author and
his numerous pupils in recent decades. Fully realising that without the constant

19

FOIOMOALUSIONLY
roe OFl-‘IC1AL use ONLY

assistance and support of my students and friends who are colleagues in the
Department of Computer Technology at the Electrotechnical Institute imeni v.1.
Ul'yanov (Lenin) it would not have been possible to do this laborious work, the au-
thor wishes to express his sincere gratitude for their creative collaboration and
presentatiou of materials. ,

This book, of course, is not free of flaws. but there were many more of them before
the discussion of the valuable remarks and wishes made by reviewers 'r.x. Krakau,
Yu.A. Kotov and V.H. Zuyev, to whom the author expresses his gratitude for their
careful analysis of the material in the manuscript.

Please send all remarks and consents on the book to: 19l041, uningrad, Harsovo
pole. 1. Leningrad Department. Energoisdat.

CWCLUSION

The methods and block diagrams of the structure of functional infatuation proces-
sors that have been discussed reflected only the case of the reproduction of the
functions of a single independent variable 2 - Mr). However. these methods and
diagrams can be used to construct functional information processors of two or more
variables 2 - 0(x1,x2,...,xn) , because in an analytical problem the latter are rep
resented in the form of a certain sequence of extremely simple mathematical opera-
tions on the functions ka) of a single variable: addition, multiplication. divi-
sion and so forth [9].

In a tabular problem. functions of many variables are subject to approximation, as
a result of which-with a certain degree of error A.z--an analytical relationship
of those same variables that is reproducible by the methods that have been dis-
cussed is formed. '

Approximations can also be useful in connection with the analytical method of as-
signing functions of many variables. when the direct reproduction of these func-
tions involves the use of a large nunber of high-accuracy functional processors and
linear blocks of a single variable, which leads to high instrument error and cost
of the equipment and a reduction in its reliability.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Akhnezer, N.I.. "Lektsii po teorii approksimatsii" [lectures on the Theory of
Approximation], Moscw, lsdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 1965. 407 pp.

2. Baykov. 14.5.. and Ugryumcw, Ye.P., ”Time-Pulsed Punctional Processors With Com-
posite Feedback," in ”Spetsialisirovanniye i hombinirovannyye vychislitel'nyye
ustroystva" [Specialized and Composite Ooa'puters], Ryasan', 1975. pp 99-102.

3. Viner. N.. ”Novyye glavy kibernetiki“ (New Chapters in cyberneticsl. Moscow,
Izdetel'stvo "Sovetskoye radio". 1963, 62 pp.

4. Koqan, B.Ya., editor. "Gibridnaya vychislitel'naya sistema GVS-lOO' [The cvs-ioo
Hybrid Computer System, collection of works] , Moscow, Institute of Control Prob-

lems. 0351! Academy of Sciences, Isdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1974, 129 pp.
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Karpovskiy, H.G., and Hoskalev, 8.5., “Spektral'nyye netody analisa i sinteza
diskretnykh ustroystv" [Spectral Methods for Analyzing and Synthesizing Dis-
crete Devices), Leningrad, Izdatel'stvo 'Bnergiya", 1973, 144 pp.

Balashov, Ye.P., Smagin, A.A., Kokayev, 0.6., et a1., ”a: the Question of Using
Abbreviated Function Tables to Construct nigh-Productivity, Homogeneous Proces-
sors," in "Upravlyayushchiye sisteny i nashiny" [Control System and Hachines],
Kiev, 1975, pp 99-102.

Saporhkov, 1m... and Sergeyev, N. P., editors. 'Klassifikator kcnbinirovannykh

vychislitel'nykh ustroystv s diskretno-upravlyayulyni paranetralni' [Classifier
of Hybrid Calputers Hith Discretely Controlled Parameters (textbookn. Panza,

1971, 425 pp.

Lebedev, A.N., "Modelirovaniye traneteendentnykh uravneniy" modeling Transcen-
dental Equations], leningrad. Izdatel'stvo ”Sudostroyeniye", 1963, 188 pp.

Loktyukhin, V.N. . "Frequency-Coded Functional Processors with Approximation of
Reproducible Relationships With Rational Fractions,“ in ”vychislitel'naya
tekhnika" [Computer Technology], Ryazan', 1974, pp 36-41.

Maslov, A. A., and Sakharov. 0.N., "sintez diodnykh tunktsional'nykh preobrazo-
vateley" [Synthesis of Diode Functional Processors]. Hosoow, Izdatel'stvo
"Bnergiya" , 1976, 168 pp.

Snolov. v.B., Ugryumov, Ye.P., Ponichev, v.s., et a1., 'Hikroelektronnyye
tsifro-analogovyye i analogo-tsifrovyye preobrasovateli informatsii" [Hiero-
electronic Digital-to-Analog and Analog-to-Digital Intonation Processors],
Leningrad, Izdatcl'stvo ”Energiya", 1976, 336 pp.

Opaleva, 8.3., and Fomichev, v.s.. 'A Complex of Programs for Autonating the
Designing of Functional Processors,“ in 'Probleny sordaniya preobrazovateley
foray informatsii" [Problems in Creating Information Form Converters]. Kiev,
1973, pp 465-469.

Oranskiy, Lu. , "Apparatnyye netody v tsifrovoy vychislitel'noy unmixe-
[ﬂardware Methods in Digital Computer Technology] . Minsk, Belorusekiy
Gosudarstvennyy Universitet ineni v.1. Lenin, 1977, 208 pp.

Palanaryuk, 6.0., "Pulsed-Frequency Conputers,‘ in "reoriya analogovykh i
konbinirovannykh vychislitel'nykh nashin" [Theory of Analogy and Hybrid Couput-
crs], Moscow. 1969, pp 165-169.

Pctrenko, 0.1. , "Specialized Functional Processors with Piecewise-Linear Ap-
proximation." in "Gibridnaya vychislitel'naya sistena (NS-100', Hoscow, 1976,
pp 84-93.

Popov, B.A., and 'resler, 6.5., "Rational Approximation of Analytically Given
Functions,“ in "Algoritmy 1 prong dlya vychisleniya funtsiy na B‘l‘svu" [A1-

gorithns and Programs for Conputing Functions on a Digital Couputer] , Kiev,
1976. pp 116-124.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17. Rytcl'. 1.. "On Selecting the Layout of,a Voltage-to-Current Converter for
Current-Density Shaping Devices,“ IZVBSTIYA LENINGRADSKDKO BLBKTROTBKHNICHES-
KOGO IRSTITUTA IHENI v.1. UL'YANOV (1831“). No 184, 1976.

18. Svin‘in, S.P., IThe Walsh-Fourier Transforn and the Modeling of Systems with
Variable Coefficients on an Analog Computer," AVMTIKA I mm, No 11,
1974, pp 179-182.

19. Smolov. V.B.. 'Analogovyye vychialitel'nyye naehiny' [Analog Couputere]. Moscow.
Vysshaya shkola. 1972, 408 pp.

20. Smolov, v.B.. and Ponichev, v.s., 'Tbifroanalogovyye and analogo-tsifrovyye
nelineynyye vychislitel'nyye ustroyatva' [Digital-to-Analog and Analog-to-
Digital Nonlinear Computers], Leningrad. Izdatel’atvo "Energiya'. 1374, 264 pp.

21. Pukhov. axe” Belyakov, v.c., Berdyakov. 6.1., et al., "Spravochnik po .
analogovoy vychislitel'noy tekhnika' [Handbook on Analog Computer Technology].
Kiev, Izdatel'stvo 'Tekhnika“, 1976, 432 pp.

22. Voronov. A.A., Garbuzov, A.R., Yerailov. A.V., et al., 'Tsifrovyye analogi dlya
sisten avtonatichcskogo upravleniya" [Digital Analogs for Automatic Control
Systems], Moscow-Leningrad. :zdatel'atvo AN SSSR [USSR Academy of Sciences],
1960, 129 pp.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Foreword. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chapter 1. Basic Concepts and Definitions From the Theory of Functional Proces-
sors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1-1. Purpose and Technical Operating Characteristics of Functional Processors . 4
1-2. Classification and Basic Block Diagrams of PPI's . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Chapter 2. Piecewise-Stepped PPI's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l8
2-1.6eneralInfomtion...............-...oo....... 18
ODOOOOOIOOOliozz

2-2. Digital Piecewise-Stepped PPI'e. . . . . . . .
2-3. Hybrid and Analog Piecewise-Stepped PPI'a. . .

eeoooeeooooe-‘l

Chapter 3. Piecewise-Linear FPI'a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S3
3'1.Generaltnfomtion............-....o..o.......53
3-2. Digital Piecewise-Linear PPI' s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3-3. cyclic, Digital-Frequency, Piecewise-Linear PPI' s. . . . . . . . . . 58
3-4. Digital Piecewise-Linear PPI' 9 Using Special Basic Functions . . . . . . . 62
3-5. Digital-to-Analog and Analog-to-Digital Piecewise-Linear PPI' s . . . . . . 67
3-6. Time-Pulse Piecewise-Linear PPI's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
3-7. Bridge-Type Piecewise-Linear PPI's . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
3-8. Analog Piecewise-Linear PPI'a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

Chapter 4. Polynouial PPI's . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
4-1.690erallnfomtion..........- one .-..-......130
4- 2. Digital. Digital- Frequency and Frequency-Pulsed Polynomial. PPI’: . . . . . 133
4- 3. Digital-to-Analog and Analog-to-Digital Polynomial PPI' s . . . . . . . . . 145

22

l1)!‘0FF1C1AI.lﬁSEi(N‘LY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
Chapters.RationalPractionPPI's.......................168

S-1.Genora1Ptopolitions...........................168
5-2. Digital, Digital-Premncy and Frequency-Pulsed muml Fraction PPI's. . 113
5-3. Digital-to-Analog Rational Fraction FPI's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181

duapter 6. Piecewise-Linear Approximating PPI'B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
6-1.0enerallnfomtion............................217
6-2. Digital, Digital-Frequency and Frequency-Pulsed Piecewise-Quadratic PP!‘:. 219
6-3. Digital-to-Analog. Analog-ﬁo-Digibal and Analog Piecewise-Quantum PPI'a. 222
Conclusion...................................244
Bibliography“..........................'......24s
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

11746
CSO: 1863/6

23

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.02

CYLINDRICAI. menc MAINS IN omen mas ms

Moscow TSILINDRIOIESXIYB MAGNITNYYE DOW V ELMNTAKB VYCHISLIm'NOY
TEKHNIKI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 11 liar 81) pp 2-5, 214-215

annotation, foreword and table of contents from book I'Cylim‘lrical Magnetic Domains
in C unputer Hardware Elements", by Vyacheslav Konstantinovich Rayev and German
Yetimovich Khodenkov, Energoisdat. 3000 copies, 216 pages]

[Text] Normal

The authors explain the principles of the theory of the eluents of domain devices
that utilize shifting of cylindrical magnetic domeins in magnetically uniaxial ma-
terials, as well as other domain structures that are used in counter hardware ele-
nents and devices. From a cannon viewpoint they discuss the basic questions or the
physics of domain walls and structures to the extent that is necessary for an
understanding of the special features of. the functioning of domain structures.

They also describe the principles of the construction of the basic structural com-
ponents of domain microcircuits.

1111: book is intended for engineering and technical workers engaged in the develop-
ment of new computer hardware elements and devices.

FOREWORD

The discovery in 1967 of cylindrical megnetic domains (mm) in orthoterrite plates
marked the beginning of a great deal of work on the creatim of domain devices for
information storage and processing. In connection with this. a great deal of at-
tention is being devoted to the construction of a highly reliable, large-volume do-
main memory.

Progress in the development of memory units based on.‘l‘sHD's has been marked by sub-
stantial results obtained in a comparatively short period of time. Prom 1972 to
1978 the capacities of domain wary unit chips increased by more than three orders
of magnitude. from 1 Kbit to 4 million bite. Il‘he goal of obtaining a chip capacity
of up to 100 million bits on the basis of M's with diameters of less then 1 um
has become realistic. Further development of the technology for realizing micro-
figures with high resolution, as well as the use of new structural methods for or-
ganizing information flows in domain memory units, will make it possible to' use
'rsMD's of even smaller sine (down to 0.08 um). which actually already exist in (for
example) amorphous and hexagonal ferromagnetic materials. In this case the density

26

POI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the recording can, in principle, be increased by yet another two or three orders
of magnitude.

However. interest in a domain memory is aroused not only by the possibility of a
high degree of microminieturization. From the practical viewpoint, some of the
properties of Ten materials are also attractive: high nobility of the domain
walls, which makes it possible to operate in the 0.1-10 m: frequency band: low
power consumption (approximately 0.1-1 nit/bit): a broad operating characteristic
temperature range (from -50°C to +60%); the ability to store intonation for a
practically unlimited period of time when the power source is cut off.

He cannot say that no difficulties have been encountered during the development of
this new field. Examples of this are the study of the behavior of magnetically ri-
gid domains (1971) or the phenomenon of dynamic conversion (1971-1914). Reducing
the diameter of a TsHD while simultaneously increasing its mobility revealed un-
expected static and dynamic '1‘st properties that have prevented their practical
utilization in a number of cases. A paradoxical situation has been created: the
more ideal (from the usual point of view) the materials that are chosen, the more
anomalously a TsHD behaves. It has become necessary to make a careful theoretical
analysis (which has not yet been completed) of our concepts of TsﬂD's and the dy-
namic and static properties of domain boundaries in general. so that we can under-
stand the origin of anomalous domain behavior.

The equations of motion of a magnetic moment that were proposed by Landau and
Lifshits in 1935 are the basis for this theoretical analysis of Ten!) behavior. The
unexpectedness of the discovery of magnetically rigid Tom's distinguished by in-
stability in the movement of the domain walls was related to an inadequate theoret-
ical study of questions related to the statics and dynamics of domain walls and
structures.

The present level of the practical work in this area is characterized by the use of
quite complex concepts that require a certain level of physical and mathematical -
sophistication.

The subject of this book is the principles of the theory of the elements of domain
devices in a broad class of domain-containing materials. The theory. which creates
solid prerequisites for engineering calculations and automatic planning of the to-
pology of domain layouts. must be based on a study of equations of the Landau-
Lifshits type, which describe a "Tenn-elements of topology“ system within the
framework of a unified plan. In all of the area under discussion, precise solu-
tions of a Landau-Lifshits equation are more often the exception than the rule.
This makes it necessary to develop approximate methods for solving these equations.
The direct methods of the calculus of variations that are used in the theoretical
sections of this book are notable for their effectiveness.

This book is formulated so as not only to explain the ideas presently acceptec
about TsMD's, but also to give the minimally necessary apparatus for solving the

25

FOR OFFICIAL LEE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

problems presented by the prospects for the developsnt of domain devices. A man-
ber of results--particularly those described in Chapters 3 and 4-m obtained by
the authors.

The literature on the questions touched upon in this book is quite voluminous and
is growing rapidly. We will limit ourselves to only those reterences that apply
directly to the essence of the questions under discussion and vill refer the reader
to monographs of a general nature, such as aw. Vonsovskiy's "Magnetism” and his
and Ya.s. Shur's 'Permwetism.“

Much useful intonation on 'I‘sMD's is contained in the monographs and surveys of

M.A. Boyarchenkov, G.A. Smolenskiy, Yu.D. Dosental', ILL. Prokhorov. r.v. Lisovskiy.
v.6. Bar'yakhtar and others, as well as the books of Bobeck and Della '1‘orre, O'Dell,
and Hubert.

The late Professor MJA. Boyarchenkov had a great deal to do with the appearance or
this book and always gave the authors a great deal of support on a daily basis.
The authors are also grateful to their colleagues, A.K.~Andreyev and Ye.P.
Lyashenko, who took it upon themselves to read the manuscript and make valuable
conuents about it. They wish to thank the collective of the Institute of
Electronic Control Machines' Department of Domain Devices for the great amount or
friendly attention it gave this work and its authors.

TABLE or coum'rs

PCQC
Foreword..........................c......... 3

Chapter 1. Static Properties of Domain Structures in To!!!) Materials . . . . . . 6
1.1. Total Energy of a Ferromagnetic Substance. Division of a Perronagnetic

s‘mstance Inca wins 0 O O O O D O O O I I O O O O O O I C O 0 I O I O O 7
a) Macroscopic Energy of a Ferromagnetic Substance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
b) Equilibrium State of a Ferromagnetic Substance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l4
C)DOIIainsandD0ll|alnH8113.o.c..................... 17
1.2.DomainWallsin‘l‘sMDMaterials.... ....... ..... ...... 18
a)Blockand(Neyelev)DomainHalls..................... la
b)Vertic&lBlochL1neSo.......oo.......o.........21
c) Effect of Scattering Fields on the Internal Structure of a Dwain Wall in
a‘rsMDPlate...............................25
d) ”'8 Blwh Point. O o O O O O O O O O O I O I O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 27
1.3. Domain StructuresinaTsMD Plate (mun). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
a)$taticPropertiesofNorma1’rle's.. ....... ........... 29
b)MagneticallyRigidelm's......................... 38
c) Labyrinth Structure. Tle) Lattices, Concentric Domains . . . . . . . . . . 43
Chapter 2. Dynamics of Domain Halls and cylindrical Magnetic Domains. . . . . . 48
2.1. Dynamics of the Magnetic Floment in Ferromagnetic Materials . . . . . . . . 48
22 DynamicsofaleeDanainWall...n.................. 51
a) Steady-State Motion ofa BlochDomainWall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

b) Reaction of a Ferromagnetic Substance Containing a Bloch Donain Hall to a
NeakﬂagneticField......o.....................55
c) Dynamics of a Bloch Danain Wall in a Massive Sample of TsMD Material . . . 58

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gyroscopic?orce.....................
Dynamics ota'lvisted Hall ina'rsmnateria’l. . . . . . .
Dynamicsofa'rsm....................
Radialnynanicsofa'rsno.................
Equations of the Translation Dynamics of a m. . . . .
qlindrical Magnetic Domains in a Constant-Gradient Field.
Non-Steady-State Dynamics ofa'i‘suD. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Micromagnetic'i‘sﬂb's....................

Chapter 3. The Tenn-Application System in the Control of Domains.

3.1..

An Interacting rem-Application System . . . . . . . . . . .
Energy of a Term-Application System. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Equationsofuotion.....................
A Continual nodal of the Distribution of Magnetization in an
Statics of a Tam-Application Systea . . . . . . . . . . . .
mmgnetostatic'l‘rap(MSL) s as as... sooss as s
Stability of a TsHD in an "Si. created by an External Field .
Interaction of a 'rsMD Hith a Psrnalloy Coating With Infinite
Interaction of a '1‘le in a System of Applications. . . . . .

Chapter 4. Operations on a Tom) in Elements of Domain Devices . .

4.1.
a)
b)
c)

d)
4.2.
4.3.

a)

b)
e)
d)
4.4.
a)
b)
4.5.
4.6.
4.7.

Motion of a TsHD in Dwain-Propagating Circuits (DPS). . . .
Principles of the Construction of DPS's. . . . . . . . . . .
TsMDHotioninthePieldofaUnitHSL. . . . . . . . . . .
Construction of an Area of Stable DPS Operation on the Basis
Analysis of the Propagating Field. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Area of Stable DPS Operation in a Quasistatic Approximation.
Fixation and Quasicontrol of M's in a DPS . . . . . . . .
Generation of 'rsMD's in Information Input Elenents . . . . .
Principles of the Construction of Information Input Elements
Dcvices...........................
DirectNucleationofTsﬂD's. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Splitting of a Domain in a Replicator Generator. . . . .
Spontaneous Nucleation of 'i'sHD's in DPs's. . . . . . . .
Annihilationof'rsm's.................
Annihilation of Tom's in Informatim-Erasing Blunts .
Spontaneous Annihilation of W's in DPS's. . . . . . .
'rsHD Elongation in Elements of Domain Devices. . . . . .
Operations on Masses of Domains in 1's!!!) Lattices . . . .
Logic and Switching Cperations on m's . . . . . . . . .

sssssas
ssssesee

Domain-Domain Interactions During the Performance of logic Operations.

SwitchingOperationson‘rsHD's . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
'rsMD Registration in Elements of Domain Devices. . . . . . .
Weto‘micwsmmisuaume s s s s s s s s's a s s s s
Magnetoresistive 'rsHD Reading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Prospects for the Development of an Element Base for Devices

TSHD'B......-..o...s...........--

v
s s s a s
s
e
s
s

s s 0

Application

Dimensions .

assess

ssssssssss
ssssssssas

o s
e s
s s
e s
s s
m a
s s
s s
s a

Utilizing

ssssso

Bibliography.................................

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. 1981
11746

CSO:

1863/3 27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sssssssses

101
101
106
113
116

119
119
119
135

145
160
169
172

172
173
175
178
178
178
179
181
182
188
188
191
192
193
195

200

204
INJRCJFFKJA1.USEIJNLJ

HICROPROCESSOR, HICROCOHPUTBR APPLICATIONS IN INSTRUMENT MAKING, RESEARCII

Moscow muopnorrsassomr 1 mum-m: PRDIENBNIYB v ntaoaos'raormr 1 v mum
Issuaoovmnm in Russian 1981 (signed to press 22 Dec 80) pp 2-4. 168 -

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents from book microprocessors and
Hicrocomputers: Application in Instrument Making and Scientific Research", by
Nikolay Hikhaylovich Nikityuk, Bnergoisdat. 16,000 copies. 168 pages]

[Text] The state of the art and the development prospects of microprocessors and
microcomputers are discussed. The characteristics, architecture and functional
systems of microprocessors and microcomputers which have become widespread are de-
scribed. Exanples are given of the use of microprocessors and microcomputers in

measuring equipment, computer terminals, in CANAC systems and in physical appara-
tus.

For specialists in automation and computer technology, students and graduate stu-

dents in the appropriate fields of specialization and users of microprocessors and
microcomputers.

Introduction

At the present time domestic and foreign industry have begun the mass production
of microprocessors and microcomputers. Now 16-bit single-chip microprocessors are
being produced which are comparable in execution rate to that of minicoeputer pro-
cessors. The folloving are the main advantages of using microprocessors and micro-
computers in modern experimentation equipment.

The creation of more effective independent (without computers) data gathering and
processing systems which are distinguished by small overall size, high reliability.
low cost and an insignificant power requirement. for example, a 12-bit micropro-
cessor designed according to the CHOS technology (an analogue of a PDPJ/B mini-
computer) at a clock rate of 5 Mil: requires a total of 40 to 105 m".

The creation of high-speed special-purpose processors and microcontrollers for
making a flip-flop and for the prescreening of useful events, for solving uncom-
plicated mathematical expressions for purposes of screening useful experimental
data and the like. All this results in an increase in the operating efficiency of
the main computer on account of the preliminary accumulation of useful events and
the partial processing of experimental data.

28

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. the creation of high-productivity and economical computing networks making
it possible to gather data and transfer than from entities distributed over a

great area and to transfer these data to a storage and processing center.

For the effective employment of microprocessors it is necessary to solve several
problems. This relates primarily to the training and retraining of personnel.

The specific properties of this equipment reside in the fact that a progras-er-
mathematician must know the hardware of a microprocessor and a hardware development
engineer, programing techniques. This is because of the fact that more and more
functions which previously had been performed by means of software have been ap-
pearing in microprocessor equipment and now because of the development of semicon-
ductor technology and a drastic lowering of the cost of memory chips the concept
of microprogram control is beginning to be used extensively.

Another problem is the lack of special instruments by means of which it is possible
to test efficiently the work of the hardware and software of a microprocessor. In
foreign literature these instruments are called logic and microprocessor analyzers.
In the absence of these instruments the testing of microprocessors is performed by
means of minicomputers.

And the third problem is the development of a technological base for the fabrication
of multilayered printed circuitry which is used in making printed circuit boards
for microcomputers.

In this book an attempt is made to give an account of the state of the art of
microprocessor equipment and its use in modern physical apparatus.

The author wishes to express his deep gratitude to Uzbek SSR Academy of Sciences
Institute of Electronics Graduate Student Ya.H. Demstov and United Institute of
Nuclear Research Associate R. Shyussler together with whom was written the summary
article whose data are presented in ch 5.

CONTENTS Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Semiconductor Memories 5
1.1. HOS devices 5
1.2. Bipolar devices 8
1.3. Charge-coupled devices 12
1.10. Static memories 13
1.5. Dynamic memories (DZU's) 16
1.6. Dynamic memory unit in the CAMAC standard 20
1.7. Permanent memories (PZU's [ROM'aD 25
1.8. High-speed buffer storages (8320's) . 28
1.9. Stack storage 31
1.10. Segmentation of a memory and concept of a virtual memory 33

1.11. Application of semiconductor memories in high- and medium-energy

physics 37
Chapter 2. Architecture of Microprocessors in Microcomputers of the Closed

Type 55
2.1. General questions 65
2.2. 8080 microprocessor 50

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1OFFHJA1.USE(NNLY

Input/output system

Interrupt processing system

MOS-80 microcomputer

Architecture of M6800 microcomputer

Single-chip microcontrollsrs and microcomputers
Transfer of digital data

Programming and software

pter 3. Bit-Slice Microprocessors

General questions

Am2900 microprocessor series

Microassembler

Use of a bit-slice microprocessor for emulating other processors
SBP 0400 microprocessor

High-execution-rate bit-slice microprocessor
Series 3000 complex of bipolar micromodulss

pter 6. Sixteen-Bit Microprocessors end Microcomputers
General

4.2. LSI-ll microcomputers

Chapter 5. Application of Microprocessors in Modern Instrument Making and
Scientific Research

5.1. Microprocessors and modern instruments

5.2. Displays and microprocessors

5.3. Logic analyzers

5.6. Microprocessor analyzers

5.5. CAMAC standard and microprocessors

Bibliography

e
OGNOM§U
e

e
o

o
e

o
e

3

e a s
NQU‘FUNH

eguuwuuuu
e

e
H
m

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdst, 1981

8831
080: 1863/21

30

FOI(Mﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

UDC 681.3.-181.48

BIT-SLICB MICROPROCBSSORS

Moscow HIKROPROTSESSORY I “IUD-EV“: Pm V PRIBOROSTROYENII I V momma!
ISSLEDOVANIYAKH in Russian 1981 (signed to press 22 Dec 80) pp 82-126

[From book "Microprocessors and Microcomputers: Application in Instrument Making
and Scientific Research", by Nikolay Hikhaylovich Nikityuk, Energoisdat. 16,000
copies, 168 pages]

[Excerpt] Chapter 3. Bit-Slice Microprocessors

At the present time domestic industry is producing an extensive list of micropro-
cessor LSIC's of the bit-slice type [11, 16, 26]. the key parameters of which are
presented in table 3.2. Here must be singled out the K536 and K588 series LSIC's,
in which the word length of a slice is 8 and 16 bits, respectively.

The K5821Kl central processor element is a 5-bit parallel microprocessor containing
an ALU, eight general-purpose registers. working registers, an-instruction counter,
a commutation unit, an operating register, and a programmed logic array. The
microprocessor's input circuits are matched in terms of levels with TTL circuits.

Table 3.2. Characteristics of Microprocessor LSIC's

Series Number Central pro- Word Number Cycle Supply voltage, Power reggire-

 

 

 

 

 

 

g; cessor ele- length. of in- time, !_ mentI mﬂ
chips ment bits struc- £3
tions
K582 1 K5821Kl a £59 1.5 1.2 200
K586 1 K5841K1 4 459 2.0 1.2 160
K536 7 K536IK1 8 1&9 10.0 27 -
K587 a K587IK2 4 168 2.0 9 5
K588 a K5881K2 l6 - 2.0 5 5
K589 7 K589IK02 2 - 0.1 5 750

The K536. K587, K588 and K589 microprocessor sets are designed primarily for con-
structing microcomputers and complicated controllers, but can be used also for
constructing very simple digital automation equipment. The "Blektronika $5" and
"Blektronika 60" series microcomputers are designed on the basis of K536 and K581
sets, and the "Elektronika “Ts" series microcomputer is designed on the basis of
the K587 and K588 series [13, lb, 16, 35].

31

FORIOFFNJAI.USEINVLY
11.

13.

1k.
16.

26.

35.

FOR‘OFFKJAlrUSEtﬂﬁtY

Bibliography

Berezenko, A.I., Karyagin, L.N. and Shchetinin, Yu.ﬂ. "Bipolar LSIC Micro-
processor Set" in "Hikroelektronika i poluprovodnikovyye pribory" [Microelec-
tronics and Semiconductor Devices]. collection of articles edited by A.A.
Vasenkov and Ya.N. Yedotov, Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1977, No 2, pp 80-94.

Borovskiy, A.I.. Kuznetsov, V.Ya. and Tavetov. V.P.‘ "'Blektronika 85'
General-Purpose Control Microconputers," WYA Pmsmmosr', No S,
1978. pp 30-32.

Butcna, N.D. and Kotlyarov. V.P. "Structure of Programing Language for
'Elektronika SS-Ol' Microcomputers," Ibid., pp 38-39.

Vaaenkov, A.A. '11icroproceesore," ELEKIROﬂNAXA PROHYSELENNOST', No S, 1978,
pp 7-9.

Dzhkhunyan, V.L., Kovalenko, 8.5., Haahevich, 9.8. et a1. 'ﬁhm K587 LSIC
Hicropouer Microprocessor Set Using Complementary M18 Tranaiatora," ELK!-
TRDNNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST', No 5. 1978. pp 15-19.

Gal'perin. M.P., Zhukov, Ye.I., Pankin, V.Ye. et a1. "Principles of the
Organization of an Interface for a Hicrocouputer of the 'Blektronika 55'
Series,” atzxrnouuava rnouvsanuuosr', No 5. 1978. pp 33-35.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdac, 1981

8831
CSO:

1863/21

32

FOR¢OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.-181.68
SIXTEEN-011' HICROPROCESSOR PARAMETERS

Moscow MIKMPROTSBSSORY I HIKE-M: “MENUS V PRIMROSWII I V mm
ISSLEDOVANIYAKH in Russian 1981 (signed to press 22 Dec 80) pp 126-11010

[Prom book "Microprocessors and Microcomputers: Application in Instrmsent Making
and Scientific Research", by Nikolsy Kikhaylovich Nikityuk, Energoisdat, 16,000
copies, 168 pages]

[Excerpt] In table 6.1 [not reproduced] are given the parameters of the most
well-known types of 16—bit microprocessors. The majority of then are used for
building high-execution-rate microcomputers which have varied software and input]
output units. THS 9980, THE 9900, SB? 9900 and or 1600 microprocessors have the

same type of input/output channel organization, which is similar to the channel
used in mdnicomputers of the PDP-ll and SH-series-computer series [82, 154].

Bibliography
82. General Instrument Corporation. 16-bit microprocessor. 1975, 1-7519, 10 p.
COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

8831
C50: 1863/21

33

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY.
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(HULY

SOPTHARB

HANDBOOK 0“ STANDARD SIMULATION PEOGRAHB

Kiev SPRAVOCHNIK PO TIPOVYH PROGRAHHAH HDDBLIIDWINIYA in Russian 1930 (signed to
press date not available) pp 2-b, 181-183

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Handbook of Standard
Simulation Programs". by a.c. Ivakhnenko, Yu.V. Kappa, v.s. Stepashko et al.,
edited by A.G. Ivakhnenko. Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika"} 17,000 copies, 180 pages]

[Text] In this handbook standard simulation programs in ALGOL-60 and FORTRAN are
described, designed for solving problems in technical cybernetics-pattern recog-
nition, forecasting, identification and the optimum control of complicated entities_
in very different fields of science and engineering. Intended for engineering and
technical personnel involved in the simulation of complicated entities and pro-
cesses employing digital computers.

Introduction

If accurate and reliable information exists on all components of a complex tech-
nological, economic. biological or other controlled entity, then the synthesis of
forecasting and control models is performed by familiar determinate methods (e.g..
by the method of imitative simulation). This handbook contains descriptions and
the texts of programs for those cases when such information is completely or partly
absent and the only source of information is a short table of experimental data.
These programs implement the inductive approach to solving simulation problems by
means of the exhaustive search of a great number of pretendent models according to
appropriately selected criteria. As a result it is possible to obtain a unique
(for each kind of criterion) model of optimum complexity. The models obtained are
described by algebraic or finite difference equations and are intended for solving
problems in forecasting, automatic control with optimization of the forecast.
pattern recognition and automatic classification. The handbook's programs can be
used individually or can be regarded as a package of programs for a modern comput-
ing complex. The programs are grouped in chs l to S of the handbook according to
the type of problem solved. At the beginning of each chapter a general character-
ization is given of the class of problems in question along with features of the
programs contained in it.

In describing each program an indication is made of the following: the programming
language. type of translator routine and computer; type of problem (forecasting,

extrapolation of a physical field, identification-discovery of a law, synthesis

36

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NNLY

of control, estimation of initial or boundary conditions, pattern recognition or
classification of situations); method of solution; type of selection criterion
(regularity, empiricisn. balance of variables or combined); general type of equa-
tion (algebraic and harmonic models or models in the form of finite difference
analogues of differential equations. probabilistic laws) (finite difference models
have preference over algebraic in the sense of accuracy of solutions); properties
of the entity (stationary or slowly varying over time); functions and subprograms
used: commentaries on the text and operation sequence of program. For polyserial
algorithms an indication is given in addition of the type of particular descrip-
tion--trinomia1, q = a + a x + a x ; four-membered, q - a + a + a + a x x ;
and sixumembered, q - 2 + £1} + 3 f + s3x1x + a :2 + a 9; . lid conlzlzgtion3 1 2
with the extensive use 3f linedrizafign of a pfoblea by main of the rewriting

of variables. in recent times linear trinomial descriptions have been used ex-
clusively, along with the method of the step-by-step complication of models by em-
ploying polyserial algorithms (exhaustive search of all pairs of arguments, serial
entry of arguments with orthogonalization, random exhaustive search for partners
and the like). and the method of selecting a model of optimum complexity (“with
protection" or "without protection by means of variables“).

For the purpose of explaining the principal features of self-organization programs
some of the handbook's programs are supplied with illustrative examples. Suh-
programs which are common to several programs in the handbook are annotated in the
appendix. They can be used both as independent subprograms or in the form of
modules.

0n the whole this handbook reflects sufficiently completely the state of the art
and the applied capabilities of the theory of the self-organization of models em-
ploying a computer. The programs contained in it represent an effective tool for
solving a broad range of problems in simulating complicated processes and systems
for purposes of forecasting and control.

CONTENTS Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Inductive Method of Self-Organization of Models on a Computer 5
1. Synthesis of mathematical models by means of the inductive method of
self-organization on a computer 5
2. Three basic structures of algorithms for the self-organisation of
models on a computer 7
3. Necessity of complexity of the model 10
6. Optimum division of table of experimental data 11
Chapter 2. Isolation of Trends for Longterm Forecasting 12
1. Problem of longterm forecasting according to trends 12
2. Program for synthesizing models for longterm forecasting 21
The VEER subprogram ' 26
The KOMBI subprogram 26
The PRI subprogram 29
The FBAL function 30
The SHIFT subprogram 30
The FINAL function 31

3S

FOR‘OFFICLAI.USE10NLN
INJI¢OFIICJAI.ll5EiCMVLY

3. Program for isolating a forecastable trend of optimum complexity according

to the polyserial HGUA algorithm 32
a. Program for isolating a harmonic trend with non-multiple frequencies
for forecasting oscillatory processes 35
HARHAN subprogram 38
98 subprogram 5‘
FRIQ subprogram 45
HCOEF subprogrsl 67
“31 subprogam 69
PP! subprogram 69
5. Program for self-organization of forecasting models of cyclic pro-
cesses _ 50
Chapter 3. Structural Identification of Algebraic and rinite Difference
Models 54
1. Problem of structural identification 5‘
2. Program for identifying characteristics of complex entities according
to HGUA 56
FORHKHP subprogram 63
NBHL subprogram 64
KOEP subprogram 66
UU subprogram 67
N0 subprogram 67
U subprogram 68
CRAP subprogram 68
3. HGUA program with orthogonalization of particular descriptions 70
AGM subprogram - 73
GENER subprogram 78
KOV subprogrsm 78
GRAPHZ subprogram 79
a. Combinatorial program for structural identification of controlled en-
tities and processes 80
COHBI subprogram 82
R801 subprogrsn 83
POD subprogram 83
5. Program for identifying a complex system for optimum control (with
obligatory inclusion of assigned control arguments) 86
SEL subprogram 91
6. Program for polyserial selection using combinatorial exhaustive search
of particular descriptions 93
RBGR subprogram 101
NORM subprogram 103
CORA subprogrsm 103
REGA subprogram 105
MISR subprogram 106
DICH subprogram 106
HAHI subprogram 107
RAZR subprogram 107
ZAR subprogram 108
K81? subprogram 109
HISN subprogram 109
EKSTR subprogram 110
36

FIN!(HHHCLALIISE(NVLY
Chapter 4. Simulation of Fields

1. Problem of simlating physical fields

2. HGUA program with rewriting of variables for simulation of dynamic pro-
cesses

NH subprogram

OP subprogram

FORM subprogram

3. Program for identification of dynamics of fields of complex entities
based on a finite difference approximation

4. Program for identification of multidimensional fields according to an
irregular mesh

Chapter 5. Synthesis of Optimum Control and Investigation of Stability
1. Problem of optimum control and investigation of stability

2. Program for identification of linearized equations of the dynamics of
complex systems and for investigating their stability

3. Program for control with optimization of the forecast for a linear
discrete system with delay

4. Program for on-line control of a cascade of water reservoirs with
optimization at a sliding interval

Chapter 6. Isolation of a Set of Traits and Pattern Recognition

1. Use of principles of self-organization for estimation of a ninimax
criterion of the quality of an ensemble of traits

2. Program for selecting an ensemble of informative traits based on the
principle of self-organization -

Appendix. Description of Subprograms and Functions

OPIml subprogram

NOA subprogram

MAX subprogram

DES subprogram

PAP subnrogram

NOS subprogram

FUNC subprogram

RANG subprogram

BCOUNT subprogram

ZEROS subprogram

COUNT subprogram

GAUSS subprogram

BAL subprogram

RPLACB subprogram

CORP subprogram

INITL subprogram

SUM function

EMA function

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Tekhnika" 1980

8831
C80: 1863/20

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHOALUSEONLY

HICROPROCESSW PROCESS CMROL COHPU'I'IR COMPLEX FOR OVERHEAD THRUST commas
Moscow PRMSHLENNYY TRANSPORT in Russian lo 8, Aug 81 pp 12-13

[Article by G. K. Bondarenko. M. B. Bmilcvekiy, V. I". unravchuk and
I. P. Rysak, L'vov] '

[Excerpts] Selection of the Process Control Cclputer

For selection of the process control couputer e caperison was made of the micro-
processor hardware being produced. Analysis showed that the teclmical require-eats
for process control conputer complex [upravlyeyushchiy vychislitel'nyy kolpleksn
INK-l control equipment is satisfied lost coupletely by an 8-bit 8H-1800 Iicrocoa-
puter. Its high degree of integration assures fleadhdlity and non-redundancy of
equipIent in the formation of control couplexes based on the SH-1800.

The SH-1800 nicroconputer has a developed order set and developed software. The
conplex includes a wide assortlent of peripherals and specdal devices which service
the interactive node of operation of the complex, the construction of highly reli-
able reserve nicroprocessou: systems. and also the preservation of operative infor-
lstion during failures and main power discmnections.

Special Software

The software developed for control of the [MK sillplifies and lakes planning work
more flexible: it changes and expands functions of the control system in different

stages of planning and operation. Ionitors and diagrams the work of the UVK and
corrects the control systel.

The UVK software system is constructed on the modular principle. Each module re-
presents a program for the acconplishnent of a definite logically perfected func-
tion. Such a priniple of constructim per-its readily describing tasks of the

To make up the software system. programs only of these units which are included in
the control system are selected fro- the library of units. For any nulber of units
of the same kind the prom for cmtrol of that kind of unit enters the software

systea only once. The library of standard unit domaentation can be supplemented
with new kinds.

38

FOROWICIALIBIONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The silple for: of description of the transport tectnological process and the ex-

tensive set of programs from the library of units per-its considerably wrtailing

the time required for planning, debugging and introducing the conveyer control sys-
ten.

Included in the software system are progress for Ionitoring and diagnosis which ac-
complish thorough periodic Ionitoring of the efficiency of the min WK hardware.

diagnosis of their functioning and the issuance 0! reports on the claracter and
place of defects. .

The correction program permits the operator to introduce necessary changes into the
operative part of the UVK inforIation.

All the above-mentioned programs have been sssenbled into one for final linkage of
the system to the controlled object. In the software system thou functions are
accomplished by a program generator jointly with some programs of the general soft-

ware of the process control computer. which as an aggregate forms an automted
planning system

Use of the developed UVK will permit cmdderably reducing the tile required for
planning work, increasing the reliability of the UVK apparatus fivefold and greatly
expanding the functimal possibilities of conveyor transport systems.

Experimental planning on individual plans Ins already been started this year.
Standard planning and also complex delivery of the UVK together with conveyors have
been designated for 1982-1983.

COPYRIGHT: Indatel'stvo Transport“
'Pronyshlennyy transport”, 1981

217a
cs0: 1863/13

39

FOIOWIGALUSEONLY
' POKOFPICIAI. USE ONLY

UDC 681.152.2
WSIOR 0P AlﬁORITHHIC LANGUAGE Pom IV

Tbilisi TEKHNICHBSKAYA KIBERNETEA in Russian No b (225), 1980 (mcrlpt
received 21 Sep 79) pp 39-“

[Article by N. R. Homtselidze and 0. H. Davitashvili]

[Text] I. General Principles

Execution of programs in parallel is one of the most efficient ways of raising
throughput of computers. This aim is achieved by creating multiprocessor computing

systems (HVS) and software for them based on the principles of the theory of
parallel programing.

There are various approaches to realizing languages and schemes for parallel pro-
gramming. In this article, we consider the language we call EHEBIDED-?ORTRAn that
is based on standard FORTRAN IV extended with facilities for parallelisn that allow
processing of operations in parallel by branches.

II. Extensions of FORTRAN IV

2.1. Organization of Operation with Branches

Static and dynamic methods of parallel processing are allowed in multiprocessor com-
puting systems with parallel operation by branches. One of the methods for realiza-

tion of these capabilities in EXTENDED-FORTRAN is the inclusion in it of the
following statements : '

CALL PAR
HAIT
PAR SUBROUTIKB

Another method is discussed in [3].
A parallel branch, irrespective of the method of parallel processing, is made up in

the form of s subprogram of the SUBROUTINB type and is initiated by the heading
with the following form:

PAR SUBROUTINB branch subroutine name (parameter list).

For activation, i.e. start of the parallel branches, the statement CALL PAR is used

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and it has the following structure:
CALL PAR integer constant
type 1 integer variable , (1.)

branch subroutine name [(parameter list)]

type 2 integer variable

branch subroutine name [(paraneter 11st)] ...

type 2 integer variable

In the process, it should be remembered that in the case of static parallel proces-
sing, the number of parallel branches (integer constant) and the branch subroutine
names are taken directly from the CALL PAR statement, but in dynamic parallel pro-
cessing. the number of branches being dynamically activated as well as the branch
subroutine names must be assigned to the corresponding variables of the CALL PAR
statement.

Let us also note that in the dynamic method of parallel processing, the number of
type 2 integer variables (they are assigned the addresses of the branches to be
activated) must be maximal; when not all branches need to be activated, this must be
reflected in the number of branches to be activated (type 1 integer variable) and
the zero-filled values of the corresponding values of type 2 integer variables
(zero-filling is done from the righe).

Irrespective of the method of parallel processing, the system is informed about the
onset (conpletion) of an event by the RETURN state-ant, written this way: RETURN.

To organize synchronization of events in zxrsunnn-rosrsan, a HAIT statement has been
included and it has the following structure:

integer constant branch subroutine name
"AI? type integer variable , type integer variable
branch subroutine n (2')
type integer variable ...

The top definitions. given in the braces, are used with static parallel processing,
and the bottoa ones with dynamic. Let us note that the corresponding attributes in
statements (1') and (2’) must be fully adequate.

Here are examples with fragments of programs with the static (l) and the dynamic (2)
methods of parallel processing.

Example 1
CALL PAR 2. 8081, 5032

eonseaaaeassssoesesessseel

WAIT 2, 8031, $032

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPIILMI. 03!. URL!

Example 2. K _ 2

18031 - ADDR (SUBl)

ISUBZ - anon (susz)

ISUB3 - ADDR (0)

CALL PAR K, 15031, 15032, Isun3

caseoso.secessoaeoaosoeseeasoe-

WAIT K, 18031, 18032, 18033
9051910231 ionisal QPsrstgLoe Are-£849!)

The conditional logical operator on arrays has the form: IFV
(logical expression on arrays) array assignment statement.

This statement makes it possible to both lake an assignment (see the example) and
(otslezhivat') the masking vector (see the section "Organization of Operation with
Masks").

Exanple 3. REAL A(2g), 3(20)

ossoasesssssssloas

IFV (A. GT. 3) A - A + B
2.2. Vector Operations

The result of performing an operation on a vector (array) will also be a vector,
each elenent of which is the result of the corresponding operation on the corres-
ponding elements of the vectors.

Examples 4 and S.

A) REAL X(2¢), Y(2¢)
Y - 10 + x

5) -REAL A(10), 3(10), C(10), n(1¢)
n s A a B + C
In a number of cases, parts of arrays named by sections (rows, columns, diagonals)

have to be processed. An asterisk is used in the corresponding position to
indicate the section.

BMW1e 5' DIMENSION A(6.6). 8(6). C(6)- ”(6)

oso.aaaooooassaassoaveeaasses-seas

B I A(l,*)

acocosooesoessasessaosleseeessosos

C ' A0‘.”
0 ' A(*.*)

42

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Vector B is assigned the value of the elements of the second row of array A,
vector c that of the third column of array A. and vector D that of the main
diagnonal of array A.

2.3. Organization of Operation with Masking Vectors

Let us introduce the MASK statement for declaration of masks to allocate storage to
masking vectors. Usually listed in this statement are masking vectors (arrays)
with indication of their dimensions and, possibly, initial values. Other ways of
setting the values of the mask elements are:

l) assignment of values in the body of the program; and

2) execution of the IFV statement.

Loading of the mask. i.e. sctualization, is done by the SET statement (mask array
name).

3‘8"?” 7' omansrou mm), mm, 2000). c(s¢), ocss). 2(50)

MASK I(100)/20*l.80*¢/,J(50)/¢(5,7,10)/

soon-aanus...saoaoeaaeeosaaaaaaaoeaaeee

SET I

assesses-a.0-easeassessaaeaoaeoooaaooao

Z=X+Y

easesaas.oonenaveeoeaosooeaao-ooooseaaa

SET J

assesses-easeaaeooaaoaeoooaeoooctets-0a

c - D + a +2

Example 8.
DIMENSION X(1¢o), Y(1¢I), z (100)
MASK I(10¢)/¢(1¢. 1s, 20)/

areas-soonasaaasaeoaaaeoeaoasesso

SET I

oases-aes-soasaaasaaaaaosseeaonaa

X I Y + Z

cacao-aca-seasons-oaassoaassstoea

I I 1
X ' 2 * Y

Example 9.
DIMENSION A(2¢). 3(20)

MASK 1(2G)

assessessaseoaseeuaoao

IFV (A. cr. 3) I - O

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mask declaration statement syntax has the form:
MASK mask array name [/initisl values/l
[,mask array name [/initial values/] ...

Initial values are defined this way:

number of repetitions* {(1)} [,number of repetition“ {2}] ...

{E} (array element indexes) [{3} (array element indexesil '

[number of repetitions*]z. hexidecimal number
[.linitial values/l ...

2.6. Indirect Addressing

To implement indirect addressing in EXTENDED-FORTRAN. the built-in function ADDR
has been included; it is written in the right part of the assignment statement:

type integer variable - ADD variable name
ubscripted variable name

The built-in function REP is used to refer to an indirect address:
variable name - REP (type integer variable)
[.arithmetic expressions]

Example 10.
K - ADDR (Y)

eeeeeeeeeeee

R1 = REF (K) * 2.
2.5. Multiple Operations

In EXTENDED-FORTRAN, multiple operations are implemented in the form of built-in
functions (see table 1). '

Example 11. Sum all elements of an array of real numbers A:
s - sun (A)

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

O‘Uwab—
......

I Ptayabrar

IiiillllliilllIIIEIIIIIIIIIliilllllllllIIII

mm '-- n-l’

ReSult of operation 7.
Function name 8.
Data type 9.
Number of arguments 10.
Sum of all array elements 11

Product of all array elements 12.

45

 

Disjunction of all array elements
Conjunction of all array elements
Step-by-atep addition

Maximum

Minimum

Search for element equal to that

specified

FOR 0F11CJAI.USE()NLY
1.

3.

8545
080:

mu UH'ICIAI. 03!; URL!

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Drobushevich, G. A., "Prograuirovaniye na PORTRANa" [Programing in FORTRAN],
Minsk, "Vysheyshaya ahkola", 1977.

Enslow, D. 1%., ed., 'Multiproceaaora and Parallel Processing," Moscow, "Mir",
1977.

Gorinovich, L. N. and Pronina, V. A., "Influence of Architecture of multipro-
cessor Computers on Programing Facilities." "Tuiay dokladov Vauoyuznoy
konferentaii po rekhnologii progrmirovaniya" [Theses of Papers fro- the
All-Union Conference on the Technology of Programing], Kiev. 1979.

1863/ 266

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ABSPRACI‘S FROM THE JWRNAL 'AIBQIITHHS AND PRCBRAB'. HA! 1981
Hoscow AIGORITHY I PRCBRAHNY in Russian No 5. my 81 pp 1-1112

[Following is a new»; of selected entries from mom-n! I vacuum (Algorithms
and Programs). a bibliographic publicatim of cm]

[Excerpts]

1781. Computation of the magnetic field in a torque notes: with pecnnnent Ingnets
by the method of equivalent charges. Afanes'yev. A.-Yu.. and Surey, V. I. In bodn
'Elatroobonddovaniye letetel'nykh nppnratov" (”Aircraft Electrical Equip-ant”).

Intervuz Collection. Kaun' Aﬂation Institute. Kam'. 1980. pp 8-12. An A1501.-

program is described for solving a. system of equetims with s Istrix of coeffic-
ients with h8xh8 dimensions.

1783. Program for numerical oouputstim of supersonic now of e systen of plane
bodies. Moscow. 1980. 1.2 pp. Trudy 'l‘sAGI (Central Aerodynamic Institute ineni n.
Ye. Zhukovskiy) No 9.076. Bduiogrepm 11 itels.

1912. On tracing electrical circuit connectims in planning on-boerd distributors.
Noterius. A. n.. and Solntsev. V..A...~In books Elektroobomdovnniye letetel'nykh
sppsrstov.” Inter-van Collection, Kesen' Aviation Institute. Ksssn', 1960. pp 79-811..
Bibliogreplm u items.

19%. On optimisation of networks in e systen of automted planning of aircraft
electrical equipment. Yeroshin. G. V.. Noterius. A. 11.. and Tsoy. A: A. In book:
"Elektrooborudoveniye letatel'nykh sppsrstdv.“ Intervus Collection. Ksznn' Avis

tion Institute. Kezen', 1980. pp 67-72. Bibliognplm It itens. A progrelned SPR
complex in MILAN-h is described for optimizing sections of electrical circuit
wires in a system of autonted planning of on-‘bosrd electrical equipnent.

2120. Auto-sted system for decoding and analysis of flight intonation hseed on
Yes conputers. Khenrakulov. I. V.. Yanovskiy. z. A.. Sheynlen. A. V., and Peohen-

in. Yu. N. In book: “Avietsionnyye svtolstisirovsnny kolpleksy uprnvleniye i
nodelirovaniya“ (“Aircraft Automted Control end Simlnticn couplexee"). Kiev,
1980. PP 103-105. .

2165. Algorithms for synthesis of nonlinear systens' for transient responses
assigned in the region of imaginary frequencies. Konovelov. A. A., and Cream.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. L. "Avtomtizatsiye proyektiroveniya v priboroetroyenii' ("Auto-anon of Plan-
ning in Instrument-Making“). Intervaz Collection. Inning-w. Institute of Aviation
Instrument—Ming. 1980, No lhl, pp 67-73. Biblical-apron 5 items.

216?. Hathemtionl model for investigating synchronization of the neter of a. die-
tent-reeding ngnetic-induction teoholeter. Afanee'yeva. 0. Yu., Ingmtullin. Sh.
H.. Pol'skikh. L. V., and Khusmntdinov, R. A. In bod“ "Elektroobomdoveniye
letel'nykh apparatov": Intervuz Collection. Kann' AviatiOn Institute. Kmn'.

1980. pp 21-23. Bibliography: 9 iteu.

COPYRIGHT: Gowdarstvennaya publicmeye nauotmo-tektmicheekm hiblioteke SSSR
(cm 5353). 1981

2174
050. 1863/263

68

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
MWLIJSEONLY

MR3 ABSTRACTS FROM THE JOURNAL 'AWRITIMS AND PROGRAHS', MAY 1981
Moscow AIBORITHY I PRCBRAHHY in Russian lu'o 5, May 81 pp 1-1152

[Following is a listing of selected entries fro. mound I PRQERAHH! (Algorithms
and Progress). a bibliographic publication of GPIITB]

[Excerpts]

17%. Tine-staring systems. Hikhaylov, V. V. MMAYA TIXHIIIKA. SERIYA 9.

momma I SIS‘I‘EHY maumn. 1980. No a (57). pp 158-59. Optilul distribution
of a portfolio of applications between computer centers of a network «1 the basis
of a. combination of nethods of the theory of schedules and methods of Iagrangian

multipliers.

1777. Program for debugging systen progress of ucroprooessor devices. Zelenko.
G. V., and Kazanskaya, H. V. In book: "Avtomatisatsiyn proyektircvaniya radioelek-
trcnnoy apparatury i sredstv vyctdslitel'noy tekhniki" ("Autonation of the Planning
of Radioelectronic Apparatus and Canputer Hardware”). Hoscow, 1%0, pp 90-9“.

The program OPLADclEK-SBO is written in the nicroassenbler language of the K-SBO
licroprocessor. occupies 1028 perment nemozry cells and uses PSTO interruption.
The cross-assembler is written in A1301. for the Odin-120'} computer.

1789. Yagi aerial design. Izvestiya Leningraddtogo Institute, .1980, lo 270.
Questions of Have and Spatial Formation of Signals and Inges. Collectim of Sod-
entific Works. pp 65-69. Bibliography: 2 itens. Design nethod with use of a
piecewise sinusoidal base in AIGOL.

1816. Software of a system for autonted issuame of graphic documentation.
Belen'kiy, P. V., and Tret'yakov. A. S. Trudy. State Scientific Research and
Planning Institute of the Nitrogen Industry and Products of Organic Synthesis.
1980. No 58. Automation and P of Chemical Processes. pp 22-27. The GRAm
package has been developed in the PL 1 language on the basis of a complex of graph-
ic programs in FORTRAN GRAM. P0 for output on graphic devices has been realized

on the Yes-1033 conputer in os(u.o) and on the m-370/1u8 computer in os/vs: and
m.

181?. Automation of the develcpnent of data input and nmitcring programs. Ryba-
kov, A. V. ELEXTRONNAYA roman. SERIYA 9. EMMA I SISTER UPRAVIBIYA.
1980. No 11(37). pp 16-18. Bibliography: 3 items. The separation of processes of
specification of a task into the development of data input and amitoring opera-

tors and their coding in the programing languare are described. as is a genera-
tion subroutine which issues the source prograa in the PL/l language.

69
mommusaouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1819. Program complex for planning experiment (version 2.0 and prospects of devel-
opment). Brodskiy. v. z.. Brodskiy, L. 1.. Haloletkin, c. N.. and Hel'nikov, n. n.
"Voprosy kibernetiki" (Questions of Cybernetics"). USSR Academy of Sciences. Sci-
entific Council for the Complex Problem “Cybernetics,” 1981. No 73. Nontraditional
Approaches to Planning Experiment. pp 138-158. Bibliograptm h itens. A general
structural dugru of the coupler is presented. The pregrans rum (factorial neth-
ed) and 3mm (numerical method) in the Eli language are described.

1830. System of automted progrsn generation to obtain computational and explana-
tory reports. Sszonovs. L. V.. Sokolinskiy. Yu. A., and Yegerev. V. V. Trudy.
State Scientiﬁc Research and Planning Institute of the Nitrogen Industry and
Products of Organic Synthesis. 1980. lo 58. Automation and Planning of Chemical
Processes. pp 62-70. Bibliography: 5 itens. An interactive syste- of sutounted
issuance of computational and explanatory reports (RAPOZA). used for the issuance
of planning and technical documentation. is realized on an 1311-370 conputer. m
the basis of the rum system a conplex of programs for strength analysis of col-
unn apparatus elenents is developed. Keywords. lethodology. PL/l. move/11:8,
RAPOZA system. planning and technical downentstion. strength.

1831‘. On the procedure for the formtion and disposition of terminal blocks in the
autonated planning of on-boerd networks. Ted-sew. V. s. In book: "Elektrooborudo-
vaniye letatel'nykh apparstov" ("Aircref‘t Electrical Equip-em"). Intelvuz Collec-
tion. Kszan' Aviation Institute. Kaun', 1980. pp 73-79. Bibliograpw: 6 ltens.

1835. Automated planning of the electrical equipment portion of the plan of cheni-
Cal production fﬂcheitieSe mt'y‘kw. A. Se. Danilyak. It ”a. m ”min. Vb Io
Trudy. State Scientific Research and Planning Institute of the Nitrogen Industry
and Products of Organic Synthesis, 1980 lo 58. Autoution and Planning of Chemical
Processes. pp 57-62. A nan-machine subsystem of er electrical equipuent
(smso) for en IBM-370/lh8 and e. res-1033 in PL/l is described.

183?. Fomtion of ASIYaD data hose. Bogonolove. Ye. 8.. Tsygenov. A. A., and
Shchukin. B. A. ESPERIMEN'PAL'NYYB HE'rODY YADERIIOY FIZIII/NIFI. 1980. he 7. Ex-
perimental Methods and Apparatus for Investigations of Nuclear Physical Character-
istics of Processes of Fission and Synthesis. pp 03-51. Bibliomphy: 11 items.
Pregrans in the PL/l language are described: CIEANERuconved-sion of the inter-

national exchange file of neutron data; HSOP end NORMAL-Ate normlizations. con-
stituting en ASIYaD second line data base.

186k. Matrix tape width nininization in the finite element nethod. Deykovskiy.
A. c.. Portugalov. Yu. I.. and Feposeyev. A. I. live Preprint No 80-152. Serpu-
khov. 1980. 18 pages. Bibliography: 9 itens. A FORTRAN minimization program.
readily adaptable to any progran system is presented. The wasting time for net-

works containing 1000 nodes is $ 1 second. Keywords: algorithm. WAN. ICE—1906.
matrix tape width nininizati on. finite element lethod.

186?. Smooth data approximation progress. Kutsenova. T. N. OIYsI Preprint No
811-80-669. Dubna. 1980, 10 pages. Pregrsns and lethods are described for solv-
ing problees in data interpolation and snoothing on the basis of selection of a.
very snooth analytical curve approximating the experimental data. Keywords:
FORTRAN-h. CDC-6500. Yes computers. IBM. splsin approximation. interpolation.
snoothing functions. experimental date. processing. real and conplex functions.

FOIOFHCIAIJJSEONLV
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

1878. Design of leveling circui ts of aide-band transistor uhf power amplifiers.

Buterin, A. V.. and Petrova. 0. A. ELEXTRCNNAYA MWA. SERIYA 1. MTRQﬂK-A
svch. 1980. No 9(321). pp 3942. Bibliography: 6 items. A FORTRAN program of ap-
proximation of frequency dependence of transistor impedances is presented and the

determination of elements of leveling circuits by the method of nonlinear program-
ming is described.

1882. Algorithm and program for analysis of interaction of waves with a charge
carrier flow in a. dissipative medium. Gavrilov, l. V., and Pishik, I.. A. ELK-
TRONNAYA mmmA. SBRIYA 1. mutating sven. 1980, No 10(322), pp 69-71.
Bibliography: '7 items. A PCRTRAN program for investiating solid-state analogs of
traveling wave tubes and acoustic amplifiers in single-frequency and mltifrequency
regimes is presented. The read-out time of the ample is ~2-8 min.

1883. Program for analysis of multifrequency modes of operation and parasitic sig-
nals in a traveling wave tube. Gavrilov. H. V.. Pishik, L. A., and Tmbetskov. D.
I. MTRONNAYA TEXHNIKA. serum 1. mourn” SVCh. 1980. No 9021). pp
70-71. Bibliography: 16 items. A FORTRAN program is described for computing the
output crnracteristics of a signal in a given range of variations of input power

within the framework of the DISPAK system for the RISK-6 and DOS for the Yes-1020
computer.

1885. Program for computing the kinetic coefficients of semiconductor compounds by
the Monte-Carlo method. Gcrfinkel', V. 8.. and Pospergedia', O. H. MOMMA
TEXHNIKA. SERIYA 1. ELEKTRONIKA SVCh. 1980. No 10022). PP 72-73. Bibliography:
it items. A FORTRAN program is presented for computing the mean rate of drift and
charge carrier energy in non-quantiaing and variable electrical mystic fields by
the Monte-Carlo method. The read-out time of one static variant is ~ 5-15 min. and
of the dynamic characteristics for f = 100 GHz ~1 hour.

1892. Program for computing regimes of generation of a multifrequenoy generator on
surface acoustic waves with parameters capable of modulation. Zhirshenkova. L. 11..
and Ryabova. L. P. auxrnormn mm. sauna 1. mmm' svoh. 1980. No
10(322). Pp 67—68. Bibliography: 3 items. A W prOgram is presented for
computation of switching of single-frequency generation from one mode to another

by brief excitation of a multif‘requency regime through modulation of the resonator
parameters.

1893. Program for computing the distribution of electric current on a plane thin
ideally conducting screen (a field in the plane of opening of an ideally conduct-
ing screen). Li'inskiy. A. 8.. Leonova, T. A., andKoverts ova. T. N. mamm-
NAYA TBCHNIXA. SEHIYA 1. ELECTRONIKA . SVCh, 1980, No 10(3g, pp 73-71}. Biblio-
graphy: 1+ items. A FORTRAN program has been composed on the basis of an integral

equation for the purpose of calculating the parameters of planar SVch antennas.
The read-out time of one example is ~30 min.

1900. A program complex for machine designing of waveguide gam-circulators.
VOrOb'era' "e As. Lyubolllrov. Am He. Nam. VI Al. and MhOV. Yu- A- M"
TRONNAYA Tamra. SERIYA 1. MTRMA SVCh, 1980. No 10(322). pp 73-7b. Biblic-
graphy: 3 items. A FORTRAN program is described for computing matrix elements of
scattering $13 of a circulator; the possibilities of simulating the influence of
technological tolerances on the circulator characteristics are discussed. The

time is ~ 0.2-3 5 for computation of Sid, ~5 min for statistical analysis and
35 min for solution of the problem of synthesis.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1902. Link-up of discharger and limiter in a protective device. Lagov'yea', B. 3.,
Frolov. A. 5., andKl'mrchenko. L. A. MTRGINAYA TREND“. SRIYA 1. ELECTRONI-
xn svcn. 1980, No 9(321). pp 32-35. Bibliography: 2 items. A my program

1913. Progra- for computing interaction in type 0 instruments with a periodic
structure. Osin, A. V.. and Solntsev. V. A. MTRGNAYA-tRMA. SERRA-l. m:
TRONDCA SVCh. 1980. No 9(321). pp 69-?0. Bibliograpmn 5 itels. A m program
for computation on a. BESH-6 and Yes computers is described. The time required for
co-putation of one iteration is iron 2 to 8 s. A SOVA progran for design in a
nonlinear regime of uhf instruments with a rectilinear-electron bean is presented
and hybrid instruments with unconnected resonators are described.

1920. Program for conputation of electromgnetic waves in a layered mgnetodielec-
trio with consideration of losses. Prdtop'yeva. N. G. ELEXTRQINAYA TEXHNDCA.

a system of two layers.

1957. Program for searching for the total minimum using ilage classification.

Lyubomirov, A. M. E'LEXTRCNNAYA mm. SERIYA l MONEA SVCh, 1980, No
9(321), pp 68-69. Bibliography: 14 itels. A FORTRAN pragru for optinization of
regenerative alplit‘iers is presented. The program has a values of 1#00 operators.
0n image classification S 1 second of title of the central processor is expended.

1966. Expansion of the possibilities of the BASIC language. Vasil'yev, Yo. I...
and Lyshenko. V. I. ELEXTRGINAYA TECHNIKA. SERIYA 9. ECGGIIKA I SISTM UPRA-
VLENIYA, 1980. "01:07), pp 25-26. Bibliography: 2 itels. Additional Operators,

commands and synbals in the BASIC language are provided for its use in the control
of instrumentation.

88-91. Bibliography: 2 items. A program is presented for the H4030 computer.
one designed for work on an automated simulation lodel and the Intel SIX-85 nice-o-

computer. but it can be used for the development and debugging the program of
planned microprocessor objects with any structure.

2072. working principles of an optiaization subsystea in a systsn of machine
designing of instruments. Zheludkova. 6. V.. and Hal'kova-KMiIOVa. N. Ya. ELEC-
TRONNAYA TEXHNIKA. 3mm 1. mam. svcn, 1980. No 10(322), pp 6u-67.
Bibliography: 11 items. The subsysten ”Optimizatsiya" frees the user of diffi-

2106. Classification by type of planning solutions of optimization tasks in pro-
duction control. Kersselidze. V. I.. and Cherkasov, Yu. H. ELBﬂ'RONNAYA Tum.

SERIYA 9. moxmu I SISPEHY umVImrA. 1980. No M37). pp 26-28. 311.110. 8

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

items. The type structure of optimization software for the Yes computer is based
on reduction of optimization models of various classes to a model of integral
linear programming with Boolean variables.

2135. Analysis of ENSDF file versions in constructing an ASIYaD data base. Tele-
vinova, 'r. n.. and Bogomolova. Ye. s. "ﬁcsperimental'nyye metody yadernoy fiziki/
HIFI. 1980. No 7. Experimental Hethods and Apparatus for Nuclear Physical Research.
Characteristics of Processes of Fission and Synthesis. pp 51-55. The structure of
the recording of a systems catalog reflecting all versions of an new file is
presented. on the basis of which a correction of the ASIYaD data base is made.

2166. Computer processing of oral information. Korobitsin. I. T.. and. Sobolev.
V. N. ELEXTRWNAYA TEXHNIKA. SBRIYA 9. Exam I 5131'“ UPRAVIENIYA, 1%0,
No M37), pp 18-22. Bibliography: 3 items. Principles of the organization of

structural processing on the 11-222 computer for continuous signals of great length
are presented.

2192. A special monitoring language. Helikyan. S. H.. and Chalikyan. S. Ye.
MTRGINAYA TmHNIKA. SERIYA 9. ENIGMA I SISTER UPRAVLENIYA. 1980. No l‘07),
pp 23-21;. Bibliography: 2 items. The semtics and syntax of a monitoring
language for the development of technological programs of instrumentation systems
which test linear integrated microcircuits are presented. The language translator
consists of a compiler developed on the basis of the Elektrmika-éo microcomputer.
The computer has a volume of &( words.

2198. Control of currents in mgnetic output elements with the PD? minicomputer.
Yelin. A. P.. Komrov, V. V.. and Hatyushin. A. A. IF'VE Preprint No 80-155. Ser-
pukhov, 1980. 16 pages. Bibliography: h items. The method of data coding and
transmission by means of latitudinal impulse modulation using an active filter in
the demodulator circuit is described. An algorithm for correction of slow current
losses from the prescribed value was realized on the mP-B/B.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennaya publichnaya naucl'mo-tekhnicheskaya biblioteka 388R
(cm 3333). 1981

217a
cs0. 1863/263

53

FOIOFFICIALUSCONLY
POI m1. USE ONLY

ADDITIONAL usmc-rs non m: Joumuu. 'mounms m Pnocnms'. my 1931
nosccu moan-m I meow in Russian No 5. Hay 81 pp 1.11.2

[Followirg is a listing of selected entries nan means: I 93mm (Algorithms
and Programs). a bibliographic publication of cm)

[Excerpts-I

1875. Optical multicmnnel analyzer based on a linear inge receiver. Zlazhenkov.
V. V., Leontovich. A. 3.. and Chase. A. ll. USSR Academy of Sciences. Institute of
Physics Preprint No 6. Hoscou. 1981. lb pages. Bibliography: it items. Keywords:
algorithm. FORTRAN. PDPBl1/05. CAMC. analysers optical multichannel. receivers
imge linear. -

1888. Computer calculation of filtration in layered usses with consideration of a
free regime in the upper horizon and hydraulic windows between horizons. Denisen-
ko, c. Ye. Trudy. vsmmno (All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydro-
geology and Engineering Geology) No 136. Hydrogeological and Bigineering Geologi-
cal Processes and Their Prediction. pp 18-21. Keywords: methodology. WAN-4.

Yes-1022. program Toms-o. filtration of ground tutors. tree regime. equation
Fourier.

1908. The isochrone method in seismic holography. Koskalenko. V. IL. and Vorob'-
ycv, 0. A. In book: "Golcgrafiya i opticheskzaya obrabotka informatsii v geologii"
(Holography and Optical Data Processing in Geology"). ussn Academy of Sciences.
Physicotechnical Institute, Leningrad. 1980. pp 159-166. Bibliograan u itels.

1936. Algorithms and programs for processing data obtained from geophysical inves-
tigations in drillholes. Collection of Scientific Articles. USSR Acadenu of Sci-
ences. Institute of Geology and Geochemistry of Mineral Nels. Kiev. kaova Dun-
ka, 1980. 111 pages. Bibliograpmn at end of articles. Algorithm and MEAN
programs are presented for processing and analysis of mterials of drill geophy-

sics. acoustic and seismologicel logging for seismic surveying: programs of express
interpretation of oil-field geophysical data for the solution of oil-field prob-

lems. Complete texts of programs on punched cards and their listings have been
retained by the authors and can be sent out upon the requests of organizations.

1939. Optimization of characteristics of an anchor system for retaining a ﬂoating
drilling platforn. Bal'camov. A. Yu.. and Semukhin. Yu. A. Izvestiya Leningrad-
i'kOgO Elektrotekhnicheskogo instituta. 1980. lo 269. Ship Automation. Collection

56

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OIOFFICIALUSEONLY

of Scientiﬁc Articles. pp 33-35. Bibliograplw: 3 items. Synthesis of optimal
parameters of an anchor system for retaining a ﬂoating object is realised in the
form of a MBA] program.

1961. Global model of the wind field in the earth's atloephere. Mam. A. A..
and Sikharulidse. Yu. G. USSR Academy of Sciences 11’! (Order of Lenin Institute

of Applied Hatinratics) Preprint No 79. Moscow. 1980, 28 pages. Bibliography:

8 items. A combined model of the wind field at a height of 6 150 kn contains 137
variants of the atmosphere and is realised in mm.

2066. Numerical solution of the problem of waves on the surface of a viscous
liquid of constant depth caused by vibrations of a plate lying at the free surface.
Potetyunko. E. N.. and Chekupayeva. A. A. htenals on Exchange of Experience/
Scientific-Technical Society imeni A. N. Krylov. 1980. lo 331». Acoustic Hethods
of Ocean Research. pp 12h-126. BibliOg-raphy: 3 items.

2071. Processing photographs of a xenon bubble changer on a."POIS(" ("Retrieval")
installation in a mode of interaction with a computer. Avdeyev. N. F.. Barylov.
V. G.. Volkov. c. A.. et a1. ITEF Preprint No 168. Moscow. 1980. 36 pages.
Bibliography: 11 items. The equipment works in a node of interactinn with the
BESH-lt and DESI-6 computers. Comnde and directives used by operators of the
installation in the process of work are described.

2168. Solution of the inverse problem of gravimetry for two contact surfaces on
the basis of the sweeping out and concentration of moses. Filatov, V. G. "Pri-
kladnaya geofinika" (”Applied Geophysics"). All-Union Scientific Research Insti-

tute of Geophysical Hethods of Surveying. 1981. No 99. pp 90-97. Bibliography: 11
items.

2173. Scientific-technical forecasting in the area of geophysical methods of sur-
veying. Nikitenko. K. 1.. Timofeyeva. II. 31.. Yefremova. B. 6.. and Fedin. V. I.
"Prikladnaya goefizika"/All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Geophysical
Hethods of Surveying. 1981. No 99. pp 20h-223. Bibliography: 10 items. Results
are presented on the processing on H-220 and “-222 computers of files of patent
intonation on non—explosive sources of seismic vibrations and digital seisnic
stations.

2178. Procedure for separation of interfering signals on recordings of transmitted
cwposite waves. Yegoz‘kln. Ac Va. Dmilm. T; It. and Ryhlw. H. B. W-
naya geofisika”/All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Geophysical Methods of
Surveying. 1981, No 99. PP 15-31. Bibliography: 11 items. Improved programs for
the Minsk-32 computer are described: for separation of interfering waves TROIA
(tine of processing one route with a length of up to 600 reports is S 5 min) and
the forming filter.

2182. Television system for hydropwdoal field visualization. Hakarychev. D. A.
Halykhin. V. A.. Safiulins. G. G.. and Khomyakov. Yu. H. Izvestiya Leningraddtogo
elektrotekhnicheskogo instituta. 1980. lo 270. Questions of wave and spatia1 pro-
cessing of signals and images. Collection of Scientific Works. pp 31-36. Biblio-
graphyn 5 items. Television systems and methods of studying oceanic turbulence are
disucssed. The starting data of imges are input in a undo-32 computer by means
of photographic equipment.

55

FOIOFII'IGALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2183. Statistical imitation experiment in the problem of signal detection in
noise with unknown dispersion. Siporov. Yu. Ye. Intends on Exchange of Experi-
ence/Sdentific-Technicel Society ineni A. u. Krylov. 1980. No 3%. Acoustic
Methods of Ocean Research, pp 60-73. Bibliography: 13 items. Differences between
imitation and machine asthmatics]. simulation are pointed out. statistical imita-
tion experiment is emined on a lint-32 oouputer by loans of a. detector of an
unﬂuctuating signal with an unknown amplitude on a background of Gaussian noise
with unknown dispersion.

MIGHT: Gosudarstvennaya publichnoys neuohno-tekmuotuekm biblioteh. 3881i
(cm 3333). 1981

2171+
cso: 1863/263

56

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 519.6
ASSEMBLBR LANGUAGE PROGRAIHING 0N UNIFIED SYSTHI 0? mass

Moscow PROGRAINIROVANIYB NA YAZYKE MSW YES M in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 26 Feb 81) pp 2-6, 286-290, 300-301

[Annotation, table of contents. preface, appendix 1 and bibliography from book
"Assembler Language Programing on the Unified System of Computers" by Zoya
I’etrovna Vostrikova, Izdatel'stvo "Nsuka", 100,000 copies, 306 pages]

[Text] This book is intended for the study of the principles of Assnbler language
programming for the Unified Systen of Conputers. Special attention has been paid in
the book to the study of instructions and programing sethods in the machine-orien-
ted 1angu 3e. Information is supplied for asaabler statements, the translation
process, macro facilities and elenenta of software. The infomtion on assabler
statemen a and software elanents allows obtaining a progr- in final for. ready for
running on a computer.

The book can be recommended as a text for students in VUZ's, and for post-graduate
students. scientific workers and programers.

Table of Contents Page
Preface 5
Chapter 1. Introduction 7
1.1. Hajor Components of the Computer 8
1.2. Data Formats in Storage 9
1.3. AritIIIIetic-Logic Unit of the Processor 11
1.4. Interrupt Systel 12
Chapter 2. Instruction Set for the Unified System of Computers 17
2.1. Classification of Instructions by Function 17
2.2. Classification of Instructions for Operations on Data 18
2.3. General Characteristics of Instruction For-ate 21
Chapter 3. Rules for Writing Stataents of Machine-Oriented Instructions 28
3.1. Language Alphabet 28
3.2. Coding Sheet and Puncbcard 28
3.3. Statenent Field 32
Chapter 4. Instructions for Fixed-Point Operations 37
4.1. Fixed-Point Data 37
19.2. Instructions 66
4.3. Sanple Programs 78
57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFEKJA[.USE(NMEY

Chapter 5. Decimal Arithmetic Instructions
5.1. Decinal Data
5.2. Instructions
5.3. Sample Programs

Chapter 6. Instructions for Floating-Point Operations
6.1. Floating-Point Data
6.2. Instructions

Chapter 7. Logic Operations
7.1. Logic Data
7.2. InstructiOns

Chapter 8. Programming Methods
8.1. Branch Instructions
8.2. Standard Subroutines

Chapter 9. Assembler Macrolanguage
9.1. General Concept of Macrolanguage
9.2. Program Facilities of Macrolanguage

9.3. Macrodefinition

9.4. Macroinatructions

9.5. Arrangement of Macrodsfinitiona and Macroinatructions in a
Program Module

9.6. Macrolanguage Characters

9.7. Compilation Control Instructions

9.8. Special Compilation Instructions

Chapter 10. Program Module Translation
10.1. Simplest Set of Assembler Statements for Program Module
10.2. General Concept of Translation
10.3. Address Counter and Symbol Table
10.6. Translation Process

Chapter 11. Brief Introduction to OS
11.1. Basic Concepts of OS
11.2. Job Control
11.3. Task Control
11.4. Data Management

Appendix 1. Machine—Oriented Instruction Set for the Unified System of
Computers

Appendix 2. Table of Binary code for Exchange and Processing of Information
on the Unified System of Computers (DKOI)

Appendix 3. Fortran Library Subroutines

Appendix 4. General Characteristics of Constants in the DC Statement

Appendix 5. Assembler Statements

Bibliography
Subject Index

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preface

It is well known that programmers with different levels of training are needed for
the most efficient operation of third-generation machines: software engineers,
highly skilled software engineers and systems programmers.

Software engineers develop and code problem programs. To do this, they must know
how to develop algorithms for the problems being solved. know one of the algorithmic
languages or Assembler. have a general idea of the operating system (08) and master
the language for job, task and data control to the extent needed for program
debugging.

Highly skilled software engineers (leaders of groups of programmers) must master
fluently Assembler, the general-purpose language PL/l or some other high-level
algorithmic language and be well versed in OS.

The systems programmer develops or exploits software facilities. To perform his
functions, he must know to perfection Assembler, the logic of operation of the OS
for the Unified System of Computers and the functions of each software component.

From this brief list of main functions of programmers and skills needed to perform
these functions, it is obvious that the higher the level of the programmer, the
more necessary is knowledge of Assembler to him.

Primary attention in this book is paid to the study of the machine-oriented instruc-
tion system, assembler statements and macrofacilities. OS software elements are
presented briefly to the extent needed to write programs in the form of a job that
can be executed on a computer. It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the
principles of digital computer technology and number systems.

It is necessary to dwell on the features of program structure for the Unified System
of Computers. Each program consists of three mutually independent parts:

1) program text developed by using machine-oriented instructions (chapter 4-8) and
macrofacilities (chapter 9);

2) Assembler statements that are designed to control program translation, 1. e. the
order of translation of it into machine language (chapter 10);

3) language statements for control of jobs, tasks and data (chapter 11) that permit
execution of the progrmn on a computer.

Therefore, some knowledge of the material in chapters 10 and 11 is needed in approach-
ing the examples at the end of chapter 4-8. This will allow approaching the final

goal more quickly and purposefully, namely compilation of a program that can be run
on a computer. You should refer to chapter 3 as you study chapters 4-8.

The author hopes this book will be useful in training programmers and facilitate
more rapid introduction of the Unified System of Computers into the various sectors

of the national economy.
2. P. Vostrikove

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix 1. Machine-Oriented Instruction Set for the Unified System of Computers

 

(6)

  

(5)

   

(3)

 

 

 

 

 

’ A 5A Add—emu. ax P .A.C.0n ’ 0.1.3.1
A!) M Add Not-must. Lena—Wm ax lI-w..A.c- M.”
l c mums-tn. senses ”1.3!!
ADI 2A Add ”unnamed. boss—muse RR on.c.t.n. 0.1.1.3
I cuauuauuuu.aumns ‘ 8a
A! 7A Md Madeline. Shed—mule RX OIL? AC. OJ.”
cumnnuwntuumnu amih
A22 1" Add Nowellud. Shed—men: IR 00.6.5". M.”
: mucus-nee. W 3"
I All I.\ A.“ Helde-uuueu comm ax P..A.c.0l'l 0.1.1.3
AL 8:! I. la halal—eman- lace IX ',A.C M.”
| AU! It! A.“ usual-eunu- macs Ill - M.”
I An' I A Add Decimal—usual! aoch- $3 Oll-P -P,- 0.1.20
we Mll-
Alt IA Add -rno-use on 0.1.2.:
w a: Add Unmanned. lasa—eeo-mm RX 0".P..A.C. MJJ
:s asp-ennui. nan-m 3.8“
MIN :2 Add "Manna-d. Long—casino. Ill OILCJJII M.”
I On muss-Mun. mom
| AU It Add Unmanned. Shed-mn- ax 011.?ka MM
| 1m to ”annual. was. 3-3“
I MIR 3: Ma Una-allied. SMCI-COOII- RR 00423.3“ ”-2.1
I Inn On ”gunman-I. ewes:
ML a Branch and Luz-mums c em- IX - -
I spares
I IIALR a) mud. and Uni—muss s on- ll - -
spam
I IIC ") u maul: on muss—mu: as- RX - -
I pexo|
I BCR 01 urn-uh on Comma-yucca“ ac- ” - -
"I":
I DC! I In Bu nth on Canal—um Is tow RX - -
, “-1
l acne a band: on M-IW‘ as ten- R2 - -
I may
i
I

 

*) The designation OR was used in the text in the description of the

instructions.
**) Expanded mnemonic codes of the BC instruction are given in chapter 8.

Key:
1. Hnenonic code 10. Format type
2. Machine code for the operation 5. Possible types of progran interrupts

3. Instruction name 6. Value of attributes of result

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Appendix 1.

       
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
        
   
  
   
  

IX"
“LE

CV.

"01
"IR
“I0
IC

(continued)

3

3323333303

20
1D
80
FD

ID
DE

Dl’

«
I I
M
w.
43

In“. on lulu ”lot—m u
“may do...»

In” on luau Ln u anal—u»
pan on mm W .-
m

Coupon Nashua-W n-
W

Guam. Loos-M un-
.00

Comm. Lola—ennui... un-
It.

Gonna. Shut—wont. nonr-
not

Coupon. Inn-cm mn-

   
  
   
 
  
    
 
 

IIO .
Coaut- mum-mu at
am

Cameo mint—W In»:
Cal-pan halal-Gnu.” an;
Coupon lulul Insulin-spu-
unu WWII

Coop-n haul—spam Ion!
Owns. banal-enacts. ml-

   
  
   
 
  
   
     
  

9..“
9,.A
p...\

any,”

    
    

ll
Comm—mm ..
We! lo Dim-Wanna ax PM.“
u mur- on
Cum Io menu-ampw RX p..A.c

III. I 1mm”

    
    
 
    
 

  

     
  
   
  

       
    
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

    
   
   
  

   
   
   
    
 
   
 
 

    
   
  
   
  

DMOc—luuu RX P .A.C.OA
bum. Lou—Luau. nil-o. RX chum;
LEM
mom. Lon-Mun. M RR on.c.l.u.
- nA
Dlvldc. lad-uncut. w RX on) c,
I." ll
Dlvldo. sun-mum. w RR on.c.z.n.
M
mm. maul-nuns menu buy.)
no. . In 2.6.
Dmdo-nmn O
nan-mummy. 53 ﬂ r'r
Em and M-mmpoun I I! 00.9.),
mm M
ﬁnch-sum I!" l.’ .M:
mm. Lou-m Mill“ III on}:
mm. Ital-noon“. W II! on;
mu Ila-m mm 8| H
mm Chum-m up It! PM

I“

    
 

0J3
M3.
0J3
0J3
M3
0J3
0.1.2
.JJ
0A.!
04.“!
0J3
0.|.‘!
Appendix 1 . (continued)

Key:

1.
2.
3.

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
      
      
     
         
          
     
    
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 

LCDR
LCER
LD
LDR
LE
LEI!
LII

LM
LNDR

LNIZR
LNR
LPDR
LPER
LPR

”’5‘!

LR
LTUR
LTER
LTR
M

‘ MI)

MN!

Hnenonic code

Instruction name

«3

' um - umm

but Slum Key—mun»
”0‘ ”I!"

Lou Mime-m Inu-
Load Mimi—urn“: nonu-
ne-n ‘

Load Complaint. Lac-worn.
“mun-I. unset

Load Comm. M-urpym
noun-«In. nome-

Lou. Lona—um“. mu:
Loud. Lou-cum“. unnu-
Load. snort-urns“. new“.
Loud. WI—uwpu'mu
Loud. Nellwrl-unnn eon.
uou

Lou Mulllple—unnu mucu-
uu Neulm. Inna-any” u-
pnatmul. unan-

Lou Noun“. M-umau or
union-u. upon"

to“ Negative-urns“ unu-
nun“

Load Poulm. Lou—supp“ w
non-nun“. unu-

Leod Pmllln. snort—unyal w
non-mun. convu-

md Putative-urn,“ um.-
nano-

Lou PSW (Mun Sula Verdi -
urns-u PSVI

Lou—unyau

Lou and feel. Lou—urn!“ u
IIWDII. “Inﬁll

lmd .end tul. Shed-um“. I
nae-cue. Iooonu

Lu“ end Tell-urn)“ I In...“
Mulllply—yuno-euuc

M-ullely. Long-yuan“. un-
no:

Mulllply, Lem—nun“... an.
M

Mulllply. sum—yuan“... me:-
we

Muluply. Slml—yuuo-euu. unr-
lov-

Muluely Iiellmd—yuuuuu no-
uyuou

Mullluly Documl—yuuo-uue n-
(III‘IOO
Mullinly—yumeuni

OILC

«1.9.43
cm:
our“
one
5.1m

v .p.c

oh;

00.6

lo. Pox-net type
Machine code for the operation 5. Possible types of program

6. Value of attributes of re

62
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
..¢. .

“on Guam-amp cu;

 
 

       
     
       
 
 

      
      

  

 

. M .
MVI R Move [Mimi-W w. ‘I -
mm”- . . :
ﬂVN 0| Mom MCI-W on" 88 P’P'A -
Mvo VI Mon cl! OllQIQ-ﬁmgil no so . P'PrA -
“mu
le m “on tout—Inc“! Io- _ 85 If” . ' -,
N 'u A“ Lulul—u nor-uncoo- IA P'LC ' 0.!
NC In And lanai—M announce .. 88 P'P'A i ll
m 9. And Leggy. Imam—n aid... SI P’A on
not. «seem-not '
Mn N And Logical—u new I! - 0.! ' I
O It Or Lone-I—hocmuo MK IX 'P :‘Ac 0.!
06 Do 0: Laud-emu“ MM 88 P..P,A OJ
OI ﬂ 0: Logical. Inmate—m SI P, A 0.!
MM. Ingmar-not J
on It Or halal-mm "JIM Ill ' 0.!
PACK P2 Peck-yum"; _ 33 .P .A -,.-
ItDD 35 Rad ulna-ounce "in” SI 35.1». -
s “I Subtract-norm". Ix P .A. c. 0.1.1.8
so on some: Mun-mu. m-mu- ex 0?”; .A.c.' 0.1.2.:
, an. e yuan-awn. unmet EM. 3"
son 23 mm mm“. Lou-unm- ﬁll 00.63.". : M.”
an o nopuuuuol. nan-loco 3"
SE 1! Sabine! Hormonal. Shovl-ouu- RX OILP .A.c. MM
tun c mama-ml. mom» ”.314
see :3 Sound Noe-mu“. Shovl-unn- Ill! 011.0. 8.". M.”
"In c Iowa-null. W 3“
5“ CI Subtract tllllwd-uuu-u no RX P..A.C.Oﬂ . M.”
use».
510 9c sun uo "mammoth-nun MM
non-cum
SI. 5? Salim! LoquI-uuuun m I.“
SLA ID SN" Lcﬂ Shut. Militant—cult ﬁlo!)
om Ion-Quantum.
SLIM ll‘ sum Len Double. Arithmetic-cunt 0.13.!
“no noel-cl. amour-«cu!
sun. ID sun Leu Doom tonal—mar . -
”no goal-o. in!
‘ SLL It SNII Len ﬂulo Logical-cunt -
“no (on
SLR II' Sumo“ mull-wanna none I.”
50 Va “Mud manual—nun.” Aun- M.”
1“.“
SIN In 3:! Progn- Muk-ycuuuu n- 3 M.”
«y nonun-
so In munch-mun. N.”
SIM IA mu Rm: Sula AnMIk-guut ' ”.3
upon ”ml
Key:
1. Hnenwnic code lo. Pom: type
2. Machine code for the operation 5. Possible types of progral interrupts
3. Instruction name 6. Value of attributes of result

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

continued)
I)
(1) M- . (3)
III‘
Mot-o .u.
“mull "a was... “all“
"M outw-
can

.NIIDA 0!: sun lush! MI. AIM-m
up... w W

sum. 0c sum ”an M00 mini—cunt
up... uni-cl nu

Sill. I sum ”(It “I. halal-ml?
upon-III.

:5! O 3.1 than Key-yam nun
“I'll

$58 00 Sol mu- Mun-mm um
‘I‘ﬂll

ST 50 sun-suns a nun

51c 42 Sun Chanda-um I um
«mu

sm so am Lou-unto s nun. un-
on

ST! 70 non Sud-tum u an». no

' you“

sm co “on mural-um I Mum
we

sm 90 um Multiply-m e um
ray-noon

su W 3-qu Una-emu. Shed-our
mum on an mum noon“

sun SF sauna union-allied. Sim—ou-
muu m mam-I. W

svc 0A Samba Coll-manna! I: cy-
urn-m

SI! 61' 3.5"“! Hum-elm. Long-u-
«mm an Inna-nun. who.

own '1? sumac! Una-mud. Long—nu-
muu Cu mama-n. “In...

TCII ‘19 Tu! Owl—upon!- “I“

'no no rm no tlmwmuu-um-
IIOI'IUW

[M II Tut on“! Mull-noun» no
nun

1’5 9) Tu! and Sol—0mm u yaw
am

TR DC Trunk-WWW"

TIT DI) Tunnel. m Tul—oopumwnu
- noun"

lml'x I) [much -u¢umm

mm M wuu Dorm-unu- um

I: 5’ unluun (Dr—nun...” mm

at DI unluln (Dc—manna” mm

XI 91 than". 0! modulo-mu.
um um alumna-noon

XI! u Elellﬂvl Or-uuoumucc mm

u? N 2m: and A“. Mull-noun“
c mum. “mu-u

I I) mama—autumn.
11c code

.ction name

§B§§§§§

{B

8|
RX

0

0”,.“
013.9,.“
9v“:
worm

on.v..LC.
2.38
005.3.
an

auras.
IAN
“1.0.8.3"

A
M

p.»
P..P..A

r .p .A
9:.A'

v .9
oh ..A
v..a.c
p._v,.A
p.»

on) .v,

lo. Format type
no code for the operation 5. Possible types of program

6. Value of attributes of res

66

FOR -OFHCIAL USE ONLY

MN
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Baron, D., "Assemblers and Loaders," translated from English, Moscow, Mir, 1976.

Brich, z. 8.; Voyush, V. I. and Degtyareva, G. S. et a1., "Programirovaniye
na yazyke Assenblera Yes EVM" [Assasbler Language Programing for the Unified
System of Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1975, 296 pages.

Stolyarov, G. K., ed., ”Introduction to Direct Access Storage Devices and
Methods of Data Organization. System IBM/360. Textbook," translated fro-
English, Moscow, Statistika, 1974, 128 pages.

Shtarlonan, V. 8., ed., "Int/360 Computing System," translated from English,
Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1969, 460 pages.

Ter-Mikaelyan, 1., ed., "Computer Hardware and Data Processing. Terminological
Defining Dictionary of IBM," translated from English, Moscow, Statistiks, 1978,
231 pages. '

"Generator program woda dannykh dlya Yes EVM" [Data Entry Progran Generator
for the Unified System of Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1976, 141 pages.

Gurova, L. I., "Osnovy programirovaniya. Uchebnoye posobiye dlya vuzov"
[Prinicples of Programing: A Textbook for VUZ's], Moscow, Statistika, 1975.
232 pages.

Guter, R. 8.; Reznikovskiy, P. 'r. and Reznik, S. M., "Programirovaniye i
vychislitel'naya matematika, vyp. 1. Osnovy progranirovaniya. Algoritnicheskiye
yazyki" [Programing and Computational Mathematics, No 1. Principles of
Programming. Algoritl'mic Languages], Moscow, Nauka, 1971, 432 pages.

(Jermain, K.). "Programing for the IBM/360," translated from English, edited
by V. S. Shtarlclan, Moscow, Mir, 1971 and 1973. 872 pages.

Donovan, J ., "Systems Programing," translated from English, edited by L. D.
Raykov, Moscow, 1975, 383 pages.

Drozdov, Ye. A.; Komarnitskiy, V. A. and Pyatibratov, A. P., "Elektronnyye
vychislitel'nyye mashiny Yedinoy sistemy" [The Unified System of Electronic
Couputers], Moscow, Mashionstroyeniye, 1976, 672 pages.

Drozdov, Ye. A. and Pyatibratov, A. P., "Osnovy postroyeniya i funktsioniro-
vaniya vychislitel'nykh sistem" [Principles of Structure and Functioning of
Conputer Systems], Moscow, Energiya, 1973, 368 pages.

Larionov, A. M., ed., "Yedinaya sistema EVM" [The Unified System of Electronic
Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1974, 136 pages.

Larionov, A. M., ed., "Kanaly woda-vyvoda EVM Yes-1020" [Yes-1020 Input/Output
Channels], Moscow, Statistika, 1976, 272 pages.

Katzan, IL, "System 370 Computers," translated frou English, ed. by V. K.
Levin and L. D. Raykmr, Moscow, Mir, 1974, 307 pages.

(Kolin, A.), "Introduction to Operating Systems," translated from English, ed.
by V. V. Martynyuk, Moscow, Mir, 1975, 116 pages.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

310.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Krinitskiy, N. A.; Mironov, G. A. and Prolov, G. 1)., "Progrmnirovaniye i
algoritmicheskiye yazyki" [Programing and Algorithmic Languages], ed. by A.
A. Dorodnitsyn, Moscow, Nauka, 1975, 496 pages.

Lavrov, S. 8., "Vvedeniye v progranirovaniye" [Introduction to Programing],
Moscow, Nauka, 1973, 352 pages.

Lebedev, V. IL, "Vvedeniye v sistemy programirovaniys" [Introduction to
Programing Systems], Moscow, Statistika, 1975, 312 pages.

Lebede'v, V. M. and Sokolov, A. 2., "Vvedeniye v sistalu progrmirovaniya OS
Yes" [Introduction to Progrming System of Unified Systen Operating Systa],
Moscow, Statistika, 1978. 11.1. pages. ‘

"Operatsionnaya sistama DOS Yes. Obshchiye polozheniya" [Unified Syata D08
Operating System: General Principles], Moscow, Statistika. 1975, 120 pages.

"Operntsionnaya sistema DOS Yes. Spravochnik" [Unified System DOS Operating
System: Handbook], Moscow, Statistiks, 1977, 271 pages.

Pcledov, G. V. and Raykov, L. D., "Vvedeniye v 08 Yes EVM" [Introduction to
OS for the Unified System of Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1977, 120 pages.

LariOnov, A. M., ed., "Sistana dolnnentatsii yedinoy sistasy BVM" [Docuenta-
tion System for the Unified System of Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1976,
328 pages.

Larionov, A. M. , ed. , “Sistens natalaticheskogo obespecheniya Yes EVM" [Softc
wnre Systan for the Unified Systea of Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1974,
216 pages. '

Stebli, 1)., "Logical Programing in System/360," ed. by 1.. D. Raykov and M. R.
Shuts-Burs, Moscow, Mir, 19710, 752 pages.

Il'yushin, A. 1., ed., "Supervisor and Data Management. IBM/360 Operating
System," translated from English, Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1973, 312 pages.

"Supervizor OS Yes EVM" [OS Supervisor for the Unified Systun of Computers],
Moscow, Statistika, 1975, 87 pages.

(Redd, U.), "Assembler Programing and the IBM/360 and 370 Computer Systems,"
translated from English, ed. by L. D. Raykov, Moscow, Mir, 1979, 590 pages.

Fateyev, A. Yc., et a1. , "Prikladnyye program-y v sistane natmaticheskogo
obespecheniya Yes EVM" [Application Progrmns in the Software Systen for the
Unified System of Electronic Computers], Moscow, Statistika, 1976, 186 pages.

(Flores, A.), "Computer Peripherals," translated from English, ed. by A. V.
Shilcyko, Moscow, Mir, 1977, 350 pages.

(Flores, A.), "Organizations of Coaputing Machines," translated from English,
cd. by V. S. Lapin, Moscow, Mir, 1972, 428 pages.

(Flores, IL), "Software," translated from English, ed. by V. M. Kurochkin,
Moscow, Mir, 1971, 529 pages.

Shtarkman, V. 8., ed., "Functional Structure of 05/360," translated from
English, Moscow, Sovetslcoye radio, 1971, 88 pages.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

(.0.

lol.

42.

Khusainov, B. S. . 'Makrosredstva v yazyke Assuhlera Yes EVH" [nacro Facilities
in Assanbler Language for the Unified System of Electronic Computers],
Moscow, Statistika, 1978, 94 pages.

Tsichritzis, D. and Bernstein, P., "Operating Systems," translated from Eng-
lish. ed. by I. B. Zadykhaylo and V. V. Martynyuk, Moscow, Mir, 1977, 336

pages.

Shelikhov, A. A. and Selivanov, Yu. P., 'Wychislitel'nyye lashiny. Spravochnik"
(Computers: A Handbook]. 2d ed., revised and enlarged, ed. by V. V.
Przhiyalkovskiy, Moscow, Bnergiya, 1978, 226 pages.

Shurakov, V. V. , "Osnovnyye ponyatiya i klassifikatsiya aataaaticheslwgo
obespecheniya" [Basic Concepts and Classification of Software], Moscow,
Statistika, 1975, 72 pages.

Larionov, A. M., ed., "Elektronnaya vychislitel'naya Iashina Yes-1020" [The
Yes-1020 Electronic Conputer], Hascov, Statistika, 1975, 128 pages.

Larionov, A. M. , ed., "Blektronnaya vychislitel'naya asshina Yes-1030" [The
Yes-1030 Electronic Coaputer], Moscow, Statistika, 1977, 256 pages.

Larionov, A. H., ed., "Elektronnaya vychislitel'naya mashina Yes-1050" [The
Yes—1050 Electronic Computer]. Hoscov, Statistika, 1976, 306 pages.

"Yazyki progrmirovaniya 1305 Yes. Kratkiy spravochnik" [Programing Languages
for the nos of the Unified Systea of Computers: Small Handbook], Moscow,
Statistika, 1977, 152 pages.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hanks". Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-natematichesluoy

8555
C50:

literatury, 1981

1863/269

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WALKING ROBOTS

DETERMINING ENERGY EXPENDITURES YOR SIX-LEGGD )DVING APPARATUS um 11' IS IN
KITION

Moscow TRUDY MSKOVSKOW ENERGBTICIBSKOGO INSTITUTA: mm UPRAVLYAYMKB
SISTEH, HASHIN I HEWIZBDV in ”Can “0 515, 1981 (819)“! to press
15 Apr 81) PP 3-9

[Article by candidates of technical sciences and docents A. M. Akeksandrav and
M. F. Zatsepin, doctor of physico-Inathensticsl sciences and professor I. V.
Novozhilov, and csndilste of technical sciences and decent Sh. Kh. Tubeyev from
the publication "Trudy Moskovskogo Energeticheskogo Institute: Mekhanika
Upravlyayenykh Sisten, Mashin i Mekhaniznov" (Works of the Moscow Power Engineer-
ing Institute: the Mechanics of Controlled Systems, Machines. and Mechanisms).
500 copies, 139 pages]

[Text] The kinematic diegran of the apparatus adopted is similar to the one for
the model of e six-legged apparatus developed at the Institute of Mechanics of
Moscow State University [1].

The front and beck legs are secured to the body at the spexes of a rectangle
2D wide and 2L long. The middle legs are secured on each side at a point in the
middle of the sides. which are 2L long (see Figure l). The body of the apparatus

Figure l. Disgras of Three-Legged
Support for Six-Legged Moving Apparatus.

 

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

weighs P. and the center of gravity lies at the intersection of the diagonals

of this rectangle. The legs of the apparatus are identical, inertia-less, and
have three members apiece. we will number the members of the legs 1, 2, and 3
beginning from the body. He will use L1, L2. and L3 for the lengths of the mem-
bers. Let us assume L1 - 0, and thereby ignore the length of the first member.
The leg members are connected by unisxial joints according to the scheme shown in
Figure 2 below. The control aoments are applied to the axles of the joints.

Figure 2. Deriving Kinematic and Force
Relationships

 

 

Let us consider an inverse formulation of the problem. He will compute the mag-
nitude of the control moment and energy expenditures for movement by this ap—
paratus. Suppose that the body moves forward at a constant longitudinal

velocity of V at a constant elevation above a horizontal supporting surface. He
will consider the simplest type of movement, with three legs. In this case the
support legs are the two extreme legs on one side and the middle leg on the other.
The remaining three legs are in the carrying phase. The alternation of support
legs occurs instantaneously. we will consider the motion of the support legs

relative to the body to be identical. The position of the support point relative
to the point at which the leg is secured is characterized by height H and constant
lateral extension 3 (see Figure 2 above).

In this formulation it is sufficient to study movement during one step. Let us
introduce the right orthogonal system of coordinates OXYZ. beginning the count
from the support point of one of the legs as shown in Figure 2. We will guide
axle X in the direction of motion and axle Z on the vertical. Then the coordi—

nates of point A, where the leg is attached to the body. can be determined as
follows:

X - (lueMQ‘OLﬁ‘M'Jtln’. . (n-
Y "(HMm'Lgl-um) to: ‘h' 0, .. _
Z ‘ Lam'a‘tam‘h ' N.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3'1 , 72. . and 3, are the angles of rotation of the nenbere on the axles. of their
joints. Angle EA, is figured from the direction parallel to axle X, while
angles if: and 3, are figured against the vertical.

Let us differentiate formula (1) by tine '1‘. According to the condition i - 2,
Y - Z - 0. Pron this ve find the angular velocities of the leg nenbers.

in - Vua'uJB. .

C" L‘lﬂnmﬂnq;’ﬂ..ﬂﬂ(‘h'90uo '
e, --ww.m.lt».ww.-Wl' - -"’

In the step under consideration notion is begun when the center of gravity of
the body is above the border of the triangle of static stability (see Figure 1),
that is, where 1(0) -= -L/2, and it continues until itireaches the opposite border.

The change in quantities x. '3‘ , 3;, 95, 9, , 9‘. and y, is determined by inte-
grating equationa (1) and (2). The initial conditions for y, , 95. and 4y,
are determined through the initial value of X(0) by the foraulas

?« - ardq(X/B) n .
‘h' arttos(Il/d)*ms‘0uu““‘ld)9
9‘ u ,a“ a. , d. ' X"°" ".9

d. - mat [ (d'- L'. ' L‘.)/1L.L.] . (a

Let us put equations (1)-(3) in nondimensional form by carrying out the nor-elite-
tion

I ‘ x/L.’.ng t'. LIIL.'aaa‘ t’T/T. 9
where L* - I. and '1} - L/V are the typical scope and tine of the problem

Equations (2) assume the form
9; - tos‘bi,
9’; ' *1:“W-/[‘.“"Wr?0] ' . “’
9', - «no.9» 9. It, sin (9.45)],

where the accent signifies differentiation by nondinenaional tine t.

We will find the nagnitudea of the control nomenta from the equations of static
balance compiled for the entire apparatus and for the systems member 1 + member 2 +
menber 3, member 2 + meter 3, and the third members of all the support legs.

After making the necessary calculations and excluding intermediate variables, we
obtain

mt... mm. mm ' 0 .
M.,.--b(hzx)/h¢..q. ,
m...--b(i-2x)/k¢ouy. ,

V"... "5/20”?“ (a)
m.J ',‘1.Sinl'.(1ozx)/l. .

m u "Limb “'21),“ ,

m'u .-t.u'\‘f;/IZ.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this notation W11 designates normalized magnitudes of control H13

relative to typical moment PL. The index i - l. 3, 5 corresponds to the nusber
of the support leg in Figure 1, while the index 1 . 1, 2. and 3 corresponds to
the nulber of the member of the particular leg.

Let us express the energy expenditures of the apparatus through the magnitudes
of angular velocities at the joints and the magnitudes of the control moment.
For the sake of dcfiniteness we suggest that the motors used he DC electric
motors with parallel excitation. we will assume that the power source is a
battery-type device at whose output direct voltage U is insured. Ignoring
transfer processes in the circuit. the expression for moment H developed by the
armature may be written as follows

H-kJ , (a)
‘- (u-kla)/R o (7)

where I is the current in the armature circuit; K1 and K2 are coefficients of
proportionality; n is the angular velocity of the armature relative to the
stator; and R is the resistance of the araature in ohms.

Expressions (6) and (7) omit the indexes i and j, which are not significant here.

The full energy expended by the power source during the tine of one step ‘i‘* is
found as follows 115- .
E '5. U! dT (8)

or, taking account of expression (6) and (7)

2-5: S:(M'#AM9.)dT . (s)
where h - K1K2/R. '

In equation (9) let us switch to nondinensional quantities
mam/PL , t-TIT. , 9-9.1], .
where, as before, T,‘ - LIV. We obtain

. . - g
t.(nv'L‘/k:V)[(mug§ mom . no)
0 ' .

Now we will introduce the designations
e.- i m‘di ,

O
“ '5'.”“ ~
Then expression (10) will assme the form

t - [an-M ”(or zip en

Quantities e. and 9d can, of course, be called the static and dynamic energy
funct ionals. Quantity c, describes the energy use that does not depend on the
angular velocities of movement of the nenbers and will not be zero even when

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the apparatus is standing in place. Quantity ed relates to normalized nechanical
energy used by the notor for one step. In the problem under consideration where
the body coves by inertia but the legs are noninertial. it is- equal to zero.

The nultiplierAWPLz) evaluates the relative contribution or the couponenta ‘a
and ed to total energy use. For "slow” and "heavy" apparatuses the static tunco
tional e. plays a relatively large part.

Let us find energy use es of this apparatus for one step, sunning expressions of
type (10) for all the working motors: I.)
0. - 0. . (II)

The relationships (1), (lo), (5), and (11) were studied numerically, by computer.

Figure 3 below expresses the resulta of the coaputations. As is apparent fro-
the graphs shown in Figure 3. there is an optimal lateral extension of the legs I:

 

        

    
 

 

Figure 3. Dependence of the
Energy Functional on the

Lateral Extension of the Legs
B and the Height of the Body.

 
 

HIE-

-.\\nml-
-‘\\‘e\‘-

|

 
 

IIIIH'IISI'E-
ﬁlm-unawa-
-im-erlia-

-“L‘§i

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corresponding to each value of height h of the Body of the apparatus above the
innobile surface; at this optimal figure energy functional tea is man.

FWBS

1. D. Ye. Okhotsinskiy, Ye. A. Devyanin, V. S. Gurfinkel', et a1, ”Ibdel of
a Six-Legged Moving Apparatus with Supervisory Control," Report No 2036,
Institute of Mechanics of Noam State University, Izdatel'stvo HID, 1978,
87 pages.

COPYRIGHT: Hoskovskiy energeticheskiy institut, 1981

11 .176
C80: 8344/0116

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFN3AL.USE13NLN

MECHANICS AND MOTION CONTROL OF ROBOTS HITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE COMPONENTS

Moscow MBKHANIKA I UPRAVLENIYE DVIZNENIYEM ROBOTOV S ELEMENTAMI ISKUSSTVENNOGO INTEL-
LEKTA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 15 Dec 80) pp 3-55

[Annotation. table of contents. foreword and papers 1-5 from chapter 1. "Mechanics and
Motion Control of Robots and Transport Systems." of the preprint collection, "Mechanics
and Motion Control of Robots with Artificial Intelligence Components", edited by D. Ye.
Okhotsimskiy, corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Ye. A. Devya-
nin, A. K. Platonov and V. Ye. Pryanichnikov, Institute of Applied Mathematics imeni

M. V. Keldysh, USSR Academy of Sciences, 500 copies, 164 pages]

[Text] The collection contains fifteen papers dealing vith the mechanics and motion
control of mobile robots; the problems of developing sensor. information and program
systems and models of robots and to the mathematical modeling of human behavior and
the human visual system. It analyzes the subsystems of individual robots. It discus-
ses the methods and results of computerized mathematical simulation and modeling. The

collection has been compiled on the basis of papers presented to the Moscow University
seminar led by D. Ye. Okhotsimskiy.

Table of Contents

Foreword ...assoc-onoooooaaeeosse.eooooeeeeooeeeeeeesoeeoosoeeeeeesaoooeaeoaes 5

Chapter 1. Mechanics and Motion Control of Robots and Transport Systems
I. An Algorithm for Programming Pootholds for an Automatic Walking Machine.

D. Ye. Okhotsimskiy. A. K. Platonov. Ye. I. Kugushev and V. S. Yaroshevskiy... 8
2. A Shock Problem for Several Three-Component Mechanisms. Ye. M. Rubanovich and

A. “I Forml'skiy noIOIODOOOOOOIOOIOOOIIUOOOIOIIO...O...IIOOOOOUOOOCDOOIOOOI 22
3. The Spatial Problem of Optimizing the Dynamics of Biped Locomotion Over an

Uneven Surface. A. C. Orlov ............................................... 35
a. The Problem of Stabilizing Spatial Biped Motion. Yu. V. Bolotin ........... A!

5. Methods of Periodic Optimization in the Problem of Stabilizing a walking
Hochinel V. B. Lari“ oOIIOOIOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO00.00.........OOOOIOOOOCOIOOOIOI (.7

b. Modeling the Motion of a Body uith One Degree of Freedom Belonging to a Closed
Kinematic Circuit Loop in Problems in Robotics. M. M. Dobrokhotov ......... 56

Chapter 2. Robot Sensor, Information and Program Systems

7. A Set of Programs for Structural Image Analysis and an Example of its Applica-
tion. 6. c. Vaynshteyn .................................................... 66
8. Means of Machine Graphing for Analysis of Spatial Robot Motion. V. Ye. Prya-
nichnikov ... ...... ................................ 72
9. A Model of Human Design Activity (Drawing) as Controlled by Visual Perception.
A. Ye. Kucherov, G. M. Zenkin and A. P. Petrov ............................. 86

74
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
no. Acquiring and Processing Photometric Information in an Integrated Robot Sys-
tem. S. M. Sokolov ...................................................... 97
ll. Employing Step Methods to Automate Surface Measurement and Analysis Using
Surface-Applied Devices. V. P. Mel'nikov ................................ 111

Chapter 3. Biological Models

12. The Mathematical Model of a Psychomotor Event. 6. V. Korenev ............ 126
13. Modeling the Human Visual System. D. G. Lebedev ......................... I38
14. The Dynamics of the Human Visual Apparatus. Ye. V. Aleksandrovich ....... 147

IS. A Model of the Color Analyzer of a Robot Constructed of Neuroid Components.
Ye. N. Sokolov. Ch. A. lzmaylov and M. M. Zimschev ....................... 156

Foreword

The development of various types of robots in the USSR and other countries is proceeding
on an ever-increasing scale. The results of these efforts are of great importance. evi-
dence of which is the CPSU Central Committee decree. "Measures to Increase Production and

Expand the Employment of Manipulators in Branches of the National Economy in Light of
Direction from the 25th CPSU Congress."

This is a period in which we are laying the theoretical foundations of robotics. It is
therefore very important to study practical experience acquired in solving concrete
problems in the theory and practice of robot construction and to compare various ap-

proaches. The seminar in problems in the science of robotics meeting at Moscow State'
University under the direction of D. Ye. Okhtsimskiy, corresponding member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. is of great assistance in this regard. The subject matter of the
seminar encompasses problems in the development of walking. wheeled. submarine and ma-
nipulator robots and devices. the study of robot mechanics and motion control. the con-
struction of "artificial—vision” information systems, the theory and execution of algo-
rithms with elements of artificial intelligence and knowledge—storage systems and points
in biology and physiology of interest for work in robotics.

The present collection has been compiled on the basis of papers presented in this semi-
nar. They deal with three areas of urgently important scientific research. The first
chapter contains discussions of problems in the mechanics and motion control of walking
robots and transport systems. The second chapter presents the results of construction

of robot sensor information and program systems. It sets forth a method of presenting
a data structure with associative access and a system employing machine plotting to
model spatial robot motion. It discusses the construction of a model of a photometric
matrix system of artificial vision. algorithms for processing photometric information

and step-type surface—applied information systems permitting automation of the measure-
ment and processing of large pieces under modern production conditions. The third

chapter consists of papers on biological models. One of them deals with a model of
the psychomotor event. Three papers discuss the modeling of human vision. Considera-
tion is given a model of the motor apparatus responsible for eye movement and retinal
image drift. A model of a neuroid-component robot color analyzer is proposed.

1. An Algorithm for Programming Footholds for an Automatic walking Machine

D. Ye. Okhotsimskiy. A. K. Platonov. Ye. l. Kugushev and V. S. Yaroshevskiy
(Institute of Applied Mathematics imeni M. V. Keldysh. USSR Academy of Sciences.
Moscow)

Annotation. This work discusses algorithms for controlling the motion of an automatic
six—legged walking machine over broken terrain.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction. The six-legged walking machine consists of the following subsystems:

- the walking drive mechanism - a rectangular platform with six legs driven by 18
motors; see Figures 1. 2;

- a distance-measuring scanning and information system - a scanner designed to collect
information on terrain to be negotiated;

- a computerized digital control system;

- an operator control panel. This is used to activate. stop and control the walking
machine.

if we look at this system as a whole we can identify four interacting processes:

- the collection of information about the environment. primarily about the contour of
the supporting surface along the path of motion;

— plotting the motion of the walking machine;

- execution (tracking) of the movement and monitoring the state of machine systems and
- reaction to operator instructions.

This work discusses the process of plotting walking machine motion at the level of
selecting surface footholds (support points) for the legs of the machine. For greater
structural clarity let us describe all the basic processes occurring and interacting
with the plotting of this motion:

— selection of path of movement,

- plotting the movement of the body of the machine.

— selection of the gait.

- plotting surface footholds and

- plotting leg trajectories between footholds.

Basic concepts. The machine's path of motion is defined by a curve in a three-dimen-
sional space parametrized with respect to a parameter 5 . The horizontal coordinates
of the body center of mass and angle of yaw constitute the components of this space.
Parametrization is such that when parameter}? changes by a certain value 6 the hori-
zontal coordinates of the body center of mass vary by no more than 5 .

 

as
Figure l ., Figure 2
direction Kinematic diagram of leg
of motion
76

FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Machine movement is not plotted with respect to real time t . but rather to path
parameter 5' . Machine movement is thus treated as a continuous, sequential change

in geometry unrelated to actual rate of motion. By selecting a f 9,! correspondence
in accordance with actual conditions we can predict real-time movement for a movement-

rate variable on the basis of a geometrical prediction of movement without additional
conversions .

The state of the legs of the machine is characterized at any given time by the set of
supporting legs, that is. those legs upon which it is then resting. Let us introduce
the six—dimensional vector t: (9‘, ’1, m, 1‘) 2‘:1 if a leg is a supporting leg.
otherwise :1. 0 He will hereafter refer to this vector as the vector of state or
simply as the state of the machine.

we will define the gait of the machine as any sequence of states [3,}, I" 1,3; "'I
that is. as a sequence of changes in supporting lags. It can easi y be selected during

movement or locked in upon activation of the system as a whole.

Foothold [0“: (6,36,3/Zg) of legt is the area on the supporting surface where legi
will be placed during movement. The dimensions of this area should be of the order of
those of the foot taking functional error into account. The foothold is determined by
its center/3' and the radius of the surrounding area 3'.

Each foothold is assigned an existence time 562‘):[6';, 3;]. This is the time 3 during
which the machine may rest in the course of its programmed movement with leg 1 at this
particular point. During this period of time leg 1, . resting at point [’4' . should pull
up to the latter. that is. come to a point within its kinematic and geometric limits; it
should not engage any of the machine's other legs nor rest upon the surface with any-
thing but its foot.

The convex hull of the projections of supporting-leg footholds upon a horizontal plane
is referred to as the support pattern. Walking-machine motion is plotted such that at
any given time it satisfies the condition for static stability with margin 670“],
that is. such that the area around the projection of the center of machine mass upon a
horizontal plane £ lies within the support pattern.

Footholds ’4'" for supporting legs together with their existence timesE/I’I/ are plotted
for each state 1,, the turbine passes through during its movement. Then we calculate
the existence time of state . -€(1,) . This is the maximum period 45' of time £6"):
s [52, 5:] within which ootholds occur for all supporting legs

Ruler?“ 50?)

and machine motion is statically stable.

If we let [555,1 represent the period of time ,5' during which the support points of
state},, provide static motion stability. then

‘3 ' :21} ""- "1 . s: - 2531:: 5,1
II.-

Preservntion of static Stability throughout the entire period of motion requires that
the following state $n+1 begin its existence before that of the preceding state 1,.
cores to an end, that is, satisfaction of the engaged condition

man no") :2 s”

or, more accurately. the inequality

obi

5-3) 5: (l)

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where J30 - period of simultaneous existence of two consecutive states. This peri-
ud should a gradual transition from state in to state hoi- This requires that the
load be shifted onto new supporting legs. which gradually take on the weight of the
machine. while the lei-,5 moving into the transfer phase should be relieved.

in the process of plotting machine movement. each new state 2"; is plotted so as to
satisfy inequality (1). It also requires that the total period of existence of state

2,,“ be no less than
' p01 a“ s
5: ' SI 3

.Stsbility of motion. In plotting walking-machine motion we encounter the prob-
lem of calculating the static stability of the apparatus for particular supporting-leg
footholds with margin 570 at a given point in time 5‘.

it follows from the calculation of static stability that this problem reduces itself
to the following: on a two-dimensional plane let there be given a circle 0 of radius
570 and a finite set of points [/7 . We met determine whether 0 falls within con-

vex hull If,

The algorithms solving this problem are written on the basis of the statement which we
will now write.

Let my [F represent L'Ih' convex hull of set /P and 5 the boundary of circle Q

Let x - a point on the plane not lying within Q . From this point we may draw two
tangents to 3' (see Figure 3). Let 00' represent the arc of circumference lying be-
tween these tangents. He will assume hat ifx‘s' .ng ; if)rc 0“ . pﬁ)=¢,
empty set.

0; can't) as U DIP) = 5
Statement. up

That is. circle 0 lies within the convex hull of set /P when and only when the arcs
9(f) from all points I of set /P encompass the entire circumference 3.

The truth of this statement follows directly from the theorem of the mutual location
of convex hulls. which is proved below.

The stability check algorithm sequentially constructs arcs D(f‘°) for all projections
’1' of foothﬁlﬁs onto the horizontal plane. If as it being constructed arc p0;-
intersects ar ‘idche two combine into a single arc. The process of checking stabi ity
is complete when either the arcs constructed encompass the entire circumference or

there are no more l'ootholds.

To reduce the calculation required. the coordinates of the ends of the arcs 00‘) are
measured in nonlinear angular units. Let us explain this in greater detail. Let us
locate the origin of the system of Cartesian coordinates 0X1Xz in the center 0 of
circle 0 . Now let the projection of a foothold have coordinates P1 P1, (see Fig-
ure 4). Arc pm) lies between points A and 8. Point A lies on segment Oﬁ’ with

coord inn tes

'la" 8 all. 9%!
”Quad-Pi! (2)

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcut usc_or_utv
I
Point 8 lies on seguent 05 with coordinates

3"=r,a. -P,l
8;:3uti‘a‘

(3)
Here a and I are calculated in accordance with
formlas
a. - J'— g . L' .1...£}_'§_:

P? 'P: ‘ r} of)"

Pormlas (2, 3) describe the rotation of vector 01’ to

angles POA and P03 with a stretch factor ofI((/,’+f:).
Let us observe that vectors 0A and OB have a nit norm.

After computing the coordinates of points A and B we

coapute nonlinear angles ‘6' and 5"! . If 2; “('2‘)-
the unit vector on the plane. the nonlinear angle

corresponding to it will be calculated according to the
formula

V; = z"ZI?’2:< o, :90

If we letd represent the angle between vectorO} and
axis ox (see Figure 5), the change in (/(‘Q will be
as shown in Figure 6.

The value of 'fﬁ‘) is computed according to the following
formulas:

sax. w/mr o<cc< ”/1.
(pﬁc) = 1—69»: with: 7%.‘4 < 7,
2’5"“: wire): 7/“ < %7
34‘ 6050‘ WA!!! %”‘¢< 21f
Let us now prove the theorem upon which is based the algorithm for determining the

static stability of walking-machine motion. Because of the great siwlicity of the
proof it will be shown for the general case.

Let us first introduce some designations and definitions.

LetIR” - Euclidean n-dimensionsl space and P a set within it. CO’WI’O will
represent convex hull IP :rﬂr) will designate the frontier of set I9 and Iﬁly its

interior. If X,9¢/ﬁ" , [’99] will represent the segment connecting X and j .
¢ will represent an empty set.

Let 0 be a set in If" . Linear functional 66!) will be referred to as a support
functional with respect to Q at point’GQ if

q. q «2 f, m r f. cu

if a support functional exists. then $6 rfo) . We will refer to point 15 Q as
an ordinary point if a support functional exists at that point and is unique.

Lot QC/F" be a given closed set. For any point Xi IR" let us calculate the set
om - {s “WU/H.110 Im:-¢}

This is a set of points r6!) such that segment [19"] has no other points of inter-
section with Q except po nts ['(Q),

Theorem. Let Q be a convex compact set in IR" . each point fﬂ) an ordinary
point and [P a compact set in/K" ; then

acronvfw U DIP)-l'/l?)
reP

Proof. 1. Let O‘CM‘I/P . Let us assume that the theorem is false. Then

run, e U 00°)
'3" 9. MP

Let f be a support functional with respect to set Q at point} ; then no. my. and

and equality is achieved only at the boundary points. Let us prove that
war, {(1') < HG)

Let us assume the opposite. that is, that aﬂp such that f@))j($) ; but then
041/] IfQ} =¢ ; hence¢epﬁa . which is not satisfied in accordance with the

hypothesis. Hencefff)<f(¢) VPE /P ; but since IP is compact.f(p)¢f@), Vf‘CMVIP
hence $é (aw/P . We have thus arrived at a contradiction.

2. Let V “"""‘o’. Let us assume that the theorem is false. that is, Ja-rthv 0W";

to -‘

According to the ﬂan-Banach theorem. there exists a linear functional} and at such
that

5:») >4 >!(I>), Vpe com/II"

(10)

Let 2* be the point of maximumf on Q.

“1'! - max fir)
9"!)

then 1. qﬁe [10)
2. ¢’¢ my /P
3. fin a support functional with respect to Q at point t}.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We prove that 1'3ng DO’) and arrive thereby at a contradiction. Let us now assume
the opposite case. that afar such that [ﬁfty/II (Oh-Q . According to the Han-
Bnnuch theorem. there exists a function 1 h dividing [glptj and Q . that is.
.1 Hum: functional such thath 6H,”) and v’g'elm,hu)$hu') . but A is a on port
functional to Q at point 1’ ; hence. by virtue of the simplicity of points [Yolhﬂ
but then from (A)}@')>e>[(f*) , which cannot be.

Thus. 2*eplégﬂ’) . which completes the proof of the theorem.

Plotting the footholds. For the sake of simplicity in notation. let us disregard the
index n in designating current and subsequent states; and we will asstme that before
beginning to plot g. new sequence of footholds we know the current initial stateﬁo .
its existence time [S?,53 J and the corresponding footholds with their existence
times. We also know the two subsequent machine states 1, and 930

Before we begin to compute the footholds for state 21 we calculate $1 . where 5
represents the moment at which the machine should move into state 1,. If the transition
from iv, to 9, is accomplished only with the raising of certain legs, thenS is calcu-
lated as the minimum time 8 during which the supporting legs of state 71 provide
state motion stability with margin £>0 and which satisfies the condition ghsﬁs.
llere J> 0 represents the value of the time of the simultaneous existence of states

$0 and 21, . which is required for redistribution of forces in the supporting legs
during, the transition from ,0 to $1-

lf during the transition from state 10 to; some legs pass from the transfer phase
into the support phase. then we calculate ; in accordance with one of the following
three formulas:

55'5;‘S (5)
S: =1($:9$:)-S (6)
sZ=§s3+§r:—S (7)

If during state 11 only the rear legs (t. - 3. 4) pass into the support phase. we
employ formula (5); if the middle legs (5, - 2. 5) pass into the support phase as well
we employ formula (6); but if even one of the front legs ( t - l, 6) enters the sup-
port phase. we calculates; in accordance with formula (7). This rule is heuristic.
It has been adopted because relationships (5-7) are satisfied with a "galloping" mo-
tion. which has provad most suitable in negOtiating cylindrical obstacles [2].

Let us now that from formulas (5-7) and from the fact that the existence segment of
state 10 is at least! in length it follows that

s:¢s}rs:-8

The set of points on the supporting surface on which leg L may rest at moment 5
represents the total foothold areapgﬁ) of leg! [3]. For point P to lie withinﬂ‘é)
it is necessary and sufficient that certain conditions be satisfied:

I. point P must already have been measured. that is. that the height of the supporting
surface at this point be known;

2. point P must be able to be used as a supporting surface. that is. the slope of the
supporting surface at this point is sufficiently small;

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. the foot of leg I. may be placed at point f at moment 5 within the limits of the
kinematic and geometric constraints upon the degree of freedom of this root;

4. if the foot of leg (' is placed at point/ at moment 5, leg i will not touch or
intersecr any other points on the supporting surface except point 6

S. if the foot of leg) is placed at pointf at moment 5 leg t. will not touch or
intersect the supporting legs of state Q, , for which footholds have already been com-
puted and spatial positions fixed.

If [fry-{2,53} is the existence segment of foothold f of leg I. . then

Pm n P; U)
“Pm

Let L represent the set of numbers of legs for which it is necessary to comute
footholds in state 11

L'{‘/ $£'°. 95-1, t'a1.:,...,s}

Let us designate these points ﬁlié'b . At the initial moments; of the existence
of state 1, footholds P; must already exist; therefore

P: ‘P;(S:2,, [9.1.

The a1 orithm employed to locate footholda & selects these points in footholds areas

/f'}(5} . The fewer the points in these areas. the more rapidly the algorithm can accou-
plish its task. In accelerate the calculations involved a special algorithm is employed

to form the family of sets Z;

lfcefcmcz‘et’ud) i'él.

Stathl footholds are sought first in sets Izﬂleb ; if the search is unsuccessful
the foothold-search algorithm looks for them in sets 22,4216 etc. In the last step
of the calculation footholds are sought in the full foothold regions

1.7.114”), is].

This organization of foothold location makes possible a substantial increase in the

speed of calculation in the case of movement over an unbroken surface and does not
limit the possibility of searching for footholds during movement over irregular terrain.

I
lie will refer to regionsZi k: Ill/'- , as partial footholds regions.

The footholds of state 71 should be selected so as to~permit the transition to state
12 . Let us now introduce into our discussion state, ; it is a product of state 71
if during this state the legs are brought into the transfer phase which were to be

found in the transfer phase in state 7‘ . that is,

if: {1 can: ﬁatugjel

(-1.1. .6 0 -“"" ’2'0 .1... vj-u
State 11, is to be distinguished from i by the fact th-I: there may be more supporting
legs int; than in 1 . Therefore, if state; provides dynamic stability at a given
moment. state ’1 will also provide dynamic stability with the same footholds. Hence,

if we select the footholds of steteq.’ so as to permit the transition from 2, to g .

then the selection of any state 71, footholds will permit the transition fromit to 1‘
within the limits of static stability.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
State 71 footholds are calculateu such that at moments; state E provides static
stability with domain Ev; . This condition is sufficient to insure that the existence
times of states 9, and ‘32 intersect within an interval no shorter than engagement
time: . He may refer to it as the condition of second-order engagement.

There are no new footholtls in state i as compared with state ’1 . Let us term the
constant pattern C the set of those footholds Ci of stateg" which passed from

state’, to state}. , that is, the set of footholds of those legs which have
20 5 21 ' 22’ " 1

We select. the unknown footholds F; of state 71 so as together with constant pattern¢
to insure static stability of motion with domain 8%: at no nt 5" . If one constant
pattern C provides static motion stability with domain 6.4-? at'monents'f , the

condition for stability is fulfilled for any set of points {5’} and is therefore
generally not checked.

Let us look now at the algorithm for computing the footholds of state 1, . For
simplicity's snke let us assume that we are calculating footholds6.{,...,4 of
legs I,2,-.-, C, These points appear in the partial foothold regionszgl is 42,-“;9'
For the sake of brevity let us omit the upper index of the designationtf.5"is the
initialpmoment of existence of state 2, and hence the initial moment of existence of
points g.

For any moments let us term the truncated foothold region of leg I‘— set Wgﬂs)

win). 2‘. ”(249,,” 13(2))

where Via) is the total foothold area of leg i at moment 2 . Set W.{s) consists
of those points of partial foothold areali, at which the machine may rest with leg!
during movement along its path within the limits of segment [59,5].

Let $=/5,’5':...,S') be the vector comprised of moments of time 5 . Let us now intro-
duce the set of variable patterns 11(5)

Urszst. .,s‘)=w.(s')xw,(s'n...xw. (4')

This set consists of the sets (8, 4,, ...,f¢) of points lying within sets “((6‘) . If we
take this set to represent our desired footholds. the existence time of point R: will
be no less than the sementD'I,S"J. According to what we said earlier, however, in
order for the set of points(h,}{ wife) to represent the footholds of state 11 , these
points. together with constant l/attern t , lust give 5+3 . the stability of. state,

at mutant 5? . Let us designate the set of sets (gig/"'1 P.) satisfying this condi-

tion V(5/,52)...5e)

and now let us refer to it as the set of pernissible patterns. As follows from our

definition V (5‘) _C_. U{$)

Any scum/3, _,r,)¢=v:s'.s‘, .-,€‘) may taken for the footholds of state 71 , and they
may exist in segments no less thanfsl’s‘J. while state 21 will itself exist in a seg-
ment no less thanfS'ZIS; ‘3] .

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If set Vtsgoi 15.5,. ._ 35.5) is not empty, that is,
V(£'¢+d’, 12%;. ..1 $35316 4’
the problem of selecting footholds for state 11. has a solution and vice versa.

For footholds for state 23 to be selected in setsli it is necessary that wast... Shep
we verify this condition before computing the footholds.

In space 3=é:$,'...,5') let us introducery . This is the set of those points: at

which the set of permissible patterns V(3) disappears with an accuracy 3’70 . The
points of this set are determined by two conditions. 8e [3) when and only when

1. V6!) is not empty and . “v. ‘. ~
2. if 3 is a point such that for a given 4 - l.2,....e $‘>5*V thenV(‘) is
V

“"9" (5): p).

The algorithm for calculating footholds organizes within space 3 the search for that
pointy at which we achieve (albeit locally)

. 3
max mt" 5‘
1e r9 (-1.1...1

we carry on our search by iterating with respect to 3 until the iterative step be-
comes smaller than y.

The value 9’0 is selected so as to be comensurate with the dimensions of the machine
foot and is specified upon activation of the entire control system.

I a!
After finding valueX“ , we select from set V(5‘) any setM/g,m,/’¢) and
set about locating our desired footholds. These points are characterized by the fact

that, with an accuracy to 1/ , the segment of their simltaneous existence is their
maximum.

Those points Fiﬁ-int)“. j, for which

S'i'w S'i‘uu «ISM-”s Ma.” S".

(name

are regarded as computed and entered in the constant pattern t while for the re-
maining points we resume the iterative process of searching for a new value for I .
These operations are repeated until all footholds are computed.

Conclusion. I. The algorithms we have described have been modeled on the display sys-
tem of the 1PM AN SSSR [Institute of Applied Mathematics of the USSR Academy of Sciences]

and employed in the control system of a mockup of a six-leg walking machine connected to
a computer; they proved effective on both broken and unbroken terrain.

2. The proposed method of determining stability is simple enough to be realized by
general-purpose computer.

3. The method of searching for a quasi-optimum solution within a family of expanding
subsets is an effective way to reduce excesses and accelerate the plotting process.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Okhotsimskiy. D.Ye.. Platonov. A. K.. Borovin, c. K. and Karpov, I. 1., "Modeliro—

vaniye na BVM dvizheniya shsgayushchego apparata" [Computer Modeling Walking Ma-
chine Motion], 12V. AN SSSR, TR. 1972. No 3.

2. Okhotsimskiy. D. Ye.. Platonov, A. K., Kugushev, Ye. I. and Yaroshevskiy. V. 5.,
"Sistema postroyeniya dvizheniya shsgayushchego apparsts. Model' T2" [A Method
of Plotting Halking Machine Motion. Model T2]. 1PM AN SSSR Preprint, Moscow,
1977. No 7.

3. Kugushev. Ye. I. and Yaroshevskiy. V. 5.. "A Study of Methods of Organizing
Walking Machine Locomotion" in the collection "Biomekhaniks" [Biomechanics].
Riga, 1975.

2. The Impact Problem for Certain Three-Member Mechanisms

Ye. M. Rubanovich and A. M. Formal'skiy (Institute of Mechanics of Moscow State Uni-
versity. Moscow)

Annotation. This work is a study of the impact-accompanied double-support phase of
biped mechanisms. It examines mechanisms consisting of three members-ma trunk and
two single-segment legs.

Introduction. Under study here are two plane three-member mechanisms. All three mem-
bers are joined together by their ends at a single point. Two members of one of the
mechanisms are joined together rigidly. the third then articulated with them. All
three members of the other mechanism are articulated with one another. The end of one
member is in contact with an impenetrable surface. that is, s nonbilaterel (unilateral)
constraint has been imposed upon the system. At a given moment of time the end of
another member comes into contact with the surface with an absolutely inelastic impact.

This imposes still another constraint upon the system. We are therefore studying the
problem of whether or not the system frees itself after impact from the constraint
existing before inpact.

Results obtained in the present work may be of interest in connection with problems
in biped locomotion [1-5]. They may also be of interest from the point of view of
purely theoretical mechanics.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

301110, or more accurately. on line AX (Figure 1). At moment {‘Olet end D of leg 00
touch this line (Figure 2). Let us direct axisA)’ of the coordinate system my
vertically upward; we will not specify the position of the origin A of the coordinate
system. Let us assume that contact occurs at a nonzero velocity. The moment of con-

tact then produces an impact. Let this impact be absolutely inelastic, that is, the
velocity of point 19 returns to zero after impact

i‘(oo)sg‘(;0)'0 (irxo-‘(h'vs’ (1,1)

After impact. point 6 any either remain on the surface
or leave it. since the constraint imposed upon pointB
is a nonhilateral (unilateral) constraint. Let us now
formulate the following problem. Find the conditions
under which point ﬂ remains on the surface (in con-

straint) as well as those under which it rises from the
surface.

 

Setting up the impact equations requires consideration
of the movement of the free (in the absence of any con-
Figure 2 straints) system. Let us take as generalized coordinate:

for this system the Cartesian coordinates 235/ of pointd
the angle '( by which rod oc deviates from the vertical and the angle of vertical devi-
ation of the bisector of angle 800 (Figure 3). Angles l! and V are measured counter-
clockwise. The expression for the kinetic energyrr of the system may be written in
the form [6).

’T‘~ "M m
in, ‘1 ' (1.2)
llere e.'|3",jv""*l (the asterisk indicates transposition). The matrixﬁé) for our
system takes the form
mloZvn. 0 mtmeow ~hgesv
o m‘ozm MWMV ~fm‘QJI-n?
Ag“: mimaoﬁ’ atlas-14in? inn? 0 (1 3
-fm‘gm’f -fm‘(‘§n~f O junk“:

The elementary action [W of the forces ﬁﬁpkgy) “dftfkax,’ezv) applied to

points D and [5 respectively is equal to

M: (hwzuwx +("s*“*ﬁ8‘d“f‘u°°“"“)* (1.1.)

* Rgc3501v(‘*‘°‘)+ an: ml"'¢)+ 2;, bill. (Wail 8‘?
86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Support (constraint) reactions f1 and ﬂ; applied to

I
Y 1 the system at the moment of impact (tea) are pulse
m effects. Therefore
00.,” _.,
. n nix-sue), tug-Eqm. Ian-Esau. Ira-Egan “'5’
: where Jﬂ) is a delta function and En. . £13 . 52:. E.‘ the
. intensity of the reaction forces. At the moment of impact
8 no other pulse effects act upon the three-vmenber mechanism
_-_._ -.- ..._..._-_ in addition to K1 and f; .
A i
Employing relationships (l.3)-(l.5) we can easily derive
Figure 3 [7] impact equations (Yzo)
(mﬂmﬂilomccostJ-fnuhomvw-£1“sz (1.6)
(mpZm) [‘3] ‘fmi £1 uhvth‘Igg"-£; (1.7)
mum!Li1*jmlwlrmuqnwaadﬁ -£ pine:
" ‘9 (1.8)
wxvtil+§nV[91-f~t‘[¢1i0—
(1.9)
Here
LU - stem-1w) =-c Mam. "\
lg]-(1100)-gl-u)--£(¢(—ul+v"(oo))sin¢,
Iv-Iw‘mx-ww. ms ¢(.o)-¢(-o). (1.10)

By substituting the value for the sudden change in speed I? ] found from equation (1.9)
in equations (1.6) and (1.7) and then the sum of Euifgz found from equation (1.6)
in equation in equation (1.8) we obtain relationships (1.7) and (1.8) in this form (we
have omitted intermediate calculations)

a1 (W‘d- w-(m o a, (¢(-01+<i‘(+0)) ' E1, 4* Ea:

. (1.11)
«mun-hut“ "u(‘i'(-U)*"'("‘“'5‘9'513 (1 12)
where m = '1-mJ q" .m-cmut
u,.-lm,(=}sin-'v-L)-2m]£md (1.13)
"s "v.3. li'MC ‘ m‘[(1-=,}cq‘?)cos’d]
If point p touches the surface at a nonzero speed, then
‘(’(-U)< 0 (1'1“)

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us assume that after inpact point 6 renains in place. In this case Y00)=O
and from equations (1.11) and (1.12) we obtain

[‘11: Ii (“ﬂux '0514'1-0) (1.15)

[:1 a it! (at ‘ Us) “('01 (1.16)

if point 43 leaves the surface after impact, then

+(oo)<o, En-Ea-o (1.17)
In this case from equations (1.11) and (1.12) we obtain
z(a‘+oa - _
E...» Ir‘—".+o.-a‘,)' w o) (1.18)
. a on 1.19
wean- m w» ( >

The constraints imposed upon the system at points ‘3 and JD are assumed to be uni-

lateral constraints; the solution for system (1.6)-(1.9) must therefore satisfy the
conditions

E,,zo (1.20) ,Eqao (1.2x) ‘P(+O)so (1.2:)

By employing the expressions in (1.13) it will not be difficult to establish that for
all values of m. . m . C . V . oi (the value {1 is not a component of coef-
ficients (1.13)) there occur the inequalities

«1,-2.1. -a,<o, 20.4a,-a,<0,
01mm, <0

Therefore. as follows from expressions (1.15) and (1.18). under the conditions of (“14)

the inequalitv (1.20) is satisfied regardless of whether leg 00 remains on the surface
or leaves it.

It follows fron expressions (1.16) and (1.19) that when

agar/0 (1 23)

the first inequality (1.|7) is satisfied and so. accordingly, is inequality (1.22);
inequality (1.21) does not occur in this instance. Otherwise. inequality (1.21) is
satisfied but not inequality (1.22).

If we take into account the designations in (1.13), condition (1.23) takes the form

t. 1‘5 ' “I‘
3 5““ “9—) 01-53%)

9",“ ‘ ' 56,7711 (1.24)

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From what we have said above we can draw the following conclusion: in case (1.21.)

leg 05 rises from the surface; otherwise it remains on the surface. This conclusion
does not depend upon the absolute value 'of the angular velocity‘l’f-o) of the two-mem-
ber system 600 , the angular velocity {(-0 of the trunk 0C or upon the lengths of

the legs ( or the trunk (1. in case (1.24 leg 06 therefore leaves the surface at
any velocity (re ardless of how low) with which leg 0,0 approaches the surface. Other—

wise. segment 0 remains on the surface at any velocity of approach. These conclusions,
incidentally. are in no way connected with the field of gravitational forces.

After computing the value )Vﬁo)employing formulas (1.9) and (1.10) we can compute the
jump [? l in trunk velocity and, thus. the velocity ?(ro)of the trunk after impact.

The rectangle in Figure 4
Outer, cm“!- (1.25)

has been divided into two parts. At values of parameters Y and at belonging to the
lower part, leg 0‘ rebounds from the surface. The boundary of these regions is shown
at u - 0. l and lo. Rectangle

‘h’c‘f‘Z‘I, Oust} (1.26)

is divided into the same two parts.

When ”11: O (u - 0: no trunk) inequality (1.26) takes the form sin2 a < .17. Let us note

that this inequality is derived from (1.24) in the case sin 9: if . In this case, the
behavior of point 6 after impact does not depend upon)! . The curves in Figure la cor-
responding to the various values of ,4 intersect precisely at '(uazcmﬁ’ melt-17341;”)?

2. Three-Member Hechanism with Articu-
lated members. Let us look now at a
three-member mechanism differing from
that studied in the previous section
only in the fact that all three rods
are joined at point 0 by means of a
plane articulation. He will formulate
our problem as we did in Part 1. Also
as before we will assume the impact of

leg OD on the surface to be absolutely
‘ inelastic (see inequality (1.1)).

“the three-member mechanism now under
. ’ consideration has one more degree of
0"5’ freedom than that we were studying in
Part 1. This type of three-member
mechanism has been studied, for example,
in [5]; this work. however. does not
treat the impact phenomenon.

 

Flgurc 4

Setting up our impact equations requires consideration of the free mechanism with five
degrees of freedom. As generalized coordinates we may select, for example, the Cartesian
coordinates of the articulation O and the angles the members form with the vertical.
From the point of view of analysis of the impact equations. however. we will find more

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conVenient the for. they take when as generalized coordinates the Cartesian coordinates

11,71 of end D of the front leg sadly}; of end [3 of the rear leg as well as
the angle 4 the trunk forms with the vertical (we need not be disturbed here by the
fact that to the given values ofxg,’1,11 , 1, correspond two positions of the
two-member system BOD). The fact is that at the moment of impact no forces (pulses)
are acting upon the three-member mechanism except the forces of reaction applied to
the ends of the legs. The horizontal and vertical components constituting these forces
0.5) are precisely the generalized forces corresponding to coordinates Inshzhgl.

The expression for the kinetic energy of the three-umber mechanism is written in the
form of (1.2), where «“-]i.,g.,i,.9,.vl . The elements of aynetrical(l?s¢";l,ELM»?
e son“

positive definite matrix [1(3) take the form (we have omitted the cumb c mputa-
tions required to calculate these elements)

5m .2m, lvkas‘d) m «om.
an" LTT‘coT'T— “a" m
a“: InoBlmnmdMZa a" , mqom cf? 2‘
1‘59};
naveemw awn-3'" 'zr'w ‘*

a” __ "160m c123 2d a,“ m-MmglLQ; 2g

0:5 ' ﬁa— coMW-t) a”: 3’" *f'gigwl‘

amzﬂ’ﬁ; ‘15"‘nb%§";°“"'°0

a“ = _5m‘ oizmﬁtilin’d) a“ ._ $ﬁ-M (V—d)
as; = 23.6.

These expressions have been written for that configuration of the three-member mechanism
in uhich members 08 and OD. deviating from the vertical in different directions. form

one and the same angled with it.

The equations of impact take the following form [7]

.ideIQthu éaiijikE,”

J"
5 e s I
E0531151‘E,; Jz‘au-qu-lt-E,’ (2,1)

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

gag [9‘1'0 (2.2)
Here [Qil'éi‘m'éjw’ (j'1v'-'5). By substituting the jump in velocity [cf ] faund
from equation (2.2) in equations (2.1) we obtain equations of impact in the form
6 ii] . E (2.3)
Here
I - \
_ 2,| E. I _ ii Eu.
2-- - E- - 2a= . a= «4.2)
E1 | a; a,

He can easily see that matrix G (414) is symmetrical and positive definite (a similar

situation prevails in the case of s biped mechanism with an arbitrary number of members).
The elements (M (Lt-J) of matrix C take the form

_ 5m 1035:}:‘(Vod3h8o1-(ioﬂld)
c,“ " cos d

.’."L(l‘.5. £33000!” ¢ ’lm
l.

'?\€-'_ _

‘Jn'm

\ : 3n). (SwsZu-écgzvhérzuyscoszan)
96(cs’d

q,

194L610: 2d - Swizv) + Smcos 2d

‘1'" ' 16 Sm. 2st

m L15 a 2L,§_._«i,\+x_m.cv.sgn_la

" l Sm‘m

= nu (5:23" -5Co$2d)-8mw$Z-\'

""5 I6$uL 2n:

, 32* (51.93.23-5 sw‘_L8m mega
‘.|:'- A 33%???

¢ -. "'tuLILisi'Aii‘Esl‘: 8m.(£.‘_514‘9!)_
_'5.\ 1411mm

. . sin} waﬂﬂlm
93" Isa» z_¢
géWJQQJTW m 1+ ' la
3‘" l! M‘s.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us note that these expressions contain member masses 1’2, audio? but not member
lengths .

Section I is a study of a three-member mechanism with rigidly fixed members. For this
three-member mechanism

it"o):o‘ (2.4)

For the three-member mechanism with articulated members. of course. equality (2.4) may
not occur. He will now pursue our investigation. however. under the conditions of (2.4)
As in Section 1. we will be assuming that point D touches the surface at a nonzero
velocity. that is.

' o
3‘“) < (2.5)

in accordance with the statement of our problem
'z;(-0)=o, immeo

If after impact point 8 remains in place. then Adm-o . In this case we obtain
from equations (2.3)

Ens a 'ﬂn‘iif'o)
(2.6)
E” ' ‘34:: $00) (2.7)

If after impact point B leaves the surface. then Ez-IO . Prom equations (2.3) we obtain
in this instance

 

E .- 1, 9:: ‘Ju 91v

‘a Jew“ in S» in
an 3» 3w (2.8)
9wo>=2.1%:Jsuaa-eusuwﬁ’) (2.9)

here

in 3m
611.: "9” g“

 

 

insofar as G>0 Providing (2.5). the values (2.6) and (2.8) are positive. that is.
they satisfy condition (1.20).

Value (2.9) is nonncgative when thao . that is, when

(2.10)
/1ws 2v; {manpower -g

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rectangle (1.25) in Figure 5 is divided by curves (2.10) and (2.11), no longer into
two parts as in the case of Lhe three-member mechanism with two fixed members (see
Figure 4), but into four. The boundaries of these regions are shown when ’usfo.
Rectangle (1.26) is divided into the same four regions. In region I

Eq‘O , gz(oo))o (2.12)
and. accordingly. after impact by leg 00 point B rises from the surface.

In region II there occurs the
inequality

Egg ‘ 0, 9,190) < o (2.13)

In this instance, point B can
neither rise from the surface not
remain upon it without moving (be-
cause the constraint is nonbilat-
eral). The slipping of point B
along the surface remains the only
possibility. we can compute the
rate of slippage by introducing
the law of friction with impact
Figure 5 [8] analogous to Coulomb's law.

 

In region III (Figure 5)
6:, >0. 9. («mo (W)

In this instance point 8 remains on the surface.

In region IV occurs the inequality
Eag70. 3z(«0)>o (2.15)

in this case we exclude neither the separation of point B from the surface nor the
preservation of its immobility. The problem of what occurs after impact can be solved
by introducing the law of impact friction or by studying the interaction of leg 08
with the surface with examination in great detail of the "microstructure" of the sur-

face at its point of contact with leg on.

Thus, if for the three-member mechanism dealt with in section 1 only cases (2.12) and
2.14) can occur, for the three-member mechanism examined in this section cases (2.13)

and (2.15) can occur as well.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The qualitative nature of the_regions in Figure 5 remains unchanged with changes in 13‘
Let us note that when surf: '31- inequality (2.10) takes the form sinus-$- . that is,

it does not depend upon ,I . A similar situation occurs for the three-member mechanism
in Section 1 as well.

Conclusion. This article has thus investigated the impact problem for two three-member
mechanisms: one with fixed and one with articulated legs (rods). The problem was fully
solved for the first mechanism; we can progress toward solution of the problem for the
second mechanism by introducing the law of friction with impact interaction or by de-
tailed examination of the structure of the support surface. It should be pointed out

that. with small leg aperture angles (small angles a), the supporting leg of both
mechanisms always rebOunds from the surface.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Velershteyn. R. A. and Pormal'skiy. A. M.. "The Locomotion of an Anthropomorphic

Mechanism (with Legs) with Pulse Effects. The Single-Support Phase. 1." 12V. AN
SSSR, Hrr, 1979, No 5.

2. Velershteyn, R. A. and Formal'skiy. A. M.. "The Locomotion of an Anthropomorphic
Mechanism (with Legs) with Pulse Effects. The Double-Support Phase. II." 12V.
AN SSSR. MTT. 1980. No l.

3. Beletskiy. V. V.. "The Dynamics of Biped Locomotion. I, II." IZV. AN SSSR. MTT.
1975. Nos 3, 6.

4. Latin, V. 8., "Upravleniye shagayushchimi apparatami" [Walking Machine Control].
Kiev, Naukova Dunks. l980.

S. Colliday. C. L. and Hemami, 8.. "An Approach to Analyzing Biped Locomotion Dynamics
and Designing Robor Locomotion Controls." IEEB TRANS. ON AUTOMAT. CONTROL, 1977,
vol 22, No 6.

6. Lur'ye. A. 1.. "Analiticheskaya mekhanika“ [Analytical Mechanics], Moscow. Filmst-
312, mm.

7. Appel', P. "Teoreticheskaya mekhanika“ [Theoretical Mechanics], Moscow. Piematgiz,
[960.

8. Panovko. Ya. 6.. "Vvedeniye v teoriyu mekhanicheskogo udara" [Introduction to the
Theory of Mechanical Impact]. Moscow, Nauka. 1977.

3. The Spatial Problem of Optimizing the Dynamics of Biped Locomotion over an Irregular
Surface

A. G. Orlov (Institute of Applied Mathematics imeni M. V. Keldysh of the USSR Academy
of Sciences. Moscow)

Annotation. This work is a study of the spatial problem of optimizing the dynamics of

biped locomotion during movement over an irregular surface at the level of a model de-

scribing the primary integral characteristics of the system. Biped locomotion is for-

malized as a complex, discrete-continuous process. The problem is solved with an algo-
rithm for improving complex gradient processes.

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction. At the stage of the mathematical modeling of biped locomotion processes,
which precedes the creation of biped walking machines, there arises the problem of se-
lecting specific modes of movement with the desired characteristics. These modes must
correspond to judicious requirements imposed by a possible machine, by its design, its

sources of energy etc. These would include. first of all, requirements for minimisa-

tion of energy expenditures and a smoothness of motion insuring reliable operation of
the spatial orientation system.

This selection is in many instances made on the basis of intuitive considerations or
of limited criteria within the framework of specific models of locomotion. Meanwhile,

however. important movement characteristics by and large frequently depend to only a
slight degree upon the specificity of the model.

The process of biped locomotion is fairly difficult to model mathematically. Its
unique characteristics would include the following [I]: the presence of a number of
support phases for each step. the dependence of solutions upon the continuity of the
path of movement and the discrete-continuous nature of the set of controlling forces-

support reactions. Relationships of this nature mean that movement in different time
segments will be described by different systems of differential equations with param-
eters varying discretely in time.

The present work presents a fairly general scheme and a solution of the problem of
optimizing the dynamics of biped locomotion at the level of basic integral character-

istics of the system: the position and velocity of the center of mass and the total
kinetic momentum of the machine indirectly taking into account the other components of

the system in the form of finite limitations. It is a study of the spatial problem of
the movement of a walking machine three steps forward. to include single- and double-

support phases. from a given initial position to a final position. The machine moves
over an irregular surface modeled with the use of a set of programs developed at the
Institute of Applied Mathematics imeni M. V. Keldysh of the USSR Academy of Sciences [2].
A sheaf of functionals reflecting the requirements for smoothness of motion, energy

and maintenance of the program for location of center of mass.

1. The problem formulated. Machine motion will be studied within a fixed right-handed

system of coordinates (Figure l) and occurs as a movement of the machine's center of

mass and a change in its total kinetic momentum under the effect of support reactions
produced on the given supporting surface.

He will assume here that there is no momentum in the foot
and that the points at which the support reactions are ap-
plied at each step are fixed.

The dynamics of this machine may be described by the fol-
lowing system of conventional differential vector equations:

 

d'tde'ev. ; MIdT-(R,9R,0P)/M; (i)
d L/dt'=('li-2,)XR, +(Z,-Z°)XR: .

Figure I

Here to is the radius vector of the center of mass of the system; '40 1‘ are the
radius vectors of the support points; Q‘,R. the support reactions; L total ki-
netic momentum and M the mass of the machine. {OJ/9,1: are treated as phase
variables; R..Q. as continuous controls and 2“}, as discrete controls.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reactions may be produced only in a region of possible supports, which is to be under-
stood as the intersection of the supporting surface with a sphere with its center at 2.

(the set of support points permitted by the design of the mechanism with the given
center of mass)

(imafzz flu-o} [Huh-1J4} . (2)

The set of possible reactions for each leg is determined by the location of the center
of mass and the support point.

Q<Z,,'(.,’l.)- {09 z" zgé ml); K(zhzl)r 29215 a", (3)
where Kuhn) is a given cone.

The center of mass of the system cannot be nearer than a certain minimum distance from
the supporting surface

”(ZOIQ) 30. (b)

We are given the Sets of initial and end conditions
(or. 1.(”.‘/.(9),L(0))"e P. , <5)

where ans; represent the beginning and end times of the process respectively.

As a criterion we take the sheaf of funciionals
a
I=I£diﬁgdf, (6)
9. in

where d; is the weight coefficient; A‘=R:+R;+(Rl-p)2+p.(l:)z, 9,.9'91 is the sum
of the projections of the support reactions and
Az-lahl‘, n,=nu§ AH-z.(t)-h,(r), mam-1.4:), h,. L",

a given program movement.

Component Al takes into account the linear and angular accelerations of the machine and
in a certain sense conveys the idea of smooth motion as even motion with low angular
accelerations; the term [10.)2 minimizes the moment of the forces of reaction and. as
may be anticipated. the internal moments as well. Components A2 and A3 take into

accOunt the square of the deviation of the phase variables from programed movement.
They have been introduced to maintain the linear movement of the center of mass of the
machine at a given height with zero lateral and transverse components of kinetic momen-
tum.

Our problem consists in finding a mode of movement satisfying the conditions we have
enumerated and minimizing the given criterion.

2. Algorithm of solution. To solve the problem we have formulated we employed an ap-

paratus for optimizing complex processes based upon the superposition of V. F. Krotov's
sufficient optimum conditions for discrete and continuous processes [3].

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE<DNLM

He formalize the locomotion as a complex process as follows. We introduce a set of
discrete stages T corresponding to double the number of machine steps and from it
single out the subset of odd [T]-- T*. Locomotion consists of the selection of discrete
controls (points of support placement) at the even-numbered stages (physical time in
this instance does not change) and of movement by virtre of the differential equations
(1) at successive uneven-numbered stages. In these differential equations the discrete

controls selected above play the role of parameters. The result is a discrete-continu-
ous process in which the group of permissible processes serves as control for set T*.

The formalization we employed permitted us to use for solution of our problem an algo-
rithm (or improving vomplcx processes [6) based upon the general sufficient conditions
for complex processes. The algorithm is a variation of the "shuttle" methods analogous
for continuous systems to the Eneyev and Chernous'ko-Krylov methods.

3. Results of numerical calculations. Within the framework of our model and the formu-
lation of Our problem. we have Studied the spatial problem of biped locomotion over an
irregular surface with single-support and double-support phases at each of three steps.
The machine moves over a given irregular surface (Figure 2) in the direction of axis

 

The machine is assumed to be anthropomorphic and has the following characteristics: it
has a mass of 70 kg; the initial and final height of its center of mass above the base
surface is 0.8 m. the initial length of a step is 0.7 m, the maximum length of a single

step 0.9 m and the initial width of its track 0.1 m. The machine moves by regular loco-
motion at an initial Velocity of Vy - 1.4 m/oec, Vx - Vz - 0; the initial values of

kinetic momentum Lx - 20 Nm/sec, Ly - L: - 0. Minimizing the indicated criterion and

satisfying the boundary conditions v” {Van Lin s Ly." , we are to move it in
three steps from an initial position ( x’ .o.°.. 3. 43.35., 2. . I I) to a final

position X; ;c.c13m yin-.56 "1,2 , 1m . As a base surface for computing devia-
tion of the fheight of the center of mass we employ a surface 1 m equidistant from co-

ordinate plane NXY. Total time required by the process is given. Each step takes
0. S st-c; the ratio of the duration of the double-support phase to that of a single
step is 0.2.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
el is realized in the form of an algorithm providing a discrete. three-level descrip-

tion of the geometry of the supporting surface. The surface environment is described
in terms of a piecewise-translational. piecewise-linear, periodic function of the hori-
zontal coordinates.

The initial approximation with respect to the continuous controls (broken line - reac-
tions Rx, Ry. 82) has been taken from [5].

Figures 3-5 show some of the results computer calculations. The broken line represents
the initial approximation.

Figure 4 shows the behavior of the
functional of the iteration problem

in the process of improvement. Fig-

ure 3 shows the supporting surface

cut through by the plane in which the
center of mass is moving. Points 1, 2.
3. 4 represent the initial support posi-
tion, points 1*. 2*. 3*, and 4* the
final support position. Figure 5 shows
projections of the support reactions.

Let us now note the special character-
istics of spatial locomotion over an
irregular surface. Representation of
the base surface in the form of a plane
and the presence in the functional of
a smoothness component and a component
representing the deviation of the height
of the center of mass from the program
mean that in the improved mode the machine is trying to move smoothly within the limits
of its capabilities and the features of the given terrain. (The maximum size of an ob-
staclc was given as no greater than half the length of a step.)

 

Herc (see Figure 3) the first support shifts “back" counter to the direction of the

Y axis nearer the initial position of the center of mass by moving "to the right"

along the slope of the "hole" in the direction of the X axis and "up" in the direction
of the Z axis. The second support "drops down" from the slope to the horizontal surface
by shifting "hack" nnd "to the right." Remaining on the upper plateau of the "mound."
the third support shifts "back" and "to the right." This type of support movement in
the improvement procch causes basic machine characteristics to behave in a manner
similar to that associated with movement along a plane.

Conclusion. Formalization of biped locomotion in the form of a complex process permits
the application of an appropriate optimization apparatus to it and successful solution
of rather complex model problems of biped locomotion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Beletskly. V. V.. "The Dynamics of Biped Locomotion." IZV AN SSSR. H11, 1975,
No 3, pp 3-14.

lv
0

Platonov. A. K. and Pryanichnikov, V. Ye.. "Modeling the External Environment of
a Mobile Robot." 1PM AK SSSR Preprint. 1975, No 84.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Gurman. V. I. and Orlov. A. 6.. "Sufficient Optimality Conditions for Complex
Processes," All. 1978, No 4, pp 127-133.

6. Orlov. A. 6.. "An Algorithm for Improving Biped Locomotion as a Complex Process,"
m, 1979. No 12. pp 35-41.

5. Chow, C. K. and Jacobson. D. H.. "Studies of Human Locomotion via Optimal Program-
ming.“ MATH. BIOSCIENCES, No 10. 1971. pp 239-306.

6. The Problem of Stabilizing Spatial Biped Locomotion

Yu. V. Bolotin (Institute of Applied Mathematics imeni H. V. Keldysh, USSR Academy of
Sciences)

Annotation. The present work looks as some of the theoretical aspects of the problem of
writing an algorithm for stabilizing spatial biped locomotion over even horizontal ter-
rain. It proposes an hierarchical approach to this problem based upon the incorporation
of rapid and slow movements and the use of an averaging procedure.

Introduction. Problems which have arisen of late in connection with the tasks of devel-
oping regions to which access is difficult and of working under dangerous conditions
have raised the question of developing walking robots possessing high degrees of ability
to adapt to the nature of a given terrain and to negotiate obstacles. Walking machine
gaits may be divided into two basic categories: statically stable and statically unstable.
Statically stable gaits are naturally realized for machines with more than four extremi-
ties. statically unstable gaits for biped walking machines (DShA) [awn]. Results of
modeling show that statically stable salts, which are highly capable of adapting to the
nature of a given terrain [l]. prove nonenergy-efficient at high speeds of movement over
comparatively even terrain. Hence the present interest in the study of statically un-
stable. primarily biped. gaits.

The present work examines the movement of a symmetrical sun with point feet over an even
horizontal supporting surface. The complexity of the problem of stabilizing a BWH is
due to the static uncontrollability of the machine [2] (there is a cyclic coordinate);
motion may be effectively stabilized only for periods of the order of several stepping

periods.

The control algorithm proposed in the present work is based upon separation of the
"rapid" and "slow" variables in the equations of motion so as to break the problem

down into three separate subproblems: study of extremity movement. of change in longi-
tudinal velocity and of the course of the awn relative to the desired direction.

1. Stability of Lecomotion Conforming to Desired Synergy. In studying the single-sup-
port movement of a sun with a controllable cylindrical flywheel secured to the body, let
us introduce the vector 3 of dimensionality a governing the configuration of the ma-
chine and vector at of dimensionality div} of the control momenta of the motors.

Let us define the synergy of BUM movement as that plane. three-dimensional surface

3: {‘é)=0} in a configurational space which can be unambiguously projected onto the
aggregate of horizontal coordinates of the center of gravity of the BHH and of the

angles at of flywheel rotation such that for all 3‘5 the axis of the flywheel is
vertical. A gait is said to conform to synergy if the relationship P(q) - 0 is satis-

fied in each support phase.

99

IINIOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us assume that we have solved the problem of realizing synergy (that is. the prob-
lem of controlling the relatch movement of the extremities); so, disregarding for now
the requirement that we insure a desired direction of movement, let us look at the gait
characteristics conforming to synergy 8 . Since all directions in the horizontal plane
are equivalent, we naturally require that synergy not vary with orthogonal transforma-
tions of space preserving the supporting surface or depend upon BUM movement in the
preceding support phase.

Let x. y. 2 be the coordinates of the BUM center of gravity within the Cartesian coordi-
nate system associated with foot 0 of a supporting extremity and oriented such that
axis 2 is vertical. while axis x is directed along the radius vector connecting the feet
of the extremities at the initial moment of the support phase and oriented in the direc-
tion of the horizontal component of the velocity of the center of gravity at that moment
(Figure l) and let K represent the kinetic momentum of the M relative to point 0-

 

Figure I

Since K is a linear function of the generalized velocities. the relationship F(’)=O
taking into account the conditions of syuaetry formulated above reduces to the following

system of equalities

h'w-m . (rm cu, {nu-{(5,0)
K- M'Qumhurm’é + coma] (1)

Here m is the mass of the BUM; i 70 is a scalar and $31.3 symmetrical
vector functions of variables 1.? calculated in region c . symmetrical
relative to axis 1: and having the plane boundary 3U . At the beginning of each
support phase. variables 1,, satisfy the condition 151’, 9: O ; the support
phase terminates when and only when (1.9)CQV . The system of relationships in
(I) is referred to as the reduced synergy; it fully governs the change in variables
1,9;eb along the trajectory of mm movement conforming to synergy 6' . So, the
set of single-support BUM gaits conforming to reduced synergy (I) has been correctly
determined; we may now pose the problem of their stability.

Let us assume a. a min {8: ($.03 3U} . ‘- “061(3'. (m,°.V}.
3-: 1 8
((2). [‘ - “13.0) .‘i‘t‘ﬂﬂ 9 3+ ‘ {‘ve} a
100

FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTICIAI. USE ONLY
and let reduced synergy (l) satisfy the inequalities

 

‘3’0s'm‘oo gg’osu't 'gganl‘1 (2)
'8. . g.
(C 1'1
és'g’l. ’3‘?ch 1“...) ' d‘e',<1 (3)

There occurs the following statement:

If I, = 5 , a plane. single-support periodic gait with a nonzero average velocity,
stable within a set of spatial gaits conforming to reduced synergy (l). is defined.

If lo. 4., . a single-support periodic gait with zero average velocity (stepping
with one leg after another). stable within a set of spatial gaits conforming to re-
duced synergy (l). is defined.

The statement we have formulated does not concern stabilization of the desired direction
of movement: depending upon the initial conditions. the vertical plane in which ultimate
movement occurs may be arbitrarily positioned in space.

Let us note that the conditions in (2) provide stable motion with respect to the vari-
ables characterizing the deviation of the gait from the plane. while the conditions of
(3) provide stability of longitudinal lotion. Conditions (2) take the particularly
simple form ﬂ >0, 1.1+]; [a] in the case of a M with low-inertia extremities.

2. Stabilization of Locomotion in a Desired Direction. According to the results ob-
tained in Section 1, neutral equilibrium occurs with respect to course angle 1, in the
set of gaits conforming to reduced synergy (l). The least change change in the control

algorithm accordingly disturbs this equilibrium and produces the only natural stable
direction of locomotion.

In solving the problem of realizin movement along a desired course, we will be employing
as a control parameter the angle of rotation of the x axis of the 303 coordinate
system in our i-th support phase relative to the projection onto the horizontal of the
radius vector of the SW center of gravity at the and of the Z'1-th support phase. He
thereby define the discrete controlled system with control parameter Ti 1‘ I < 09 ;
under certain conditions this system is completely controlled. There will accordingly

be an algorithm for stabilizing any direction of movement desired in advance.

Let us note that at the step preceding a turn, a human moves his foot in the direction
opposite the turn; let us therefore adopt our law governing the change in f}, in ac-
cordance with the formula

‘;.-‘P‘ . |" “‘ (4)

We can show that for sufficiently small 8 . and with satisfaction of conditions (2)
and (3). algorithm (1.) provides stability of the value ﬁgs-O . that is. stability
of the desired direction of movement.

3. Realization of Desired Synergy. Let us look now at the last of the set of tasks in
our proposed hierarchical system of stabilizing locomotion--the task of realizing the
required relative movements of the extremities. Let synergy be given by the equation

Fa.) = O . For fixed constant1>0 and for arbitrary O c ﬂ« 1 let us intro-
duce the motor-control algorithm [3]

u. .- '3‘ L up [ F(9)+1,% twin (5)

101
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
Here ”-91 is the "large" coefficient of rigidity of control. L (12 the square
matrix and Q the vector of generalized M velocities in the support p ase.

Control (5) reduces the system of equations of sun movement [a] to singularly perturbed
form [3. 5]. He can show [3. 5] that matrix L (1,) can be selected such that with
sufficiently smallf BUM motion has the following character.

In the vicinity of each mment of imact o a moving extremity upon the supporting sur-
face of a duration of the order of [“fn 1 , referred to as the time boundary layer
[5]. the trajectory of movement is modeled by a high-intensity, short-duration pulse
transient process. Outside the boundary layer the trajectory varies from one with the
same initial conditions conforming to synergy by a value of the order of f9 . When
#00 equation (5) accordingly solves the problem of realizing synergy 8,

Let us now formulate the following statement by combining the results we have obtained.

Let reduced 5 nergy (l) satisf inequalities (2) and (3). There then exist matrix
function L0 and constant >0 such that with sufficiently small 8, ”>0 the

control algorithm (lo), (5) provides stable single-support locomotion in any given
direction.

The control algorithm (4). (S) is based upon the division of motion variables into

three categories on the basis of the rapidity with which they converge to their limiting
values. "Rapid“ variables characterizing the deviation of the trajectory from desired

synergy converge in times of the order of f‘ln/“I‘. "Slow" variables characterizing
course-angle error converge in times of the order .‘g' ‘4. 8'1 . Other variables converge

in times of the order of a stepping period.

Let us note that it is possible for the algorithm (6). (5) to be modified such that
the set of realizable gaits includes running [6].

lo. Results of Numerical Modeling. Let us now dwell for a moment upon the results of
numerical proof of the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm for finite values of/‘f
Let us look at the motion of a plane model of a footless BUM with the kinematic and
dynamic characteristics employed in [7] and approximating those of a human being.

Without. however. dwelling upon the method used to select synergy 8 and the matrices
LG) (this problem is dealt with in [6]). let us formulate the results obtained.

The algorithm is effective if the time characteristic of rapid movements is not less
than 5-10 times less than the stepping period. This produces peak motor torque values
2-1. times greater than their average values. Overloada with locomotion at the rate of
1-2 m/s are of the order of one-two ’-

Extrenities strike the support surface during movement with pulses of the order of
20-100 N-s. It is interesting to note that at high speeds, the presence of these im-

pacts yields important advantages in locomotion energy in terms of the value of average
engine work per meter:

, T n-‘I ,

Aug. 3 z \unn 4*

0 In!

It would in fact be sufficient to compare curves of the value of A as a function of
the average velocity for energy-optimum impactless locomotion [7] and locomotion under

the effect of control (5) (Figure 2).
102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A characteristic of the control algorithm
proposed in [6] is that locomotion becomes
a run with decrease in the value of the
support segment. It can be seen from Fig-
ure 2 that at velocities greater than

2.2 m/s. a run is more energy-efficient
than a walk.

Conclusion. The hierarchical algorithm '
for locomotion control based upon the
grouping of novements on the basis of their
characteristic times permits solution of
the problem of the spatial stabilization of
Figure 2 a BUM in closed analytical form. The ef-
fectiveness of the mathematical model of

locomotion constructed indicates that the proposed procedure may be practically em-
ployed in BUM control.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Okhotsimskiy. D. Ye.; Platonov. A. K.; Borovin. G. [.3 Karpov. I. 1.; Kugushev.
Ye. 1.; Lazutin. Yu. M.; Pavlovakiy. V. Ye. and Yaroshevskiy. V. 8.. "Control of
an Integrated-Locomotion Robot. 12V. AN SSSR. TEKH. KIBBRNETIKA. 1974. No 6.

Yamashita. T. and Frank. A. A.. "A Study of Controllability of Body Motion in a
Biped by a Linearized Model." PROCEEDINGS OF 1974 JOINT AUTOMATIC CONTROL CONFER-
ENCE. USA. 1974.

Bolotin, Yu. V.. "Dividing Movements in the Problem of Controlling Mechanical
Systems with Unilateral Constraints." VESTNIK MCU. 88R. MATEMATIKA. MEKHANIKA.
'979a No ’0.

Alekseyev. A. A. and Colubev. Yu. F.. "A Model of Walking Machine Dynamics."
12V. AN SSSR. TEKH. KIBERNETIKA, 1975, No 3.

Vasil'yev. A. B. and Butuzov. V. P.. "Singulyarno vormushchennyye uravneniya v kri-
ticheskikh sluchayakh" [Singularly Perturbed Equations in Critical Cases]. Moscow.
Nauka. 1978.

Bolotin. Yu. V.. "Dividing Movements in the Problem of Stabilizing Biped Locomotion."
IZV. AN SSSR, HTT. 1979. No 4.

Beletskiy. V. V. and Berbyuk. V. Ye.. "A Nonlinear Model of a Biped Walking Machine
with Controlled Feet." PRBPRINT 1?“ AN SSSR 1H. H. V. KELDYSH. 1978. No 54.

Periodic Optimization Methods in the Problem of Walking-Machine Stabilization

V. 8. Latin (Institute of Mathematics of the UkrSSR Academy of Sciences. Kiev)

Annotation. Despite the view which has been expressed (see. for example. [1]) that it
is inefficient to employ optimization methods to solve problems of artificial locomo-
tion. the present work shows periodic optimization methods permit the solution (in linear
approximation) of walking-machine stabilization. which is treated as a controlled system
with variable constraints.

103
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction. The problem of building a walking machine (ShA) [UM] requires the accom-
plishment of a number of complex tasks, among which one of the most important is that

of developing a control system. The treatment of UK as locomotive robots [2] reflects
the now established view of the multilevel structure of the control system of these
apparatuses. According to [l]. for example. a HH control system may be divided into

the following three levels: 1 - the decision-making level. 2 - the algorithmic level
and 3 ~ the level of dynamic control. Simultaneously with work on the general problems
involved in developing this hierarchical system. studies are therefore under way on in-
dividual subsystems as well. The present work focuses attention primarily upon the
mathematical problems associated with development at the third level (the level of dy-
namic control or. strictly speaking. the UH stabilization system). Accomplishment of
this task requires definition of the characteristics of a HH as a controlled system.
Since "...human or animal locomotion consists in a sequence of pulse constraints peri-
odically applied and rermved ([2]. p 196). synthesis of a UN stabilization system re-
quires that attention be focused upon taking into account the effects of the succession
of changes in supporting extremities (the changes in the constraints applied). By ap-
propriate selection of generalized coordinates in the time segments between successive
moments of change in supporting extremities. we find that in the different phases of its
movement the HM may be described first by differential equations. then by finite-differ-
ence relationships reflecting the sudden changes in the generalized coordinates and
velocities at the moments of the release from old and the application of new constraints
(relationships (5.77) and (5.104) in [2]. for example. may be employed to obtain these
equations). Having by one method or another selected the walking machine's programmed
movement (minimizing a given functional etc.). we come to the problem of stabilizing the
object. whose motion in its different phases is described now by differential. now by
finite-difference equations. The complexity of this task is increased by the compara-
tively high order of the differential and difference equations involved. which describe
the HM as the controlled system (the large number of degrees of freedom which must be
taken into account). It now appears. therefore. that a satisfactory solution of this
problem is to be found only in linear approximation. That is. after linearization in
the vicinity of the program trajectory of the equations describing UH motion. we formu-
late the problem of stabilizing this system within the framework of a linear-quadratic-
Gaussian problem (LQG problem). Let us now dwell in greater detail upon the circum-
stances pointing to the advantage of employing the mathematical apparatus of the LQG
problem to solve the problem of HM stabilization.

We may agree with the statement that. generally speaking, the stabilization of linear
systems with large numbers of variables on the basis of a linear control law has been.
and remains. a purely heuristic method which yields good results in some instances but
is unsuitable in others [I]. But the current absence of any effective methods of syn-
thesizing nonlinear (not to mention optimal) regulators for systems whose motion is
described by both differential and finite-difference equations does not permit synthesis
of nonlinear systems for HM stabilization.* Moreover. practical experience which has
now been acquired in the development of walking-machine control systems indicates that
in working on the lower level of a control system (the stabilization system). we can
orient ourselves toward "moderate" perturbations**. in the case of which a linearized
model will still adequately describe the dynamics of the system. It should also be

* Here we can only indicate the availability of works dealing with the stability of

solutions for similar "hybrid" nonlinear systems (see [3] and the bibliography for the
present work).

** It is pointed out in [l]. p 15. for example. that a HH control system having the
three-level structure referred to above "...can be highly effective only in the case of
'moderate' perturbations. But its characteristics are entirely satisfactory for the
category of problems under consideration."

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
added that by having available a sufficiently generalized algorithm synthesizing linear
systems for stabilizing objects with variable constraints [A], we can eliminate (or at
least substantially reduce) undesirable nonlinear effects by utilizing existing arbi-

trariness in formulating the synthesis problem (selection of weight coefficients in the
optimized functional etc.) [5].

Periodic O timization Methods in the Problem of S thesizin HM Stabilization S stems.
Let us now examine in greater detail the mathematics involved in synthesizing the linear
regulator of a system stabilizing the horizontal movement of a walking machine. As has
already been pointed out. the special nature of this problem stems from the fact that.
because of the change in the constraints applied (the alternation of supporting legs).

a UN is described in the different phases of movement sometimes by differential equa-
tions. at others by finite-difference equations.

If we look at the regular single-support gait of a biped H14 (one supporting leg replaces
the other at intervals of time 2’ ) and linesrize the equation of motion in the vicinity
of the programmed trajectory (step time 2' does not vary). which is characterized by
vector I7 . then, as shown in [lo]. the change in the vector of the errorgzx’l

( x is the vector of the machine's phase coordinates) in reproducing programed

machine motion during the K -th step (({o1)f<£< [rt/(3172)..)lis described by the differ-
ential equation

5. = F's +Gu (1)
and at the moment of the replacement of one support leg by another (3!! by the
difference equation

gun-,0) = [Vain-oh MVtk). (2)

ln these equations U, l/ represent control input vectors.

but us now formulate our problem. During time segmentsf~fkt let machine motion be
described by a conventional system of differential equations (1); at moments of time
t =Kt the change in the vector conforms to difference relationship (2). We have
now to find .1 strategy (regulator equation) of continuous and pulsed control “(9:
-ﬁun), Wk): Wﬂkt-O» such that the closed system object 1- regulator
is asymptotically stable and that this strategy minimizes the following quadratic
functional (quality criterion) _.

JII.) aﬂe'aer weanin- g‘vavm. (3)
I.

In these expressions, matrices F, 6’EI§;Q=Q'are periodic with respect to t with
the period t ; matrices M mlcxyare constant (prime indicates transposition opera-
tion).

By employing the conventional LQG procedure for finding the minimum of functional (3)
in the quadratic form

:29; 9h.) :- £'«.) Swen.)
we find that when f f I!

u. =-B.‘6IS E (1‘)

when 1‘ ¢ [2‘ 105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v(k)=-(M1$(hvo)M+ CI’M'SdrrooM/E (kt-0). (5)

When {4” matrix 5 satisfies the Riccsti differential equation
—5' =5F+P'$—SGB"6’$ *0 (6)

while the jump: of this matrix at moment: [3“ are described by the following relation-
ship

Sat-o) = M’mew) - Samo) M(c +

+M'SikteO)M).‘M'$(h+0)}” (7)

The periodicity of this problem (the strategy does not vary when L‘, in (3) changes by
a whole number of periods 1' or. in other words. regulator parameters do not depend
upon the number of the step) imposes a periodicity condition upon matrix

$(kr+O)--= sat-Who) (s)

which. together with (6) and (7) and the requirement for the asymptotic stability of
the system (I), (2). (lo) and (5), fully determines the desired periodic matrix S .
Concrete definition of condition (8) (see [6]) yields the discrete Riccati equation
relative to matrix $60)

$00) = ¢(t)~,[5bo) ‘3‘.” z 0'," f
* ZIS('0)Z)-12'$(o0)] M (Mr) - Rte)

(9)

In addition to these problem conditions. the matrices incorporated in this equation are
calculated as follows (E is the unit matrix)

<13 = Wow F"), Won-E

Rs- (Patr’, Rm-o

we pw. wr' ; wow— 68’3“, MOM-=0
(MC"M'- A’Wrm’) = z n 2’.

He factor this matrix such that we have ’7. . The solution to equation (9), with

which matrix
-1
(E + znz'Sw» IV $50 (10)

has eigenvalues lying within the unit circle is the desired value for $60) . This
value 5&0) may found by the usual methods, those in [6] for example.

If in (3) Q:O . let us define the relationships we have obtained more concretely.
in this case l(z)=o and for solution of Riccati equation (9) let us substitute a
simpler procedure--solutlon of the Lyapunov equation.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
Let eigenvalues of matrix N¢fz) not lie on the unit circumference, that is, let there

be amatrix 7" such that
4 . _ A, 0]) __
'T ”(PmT—"o A ’

with eigenvalues of square matrix Af' lying outside the unit circle. those of A-
uithin it. In this case. matrix 5(ro)my be written in the form

Y0 .1
_ " 'T
Saw-(77 o 0

we determine symmetrical matrix Y by the Lyapunov equation
- _ _ .. .1 I 4
v ‘.(A.) ‘Y W.) ‘=(A.) MM

He obtain matrix 9,, incorporated in this equation by dividing into blocks the matrix

(the dimensions of matrices 91/, YudAcoincide).

Hith this selection ff matrix 500) the eigenvalues of matrix (10) coincide with
those of matrices A} and A - . The desired periodic solution of equations (6) and

(7) when O<t<t takes the form

(Y-l' "‘0 -1 0

5m: (T’Cpmfx W07“)?
0 0

where matrixb’i‘ is determined as follows:

”:2 fill/=1“ ' la:("yylé‘ml‘l’il7w=0

This expression of matrix 5 indicates that, generally speaking. optimization of the
stabilization system in accordance with criterion (3) reduces to a nonstationa matrix
of feedback coefficients determined (lo) even in the stationary case (matrices [6,5,0
do not depend upon time). It is interesting to note that the results of some studies
(see [1], p 422) point to the advantage of using variable feedback circuit coefficients

in following systems of anthropomorphic mechanisms. One possible way to overcome the
difficulties associated with realization of a nonstationary matrix of feedback loop co-
efficients lies in application of walking-machine control at discrete moments of time.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
bet us restrict OurselVes here to description of a discrete version of the problem of
synthesizing a mi stabilization system. Let moments t£,K divide the time required
for the k -th step into I equal intervals. during each of which ((50): <t< ti,t) the
control input Ll[{) in (l) remains constant (the components of vectortlrF)are step
functions of time). Assuming that vectordl(?) is piecewise constant permits us to
describe machine motion during the course of a step not by differential equation (1).
but rather by the corresponding difference relationship

we) -wos....oi.-3u(u (u)

the change to which from equation (1) is accomplished by the conventional method (see,
for example, [7]).

Because of the periodicity of system (1). difference equations (2) and (11) constitute
a periodic finite-difference system. the procedure for optimizing which with respect to
the quadratic quality function is analogous to that discussed above and reduces [8] to
solution of an equation like (9). By employing this procedure we ultimately obtain a
stabilization algorithm forming control inputs at discrete moments of time [‘0]. This
method of control may be comparatively easily realized in real tire with the use of

modern digital computers.

Conclusion. 0n the basis of the algorithm. described above. for construction of a
periodic solution of the Riccati matrix equation, we can, within the scope of a LQG
problem, solve problems in quadruped control as well [4. 9]. We can also consider

more complex formulations of the synthesis problem. Let us assume, for example. that
we measure only part of the phase coordinates of an object and that the results of these
measurements are diStortcd by random additive noise [4, 10]; we can take into account
the delay due to the time required to process navigation information and for a computer
to generate a control signal [10]; we can synthesize a system to stabilize a machine
moving by jumping Ila] , utilize visual information to reduce dynamic loads during move-
ment over irregular surfaces [9) etc. But even within the framework of an 1.06 problem.
the effect of the dimensionality of the problem (the number of the “H's degrees of
freedom which must be taken into account) upon the amount of work required to solve

it is round to be substantial. He can reduce this dimensionality by disregarding the
inertia of the legs of the walking machine, but this kind of idealization is not always
acceptable. It is therefore of interest to find an algorithm to construct a system for
stabilizing a walking machine with legs having weight which for this purpose employs a
simpler solution of a shorter problem (a model with weightless legs) as a first approxi-

mation [ll].

It should be emphasized that it is precisely the optimization approach to the problem of
synthesizing a system for HM stabilization which we hIVr. described which makes it pos-
sible to solve this kind of problem using a single mathematical apparatus. At the same
time. however, it should not be forgotten that these algorithms for synthesizing HM
regulators guarantee the asymptotic stability of closed "object + regulator" systems

in linear approximation only. Strictly speaking. it can be said only that with suffi-
ciently smll perturbations the stabilization system will inSure WM performance in at:-
cordance with a programmed trajectory. Therefore, with finite perturbations. in view
of the nonlinearity of the mathematical model of the HM. the problem of estimating the
range of perturbations through which the regulator will insure performance in the pro—
gram mode requires special attention. And in developing systems for controlling com-
paratively complex (anthropomorphic) HM other questions arise as well: is it possible
to deVelop an effective control system by separately synthesizing a system of vertical
and a system of horizontal stabilization?. can we utilize the arbitrariness existing in
the formulation of problems of synthesizing a stabilization system (for example. the
selection of elements 6 C, Q in the functional (3) or its analog in the case of the

I
108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
synthesis of a discrete stabilization system) to suppress undesired nonlinear effects,
etc. These questions have been studied in [5, 9] by means of matrix modeling. In [S],
for example, we have modeled the plane motion of a WM idealized in three-member form

(a trunk and two legs all having weight). It has been assumed that the legs are of
telescopic construction (this was necessary to solve the problem of controlling vertical
motion) and postulated that each leg has a foot. The results of mathematical modeling
presented in [5. 9] demonstrate the effectiveness of synthesized linear stabilization
algorithms. According to [S]. for example. with fixed stabilization-system parameters,
the machine could stand in place. start, climb a slope of 23° and then, at a speed of

3 km/h, stop within some 1.5 steps. It should also be pointed out that the method of

reducing energy losses associated with locomotion proposed in [a] points to the theo-
retical possibility of developing a highly economical HM (the "coefficient of friction”
of the HM dealt with in [5] was roughly 2 per cent with a step length of 0.7 m).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. kaobratovich. M.. "Shagayushchiye roboty i antropomorfnyye mekhanismy" [Walking
Robots and Anthropomorphic Mechanisms]. Moscow: Mir, 1976.

2. Popov. Ye. P.. Vereshchagin. A. P. and Zenkevich, S. L., "Manipulyatsionnyye

roboty: dinamika i algoritmy" [Manipulation Robots: Dynamics and Algorithms].
Moscow: Nnuka, 1978.

3. Samoylenko, A. M. and Perestyuk. N. A., "Periodic Solutions for weakly Linear Sys-
tems with Pulsed Response." DIFFERENTS. URAVNENIYA. 1978. 14, No. 6.

lo. Latin, V. 3.. "Upravleniye shagayushchimi apparatami" [Walking-Machine Control],
Kiev, Naukova dumka. 1980.

5. Karpinskiy, F. 6., “Model' dvunogogo shagayushchego apparata: (Opiaaniye i uprav-

leniye dvizheniyem" [A Model of a Biped Walking Machine: (Description and Motion
Control)], Kiev. 1978, (Preprint 78.23, Institute of Mathematics, UkSSR Academy of
Sciences).

6. Aliyev. F. A.; Larin, V. 8.; Naumenko. K. I. and Suntsev, V. N.. "Optimizatsiya
lineynykh invariantnykh vc vremeni sistem upravleniya" [Optimization of Linear
Time-Invariant Control Systems]. Kiev. Naukova dunks. [978.

7. Andreyev. Yu. N.. "Upravleniye konechnomernymi lineynymi ob"yektsmi" [Controlling
Finite-Dimensional Linear Objects]. Moscow, Nauka, 1976.

8. Latin, V. 3., "The Optimization of Periodic Systems," DOKL. AN SSSR. 1978. 239,
No l.

9. Bordyug. B. A. and Lorin, V. 3.. "Ispol'zovaniye zritel'noy informatsii pri uprav-
1enii shagayushchim apparatom" [Using Visual Information in walking-Machine Control].
Kiev, 1979. (Preprint 79.9, lnstitute of Mathematics, UkSSR Academy of Sciences).

lo. Naumenko. K. 1.. "Stubilizatsiya gorizontal'nogo dvizheniya dvunogogo shagayushchego
apparata pri nepolnoy informatsii" [Stabilizing the Horizontal Movement of a 51ped

Walking Machine with Incomplete Information], Kiev. 1978, (Preprint 78.31, Institute
of Mathematics. UkSSR Academy of Sciences).

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11. Lorin, V. B. {and Naunenko. K. 1., "Upnvleniye shagayushchiu apparaton s pochti
nevesonyni nogaui" [Controlling a Halking Machine with Almost Heightless Legs].
Kiev. 1980, (Preprint 80.22, Institute of Mathematics. UkSSR Acadely of Sciences).

COPYRIGHT: Otpechatano na rotaprintskh v Institute prikladnoy late-stilts AN SSSR
Hoskva, Hiusskaya pl. 6.

8963
C50: 8344/1810

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUBLICATIONS

METHODS FOR AUTOMATING GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH

Apatity AVTOHATIZATSIYA GEOFIZICHESKIKH ISSLEDOVANIY in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 26 Dec 80) pp 2. 151-157

[Annotation and abstracts from collection of articles "Automation of Geophysical Re-
search". responsible editor I. A. Kuz'min, candidate of physical and mathematical
sciences, Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR, 300 copies, 157 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The collection of articles "Automation of Geophysical Research"
is devoted to the timely problem of automation of the collection and processing of
geophysical informatiOn and also the description of the apparatus and methods em-
ployed in geophysical experiments. The collection includes descriptions of specific
technical developments in systems for the automation of scientific research, a sys-
tea for the input of different types of geophysical information into an electronic
computer and autonomous recorders of data on a magnetic tape. Several articles are
devoted to the problems involved in computations and specific technical designs of
individual recording apparatus components. In general, the collection will be of un-
questionable interest for researchers working in the field of automation of sci-
entific research and the description of specific technical innovations may be of

substantial assistance to scientific workers in many related fields of science and
engineering._

Abstracts

UDC 65.011.56+550.3
AUTOMATION 0F SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN GEOPHYSICS

[Abstract of article by Kuz'min. I. A.]

[Text] The article examines the requirements imposed on systems for the automation
of geophysical research in the field of study of solar-terrestrial relationships.
There is a brief review of eiisting systems for automating the collection and pro-
cessing of experimental data. The structure and technical aspects of a system for

automating geophysical research at the Polar Geophysical Institute. Kola Affiliate,
USSR Academy of Sciences, are presented. Figures 6. references 23.

111

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
ms OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

UDC 550.385.37

RECISTRY AND PROCESSING OF CEOMAGNETIC PULSATIONS AT REAL TIME SCALE
[Abstract of article by Yelistratov. V. P. and Negrebetskiy, A. A.]

[Text] An automated system for the collection and processing of geomagnetic data at
a real time scale is described. A block diagram and description of operation of a
reworked control program and time program are given. A magnetic variation station
and the active RC filters which it contains are described, the filter parameters
are defined and the practical results of processing of geomagnetic pulsations are

presented. Figures 3, references ll.

UDC 681.335+621.39+550.3

INSTRUMENT COMPLEX FOR THE PROCESSING OF ANALOG AND TELEMETRIC INFORMATION OBTAINEI
IN A GEOPHYSICAL EXPERIMENT

[Abstract of article by Radkevich, V. A. and Perlikov, A. H.]

[Text] An instrument complex for the processing of analog and telemetric information
is cxamined.'lt was developed at the Polar Geophysical Institute, Kola Affiliate,
USSR Academy of Sciences, and is intended for the processing of information trans-
mitted by the radiotelemetric system aboard a balloon in experiment SAMBO, from
aboard an artificial earth satellite and received at geophysical observatories. A
block diagram is presented and a description of the processing procedures with the
ASVT H-4030 and VK “lskra-1252" computers with use of a device for the decoding of
telemetric information is given. The authors describe operation of the decoding
unit, which makes it possible to transform an analog signal, PM signal with partial
separation of channels using the IRIG standard or a separated PM signal into a dig-
ital form and introduce it into an electronic computer. Methods are given for re-
duction of the analog signal into digital form using an ATsP system and PM signal
as well as a discrete-frequency meter and the channels of an x-rsdiation spectro-
meter. The number of simultaneously operating channels is up to 8; the instrument
error is 0.11. The accuracy in tie-in to the time mark is 4 0.01 sec. The maximum
discretization frequency is 20 KHz. The problems involved in long-range development
of the instrument complex are considered. Figures 5, references 13.

UDC,550.83.065+681

AUTONOMOUS RECORDERS 0F GEOPHYSICAL INFORMATION ON A MAGNETIC CARRIER

[Abstract of article by Deryabin, V. H.. Ivanov, A. P., Kazsk, B. N.. Kuz'min. I. A., .
Lemnev. V. I. and Hakarov, V. 1.]

[Text] Different methods for the registry of geophysical information are examined
and their comparative characteristics are given, as well as examples of the prac-
tical realization of the considered methods. Carriers of geophysical information

and registry methods meeting the needs are described. A slow analog magnetic recorder

112

FOIGMHWCJAI.USE(NNLV
and a stepped accumulator employing magnetic tape which have been developed are
briefly described, as are the principal fields of their application. Figures 2,
references 9.

UDC 551.5?b.5+550.388.8
AUTOMATED COMPLEX FOR THE REGISTRY OF NIGHT AIRCLOH AND PROCESSING OF COLLECTED DATA
[Abstract of article by Solov'yev, V. H., Starkov, G. V. and Yushchenko, V. F.]

[Text] The need for and possibility of creating an automated complex for the regis-
try of night airglow are examined. This complex also processes the collected data.
Existing methods and apparatus for the registry and processing of information on
auroras are briefly analyzed. Block diagrams of instruments and apparatus for the
registry of auroras and processing of the collected data, which have already been
developed, are provided. Figures 3, references 8.

UDC 535.241.6
USE OF COHERENT LIGHT SOURCES IN PROCESSING OPTICAL INFORMATION
[Abstract of article by Anokhin, V. V.)

[Text] This is a review of methods for laser beam control applicable to the problems
involved in the processing of images, in particular, aurorss, on an electronic com-
puter. The problems related to reduction of images taken on photographic film to
digital form are analyzed. Figures 3, references 11.

UDC 550.388.2:551.501.8

MODELING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC PROCESSES IN THE AURORAL IONOSPHBRB BY NUMERICAL
SOLUTION OF THE HAVE EQUATION

[Abstract of article, author not indicated]

[Text] The computation of low-frequency (f<Z10 KHz) electromagnetic fields in inho-
mogeneous plasma of the auroral ionosphere is considered. A method for determining
fields by means of numerical solution of the boundary-value problem for the wave
equation is given. This method is used for investigating ionospheric sources of
low-frequency radiation and study of the resonance properties of the earth-iono-
sphere waveguide. Figures 7, references 6.

113

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
‘1)! ﬂ“ﬂﬂt1Al.U$l2lﬂVLI

UDC 550.388.2z551.594.6

ANALYSIS OF VLF SIGNALS BY DIGITAL METHODS
[Abstract of article by Perlikov, A. H. and Ostapenko, A. A.]

[Text] Methodological problems arising in the analysis of signals in the frequency
range f<'3 K“: are analyzed. An experimental apparatus for the input of analog
signals into an electronic computer and an algorithm for the spectral-temporal
analysis of VLF signals are described. This apparatus has a high resolution. An
example of analysis of a model signal, describing a short electronic whistler, is
given, as well as the results of processing of an experimental VLF signal of a
discrete type. Figures 5, references 9.

"DC Sl+550.3

MATHEMATICAL SUPPORT OF A COMPLEX FOR PROCESSING GEOPHYSICAL INPORNAIION

[Abstract of article by Rndkevich, V. A.]

[Text] The article gives a description of the mathematical support of a complex for
the processing of analog and telemetric information obtained in a-geophysical ex-
periment. Included is a block diagram of a complex of programs containing primary
and scientific processing programs, servicing programs and standard programs. The
storage of data is organized on nagnetic tapes. A description of the organization

of input of information into an electronic computer and the purpose of the programs
are given. The complex of programs is introduced into ”‘6030 and RV "Iskra-lZSZ"

computers at the Polar Geophysical Institute, Kola Affiliate. USSR Academy of Sci-
ences. Figures 1, references 6.

UDC 681.17
SURFACE RECEIVING-RECORDING COMPLEX FOR THE SAHBO-79-EXPERIHENT
[Abstract of article by Zhavkov, V. A. and Sushchenko, M. 8.]

[Text] The purpose of receiving stations is examined and a block diagram of the
equipment is given. The authors describe the apparatus at the receiving points
and give a brief description of the operating principle for a receiving point and
individual instruments. The technical specifications of the principal units are
presented. Figures 2, references 3.

UDC 621.37l+621.396.6+550.3
MOBILE COMPLEX 0P APPARATUS FOR STUDYING PROPAGATION OF DECAHETER RADIO HAVES'

[Abstract of article by Patenchinkov, A. A., Pertsovskiy, R. A.. Sazonov, V. A. and
Thachenko. B. V.]

[Text] A mobile receiving-transmitting complex has been developed which makes it
possible to organize temporary radio links in the 8" range for solution of various

116

INJI!OFTHCJAl.lEﬂi(NULY
scientific research problems. This complex makes possible the simultaneous radi-
ation and reception of radio waves at several fixed frequencies in both continu-
ous and pulsed regimes. The radioelectronic apparatus installed at the reception
point makes it possible to register the following parameters of test radio signals:
1) envelope of a radio signal radiated in a carrier regime; 2) averaged envelope
of multimode pulsed signals with resolution along the rays; 3) Doppler frequency
shift in one of the receiving channels; 4) absolute signal level at the receiver
input; 5) visually monitored data for some signal parameters in any of the receiv-
ing channels with the possibility of photoregistry; 6) number of rays of multimode
signals. with measurement of their duration and lag time between them; 7) high-
quality magnetic record of transformed high-frequency signals at several fre-
quencies simultaneously for their subsequent spectral analysis. The complex also
includes a magnetotelluric station making it possible to register the median and
short-period variations of the magnetic field in three components. this making it
possible to monitor overall geophysical conditions at the reception point. This
complex was tested within the framework of the international experiment SAHBO-79,
during which it was used in obtaining unique results in the field of slant sound-
ing of the auroral ionosphere. Figures 8, references 2.

UDC 621.396.62
NARROW-BAND SUPERHXCH-FREQUBNCY RECEIVER WITH DOUBLE FREQUENCY CONVERSION
[Abstract of article by Beloglazov, M. I.and Shishayev, V. A.]

[Text] The article describes a 8“? receiver with compensation of phase changes of
heterodyne voltage. The receiver transmission band is 0/15 32. the amplification
factor is 100 db and the level of instrument noise in the passband is less than
0.01 p.V. In the temperature range 10-60%: the change in signal delay time is 0.10-
0.lS[isec/l°c and the mean change in the amplification factor in this same temper-
ature range is less than 0.51/1'0. A block diagram of the receiver and circuit di-
agrams of individual stages are given. Figures 2, references 2.

unc 621.38+629.l321
SPECIALIZED SIGNAL RECEIVER IN A PRECISE TIME STATION
[Article by Kornilov, I. A.]
[Text] This is a review of the principal methods used in synchronising precise
time services. It emphasizes'the prospects for using precise time stations in a
geophysical experiment for transmitting time information in a digital code. The
author briefly describes a specific receiver used in the territory of Murmanskaya
oblast for the reception of signals of precise time stations situated in the ter-

ritory of West Germany (77.5 KHz) and Great Britain (60 KHz). Figures 3, refer-
ences 3.

115

FINICHHWCJAI.USE¢N§LV
I'UK UI'I'MAL U80. UNLI

[Inc 621. 384629.1321

RECEIVER OP VLF RADIATIONS FOR BALLOON INVESTIGATIONS

[Abstract of article by Kornilov, N. A.]

[Text] The article concisely sets forth the fundamental principles for construct-
ing a receiver of VLF radiations for balloon investigations. A block diagram of
the instrument is provided and its technical specifications are stipulated. In
addition to balloon studies, the instrument was also employed in surface VLF in-
vestigations. It can operate with both electric and magnetic antennas. Figures

1. references 2.

"DC 535+550. 388

HIDE-BAND SPELTRAL CAMERA WITH INTERHEDIATE DISPERSION FOR OBSERVM AURORAS
Hl‘l'ﬂ LIGHT BRIGHTNESS AMPLIFIER

[Abstract of article by Sukhoivanenko. P. Ya.)

[Text] A highly sensitive spectral camera has been created with a brightness ampli-
f ier for the observation of auroras. The instrument field of viev is 100'. The in-
verse linear dispersion is 150 Alan. Exposures from 30 to 150 see are 'used in sur-
veying the auroral spectra. Figures 3, references 7.

BBC 621 . 39+591 . 510

DISCRETE CIRCUIT OF A RECEIVING-RECORDING APPARATUS. FOR ADDSPHERIC
OPTICAL SOUNDING

[Abstract of article by Baydalov, s. I and Drosdov. H. Yu.]

[Text] A simple circuit for optical sounding of the atmosphere by the photon count-
ing method with discrete sampling of range and the strobe is described. A threshold
response of a ut 5-10"19 V was attained. The dynamic range of the measured light
fluxes is ~ 10 . The shaped counting pulses were normalized with respect to dura-
tion and amplitude. The circuit simultaneously provides for direct and inverse out-

puts. Figures 1, references 5.

use 621.316.S
Low-rowan D—c VOLTAGE CONVERTERS

[Abstract of article by Zhavkov, V. A.]

[Text] The author gives-concise reconsndations on the choice of circuitry for a
low-power converter. The article examines in adequate detail the operation of a
converter with a saturating core constructed in a circuit with a grounded collec-
tor. A formula is cited which relates the conversion frequency, power voltage and
core parameters. A method is given for simplified computation of the specific cir-
cuit. Figures 2. references lo.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FINIGJFFICIAI.IENE(HHLY

UDC 621.371

PHASE METER HITH PULSED PHASE DETECTOR WITH RECTANGULAR CHARACTERISTIC FOR RADIO
SIGNALS IN THE SUPERLONG-WAVE RANGE -

[Abstract of article by Beloglazov. H. I. and Shishayev]

[Text] The article describes a device for measurement of signal phase in the range
10-30 KHz. The authors validate the use of a phase detector with a rectangular char-
acteristic and a signal limiter in the phase meter instead of an AVC system. The re-
quirements imposed on individual parts of the developed device. which ensures the

measurement of the phase of superlong-uave signals with an error less than 11 sec

with a signal-to-noise ratio > 0.5 in the band 20-30 Rs, are analyzed. A block dia-
gram of the phase meter ls given. Figures 2, references 7.

UDC 621.37

AMPLITUDE LIMITER WITH FLOATING THRESHOLD
[Abstract of article by Galakhov. A. A.]
[Text] A scheme of an amplitude limiter with a floating threshold for reducing the
influence of atmospheric noise on the error in registry of VLF radiations is de-
scribed. Figures 2, references 3.

UDC 621.396.62
ACTIVE FILTER FOR PROCESSING VI? SIGNALS
[Abstract of article by Pershakov. L. A.]
[Text] A scheme is proposed for an active RC filter for very low frequencies. The
proposed scheme makes it possible to construct filters with independent regula-
tion of the mean frequency of analysis. the width of the band of analyzed fre-
quencics and the transfer coefficient. Figures 1. references 2.

COPYRIGHT: Kol'skiy filial AN SSSR, 1980

5303
cso: 1865/23

117

INJR OINNCJAI.UBI§(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

ABSTRACI‘S FRO! THE JQIRNAL 'TECHIICAL WC', JULY-AUG]?! 1981
Hoscov TBCHNIGIMAYA KIBERNEPIKA in Russian lo ’4. Jul-Aug 81 pp 222-223

UDC 681.3

CREATIOI OF DEVICES SUITABLE FOR mm. A DING PEM- BY mum
TECHNOLGIY

[Abstract of article by Aasf'yev, Yu. v.. Boykevich. A. m. Volchek, v. I... and
Goryasﬂco, A. P.]

[Text] A number of tasks of synthesis of silply diagnosed circuits is manned
with consideration of real distinctive features of third-generatim conputers.

It is shown that. by introducing relatively small structural redundancy in an ar-
bitrary computer it is possible to detect and localize constant defects of the
device without resorting to generation of test sets for the entire device.

UDC 62-52
Amonws AII'I‘ITONIC SEQUENTIAL CIRCUITS. 1. DEFINITIONS AND MANOR
[Abstract of article by Sterodubtsev. II. A.]
[Text-I A new class of switching circuits is introduced--autcnom sntitcnic se-
quential circuits. Their connection with a nodal of a finite sutcmton is estab-
lished. as well as with a model of a circuit not dependent on the working rate of

the elenents and also with models of seunodular. completely sequential, snoothed
and aperiodic circuits.

"DC 519-95
nsvmopm or A PLAN FOR Lomm A cmvs-usn omen cumin
[Abstract of article by Eyvazov. A. 3.]
[Text] The task of constructing an optima schedule for two criteria for loading

a collective-use computer center is examined. The solution is based on intonation
about computer service resources forecasted in the planning period and the declared

118

FOIOIFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

need for resources of the subscribers, where a request for resources can contain

an indication of a specific tine interval during the course of which that request
nust be satisﬁed. The nethod of dynamic programing is used to solve the problem.

UDC £9.68
DISTRIBUTION OF THE RESGI'RCE W ASU DIGITAL COHPUTI PRWJCI‘IVITY

[Abstract of article by Tinonov, L. 11.]

[Text] The article cxenlnes the task of optimizing distribution of the nesting
tine of a digital computer processor between progress for the solution of individu-
al ASU tasks. The quality criterion is the general ASU efﬁciency. The connection
of the general efficiency with the quality of solution of individual tasks is as-
sumed to be known. The dependence of the quality of the automted solution of
tasks on the developed digital conputer productivity is approximted by exponential
functions. For the additive function of A80 effectiveness the task is reduced to
explicit fern. It is shotm ttat optilisation of the operative distribution of the

resource of digital computer productivity can substantially increse the ASU effi-
ciency.

unc 681.326.3t327.2
INFLUENCE or queue STORE on comm Im'r-wrnrr srs'm mum CAPACITY
[Abstract of article by Artanonov, a. 1n, and Yablonskiy. s. v.]

[Text] An analysis is rude of the influence of the queue store on the probability
of saturation of a computer input-output system. The systen consists of a model of
a two-phase nulti-unit queueing systen. It is found that the output flow of the
lultiplex channel is close to a very simple Poisson flow and the output flow of the
channel and multiplex unit channel is a geometric process. Several nethods of
approximte description of processes in an input-output system are examined. A

comparison is made with traditional lethods of investigating two-phase mlti-unit
queueing systems.

000 519-853
HATHEIATICAL WEI. 0F SOHE TAS(S 0F OPTIHIZATIQI W PATHS

[Abstract of article by Smelyskov. s. v.. and Stoysn. m. 0.]

[Text] A matheratical nodel is emitted of the space of paths lying in a non-
singly-connected region which is used to solve a number of tasks of optilisation
on paths. Properties of that model are presented. properties which per-it com--
puter solution of corresponding problens by selecting classes of path equivalence
and. if necessary constructing extrema in those classes. The possibilities of
obtaining a nodel are illustrated by enlples of the solution of sons tasks in the
optimisation of the tracing of engineering networks.

119

MWWONLY
MOFHCIALWEONLY

unc 62-50
nsrmnmc m 30:11an sum or mmc svsms
[Abstract of article by Pavlov, n. 3.]

[Text] For dynamic systels described by ordinary differential equations the prob-
len of direct determination of boundary states on the fixed left and nobile-in-tine
right ends of the Variable interval of notion of the tastes. A lethod is proposed
for solving the problem. one based on properties of sy-Ietry in autontic systems.
Equations of inversion of phase states are obtained for deternining the initial
components of the phase vector for given fiml and equations of transfer of states
for determining unknown final components for given initial values.

we 62-50
smnssts or m Immm mmc sxs'rsn vrm vacuum comm.

[Abstract 31‘ article by Petrov, B. N. (deceased). Denent'yeva, V. V.. and Kin-nata-
lev, H. H.

[Text] A study is mde of synthesis of a dynanic systel invariant in relation to
a terminal functional. Necessary and sufficient conditions of weak invariance are
used in the solution. In the work a class of systens is distinguished for which
invariance can be assured by means of programed control.

COPYRIcﬂl‘n Iggatel'stvo "ﬂanks“. "Izvestiys AN SSSR. Tekhnioheslcaya kibernecika"
1 1

217a
can. 1863/?

120

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
TABLE OF CONTENTS FROM THE JOURNAL 'ENGINEERING CYBERNBTICS'

Tbilisi TEKHNICHESKAYA KIBERNETIKA in Russian No I. (225). 1980 (signed to press
12 Apr 80) pp 2-4

iTable of contents of Works of the Georgian Polytechnical Institute ileni V. I.

Lenin; editorial board for the collection: G. K. Tkeshelashvili (chairman), A. Sh.
Gugushvili, M. M. Gotmzhiya, I. G. Zedginidze, K._ M. Kamkamidze, G. A. Chikhladze,

c. G. Chogovadze and N. Z. Chkhaidze (responsible secretary”

i‘i‘ext] Table of Contents
1. On the Evaluation of Senantic Information. A. G. Losaberidze

2. Evaluation of the Accuracy of a Gas Dynamic Model of the Process of
Movement of Container Formations in a Pneumatic Pipeline by Results of
Experimental Research. 5. S. Cusev and L. I. Gamkrelidze

3. Mathematical Modeling of Various Modes of Operation of a Container
Pneumatic Pipeline of Continuous Operation. 1.. A. Afoniya, V. A. Arakelov,
v. V. Yerenenko and L. I. Gamkrelidre

10. Method of Compression of Information on a Continuous Process Based on a
Simple Procedure of Piecewise Linear Approximation. G. M. Kuznetsov,
K. K. Kuskov and T. M. Baramidze

5. On Evaluation of Disturbances in a Hydrostatic System with Distributed
Parameters. V. A. Koval' and N. I. Narimanashvili

6. (‘-n the Question of Structure of a Library of Models in an Automated Systaa
of Preliminary Algoritlnization (ASPA). G. Sh. Bagaturiya, B. D.
Meparishvili and L. G. Nercheuashvili

7. Processing of Information Represented in Matrix Porn on a P8

[Rearrangeable Structure] Type Computer. K. N. Kamkamidze and
A. S. Papandopulo

8. Representation of Dynamic Characteristics of Pulse Magnetic Polarity
Reversal of Magnetic Circuits with a Rectangular Hysteresis Loop as a
Product of No Functions. M. 2. Chkhaidze

9. Extension of the Algorithnic Language FORTRAN IV. N. R. Montselidze and
O. M. Davitashvili

10. Problem of Designing Systems Operating in Real Time. D. O. Sanikidze,
O G. Natroshvili, V. A. Goglidze. M. G. Yashvili and L. G. Tartakovskiy

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

5

12

16

19

25

29

34

39

65
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

210.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

85105
CSO:

POI! OPFlCIAL USE ONLY

On One Question of Realization of a Subtraction Algorithm in Digital

Computer Operating Units. 0. G. Natroshvili and V. P. Kozhaayako 51
On the Question of Estimating the Effectiveness of Adaptive Discrete

Systems with a Base of Functionally Redundant Elements. 6. S. Tsiramua 55
Organization of Monitoring of Microprocessor Systems. 6. S. Tsiramua 58

Synthesis of Optimal System for Automatic Control of Lowering of Column
of Drill Pipes with Computer Application. A. G. Bdiberidse, A. V.

Zagrebnev and 1'. Yu. Tsintsadre 61
A Method of Machine Analysis of Complex Logic Circuits. L. V. Peradae 67
Morphological Analysis of Texts in Natural Language Using a Computer.

C. G. Gogichaishvili ' 72
Development of Means of Identification of Unicapacitive Nonlinear Objects.

G. A. Buadze 78
Algorithm for Forming Decision-Making Rules in a Semiotic Simulation

Model. 2. G. Shurgaya 83
Technique of Preliminary Algoritinization of Continuous Technological
Processes. B. D. Meparishvili 87

Planning an Experiment with Construction of Diagrams of the State of
Binary Alloys with Unlimited Solubility in the Solid State.

I. C. Zedginidze. Sh. S. Lobzhanidse and L. G. Narchaashvili 91
Making Use of Apriori Information to Reduce the Dimensionality of Problems
with Cubic Description of Properties of Mixtures. Sh. B. Dzhaparidze 96

Iterative Algorithm for Modeling Objects of Control with Incomplete
lnfnrmation by Optimization Criteria. 6. Sh. Bagaturiya and V. I. mchua 103

Problem of Determining Optimal Module Size of Standard Exchange Card (T32).

M. M. Gotoshiya and 0. A. Vartanyan 107
Problem of Optimization of Gas Supply Systaas. M. M. Gotoshiys, M. K.
Kakhadze, 0. B. Meladze and T. S. Tsutsunava 1110
Some Problems of Structure of Simulation Models of Discrete Continuous
Type Production Systans. 6. Ya. Amkoladze and B. M. Dimov 119
Algorithn for Computing Check Functions of Multiple Faults in Circuits
for Railroad Automation and Remote Control. T. G. Melkadze 122
Coding States of Discrete Devices for Railroad Automation and Remote
Control. A. A. Dundua 127
Optimal Control of Modes of Operation of Wells in Petroleum Deposits
in Elastic Mode of Filtration. G. A. Dzidziguri 132
Problem of Consideration of a Pump in Modeling Filtration of Multiphase
Liquid in a Porous Environment. A. R. Kutateladze and Yu. 1". Sharonov 138
1863/266

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.142.4
SYSTEMS AND METHODS FOR AMTING SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Moscow 518190! I HETODY AWATIZM‘SII NAUCHNYKH ISSLBDOVANIY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 17 Apr 81) pp 2-3, 149-150

(Annotation, foreword and table of contents from collection of works “Systems and
Methods for Automating Scientific Research", edited by Professor V.H. Pononarev,
doctor of technical sciences, Leningrad Scientific Research Conputer Center, USSR
Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2,800 copies, 152 pages]

[Text] ANNUI‘ATION

This collection of works is devoted to an analysis of the development and realisa-
tion of systems for automating scientific research on the basis of computer net-
works, time-sharing infonation and counter systems and robot technology. There
is also an analysis of the effectiveness of the utilisation of algorithmic models
to control coupler socioeconomic systems in the process of solving urgent national
economic problems.

This book is aimed at scientific, engineering and technical workers.
PORBHORD

The development of science and technology in its present stage is inextricably con-
nected with the extensive use of computer facilities and fundamentally new algo-
rithmic models and technical organizational forms of the computation process. of
particular value is the work that is being done on the creation of computer net-
works and tine-sharing information and computer systems that encompass a wide cir-
cle of organisations and establishments that are performing research in the field
of the creation of methods for the automation of scientific research.

In this collection we present the results of scientific research work performed by
workers at the USSR Academy of Sciences' Leningrad Scientific Research Comuter
Center in three basic areas: the creation of new algorithmic models for the solu-
tion of scientific and national economic problems; the development of algorithms
and packages of applied programs for solving complex problem involving the pro-
cessing of large masses of information; analysis of the possibilities of creating
and using automated systems for different purposes.

The collection consists of three sections.

123

POI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first section, "Algorithmic Models and Methods.” there is a discussion of.
questions related to the construction of the algorithmic models that are used in
time-sharing computer networks during basic research and the solution of such im-
portant national economic problems as predicting the development of a branch and
branch planning.

In the second section. “Algorithms and Programs for the Machine Processing of In-
formational Data,‘I there is a presentation of the results of the work that has been
done on the creation of packages of applied programs and a description of fundamen-
tally new algorithms that can be on interest in the process of conducting research
in the areas of experiment control. pattern recognition and the analysis of large
masses of information. Results related to the automation of patent and licensing
information research and the presentation of data on museum collections are also
reflected in the articles in this section.

In the third section, “Automated Data Processing systems," methods for creating and
controlling robot technology systems with the use of minicolputers are developed.
along with the principles of the construction of the terminal complexes of systems
for the automation of scientific research. There is also a discussion of problems
related to the organization of the associative storage and retrieval of information
in a computer's memory and the economic and organisational aspects of the use of
data bases. '

The novelty and practical orientation of the problems that are discussed make it
possible to hope that these materials will be of interest to workers engaged in re-
search in different fields of science and technology.

TABLE 01’ CGITENTS

Page
Foreword.................................... 3

1. Algorithmic Models and Methods

The Procedure for Predicting Branch Development on the Basis of an Algorithmic
Model (V.V. Ivanishchev, A.V. Yevseyev, v.1. Kudasov) . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

Modeling Current Branch Planning Production and Transport Problem (B.P.
NOIIICSOV'L.V.Chcmy3heV).....o.................o..11

Algorithmic Structure of Models of Decomposition levels of Computer networks
(B.M.Shishkin)............................... l7

Algorithmization of Information Units and Comications in a Closed Experiment
Control Circuit (NJ. Ponomareva, B.M. Shishkin). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

Numerical Modeling of the Axially symmetric Motion of an Incompressible. vis-
cous Liquid in a Spherical Layer (6.1. Podol'skaya, I..M. simuni). . . . . . . 25

Statistical Systems and Exchange Correlations (AM. Balonishnikov). . . . . . . 35

2. Algorithms and Programs for the Machine Processing of Informational Data

12!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pattern Recognition With the Help of Mappings of Discrete Spaces (A.I.
Alekseyev,N.D.Gorskiy)..... ......................

0n Automating Patent and License Information Research (V.M. Vyatkina) . . . . .

An Automated Information System for the Presentation and Analysis of Data on
MuseumCollectims(I.P.Podnozova).....................

A Package of Applied Programs for Processing Ronstationary Random Processes
(V.S.Shneyderov,v.P.Talalayev) ........ . .. .. ... .. . . . .

On One Approach to Orienting a System of Mathesatical Statistics Programs for

Processing the Results of Nonnumerical mality Measurements (O.N.
Kolesnikova,N.V.Khovanov)... ......................

Investigation of the Statistical Relationships Between variables Described on
Different Scales (N.D. Gorskiy, A.M. Nikiforov, 'l'.0. Oderysheva). . . . . . .

On Representing Filters in Automated Image Processing Problems (D.I. Volgin,
I.v.'rerent'yev)......... ...

An Algorithm for Searching for Salient Points in Experimental Relationships
During Automated Data Processing (I.M. Breyev). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3. Automated Data Processing Systems

Organization of Associative Information Storage and Retrieval in a Computer's
Memory (V.V. Aleksandrov. N.D. Gorskiy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

A Method for Organizing Composite Control of a Robot's Drives (PM. Kulakov,
T.N.Sl1mova)..............onoooo....o.......

Organizational and Economic Aspects of the Use of Data Bases (V.V. Aleksandrov.
A.V.Arsent'yeva)........ ......................

On the Structure of Arrays in Document-Type Automated Intonation Systems (I..I.
KOISaROVa,L.V.ChemYSheVG)o........o.....o-.o......

A Method for Monitoring Completeness During the Renovation of logically
Connected Data in a Distributed Data Base (1w. Arsent'yeva). . . . . . . . .

Principles of the Construction of a Cosmon Mesory Module in Multimachine Sys-

tems Based on Microcomputers With a Cannon Line (Am. Domaratskiy, A.V.
xashirin) O I O O I I O 0 O I O O O 9 I I O I O I O O O O O I I I D O O O O D

Functional Levels of the Decomposition of Terninal Units in Information and
Computer Networks (A.V. Kashirskiy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1erminal Complex of a System for the Automation of Scientific Research on the
Basis of Graphic Interaction (A.O. Polyakov, V.P. Sukharichev). . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka', 1981

11,746

C80: 1863/9 125

FOR OFFICIAL (5! ONLY

Page
48

55

64

71

76

87

96

99

111

117

121

125

129

137

142
. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 681 . 326. 32

PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTINC COHHON mom! MODULE IN HULTIHACHINE SYSTEMS
BASED ON HICROCOHPUI‘ERS um! COMMON LINE

Moscow SIS'I'BHY I WY AMHZATSIYA vacuums: 18W in Russian 1981
(signed to press 17 Apr 81) pp 129-136

[Article by LN. Domaratskiy and A.V. Kashirin]

[Text] The rapid development of the microprocessor element base made it possible
to build multiprocessor structures containing practically any number of processors.
The construction of hierarchical computational and control systems with a distrib-
uted architecture also became possible. This caused great interest on the part of
developers in questions concerning the organisation: of the interaction of individu-
al processors in multiprocessor systems on both the equipment and programing lev-
els. The experience that has now been amassed in cmputer technology shows that
the architecture of multimachine systems depends to a great degree on the method
used to construct the apparatus for interprocessor cousunication. In connection
with this, the solutions that have been found depend on the types of processors be-
ing used and the purpose of the multimachine system. For example. in the general-
purpose an. system [1,2] a special commnication controller that insures processor
interaction in the direct-memory-access mode has been developed. In such a system
a single processor can be stopped in any stage of program execution when another
processor needs it to be stopped. This solution makes it difficult to use such a
processor communication method in real-time systems. where all the major practical
applications are found. 'ihe cannon question in the realisation of most know
multinachine structures is the question of realizing the module for the canon mem-
ory to which all or several of the processors in the multimachine system have ac-
cess. Let us also mention here that the use of microcomputers with a common line
in the creation of multimachine systems is quite extensive (see, for example,
[1.2]) .

The basic subject of investigation in this article is methods for constructing a
comon memory module in a programmed access mode for cosmunication among the pro-
cessors in a microcomputer with a common line in multiprocessor systems.

At the equipment level. processor couuunication in multimachine systems must pro-
vide a capability for joint utilization of the data and procedures stored in the
common memory module, as well as the transmission of information to each other.

In order to do this, the coununication nodule must have the capability of resolving
equipment conflicts that arise when simultaneous access to the canon memory is at-
tempted and must provide a possibility of resolving programing conflicts that can

126

FOR OMCIAL US! ONLY
for organizing pzt
ugh e

 

Item:
multiuachine systems based on
cannon line. We
n with a two-processor system an<
then extend the results of our investiga-
1. Special address (AI ) tron to the e of multimclune systems.
. Interrupt cxrcuit (SR) Figure .1 is a block diagram of a possible
3. Control circuzt (SU ) variant of a cannon memory module. The
4. Status regzeter (Rs ) processor‘s line is represented by the
5. cation unit .) thzck solid lxne. while the memory mod-
6. mory unit (20) ule's address and data lines are repre-
sented b the double line. The Comm
Memory module consists of the zdenticelly reeliz d conunzcetion units of the first
and second processors (M51 and H52 an the c
tere R81 and 2, to whac
change info

Statue regis-
used to ex-

. 'l'he module's

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:comands with access to the common memory
module's zu

CLRIOABI

:comand for termination of access to the

acomon mastery module's 20. Processor 1
:cleare 882.

The second processor's subprogram for ac-
cess to the canon memory module is analo-
gous, with the appropriate replamment of
address “81 by A352.

 

Figure 2. Block diagram of canon
memory module with line cycle resolu- In order that the processors have the ca-

tion. pability of programd interruption of
Key: 1. Special address (A1.) each other, special addresses An and A12
2. Address register um.) are reserved in the address space of each
3. Interrupt circuit (SP.) of them. In connection with this, the
4. Control circuit (50.) hardware of H31 and MSZ can be realised so
5. Status trigger ('15.) that the interrupt request will be formu-
6. Conmmication unit 015.) lated upon the execution of any machine
7. Memory unit (20) command with access by addresses an and

A12. For example, processor 1 can inter-
rupt the operation of processor 2 as the result of the execution of the coal-and
cm I @ hIl. Formation of the interrupt request signal, its removal after resolu-
tion of the interruption, and setting of the interrupt vector on the interrupted
processor's line can be realized by interrupt circuits SP1 and SP2 in a fashion
that is typical for microcomputers.

The advantage of the cannon memory nodule structure that has been described is the
simplicity of the principle of sharing access to the canon memory unit. As a re-
sult of this, the problem of programing conflicts between the interacting process-
ors is solved. However, one substantial defect is the dependence of one of the
processor's access time to the cannon memory module on the length of the program
being executed by the other processor.

Let us now turn our attention to the fact that, in most cases. communication over a
microcomputer's line between active units (a processor, for example) and passive
ones (a connon mmry module, for example) is asynchronous. In an asynchronous
line. answering signals from the cannon memory module must act on the processor's
control signals. 'mis fact makes it possible for several processors to achieve ac-
cess to the cannon memory under conditions of sharing access to the line.

Figure 2 is a block diagram of a common memory module with shared access to the
line. The definitions used are analogous to those used in Figure l. The differ-
ence consists of the use of status triggers T51 and T82 in the diagram. In the
module of such a structure. at any moment the cannon memory is in an OCCUPIED or
FREE state for each processor. The duration (1) of the OCCUPIED state for one pro-
cessor will equal the duration of the other processor's access time to the line
during its monopolistic possession of the memory unit's module. single-bit regis-
ters to which direct programsd access is lacking are provided in memory units H51
and M82 in order to store information about the status of the cannon memory.

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY

line access cycle to the moment when the processor's communication nodule receives
an answering signal. During access to the common memory in the FREE state, the
control circuit ($01 or 802) connects the 20's address and data lines to the pro-
cessor's line during the address section of the access cycle and the data exchange
subcycle, respectively. In this case, the communication module's answering signal
arrives after time T (to - T). In the OCCUPIED state, the communication module's
control circuit must insure storing of the address of the common msmory's required

pend on the length of the program being run in the other processor. but equals the
duration 1 of the line access cycle. It can be assumed that each processor has the
capability of. having access to the cannon memory at practically any lament: that 134
the illusion of monopolistic use of the cannon memory module by each processor is

memory module's zu and that the multimachine system consists of processors of a

that is stored in the common zu under address A. The initial state is (A) - 0.
Starting with this, the first processor's subprogram for access to the critical re-
source has the form

LABEL: TST # 0 A
:check the value of the coma variable

8M1 LABEL
INC N 9 A

:(A) - (A) + 1, the process obtained the critical resource

:the critical section

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEC I 6 A
:(A) - (A) - l. freeing the critical resource.

within the framework of the limitations that have been adopted, the second process-
or's subprogrmn for access to the critical resource will have the torn

DBCIBA

:(A) - (A) - l, requirement for the critical resource

:sequence of comands for forming a tesporal pause of duration greater than the du-
:ration of the wands Bu! LABEL + INC 0 0 A executed by the first processor

LABEL: TST I 0 A
:check the cannon variable

BBQ LABEL

:the critical section
INC 5 9 A
:(A) = (A) + l, freeing the critical resource.

In these subprograms the common variable can take on three values: 0, l, -l. The
first processor obtains the critical resource if (A) - 0 at the moment of the check.
while the second one obtains it if (A) - -l at the moment of the check. When the
comands for the formation of the teaporal pause are chosen correctly, in the sec-

ond processor's subprogram the proposed solution resolves the progressing conflicts
arising during the interaction of two processes. Several sets of data shared by

different processors can be stored in the cannon memory. Each such set of data is
then a critical resource.

The use of a cocoon memory module with sharing of the access time to the line in a
nultimachine system makes it possible to increase its overall productivity in com-
parison with the system based on a cannon memory module depicted in Figure l. The
reserve for increasing productivity consists of the possibility of the simltaneous
use of different critical resources. In addition to this, the total duration of a

single processor's access times to the cosmon memory's addresses is only part of
the entire time of execution of the corresponding critical section in this process-
or's program.

The operating principles of the comm memory modules that we have been discussing
allow generalization to the case of the connection of N processors (N > 2) with a

130

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
Key: 1. Processor line serviCe discipline is "first in--first

2. Special address (AIS) served," and considering the definitions

3. Special address (nos) previously introduced. in a multiprocessor

4. Inhibit systen this limitation has the form

5. Conditional branching con- t < to < m. merefore, the allowable
trol circuit (SUUV). nunber at processors with a canon Minty

6. Conditional branching can- is limited by the inequality N1- < '1'. Let
and realization circuit us also mention here that programing
(8W) interaction of processes is made consider-
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

 
     
 
    

"unpom-m palm
n eaupenoo npopu-
seals ‘(1’

  

Figure 4..Examp1e of the use of a conditional branching cos-and.
Key:
1. Hardware interruption re- 2. Indivisible operation

action subprogram

During execution of P- and v-operations by the i-th process, an ImiIBIT-i signal is
established at the output of BUV—i that adjusts the branching condition for inter-
ruption at all the other inputs of the cannon memory module. During the performance
of the indivisible operation by the i-th process. the INHIBIT-i signal must remain

constant. In order to remove this signal after completion of the indivisible opera-
tion. it is possible to provide for the execution of any machine contend with access
to the special address A05 (CLR I 0 nos, for example) (see Figure 3).

From the investigations that we have conducted, it is possible to draw the concluo'.
sion that a cannon memory module with monopolistic access can be realized for multi-
nachine systems in which the tendency for joining together a large number of pro-
gramtically weakly connected processors is observed. Complicated programing in-
teractions of processors are realized more efficiently with the help of a cannon
memory module with line cycle sharing. However, the limitation on the maxim re-
sponse delay of a unit on an asynchronous line for a large number of processors hav-
ing access to a counon memory module can make it necessary to use error interrup-
tions on the line. This results in some reduction in a multimachine system's over-
all productivity. The answer to the question of how much is productivity reduced

and how to achieve the best compromise can be obtained with the help of machine
modeling of such systems. but this is outside the framework of this article.

BIBLIWRAPHY

l. (Enslou) , Philip x.. "Mul'tiprotsessory i parallel'nyye vychisleniya" [multi-
processors and Parallel Computations], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1976. 383 pp.

2. Tammi, Ye.N.. "Multiprocessor Systems.“ MEWMIA RADIOBERTRONIKA, No 3,
1979, PP 3—27.

3. Puller. S.X.. ct al.. “Multiprocessor Systems: Review and an Example of Prac-
tical Realization,“ TIIER, Vol 66, No 2, 1978, pp 135-150.

4. (Deykstra). 8., “Interaction of Sequential Processes," in "Yazyki programirova-
niya" [Programing Languages], edited by P. zhenyui. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir",
1972, pp 9-86.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Nauka‘, 1981

11,746
cso: 1863/9 - sun -

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY