FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10023
30 September 1981

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 15/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MTB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in content.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHL’IATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
CONTENTS

INVESTHENT, PRICES, BUDGET AND FINANCE

Production Integration for Investment Efficiency Urged
(Ye. Beraheda; VOPROSY BKONOHIKI, Jun 81) . .........

Economic Impact of Price Hark-Ups Heighed
(V. Shalinov; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. Jun 81) . . . . . . . . . . .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INVESTMENT, PRICES. BUDGET AND FINANCE

PRODUCTION IMTIQI FOR INVESTMEIT EFFICIﬂICY URGED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 33-40

_/_Xrtic1e by Ye. Bersheda. Kiev: "Integration of Sectors and Industries in the In-
vestment Process27

5335.7 The overall approach to the planning of interconnected sectors of the na-
tional economy envisaged in "Basic Directions in the Economic and Social Develop-
ment of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period Until 1990" requires the study
of integration processes in the national economy. The integration of sectors and
industries having a general goal orientation toward the attainment of final nation-

al economic results leads to the creation of intersectorial formations.

At present the dependence of the results of capital construction on the economic
sectors connected with them intensifies, which necessitates an investigation of the
integration of sectors and industries in the investment process. Academician T.
Khachaturov includes the construction industry, industrial sectors providing con-
struction with materials and equipment, the titer and wood processing industry.
machine building and metalworking and ferrous metallurgy in the set of capital form-
ing sectors.1

In the course of industrialization of construction a nuster of technological func-
tions are separated from it and assigned to industrial sectors. Overall schemes
for the creation of fixed capital are developed and realised in industry and pro-
duction processes in industry and construction gradually become a single intercon-
nected process. Industry and construction are transformed from relatively inde-
pendent links to a system of integrated industrial building production oriented

toward final results.

An analysis of intersectorial production relations of construction based on the
indicators of the USSR intersectorial report balance of production and distribution
of products in 1972 has shown that, of the sectors of material production included
in it, construction is the largest consumer of the output of Inchine building and
metalworking, of the construction materials industry and of the sectors of the tim-
ber, wood processing and cellulose-paper industry. The proportion of material

1. See '1‘. Khachaturov, "Ways of Increasing the Efficiency of Capital Investments"
(VOPROSY BCONOHIKI, No 7, 1979, p 123).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prises 41 percent. In the construction materials industry this indicator is 76 per-
cent and in the sectors of the timber, wood processing and cellulose-paper indus-
try. 44 percent. Construction is also a major consumer of metallurgical output.

pers the coordination of the diverse needs of its participants. Enterprises produc-
ing structures for construction projects or preparing materials not subject to ware-
house storage (concrete and solutions). transport organizations and other subdivi-
sions servicing construction. despite their organizational independence, are limited
in their activity. Therefore, there is a need for a coordinated and operative regu-
lation of the development of production of the participants in the investment

construction enterprises and associations. as well as agrarian-industrial, exist in
the following forms: house building combines. plant building combines. rural con-
struction combines and production construction and installation associations and

process and the transformation of interdepartmental into intradepartmental and. if
possible. into intraproduction relations (within the framework of a single enter-

ital. within the framework of industrial construction formations it is possiLle to
strive for a stabilization of production relations among their components and to at-
tain the greatest correspondence between the produced output (fixed capital) and
consumers' interests. The consolidation of enterprises facilitates the solution of
the problem of providing the creators of fixed capital with circulating capital.

The transition to an evaluation of the activity of contractors on the basis of fin-
ished projects envisaged in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR
Council of Ministers "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the

Industrial and building production was first combined during the organization of

a house building combine in Leningrad in 1959. In the country there are now more
than 200 combines. in which the production of structures. their delivery to con-
struction sites and the performance of construction and installation work have been

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unified in a single technological couplex. Often house building coutines have
their own transport facilities, as well as planning and design offices developing
technical documents and working on an isprovenent in the structures of houses and
in the technology of their manufacture and installation. As a rule, house build-
ing codines acted as a subcontracting organization for the construction of the
above-ground part of the building. Below-grade work and the engineering prepara-
tion of the building territory were carried out by the general contractor (general
construction organization) or by specialized subdivisions on the basis of a con-
tract with it.

However. in a nunber of cases house building combines are engaged in the manufac-
ture of buildingas a whole. including the underground part, and are even general
contractors for the construction of housing tracts. For example. the house build-
ing codaine in Vilnius has the status of a general contracting organization and
performs the entire set of operations from the development of a territory to the
provision of public services and amenities in it. The cowine is on a single con-
struction balance. which contributes to the development of a single technology of
manufacture and installation of the structures of dwelling houses. Such experience
was accumlated in the Ukrainian 888. the Latvian SSR. Leningrad, Ala-Ate. Baku,
Gor'kiy. Tallinn and so forth. In this case general construction and specialized
organizations engaged in special construction work (performance of below-grade
work, laying of external utility lines and provision of public services and amen-
ities) perform the role of subcontractors.

House building combines performing the entire set of operations in the construc-
tion of projects ready for operation are becoming more and more widespread. The
consolidation of formations (large-panel house construction associations) contrib-
utes to this. For sample. a large-panel house construction association including
all the house building cosbines in Moscow. main specialized organizations and
plants for the manufacture of structures and parts was established in the Main Ad-
ministration for Housing and Civil Construction in the City of Moscow.

The formation of the new organizational structure in the Main Administration for
Housing and Civil Construction of the Kiev City Executive Comittee is to be com-
pleted by 1985. Five associations and combines, including a large-panel house con~
struction association. a large-unit construction association. the Kierpromstroy
Codine, a frame construction cotine and a scientific production association. in
which all the scientific. research and planning subdivisions of the Main Adminis-
tration for housing and Civil Construction of the Kiev City Executive Conittee

are concentrated. will become its basic subdivisions.

The advantages disclosed in the process of operation of house building combines
also affected the form of organization of the investment process in industrial
construction. The establishment of a plant building combine in Brovary by the
Main Administration for Housing and Civil Construction of the Kiev City Executive
Cosmuttee in 1964 was the first experiment. In the field of construction its ac-
tivity was limited to the construction of the above-ground part of one-story in-
dustrial buildings. An industrial project (shop) prepared for finishing and spe-
cial construction and installation work is the conbine's output. The L'vov, Do-
netsk. Dnepropetrovsk. Zaporozh'ye and other plant building combines were formed
subsequently.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subsequently, however, conbines began to function as ordinary suppliers and only
partially, in the role of organizations assebling the structures. elemts of
built-in prenises and industrial partitions mnufactured by them and performing such
operations as the filling of openings, roof installation and finishing of buildings.
The spread of plant building codines is hampered, because their legal status is
determined only by the departmental documents of construction ministries and their
activity is limited by general standards.

A nuaber of authors have a negative attitude toward the organization of plant build-
ing codines. It is stated that they are unable to manufacture one-series indus-
trial buildings on a mass scale. assenble them in the region of location of com-
bines with the performance of all special and finishing operations and prepare them
for commissioning.1

In our opinion, the advantages of plant building coatines are disclosed as the deg-
ree of readiness of their output is increased. Such cosbines should build founda-
tions and perform finishing and other operations connected with the installation of
prefabricated structures. Industrial buildings fully prepared for the installation
of industrial equipment should become their final output.

At present construction and installation organizations experience considerable dif-
ficulties connected with the fact that some work on the preparation of shells of
industrial buildings for operation technologically should be performed in parallel
with the installation of structures. In practice, it has to be carried out after
the completion of work by the forces of plant building conbines under hindered con-
ditions of finished frames of buildings, which hampers the delivery of materials.
use of mechanisms and efficient work organization. The preparation of shells of
industrial buildings for operation should become primrily the duty of plant build-
ing conbines. As a result. the readiness of building structures will increase.

For example, the Krasnoyarsk Experimental Plant Building Cosbine No l erects fin-
ished industrial buildings. The elements from which blocks are asselbled do not
require additional, even welding, work. Buildings are erected by the screwing
method.

The formation of rural construction combines began in the last few years. A to-
tal of 35 rural construction and rural house building combines were formed in the
USSR Ministry of Rural Construction by 1980.2 these coatines are industrial con-
struction organisations and perform the entire set of operations from the plant
mnufacture of sets of structures of fully prefabricated buildings to the delivery
of projects to clients in finished form. The USSR Ministry of Rural Construction
developed and approved "Temporary Instructions for the Organisation and Activity of
Rural Construction Combines," according to which it is permitted to establish

1. See A. s. Podol'nyy. "the Procedure of Planning the Activity of Construction
Ministries Must Be Changed" (EXONOMIKA S‘I'ROI‘I‘EL'S‘I'VA, No 11, 1978. pp 101-43).

2. See A. s. Hiroshnichenko, "Rural Construction Corbines: Experience and Prob—
lems" (EKONOMIKA STROITEL'STVA, No 7, 1980, p 32).

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combines of various types with due regard for specific local conditims. However.
in all cases the following are unified in a single production cycle: industrial
mnufacture of sets of structures and parts according to the established products
list; transportation and supply of full sets of structures and parts; performance
of the entire set of construction and special operations on the above-ground part
of a building.

lhe development of industrial construction integration in rural construction is
hawered by a nuﬂer of difficulties. in particular the overwhelming mjority of
conbines are not general contracting coﬂiines and their economic production activ-
ity is recorded on two balances--industrial and construction. As a result. there
is a contradiction between the combine interested in the installation of lightened
structures and the reinforced concrete article plant. for which cubic meters of re-
inforced concrete. not square esters of conissioned production premises. are
planned. At the same time. the structures and articles produced at the coabine are
formlated as connodity output and are transferred to installation organizations

at wholesale prices. which lakes it possible to increase profit artificially. Su-
perior organs plan for combines a list of structures and articles not only for
their own provision. but for that of general constructicn organizations as well.
All this hampers the unification of industrial and construction processes into a
single production cycle and mny rural construction commas operate as ordinary
precast reinforced concrete plants.

It is necessary (as. for exaaple. at the Gatchina Rural Construction Codaine) to
evaluate the activity of coatines according to comedity output with a single con-
struction balance. Under these conditions there is a direct interest in the final
results of work and in an increase in the plant readiness of sets of structures and
parts produced by comines and reporting is reduced.

At the July (1978) Plenum of the CPSU Central Co-ittee L. I. Brezhnev. discussing
the tasks of rural construction. noted the following: "It is a question of the es-
tablishment of large rural construction carbines designed for the output of sets

of light industrial structures of high plant readiness and the construction of pro-
duction buildings ready for operation from them with a delivery to the client."

As of 1979 the slutsk Rural Construction Coabine ssbarked on bringing a nutter of
projects under construction in Hinskaya Oblast up to full construction readiness.
The establish-mt of combines ensuring. like house construction coabines. the man-
ufacture and delivery of complete structures of buildings and installations to con-
struction projects is the next task. When necessary. shops for the production of
articles used for the developnent of specific types of projects for the purpose of
ensuring their complete delivery to construction projects should be built in di-
rect proximity to the construction combine. It is advisable to assign the appro-
priate planning and design offices to codines. These offices will attach the
standard plans for the projects being established.

The existing procedure of mtual relations between the client and the contractor
in the approval of planning estimtes. planning of capital investments. approval
of title lists and planning and financing of design work needs to be changed. In
addition to this. it is necessary to work out provisions for the organization of
the work of associations and of their subcontracting organizations taking into

consideration the nutual financial interest in shortening the period and lowering

5
roe omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the cost of construction. The development of construction cobines occurs in the
direction of expansion of their functions in the investment process. With such
work organization combines are transformed into construction firms. from which a
finished building or a set of buildings can be ordered. The further expansion of
the functions of construction cottines should be carried out in stages with due
regard for their specific nature, characteristics of functioning and degree of de-
velopment of cooperation among the participants in the inveth process.

The production construction and installation associations and trusts established
in a nutter of the country's regions (Kaliningrsdskaya (blast of the RSFSR, Ak-
tyubinskaya Oblast in the Kazakh ssn and so forth). which include subdivisions of
several sectors of the investment complex and are the result of development of or-
ganizstional forms of interaction of industry and construction. pertain to exist-
ing industrial construction formations.

According to the decree dated 12 July 1979 of the CPSU Central Comittee and the
USSR Council of Ministers. production construction and installation associations
and in individual cases trusts should becone the basic cost accounting links in
building production. Construction and installation associations and trusts can
include. as production units. general construction and specialized construction and
installation administrations and organisations, construction industry enterprises.
administrations of mechanization. subdivisions for mterisl and technical supply
and so forth equated vith then.

The question of the structure of construction and installation associations is de-
batable. For example. there is no unity of views on the need to include planning
subdivisions in the structure of associations. Heanvhile. joint work of planning
and construction subdivisions in the structure of one organization brings good re-
sults. The experience in the establishment of planning and construction associa-
tions in residential housing. reclaaation and rural construction attests to this.
For example. the following were formed in the Main Adninistration for Housing and
Civil Construction in the City of Moscow: the planning and construction associa-
tion No l for the construction of the experimental region of Chertanovo; the plan-
ning and construction association No 2 for the construction of schools and child-
ren's institutions. A planning and construction association for the construction
of projects for agricultural purposes was established at the base of the Hosobl-
stray-24 Trust. The organizational unification of planners and builders makes it
possible to improve the quality of plans, to shorten the time of their developnent
and to improve the relationships among clients. contractors and planners. Planning
organisations are able to concentrate efforts on the solution of such important
problems as ensuring in plans .dvanced technology for the manufacture and installa-
tion of structures. raising the technical level of planned solutions and so forth.
The mutual interest of planners and builders in the results of labor intensifies
and additional prerequisites for an increase in the responsibility of capital pro-
ducers for finished output not only at the moment of delivery to the client. but
in the process of its operation as well. appear.

The structure of production construction and installation associations (trusts)
can differ and in each specific case depends on the characteristics of the invest-
ment process in the region or on the development of a specific type of fixed capi-
tal. Along with the elimination of the lack of departmental coordination of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time was characteristic of early forms of construction organization. In the 1930's-
1940's construction and installation tmsts. along with general construction trusts.
included specialized organizations. In contrast to modern trusts they had on their
balance brick, reinforced concrete and concrete plants. open-pit facilities, In-
chine shops. saw milling and wood working capacities. various equipment and motor
transport. The presently established construction and installation associations

formations it is possible to avoid the lack of coordination arising during the
merging of enterprises and organizations. The technological, economic and organi~
rational integration of various stages in the production of the final product is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

complex. Such an approach can be realized on the basis of joint planning, financ-
ing and management of the development of the investment complex—elaboration of

the organizational and economic mechanism of interaction of the group of ministries
responsible for the satisfaction of the need of the national economy for fixed
capital.

The national economic investment couple): should at first become the object of plan-
ning and then the object of management as well. The problem of the need for the '
"organisation of a couple: of investment sectors including construction sectors, as
well as nchine building." was first raised by V. Krasovsltiy.1 As a result. condi-
tions can be created for a systematic use of the object program method of manage-
ment. solution of the problem of combination of sectorial and territorial planning.
overcoming of departmental and localistic barriers and elimination of dissipation
of capital investments for the further development of industrial construction in-
tegration.

A unified management of the investment complex of the country and of the Union re-
publics will contribute to an increase in the balance of sectorisl plans at all
the levels of nnagement, optimization of intersectorial proportions, more effi-
cient utilization of all the elements in the created investment potential and im-
provement in final national economic results.

A unified administration of the investment complex will make it possible to ex-
amine and analyze the effect of its development on the basis of a single crite-
rion—increase in the volume and improvement in the quality of final output with
a simultaneous increase in production efficiency. The nnagematt of the invest-
ment complex should be carried out on the basis of the elaboration and realisa-
tion of a single state plan for its development. Along with an improvement in
production relations and selection of their rational forms such a plan would be
a means of regulation of intersectorial relations. A single plan makes it possi-
ble to ensure deliveries of all types of mterial resources coordinated in time,
space and in the quantity, quality and assortment, to offer services to interact-
ing enterprises and to perform the necessary credit and other operations.

Interconnected overall programs for the development of the country's national e-
conomic investment complex envisaging the optima intersectorial proportions and
rates of development of every sector on the basis of the tasks of maximization of
the final national economic result could be worked out at individual stages of
economic development. Each such program can become the basis for the formation of
the overall programs and subprograms specifying it and determining the development
of republic investment complexes. all-Union (republic) construction and installa-
tion associations and other organizational forms of industrial-construction inte-
gration. This will make it possible to ensure the continuity of investment cycles
and to more fully meet the needs for fixed capital. '

In the course of organizational formlation of the national economic investment
toque: it is possible to lean on the experience of socialist countries in the
area of industrial construction integration. as well as on the experience in the

———n—--— . -
1. See Investitsionnyye Problemy Narodnokhozyaystvennykh Kompleksov' investment

Problems of National Economic Complexes-I. Izdstel'stvo Nauka. 1975, p 3.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

establishment of mltisectorial structures in the national economy of the USSR.

For example, the "Stroitel'stvo" National Complex was organized in Bulgaria in
1976. It includes economic, scientific research, planning and other organizations,
which on the basis of existing .rganizational, economic. technical and technolog-
ical relations should ensure the development of fixed capital. The mnagenént of
the cowlex is entrusted to the Ministry of Building Materials. At the same time.
the ministry's decisions and orders in the field of construction are also applied
to organizations subordinate to other departments.

Even under the conditions of market economy attempts are made to organize large-
scale business-like cooperation between manufacturers of building tutorials and
contracting construction organizations. For example, in the United States the or-
ganization of owners. which together with departments and affiliates encompasses
150 plants-manufacturers of building mterials—and the association of general
contractors develop joint program promoting the development of cooperation for
the purpose of information exchange. It is assumed that. as a result of their im-
plementation, manufacturers of building materials will produce output and develop
technological processes necessary for meeting the needs of building production.
Additional possibilities for the transmission of new information on the manufac-
tured output and its use to contractors also appear.

At present it is still cowlicated to judge the specific bodies for the management
of the investment complex. It should be taken into consideration that enterprises
of Union, Union-republic and republic subordination are subject to unification.
Apparently. it should be primarily a matter of the first stage in the formtion of
the investment complex. It is characterized by the strengthening and expansion of
the system of existing industrial construction forsations and by the supplements-
tion of the existing planning system with new forms and methods of preplsn work
making it possible to single out in the plan the national economic investment com-
plex and for the most important national economic projects to take into considera-
tion in the capital investment plan the models of industrial construction forma-
tions including all the participants in the investment process.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

11,109
080: 1820/235

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INVESTMENT. PRICES. BUDGET AND FINANCE

ECONOMIC IMPACT OF PRICE MARK-UPS "316320
Moscow VOPROSY HONMIKI in Russian No 6. Jun 81 pp 50-60
lxrticle by v. Shalimov: "Calculation of Economic Impact in Incentive Hark-ups17

[rexg/ The system of planned price formation is the most important coaponaxt of
the economic mechanism of scceleratim of scientific and technical progress. The
stimlating role of prices in the implementation of scientific and technical prog-
ress lies primarily in the distribution of the national economic impact of new e-
quipment between the spheres of its production and use. A successful realisation
of this stimlating function contributes to a prompt introduction of the achieve-
ments of science and technology into the national economy. "The introduction of
scientific discoveries and inventions," stresses the accountability report of the
CPSU Central Comittee to the 26th party congress, "is now the decisive and nost
acute area." In connection with this "Basic Directions in the Economic and Social
Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period mtil 1990" envisage in-
creasing the effect of wholesale prices on an improvement in the quality of arti-
cles and on an acceleration of the mstering of highly efficient, new and replace-
ment of obsolete equipment. A successful solution of this important problen is
connected to a significant meamre with the further ilprovement and development of
the econonic mechanism of incentive mark-ups and discounts.

The effect of the mechanism of incentive wholesale price lurk-ups has a positive
effect on the processes of the metering and production of new equipment. However.
its role is weakened by the fact that a sufficiently close dependence of lurk-ups
on the economic impact has not been established. Therefore, an examination of the
ways of establishing such a dependence seems urgent.

A nuﬁer of neasures for an improvement and development of the system of incentive
mark-ups and discounts have already been implemented in accordance with the dec-
ree of the CPSU Central Comittee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Improving
Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism on Increasing
Production Efficiency and Work Quality." For example. wholesale prices with anin-
centive mark-up are established for highly efficient. new products corresponding
to or surpassing in their technical and economic indicators the best models of
Soviet and world science and technology.1 The economic inpact obtained from the
production and use of such products is the basis for this. The distribution of
the economic impact between producers and consumers of new equipment through the
establishment of incentive lurk-ups represents a systematically organised and re-
gulated process. whose starting point is a specific ratio between the econonic
inset and the price (more accurately. the lower price limit).

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

condition for the differentiation of the amount of incentive uric-ups. This con-
nects the differentiation of incentive lurk-ups with the indicator reflecting the
actual efficiency of development of new equipment. The use of the specific effi-
ciency (3:11...) of new articles as such an indicator is more substantiated as com-
pared with the previously used ratio of the upper and lower price ceilings. This
amount of the incentive mark-up is rude dependent on two restrictions. that is.
the normative profit and the econonic impact. At the same time, it has not yet
been possible to establish the necessary direct dependence of incentive mark-ups

transferred to cost accounting conditions of organization of work on new equipment
has shown. the first limitation (in the normative profit) of the amount of the in~
centive mark-up for the overwhelming part of articles is several orders higher than
the second limitation (in the economic impact). For the most important groups of
electrical engineering articles at enterprises annufacturing new equipment in 1977-
1979 the ratio of the obtained incentive mark—ups to the normative profit was with-
in 75 to 100 percent. that is. in practice. the level of incentive lurk-ups corres-
ponded to the previously established ceiling (linitation)--100 percent of the nor-
mative profit. The proportion of incentive mark-ups in the distributed economic
impact averaged from 6 to 8 percent. which did not correspond to the established
limitation in the econonic iapact (50 percent).

Therefore, the dual dependence of the incentive mark-up (on the amount of the nor-
mative profit and the magnitude of the economic impact) is not ensured and it de-
pends only on one limitation--the normfive profit. This is due to the following.

profit, which even indirectly is not connected with the results of use of this e-

In essence, the establishment of a direct dependence of the incentive lurk-up on
the normative profit leads to the fact that. first, the amount of additional prof-
it obtained by the manufacturers of new equipment is completely not connected with
the magnitude of the economic impact ensured in the national economy and, second.
incentive mark-ups are unjustifiably small.2 It should be stressed that the in-
terconnection of the cost accounting effect (realized in this case in the form of
incentive lurk-ups) and of the national economic ilpact is also disrupted.

Improvement in economic incentives for the production of new equipment sometimes
boils down to an increase in the amount of incentive mark-ups to two or three
standards of profitability. For example. an opinion is expressed that the "amount
of a lurk-up should be doubled only (our stress-4]. Sh.) for the compensation for
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

profitability as compared with the sectorial standard for highly efficient equip-
ment... can be increased to three standards of profitability.“ At the same time,
the authors propose that the anomt of the incentive lurk—up be established. as
before. in percent of the normative profit.5

However. the propon increase in the amount of incentive mark-ups depending on

the amount of the normtive profit will hardly contribute to an acceleration of

the production and expansion of the use of new equipment in the national economy.
The problem lies not so such in increasing the amount of additional profit obtained
by manufacturers of new equipment as in establishing its real dependence on the
economic impact brought by this equipment. Thus. in fact. incentive mark-ups in
percent of the normative profit are increasing. In 10 years (from 1969 through
1979) the umximn amount of incentive lurk-ups in percent of the nonnative profit
doubled in accordance with the introduced methods. rising from 50 to 125 percent,
that is. it increased 2.5-fold. At the same time, in 1969-1971, when the amount
of mark-ups was limited to 50 percent of the normative profit. according to V. As-
tsf'yev's evaluation, their proportion in the economic impact in electrical engin-
eering articles was 4 to 5 percent.6 During the subsequent period (1972-1979),
when the maxim asnomnt of mark-ups was increased to 100 percent of the narrative
profit, the share of this additional profit in the economic impact in the electric-
al engineering industry increased to 6 or 8 percent. that is. it was also appro-
ximtely doubled.7 Ihe subsequent change in the maximm limitation of incentive
mark-ups in the normtive profit from 100 to 125 percent introduced by the Instruc-
tions on the Procedure of Establishment of Incentive Hark-ups (1979) will lead to
an increase in the proportion of lurk-ups in the economic impact only to approxi-
mately 10 to 12 percent.

However, as a result of such an increase in the amount of incentive mark-ups in
percent of the normative profit, there is an increase in the absolute amount of
additional profit obtained by manufacturers of new equipment, not an intensified
dependence of the amount of incentive ark-ups on the magnitude of the economic
impact of new equipment. A certain increase in incentive mark-ups in percent of
the normative profit (for example. to two standards of profitability) is advisable
only for some, especially highly efficient, articles, for which the ratio of the
economic impact to the wholesale price is characterized by values limiting for the
appropriate groups of products. However. such an increase in the amount of incen-
tive mark-ups will become a real incentive for the atpansion of the production of
new equipment only if their anount is determined directly in the shares (percent)
of the economic impact.

To substantiate the establishment of a direct dependence of the incentive mark—up
on the economic impact of new equipment. it is important to also examine the the-
oretical aspect of the problem. The establishment of a cause and effect relation-
ship of the incentive measure with the final results of the incentive process is

the basic condition for the formation of material incentives under socialise. In
this case the share of the incentive mark-up in the wholesale price is the measure
of incentive for the enterprise manufacturing new equipment. An increase in the

number of use values is the final result of the incentive process (the process of

production and use of new equipment). However. a direct comparison of use values
is iwossible. Obviously. this process must occur indirectly.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The recording. evaluation and comparison of the final results of the production
and use of new equipment are possible only on the basis of the national economic
impact. Such a functional role of the national economic impact corresponds to F.
mgels' thesis that the movement of resources in the new society "ultinntely, will
be determined by the weighing and comparison of the useful effects of various con-
sumer goods with each other and. with the amounts of labor necessary for their pro-
duction."8 The interpretation of the national economic impact as the final result
of scientific and technical progress has been substantiated in the economic lite-
rature recently. In our opinion, such an understanding of the final results of the
production and use of new equipment is justified in theory and practice for the ap-
propriate stage in the examination of the "investigation-production" process at the
level of the enterprise mnufacturing new equipment.

Specification of the proposals of many economists on the need for the establish-
ment of a close connection between the amount of incentive mark-ups and the abso-
lute Ingnitude of the economic impact is an important task in the imrovement in
the economic mechanism of incentive mrk-ups.9 We ude an attempt to represent
the dependence of the amoxmt of incentive lurk-ups on the magnitude of the econ-
omic impact on a methodological basis in the form of specific scales. Ihe calcu-
1ation of the scales of incentive lurk-ups realizing the indicated dependence was
made for 12 key consolidated groups of electrical engineering products.

when constructing scales for the determination of the amount of incentive mark-ups
on the basis of the dependence on the economic iapact of new equipment. the used
ratio of the economic impact and of the wholesale price should be retained by the
condition (indicator) of differentiation of the amount of incentive lurk-ups in
percent of the economic impact. In connection with the proposed method of calcu-
lation of incentive mark-ups this ratio acquires especially great importance. be-
cause it becomes basic for the construction of the appropriate scales of lurk-ups
(see table 1).

The results of calculations of the ratio of the economic iwact and of wholesale
prices of electrical engineering products presented in table 1 sake it possible

to determine a number of the necessary requirements for the construction of scales
of incentive ark-ups.

First, in 9 out of the 12 examined groups of electrical engineering products the
minimum values of the ratio of the economic impact and of the wholesale price com-
prise from S to 10 percent. Obviously, in accordance with the existing methods
incentive price mark-ups can be established only for articles with a specific ef-
ficiency (impact-price ratio) of no less than 15 percent. Thus, a single lower
limit of efficiency. whose excess should be stimlated, ought to be established
for all groups of products. When the ratio of the economic impact and of the
wholesale price is less than 15 percent. the problem of the establishment of an
incentive lurk-up should be considered by price formation bodies in accordance
with a special procedure.

Second, analyzing the maximal values of the ratio of the economic upset and of
wholesale prices, it should be noted that they are differentiated considerably by
groups of articles. For example, for electrical welding equipment this indica-
tor exceeds the msximm specific efficiency of power transformers more than 16-
fold.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Initial Data for the Calculation of Scales for the Determination of the
Anomt of Incentive Hark-ups for Key Groups of Electrical Engineering
Products (in 1)

Ratio of economic

impact to wholesale Nor-native prof-
price itability cal-

culated in rela-

Hininal Maximum tion to produc-

value value tion costs
———-————____________________

 

Groups of Products

Power transformers 10 140 15
High-voltage equipment 10 160 22
Electric lamps lo 170 17
Electric mll- and average-capacity

Inchines 10 240 16
Large electric machines and turbo- and

hydro-generators 10 260 20
Condensers 10 330 13
Low-voltage equipment 5 330 12
Electric lighting fixtures 10 370 10
Cable articles 20 670 10
Electric insulating articles 10 500 10
Power converters 20 520 18
Electric welding equipment 30 2300 14

Third. the maximum values of the ratios of the economic iwact and of wholesale
prices in nine groups of electrical engineering products are from 240 to 2.300
percent. which exceeds the corresponding uxim value of efficiency according to
the standard scale many times.

However. the Instructions on the Procedure of Establishment of Incentive Hark-ups
stipulate that the USSR State Couittee on Prices can introduce changes in the
standard scale for individual groups of products with due regard for the specific
nature of sectors.«10 In our opinion, so objectively deternined differentiation
of the scales of incentive lurk-ups for groups of products depending on the maxi-
mum values of the ratio of the economic impact and of the wholesale price would
be a concrete realisation of this iaportant provision. For «style, an analysis
of initial data has shown (table 1) that for the manned 12 key groups of elec-
trical engineering products it is advisable to develop lo differentiated scales
of incentive ark-ups (tint is, for electric lighting fixtures and cable and elec-
tric insulating articles, taking into consideration the close values of specific
efficiency and normtive profitability, the use of a single scale is proposed).

The stated methodological requirements on the construction of scales of incentive
mark-ups are of a general nature and determine the unified approach to the stim-
lation of the output of new products for production and technical purposes through
the mechanisn of incentive mark-ups. On their basis we constructed a model scale
of incentive uholesalewrice mark-ups for power transformers, in accordance with
which the amount of the incentive mark-up in percent of the absolute sum of the
economic inpact is differentiated depending on the ratio of the economic inpact
and of the wholesale price within 15 to 140 percent divided into nine intervals

(see table 2).

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Scale of Incentive molesale Price Hark-ups for Power Transformers

Amount of incentive mark-up in rela-

tion to economic igact Sin 1}

Ratio of economic impact Upon attainment of Reduction per
and of wholesale price the lower limit of point within
((3 u.” m. in 2) efficiency interval the interval
on) (w
15-35 70.0 1.68
36-50 47.1 0.91:
51-65 35.8 0.55
66-80 29 . 6!. 0. 37
81-95 25 . 76 0. 27
96-110 23.1 0.21
111-125 21.15 0.17
126-1100 19.66 0.16
over 160 18.2" -

* But no higher than two standards of profitability

The amount of incentive wholesale price mark-ups for highly efficient. new equip-
ment in relation to the economic impact, that is. the share of lurk-ups in the im-
pact, decreases uniformly. For example. the amomt of incentive mark-ups in per-
cent of the economic impact (n‘Z) is reduced from 70 to 18.2 percent. At the same
time. the amount of incentive mark-ups in relation to the normative profit in-
creases from 98 to 200 percent. Thus, the amount of the normative profit retains
only an indirect limiting effect through the mechanism of calculation of the

scales themselves.

In the proposed scale the amount of incentive wholesale price lurk-ups for highly
efficient. new products was made closely dependent only on the absolute mgnitude
of the economic inpact obtained from the production and use of equipment in the
national economy. Proceeding from this it is possible to reco-end a forumla for
the determination of the amount of the incentive wholesale price mark-up on the

basis of a differentiated scale:

3‘0“ 2.6—0“) - (1)

H:
I IN 0

 

where H“ is the incentive wholesale price mark-up (in rubles);

3 is the economic impact of a new article (in rubles);

"i is the incentive lurk-up in relation to the economic impact upon attain-
ment of the lower limit of the corresponding interval of efficiency ac-
cording to the scale (in 1);

AC is the difference between the actual ratio of the economic impact and
of the wholesale price (c...) for a new article and the lower limit of
the corresponding interval of efficiency (0”). that is. oc-crc";

15
ron omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K4 is the percent of reduction in the incentive mark-up per point of excess of the
lower limit of the interval of efficiency according to the scale.

He shall present an actual example of the calculation of the incentive wholesale
price mark-up for highly efficient. new equipment. The annual economic iwact
from the production and use (3) of the m'sznn-loo new power transformer is 454 ru-
bles. The wholesale price (u...) is 950 rubles. The specific efficiency of the
new article (3:11....X I00) is 47.8 percent (454:9sox100). According to the scale
(see table 2) this value pertains to the second interval of the ratio of the econ-
omic impact and of the price (fron 36 to 50 percent) and the incentive mark-up in
percent of the economic impact, upon attainment of the lower limit of this inter-
val (nj). will be 47.1 percent. The difference between the actual ratio of the
economic impact and of the wholesale price for the new power transformer and the
lower limit of the second interval of efficiency (ac) according to the scale is
11.8 percent (Mn-47.8-36.0). The percent of reduction in the incentive mark-up
per point of excess of the lower limit of the second interval (K41) according to
the scale (table 2) is 0.94.

The incentive wholesale price mark-up for the new power transformer (H ) according
to formula (1) will be:

W'- 654 ' 47.1;ge8°0s94 - 163.46 rubles

Thus, the amount of the incentive mark-up in percent of the absolute magnitude of
the economic imact is 36.0 percent (47.1-11.8-036 or 163.6ézloSInXIOO). The ratio
of the incentive lurk-up to the normative profit envisaged in the price of the new
power transformer is 131.8 percent (163.610:123.9X100).

Sometimes. along with recognition of the theoretical legitimcy of establishment
of the dependence of the amount of profit taken into account in the prices of new
equipment on the magnitude of the national economic ispact, practical objections
against such a method of calculation of incentive mark-ups are raised. In parti-
cular. it is stated that it would be incorrect to remove one of the limitations in
the system of distribution of the economic impact between the manufacturer and con-
sumer, leaving one criterion-the total sum of the impact. Usually, this is moti-
vated by the possible rise in the general level of profitability to tens and hund-
reds of percent in some cases and by the loss of control over the price level.

Such a position seems only partially substantiated. As illustrated by the pro-
posed scale and fornmnla of incentive mark-ups, the use of the economic impact as
the only indicator, depending on which the amount of additional profit assigned to.
the enterprise manufacturing new equipment is calculated. in practice. is possible
for the overwhelming majority of new articles. With regard to some, especially
highly efficient, articles, for which the ratio of the economic impact and of the
wholesale price exceeds the minus values envisaged by the scales, in fact, a di-
rect limiting effect of the normtive profit is needed. For example, if the spe-
cific efficiency of the new power transformer exceeds 140 percent. the maximn
amount of the incentive wholesale price mark-up for such highly efficient articles
is directly limited to 200 percent of the normative profit (to two standards of
profitability). At the same time, it should be stressed that in this case as well
the nomtive profit does not determine the amount of the mark-up, but only serves
as its upper limit for some, especially highly efficient. articles.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the stimlation of the production of new equipment. along with the determina-
tion of the amount of incentive mark-ups and the establishment of their close con-
nection with the economic impact, the planning. recording and control of additional
profit are of great inortance. his is due to the fact that at present incentive
mark-ups have a marked and constantly increasing effect on the most important indi-
cators of the production activity of enterprises sanufacturing new equipment.

Improvement in the economic mechanism in the area of price formation is directed
primarily toward the strengthening of the role of incentive mark-ups in the re-
sults of the production and economic activity of enterprises manufacturing new e-
quipment and toward a significant expansion of the sphere of effect of incentive
lurk-ups for highly efficient. new products. that is. toward the use of stimlating
hark-ups in all industrial sectors. In connection with this the increasing mass
of incentive mark-ups will have a significant effect not on the results of work of
individual industrial sectors, in which the corresponding economic experiments
were conducted. but on the structure and proportions of development of the entire
national economy.

However. at present the sum of incentive mark-ups is not taken into consideration
in plans and the evaluation of their fulfillment is made with due regard for ad-
ditional profit. Obviously. such a procedure of evaluation of plan fulfillment
has a significant stimlsting effect on enterprises manufacturing new equipment
and it is advisable to preserve it. but only for this purpose. with regard to the
system of planning, recording and control of the additional profit obtained from
the production of new equipment, some studies rightly point to the need to change
such a procedure. In particular. A. Salyukov notes the following: "It seems ad-
visable to abolish the procedure in which the evaluation of fulfillment of the plan
for the sale and profit of industrial products is made without taking unrk-ups into
consideration."11

Many arguments in favor of such a position can be adduced. For example. the func-
tioning of the significant and constantly increasing use of incentive mark-ups.
essentially, outside the sphere of planned effect and control has many negative
consequences. First of all. such a procedure brings about an incomplete reflec-
tion in the plan of the value indicators of the production volume (which is com-
plicated under the conditions of application of indicators of net output) and
distorts the actual sectorial and intersectorial planned proportions and the plan
structure. me lack of planned control of the mass of incentive mark-ups has a
negative effect on the use of incentive funds for new equipment in the part formed
from this additional profit. because at present there is no possibility of planning
and approving them. For the same reason there is a significant decrease in the
effectiveness of one-time bonuses for the development, mastering and mass output
of especially important and highly efficient types of equipment and machinery, as
well as of bonuses for the development and mastering of fundamentally new tech-
nological processes. which should be paid from the capital of the single fund for
the development of science and technology formed from the part of incentive mark-

ups.

All this points to the need for the planning at enterprises manufacturing new e-

quipment of incentive wholesale price mark-ups for highly efficient. new products.
Incentive mark-ups can he planned within the existing forms of statistical report-
ing (with the introduction of some improvements). however. it would be efficient

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to introduce a special form for the reflection of the totality of qualitative indi-
cators, to which a new inmortant role is assigned in accordance with the decree on
the improvement in the economic mechanism. This special form, along with incentive
price ark-ups for highly efficient, new products and products with the state Badge
of Quality. should also reflect other mark-ups and additional payments (for maple,
for export. for additional supply. for higher technical and economic parameters and
so forth).

The inclusion of incentive mark-ups in the sphere of planned effect and control,
along with a full and objective reflection in the plan of measures for scientific
and technical progress, will have an additional stimlating effect on enterprises
mufacturing new equipment. This measure will take it possible to plan the amount
of deductions from mark-ups into economic incentive funds and into the single fund
for the development of science and technology (for the payment of one-time bonuses),
which will make the formation of the mentioned incentive sources more substantiated
and guaranteed. To retain the existing incentives in the evaluation of fulfill-

ment of planned assignments, they can be corrected by the actual amount of the ob-
tained mark-ups.

For an efficient effect on an accelerated watering and production of new equipment
the system of incentive mark-ups should be reinforced with economic levers directed
toward the withdrawal of the high profit obtained by manufacturing enterprises from
the sale of obsolete products. The 26th CPSU Congress paid mach attention to an
isprovement in the quality of output and to a cessation of the production of obso-
lete articles. N. A. Tikhonov's report stressed that for a prospt removal of ob-
solete equipment from production it is necessary to introduce more effective sanc-
tions for the output of obsolete models. Thus. the congress pointed out the in—
sufficient efficiency of the measures for the removal of inefficient equipment
from production.

Uholesele price discounts for obsolete articles should be used as the basic econ-
omic levers affecting a prompt removal of such products from production. However,
an analysis of the functioning in sectors of systems of wholesale price discounts
for obsolete equipment shows that. in practice. the worked out provisions on econ-
omit levers directed toward the withdrawal of the high profit obtained from the
sale of these products are not applied. For example, in the Ministry of Electrical
Engineering Industry during the analyzed period (1972-1979) discounts were not ap—
plied at all in lo years (1975 and 1977-1979) and totaled from 2,000 to 121.000 ru-
bles during other years. The discounts paid to the state budget are incommensura-
ble with the obtained incentive mark-ups. They comprise from 0.006 to 0.51 per-
cent of the latter. A similar situation is also characteristic of other indus-
trial ministries; for exasple, the Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Build-
ing and the Ministry of Power Machine Building. Thus, in the indicated ministries
in 197A-1979 wholesale price discounts for obsolete products. in essence, were not
applied. In connection with this the conclusion that, in practice. the production
of articles in the second-quality category is not punished is fully substantiated.

In 1972-1979 wholesale price discotmts for obsolete products could be established

only upon the expiration of the period of removal of such products from production.
This was the basic reason for the fact that, in practice. the discount system "did

18
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not work." Ministries and departments establish groundlessly long periods of re-
moval of obsolete equipment from production. which often are revised toward an in-
crease. The output of obsolete products and their sale at high prices without dis-
counts for my years is often justified by the necessity to meet the needs of en-
terprises. lack of articles replacing those removed from production. lack of pre-
paration of production for the output of new articles and so forth. As s result.
not only obsolete products are produced for a long time. but the output of highly
efficient. new equipment is delayed.

The decree on improvement in the economic mechanism introduced a two-stage discount
system. which has a number of advantages as coqared with the variants experiment-
ally applied in a nudner of industrial sectors (Ministry of Electrical Engineering
Industry and Power Machine Building. Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Build-
ing. Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural Machine Building and so forth). The main
advantage of this system lies in the fact that wholesale price discounts at the
rate of 50 percent of the obtained profit should be applied inediately from the
time of certification of an article in the second-quality category. The normative
period necessary either for an improvement in this article. taking it possible to
transfer it into a higher quality category. or for a comletion of the preparation
of the production of the new article replacing the obsolete article should be es-
tablished for the manufacturing enterprise from that moment. After the end of this
period, in case of continuation of the output of the obsolete article. all the prof-
it sctually obtained by the Innufacturing enterprise should be withdrawn into the
budget without fail.

Such a procedure of establishment of wholesale price discounts for obsolete equip-
ment seems quite substantiated and more efficient as compared with the previously
used procedure. However. at present for an efficient functioning of such a dis-
count system it is necessary to further improve and develop it. In particular. in
accordance with the Instructions on the Procedure of Establishment of Incentive
Mark-ups and Discounts wholesale price discounts are not applied to spare parts
and sets produced for products removed from producticsn.12

In our opinion. such a definition of products exempt from the application of whole-
sale price discounts is too general. As the practical experience of the Ministry
of the Electrical Engineering Industry has shown in 1980.

this makes it possible. as before. not to apply wholesale price discounts to almost
all obsolete equipment. Therefore, a more accurate and specific definition of
products for whose output economic sanctions (wholesale price discounts) are in-
troduced is needed. This is especially urgent for the machine building sectors
whose products are assigned as accessories to other national economic sectors.
Therefore, it is advisable to introduce nondepartmental control of the inclusion

of articles in the list of products in the second-quality category exempt from

the application of wholesale price discounts. Such a nondepartmental expert ex-
amination will make it possible to objectively determine the need for a temporary
production of a strictly determined range of obsolete equipment as spare parts.

The procedure of recording price discounts for obsolete equipment determined by
the cost accounting system of organization of work on new equipment also needs

to be improved. At present the sums of wholesale price discounts are not taken
into account in the plan. but the evaluation of its fulfillment is made with due

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regard for them. This motivates manufacturing enterprises to remove obsolete e-
quipment from production. However. for a planned effect of discounts and a strict-
er control of their application by mnufacturing enterprises. obviously. it is ad-
visable to plan in absolute terms the sum of profit obtained as a result of the
production of obsolete equipment and subject to transfer to the state budget. The
possibility of planning and controlling the correct establishment of discounts is
determined by the fact that they are applied to all the products in the second-
quslity category envisaged in the corresponding plans.

The stated proposals for an improvement in the economic mechanism of incentive
mark-ups. on the one hand. are directed toward the establishment of a close con-
nection of the stimlation of the production of new equipment with the final na-
tional economic results of scientific and technical progress and with the real e-
conomic inpact obtained in the national economy and. on the other. presuppose the
intensification of the interconnection of the results of introduction of scientif-
ic and technological achievements with the general system of planning. recording
and control. Such an improvement in the system of economic incentives for scien-
tific and technical progress will contribute to a successful solution of the prob-
lem of increase in the scale of development of products in the superior category
and of the metering and introduction of highly efficient, new equipment into pro-
duction set in "Basic Directions in the Economic and Social Development of the USSR
for 1981-1985 and for the Period Ihtil 1990."

FOOTNOTES

1. See "matructions on the Procedure of Establishment of Incentive molesale
Price Hark-ups for Highly Efficient, New Equipment for Production and Techni-
cal Purposes and of Wholesale Price Discounts for Products in the Second-Qual-
ity Category. as well as for Products Not Certified Durin the Established Pe-
riod" ("Sovershenstvovsniye Khozyaystvennogo Hskhanim" _Improvement in the
Economic Hechsnisg7. Collection of Documents. Izdatel'stvo Pravda. 1980, p 177).

2. According to the evaluations of A. Glichev and Ya. Kotlikov, the amount of
mark-ups for machine building products comprises 3 to 4 percent of the whole-
sale price and no more than 10 percent of the economic impact (see A. Glichev
and Ya. Kotlikov. "Incentives for an Increase in the Quality of Products."
VOPROSY BKONOHIKI. No 12. 1979. p 60).

3. V. Ye. Astaf'yev. 1.. Ya. Povolotskiy and V. P. Khaykin. "Bkonomichesky Hekha-
nizm Uskoreniya Nauchno-Tekhnicheakogo Progressa (Own: 1 Problemy)“ chononic
Hechanism_of Acceleration of Scientific and Technical Progress (Experience and
Problemsll, Izdatel'stvo Bkonomika. 1977. p 167.

lo. 1.. I. Shevchenko. "Teens 1 Stimlirovaniye Proizvodstva i Primeneniya Novoy
'l‘ekhniki" ﬁhe Price and Stimulation of the Production and Use of New Equip-
men57, Kiev. 1976. p 92.

5. See V. Ye. Astaf'yev, L. Ya. Povolotskiy and V. P. Khayltin, "Ekonomicheskiy
Hekhsnism Uskoreniya Nauchno-‘l‘ekhnicheskogo Progressa (OPyt i Problemy)." p
199; L. I. Shevchenko. "Teens 1 Stisulirovaniye Proizvodstva i Primeneniya
Novoy Tekhniki." p 93.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See "Planirovaniye i Stimlirovaniye Nauchno-Tekhnichezk- o Progresea" 131m-
ning and Stimulation of Scientific and Technical Progreeg , Izdatel'etvo Elto-
nonika, 1972, p 229.

The procedure of eetebliahaent of incentive ark-ope set forth in the 1974
method began to be in effect in the electrical engineering industry in 1972.

K. Marx and F. angels, "Soch." Forkg7. Vol 20. p 321.

See "Soverahenetvovaniye Planirovaniya i utmonicheakogo Stimliroveniya Nanch-
no-Tekhnicheekogo Progreeee" ﬁuprovenent in the Planning and Ronnie Stim-
lation of Scientific and Technical Progreeg7, Irdatel'stvo Hoekovskogo Univer-
aiteta, 1977. p 133; 'Wamhno-Tekhnicheekiy Progress 1 Ekononika Sotsinlim"
ﬁcientific and Technical Progress and the Economy of Socialisg7. Izdetel'etvo
Bkononika, 1979, p 107; V. P. Kochikyan. V. I. Koahkin and Ya. G. L ubinetskiy.
"Kowlekenaya Sietem Stimlirovnniya Tekhnicheekogo Progreesa" __0vere11 Sys-
ten of Stimulation of Technical Progreeg7. lzdatel'etvo Hyel'. 1980, p 85.

See "Soverehenstvovaniye Khomyetvennogo Hekhanim," p 178.

A. T. Salyukov, "Vliyaniye Pinansovogo Mekhanim na Povyeheniye Kacheetva
Produkteii" [Effect of the Financial Mechanism on an Increase in' the Quality
of Outpu_t_7, Izdatel'etvo Pinaney. 1980, p 86.

See "Soverehenstvovaniye Khozyeyatvennogo Mekhanim," p 178.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'stvo "Pravda". "Voproey ekononiki", 1981

11 ,439

080:

1820/ 233 END

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY