FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10378

10 March 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(ﬁouo 12/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language scurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion ear]: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
”TERMS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINA'I‘ION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10371
10 March 19

WORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues

(2000 12/82)

Courenrs

ASIA
AUSTRALIA

Amtralian Officials Aid ‘nlais in Arrest; Trial of Suspects
(“m sturm“; mm. 2, 5Jan82)ooso00000000000000.0000... 1

Drug Case Alert
Violation of Law (marge

Briefs
Drug hats in Accidents
Police 'Bmgling'
Heroin Smuggling
Deportation for Drug Dealers

bwuw

BANQADESH

Bangladesh Becoming Major Transit Point for Opiu-
(s‘lec' sud; m! “N NATION. 6 “b 82)....................... 5

ENG KONG

lbcord Benin Base Haul Fro- Singapore-Registered Ship
(scum GINA ”DINING P31. 6, 7 m: 82) 6

Hidden in Air Compressors
“No Local Residents (harged

Holiday Traffic (bvers Heroin Smggling Prom (hm
(‘1be lewis; soum GINA )0me Par, 8 Feb 82).............. 8

Singapore Vessel Crew on ansrges of Smuggling Opiu-
(SOUTH GINA Emma MT. 9 “b 82)....oooooooovsoooooocsooooo 9

- a - [III - WW - 13B P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m 0min“. use aux

Campaign lb Curb Drug Abuse Among Youth InauguraOed
(SM “1.“ mama Par, 2 hb 82)....0.‘OOOCOUCCCOIOODOOOOOCO

Briefs

Opium Smuggler Sentenced
No Pakistanis Jailed
Heroin Ring Slashed

INWESIA

rhjority of Narcotics Offenses (bnnected With Hnr'ihuma
(KOHPAS. 11 Jan 82, PBUTA, 15 J” &)oeeseeoeoeonoeeoseoeoeaeeo

Harihuana Growing Increases
Harihuana Confiscstsd

NW ZEALAND

Scattered (hnnabis Plots Binding Police mtection
(Editorial; me an: MD HERALD, 19 Jan 82)..................

PAKISTAN

Need To Control 'Deadly Trade' lhderlined
(umomr’ A Rb 82).OI’D...00.0.00...OOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOODO...

Interpol lbn Complete Heroin Smuggling Investigation
(mmluc “M, 9 hb 82)..I...00.0.0.0...00......COCIOOOOOOOO...

Accused Gives Details of Smggling Operation
(JMG, 28 he 81).O...tI.D.I0.000.060.0000.00IOOIOIDOODOOOOOOOO.

Briefs
Opium Seized in Peshuar

PEOPLE'S REPIBLIC OI" GINA

Moscow Claims PRC Supports Dmg Traffic in Burma
(“00" Radio, 30 Jan 82)...00....enoOOOOOOOOQeOOOOOOQOOOOD-Imoo

THAILAND

More Questions Raised on Motives for Ban ﬂin 'raek Raid
(SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICHAN, 31 Jan 82).:..........................

Editorial (buent, Editorial
Further (lament

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL [BB GILY

10

11
ll
ll

13

16

17

19

20

21

22

24
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

EAST m
Yucosuvn
3mm
Drug Addiction in Vojvodinn
um “RICA
BAHAMAS

Police at Hot-Inn's Guy in la. Effort to m: Drug Trade
(m3 mm, 9 J“ u)...’.'....00......00.00.000.000000000.0...

33mm

30 low Patton:- for Drug clinic; Study ‘Do-Bc Launched
(m m“ mm. 20 J‘ a).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0'00...

BOLIVIA

New Bounties Ln: ‘ro Control Coca Purchases
‘m m. 18 J“ ”)00000000000000000OIOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOIOOOO.

Pennants ‘n: Help in Coca not Oontml
(hm mm ”Cm“, 26 hb 82)....0.noooooooooooooooono...o

htidrug Effort tacking honour, Equip-n:
(am, 1‘ 3n ”>0000000000n0....O000......OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOO..0O

nmts’
Coca Ctop kplnon-nt Coot
au'pnm mama Oondnnn mac-ma

BL SALVANR

Mint:
)8th Seized

JAMAICA

Inch

"can on Cocaine (large
Cocaine, (karma, 8.1mm

anon

Juan-y Anddmg may: bunt. bporud for Zone 06
(810 so]! u 8mm, 8 hb &)OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

-c-

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

28

29

31

32

33

34

36

35

88

37
PERU

Drug Addiction bevel, Drug Seizure-knotted
(BL “may w Jan ”)0..00...0.00.00.00.00.000000000'OOOOOO

Drug Addiction level
Drug Seizure

NEAR EAST AND NOW AFRICA
ANAHEIM

Briefe
Let-gee: Opiun lieu]. Ever

EGYPT

Briefs
Drug Conviction Sen tenoee

IRAN

Ind-3.33311“ Plane Tighter Border Control.
(mm. 17 J“ M)OOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOCO00.0.0000...

SIB-8W AFRICA
KENYA

Briefs
Search on for Ruben

WEST EUROPE
MW

Debate Over Nationwide Drug Crises Engineer Aired
(Editorial: 38mm TIME, 2 Rb &)eooeeoeoeoeoooeeoeeee

Nordic Conference on Banish Dennds Action on mmtianie
(htm; 33mm um, 17 hb 82)-eeeeeoeecooeeeeeeoooeoe

Penning Beck- Hiniener in Drive Against Narcotic: Accomplicee
(33mm! “mm. ‘ Rb 82).eeueeeeoeeeeee'oooeoeeol00.00..

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Asylum Denied Drug Snuggle:
brim Sentence for Mini: Susanna

FINLAND

Authorities Ask for New Ensures 1b (babet Drugs (hi-es
(m1 8m, 29 J” 82)....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.00.00.00

Phone-Topping Permission Requested
Prison Officials Rant Blood ducks

IGLAND

Briefs
Total 1981 Drug Seizures

ITALY

PCI (111s for Parhsnentery Action on Antidrug 1m: hforl
(Gimfunoo Tnﬂiebue: BINASCI'IA, 15 Jan 82)...................

NOWAY

Omton Service Getting New Petrol Boats To stop Drugs
(motleif Andreusen; mos-um, 12 Feb 82)..................

Official Reports Regionn nistribution of Drug maths
(Tomd Kluﬂtldzmm1', 15 Jan 82’000ssosososooseoosooosss

SWEDEN

Heshish Use in Greater Stockholm 'Increesing Drunticdly'
(at: mm; mm Max. 13 “b m)........0.0.0.0....0000

Official Figures on Prison Drugs Questioned by Expert .
(mm MR. 13 Rb 82)....)0.COO0..OOIOOOOOOOCOOOOODOOOOOO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AUSTRALIAN OFFICIALS AID MIS IN ARREST. mm 0! SUSPMS

mmgcunluux

Melbourne was AG! in English 2 Jan 82 pp 1, 3

[Axticlo by Garry sturgensl

m

f . mm
_ mumwmw.wmwmmmﬁmm.wmm mmmu.mmmme? mmmw.mwmw”m

MM%

mwmmm $3

M

.m nun
w£ﬁw

WWW

m

m

fﬁ

mm MM “MUN

mmmm mwmmmmmmm

my

“hm “hm“

mnum m
”WWW”

mm.
mm“ EWWMW ”mm WMMMWW MM“

m. mum m
» WWmmm.% mu.m

hm
xﬂmgﬁ

mm mm
wmmw mmm

mm wwﬁMMumMW mmemme mmemw
mmmmwwmmw

Wm mmmem

”Mn-Tm WWW! Mm:

mmmm
mmmmmmmmwmmmmmmmwwmrm $.me

”mg%m£ﬁm

m a mm .u
mm? mm“ gm,” mm WWW WWW

mamwwmwm ”Wmmmm
.w mmm "a

wmﬁﬁ

mm: —

mumw
wmmuﬂ mmmmumw

ﬁ?%t
wmwm MWWWWM m

Mmemm mmwa A
i
3
g

mum-m mu
mhwhmh gag-”oi”: 6°
mun-m" coat .
“nonhuman munmwm
ﬂusttclait'aaoLIrGuSh- mmwmm
damn-aaa utm- coma hoot-lay and link
tratﬂooutt . «Moonwalk-claim
'W'aa. "" ”"""°°‘"‘
INN h mmmw
mumntmaa 1- was in chewa-
Obtouyaooutmm moo-Minuet:-
mkh&%al “lawful” .mm';
um M
statattitnafaalt and! ”Mamm-
notuouaua m. tioaootnaaaﬂorrauurtaln‘l'he
thoootlttoaho'tintluaaa Aoa'tltlauaataltouttitoSiactak
truadmtolvltatwaam- cane. .
dbyttowtncaa." Pcﬂmmlﬂamrdm
Anatolian come. with mmwthamteuurt
Mpolioch a... «mallard-withh-
Whthosz-uonamlm. tcutiootomulaitrallowawaa
mimhanainat .g. ngmth
million-uracil. Fedora 'ur'". M M

Violation of Low Chargo

Melbourne m AG: in English 5 Jan 82 p 4

[Article by Garry stances]

[Text]

C50:

Australia‘s involvement in tho
arrest and trial oi William Sin-
clair [or Thai dru oilcncca

.W“ probably in aclt of
tnternatlonal law. a legal ox-
pcrt taid yesterday.

Ms Gillian Trina. a lecturer in
international law at Moibounta
Lnlvzrxlty. said “it to liitely that
me federal Govornntent was also
in breach at its legal obligation
tooncolltacitixena”overtlta
Sinclair coco,

Tho Mia breaches stain
iront Amtralia'a ratiﬁcation of a
Unitad Nations aaroantont on hu-
man righta and trout recent
lotion aottlua up a m r ta
commion in Australia.
agrounent and initiation. estab-
lhlt minimum rl to to lair trtal.

Ms Trina aa' that van with-
out tltc Australian inhalation.
tam was a rule that veil-onto»
ltshao intornationai lag auto-
matiaiiy became local law.

Sinclair la oorv a 33-yaar jail
turn in Thailand or conspiracy

S 300/7529

to Detentiowaaarmw
tcuﬂmhorlmm'atuot

outwit“

Au last year. For nauriy taro
MW: alt. his arrest he tib-
ly could have boon exaout with-

out trial.

in TM Ago“ laat truck
data the clooc lnvolvemant of
Anatolian oﬂleiala with final
authorities it tho arrest and trial
oi Sinclair. Bvidonoa preaautad by
Australian: to tho Tital court was
not acouutod by Australian courts.
There twat no mmlaatioa
of crucial evidottca and Sinclair
ltad to yrovitio his own lntorpro-

tar.
Articio it o! the UN Interna-
tional Covonant on Civil Political

tlobamwithoutdall.
{PWMUDIRM
nitnmtoltavotltamoltalp
otaulntorurotar. '

Article It It embodied In Atta-
tralia'a Human Rights Concla-
sioo Act. -

Mn 1' aid that Australia
had a ' tion to maintain

s Articlo It lute!-
aatioually; aoooadly. it had an
sums

Dan's TESTS m mommy-rests for traces of marijuana should he carried out on
all drivers and pedestrians involved in notor accidents, a Melbourne psychiatrist
said yesterday. Dr. Hillie- Orchard. liaison psychiatrist at Prince henry's hos--
pital, said he supported the view of an Marion research report that earijuana use
could be a “significant factor" in road accidents. This view was also backed up by
the director of accident and seer-gency services at the hornshy and Ku-ring-gai nos-
pitalinSyatey. bribny Harrison. aesaid 23percento£cardriversandutorcy-
cle riders taken to the hospital after being involved in accidents over the past
six months had cannabis or breakcbwn products in their urine. or aarrieon said he
decided to investigate the association of earijnsna in road accidents became he
was curious as to what was involved in the 50 per cent of accidents not associated
with alcohol. “I could not believe the other 50 per cent of people were all plain
stupid or had drivers. or the roea were that had,“ he said. [Canberra m hus-
mm in English 22 Dec 81 p 3]

POLICB 'Wm'--Drug dealers were profiting iron the shinistrative bungling
and low aorale in the Federal Police ﬁorce. a Labor Senator said yesterday. he
rederel Opposition spokessen on ed-inistrative services, Senator Arthur Gietrelt,
said new guides for the rederal Police announced last month were “nothing sore than
window dressing“. The merging of the math and m police forces two years
ago had been a “false and classy aealga-tion" that had earned chaos and dissatis-
faction. [Canberra m rostrum in much 23 Dec 81 p 21

33mm W4 nrried couple will appear in med heads Court today charged
with having isported heroin worth $5,500,000 tr:- South-Bast Asia. 0n Honday.
police said Robert Frederick Eyre, 37. and his wife, neslie Anne Eyre, 32, of
‘rerranora. and Jill lures traser, 31. of Med heads, had conspired to inort 6.5
kg of heroin into Australia between 1976 and 1977 and again in 1980. me Byres
were remanded in embody. The three entered no plea and hrs Fraser was released
on $50,000 bail on the condition that she report daily to the police. Police said
thethreehsdheenarrestedineerlywrning raids at'lweedaeade attheweekend
following a year-long investigation by new South Isles and federal police. ﬁre
prosecutor. Det. Sgt John Burke. told the court a large quantity of heroin hidden .
inahollowedshoehadheeniworted fro-South-nesthsia. Immacula-
m in mglish 23 Dec 81 p 10]
DEPORTATION FOR DRUG DEALERS-JIM inigration minister, Hr Hacl’hee, has told
federal parliament that two drug offenders he has ordered deported are linked with
the disappearance and murder of Donald Nacllay, the new South Wales anti-drug
campaigner. Hr HacPhee said he ordered that Luigi Pichi of Canberra and Vincenzo
Barbara of Adelaide be sent back to Italy despite a recouendation by the adminis-
trative appeal tribunal. The minister said a fedecal goverment inquiry into drug

trafficking had named both men as when of a secret

Calabrian criainal organiza-

tion which was responsible for Mr Hacltay's death. He said the inquiry had reported
after the tribunal had reveiwed his initial deportation order. The opposition

spokesman on imigration, Mr Young, said both men had

served ssntmces for their

crimes and their deportation amounted to double jeopardy. lit Young said a coroner's
inquiry into Mr HacKay's death had only just opened and the deportation should

be delayed in case the man were needed as witnesses.

[Text] [nelbourne Overseas

Service in English 0830 GMT 21» Feb 82 BK] The high court has granted a temporary
injunction to restrain the imigration department from deporting a drug offender.
The chief justice, Sir Barry Gibbs, said the order sought by Mr Luigi Pochi, 53.
of Canberra would rennin in force till 8 March. Hr Pochi's counsel told the
court he planned to lodge an application with it for a restraining order for an
indefinite period. [Melbourne Overseas Service in English 0830 GMT 25 Feb 82 BK]

080: 5300/ 5655
BAMLADESH BBCWING MAJOR TRANSIT POINT FOR OPIUH

Decca THE NEW NATION in English 6 Feb 82 pp 1, 8

[Article by Saleem Sand]

[Text]

Baum-u in hot mm
Into I major mutt octet ottln
coho-bend «omit: m In
than“ of vigilance.

Countty'l Ilvpon and m
”(were carom fottlu Ille-
gal trade otovtuu for the W.-
me would. hull“. m
aid.

Moe-hue. the In“ con-
and In I bld to stop the drug
mule. found n Nelle-ﬂ
Mantle. Ola-mitt” In tho
lat week of Jam. The 05.0
0! Controller of Nneotla and
Liquor lm waited. obort
tnlnin mm lot the cm
of Custom. Pollen. Mada
end Narcotic: Intelsat-a m.

Bangladesh nod-had bot-
mt-o duals Dom or
lllelil coho-M dunk-tho
Golda l‘ciauk (lama. ‘l’ml.
lend end um) lad IM Golden
0am tP-kbtll. Mun-nine-
Ind Ian) I: no Iona coul-
dtmdto l» Imam to illicit
nvootlc dunes tnﬂlakta. u no

050: 5360/7019

06:“ Idadttdd.

The UN Coat-halo- oo Nu-
coal: Dun ll «pond to hm
mud tlo lawman claw
beetle. my ladle no tub,
I tmlltwul opto- «north.
convict and also and 0M

atom mettle-to mum
tuck output.

The 0.00 of Outtoltu at
mm ad Llano: neatly
detected m of ind/Olly
(halt) and hellish (atom) to
Mimi-‘5. Chittagong and ll.
dlotdm ot when has“.

.IN‘I’SRIOL'I taut condo
dam! ”will” bullo-
“I. I lulu m at W
on unotlo «null-n aid
that lt in Mind by
any mm mm» met.
at lodionlhklutul lunch. mo-

.ub ﬂout. on Matt»

ll. and N6. Inc.
1'» an. malt" "0
Woznia- m “In

numeral-ml-
Nont Acute: and man

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000500040024-6

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040024-6
RECORD HEROIN BASE HAUL no“ smcmnn-mlsmm SHIP

Hidden in A1: Coupressors

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 6 Feb 82 p 5

[Text]

MMMM M M...” MMMM MMMMMMM MM. MMMMMM
. MMMMM M MM MMMM MMMMMM. .MMMMMMMMM
MMMMMMMWMM M -MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMWM am
My. «Mg m war a m Mum uuummmmummmm
MMMMMMMmMMwﬁ
MMM M MMMMM MM MMMMMMMMMMM MM: MMM MMMM
umm .. ummu mwmw «mm mwamnwmuwm Mm. mmme nu
”mam“ MT.“ Mmmmm ”mm“ WWW Mum? Wmmmm mm“ a
MM M M M MMMM MM
memm mm MM MMMMMMM MMMMMMM MmeMMM MmM MMMMMWM
.mmm M
WWW” mvaWm vwWMme mm mm? «WNW. mwmmwwmm mm“ mnmcmmmm
mm Mum M ..
MMM MMMMMM MMMM: MMMM MmMMM MMMMMMMMMMMM MM. MMMMMM
a u ». um . .mf .
MMM. M. MM MMMMMMWmmMM MM MMmMMMMMMMMMM-mmeMMM
M MMM MMM MMMMMMMM MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM.
oJ-u remove tom 0! lb. mango: containmg horoun ban horn on u cornpuuor ll

M MIN» —Picnta by C.Y. You.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040024-6

HOLIDAY TRAFFIC COVERS HERO!“ SWIM FRO" cam

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA WING POST 1n hsluh 3 Feb 82 p 12

[Article coupiled by Tony Levis]

Em“ “hummmmmmmvm mum“:
mmﬂm E mm mm“ .m:
“mam“...

W33

:0“:
”Wu-
can“
Mm
in“
mm «‘30

.3” HMNhMm—mmhmmmumumm

~3”_w mm-m Mwmww

“Mum wwmmm
mm?” “3me WWW
3mm 3 mm. muwmwmwm

333 .3 3333:“ m. 3 3 mmm .333
3 3 M m: 3 ,W 3 .3
“$3333.33me 3 mm“ 3mm mm.me m?“
3.33333 3333. M3357 :3:

5320/9119

(:80:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600040024-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040024-6

SINGAPORE VESSEL CR3! 0" CHARGES 0P SHUGGLING OPIIH

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA FDRNING POST 1n mgluh 9 Feb 82 p 14

:“3...

WWW? “A? mWWW :WMWW

A.
m

m
m

[Text]

AWAA

WW3” u 3
Aw A 3

WWW?

WWW

A
WWW.

AA WWW A AAA m.

nun

WWW

A

AA

WWW” W
mm“ «
AA A

will

twlkm

Vii-II

’03....

«Wm

canal

§uior C'ovn

mama-u:

A

wwwmm

AAA“ AAA

AA,
AAWA

Wham

awmw AAA”

-3 *mma

AAA. AAA

AWWWWWA W"
«mamMMarm hmmmm

5320/9119

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040024-6
.. SE” mung .mr «Emma:
W {3% mm: a ,m
M £3 mumuwm aw. mm“ m

5320/ 9117

C50!

10
OPIWWSBM-A fonereookellegedtobetheﬂo 3minanueive
druge syndicate responsible for sealing nor-one quantities of raw opium into
Ilongkmg in the 1960e end 1970c wee eentenoed to 15 yeere' (mi-aunt by Kr Jus-
tice Hooper in the High Court. Cheng Ah-kei (53) wee convicted by e juryon Hon-

the High Court yesterday for dangeroue druge offences. whee-ed rufeil (55) wee
sentenced to two yeere while Kohl-ed Banif (30) received 2-1/2 yeare. Nfail was

The proeecution'e case no that Tufail and mother Pakistani, Kalil: Abdul Guyyen.
arrived from Pakietan on Now: a leet year. At the airport. they were searched

to traffic in opium end wee eentenoed to four yeare' inprieonnent. [kcerptl
[ilong Kong scum CHINA nomm POST in Bulieh 23 Jan 82 p 6]

rested in the raid and will appear in South xovloon court today cherged with poe-
ceasing _denge:oue drugs for mlewful trefficking. The drugs were eeized after a
Andrew Pellet. began shortly after 9.30 an at 415 Grenville need. 11th floor. he
packets of suspected heroin, weighing 0.9 kg, end 17 mil packets of suspected
heroin, weighing 0.3 kg, me seized. Equipment associated with herein packaging
was also seized. [Text] [flung Kong scum cam mm POST in uglier: 1 Feb 82
p 1]

C80: 5320/9117
MAJORITY 0F memes OFFENSES CONNECTED RITE MARIRUANA
Harihuana Growing Increases
Jakarta WAS in Indonesian 11 Jan 82 p 3

[Text] The co-ander of the Main Unit for Narcotics Investigation at Police Head-
quarters, Police Brigadier General Soeharjono, revealed Saturday that from 1980 to
1981 the amber of narcotics cases had declined by 35.66 percent, but that evidence
seized in the forn of dried asrihuana leaves had increased by almost 70 percent.

Acconpanied by the district head of infer-scion, Brigadier General Dar-swan Seeder-
sono, H.A., Soeharjono said in a press conference at Police Headquarters that sari-
huana has now becone a serious problem requiring special public attention. Re
stated that the plant was spread all over the country, and that in fact Indonesia
was known abroad as a producer of Iarihuana. lie added that many packages of nati-
huana were sent out of the country.

In Soeharjono's opinion, urihuana offenses will continue to be a problem in years
to come. Haribuana, which has always grown wild on nountain sides and in the woods
in Aceh and North Susatra, is very difficult to control.

Since 1979 my residents of those areas have been growing narihuana and cultivation
has now reached eight police jurisdictions: Region I Acehwnlangkejeren, Blsngjeu-
nip and Kotacane; Region II North Smatrs--Tansh Karo and Sinslungun.

Region III West Sumatraul’ayakunbuh; Region IV Riaunbengkalis; Region VI South
Sunstra—Rejanglebond and North Lanpung; Region VIII "est Java—Garut, Cianjur.
Sukabuni, Hajslengks and Tasiksalsya; Region I! Central Java--Banyunas and Region X
Bast Javaunanyuwsngi and Halang.

All the narihuana in those areas is illegally transported to and sold_in Jakarta.
Bandung, Yogysharta. Surabaya and even as far away as Denpasar.

Two Factors
Two factors are believed to be involved in the increase in the planting and distri-

bution of narihuans. The first is the large profit which tempts people who don't
think about the dangerous consequences to the younger generation.

13
Prices which in the place of origin are thousands of rupiahs per kilogram become
hundreds of thousands at the place of sale. In fact, some suspects in the Began
Siapi-api area of Riau said that dried marihuana leaves bring in Rp. 800,000 per Kg

when sold abroad.

The second factor is the scarcity of opium derivatives such as morphine and heroin,
which now all come from abroad. For the time being marihuana is being sold as a

substitute.

Arrests of suspects in narcotics cases have decreased. 816 suspects were booked in
1980 and only 489 in 1981. The number of cases handled, the number of suspects
arrested and the amount of evidence seized or destroyed can be seen from the figures
in the following table:

 

 

Year Cases Suspects Evidence
1979 300 501 795.963 Kg of marihuana

leaves and 7,883 plants

1980 461 816 1.328.872 Kg of leaves,
8,050 plants and
528.15 grams of seeds

1981 260 689 2,263.626 lg of leaves,
2,621 plants and
12.3 grams of seeds

Soeharjono said that some but not many of the suspects were foreigners, 66 foreign
suspects were booked in 1980 and 30 in 1981, usually tourists who took the oppor-
tunity to smoke marihuana in Indonesia. Most were arrested in tourist areas such
as Yogyakarta and Bali. They were not members of a marihuana-smuggling organization.

According to the Commander of the Main Unit for Narcotics Investigation, the inter-
national narcotics syndicate no longer routes traffic through Indonesia but instead
through Papua New Guinea and New Caledonia and then to Europe and America.

Harihuana Confiscated
Jakarta PELITA in Indonesian 15 Jan 82 pp 1, 7

[Text] The Commander of the Main Unit for Narcotics Investigation at Police Bead-
quarters, Brigadier General Soehsrdjono, M.A., explained to the press last Saturday
that between 1980 and 1981 the number of narcotics cases in Indonesia had decreased
while the amount of marihuana seized in evidence had increased by 168.82 percent.

In 1980 there were 665 narcotics cases and in 1981 609 cases. Harihuana seized in
1980 amounted to 1.328.872 kg and in 1981 to 2.243.624 kg.

In 1980 113.34 grams of opium, 127.730 grams of morphine, 6.025 grams of heroin and
3.5 grams of hashish were seized. In 1981 56.006 grams of opium, 116.518 grams of
morphine, 11.55 grams of heroin and 520.25 grams of hashish were seized. There
were 8,050 marihuana plants destroyed in 1980 and 2,621 plants destroyed in 1981.
Soehardjono said that in 1981 fewer people were arrested in Indonesia for narcotics
offenses than the previous year, with 679 Indonesians and 30 foreigners arrested

in 1981 and 1,031 Indonesians and 66 foreigners arrested in 1980. In 1981 282 users
and in 1980 380 users were detained.

Three Australians, two Japanese, 15 Chinese, two Englishmen, four Americans, one

German, two Frenchman and one Canadian involved in narcotics offenses were arrested
in 1981.

In answer to a question, Soehardjono admitted that the police still face many ob-
stacles in their attempts to respond to these narcotics offenses-the lack of facil-
ities and staff to handle the narcotics problem, and the failure of the public at
large to report such cases.

Formerly marihuana was only found in Aceh and in North Sumatra, but recently people
in Heat and East Java have been planting it. In these new areas the planters gen-

erally do not know that it is forbidden, Soehardjono explained; they are the victims
of businessmen who tell them to plant it.

In answer to another question, Soehardjono said that up to now the police had not
found any evidence of subversive elements in the narcotics trade in Indonesia. The
purpose of the narcotics business is purely to make a huge profit. It also cannot
be said these activities take the form of an international syndicate; nevertheless,
they are quite well organized.

9866
C80: 5300/8318

15
scam CANNABIS MS mm FOLIO WIN

ammmmmmmsnmcmozps

(Editorial:

l'liextl

cso:

"meding Out Cannabta Plato']

A scarcity of ”hand” drugs,
ideal growing conditions and a
tendency for eome users to grow-it-
alone epell an upsurge this year
inthe uae of marijuana. For the
police. the task of detecting the
aourcu of this eo~called “soft" drug
ia becoming increasingly difficult.

Plots of cannabis eativa plants
are becoming smaller, more ecat-
tered and more remote a grower:

eeek to outwit police whm-only a
year ago. were findihg plantations
containing more than 1000 plants.
By growing perhaps 20 planta in
each plot and using nets to prevent
aerial spotting, the supplier:
‘believe they can limit the rielt of
detection — while continuing to

5320/ 9118

16

harvest a much as $600 in street
aalea from each plant.

in this pitting of wits. the
police acknowledge that they rely
very much on information from
the public — from people who
might etumbse upon a marijuana
patch or overhear a looae word
about its-location. here should be
no need for community-funded
helicopter swoops like the air
search which uncovered 10 plant:
ationa in 1980. Such operations
ahould be financed from tum.

Nonetheless, public willingness
to report illicit plots la vital if
mounting use of cannabis is to be
checked. Reports from around the
country show that cultivation i!
too widespread for the police force
to tackle the job alone.
REED 1o m1. 'neaonr m‘ cum
laborevnmminmglishdrebap'l
[Article by 'Lineenn'r ”me Deadly Trade“)

[lest] Parallel with the increased production of opiu and heroin in parts of
Pakistan.'and a phonon-ml rise in the deadly trade. drug dense within the country
is spreading at a fridltening pace.

According to reliably-investigated reports, the Golden Triangle. wedged in the her-
derlends of ‘mainend and Burns. has gradually been replecrd by the Golden Crescent,
lying along the Pair-afghan frontiers. as the nain swplter of hard drugs to the
world. a umber of heroin-unufacturing plants, sons of then mbile, are said to
have been set a) in or near Pakistan's tribal belt: ad despite efforts by the
authorities to cut down on pom cultivation, these mite flourish and seen to
have no difficulty in getting all the raw material they need. This grin estimate
is substantiated by the fact that the seizure of drugs sought to be snuggled froe
Pakisan has risen steadily in recent years. ad the traffic. once lieitad to opiu-
and hashish now includes large quantities of heroin. There are good reasons to
believe that this Iulti-nillion-dollar business has grown as a result of local col-
laboraticn with Western drug syndicates who are said to provide the incentive,
finance and technical know how to expend the heinous trade.

Addiction Grows

mevitebly, the flourishing business in the production and export of all varieties
of such drugs has encouraged drug addiction mug large sections of our peoples.
According to a panel of doctors esseﬁled in Swat recently, not only has addiction
of traditional drugs spread. but the deadliest of all habit-forning drugs. heroin.
is now becoming readily available and increasingly popular. It is said that at
least 150 cases of heroin-addiction were registered during 1981 in the ten rehabil-
itation and detoxification centres functioning in the country. In the bigger towns,
the dangerous addiction is spreading smog students, and a report from sind indi-
cates that it is not unknown in the rural areas. A report presented to the Swat
symosiu gives the alaraing estieate that victies of various types of drugs in
Pakistan rage between 4.5 and 8 lathe. It is also adnitted by the experts and
these estimates are incosplete because a large nueber of drug addicts, particularly
in the reeote areas, have not been brought under any count. A sore comrehmsive
nation-wide survey is to be mm with last Ger-en assistance, and when

17
cospleted it will underline the grave threat to national health presented by the
menace of drug-addiction.

hain Tasks

The first task obviously is to check the cultivation of poppy and the production of
opiu- and heroin. Here, some effort has been ads, but the claim that it has been
successful is belied by other evidence. the narcotics seized during 1980 and 1981
equal the quantity seized betwean 1973 and 1979. If it is correctly believed that
only one-tenth of the quantity snuggled is seized, production is clearly booting.
Apart from the variety of indigenous drugs. inorted drugs available at any chenist,
and sold often without a pruscription. add to the dange.

A new Ordinance is said to be wider preparation to allow for are effective steps
against the illegal sale and snuggling of hard drugs, such as heroin. opius, hash-
ish, etc. It must be kept in nind that the sisple bureaucratic renedy of nerely
enhancing sentences for violation of the relevant laws will not suffice to curb the
menace. The profits available in this trade are so high that the operators' agents
are willing to take the risk of paying large fines and even undergoing iqrisonaent.
Apart from inning truly deterrent pmishnent, it is essential that the nachinery
for dealing with the trade is made sore efficient, so that the law-enforcers can
keep ahead of the methods used by the traffickers in drugs. So far, these agencies
seen to be vigilant only at certain Imown points. such as the nain airports for
foreign flights and the points of entry into the Punjab free the sun which remains
the main area for supplies. This is plainly not enough. The Narcotics Board must
be persuaded to estaklish a wider net so that the sale and export of drugs does not
reaain such an easy operation. It is also necessary that proper efforts should be
nade to detect and apprehend the big bosses, who are responsible for the planning
which has expanded the drug business to such an extent with such frightening speed.

Along with preventive and panel measures that are said to be in offing, doctors and
students of psychology should investigate why the demand for opiates has received

such a spurt in recent years, and suggest rev-ladies that can save our people frosl
the deleterious effect of destructive drugs.

CSO : S 300/ 5654

18
INTBRPOL HEN comm: 33mm MING INVESTIGATIOI

Karachi MORNING KENS in English 9 Feb 82 p 5

[Text]

CSO :

5390/5651

lnveetiatione have been
conﬁned!” 'e high ieul tenrn
oi Went Gem-n Interpol to
colieet ¢Vitlooeo one! link: oi
heroin mutton use toiled
hy Pnldeten Cum out! at
Kereehi' eirport in October
lat year lnvolvinc a Germ

riand e number at lrnnhne
lit in; in West Gurney.
Theoﬂciele ot inie'rpol who
iett here yeeterday t’or Prank
tun toid PM in an interview
heiore invin; that during
their My my they recor-
ded atonement: oi Mia Joeode
lriee. the German girl. anti
three mane—Momma“.
Ben Teqavi. Mohemnied Rea
Iohuhrnrd and Ghuietn
“min We.

“We have now enough evi-
tienee oi tho-o invoked in the
international an; of heroin
amnion Iron Pakiezen to
Wen Germany end we hope to
eﬂat the remaining
in our country soon: they
eeiti.

it they he malted thet on
Oct. 27. I”! like Brian and
Mohuhertmi were errata
tron Ker-chi airport mom:

,heiore they here to law on

an Air from light by the
(Antonie the“ and 4.50 kilos ol
heroin wee recovered from
their euitueee.

The two had arrived in Re-

19

radii three tiers no. Too-vs
who W the onen-
tion aw Irvin the
eirport when like triea end
huh-herald were nrmzed
lie wee outed horn Lahore
airport {our tieye later when
he tried to ly out to New
Delhi. Rte eeootnpliee in Ka-
3:“ Mildred: wu eho errev
north: interrogation. 't'aqat'i
cool-ed he enriier tent one
lie-am with heroin to Vent
m lamination wee
conveyed to West German in-
terpol who arrested Hana .‘ma
from hie Int in Berlin. along
with one Sehlr Shehidl.

It. Bria who eeriier de-
nied any involvement in the
are. later conic-on in court
to her crime nndwu ﬁned In.
one letth which was void by
her tether who ﬂew in here
here West Germany. Hoba-
eherieni also ma willy
endwaebedﬂe ooetekhend
one yeer in Soil. Mei wee
however releued on he".

The lnterpot omelet: tinnked
the Petieten Corinna mm in-
cludhn Ir Indian antni
end Ilr Abdul Weheed Khan.
Deputy Collector Cutolne. Ke-
reehi eirnort. tor heioinn then
in their investigations end nine
tor toiling theettmototherein
mowing to their country.—
ACCUSED GIVES DETAILS OF SWING OPERATION
Karachi JANG in Urdu 28 Dec 81 pp 2, 15

[Article: "I Used To Supply Tons of Cliaras in'Karachi; Confusion of Anna Allah
Accused of Struggling and Hurder of a Police Officer; Police Looking for Ann
Allah and His Five Companions")

[Text] Karachi, 27 Decenber—Anan Allah, accused of killing a police officer in
Site area, told the police during an investigation that he was the leading sup-

plier of drugs in the country, particularly in Karachi. Site police had arrested
All“ Allah and his three conpaniona after a struggle. The police learned about

his activities in that area and arrested hi. when he went to sell drugs in Site.

police under the leadership of deputy inspector Ayes Khan. when Ann Allah tried
to escape, police constable Zabur Khan tried to hold him. Anan Allah shot Zabur
Khan in the head, killing his instantly. Anan Allah hid in a sedan nearby
while his coapanions tried to escape. The police arrested his three companions,
Kashnir, Kadir and Abdul Usheed. as well as Allan Allah. The police recovered
about 5 and 1/2 naunds (approxintely 650 pounds] of charas from the car. Anan
Allah admitted that he had been taking charss in the tribal area for the last 10
years and selling it to dealers in Karachi area. lie added that he brought 160 to
1,600 pounds of charas to Karachi every 2 months. He said that he paid 2.000
rupees to the truck drivers for each naund of char . Be further said that he
did not check the identity of his custoners. Anyone who was willing to pay the
right amount got as much as he desired. He further said that the persons he .
supplied to have become millionaires and are living in fancy houses. Be used to
stay with a friend in P.I.B. colony in Karachi and stored his charas in Bare

Karachi and take then to the tribal areas. Various groups med Alan Allah's
services to have their opponents kidnapped and later released on psylaent 6f ran-
soa. Allan Allah's companions, Kashnir and Abdul Qtdir, were also involved in
drug traffic. Ilia other assistant, Abdul Haheed, acted as a driver for a known

criainal until Anan Allah emloyed hin fullti-e. The police are looking for five
other heaters of. his gang.

799 7
C80: 5300/ 6589

20
BRIEFS

OPIUH SBIZED m PBSHAHARuPeshavar, 25 Petr-In the third conaecutive raid in 6 days,
the Peshawar custona seized 633 kilograms of spin: and 315 kilograms of charas
from a truck near Naushera on the grand trunk road today. The narcotics were bound
for Karachi en route Europe. The value of the contraband items was laid to be

about rs 3 crore in foreign market. [GP271316 Karachi mum in English 25 Feb 82
p 1] -

080: 5300/5656

21
HBO)" cum Pic SMOKE DRUG me Ill am
31311215 lbecow Radio in Bur-one to Bur-e 1030 can 30 due 82

[Text] There heve been reporte on eilitery operetione being weged by coweniee of Burneee

end Thei erned forcee egeinet the ereed genge engeged in the illicit opiu trede in the golden
triangle eree. The neee of the opiue king. than Se. elm Chng Si-Eu - e Chineee netionel -
ie well known. he bee been engeging in thie highly protiteble venture for 20 yeere. Be

not up opiu refineriee in foreeted end counteinoue ereee end devieed e nooth eyetee of
treneporting nercotice through jungle routee. lie owne e privete erly with e force of 3.000
een. KhunSe hee not been erreeted deepite e ceeh ewerd named for hie erreet.

An ltelien weekly eegeeine. (PM). once euggeeted the: to get ewey with notoriety in
euch e bletent anner, lhun Se euet heve nore cepitel then the goveruent orgeniretione in
cherge of enti-oercotice operetione. Other then thie factor. the feilure to erreet hie end
hie expending underground operetion an be ettributed to Beijing'e encouregeeent. It hee '
been proven thet Beijing hen contecte with the ﬁnite geng which controle production end
trefticlting in nercotice. It ie known thet Ieijiog‘e egente eetebliehed contecte with

(Sentoe Troiigente). leeder of en underground geng which controle the illicit drug treftic
in the United Stetee.

The opiue trade in the golden triengle grove with eech peeeing dey. According to figuree
releeeed by the United Iletione, 800.000 kge of opium or 60,000 ltge of heroin ere produced
in the region every yeer. Leboretoriee net up clendeetinely in cevee end tunnele in
inecceeeible lountelnoue ereee refine opiul into heroin. when opiu ie refined into heroin.
the voluee ie leee but the velue eultipliee eeny tieee over. Calculeting on the beeie of
8500.000 per kilogree of heroin on the illegel enter in the United Stetee. we on gueu

er the extent of huge profite eede by drug treﬂichere end deelere. The following figuree
releeeed by the United Stetee eleo reveel the profite of thoee in thie illicit trede: In

1980 drug eelee toteled 36.6 billion in the United Stetee. end eelee juwed to no billion
leet yeer.

Beijing'e interference in the internel eff-ire of Bone ie ueuelly nentioned in reletion to
the extent of ite involve-eat in the opiue trede in Mill. Beijing. which in ueing rebels
of ell stripes en in followers. offere em end .unitiu in enchenge for opiu.
Coneequently. ineurgency end drug trefticking heve becoee ineepereble beceuee 'opiue eervee
the ceuee o! wer. Vida the upeurge in insurgency, the proepecte (or trefiicking in

the deedly white powder becoeee greeter.

The lureeee Any hen conetently fought insurgency ee well ee drug trefiicking by ineurgente.
Poppy plentetione ere deetroyed by plenee. Aircreit oi the Bur-tee Air F'orce heve
frequently bated rebel ceqe. routee elong which the rebele eove. ee well ee ereee believed
to.be the eitee of the leboretoriee end drug etorege duepe. Deepite thie, ineurgente
continue to survive. Thie ie beceuee. if neceeeery. they cen tehe refuge in Giineee
territory. There ere beeee end treining cone for the rebele in Guineee territory.
Routes leading into Burns iron the north fora an intricate network throng: uhich Chineu
goods and era are delivered to the rebels by nules. This was nntioned in (U Thein Pe
Myint's) travelogue of the northeastern region. The minus returning iron Burns take back
teak. all aorta of tidser. ivory ad precious gen tron Burns. Opiu- ia also transported
illegally through these Iountsinous routes. These routes are also the source of the black
natket in Bur-a, Thdtin Chit Hang. a well-known Bur-ass leader. wrote in his book: The
blov to the burnse scone-y cones fro- the fact that the circulation of goods ad noney
take place on the black Isrkst and not when it should. He said: This not be considered
as an stteapt not only to sabotage the econolic systea of the revolution in burns. but
also as an attewt to topple the state and destroy existing social relations.

In addition to their blackaarketeering. Chinese nationals are infiltrating Bursa. They
ningle with harness-born Gainese nationals and disappear. 0n orders fro: Beijing. they try
to establish themelves in Kokang. Moog lust and in other areas 0! Burns which axina
claias to be its territories even to this day. The extent of Chinese infiltration was
revealed in a series of Iilitsry caneigns launched by the lunaae Arly. The gradual
infiltration into Burns is shed at setting up liberated areas. In other words. the
aches is to slice up a piece of Dumas territory. 011M" gradually increasing opiun
trade is to inlelent these sin. This scheme is inseparable fro- the general strategy

of the Chinese leaders to bring Southeast Mia mder their influence.

cso: 5300/2195

23
"ORE QUESTIONS RAISED ON HOTIVES FOR BAN "IN TREK RAID
Editorial Co-ent

Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICHAN in Thai 31 Jan 82 p 2

lsditorial: “Pureign Armed Forces In Thailand“)

[Text] last week, border patrol police sent forces to wipe out the armed forces
of mun 5a, or Chang Si Pu, who has been called the narcotics kingpin of

the world, at Ban "in Task in Nae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province. This
operation couenced on 21 January.

General Prachuap Suntharangkun, the deputy prime linister, and Police General
Suraphon Chunlaphran, the director-general of the Police Depart-ant, together
with several other high-ranking police officers, together told reporters
about why the government had tocarry out this operation to wipe out the
forces of Khun Sa at Ban Hin Task. They said that this was necessary because
these forces threaten Thailand's sovereignty and they are engaged in producing
and selling narcotics, which is destroying the stability and security of

the nation. in addition, they affirled that this suppression drive was not
related to the visit to Thailand by letters of the United States house of
Representatives or that they had been pressured or encouraged by the United
States.

Concerning the foreign armed forces that have entered Thailand, particularly
in the area bordering Burma, in reality there are several groups because

the border between Thailand and Burns is approxinately 2,000 kilometers

long and there are more than 70 crossing points. in addition, the coaplex
jungle and mountain terrain has lads it easier for the Iinority groups in
Burma to secretely enter the country and for. arsed forces. However, of
these various foreign arned forces, it can be said that only two have great
influence or forces and weapons. These are the shan national liberation
group of Khun Se and the 101T forces of the 93rd Division.

Both of these groups, or arned forces, are engaged in the same business,
that is, producing, selling and transporting opium. Thus, the Ienbsrs of
both groups have claimed the northern area of Thailand as their hone since
it is near a 'najor opiua producing area of the world in the Shan and Kokan
states in the Golden Triangle. And since they are both engaged in the sale
business, soeetinss they clash. The only thing is that the status of the

2A
two groups is not the same. That is, the Chinese KMT soldiers have been
granted the status of refugees by the government and some became Thai
citizens during the time when General Kriangsak Chamanan headed the government.
They have extablished homes at Doi Mae Salong and Doi Pha Tang. As for the
Shah group of Khun Sa, they have settled down at Dan "in Task, which has

the status of a village. This village has a village headman who was elected
by the villagers and appointed by the government officials who monitor their
affairs. Since the real forces of Khun Sa do not live at Ban Hin Taek, it

is probably just the home of the Shah families or a temporary rest point

for the Shan armed forces. There is a small force of border patrol police
stationed there and administrative officials make periodic visits to inspect
things. '

Concerning this attack on Ban "in Taek, it is worth noting that Khun Sa 1
was not captured, or good information was not gathered ahead of time. The
only things found were weapons and war materials. No opium or other narcotics
were found. Thus, the expectation that this suppression drive would reduce
opium production was wrong.

We feel that_suppression drives to wipe out foreign armed forces that have
established homes in Thailand are legal operations that should be supported,
regardless of whether these forces pose a direct or indirect threat to the
security of the country. But at the same time, similar action should be

taken against all the foreign armed forces. Otherwise, some people may mistakenly
think that the government, or some powerful people, are involved with some

of the armed groups and do not want to suppress them.

Further Comment
Bangkok sum RAT snppnoa urea»: in Thai 31 Jan 82 p 49
lbasc Page column]

[Text] “I don't know why a suppression drive was not carried on before.

we want them to leave the country," answered General Prom Tinsulanon, the

prime ministter, when a reported asked him 'why have we tried to suppress

Khun Sa just now when he has lived here for a long time?"“ﬂe knows what

we want. If he wants to liberate a country, let him do so outside our country...
let him do so somewhere else,” added the prime minister when a reporter

asked whether or not we would "ask for cooperation from Burma.I

The question of why we have carried on a suppression drive at this particular
time is a question that is in the minds of the people too. There were reports
that the government was trying to suppress Khun Sa. or Chang Si Pu, and -
there was a clash. Sixteen border patrol police officials were killed and

45 wounded in the clash. As for Khun Sa's side, at least 32 are known to

have been killed. Khun Sa himself managed to escape, which is normal for

the "big shots."

Yes. Why was the suppression drive carried on just now? Why wasn't this done
before? Is there something behind this? These are the questions of the people,
including myself. who do not have detalied knowledge about
this.

But it is not right to blame the government for not knowing what is happening
because it would be terrible if [the government] was not aware of the fact
that large forces equipped with large numbers of modern weapons are in our
counrtry. The evidence that shows that the government is aware of this is

that the Narctoics Control Board has stated that Khun Se is an important
figure in the production of heroin and that he is an international trafficker.
in addition to his other crimes.

he stated, their main occupation is heroin trafficking. The claim that they
are engaged in [a war of] national liberation is not reasonable. Even if
they were engaged in national liberation, why do they have to station forces
in our country? If they want to liberate something. let them do_it elsewhere,
as the prime minister correctly pointed out.

This is problably not just a matter of (Shah) national liberation or narcotics
trafficking alone. There was unquestionably a matter of politics involved

also and it is the government that knows about this. Otherwise, suppression
would have been completed a long time ago. ”Khun Sa had great foresight.

He adapted himself to the situation and joined the Shans in order to rely

on these forces to make profits for himself. ht Ban "in Task, if our officials
want to go there, they must first hand over their weapons. This is a great
violation of our sovereignty. Thus, it is fitting that the gowernment has

a resolute suppression policy this time." stated.Police colonel Thongun
Charoensom, the commander of the Region 6 Border Patrol Police.

Another question is'why previous governments did not have a suppressin policy
and why they ignored matters to the point where Khun Sa's forces were able

to grow very large and form an intricate network. They have boldly announced
that they will immediately oppose the present government when suppression
drives are mounted. And they attacked the Mae Sei police station at the

Mae Sai District market in Chiang Rai Province. One policeman and five innocent
bystanders were killed. since his forces fled in the wake of the suppression
campaign, how bold will Khun 5a be now?

If he was just an ordinary heroin trafficker and did not have such a broad
network, one that reaches throughout the world, his boldness would not have
reached the point of becoming news like this. Ordinary heroin traffickers
do not want to clash with suppression forces, or the government's forces.
The only thing they try to do is escape so that they can continue to carry
on their illegal activities.

As for whether there was anything evil about this matter, it must be admitted
that this was not an ordinary matter and that there must have been something

in back of this for a long time. There must have been national or international
interests in back of this. That is. politics was certainly involved in this.

26
As for the reward for the capture of Khun 8a, or Chang si Pu, a ﬂaw Chinese

of Burmese origin. the Thai government has set the reward at 500,000 baht.

But to raise forces to carry on this resolute suppression drive. the government
had to spend millions of baht and sacrifice the lives of police officials‘

and the wealth of the nation. It does not seem like it was worth the cost

to send so many forces and weapons to carry on this suppression drive. It
was like riding an elephant to suppress a grasshopper.

In reality, if complex political. matters were not involved and it was desired
to settle things with Khun Sa, there is a sure way to dispose of him alone.
Everything would then be fine. I do not know how the suppression officials
think. It is probably possible to use a method like in the movies, that

is. by sending in an expert to dispose of him quietly.

Hell-informed persons have confirmed that this is possible because Khun
Sa does not live just at the border or at Ban llin 1'aek. lie travels to many

places and there have been news reports that he has a house in chiang Hai
and even one in Bangkok. It should'be within our goverment's capabilities

to dispose of him by infiltrating an agent or establsihing an investigative
network. .

As said, this is a very complex matter, and I feel that it is a national
matter, a national political matter. The important people in the country
certainly know the facts and what is behind this. The only things is whether
or not they will tell us. I

It is difficult to suppress the heroin traffickers. Lao Su, for example,
was once captured and put in prison but he still managed to escape. What
more can be done?

The best thing at present would be for the government to answer the people's

question of "why has a suppression drive been mounted just now.“ The villagers
would like to know.

Because, everything in this country is mysterious and complex. It is sad
and strange that the government has had to spend so much money and sacrifice
so many lives to suppress these people.

1194 3
C50: 5300/5641

27
BRIEFS

DRUG ADDICTION IN WVODINAnIncreased drug addiction has not bypassed Vojvodina.
where over 250 young drug addicts have sought medical help up to now. Although the
exact number of drug addicts is not known, there are at least 150 to 200. The
nunber of addicts in the Province of Vojvodina has increased abruptly, especially
in Novi Sad and Subotica: 8 young people have died in the last ten years in Novi
Sad from drug use. In a survey of 16.000 young people in the province. it was
found that 122 are regular drug users and that users are younger in age now (between
1‘ and 15 years old) than before. Dr Danjan S'avic. who has been dealing with this
problem for a nudaer of years at the Novi Sad neuro-psychiatric clinic. said that
addicts in Vojvodina used Macedonian opigl up to a year ago. but non urijuana and

heptanon are being used increasingly. [memt/ (Belgrade scan in Serbo-Croatian
14 Feb 82 p 5/

C80: 5300/3007

28
POLICE AT NOW'S GAY IN NW EFFORT 1‘0 HAL? DRUG TRADE

Nassau THE TRIBUNB 1n English 9 Jan 82 pp 1, 13

(Text)

080:

POUCE and Delence Force
ofﬁcer! are now atationed
round the clock at Norman'e
Cay and Cay Sal in an eﬂort to
curb drug running through the
Bahamas. Prime Minister
Lynden finding has dheloeed.

The Government, Mr
Finding aald. took a coneclous
decision to apply more funds
"to thie very realm problem.”

"We had to expend much

more than we had planned to
by keeping constant rol of
sea in the nort western
Bahamas and the western
Bahamas." Mr Plndllng aald.
“Those were the math traﬂ‘re
lance.“
The western Datum: would
be that pm: leading up on
the east of Cay Sal. The
northwestern Bahamas is that
area between Bimini and north
Andros.

"We have had to malntaln a
contingent 0! men hvlng round
the clock on Cay Sal.”heaetd.
"We have had to coat men full
time at Norman‘a Cay. We had
to beef up men on the grow
at north Andros. We had to do
regular shift: of men ln Blmlnl.

“We have had to incrceee
our aerial patrols every day
several times a day lnprder to
detect what tram: may he

5300/7527

condr'throughontheoutalde
of the Bahamas. east of the

pt acme advance lntornmtlon
on movement: from South
America or wherever the point
at oriln la. The laharnee
Nance Force. he aald. hea
been able to come
interestlogarreetaateaa.
hat I98! Itr ha “I:
t wee per t
(1?. u.

m aucceaeful year
mealntorrneof combating
ml and la ” herald l

.ee ' ‘ . ee I
meant a Mug..." I wouldn't
my ehut down completely
but It has meant a great
reduction in the mm: through
at through north Andree.
thro lnague. They were the
main potnta of concern.

“We hardly now llnd hoete
coming up though the
Dana-nae. ll they are cornlng
through now. more often than

29

not. they would be coming on
the west ride near Cay Sal
bank. If they go out on the
east aide. then they would be
outside the Bahamian
terriorlal water: and.there u
netting we could do about
thatanywe.Andlttheygo
around ll order to get to
Florlda well there la nothing
recouhldoahout that.”

"l'hc end reeult of all thlr.
the aaenclee tell me. It not
there has been a considerable
reduction In tll now of drug
thromh the Bahamas." r
cold. The Defence

E

.Porce maintain a party at Cay

Sal; the police force mehttaltu
a carry at Norman's Cay.”
Itr Pindltag eald
diacudom have led him to
believe tint material assistance
-- equipment. advance tralnlng
rum to al prohehllty be
forthcoming from the United

Sateeauthorltlce.
N0 N5" PATIENTS FOR DRUG CLINIC; STUDY 1'0 33 LAURCHED

Hamilton THE. ROYAL GAZETI'B in English 20 Jan 82 p 3

[Text]

Government‘s methe~

done programme for her-
oin eddicte is not likely to
eccert my new petrente
unti the summer. The
promised expeneion of the
often-criticised ro-
gramme has been he d up
as St. Brendan's Hoepitel
is still t 'nz to bring its
medice etel‘l‘ up to
strength.
4 A new doom ie eet to er-
rive from Cenede in April
but that will cull leave hoe-
pitel one short of ite full
complement of_ four 9?-
chietriete. Appliqetione or
the fourth poet will be con-
eidered next month but it
me he enother eix monthe
hegtre the new doctor re
brought in.

, Meenwhile. St. Brenden'e
medicel director Dr. Micheel
Redford ie reluctent to};-
tend the methedone clinic
without e peychietrret in
long term control. He eeid:
“In the pest we heve iuet
hended out methedone with-
out offering much elee in the
wey of support. Thet ie the
woret wey to hend out meth-
edone end may ectuelly do
more herm then good."

The clinic etopped tehl
new edmieeione leet July
is now treeting only {our ed-

dicte. Former Heelth Min-
mug: (3|ng
prom to

. me end next ﬁnen-
cie yeer’e budget'will in.
clude tunde for e full-time
nureetoeeelet.

The tel hee to
rerlly .513“ e mele 333
to hill-time dutiee with the
drug progreieme. But while

~onenureeiethouzhttohe

cepehle of hendlinc ei t ed. .'

mu :2qu the d bun.
Ito

block. In

- in eddition. Government

hee oornmieeioned e e of

-theecweol‘Bermude'e n3

problem end en err-mien
3:1: am“ am
on

'te the de Dr. Red-
mlm thehgervleee tor
‘3 gm." ”vii": .a““'a'
u y . ‘ -
tion of the eetre nume will be
e meet help.".he eeid.

A. well ee edminieterin;
methedone the euree will ee-
eret Mr. Bryent Richerde
who le eo-ordinetor o! the

' over-ell drug ﬁr emu

11» new

expected etert work et 8t.

Emmi?” “Whig."
emee .

He Word end Dr.

Ro end Robineon who wee

recruited from Sootlend in
October.
WWICS W10 CWCOCAPURCHASBS
Cochabalta 1.08 TIMOS in Spanish 18 Jan 82 p 5

[Text] In accordance with the Narcotics Law, lining, agroindustrial and other fires
whose workers chew coca lust acquire the coca leaves directly from the Office of
Supervision and Sales Control in their respective districts by suheitting lists of
the workers with their identification card number, signature or fingerprint.

Until recently the lining, agricultural, cooperative and other fir-s purchased coca
through intermediaries and delivered it to the workers without any type of control.

In the future they will have to supervise delivery and justify the purchase. accord-
ing to Article 31 of Decree Law No 18714, which states: "State or private mining
fires. as well as agroindustrisl, agricultural and livestock and forestry businesses
which eeploy workers who chew coca, Inst distribute it through general stores accord-
ing to their needs. For this purpose they will purchase the quantities required di-
rectly fron collection and sales centers operated by the National Council for the
Campaign against the Narcotics Traffic, paying in cash.

"The fires must keep a register of users, with their identification card nuaher and/or
fingerprint."

The aforementioned law also states that the firms must sake their require-ents known
at least 3 months in advance.

New Identification Cards

Regarding retail sales. the law provides that within the next 30 days, retailers'
identification cards will be given to proprietors of shops, stores and other places
which pay their taxes.

Article 32 of the decree-law in question states that all identification cards pre-
viously issued are null and void for the sale of the coca leaves, and that others
will be issued shortly which will permit the retail sale of coca to peasants and
users.

8735
080: 5300/2152
PEASANTS TO HELP IN N LEAF CONTROL
”261760 La Pu Radio Illiuni Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 26 Feb 82

[Excerpts] The National Council. for the Struggle Against Drug Traffic has decided
to include peasants in running the storage centers for coca leaves and in the
council's nobii units for the production control and sale of this product.

This decision was made to prevent hostile actions in the future against the council
officials in charge of the control and sale of coca leaves. This information was
given during s press conference held yesterday. The decision to include peasants
is aimed at stopping the actions unleashed by drug traffickers against officials.

The council officials reported during the preas conference that the spreading of
rusors and contents contrary to the struggle against drug traffic created a con-
frontation between officials and peasants a few days ago. The peasants urged by
the drug traffickers tried to stop the legal actions of the council. As a result
of the confrontation two peasants were killed and four were wounded.

[Nerds indistinct] with peasants took place in the Ivirganzans Valley in Chapare, a
site where agricultural producers from Iviraa and (Siruata) got together. Council
officials said that the participation of peasants will prevent the production of
coca leaves from being diverted to the production of cocaine.

During the press conference, council officials also presented four of six criminals
who were converting gas bottles into containers for transporting coca. Those
arrested by the police are: (Raul Ugarte Hanani); (Moises Piste Guarite); (Justo
Antonio Quise); (Delfin Choque Gabriel); (Osvaldo Callata Haricoyo); (Gregorio Goya
Ramos); and (Joaquin Piste Cuarica). They have all confessed, therefore they will
be put at the disposal of regular courts after the police conclude their investiga-
tion.

Interior Minister Ronulo Hercado Garnica said that there is complete tranquility in
the peasant sector of Cochabanbs, where a confrontation banteen narcotics officials
and acne peasants took place. He indicated that this situation has been overcome
due to the tinely intervention of the sinister of agriculture and canpesino affairs
and the Cochsbsnba prefect. lie also said that the situation in the country is
normal and that 'he carnival celebrations were held without any incidents which
could have obst.ucted the peace and tranquility of the population.

080: 5300/2206

32 I
ANTIDRDG ETTORT LACKING NECESSARY EQUIPMENT
La Paz BOY in Spanish 16 Jan 82 p 7

[Text] Cochabamba, l3 Jan--By order of court officials, 56.72 kgs of cocaine sul-
fate were burned yesterday after the conclusion of the trials of several narcotics
traffickers.

The order from the third criminal court came after the usual narcotics analysis which
was done in the presence of the president of the Superior Justice Court, the district
attorney. a representative of the University of San Simon and other authorities.

The 56.72 kgs were part of several operations carried out during the recent campaign.
in which the direct and indirect perpetrators, whose cases were tried. were captured
as they hid in the wooded area of San Sebastian.

It was reported that last year a sinilar procedure was followed, in the presence of
officials and newsmen. with a like quantity which had been seized in operations car-
ried out by agents of the regional office of control of dangerous substances.

According to the international press, it is believed that 1 kg of cocaine sulfate is
worth $1 million in Miami, United States, so the value of the drugs burned here yes-
terday in Sucre Square was $56 aillion.

The aforementioned quantity of the drug was placed in safes in the Central Bank. in
the court and in the district attorney's office.

The interin departmental director of the office of control of dangerous substances
said that in order to confront the task of suppression [of the drug trade] with great-
er responsibility amd efficiency, he has asked for more personnel and vehicles, a
request which so far has not been given the attention it merits.

Luis Avalos said that there is a shortage of vehicles to get to the villages in El
Chapare, where the illegal activity of cocaine manufacture and coca sales abounds.

He expressed his optimism that the higher authorities of the National Narcotics Di-
rectorate would conply with Lochabamba's requests and send the items needed to do
the task properly.

8735
C80: 5300/2152

33
BRIEFS '

COCA CROP REPLACEMENT COST--Villa Tunari, 16 Jan-The plan to replace coca cultiva-
tion in the Chapare-Chimore region will involve the treatnent of 150,000 hectares of
land, according to the Executive Directorate of the National Council of the Carpaign
against the Narcotics Traffic. The amount needed for the various programs has been
estimated at $15 million. Colonel Rene Ocampo said in La Paz that "at first glance
and by sieple calculation that figure might appear unattainable, and even more so
when we consider that during the 10-year period it will have to be increased." He
emphasized that the ”plan calls for the incorporation of modern egroindustrial tech-
niques and the sale of what will be produced by approximately 30,000 settlers in El
Chapare and Los Yungas. Leaders of the Chapere Special Federation of Farm Workers
said that those plans have not yet entered their initial phase. According to that
intonation it is estimated that the surplus coca production in El Chapare and Los
Yungas will be 10,000 tons annually at a cost of 575 million Bolivian pesos, or about
$30 million per year. He explained that "while the results of a systematic policy
of coca-replacement are being consolidated, we will have to purchase and burn coca
leaves at that price." These and other problems affecting the settlers will be ana-
lyzed by delegates to the Seventh Parm Workers Congress, which will be attended by
representatives of CORDBCO [Development Corporation of Cochabamba'], MACA [expansion
unknown] and PRODBS [Chapare-Yungas Development Program]. They will report on the
progress of plans to replace the coca plantations. [Text] [Cochabamba L08 TIWOS
in Spanish 18 Jan 82 p lo] 8735

CHAPARB TRAPPICKERS CONTINUE WOW-In spite of repeated announcements about
control of the coca trade, peasants from the ampere area continue to bring coca on
foot to the Santa Cruz district. using paths and rivers which lead to the Yapacani
area, according to persons who have visited the tropical region recently". They said
that in view of vigilance by .narcorics agents at the Villa ‘hmeri, Paracti, Colomi
and Sacaba stations, some Chapare producers have decided to take the coca to Santa
Cruz by a route which takes 3 days one way, carrying on their backs large shipments
of coca consisting of two drums, which they later sell for 30,000 Bolivian pesos. It
was learned that the peasants who make this journey return here by bus from Santa
Cruz and then go by truck to El Chapare. Officials of the Office of Supervision and
Control of Coca Sales indicated to the press on an earlier occasion that "they do not
dare to enter that region for fear of the narcotics traffickers," who have automatic
weapons and other items. They also said there are many routes which lead to Santa
Cruz and that it is difficult to supervise th- all with the small nunber of people
the division has. Meanwhile, supervision of coca coming into this city is strict,
peasants have told their leaders, and the combined Military-Peasant Pact and the
agents concern themselves with seizing coca by the pound and are afraid to enter the
Sajta area which leads to Santa Cruz to take it from the traffickers who are trans-
porting large voluues of coca. [Text] [Cochabamba L08 TIMOS in Spanish 16 Jan 82
p 7] 8735

(30: 5300/2152
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA sum—The National Police seized yesterday 500 pounds of narilmana and
17 pounds of seed, totalling more than 130 thousand colons, capturing those
responsible for the cultivation and sale of the drug. Those arrested in this case
are the following: Simeon Antonio Martinez, Tones Deleon Baires, Pedro de

Jesus Baires, Juan Deleon Baires, Julio Cesar Cueila Reyes. The plants were dis~
covered in the Hizata region, on the highway between La Libertad and Acayutla,

on land belonging to Enilio Deleon Baires. who is being held in the city of
Sonsonate. The capture of the five people mentioned -took place in ‘
the Anya area on the outskirts of the Cute-ah 'area

of the capital in the Santa Emilia apartments. They were selling the nerihuana
at 250 colons a pound, and a pound of nsrihuana seed for 300 oolons, according to
police authorities, after having received declarations iron the accused. The cap-
ture is one of the most sensational ends by the National Police in 1981 in which
drug trafficking is involved, according to that body. [Text] [San Salvador LA
PRENSA GRAHCA in Spanish 29 Dec 81 pp 2, 17] 9678

CSO: 5300/2165

35
BRIEFS

HUMAN 0N COCAINE CHARGB-Gail Griffiths a 25-year-old Englishwoean who is charged
with possession of 31b 3ozs. of cocaine valued at over 0.8.33 million appeared

in the Home Circuit Court on Thursday and was remanded in custody by Hr. Justice
Theobalds to return on February 3 for trial date to be settled. Griffiths was
arrested on November 20 last year at the Norman Manley International Airport
after he she came in on a flight from South America. [as published] The case
should have been tried yesterday but an adjournment was granted after attorney
Mrs. Kay Sherman informed the court that Hr. Frank Phipps. Q.C.. who represents
Griffiths was engaged in the St. Catherine Circuit Court. She said Miss Narcisse
Hamilton who also represents Griffiths was ill and said that Mr. Phipps had
received the certificate from the Government Analyst only on Rednesday. Hr.

Lennox Campbell, Crown Counsel. represented the Crown. [Text] [Kingston THE
DAILY CLEANER in English 30 Jan 82 p 16]

COCAINE. CURRENCY SEIZURE-CLEANER Western Bureau--bouis King. operator of King
Aquarius Club. Church Street. Hontego bay. has been arrested by the Montego Bay
C13 and charged with possession of ganja and cocaine and hoarding foreign cur-
rency. Three women were arrested and charged jointly with Ring with possession
of the drugs but police have withheld their names pending further investigations.
The charges were laid after police raided King's residence at Coral Gardens early
Thursday morning. Ganja and cocaine said to be valued at thousands of dollars

and about [1852.500 were seized, police said. [Text] [Kingston m DAILY CLEANER
in English 1 Feb 82 p 2]

680: 5300/ 7527
JARUARY ANTIDRUC CAMPAIGN RESULTS REPORTED FOR ZONE 06
Culiacan BL SOL DB SINALOA in Spanish 8 Feb 82 p 8

[Text] The action taken against the drug traffic by the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic, through the Zone 06 coordinating unit established in this

state, has been relentless, and during January 64 individuals were remanded for
various crimes against health.

A total of 30 kilograms and 571 grams of marihuana were seized from those persons,
as were 2 kilograms of seed of the injurious grass, and l kilogram and 380 grams of
heroin. Hence this action on the part of the Federal Judicial Police, in addition
to having precluded the distribution of those drugs. has also made it possible to
prevent the health of many people from being damaged.

After making the foregoing statement, Hector Aviles Castillo, the Zone 06 coordinator,
said that, furthermore, 90 grams of opium gum had been seized, and that three long-
barreled and seven short-barreled weapons, as well as 1,027 cartridges, were confis-
cated from those under suspicion.

In discussing the fumigation activities. Aviles Castillo stated that 1,666 poppy
plantations were destroyed over an area of 465,040 square meters, while 22 marihuana
plantations were razed on an area of 4,870 square meters; and only one mixed planta-
tion was found covering an area of 100 square meters.

Aviles Castillo said that the action taken by the Mexican Army which is combatting
the drug traffic was also in evidence manually, because 637 poppy plantations were
destroyed in that manner, over an area of 223,986 square meters, as were only 13
marihuana plantations situated on 19,710 square meters; while six mixed plantations
were found on an area of 1,100 square meters.

Also, the members of the Operation Condor task force destroyed a poppy seedbed over

an area of 125 square meters, thus culminating the activities for January in the
battle against the drug traffic in the state, as described by Aviles Castillo.

2909
CSO: 5330/66

37
DRUG ADDICTION LEVEL, DRUG SEIZURE REPORTED
Drug Addiction Level
Lila EL COHERCIO in Spanish 30 Jan 82 p A-12

[Text] Peru is mainly a cocaine base producer rather than a market for direct
consumption of the drug. The drug addiction rates in the official statistics do
not show levels that could be called alarming.

According to the International Drug Control Council based in Vienna, drug production
has increased notoriously. The organization mentioned Peru as one of the countries
which contribute the neat to the world flow of cocaine and cannabis (narihuana).

The specialists reported that drug consumption in the country is relative. because
of our incipient developnent and industrialization. Drug addiction and drug traf-
fic occur nest in highly industrialised countries, according to council statistics.

The Peruvian market does not have much attraction for drug traffickers, because of
the small quantity consumed as well as because of the lack of buying power of
potential users. 0n the other hand it is an attractive production market, and
therefore, according to police statistics, many foreigners are always caning to the
country to make contact with the centers of production and take away drugs.

It is believed that only 10 to 20 percent of the drug traffickers are detected by
the police, and of then, only a small number are arrested and sentenced.

Centers of Production

The whole uuallage valley as well as other parts of the departments of San Martin,
Anaronas, and luanuco, are production centers for raw naterials for drugs.

In addition, large production centers were discovered in the La Convencion (Cuzco)
valley and in Sandia (Puno). Naturally all these production centers are secret and
their boundaries are closely guarded against anyone approaching. “any crimes have
been comaitted in those places among drug traffickers, and moreover the police
have found it impossible to penetrate the centers.

As is known, the police recently conducted a stubborn campaign against the coca and
poppy crops in the Tingo Maria District.

38
In spite of that assault, only a small part of the production centers were affected,
and besides they are once again planting and producing there today, according to
reports from our correspondents.

The police do not have the resources or the tools (weapons, vehicles, and so forth)
necessary to wage a decisive fight against that degrading tide.

Hhile the police go about in cars or trucks, the drug traffickers use private planes
and have informants scattered everywhere to keep track of police movements.

Relative Consumption

Harihuana is the drug which has become most entrenched among the nation's youth,
whereas heroin, a derivative of cocaine, is consumed on a smaller scale among the
sore well-to-do sectors in the capital. Drug prices are generally high, which
eliminates consumption among the poorer classes.

Nevertheless, drug traffickers are always on the alert. They infest high schools

and universities, feeling that young people are much easier to initiate into drug
use than adults.

The police forces need modern equipment and more troops to carry out an extensive
campaign against drug addition and drug traffickers in the schools. At the present
time little is done in that area.

Drug Seizure
Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 30 Jan 82 p A-lb

[Text] The Huanuco Department Headquarters of the Peruvian Investigative Police
arrested three [sic] drug traffickers, identified as Roger Reyna Grandez, 27 years
old; Roberto Rengifo Nunez, 26; Eliseo Ayala Cabrera, 2b; and Lucinda Cabrera Leon,
24. In their house in the hamlet of Angsshoco, buried under the floor, police
found 34 kg of cocaine base worth about 100 million sols. '

8587
C50: 5300/2186

39
BRIEFS

LARGEST 091m HAUL NBA—Islamabad. 20 Jam-Afghan polio. uiud urn than two
tonnes (2,122 kilogram“) of opinn in Kabul last Sunday, mam Kabul, unicorn!
hero. said Tuesday. The police had trust-d eight pooplo in oonnoction with what
the radio ducribod as tho biggest opiu haul in Afghanistan. The apiu, in 46
bags, was sound in the Afghan capital's Sadat mm. the radio slid. [Rangoon
THE WORKING PEPEB'S DAILY in mglioh 21 Jan 82 p 5]

C80: 5300/‘922

40
mum

DRUG CONVICTION sway-cure. 16 Feb (um—A m of permanent was
sentenced to 15 years in prison yesterday for snuggling 5.5 tons of hashish into
Egypt last April, newspapers reported here this morning. lie is W Sulaynan
'Uthnan, of the ruling National Delocratic Party (10?). A brother one also
sentenced to 15 years. The HP's father and another brother were sentenced to

10 years. The prosecutor had asked that all four be executed. [Text] [36162317
Paris APP in English 2303 M 16 Feb 82]

680: 5300/2195

41
ANTI-SHUGGLING PLANS TIGHTER BORDER CONTROLS
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 17 Jan 82 p 5
[Interview with governor-general of Sistan-Baluchestanj

Excerpts On the whole the point must be made that the Province of

istan—B uchestan has consistently been one of the major bases of
trafficing and dealing in smuggled goods in Iran. Hence, a major
portion of anti-smuggling activities can be centered in this province.
Dr Nohammadi, the governor-general of Sistan-Baluchestan, said about
the problem of smuggling in this province: "The British colonialist
policies followed by the 0.5. imperialist policies of Mohammad Reza
and his sonaEas published in the region of Sistan-Baluchestan were
the essenti factors con ributing to the growth of smuggling.

The basis of the policies of the previous regime in the Province of
Sistan—Baluchestan was always that which would deprive the brave,
combative people of this province of education and the ability to
engage in honest and henorable professions. Therefore, until the
revolution, not only was smuggling not fought in the province, but
influential smugglers were even encouraged. It must be pointed out
that the head of the influential smugglers, especially in the area of
narcotics, was the Pahlavi family itself, the main factor contribu-
ting to the expansion of smuggling in Iran. The special geographic
situation of this province, which has long land and sea borders, also
helped the implementation of this sinister and treacherous plan. One
of the greatest problems of the government after the revolution was
that of smuggling. In the Province of Sistan-Baluchestan. on the one
hand, we faced people who know no other trade but smuggling, and on
the other, the government was determined to fight this illegal and
wrong action. In the beginning, the government implemented a plan to
redirect the smuggling issue in a way that they (smell dealers) could
import goods needed by the society, such as foodstuff and agricultural
machinery, through border exchanges during the economic embargo, In
the meantime, with the implementation of develOpmental plans, proper
employment would gradually have been provided for them. Presently,
this plan has been suspended as of eight months ago and the serious
fight against smuggling continues."
The Stratification of the Smugglers

large capitalists who do not personally enter the smuggling business
but make large profits through their agents. Obviously, neither can
they gain such profits through legitimate means nor are they prepared
to simply accept the fight against smuggling. The second group
consists of smugglers who are the agents and small dealers endangering
their lives to make money for large smugglers. This group makes up

a large portion of the deprived class. Once we are able to provide

have these problems. we hepe that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
will contact neighboring countries and make mutual arrangements to

.43
in the Guards Corps, gendarmerie, and police on the borders and in
the cities, the numbers of narcotics discoveries is rising every day
and the distributors of these items are being identified. We hope
that with the plans we have for the control of the borders, we will
be able to prevent narcotics smuggling. It is reported to us that
the counterrevolutionaries intend to spread narcotics throughout the
country in order to fight the revolution and Islamic culture. The
counterrevolutionaries have even equipped factories to produce
narcotics across the borders and send the products of these factories
into the country as soon as possible. The counterrevolutionaries
intend to dampen the enthusiasm and activity of the young generation
by bringing more of this Satanic product into the country to make
them miserable.

"In my opinion, more serious steps must be taken in this regard
throughout the country and in those countries which allow conspira-
cies on their land to take place against Iran should be given
Warning. To fight the smuggling of narcotics and addiction, we need
an essential military, security, and political movement. In this
regard, we can Spread prOpaganda through the media and religious
propagators to stOp the smuggling of and addiction to narcotics. We
hOpe that the government, after the war ends, will begin a more
serious fight against smuggling."

The political deputy of the Governor-General's Office of Sistan-
Baluchestan said, concerning the relationship between smuggling and
the conspiracies of world oppressors: "World oppressors use smug-
gling as a means to destroy the Spirit of dynamism and activity in
the regime of the Islamic Republic of Iran. That is, when the world
devourers see that the country needs sayings, they begin to take
currency out of the country through their agents and when the world
Oppressors realize that credit reserves are very important to us,
under such conditions, gold smuggling across the borders increases
tremendously. In any case, considering the long borders of this
region, the shortage of forces and sufficient military personnel to
prevent smuggling, and the war, the borders of the country cannot be
controlled 100 percent. Therefore, we have had many examples of
gold and currency being taken out of the country or even of counter-
revolutionaries escaping."

9593
C50: 5300/5367

64
BRIEFS

SEARCH 0!! FOR PUSHBRSnTvo illegal sellers of an addictive drug, 'mupin," were
arrested by police at Hoyale township with dozens of the tablets yesterday. The
alleged drug pushere included an elderly lien and a young nn Ihose name police
did not disclose. however, police confined that an intensive search has been
Inunted to net lore drug pedlere and their clients. Contacted by K.N.A., the
Hoyale District Hospital Medical officer of Health, Dr L. Ingotei, said the drugs
could not be identified as there were no such types in the hospital's phenacy.
He added that eawlee of the drugs had been sent to the government cheliat for
analysis. [Text] [Nairobi 1113 STANDARD in Rnglieh 12 Feb 82 p 5]

cso: 5659

105
MATE OVER NATIONHIIE DRUG CRIMES REGISTER AIRBD
Copenhagen 381.1365“ HOME in Danish 2 Feb 82 p 6
[Editorial]

[Text] The statements made by leading politicians on the proposed registration
of drug addicts indicate that this question will renein unanswered this time
around too or that at best it will have a very difficult passage through the
system.

In the lively debate that has been conducted in BERLINGSKB TIDENDE forceful
terns have been used to characterise the ability of politicians to understand
the scope of a no vote on registration. Ignorance is one of the words used.
The former head of the Cancer Register, Dr Johannes Cleuesen, has read "with
feelings of great alarm" the argments of politicians against registration.

Dr Clemesen says in response to Radical Liberal Bernhard Bsunsgaard's speech

on ”the gaps found in the existing public registers" that no mistakes or drawbacks
have been demonstrated in medical registers and that "no disadvantages have

been cited that in any way offset the great benefits society gains from such
registration." He asks if the politicians are aware that in the long run the
only way to prove the harmful effects is through accurate registration. He
would assign the responsibility for the continued development of drug addiction
as the social misfortune it is to the politicians.

Hagen Hagensen (K [ConservativeD opposes registration with reference to the
uncertainty involved in setting the dividing line between abuse and dependency
"and what will be the next group in society to be registered-alcoholics, per-
haps?"

This involves a central argument that has led to a great deal of confusion in
attitudes toward the issue of registration of drug addicts. It is quite legal
in this country to buy, enjoy or abuse wine and other alcoholic beverages. No
matter how tragic dependency on alcohol may be for an individual no person or
state body has the right to interfere with the abuse. Drug addiction, on the
other hand, is inextricably tied to criminality. It' is based on substances
that are illegal to import. possess or sell. Hagen Hagensen must be well aware
that one cannot equate drug addicts and alcoholics. As a jurist he can be in

66
no doubt whatever that the legal prosecution of narcotics dealers loses its

full weight as long as there is no supervision of the custoners of these trini-
nals and as long as their problems are not dealt with firmly.

For both individual and social reasons it is justifiable to take precautions
concerning drug addicts who constitute an enclave within society. It is now
necessary to demonstrate this need in a factual and undranatic way. Ideolo-
gically-based ideas about registration as a sign of loss of freedom are a result
of faulty thinking. The apprensions about using the means that might help have
a high price tag-among other things the deaths of perhaps 400 young people

this year.

6578
C50: 5300/2162

107
MEDICCWWWSEWACTIONWW
CopenhageanIMinDanish17hb82p2
[Article by Jeton]

[Text] According to a resolution adopted yesterday by the first Nordic anti-
hashish conference held at Rhino, there is a turnover of approximtely 1 million
Innish lcroner worth of hashish in Christiania every 2k hours. 'nxe conference
was arranged by anti-hashish nation-wide movements in Sweden and Norway.

In the resolution, the Danish people and the Danish government are requested to
put a stop to all drug traffic at Christiania, and, at the same time, the govern-
ments of Finland, Norway, Iceland and Sweden are requested to inﬂuence the Innish
government to pursue a new anti-narcotics policy.

Denmark is a transit country for a large part of the dmg traffic in all of the
Nordic countries, and the policy pursued by the ﬁnish government with regard to
hashish constitutes a perfectly clear breach of a number of conventions on drugs,
and the conference at "also finds that hashish traffic has become practically
legalized in many places in Denmark, the resolution states.

he consultant on alcohol and drugs of the Danish Ministry of Education, Peter _
Schieler, was invited to attend the conference but declined to attend the conference,
which he describes as private and biassed.

"I do not want to participate in the meetings of a private organization at which
Denmark is being showered with abuse for sabotaging international agreements on
drugs. Nor do I find that the Swedes are justified in claiming that heshish
purchased at Christiania is the cause of Swedish drug abuse," Peter Schioler says.

The resolution adopted at Helms, moreover, finds it strange that Finn Jorgensen, Ihnish
physician—the only physician wanting to legalize hashish—appears in information
films for schools of the Ministry of Education.

7262
080: 5300/2169

68
POLKEI‘ING BACKS MINISTER IN DRIVE AGAINST mooncs ACCOMPLICES
Copenhagen BERLINGSKB TIDBNDB in Danish to Feb 82 p 7

[Text] Justice Minister Ole Bspersen will have full or very widespread support
in Polketing for his proposed law on penalties for "those profiting from narco-
tics crimes." The object is to get at some people behind the scenes who nay
not import and sell hard drugs themselves but who make cash profits in connec-
tion with violations of the narcotics laws. The proposal also includes people
who store or transport drugs or who help to transfer profits from narcotics
transactions.

All party spokesmen supported the proposal in principle during .its first discus-
sion in Polksting yesterday. Several masters regretted that such a law had to
be passed but they did not doubt that it is needed. "It is quite shocking that
there are people behind the scenes who earn money off the misfortunes of
others," said Hagen Hagensen (K [Conservative]).

According to the proposed law those guilty of profiting from narcotics viola-
tions could be sentenced to up to 6 years in jail. Some speakers thought the
maximum penalty should be increased to 10 years, as if. is for importers of nar-

cotics, for example. To this the justice minister replied that if one can get
hold of the real backers and prove that this is what they are it is possible
under existing law to sentence them to as much as 10 years but if there is in-
sufficient proof for that all they can be charged with is profiting from a
crime. With the new law it would be possible to get at some people it might be
impossible to prove are the real backers. -

Some skepticism was expressed by Bbba Strange (SF [Socialist People's Party])
who would support the proposed law if it led to the seizure of the real hackers--
and by Preben Hilhjelm (vs [Socialist Left]) who felt some questions needed
clarification and said the proposal was perhaps more suited to scooping up some
of the "small fish" who helped out with transport and the like.

The proposal will be discussed further by the Folketing Justice Ooelnittee.

6578
680: 5300/2162

49
3R1 BFS

ASYLUM DENIED DRUGS SIIJGGLﬂl--‘l'he Human Rights Con-ission has refused to take
up an appeal from the imprisoned Pakistani, Atlaf Hussain. He is serving his
fourth year in jail for a large sale of morphine pills. And yesterday the Jus-
tice Ministry rejected an application for asylum. Hussain will now be expelled
from the country when he is released on 25 February. Barrister Jorgen Jacobsen,
the Pakistani's lawyer, had appealed to the Human Rights Oomission because it
was alleged that in Hussain's trial methods were used to obtain proof against
him that violate the law on the administration of justice. Among other things
it was charged that the police had promised special treatment for the main wit-
ness with a similar sentence. The witness was promised work and residence per-
mits if he would speak out on the case. [Excerpt] [Copenhagen BERLIIBSKE
norms in Danish 5 Feb 82 p s] 6578

MAXIMUM sammvcz FOR HASHISH WNW-The judge and lay assessor of Copenhagen
Municipal Court's Fourteenth Division yesterday issued the toughest sentence per-
nitted under the law for smuggling and trafficking of hashish-six years imprison-
ment. The person sentenced is the 31-year old Niels-Jargon Jensen. Illegal
earnings of 1.4 nillion Danish kroner, found in Swiss currency in a suner cottage
in north sjaelland, were confiscated at the sane time. Hiels-Jorgen Jensen was
sentenced for having mggled in all from 700 to 800 kilogrns of hashish. of which
500 kilograms figured in an earlier sentence. In issuing the sentence. the court
took into consideration partly the large quantity and partly the fact that the
person convicted lived entirely off the trafficking of hashish. Until his arrest,
he drove around in a Hercedes. which the court also found justificationjor seizing.

since it was purchased with funds from the_illegal activity. [rosy [Copenhagen
BBRLINGSKE TIDENDB in Dansih 27 Feb 82 p g/

C80: 5300/2210

50
murmwrrosmmsmssmmnsucs muss
Phone-rapping Permission Requested

Helsinki 0081 sum in Finnish 29 Jan 82 p 8

[Arti'clez "Phone-rapping Should be Allowed")

[Text] According to Assistant Chief Matti Tenhunen as well as Narcotics Section
Chief Inspector Olli Weclnsan of the Central Crininal Police drug-related cries in
Finland is pretty such under control by the officials.

Bowever. in order to keep the problem under control in the future new procedues

as well as additional investigative power are needed. According to renhunen the
adoption of a clause to per-it phone-tapping in the narcotics and alcohol abuse
law. a clause to pernit observation, and strict regulations regarding co-unication
between prisoners and outsiders are needed as necessary measures to prevent drug-
relsted crises.

According to Inspector Olli Uechan. chief of the Narcotics Section of the Central
Criminal Police. there can no longer be Just a discussion of the drug probles in
central Helsinki at this tine. Drug-related crises have spread throughout the wholc
country. ”the met recent ennles of this are the more than 30 cases of drug snug-
gling and selling as well as nearly 100 incidents of drugr use that were disclosed
during a drug investigation conducted in Northern Finland.

"Five years ago 85-90. percent of drug-related crises were omitted in Helsinki.
Now less than 50 percent is co-itted in Helsinki. the minder throughout the
rest of the country." states Hechan.

he states that if the statistics from Finland and other Nordic countries are con-
pared. we do not have a drug problem.

Statute on Foreigners lies Helped a Lot

"However. the drug'problen is becouing worse everywhere and it has also cone to
stay with us. There are indications that hard drugs are also available on the ser-
ket." points out Heck-an and adds that sooner or later hard drugs will also lake
their way to Finland.

51
Assistant Chief Tenhunen states that the drug traffic in Europe is largely in the .
hands of foreigners. Finland has been helped greatly by the statute on foreigners.
which provides officials with an opportunity to observe the novements of foreigners.

"In the government's proposal crime preventive aeasures are not given sufficient
attention in the statute on foreigners." aqhssises 'l'enhunen.

According to his we should allow phone-tapping as in other Nordic countries and
several European countries in the investigation of flagrant drug-related crimes
in order to facilititate and nake the work of officials sore effective.

Tenhunen points out that the Central Criminal Police has proposed to the Interior
Ministry that the drug and alcohol abuse law include a security-confiscation clause
in order to seize illegally obtained substances and prevent the continution of cri-
minal activities. ' ‘

Comunication Is Too Easy

Tenhunen also sees strict regulations of the kind they have in other Nordic coun-
tries for controlling conunication between prisoners and outsiders as a positive
measure for prouoting the struggle against drugs.

"Communication from within prison to the outside and vice verse is nearly withoat
any restrictions in rinland, " he states and points out an incident in which an
individual called the Nordic drug king directed the operations of two drug labora-
tories from within the prison and even went out on inspection tours of the labora-
tories while serving a sentence.

"We have a serious problem with pills in prisons. For exawle. in Sweden it is
very clear that those visiting prisoners can. if required. be inspected. We do
not have this kind of authority since there is no mention of it in prison regula-
tions," he notes.

Prison Officials Hant Blood Checks
Helsinki UUSI SUM in Finnish 29 Jan 82 p 32
[Article: "Blood Tests for Those Suspected of Using Drugs")

[Text] In investigating disturbances caused by prisoners breathelizer tests should
be administered in all penal institutions. Blood- and urine sawles could also
be taken fro. prisoners if they are suspected of being under the influence of drugs.

Undressing a prisoner. anal douching. and buys. the purpose of which would be
to find illicit objects and drugs, would involve coercive measures.

This is the opinion of the Justice Ministry's prison division work group, whose
task was to consider methods for improving the investigation of disturbances in
prisons.

The fact is that the work group's proposed neasures do not contain anything essent-
ially new since they are already generally in use. Rather. the purpose of the

52
report was to compile present norm and standards so that prisons could make their
procedures unifora. Also the'purpose is to compile s standard handbook on the ba-
sis of the guidelines presented in the report.

In the report it is eaphasized that blood or urine s-ples can only be taken with
the written permission of the prisoner. Only a trained nurse can take blood san-
ples or give enemas. the work group states that x-rays are persissable under the
condition that it is prescribed a doctor.

One nethod that has been tried for preventing the snuggling of drugs is to isolate
a prisoner returning fro: the outside into a special cell until any possible illi-
cit objects are eliminated from the body by natural means. Hovever, the work group
warns that this procedure should not be applied to all prisoners returning from
the outside, but only to those suspected of snuggling.

The work group is not completely satisfied with investigative procedures which ex-
clusively emphasize the seeking out of milty parties. In order that the investi-
gation serve as a measure to prevent disturbances. the causes and consequences of

a disturbance should be thoroughly clarified. thinks the work group.

Even though an investigation of serious disturbances belongs to the police. the
prison should also conduct its own investigation. There should be no delays in
the hearings and the transfer of information iron guards to officials should be
made more efficient.

The chief of the guards should also conduct an investigation of a disturbance, but

the conduct and supervision of an investigation should be turned over to an assis-
tant director or director.

10576
080: 5300/2155

53
BRIEFS

TOTAL 1981 DRUG SEIZURBS—Lsst year. slightly over 8 kgs of cannabis was seized;
almost 5.3 kgs of hashiah and almost 2.8 kgs of marijuana. The estimated sale
value of these drugs is slightly over 1.3 million kroner. The estiuted sale
value of hashish in the Reykjavik market is then 200 kroner per gran and 70 kroner
per gran of marijuana. Some cocaine was seized and slightly over 50 grain of an-
phetanines. The Reykjavik Narcotics Squad dealt with 338 individuals last year
and a total of 710 investigations. The Narcotics Squad had dealt with 187 of
these individuals before, but 151 were new cases. ”This is a considerably greater
anount than during the last 2 years. In 1980. 822 grass of marijuana were seized
and 2.8 kilograms last year. The biggest difference is the 2 kgs that the Re-
flevik police seized at one tine. Then the amount of hashish that was seized in-
creased fron slightly over 2.8 kgs in 1980 to 5.2 kgs last year. and of this
slightly over 730 grams were seized in Keflsvik. It is clear that it can be as-
suned that the drug abusers in Iceland are in the thousands." said Gisli Bjorns-
son, police representative, in an interview with HOBGUNBLADID. [Text] [Reykja-
vik mRGUNBLADID in Icelandic 27 Jan 82 p 32] 9583

080: 5300/ 2149
PCI CALLS FOR Pmnm'rm ACTION ON manna LAW anon!
Rose RIMSCI‘M in Italian 15 Jan 82 p 1!»
[Article by Gianfranco Tagliabue: ”Law Also Huat he Changed"]

[Text] 11. OOM'BIPORANEO dedicated itself entirely to "how to organize the re-
sponse against the use of drugs, the scourge of our tine." The collection of
articles and evidence constitutes a significant confornation of the need to in-
spire a severe and rigorous public willingness to "attack" the "drug phenone—
non," and social conditions that create a fertile territory for its spread.
This fact of a political, social. cultural and ideological order. that goes to
the heart of the drug problea, is not always understood by certain nesbers of
the press and by certain novenents. This is also true of a large part of the
denocrstic political forces thnselves.

The fight against drugs and a supportive attitude toward those with a drug de-
pendency is effective. It can play a role in developing a broad united nove-
nent if it is placed "within" the working plans of each of our organisations.
anall and large. with adequate roan for development and not relegated or dele-
gated to "specialists," so that it is not sectorialised, or worse. "sanitized."
0n the other hand. this was the spirit that guided the developnent of draft
legislation presented by the PC! in August 1980.

How far has it gone on the parliamentary road? The process of debate and con-
frontation is too slow. It was started by the Chanber Health Cot-ittee last
spring on proposals presented by all parlisnentary groups. except for the N81
[Italian Social Novaent] and the P801 [Italian Social Denocratic Party], to
change Law 685 regarding psychotropic substances. The slowdown followed an
initial phase of tension and eminent in that cn-ittee. As cpl-mists. we
often urge the conclusion of the committee's work and "bring" into_ the Chanber
either a unified text or a text representative of the various positions. It
is urgent to escape the lisbo of good intentions and formal declarations that
many najority parliamentary groups do not fail to advance every tine the dra-
natic drug plague is referred to. Obviously, we do not believe the new law
would work miracles. However. it is important to overcone certain present
regulations and lake the scans adequate to the quality of the fight against
drugs and substances that are harnful to health. That is the exact opposite
of trying to codify once and for all a law governing the “Iiracle prescrip-
tions." Rather, in order that society any direct its work and cousinsent

55
against drugs, the law must express three directives, none of which can be sep-
arated from the other:

(a) Contain and destroy the drug market, strike at the organizers, the large
traffickers, and the shippers. clean out situations where there is connivance
and camouflaging of interests--which are not only economic--that the mafia has
in the field of production and traffic;

(b) Develop an active, concrete solidarity of the people, of institutions, of
volunteer associations and develop experience in care, assistance, and recovery
of drug victims through a human, personalized and trained human relationship;

(c) To make necessary prevention, information and knowledge effective in order
to bring more forcefully to light the recondite objectives that the dominating
classes hide behind drugs.

There is no doubt that the delays in changes to Law 685 constitute an inadmis-
sible "obstructionism" against the urging that comes from many quarters. It
also contributes to feeding and shifting the debate, study and confrontation
onto a terrain that is not useful. It is neither exaggerated, nor propagandis-
tic, nor contrived, to affirm that the inertia was for the purpose of leading
people to think in terms of a "void" in legislative reference, while the gov-
ernment had and has the duty to implement the fundamental points of existing
law. It has been operational, not in terms of conitment and experimentation,
of the search for trained assistants, but in terms of the emergence of orienta-
tions that could not be shared in regard to the complex relationship with drug
users.

Therefore, it is obvious that the boom must be lowered also on the legislative
plane. This objective is possible today if all political forces function with
an open and lay spirit, anchored to factual information. The restricted com-
mittee, named at one time to examine draft legislation, concluded its work sev-
eral months ago "approving” for the Public Health Committee a text that improves
and changes Law 685, bringing it into line with health reform.

The text of the draft legislation, approved by the restricted committee of the
Chamber Health Committee, contains improvements of considerable importance be-
ginning with Article 1 in which it is affirmed that "the state promotes aware-
ness and initiatives to counterbalance the damage to physical and mental health
deriving from the abuse of psychotropic drugs, from the use of opium derivatives,
and other toxic drugs, as well as alcoholism and addiction to tobacco products."
Additional points are:

(a) The task of the public health minister, upon the advice of the National
Health Council, to establish procedures to permit local and regional health
units to establish, according to homogeneous criteria, the progress of drug ad-
diction, of alchholism, and of tobacco addiction; establishment by the regions
of annual operational plans for prevention, cure and rehabilitation, and for the
training of specialists in the field;

56
(b) Prohibition of any kind of publicity for beverages with a high alcoholic
content and of cigarettes, with the obligation to indicate the degree of harm
for each substance and fixing new and heavier fines for violations of these
regulations;

(c) The extension of punishment also for those who drive in a state of intoxi-
cation by the drugs referred to in the new lists:

(f) Specification of tasks carried out by health units for prevention and care
and rehabilitation of habitual drug users with the absolute prohibition of any

form of record for drug users, or coercive treatment; maintenance of voluntary
groups and associations;

(3) A broader and more precise commitment to provide aid and information for
drug users abroad;

(h) Annual appropriation of adequate funds in their respective budgets by var-
ious ministries involved in direct aid and aid to the regions.

These are only some of the points that improve Law 685. Other matters remain
open: (a) A different reformulation of schedules and then removing cannabis
and its derivatives from the list of substances for which there is a penalty;
(b) Better specification of the concept of 'hmderate quantity;" (c) Increase
of penalties for organisers, large distributors and traffickers compared with
the small distributor and small seller-consumer: (d) Increased penalties for
those who distribute mixed substances. including homicide in the first degree
for anyone distributing "cut" substances thereby causing the death of the re-
ceiver; (e) Alternative punishment for small seller-users; (f) Possible re-
duction of penalties for those who collaborate with the police for the purposes
of identifying and bringing large traffickers to justice; (g) Possible experi-
mentation with the contolled administration in public institutions of opium-
like substances, or their substitutes, for a period of 1 year and, in some ac-
tual cases, as a means of establishing a rapport and beginning a personalised
project of emergence from the drug habit by drug users who appeal to public
institutions, this being done without any kind of "record."

This is a matter of questions that are not secondary, but upon which-if all
the political parliamentary forces show the necessary effort and will-it is
possible to achieve positive results and the work of the communist deputies
will continue in this spirit.

6034
CSO: 5300/2151

57
CUSTOHS SERVICE GETTING m PATROL BOATS TO STOP MOS
Oslo ATTENPOSTBN in Norwegian 12 Feb 82 p 8
[Article by Thorieif Andreassen]

[Text] ‘No new rapid patrol boats for inner Oslo Fjord. Nordic mobile tele-
phones in patrol cars along the Swodish border and in the train from Sweden to
Norway. These are some of the measures aimed at improving the efficiency of
the customs service's efforts to conbat narcotics smuggling. “‘lhe equipnent is
a welcome addition to the limited resources of the custons service," Vidar
Vestreng, deputy assistant with the Customs and Tax Directorate, told AREN-
POSTBN. The new equipment will cost 2 million kroner, appropriated last year

by Storting.

The patrol boats are 25 feet long and have a top speed of 30 knots. They will
be stationed in the Predrikstad and Drobak/‘l‘onsbarg areas.

”Aren't the boats too snail and slow to operate effectively? For instance, can
they catch rapid, fleeing vessels in a high sea, deputy assistant Vestreng?"

"Such pursuits of smgglers are rare. for special assignaents in poor weather
and far out at sea we can use pilot boats or navy vessels. But obviously we do
not have the resources to carry out an effective surveillance along the entire

coast as they do in Sweden. That would be too expensive.”

Vidsr Vestreng did not hide the fact that the customs service faces enormous
problems. A great deal of narcotics smuggling goes on in the entire Oslo Fjord
area. With their linited resources they are unable to provide the desirable
supervision of the pleasure boat armada invading our coasts in the sumrtime.

"He must continue to base our efforts on spot checks," Vestreng pointed out,
"and we depend on good communications with other countries to tell us when boats

are arriving that should he investigated. This report service is very ilportant
in our work.”

Vidar Vestreng said Nordic cooperation between police forces and custons people
functions very well. ”And that,” he said, "is quite vital for our ability to
nake the maxim use of our resources."

58
And communication is a key word in the increased efforts of the authorities to
combat narcotics snuggling more effectively. Nordic mobile telephones in cars,
boats and trains are iuportant aids in this work. For instance, such telephones
will be used on the train fron Goteborg to Oslo, a known snuggling route. It
would be an obvious advantage and necessity for customs people on the train to
be able to get in touch with colleagues in Oslo when southing is going on.
Today this kind of comunication does not exist on the trains.

6578
080: 5300/2192

59
OFFICIAL REPORTS REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF DRUG DEATHS
Oslo DAGBLADB‘I‘ in Norwegian 15 Jan 82 p 8

[Article by Tor-0d ﬂaugstad: "Drug Deaths 1982; 17 Drug Deaths and More Confisca-
tions")

[Text] Last year 17 drug-related deaths were registered in Oslo; 8 fewer than in
1980. At the sane tine, confiscation of narcotics increased, especially of can-
nabis drugs such as hashish and marijuana. Host disturbing is the increased
confiscation of anpheta-ines. On the other hand. there was a reduction in con-
fiscation of heroin and morphine.

The worsening situation in the narcotics sector is particularly worrisoae in
Oslo. The nunber of addicts is increasing. "This applies in particular to young-
er people. Drug use has becone much sore co-on among 12 and 13-year-olds; this
seens to be connected with it beconing nore socially acceptable to use cannabis
drugs in certain circles, especially outside the note col-on drug locales in down-
town Oslo," said police inspector Arne Buuse at a press conference at the police
station on Thursday.

More Foreigners

A total of 1,285 confiscations were node last year. While in 1980 about 36 kilo-
grans of cannabis were confiscated, close to 81 kilogram were seized last year.
The increase was greatest in anphetanines, from 284 grass to 1,076 grams, an in-
crease of 279 percent.

0n the other hand. only 250 gram of heroin were seized last year as coupared to
3.5 kilogram in 1980. In addition to drugs. the section confiscated close to
2.3 million kroner in cash. It should also be noted that the number of foreign-
ers involved in drug crines according to the so-called "paragraph" (162) of the
criminal code, has increased fron 3 to 13. In total, ‘3 foreigners were jailed
in connection with narcotics cases.

Better Contacts

Today the narcotics section has 80 e-ployees. An inportant part of their task
is that of aiding other police departnents in solving drug criles. The Iain
reason why the section madesnreconfiscations last year was that the interna-
tional contact network has been strengthened.

Rbgaland: Two Deaths

Stavanger: There were two drug deaths in Rogaland last year. The Stavanger
Police and the Rogaland Police, Sandnes. each had one case.

"It is only by chance that drug deaths have been found in postmorteas included
in the statistics. There may have been other deaths, with another cause of
death given," says Police Officer Adolf Endreplass of the Stavanger Police to
DAGBLADET.

Bergen: 30 Drug Deaths

Bergen: Bergen health authorities estimate that a total of 30 deaths resulted
from drug addiction in 1981. The official list of drug deaths counts three
youths as dead last year, but this figure includes only those who died as a di-
rect result of overdoses.

Health authorities in Bergen have included on their lists youths who after long
periods of drug addiction have worn down their health and who. for example, die
of pneumonia or other diseases. It is estimated that at the present time about
50 youths are in the danger zone in Bergen.

Gro Lie, leader of the Vagrancy Section in Bergen. says she is not surprised at
the high death figures. At the same tine, she stresses that all statistics on
drug deaths are based on unreliable data. At the present tine the Vagrancy Sec-
tion is working with its own statistics.

Northern Norway: Four Deaths

Tronso: Last year drug addiction claimed four lives in Northern Norway: one in
Pinnnark and three in Nordland, but in Trona no deaths were registered despite
the fact that here, with Tronso as the center, the greatest drug abuse in the
north is found. However, the statistics of the police are somewhat diffused in
this area, and hardly give a conplete picture of the situation in northern Nor-
way, where drug addiction is increasing.

Sorlandet: Nine Drug Deaths

Kristianssnd: Nine deaths connected with drugs_were registered in the Agder
provinces last year: three in Handel, two in Arendal, two in Kristiansand, and
two in Plekkefjord. Hard drugs are increasingly used in Sorlandet. Bashish is
dominant. but the police have also had a number of heroin cases.

The number of drug cases is increasing considerably in all police departments.

In Mandal, which only a few years ago was free of drugs, the police last year
solved close to 60 cases.

61
cunrrnl Norway: No Drug Deaths

Trondheim: Central Norway did not show up in statistics on drug deaths last year.
Police authorities from Holde to Handal encountered no such cases last year. In
1980. one death from drugs was registered in Outer Trondelag.

Deaths with drugs as a contributing cause of death have occurred. But none of

these cases are of such nature that they were included in criminal police statis-
tics of drug deaths.

Chief Constable Per Christiansen of the Trondheim police states, however, that

there has been a dangerous increase in the use of asphetanines and LSD in Trond-
heim.

11,256
680: 5300/2102

62
HASHSH USE IN GREATER 813001601}! ”INCREASING DRAMATICAILY'
Stockholn DAGBNS NYHBTBR in Swedish 13 Feb 82 p 30

[Article by Gert Try-an: "Situation Soon Untenable: llashish Use Increasing
Dranaticslly"]

[Text] The abuse of hashish is growing into the largest
drug problem in Stockholm. Last year the number of hashish
abusers who came in contact with Maria Youth Unit increased
dramatically. Compared with the year before the increase was
120 percent. ‘

Several days ago the Schools Adninistration released the results of interviews
which showed that school children between 12 and 15 are using drugs less.

But the picture is much darker for youths over 15 and adults.

This is contained in a report which the Social Services Administration released
yesterday.

"The report shows that hashish abuse is much greater than we suspected." said Hats
Hulth, social services con-issioner.

The report was supported by investigations made by such organizations as Maria
Youth Unit. Contact Central, and the social services centers.

It also shows that it can be more difficult to treat hashish abuse than heroin
abuse-contrary to what was previously believed.

"The reason is that hashish is relatively easy to obtain, and it has a lingering
effect which takes tine to detect." said Lannart Ala, social inspector at Maria
Youth Unit. '

Hashish Suckers Have Psychoses

"Hashish abusers are now the largest group at Maria, and when they case here they
often have serious psychoses which are difficult to treat."

63
Hats Hulth said that perhaps it is tine to start a "Maria 2" because of the drastic
increase in the number of patients.

"If the present Youth Unit load can not be reduced by starting a second unit, the
situation is going to be untenable," said Lennart Alm.

The Social Services Administration and the county council are now discussing the
question of starting a "Maria 2."

"The most serious aspect of increasing hashish abuse is that it obviously can be

connected with youth unemployment." said Hats Hulth, and be quoted an employment
officer who said that it is more often the exception than the rule when unemployed
youths do not use drugs.

Spread Through All Greater Stockholm

Hashish abuse is now spread through all of greater Stockholm. even though it is
still most common in the southern and western suburbs.

Due to the efforts of the police during recent years. the sale of narcotics has
changed character. Street sales have almost entirely disappeared, and instead the
users have contacts with sellers who sit in apartments out in the suburbs.

"Something which is also of concern is that nore and more socially well-established
adults are beginning to smoke hashish instead of drinking spirits. That shows

that the misconception that hashish is not dangerous is still prevalent," said Hats
Hulth.

"That also shows that our information is not getting out, and we lust do something
about that.

"But mainly what we can do is learn from our successful efforts, and that we are
doing," said Hats Rulth.

"Take for example the area around Maria Square where different authorities have
worked together and have almost entirely eliminated drugs. We must have more of
such actions."

9287
C80: 5300/2193
OFFICIAL FIGURES 0N PRISON DRUGS QUESTIOMED BY EXPERT
Stockhola DAGENS mums in Swedish 13 Feb 82 p 5

[Article from Swedish Central News Agency. Norrkopins: "Researcher Chi-s Statis-
tics on Narcotics in Prisons Are Palse"l

[Tut] It is wrong to allege that the umber of drug abusers
in prison has grown. More accurately it has relained rather
constant over the years.

This was said by Norman Bishop. chief of research and developlIcnt of the National
Correctional Service. He has critically scrutinized the statistics on narcotics
abusers in the country's prisons.

According to those statistics the number of drug abusers since 1969 has ruined
at about LOGO-1,200 yearly.

The numbers for the last 5 years are 1,188, 1.166, 1,086, 962 and 1.168.

But these figures have always been seen in relation to the total nulber of innates.
This has easily led to misinterpretation and faulty conclusions.

"If tomorrow we suddenly had half as many innates in prison, seen that way it
would mean that we would then have twice as many abusers.”

Information

Noreen Bishop denies, however. that drug abuse in the prisons is not a serious
problem. On the contrary. he believes that the nobles is so serious that it re-
quires better collection of infer-nation about the social backgrounds of the abusers
and what can be done for the during the tine they are incarcerated.

9237
cso: 5300/2193 m,

65