FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10584
14 June 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM

FOUO 2/82

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL UTE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English~1anguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or 'ames preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
*

*ﬁiiﬁﬁﬁ*iﬁﬁiiﬁﬁtﬁﬁiﬁﬁtﬁﬁﬁﬁiﬁtﬁ

t**t***************t***************************t*********ﬁ********k

NOTICE

This new JPRS serial, HORLDHIDE REPORT: TERRORISM. is
devoted to international terrorism and entigovernment
revolutionary violence. It is FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY and
includes material on the organization. objectives and
methods of terrorists and the consequences of terrorist
actions. Items on terrorism formerly published in other
JPRS reports will henceforth appeer in this report. It
is expected that the report will be published weekly.

***********************hit*ittﬁtﬁtﬂi*t**ﬁ*t*ﬁ***ﬁﬁ***tﬁﬁ******tt***

*ﬁﬁﬁﬁtﬁﬁtﬁﬂﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬂﬁﬁ

ﬁttﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁiiﬁﬁ
WORLDWIDE REPORT
TERRORISM

POUO 2/82

Comm-s

LATIN AMERICA
COMBIA

I Am Comander One
(Jose Fajardo, Higuelangel Raldan; 80! El. CMDANTB l,

w A” 82) 00.000000000000-coo-0000.00.00.00.0no-coo...

GUATEMALA

(EPA Subversive Group Security Material
(“Tmumsmmm’ Hum) OOOCOOOOOOIOQOIDOOOOOOO

WEST EUROPE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GEMANY

RAF Leader on Concept of Urban Guerrilla: Black September
(TEXTS: m m, 1977) ...I........I..................

FRANCE

Debre on Security, Courts Policies: Terrorist Destabilization
(Michel Debre; PARIS MATCH, 23 Apr 82) ................
SPAIN

FOR OFl-TCIAI. USE ONLY

GRAPO Terrorist Training Manual
(EXPERIENCIAS IE TEES ADIOS DB LUCBA ARHADA, May 78).....

Threat Posed by ETA-H Emphasized
(F. Castano; KI. SOCIALISTA, 28 Apr-h May 82) ...........

Carrillo Speech to CC Deals With Terrorism, Popular Front
(mm m, ” Apr‘6 May 82) coon-oeon-000.000.000.000

Carrillo Sees Terrorism as Linked with Coupism -
(mm m, ”Apr-6m82) OOOOIOOOOCOOIOOOOOOOOOO.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I AM OOHMNDER ONE
Bogota SOY EL OOHANDANTE 1 in Spanish 30 Apr 82 pp 3, 131-158. 180-195

[Section 2. chapter 6. extract from chapter 6 and table of contents from book "I
Am Commander One' by Jose Fajardo and Higuelangel Raldan. Editorial La Oveja
Negra. Bogota. April 1980. 10.000 copies. 220 pages]

[Excerpts] 2. Concept and Structure of the Political and Military Organization
of the H-l9 (Sixth National Conference held in March 1978)

Chapter 1

The Sixth Conference of the 19 April Hovenent ("-19) approved the following
structure and concept for the political and military organization in March of
1978. after a discussion in all of the units and three months of practice in
which the justness and the necessity of this concept was put to the test.

It Is not nor has it been difficult for our organization to naintain a critical
spirit with regard to our own practice. He keep the theoretical theses we have
not tested by our own experience on the level of resources. hypotheses, and we
only relate the applicability of these theories to concrete practice in the
process of practice and later systematization.

It took long years of struggle and painful frustration to achieve this evalua-
tion of the political and military organisation. not only in our country. but
in the whole of America. These and other experiences have clearly revealed the
need to compare any theoretical thesis with the historical conditions and cir-
cumstances and the experience in struggle of our people. No thesis which has
not been incorporated on the basis of our experience can be endorsed as a
strategic or poli ical line for our organization. But when our experience is
inadequate. we must adopt these theses provisionally. and proceed to test then
constantly in action.

This is what is happening with this document. Although it is not a finished
primer. it does represent our basic principles for future work. This is the
reason for the importance of study and application of it, which is how we can
proceed to enrich it.

The same thing happens with the political resources, which we have to continue
to compare with the masses. to see if they are sterile or ineffective. Re have

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
defined our policy in general as a strategy of power the basic elements in which
are found in the definition of our enemies (U. S. imperialism and the Colombian
oligarchy and our friends (workers, peasants, popular sectors). The definition
of these two irreconcilable camps leads us to the conclusion that the problems
of our people can only be resolved in our country through a national liberation
revolution. leading the people to guide their destiny and their state. in other
words. a revolution which can mobilize the majority of the people for a concrete
goal--total liberation from the oligarchic and imperialist bonds, which neces-
sarily leads to the construction of the socialist fatherland.

But these goals cannot be achieved except through a long and difficult struggle
wherein the political struggle must have popular participation as its central
and basic axis. To achieve this it is necessary to utilize all those forms of
struggle and popular organization making it possible to proceed to deprive the
enemy of power in this process, and to proceed to create a popular authority
capable of political. trade union and military dealings until the long-term
goals are achieved.

And when one speaks of politics. one must speak of organized forces. This is
why the central idea of linking the people with a struggle against the enemies
mentioned above, who are organized, disciplined, armed and aware of their tasks.
aware of the difficulties and weaknesses of the people. also requires that the
people learn to organize and discipline themselves and to have an overall View
of the necessary tasks in a long and difficult struggle. And if these are the
tasks of the people. to a much greater extent they must be the tasks of the most
conscientious sector of the people-—the revolutionaries. They must in addition
equip themselves with a clear understanding of the process, of the organiza-
tional and military elements. In the final analysis. launching a strategy of
power without having an organisation capable of planning development and train-
ing men to assume leadership of the process in the trade union. political and
military struggles. capable of resisting the enemy's attacks and of achieving
the final results means drafting plans without any concrete results and con-
tinuing the long path of frustration and defeat.

Part ll--0n the Political-Military Organizational Concept
2.1 The Experience in Latin America

The political history of Latin America provides us with dozens of examples of
organizations which have had initial development which could not be checked but
have ended up in less time than one could imagine as small groups of pro-
Harxists or organizations in exile, split into thousands of factions or simply
eliminated from the political picture. Guatemala, Venezuela, Chile, Uruguay,
Argentina. Bolivia and Peru have provided us with valuable experience concerning
what we should and should not do in the implementation of a revolutionary
policy. in the choice and treatment of our allies and our enemies. in the motive
for'es of revolution and the enemy forces, and the ways of combining ideology
with politics. the armed struggle and the broad mass struggle. between reformism
and vanguardism.
Hhat should have been the unity of opposites became the antagonisation and elim-
ination of one of the extremes. Either armed struggle or mass struggle. either
political or military. either political leadership or military leadership.
either socialist revolution or democratic revolution. Such polarization of the
contradiction within a given strategy became simple paths adopted by one of the
two elements as the basic and unique way. As a product of the Cuban revolution.
the decade of the '60s blinded revolutionaries. and everybody plunged into armed
struggle. contrasting it with mass struggle and its multiple expressions. with
results which are known to all. In the decade of the '70s. a formidable mass
movement developed throughout the Southern Cone but was never completed by armed
struggle. being on the contrary defined as antagonistic. The results were no
better than in the preceding case. with the difference that in some instances
(Chile). they ended in violent terrorist dictatorships.

when within a given concept of revolution. elements which should coincide and
in some cases be simultaneous are viewed as antagonistic. the very process
develops such that some of them experience a shift and reject the others. This
is what has happened with the Latin American revolution. wherein the discussion
of revolutionary paths has become the leading mechanism for drying up the
imagination which the people themselves revealed to us in the struggle.

2.2 The Colombian Experience

It is a secret to no one that the polarization between the vanguard struggle and
the mass struggle in our country has come about in almost absolute terms. As
early as the fifth conference the following statement was made:

". . . The left wing has fragmented the problem of revolution. setting forth
dilennas in which the incapacity of each of the groups has prevented them from
fully assuming the complex tasks of the revolutionary process. The comple-
mentary tasks have been converted into antagonistic and exclusive elements.

"Let us see how false alternatives are postulated: either armed struggle or

legal struggle. either construction of the party or construction of the army.
either a vanguard struggle or a mass struggle. either creation of a front of ex-
ploited classes or creation of a political organization of the proletariat.

etc. These are false alternatives because we regard them as dialectic elements‘““
and complementary aspects of a single struggle. the struggle to seize power. to
destroy the oligarchic state and to build a state of workers, laborers and
peasants" (fifth conference). .
in general. and despite the conditions under which the class struggle has devel-
oped and the peculiarities of each group or party. their options and proposals
have been limited by a linear view: either elections or armed struggle. either
the workers class or the peasants. either revolution or reform. etc. Those who
have neither been antagonized or denied either of the two extremes have simply
contented themselves with a tactical accumulation of forms of struggle without
integrating them in strategy. dividing them by geographic zone. This calls for
one form of struggle for the cities and another for the countryside. without
seeing one as the continuation of the other. integrated within a single

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strategy. as complementary parts tactically. This :s the case with the
Comunist Party of Colombia (PCC) and the PARC [Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia]. The ELN [National Liberation Army] provided a typical instance of
antagonization of the vanguard, ideological and military pole and deception or
destruction of the mass or political pole.

To be clearer, we can identify the various factors in revolutionary strategy
with two main poles-~the ideological and the political. All of those factors
which have to do with the final or strategic aspects are grouped around the .
ideological pole. while everything functioning in terms of the training and
mobilization of forces and mass mobilization is associated with the political
pole. Hhere did the error lie? In the fact that these two poles were taken as
irreconcilable opposites and not as the permanent and constantly changing inte-
gration of the various components.

If we adopt the principle that the workers class is the vanguard class, which
when faced with the possible alliance with the antimonopolistic bourgeoisie re-
jected that alliance because it (the bourgeoisie) only produces reforms, and
continued to wage the struggle for socialism with the workers class alone, then
we are dealing with a principle which is correct--reliance on the basic class.
But at the same time we are rejecting the possibility of winning political
space and mobilizing forces. At the present time, this is pure ideologism.

At the risk of being simplistic and schematic we would like to illustrate this
point graphically:

Ideological Pole Political Pole

revolution...............................reform
power..............o............o........government
bas1c Class-n.......o...o....u........-p¢0ple
vanguard..........o......................lllasses

armed struggle...........................legal struggle
principles...............................alliances

strategy..........ou..-.................otactics

if we as revolutionaries function in daily life solely on the basis of the
factors having to do with ideology, strategy and principle, we will perhaps
prove to be very firm. solid and pure revolutionaries, revolutionaries who know
that the workers class is the basic class. who know about the need to organize
the most conscientious sectors into a vanguard organization (party). a struggle
for power and socialism. But we will be. with absolute certainty. very isolated
and lonely revolutionaries who are not interested in the lagging masses. revolu-
tionaries without allies because alliance means dealing with interests different
from those of the basic class. we will be revolutionaries who do not seek
organizational forms for the less aware sectors of the people, giving the enemy
the gift of ample space for reforms. legal struggles, etc. This is what we call
ideologism. excessive reliance on strategy. purism, overemphasis on principle.
And this inclination leads only to inefficiency. isolation and failure to multi-
ply the effort invested.
if on the contrary our action is based solely on the level of reform, using only
legal struggle. always in terms of the masses, while forgetting the vanguard
organization aspect, moving from tactic to tactic and engaging in alliances
without principles or defined goals, we will be able to point to a broad

mass audience, concrete achievements in the struggle to gain recognition of de-
mands. etc.. as the fruit of our labor. But these political forces, when faced
with the enemy onslaught, will have neither goal nor organization, neither the
forms of struggle needed to defend or to advance in what has already been won
in the political or trade union sector. In other words, revolution does not
appear on its political horizon. This is what we tern! reformism. tacticism,
politicism, etc. This inclination. then, leads only to the defeats which have
bathed the great hopes of our continent in blood, repression and death.

What is needed then is to join both poles together and to integrate them "
permanently. It is not a question of adding one to the other or creating rigid
schemes. It is a matter of bearing the mass problem always in mind, anchored

in solid ideological principles. In other words. strategy makes sense if it is
reflected in flexible and effective tactics. The vanguard makes sense if it is
linked with a mass process. The basic class serves its vanguard function when
it is capable of rallying around it the various popular sectors. The armed
struggle makes sense if it is a tool of the people in general. of the struggling
masses. In short, ideology makes sense if it is capable of developing forces,
projecting proposals and drafting tasks in the political sector.

2.3 Our Own Experience

In cur case, although the organization has tended clearly toward the pole con-
cerned with the vanguard, mechanism, military and ideological aspects, basically
because of our class origins and our relative isolation from the masses, it is
also true that we have been able to deal with the contradiction without antagon-
izing it, without destroying either one of the two poles. At the fifth con-
ference we succeeded in reorienting the path, better synthesizing our experience
and regaining the indispensable level with regard to the political struggle
pole. This explains why the organization, although it has committed innumerable
errors. has always kept itself on an ascending line of development, for despite
everything, we have kept the political pole and the ideological pole, in the
course of continuing struggle, coexistent within the contradiction.

Therefore, one of the general conclusions of the fifth conference which we must
stress is that pertaining to the impetus and importance we must give politics
as compared with ideology. and the mass struggle as compared with the vanguard
struggle.

"The basic direction of our work from now on will be an orientation toward ser-
ving the masses. being with the masses, through:

I. Political agitation, armed propaganda; mass organization, based on the
interests of the masses;

2. Political and military action, working from the smaller to the larger in the
course of further linking the people with armed struggle; and

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Establishment and consolidation of the political-military bodies" (fifth
conference).

To give priority to all political activity over the activity of our apparatus,
to our mass activity over our internal activity, and to our political-social
weapons over our military weapons does not in any way mean abandoning the
apparatus or neglecting internal tasks. Quite the contrary. The mass struggle,
the training of the masses without an apparatus, without cadres trained for
everything. without the infrastructure, is an impossibility, an absurdity.

when we say "giving priority to the political," we mean for example that all or
at least the majority of our actions should basically support the struggles of
the masses themselves and have to do with concrete matters, not simply involving
principles or ideology or stopping at mere denounciation. Also. in our finances.
the greater part of our budget should be directed toward work with the masses.
with a lesser sum devoted to maintaining the apparatus. And this dOes not mean
a change of attitude. It simply nuans being consistent with the line of devel-
oping the war of the people which we have approved. "If we withdraw into the
apparatus, into compartments, into our own forces, we will be doing the enemy

a favor. because thus, by confining ourselves within limits we have set, we can
more readily isolate ourselves. If we plunge into mass work with a very clear
political-military concept, we will be gaining a broad political-military space
which it would be difficult, not to say impossible, to destroy.

2.6 We Are Not a Party

As to concept and content, the fifth conference was right in its assertion of
the basic need to sink our roots in the masses and to train ourselves as
integral cadres in the period of transition between the initial apparatus we
established and the party we want to build.

“. . . With the first stage--the construction of a political-military
apparatus--completed, what is wanted of us now is to break with earlier concepts
and to plunge into the task of taking on the struggles of the people and the
masses as such, rather than the simple struggles of specialized apparatuses"
(fifth conference).

This stage already completed was a necessary one or a "necessary evil," since
it allowed us to acquire the basic prerequisites for the development of a
political-military organisation. "hat was not needed was to begin to slide. as
we were doing, into overemphasis on the apparatus, in other words the tendency
to isolate ourselves from the masses, to rely solely on the infrastrv'ture, to

think only of our own forces.

". . . A period of transition is then necessary, involving the creation of
political—military units which in their mass work will lead the exploited
classes to take on the tasks of their own liberation, a pericd of transition
which, breaking with the concepts. practice and organizational forms of the
apparatus, will incorporate the positive things already achieved and prepare us
for the future tasks of the party and the army...."
And we visualized a necessary period of transition in the following terms:

“. . . Creation of a revolutionary (political-military) organization with mass
support and influence capable of combining and centralizing the most varied
forms of struggle and different demands of the people, waging a battle for
conscious and combative unity. toward alliances with and integration of various
revolutionary forces. an organization with cadres armed with a political-mili-
tary concept and practice which will promote the war of the people."

But although these concepts were valid and accepted, we were not capable of
giving them a truly adequate structure and organizational form. He leaped
thoughtlessly from the political—military apparatus to the establishment of
party cells without having completed the required period for the shaping of the
necessary organizational. ideological and political bases. We say "leaped"~be-
cause we wanted to be a party without the minimal prerequisites for the purpose;
because we have no influence with a large part of the population, especially the
workers class and the peasantry; because we have not succeeded in establishing
popular organizational forms reflecting the leadership of the vanguard organiza-
tion; because we have not learned to articulate. to combine. to integrate the
forms of political work with the forms of military work; because we do not have
the integral cadres capable of directing the masses in all sectors and under all
conditions of struggle; because we still do not have a completed strategic plan
converted into a material force on being adopted by the masses themselves; and
because ideological schemes which had no parallel in our reality nor any place
in its transformation still weigh heavily in our thinking.

2.5 in What Stage Are He?

We are not in the stage of planning an offensive against our enemies. We are
only in the phase we have defined as strategic defense. He are preparing the
conditions for launching our efforts in truly active defense, which will lead
us. based on small successes, to confront the enemy forces. in short. then. it
is a matter of accumulating power. We speak of accumulation because power is
not a question of contemplating an imminent attack on the oligarchic state.
Power is a question of capacity to impose our will on our enemy or at least to
neutralize our enemy. Therefore. then, the accumulation of power is essentially
a mass action. If the masses move toward satisfaction of their demands. if the
trade union organization is a weapon for struggle and triumph. and in its devel-
opment it is given political weapons, we will be creating power. and this
political power requires and involves our own military force to consolidate. ex-
pand and create new spaces for our advance. In this period of strategic
defense, it is not simply a question of proceeding to create a trade union
force, a political force, a military force or an organizational force. What is
involved is relating each of these forces to the others so that they can be con-
verted into power.

This process of accumulating power is the only way of making a revolutionary
strategy real and concrete, the only way of proceeding to complete stages which
will change the balance of forces between the enemy and ourselves. In other
words. it is a matter of proceeding to create a real shift in the social forces

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while increasing ours. Normally we speak of proceeding to create popular power
from below. What we have never gone into more deeply is how this power is
developed, defended and expanded. He must be much more than propagandists. We
must be much more than agitators. He must be builders who not only conceive of
large undertakings but also implement them, make them a reality.

Power is something which is being built, being accumulated. For example. when
the organization undertakes to carry out any type of operation. it takes three
factors into account:

1. Planning. wherein we study the political, social and military conditions.
analyze the future development and consequences, as well as our capacity and
that of the enemy.

2. Execution, including the implementation of all that has been planned through
individual responsibilities.

3. Consolidation, in which the operation should become a mass and forceful
event. not only because of the organizational results achieved in the trade
union or political sectors. but because it coincides with a given project and
situation of the masses. '

in conclusion, the accumulation of power means in the final analysis making of
all of our political, organizational, military, propaganda, financial and ideo-
logical activity deeds which need to be or can be materialized in mass organiza-
tions, in an increase in our influence. in an increase in our infrastructure and
in the consolidation of what has been won with a view to a further future
advance.

2.6 "but Are We and What Should We Be?

The current situation of the organization, along with undeniable advances. mass
receptivity, increase in political space and limitations on development. reveals
to us that we are still not the organization we need to be.

Any organizational structure must be able to meet four basic requirements:

I. It must be capable of responding to the strategic concept established. We
have said that the participation of the people in their own destiny, in the
management of their struggle and in the use of the methods of struggle the pro-
cess requires are basic to the implementation of our strategic plan. This
obviously requires an organization capable of establishing policies, capable of
proposing solutions. creating organizational forms and also of implementing.
executing and integrating military activities with the level of mass demands and
politics. These tasks are only possible at the current stage reached by our
forces and given our political space through a structure integrating the
political and military aspects, the ideological and the political, in a single
whole, in other words, merging its vanguard and mass leadership functions. In
the final analysis. it must specifically expand its political space, strengthen
and defend it and open up new prospects for it through political-military
action. in order thus to continue to accumulate power.

8
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
2. A structure capable of ensuring and reproducing its functions. The opera;
tion of such an organization is nothing other than its capacity to respond in
each concrete situation (neighborhood, factory. peasant sector, etc.) to the
political and military requirements of the struggles the masses are waging. It
is not a question of isolated little groups which aid the masses from outside.
It is a question of advancing in integrating the political with the military,
and not only in general (conceptual) terms, but under real and concrete condi-
tions. Base units whose sole function is to study and applaud the organiza-
tional activities they read about in the newspapers are groups which in no way
guarantee or carry out any political project. Groups which have failed in their
trade union or legal work and call upon sectors of the organization to undertake
the military effort, without the slightest concern about the development of
these tasks, are either groups which have not realized that the unity between
the political-military concept and practice is implemented in each of the parts
of the structure or are groups which having understood this, have not had
capacity enough to develop this concept in their sector.

3. A structure which reproduces the cadres needed for the plan. A capacity to
produce cadres is an indispensable requirement for any organizational structure,
and in our case, it is one of the key elements in the decision to develop a
political-military organization now and not a party. That is not our task now,
much less is it to train only trade union or political or military cadres in the
present stage. Our task today is to train ourselves as integral cadres

capable of later assuming specialized tasks, in other words integral cadres
which can in the future devote themselves to trade union, military, peasant and
other sectors of work.

it is impossible that cadres required to prov.de the masses with military and
political leadership would have no vision, concept, plan or overall practice in
the process. It is no longer conceivable that our militants in the mass sector
would be incapable of proposing a military action to support, create an opening
for or consolidate the political struggle, or on the other hand, that officers
capable of planning military operations would be inefficient and mute when it
comes to making political proposals in an invasion neighborhood or a trade
union. Our intention is to train them as men capable of making political pro-
posals to the masses, of organizing them, of supporting them and facilitating
their advance through military means, while characterized by a new and socialist
morality.

4. A structure which guarantees control of development as a whole rather than
separate parts. This means that the structure will be subject to control
mechanisms, such that each movement in a specific area corresponds to a general-
ly established goal. Planning is not only a problem of analysis or the under-
taking of tasks, but also a problem of efficient mechanisms for control and
evaluation of its fulfillment. lndiscriminate growth without prior determina-
tion of what the principal thing is, or action subject only to local or regional
requirements and methods of work and functional analysis which are the product
of improvisational individual criteria prevent political efficiency, scatter
efforts and leave room for error which would otherwise not have been connitted.
F0: all of these reasons, centralization in leadership, planning. decentralized

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

execution. rigid discipline. responsibility and conmund are not formal problems
but a requirement for the rational use of the forces for internal development
and for the fulfillment of the requirements of the current period in the class
struggle.

The four basic requirements we have listed should be the basic supports on which
a political-military structure is built. we need a political-military organiza-
tion which integrates both ideological and political aspects. the vanguard tasks
and the mass tasks. sinking our roots in the masses and training us as integral
cadres. In other words. it is a question of taking on the tasks. the require-
ments and the functioning of a political-military organization with all its
consequences. politically and organizationally. functionally and individually.

The tasks of such a structure are none other than the tasks required for the
political plan we have established. And this plan is based on a fundamental
axis--the masses. If the people are to begin to accumulate power. a policy for
each concrete sector. a joint policy and political-military action to support
and consolidate the tasks of the masses are urgently needed.

it is not a question then of an organizational structure making it possible to

implement both political and military aspects. or of carrying out the two
activities at the same time. What is involved, and this is very different. is
integrating and combining the political and the military in a single strategy.
making progress in the relation of the two elements which are parts of a single
practice. Political-military activity provides the only possibility for con-
solidating. increasing and expanding power. Anything else is a reformist or
militaristic combination. for even though armed struggle is waged with technical
efficiency. if the plan is reformist. the general concept with which the
struggle is carried out continues to be reformist.

And if one engages in politics tactically, but strategy is solely a function of
the military. this is nothing other than militarism.

2.7 Criteria for Integral Cadres

a. Criteria of wholeness. The characteristic of wholeness does not depend
merely on the time we devote to each of our activities. It is not sufficient
for us to study, to be involved in mass work and to participate in military
operations in order to claim that we are being integrally trained. It is the
very nature of our activities. the concept with which they are carried out which
provides this characteristic. If our studies are purely academic. if our mass
work is undertaken with reformist concepts. and if our participation in the
military sector is purely mechanical. however much we engage in these three
things we will not be acquiring training as integral cadres. The aspect of
wholeness in this stage has an axis providing cohesion which is our link with
the masses. On the political level. this involves our incorporation in the
dynamics of mass struggle. 0n the military level, this means actions which are
within the reach of the masses. which affect their most immediate interests.
which reflect their feelings and which open up new prospeCts for the development
oi the struggle. 0n the theoretical level. this means acquiring tools for

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
investigation and interpretation enabling us to know in what country we are
operating. enabling us to situate ourselves more justly at various times. and‘.
allowing us to formulate proposals for action and work toward a concrete
reality.

b. Difficulties in integral training- As we said above, the history of the
recent struggles on the American continent has been developed by revolutionaries
on the basis of antagonistic contrast of the forms of struggle. and on this
basis. each organization yields very special fruit. Some produce only theoreti-
cians. others only activists on the mass level. and still others only military
technicians. This leftist heritage has its logical repercussions on an organi-
zation which for better or for worse is still affected by it. and this is where
the organization should focus all its effort so that. incorporating the best of
the experience in the revolutionary struggle, it will be able to extract from
each unit and each officer the product of a new concept and a new style. Sur-
mounting this heritage of schematism. dogmatism and excessive emphasis on
ideology is not something we can claim to have already accomplished. It is true
that doing so has been a constant concern, and that we are now beginning to see
a new type of cadres. more committed to our reality than to the international
conflict of the socialist camp. cadres beginning to give theory its true meaning
as a dynamizing element in revolutionary practice, provided always it is mass
practice—-new cadres who in their language and thinking do not lose their
national and popular identity. their Colombian nature. when they engage in
analysis. speak to the masses. or plan or implement a political-military action.
These values which are now beginning to crop up within the organization, and
which break with a whole tradition of leftist orthodoxy. must be developed much
further. They must become a characteristic of the collective and no: the privi-
lege of just some cadres. '

c. Steps taken toward integral training. Our organization is not the product
of a group of enlightened theoreticians. nor was it born of any abstract prin-
ciples. Neither is it the product of the need to demonstrate that this or that
method of struggle is the correct one. We have developed in response to a mass
need. and since our origins. we have known that our main interlocutor was these
masses and not leftist groups. We were not born tied to a single method of
struggle. Since the beginning we have trieo to develop various forms of combat.
aware that we were testing a new path. we have tried to keep an open mind.
acknowledging the mistakes made and correcting them and launching new proposals
in order to continue to advance. Naturally. the impression of covering the
easy. beaten path of proleftist schematism has always been present, but it has
been possible to reject it not because it is a beaten or easy or proleftist
path. but because it is inefficient.

we believe that we still suffer from many shortcomings in terms of the integral
training of cadres. Shortcomings such as believing that the official cadres
know everything. Han must orchestrate. Integral cadres are those who have
mastered a series of political. military. trade union and other techniques. A
step farther in the evaluation and assessment of the tasks is necessary to over—
come these failings. We must not be content to know if things were done: we
must know how they were done. He must not be content with the fact that a given
unit fulfilled its pamphlet goal. we must know how that quota was fulfilled.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

how the action was organized, if it was evaluated later. He must know if each
such effort raised the technical, political, military and organizational levels.

Part lll-Hhat Is the 0?"?

An 0PM [political-military organization] is then a structure which allows the
political-military leadership to use all methods of struggle in a single culture
and a single plan. It is a structure which exists as a function of a mass
policy, a part of the level of awareness of the masses and a part of the organi-
zational level with which to progress with the masses. using the political-
military concept as the basis for the accumulation of power. If this is the
task of such a structure and if political-military action exists as a function
of the masses, it will then be possible to achieve two goals: achieving roots
in the masses and the training of integral cadres. The first is necessary be-
cause the people will always see us struggling for satisfaction of their de-
mands, struggling not for a future they do not yet understand but for their con-
crete and real needs. Then they will understand that the military aspect repre—
sents a weapon for winning, for achieving goals, for defending what has been
won, for growing or dealing blows to their enemies.

The 0PM is a structure which allows a complete demand to respond to each mass
demand. rather than a simple ideological proposal. when the masses demand
higher salaries, public freedoms or seek implementation of a list of demands.

it is absurd to respond with a ideological slogan such as "Long Live the Armed
Struggle," "Support the Popular war." "Long Live Socialism," etc. "hat is in-
volved is providing the political, military and organizational weapons to fight,
to win, to consolidate what has been won and to fight again.

The second goal, integral cadres. is the basic requirement for proper and real
leadership of a mass process. If our political proposal requires the organiza-
tion and mobilization of the complex of masses with a view to winning power.
what is needed then is men and women provided with an overall view of this pro-
cess, capable of the political planning of the political, organizational and
military proposals. based on a mass approach and mass practice.

The integral cadres take on the political-military leadership of the masses, on
the basis of their needs, develop and deepen the established policy and enrich
it in their daily activity. They interpret the political responses for each
period, launch organizational and military proposals valid for each situation,
and translate our policy plans in thousands of proposals consistent with con-
crete situations. They are the directors and it is they who regularly supply
the tools and mechanisms which make it possible to achieve the goals of the
revolution. to seize power.

we are not preparing to gain power solely by electoral triumph. If this were
the case. the legal leaders of the masses would suffice. He are not preparing
for the destruction of the state by a handful of bold and well-armed men. If
this were the case. we would only need the military cadres. Nor are we prepar-
ing to have power wrested for us by a spontaneous popular rebellion.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is a question, and this should be reiterated, of a prolonged war in which the
masses, using all the methods of struggle, will increase their power with each
specific instance of struggle for economic or political gain. The power won
will be consolidated and expanded, necessarily making use of the political-
military aspect as the main axis in each neighborhood, each factory, along each
path and in each mass work effort.

3.! Centralization and Vertical Structure of the OPE

In addition to sinking roots in the masses and the training of integral cadres,
the 0?" needs centralized leadership and decentralized implementation, and
therefore verticality is needed in the structure and the command.

Centralized leadership is needed so that the organization can function as a
whole. as a complex, overcoming heterogeneity or inequality in development, so
that it can establish general directives and plans, assigning responsibility
both to the collective and to individuals, and, finally, to maintain strict and
rational control over the plans and these specific work areas.

Centralized leadership presumes that the vices which prevent the necessary de-
velopment toward concrete goals will be overcome. 0n the one hand, there is
absolute dependence on the orders issued by the leadership, thus restricting
initiative, concrete analysis of one's own situation, and planning consistent
with concrete needs and general requirements, while on the other, there are
liberalism, anarchy, and absolute autonomy. in which each individual does what
he wants as a function of his own and petty local or group interests. thus
losing the overall perspective, whether pertaining to the nation or the organi-

zation.

We need then first of all a general plan and general guidelines, and secondly,
analysis for the execution of general policies and their implementation on the
local and regional levels as well on the basis of plans; strict fulfillment of
the plan and control mechanisms on all levels; and finally, reports on the ful-
fillment of plans, on contributions and shortcomings and a synthesis undertaken
by the national leadership, on the basis of the participation of the entire
organization.

Any organization is a complex whole made up of parts which implement the

general policy which has been set forth in the general plan. A revolutionary
organization is made up of parts, including men and organizational units belong-
ing to an apparatus allowing the classes interested in revolution to pursue the
joint struggle of the people organically in order to win political power. Thus
we have a goal (national liberation) and a joint plan. involving:

a. The experience of the masses and their forms of organization;

b. The program making it possible to rally the greatest possible social

efforts around the workers class and the people against the principle enemy

(the anti-oligarchic and anti—imperialist program with regard to socialism); and

c. The strategy for winning power (the combined popular war).

13
son OFFICIAL use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus each part of the organization participates in the drafting and constant re-
vision of the overall plan (through its task in each unit. on each intermediary
level. in each column and on each regional level. as well as in the mass fronts
and apparatus). At the same time. each part is constantly subordinate to that
plan as it is formulated by the central bodies.

in short. what causes the revolutionary organization to exist and develop are
the actions adapted to the general plan. and this is the final basis of disci-
pline. that is to say the subordination of the parties to the whole. lf actions
are not carried out or are partially carried out. some parts of the organiza-
tion deteriorate. always affecting the whole. Here again is a reason for the im-
portance of centralization as :he only means of discipline and control. and a
vertical structure as the form in which the concept of centralization is ex-
pressed.

In order for an organization to function as a whole. homogeneity not only in
the political and the ideological aspects. but also in the political-military
practice in various situations and in different class sectors is indispensable.

Until a certain level of homogeneity is achieved. the leadership bodies must be
much more centralized and must carry out a more dynamic function in the achieve-
ment of this goal.

Moreover. the levels of consultation and that of the democratic bodies become
factors in disintegration for lack of a common framework. and fail to carry out
their task of collective drafting and synthesis.

In addition to the need for greater homogeneity in the sector where the leader-
ship carries out its basic task. the fact of engaging in political-military
activity makes it necessary for us to adapt the organizational structure in
order to adhere to the laws of war wherein. in addition to leadership of the
masses. a single command and rapid decisions are required for the implementa-
tion of the political-military decisions. The urgent need for a clandestine
organization to have bodies which can at any time and without delay adopt the
decisions which the political circumstances dictate is much greater when that
organization is in charge of leadership of the armed and unarmed political
struggle. These decision-making bodies (leaderships) must exist on a permanent
basis in order for the life of the organization to expand. In this way. central-
ization and the vertical structure and their main consequence. which is the sub-
ordination of the whole to the decisions of the leadership. are expressed.

The democratic aspect does not always exist on a permanent basis. It appears
only at certain moments. This means that the democratic aspect of the organiza-
tion of joint participation in the decisions comes during the national confer-
ence. The conference is the point of greatest democracy. and it should not be
viewed as a large gathering of delegates, which may occur under circumstances
of maximal legality. but basically as a process in which the organization as a
whole discusses the political. military and organizational theses. and in this
way shares in the collective planning.

1!:
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
3.2 Democracy in the O?"

In order to implement democracy in the 0P”, it must be stressed that in it and
in any revolutionary organization, we speak not abstractly but in concrete
form. However much democracy there may be. if training is not of the best kind.
the participation in the discussion and in decision making becomes mechanical
and slavish. If on the contrary we promote integral training, we make it
possible for each one of us to assume his responsibilities. and on the basis of
political-military capability, we are establishing the real foundations for
building the principles of democratic centralism. If the cadres heading the
organization have neither the training nor the conviction that they are strug-
gling as a function of the masses. the development of bossism and militarism be-
comes possible. and if the internal mechanisms allowing a comparison between
their leading role and achievements in practice are lacking. we will readily
lapse into bureaucracy.

Thus we must advance in the method of operation and leadership called demo-
cratic centralism. a method which establishes a relation between absolute cen—
tralization and democracy. providing a given combination of these elements
allowing us to respond to two questions:

a. The need for the existence of decision-making bodies which have the author-
ity on a permanent basis to make decisions by themselves. without consulting
any organizational level; and

b. Participation by all of the members of the organization in its decisions.

If we consider only the first of these two aspects, we will have a centralist
system in which there will be no participation by the whole, while if we con-
sider only the second of these two elements. we will have an operational system
of continuing consultations or assemblies for the adoption of any decision.
leading the organization to total inoperability.

A whole range of possibilities exists between these two extremes in which one
or the other aspect may prevail. Under democratic centralism. the central
aspect prevails, for which this term is used rather than centralized democracy.

in order for this method to function fully, there must be in the organization a
substantial degree of homogeneity. making the organization a living body which
seeks a single goal based on the same criteria.

The current mechanisms for leadership, evaluation, consultation. criticism and
self-criticism must be deepened, bearing in mind that we must no longer channel
them toward the discussion or the formulation of plans which are scattered or
isolated from the general policy established. but in such a way as to implement
the overall plan, adapting it to the concrete conditions of each group and sec-
tor of the masses affected. and the product of a discussion, of these assess-
ments. should be taken up and centralized by the leadership for the making of
future decisions.

15
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.3 Hierarchic Structure of the OF“

The organizational structure must correspond with the political line. and is
not a complementary element. He can say that the structure is the materializa—
ticn of the political line at a given moment in its development. He cannot con-
ceive of an organization which has the goal of seizing power, while its form of
organization does not correspond to that goal. The organization is the tool
with which the revolutionary social force directs the struggle for political
power. Therefore. its organizational structures express the concept of power
and the political strategy. The organization guarantees the possibility of

directing the development of the ideology of the workers class through popular
policies.

'“brganizatiohal Structure
of the "-19

National Leadership

   
   
 
   
 
 
  
    
      

Highest Authority

  

High
Commands

iegional

  
  

   
  
  
  

 

Leadership
Col mn Units
u
Leadership unzzrsah::::;s.f::::::g
Units

 
   

officer
omenmauaoac'

Joouudiuovmaalo
unoﬁddm

       
 

Intermediarv
Leadership

   
   
   

 

3 or 5 first
officers unde'

a higher
officer

  

 
 
 
  
 
     

  

3 or 5
second
officers
under a
officer

numerous: VINO!“

365°00‘00““.
momqumm

ers un-er a second
officer

 
 
 

     

3 or 5 men

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Our own policy is based on the mobilization and organization of the masses. so
as to proceed to accumulate political-military power guided by a revolutionary
party. which must develop a tool capable of using force to challenge our
enemies for power.

This purpose requires the training of revolutionaries who will combine the
armed policy and the nonarmed policy in theory and in practice. It requires an
organizational structure which allows us and helps us to adopt this double con-
cept beginning now. a structure which wisely reconciles the tasks suited to the
present period with the longer-term tasks. a structure capable of preparing us
internally and of projecting political goals outward. To summarize, we need an
organizational structure to develop the prolonged combined and mass war.

The highest organizational authority is the national conference. made up of the
national leadership and the sectorial and regional delegates.

The national leadership is made up of the national officers and the high-rank-
ing officials.

The high command. the highest permanent body. is made up of the leading
officials.

Below it. on a regional or geographic basis. are the regional. column and inter-
mediary leaderships and the base units. as well as the groups of candidates and
collaborators.

This entire structure. the ranks and hierarchies. the elements and symbols.
make no sense if the basic goal of an organization is not sufficiently clear.
The goal of our organization is not to contribute a "grain of sand" to the pro-
cess. to add to its development. or to make some contributions forced by circum-
stance, but to become the vanguard force in this process. To do this the 0?!
will have to be organized to carry out the leadership functions which result
from this task. This does not mean that we are a vanguard today. if that is the
fear, but we must indeed constantly combat the deviations of those who refuse
to accept that the process needs a vanguard for its development. and we must
combat those who say that the organization problem is a matter of a simple sum
of cadres with an already completed program.

The goal of the vanguard in the process. and this is the role we want our organ-
ization to play, can only be achieved through development which has two stages.
The first is the construction of the organization. and the second is that in
which the organization becomes the real leadership of the revolutionary pro-
cess. This division is not absolute. Both elements in the revolutionary process
an present in both stages. except that one or the other takes on the leading
role in each of the two. in other words the 0PM is constantly being built. just
as the need to exercise leadership is also a constant. For a time we Ilainly
qrrpsspd the tasks of constructing the organization. Now. without neglecting
this task. the conditions in the country and our political plan force us to
place the basic stress on leadership tasks.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In making political propositions to the people. it is necessary to bear in mind
that they can only be imposed to the extent that they are correct. It is a prob-
lem of the quality of the proposals and the quantity of those adopted, of the
leadership in the tasks and their execution. This is the basic problem for our
revolutionary process. Either we are an organization of cadres for internal
operation (all of the tasks and actions for the apparatus. financing, propa-
ganda. logistics). or we are an organization incorporated in the masses which
sets forth proposals which because of their quality. correctness and breadth

are accepted.

Hithin this situation we have two limiting factors. One occurs when proposals
are not put forth or they are insufficient and we then seek to compensate for
them. using our military capacity. and the other occurs when we propose broad
goals to the masses but they are only taken up by the activists or our own mem-
bers. These problems derive basically from the manner and the criteria on the
basis of which the organization is extended into the masses. In other words.
what underlies each organization officer? In our view extension of the
political-military structure to the mass level is not the important thing. The
political-military structure is established, is created in a qualifying process
in order to put forth proposals and plans on the mass level. But if each organi-
zation officer who is the final link in this pyramid lacks a direct relation
with the masses. what we mentioned above happens. and either he is bolstered by
military actions or he himself must do this. Therefore. it is also true that
not just any individual can be an organisation officer. Being an organization
officer equals leading the masses. A comrade who does not represent the masses
but represents himself has no reason to be an organisation officer.

But this is not a disqualifying process. On the contrary. our structure recog—
nizes the member of the organisation (different from an officer) on this inter-
mediary level between the people as a whole and the organization officer. that
individual we have termed a collaborator and candidate. who because of the
acceptance of some of our views and support of some of our activities is re-
garded as a participant in a strategic project. In other words. the organization
should be capable of responding on each level of awareness with organizational
and political proposals for each concrete cadre or mass situation. We have
always spoken of the need for the masses to have (and they do have) political-
demand and even military bodies. such as the self-defense and civil defense
groups. committees for support of the organisation and committees to propagan-
dize our proposals. etc. They must have their own structure. which cannot be
that of the organization. their own tools of struggle, their own propaganda.
etc.

3.6 Election and Evaluation Mechanisms

In a compartmented and centralized organisation, the election of individuals to
leadership posts on any level cannot be carried out by means of the old voting
criterion. nor by personal election either. In our OPH structure. the leadership
is elected from the top down. based on the criterion of evaluation of each com-
rade and collective work. In the unit. intermediary. column. regional and
national leaderships. those chosen must be the comrades with the best evalua-
tions on each level, in other words. the cadres with the most nearly integral

training.
Evaluation. which is a system of measuring the capabilities of the members.
taking their practice and their political. military. organizational and ideo-
logical concepts into account. is based on the criterion of integrality.

in the evaluation of each comrade. the following aspects will be taken into
account:

I. Political--In this connection. the concept implemented by the comrade on
the mass level and in the handling of the political line of the organisation
will be analyzed. along with the implementation of the organizational line in
mass work. political practice. the method used and the proposab put forth.

2. Military-The concept of combined and mass war and the implementation of it
in practice will be analyzed. taking into account command capability. disci-
pline. capacity for planning and for operations.

3. Organizational--Concept of the 0P”. the centralized structure and the rela-
tionship of the OPE to the mass movement. organizational capacity. functioning
within the structure, work with candidate members or officers within his juris-
diction. leadership capacity, command practice. criticism and self-criticism.

6. Ideological—-Concept and practice with regard to the people. the individ-
ual's comrades and his family, as well as matters pertaining to revolutionary
morality. the ideological values reflected in his daily life, etc.

Part IV
6.1 Differences Between the GP" and the Party

The 0PM is a necessary and prior stage for the construction of the party. With-
out real mass leadership. no party is a real party. but rather formalism and
self-definition. The party is the first organizational level existing in revolu-
tionary leadership. It develops under precise and specific conditions. and is
not based on the existence of small groups of men affiliated or identified with
a common program.

The party emerges when the political. organizational, ideological and military
requirements can no longer be met under the old leadership structure.

Often there is confusion between the party and the formal facts of a plan. con-
gress and democracy. when it is forgotten that the basic fact of a party. above
all in our reality. is political and military leadership of the masses. one is
forgetting the basic principle which gives it reality and defines it as the
leadership of the masses and a simple internal organization.

The difference between the 0PM and the party does not lie in the difference in
concepts. The concept continues to be the same and continues to become more pro-
found. This reveals the need to define the forms of party organisation, which

is a dialectical development of the tasks of the OPE. Hhen its roots in the
masses and the scope of the class struggle exceed the capacity of the OPE. due

19
son orncm. uss om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to its verticality, its centralism or the integral cadre requirements. a cen-
tralized structure. but one with greater participation by the masses and the
cadres in decisions and in political decision making becomes necessary. In this
structure. it is no longer for all of us to do everything: rather it is then re-
quired that cadres specialise in trade union, political. legal. and other work.
In other words. the requirement of integrality does not exist in the party for
the militant. but for the whole of the structure. When the breadth and complex-
ity of the military tasks makes them a mass phenomenon. then the emergence of
another specialized structure, the army. becomes indispensable.

6.2 Differences Between the 0PM and the Political-Military Party

Unlike what happens with the party. the differences between the political-mili-
tary organisation and the political-military apparatus are differences of con-
cept. practice and criteria.

The apparatus concept is based in the final analysis on the idea that it is
revolutionary organizations which defeat the enemy. denying in fact that this
task is the task of the masses.

The basic and essential thing in the apparatus is the determining weight of the
technical infrastructure, its own forces and the internal needs, or rather the
also internal potential and rhythm. For the apparatus. the masses are always an
object on which it acts in order to dynamize. guide. enlighten. teach them.

etc. The vanguard is elitist. with overemphasis on ideology and strategy. We
have given this entire policy the name "apparatism." The typical militant with
such a concept is in the best of cases an individual identifying with the polit-
ical line but lacking in concrete activity with the masses; an individual with
technical resources -- above the popular average and with military operational
techniques beyond the reach of the masses. The rear guard is the infrastructure
itself. the technology and the apparatus itself, while the organizational struc-
ture is determined by results, functional efficiency and technical level.
Democracy does not function. centralism is based on execution. and the criter—
ion for selecting militants does not go beyond their functional efficiency.

The differences between this and the 0PM are obvious~-the difference in polit—
ical criteria. the focus always placed on the masses as the subjects of the
revolutionary process, the requirement of integrality in the political. organi-
zational. military and biological aspecta-these contrast with and differ from
the apparatus criterion of technical specialization.

The technical level of functional capability is reduced in the OPH for a time,
but with the advantage that it is generalized to all the members. This occurs

in order to open up. expand and basically consolidate the political space (with-
out neglecting infrastructure needs) and is in the short run within the reach

of the technical level of the masses. since the technique isless complex, the
weapons are more popular and the goals to be sought more inundiate. The struc-
ture therefore is different. It is no longer a specialized structure for opera-
tion. for functioning. but is a centralized structure for drafting, planning

and directing organizational. trade union and military proposals within the

same political plan.

20-21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Part V——lnternal Regulations

The internal regulations are designed to be a complex of norms which will
guarantee collective functioning and serve as a framework for the development
of the members along an integral approach toward a single goal.

Thus they are designed to be functional. providing a leadership structure. indi-
vidual responsibilities and specific tasks suited to a combat organization. and
political leadership for a strategy seeking power for the masses.

Article i-Goals and Methods

The 19 April Movement is a part and the continuation of the people's struggles

for national liberation and for socialism. It reflects the national aspiration

for true independence. the need of the people for social justice. and the work-
ers struggles for a socialist fatherland.

These struggles for independence. social justice and a socialist fatherland
join together the needs of the nation and the people and basically of the work-
ers class. and they will be victorious through the participation of the people
as a whole in winning their own power. This requires the development of politi-
cal and military power such as to confront and defeat the attacks of the oli-
garchic power.

The 19 April Movement is developing and encouraging the power of the masses.
and to this end it is organizing and waging the struggle as a political-mili-

tary body capable of reflecting the aspirations. the battles and the forms of
organization and struggle in a single process leading to power.

Thus we are a nationalist. revolutionary and prosocialist political-military
organization.

Article 2--Hembers

That complex of men and women who accept these goals. contribute their concrete
and voluntary efforts. and work in orderly fashion for such goals are members
of the 19 April Movement.

in this voluntary integration and coordination of efforts and goals. there are
various levels depending on degree and discipline. availability and concept.
They include officers. candidates and collaborators.

I. The officers of the organization are those members who:

a. implement and develop the line of the organization;

b. Carry out and endorse these internal regulations;

c. Are always ready to execute the tasks assigned by the organization; and

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d. Participate permanently on some internal organizational level.
2. Candidates for the organization are those members who:

a. Accept and implement the line of the organization;

b. Accept and observe the internal regulations;

c. Participate in a candidates' unit; and

d. Aspire to reach the officers' level through continuing discipline and
conscious participation in the life of the organization.

3. Organizational collaborators are those members who:
a. Accept our general proposals; and

b. Collaborate consciously and voluntarily in some tasks assigned by the organ-
ization.

Article 3--Promotion and Officers' Posts

1. Officer hierarchy. The officers of the organization come under a hierarchy
of command with the following designations: officer, second officer, first
officer. higher officer. highest officer.

2. Numbers. Each officer in the organization has a number within his unit and
on his level. This numerical order dictates authority for political-military
and organizational leadership, as circumstances require.

3. Evaluation. The entire officers' body will be evaluated on the basis of
the criteria existing in their respective units. To this end, a commission will
be appointed on the immediately higher level. The results of this evaluation
will dictate rank and numerical order.

a. Advancement. The promotion of collaborators and candidates is carried out
on the basis of their attitudes and activities within the organization. on the
recommendation of their superior officers and with the approval of a higher
level. which may be the second officer.

Article h--0rganization

1. Candidates' unit. This is the unit for political-military training for the
assumption of the tasks of an organization officer. The candidates' unit is
commanded by an officer of the organization as its political-military leader.
Each unit is made up of three to five members.

The following are the functions of each candidate:

a. Political--He must carry out mass political orientation tasks, constantly
strengthen his character as a popular guide in a specific sector. and as such,
encourage and direct the political-military activity of the masses consistent
with the line of the organization.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
h. Military-ﬂe must participate in the planning. execution and evaluation of
all the military operations assigned to his unit. carrying out therein the
tasks assigned to him and contributing to the integral capacity of the unit.

c. 0rganizational-—He must be an active element in the cohesion of his unit.
carrying out the leadership tasks assigned to him by his officer, and

basically. he must struggle to encourage mass organizational forms on a broad
political and the military level. as well as new popular self-defense groups.

2. Base Unit--This is the basic unit of the organization. made up of a minimum
of three and a maximum of five officers. A second officer is in command of the
base unit as its political-military leader. He will be chosen by the inter-
mediary leadership and confirmed by the immediately higher level on the basis
of his respective evaluation.

The functions of each officer are:

a. Politicals-To carry out. broaden and develop the tasks of leadership and
political guidance of the masses. becoming the integral leader of the sector in
which he functions.

b. Nilitary--To participate in the planning. execution and evaluation of all
the military operations assigned to his unit. In addition to activities on the
mess level. he may be called upon to carry out military actions of greater
scope.

c. 0rganizaticnal--To supervise the collaborators and candidates' units. serv-
ing as the regular channel between them and his immediate superior.

d. ldcological--The officer is trained as a part of the integral cadres. par-
ticipating in the study and deepening of the organizational line. He struggles
to have his daily life reflect his attitude as a conscientious fighter. always
placing collective needs above his individual needs.

The functions of a second officer are:

a. Political--To work to ensure that all the officers in his unit deepen and
broaden our political proposal on a mass level. such that each officer becomes
u true director. and to control and direct the political-military work of the
oilicers on the basis of the established plans.

b. Military—-Tc propose. plan and direct the execution of the plans and mili-
tary operations assigned to his unit. guaranteeing the integral nature of the
operations.

c. Organizational--He is the axis of the base unit and directly responsible
for the political-military development of its officers. as well as the regular
channel between them and the first officer.

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Intermediary Leadership--This level is under the command of a first officer
and is made up of three or five second officers. It directs and guides the
tasks of the organization in a column sector. implementing. supervising and
coordinating its task fulfillment.

Functions of the first officer:

He is the regular channel between second officers and the higher officer. being
in charge of all of the comrades assigned to the sector. He is appointed after
his evaluation by the head of the region, with confirmation by the higher
command. He guides and directs the implementation of the mass policies. mili-
tary plans and the organizational development of the sector. He makes tactical
decisions within the established plans.

4. Column Leadership--Under the command of a higher officer or the first
officer with the best evaluation in the column, such units are made up of
three. four or five first officers heading intermediary leadership units. They
implement. check on and direct such units. and through them, all of the base
units assigned to them. The higher officers will answer to the regional leader-
ship for the functioning. plan fulfillment. mass work. implementation of opera-
tions, intelligence. officer training and everything pertaining to the develop-
ment of the personnel under their command. They are the regular channel between
the first officers and the highest officer level. They are in direct command of
their first and second officers and are responsible directly to a highest level
officer or the commander of the regional leadership.

5. Regional Leadership--1t is under the command of a highest level officer or
the higher officer with the best evaluation in the region. It also includes
three. four or five higher officers in command of columns.

The highest level officer proposes. carries out. directs and checks on the
tasks of the organization on the national level and in a preestablished area.
Highest level officers carry out national plans and are the directors respon-
sible for the mass policy. political proposals. military proposals, organiza-
tional control and the development of the infrastructure. The highest level
officer or commander of a regional leadership unit is the regular channel be-
tween the higher officers and the high conunnd.

6. high Command. This level is under the command of the highest level officer
with the best evaluation in the organization. in other words the political-mili-
tary commander. and it is made up of the highest level officers. The high
command drafts the policies. the national plans and the specific projects on
the mass movement and internal level. In addition it makes the tactical and
situational decisions within the gener1l guidelines approved by the national
leadership. It drafts the financial plans and checks on the expenditures of the
organization. as well as its assets and infrastructure. It is in charge of the
national newspaper office. appoints the evaluation commissions for the national
level. and is responsible for relations with national and international organi-
zaticns.

7. National Leadership-—This body is made up of the highest level officers and
the higher officers under the command of the political-military leader of the

25
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
organization. Meeting in national conference. it is the highest authority of
the organization. Its functioning is democratic and its duties include discuss-
ing. analyzing in greater depth. correcting and establishing the policies.
plans and proposals on the strategic level of the organization. It approves or
rejects the policies implemented by the high command. It also has authority to
evaluate the high command and the higher officers. to approve or amend the in-
ternal regulations and to establish the general guidelines of the organization
on basic issues in the revolutionary process. A conference is convoked by the
high command or when the majority of the organization so requests.

in addition to the national leadership. other members can participate in the
national conference if the high command deems their attendance desirable be-
cause of their organizational position. mass work or any other special reason.

Article 5--General Norms

The drafting of the policy expressed in plans. projects and proposals and de-
cision making are centralized in the high command.

There is decentralization among the regional leadership units for implementa-
tion. These units in turn adapt their plans to the concrete situation and draft
plans for their respective columns. Leadership is centralized and implementa-
tion is decentralized equally from the top downward. The decisions on politi-
cal. organizational and military matters adopted by the high command are bind-
ing on all the officers. just as all decisions adopted by a higher level are
binding on all those under its jurisdiction.

Criticism and self—criticism are included as methods for all tasks, to which .
end every task. simple or complex. individual or collective. is evaluated. once
completed. in all its aspects (political. organizational. military and ideologi-
cal). and the immediately higher body is informed of the assessment made.

Article 6-0fficers' Responsibilities

1. To participate actively in the life of the CPU. adhering to its ideology
and its policy and strictly observing the internal regulations. In this re-
spect. the higher ranks are not excused from absolute adherence. On the con-
trary. the higher the rank. the greater the responsibility.

2. To work actively in the assigned body.

3. To be available for the fulfillment of tasks. without regard to how agree-
able or desirable they may seem.

5. To utilize criticism and self-criticism as a norm for dealing with problems
and as a method of constant improvement.

5. To raise the political-military capability of the various bodies steadily.
as well as that of each of the members.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. To struggle tirelessly for unity of action among all the popular and revolu-
tionary forces in the country and for the elimination of sectarianism. "group-
ism" and dogmatism.

7. To carry out the resolutions adopted by the leadership units and the com-
manders.

8. To respect the hierarchy and regular channels.

9. To maintain absolute secrecy about internal activities and special. indi-
vidual and collective tasks before and after their execution.

10. To keep revolutionary vigilance on a high level against anything threaten-
ing the unity of the organization and the popular movement in general. and also
to remain vigilant against enemy intelligence and infiltration efforts.

ll. The conduct of all officers must be concretely seen in their honesty.
truthfulness. self-sacrifice and courage in battle. whatever the field in which
they must function. and in fulfillment of all the organisational norms.

12. To exercise vigilance at all times over the integrity of all of the organi-
zation's members and sources of information. and also to see to the maintenance
and preservation of individual equipment and the means and assets of the organi-

zation.

13. For the safety of the organisation. no member should know or inquire into
anything not strictly necessary for his individual work.

16. To participate actively in the political, military and ideological life of
the organization with suggestions. proposals. projects. plans. etc.

15. To encourage a spirit of constant improvement. to take on the leadership
work assigned to him and to accept willingly the responsibilities which a promo-
tion in hierarchic rank imply.

16. To criticize the behavior of any member of the organisation. without re-
gard to his rank. using the proper channels.

17. To participate in discussion when his conduct is in question.

18. To appeal to higher bodies. proceeding to the ismwdiately higher level.
Article 7--Disciplinary Norm

Although membership is voluntary. once accepted. members are bound by the in-
ternal norms. Failure to observe them will lead to the implementation of

ordinary or special steps. as the case may be.

These steps have a double purpose: a) educational. not only for the member
penalized. but for the organisation as a whole and the masses as well. Thus it

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
does not suffice to apply penalties mechanically. This step must be given the
full educational dimension it merits so that an error committed will be trans-
formed into a factor to advance the revolutionary process. b) Repressive. in an
effort to prevent individual errors from being committed or repeated, by punish-

ing the individual or individuals responsible for them, in order thus to safe-
guard the organization and the popular movement.

Hith ordinary penalties. the educational factor takes priority over the repres-

sive factor. while the punishment factor is the dominant one in special penal-
ties.

1. Ordinary penalties. The following are justification for ordinary penalties:
a. Repeated lapses into sectarianism. dogmatism. "groupism." favoritism or any
other deviation which theatens the policy of the organization with regard to
the people. the unity of the revolutionary forces or organizational unity.

b. Interpretation or discussion of our political proposals in improper form.

characterized by vanguardism, lack of modesty or lack of respect for the popu-
lar organisations.

c. Disrespect for comrades.

d. irresponsible or destructive use of criticism or self-criticism.

e. False modesty. expressed in the refusal to assume leadership tasks. disre-
spect for political-military rank. or any of those attitudes which in one way

or another work toward discouraging the spirit of constant improvement and its
recognition within the hierarchic structures of the 0?“.

f. Weakness in ccmmand.

3. Failure to fulfill tasks.

h. lnsubordination (ignoring orders or refusal to carry out tasks).

i. Abuse of authority.

1. improper use of the political. organizational or military infrastructure.

k. Failure to carry out disciplinary steps or prohibitions issued for security
purposes.

I. Violation of compartmentalization.

m. Verbal liberalism or any action threatening the security of the organiza-
tion or any of its members.

n. Simple desertion.

28
roe OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These violations are penalized on the basis of the seriousness of the act
committed or the omission. ranging from:

a. Warning.

b. Closed order penalties.

c. Surrender of weapons.

d. Incarceration.

e. Temporary suspension of rank or responsibilities.

f. Hierarchic demotion.

3. Removal from the respective body.

h. Supervised exclusion.

i. Expulsion.

2. Special penalties. The following are justification for special penalties:
a. Misuse of the organisation's funds or general assets.
b. Death of a comrade. with responsibility proven.

c. Crimes against the interests of the people. such as rape, blackmail. extor-
tion.

d. Use of the organization name to carry out deeds for personal benefit,
threatening its prestige and harming the popular interests.

e. Aggravated insubordination.

f. Denunciation.

g. Aggravated desertion.

h. Betrayal.

The ordinary penalties specified under letters a. b, c. d. e and g will be
determined and applied by the body to which the person being penalised belongs.
Hierarchic denotion must be decided by the levels of command which authorised
the corresponding ranks, or by higher commands. The ordinary penalties speci-
fied in letters h and i will be imposed by the national leadership on the

recommendation of the corresponding regional leadership unit.

Special penalties will be discussed and approved by a disciplinary council
appointed by the high command.

29
PO! orncm. use ONLY
The implementation of these measures is binding upon all the members of the
organization.

Article 8--Finances

The finances of the organization are made up of:

a. The organization's own finances;

b. The ordinary and compulsory contributions of each member of the organiza-
tion. which will be established by the bodies to which they belong, based on
one day's wages; and

c. The contributions of collaborators.

Article 9-—Specia1 Action

Sabotage. execution and other special actions are necessary tasks in the devel-
opment of the war. but in view of the political implications they involve they
must be discussed and approved by the high command. The same is true of
actions which because of their national repercussions or intervening forces
threaten the development of the organization as a whole.

Article 10--Revolutionary Morality

All of the candidates and officers of the organization must study and implement
the basic concepts of revolutionary morality. which are considered to be:

a. Promoting the spirit of collective work.

b. Fraternity and solidarity among comrades, without lapsing into paternalism
or favoritism.

c. Mutual respect.
d. Truthfulnesa with the organization and a self-critical spirit.
e. Respect for the beliefs. customs and assets of the people.

f. Constant vigilance to prevent vices such as alcoholism. drugs. narcotics
and gambling from penetrating the organization.

g. Private life consistent with being a true revolutionary.

Part VI--Closed Order Drill in the OPE

I. The General Provisions

These regulations contain all of the closed order exercises which should be

practiced both individually and collectively by candidates and officers of the
organization.

30
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of the above. practice of the various exercises should be character-
ized by discipline, energy, precision and speed.

The purpose of closed order training is:

a. To train the command personnel to mobilise their units in orderly fashion
and to develop simple formations from which combat maneuvers can be speedily
effected.

b. To discipline the personnel and inculcate in them habits of precision and
speedy reaction to the orders of their commanders.

c. To develop a means of promoting morale among the combatants and developing
their spirit of cohesion.

d. To awaken an awareness in the people that our organization, through its
cohesion and discipline. is taking firm steps toward the development of the
future army of the people.

2. Commands

A command is the directly and verbally expressed order of a commander. using
words in prescribed succession and requiring immediate execution.

Commands are made up of two clearly defined parts:

a. The alerting command, the purpose of which is to warn those who will carry
out the movement or exercise as to what it will he.

b. The executory command, the purpose of which is the execution of the move-
ment or exercise.

The alerting command should be issued. beginning on one note. more or less.
above the tone of voice used in normal conversation. It may have any number of
syllables. and should have an upward stress. such that the final or the penulti-
mate and final syllables (if the pronounciation of the word so dictates) are
vciced two or three notes above the first. The last syllable of this command
should be drawn out.

The executory command should begin at least two notes higher than the final
syllable of the alerting command. This command is typically short, decisive and
energetic. such as to produce immediate execution on the part of those hearing
it.

In some commands, the alerting and executory parts are combined or made up of a
single word.

In such cases. the procedure is to give the name of the unit as the alerting

command and to instruct the troops that execution will only begin when the
executory command is completed.

31
3. Individual Training Uithout Weapons

3.1 Basic Position

a. Command: Attention...Pirel

b. Description of the exercise:

I. The heels should be as close together as the individual's build allows.
2. The feet should be positioned at a #5 degree angle.

3. The legs should be straight, without rigidity.

a. Body weight should rest entirely on the soles of the feet.

5. Hips balanced. trunk straight, chest naturally thrust forward, shoulders
slightly to the rear and level.

6. Arms hanging relaxed, elbows slightly bent and a little forward. with the
palms of the hands in contact with the thighs along the trouser seams, with the
fingers extended and close together.

7. Neck and head held naturally. chin slightly drawn in. eyes focused straight
ahead on a reference point slightly above eye level.

c. To assume this position. the left foot is drawn smartly against the right.
while the arms simultaneously fall naturally along the legs such that the hands
touch the thighs. The individual must remain motionless in this position (taken
from the magazine GUION. March 1980).

Extract from 16 October 1979 speech by Gen Luis Carlos Camacho Leyva, sinister
of national defense, to the Chamber of Representatives

Subversive Groups

Something has been developing which is inherent in the current problem of
democracy. i.e.. the failure of democracy to defend itself. The result is that
people talk against against democracy and no one rises up to defend that which
we are enjoying. Now paradoxically. we see the communist bench in the congress
defending freedom of thought, freedom of opinion and freedom of assembly. This
is natural, because they are yearning for what is behind the iron curtain.
accustomed as they are to being accorded all these freedoms in those countries.
where communism holds away. and they want them for Colombia as well.

And there is a belief that nothing is happening here. that we are like madmen.
that the government does not know what its obligations are nor have the mili-
tary forces any reason to emerge from the barracks. because this is a country
of the Sacred Heart where there is no need to adopt exemplary legal measures
nor for the military forces to reduce subversion to impotence either.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

But I am going to take the liberty of rapidly sketching what is happening. be-
cause matters are not what they are sometimes said to be. What then is the
reason we are acting in more forceful fashion than we normally should? The fact
is that innumerable subversive groups have developed in the country. including
among others the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. which says in all of
its writings that it is the armed branch of the Communist Party of Colombia.

1 said that innumerable subversive groups have been developing and are precise-
ly the reasons for the unease in the country. It is they which have created the
anuiety in the rural and agricultural sector, it is they who have murdered
peasants as "stool pigeons." as Representative Cardona said in a famous state-
ment, and it is they whose banners with their legend we find above the corpses
of these poor people. uselessly martyred. It is the Revolutionary Armed Forces.
the National Liberation Army and the H-l9. it is the Pedro Leon Arboleda or PLA
Group. the Workers' Self-Defense and the Popular United Front for Guerrilla
Action and the Revolutionary Organization of the People-it is these movements.
which as I said before. are disturbing the public peace. Let us see. if only
briefly. what is happening with these movements.

“-19

The members of the "-19 undertook distributions of milk and market goods,
seizures of buses and speeches at secondary schools, hospitals. etc. However.
following its failure. after penetrating the North Canton. where the republic
warehouses were located. we were able to see immediately that this was not the
somewhat sympathetic H—19 movement which we gave credit only for speed of
action with a certain ingenuity in order to affect public opinion, but rather
that this movement was also engaged in kidnapping. There they held the manager
of the Texas Company. Nicolas Bscobar Soto, who died the death of a martyr
after being held in a cell or "people‘s prison." as they call it. for more than
6 months. under truly inhuman conditions.

I would invite the honorable representatives to go and visit one of these so-
called "people's prisons" which we still have one fine day. in order to learn
under what conditions the kidnapped people were and are being martyred. And

they were also involved in the kidnapping of Miguel de German Ribon, and with
innumerable problems. suffocating infiltrations and. of course. simultaneously
engaging internally in innumerable forms of depravation such as homosexuality.
prostitution. swindling. bank robberies. etc. But financing was not going bad-
ly. One of the members. Duplat Sanjuan. received a salary of 50.000 pesos month-
ly and 50,000 for his expenditures as an agent.

We have in our possession the books we seized from the gentlemen in the H-19.
what then is their organization? Let us see (see Organizational Chart No l).
The high command of the Bogota region was in turn organized as shown in Organi-
zational Chart No 2. what is shown as gray on this chart has already been cap-

tured. We still have to capture the sections with lighter shading, and we will
have to do so even if the subversives claim that we are torturing them.

33
son OFFICIAL use out!
Organizational Chart No l

  
   
 

National . Political-military
Leadership

High

  
      
  
 
 

I _
r-Ievuﬁ '- .3
C -_a '1- _J

Regional - regional Intermedia -

unit
Hovil = mobile unit

And what had these individuals done up to 1978 and the beginning of 19797

Kidnappings........................... 7
Robberie50000000OOOOOOOOOOOCCDOOOOOOOI h
Explosions............................ a7
lncurslons......"noon”...uun... 3
Incendiary bombs...................... 9
Leaflet releases ..................... ll
M-l9 banner hoistings ................ 2
Vehicles stopped eaeeeeoeeaaeeeeeeeeee 2

Total ........ 85

But the most serious thing. and that challenged by Representative Cardona, was
the removal of weapons from the North Canton. The official figure is 6.303. of
which. as 1 said before. we have recovered 95 percent. But in addition to those
recovered. as we will see later on, we have been able to capture other weapons.
and perhaps more. speaking potentially.

This group had the capacity to falsify identity cards, drivers licenses. search
warrants. customs seals. vehicle ownership and registration certificates.
credit cards. permits to carry weapons and military identification papers.

This group. according to the information we have. was able to obtain illegally.
in attacks on banking and credit institutions. a total of 86 million pesos.

And what has been done? Well, as of the present, from 2 January to 1 October,
the military forces have arrested 673 individuals, of whom 366 were released on

3h
FOR orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organizational Chart No 2

  
  
      
   
    

ﬁrgyarrff "x“ .
High Command

Bogota Regional

Command Column Command

Unit

ntermediar

BAI‘1lsg
(EVE/2,! be) (3000000 000 000 o -
Candidates' Unit -- 5 members each

.. . .-__._.-—_—_-

Organizational Chart No 3

omeccuou wow. National

Leadership
lligh Command .. . MWIOR

MLA m Md“ mm ' ’ ‘ mm WI.
CMUET" “"000“ “HANGER YOLIII V‘LL I

Guerrilla moyil - mobile
guerrila unic

    
 

"szwtr Columns guerrilla movil -
[Tile m m mobile guerrilla

0

staff. olumn general

COIII 00
CUCOIILM

C0“!!! 00 (0-000
emu!» annual:

Note; The ahoye chart shows NsIQ activities in the rural
aector.

35
the brigade level and 138 were released by the courts. Arrest warrants were”‘
issued for 180. of whom 106 have confessed.

Therefore there remain to be found and brought before the proper authorities
207 individuals for whom the military records show serious charges of involve-
ment in the activities of the “-19.

The final results of the operations against the “-19 are as follows:
Total captured eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 673

Released by the courts................. 138
Released on the brigade level.......... 366
Arrest warrants........................ 180
In the hands of the courteeeeeeeeeoeeee '-
Beins deta‘nedeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeo --
Executed....O.......................... 9

Total.................................... 673 673

Recovery of North Canton Weapons Stolen

Cr‘minlls shot.............o..........oo.o.......... 9
Individuals arrested and charged with

membership in the H—l9............................ 180
Heapons seized from the movement.................... I97
Ammunition selzed..........................o......-. 18.000
Radio equipment and Vehicles seized.....o.-......... 137
Auto-Oblle plates................................... 30
People's jails foundeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeee 9
“-19hood‘ ‘eized.'.........I....................... 178
Dental equipment seized............................. 6
First-Old equipment................................. 38

Workers' Self-Defense Organization (ADO)

Now let us look at the so-called Vorkers' Self-Defense organization (see Organi-
zational Chart No a).

The 16 September Command shown on Chart No a was that which eliminated the
illustrious public figure Dr Pardo Buelvas. in a manner known to all of us. Let
us recall that after the courts investigated and sentenced its members in
rather spectacular. bold and challenging fashion. two of them escaped from the
National Model Prison. I imagine that when they are captured. if they are cap-
tured. those who want to say that we are torturing them will immediately raise
their voices. This does not matter to us.

But what has this group done in addition to the murder of Pardo Buelvas? Let us
see:

36
ton OFFICIAL use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organizational Chart “0 4

ORG—ANZACION AUTOOCFENSA 08 R t R A( 1)

I". DC...

DICK-OI 0.1-0
“1* “I'M
ﬂout-o “not
out". Can!"

(7.) conno- «mm.

    
     
 
 
 

¢ Ola-IO g."

(6) m {=" 22'1““

Key:
1. Workers' Self-defense Organization
2. Central Commission: high commander, political leadership,
military leadership, propaganda commissioner, finance

commissioner
3. Camilo Torres Command Unit -- commander
4. Cells

5. 14 September Command Unit -— commander

6. Cell -- of 3 or 4 members. headed by a member
7. Member

8. Collaborator
9. Sympathizer

Organizational Chart No 5

    
      

Nul-

m . - .107":
"I0“
ll-HJI ‘- '

.

Harxiat-Leniniat
Into-nab
Traditional
Lenin- Urban m m
ist 5L"... cum-nu

"VII

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Organizational Chart No 6

(2)
moo: (3)
tin - n- t
(a) 5 (6) .p
m <15) m EM m 11:: 12::
Autumn-no (7) (8) (9)

|

2.

gun-mu; “immune.
Luann-nu. mm

"W tmehm,

‘ :m:..m

 

(12) —.(.13)
WIN-:00" m um 14 '
(1°) "sop-,9 ( )

(15) numwna 11)

m ......... a.) m m m

tuna ulna " "" “a
I. moon-wall I. “and:

m m“ «.3 mm“. W" “qu
nun-noon ' ' (17) (18) ' “-11.93.-

Key:
1. National Liberation Army
2. National Liberation Army orqanization
3. Front organizations
4. Revised
5. Traditional -- national leadership
6. Sociopolitical
7. Infiltrated
8. Propaganda
9. Planning
10. Region 1 and 2 officials
11.Nariona1 Urban Leadership (DUN)
12. Urban support networks
13. Armed branch
14. Fronts
15. National leadership (a - alias)
16. NN - no name (Zapata is alias)
17. Jose Antonio Galan. 25-30 nen, zone of influence --
Caceres, Antioquia - Cordoba boundary
18. Canilo Torres R.. 30-60 nen, zone of influence -- Hotilones
Mountains - south of Cesar
19. Jose Solano Sepulveda. 20-30 nen. Alejandro Chavez
(captured). zone of influence -- San Lucas Mountains and
south of Bolivar

38
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
8060“ 0 E.

   

CWUE‘I’A
l-FRENTE

muxmumauol
new.“ (1.)
menus o9

  
 

(a. A“... a )
NM. MK! 21

ll-FREN‘I’E

CM mno
“ﬁw tome L.
B. Jo ulo g.“c.uulso'z3
I III!!! EMU!
3:33am” so "till“! IS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organizational Chart No 7

 
  

   

WE Pt'l’O

NI- FREN TE

HUILA

    
   

   

  

    

      
 

 
 

    

 
 

Revolutionary Armed 7.
Forces of Colombia Fronts
Bogota Federal District.

Urban Front. 8.
number of men -- 27

Santander, Eighth Front.

number of men ~- 45

number of weapons -- 30 9.
Caqueta, First Front,

number of men -- 50

number of weapons -- 45

Meta, Seventh Front, 10.
number of men -- 42

number of weapons -- 37

Huiln. Second Front,

number of men -- 99

number of weapons -- 60 Note:

39

 

 

SA NTANDER

32%

«Alan!
(3) mum‘s

N! CWA‘ 30

 

NEVA -

   
  
 

mm «mm
h.lcn"o|)
(5) atoms“

gnaw“: 37

 

mum-duca-
' wut-oummo

 

Pato Region, Third Front
number of men -- 143
number of weapons -- 89
Middle ﬁagdalena. Fourth
Front,

number of men -- 268
number of weapons -- 103
Uraba.

Fifth Front

number of men -- 60
number of weapons -- 40
Tolima-Cauca-Valle-Quind
Quindio.

Sixth Front,

number of men -- 68
number of weapons -- 2‘

a a alias
Broadcasting facilities seized..................
Bank robber‘es...‘CI.O.........0................
lncurstons into public office‘eeeaeaaeaeeeaaaeea
Bombs p'aced.......COUCOOOC.....................
Attack on model prison.........o.............o..

weak-’0“

We have captured and court-martialed 10 of the members of this group. Eight are
in prison now and two have escaped and are being sought.

Pedro Leon Arboleda (PLA) Command (see Organizational Chart No 5)

I would not like to tire this honorable chamber and the honorable representa-
tives with statistics and tables. but we will review the charts one by one with
a view to understanding all of what is in the hands of military intelligence.
The FLA. which is in turn a subversive organization dependent on the self-
styled Popular Liberation Army (EPL). has engaged in the following activities:

B.nk robberies....o...........o-.o.o....o 12
Bombs PlaCCdeaaeeeaaeeaeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaaaa '0
Incursions...........................ooo. 6
Attacks on settlements seeaeeeeeoaooeeooe I.

On the other hand. in operations carried out against the PLA. the military
forces have carried out the following actions:

Criminals capturedeoeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeee 87
Criminals k1]led..............oo....¢... 17
Criminals VOUIlded....................... 10
Long-barrelled weapons recovered........ 25
Side arms recovered..................... 16

National Liberation Army (ELﬂ)

Now let us examine the ELN. which has a reorganizational commission responsible
for seeking new horizons for it. This group is organized as shown in Organiza-
tional Chart No 6.

Thanks to the activity of the military forces. the BL" has not succeeded in
carrying out significant activities. but on the contrary has suffered harsh
blows dealt by the army. as can be seen by the following:

Weapons recovered.................................... 3A
Grenades............................................o 3]“
Rural aux‘liaries captured.~......o.................. a
Al'l'led branch band‘t' captured-o........o.o........... 2
Urban network members captured....................... 33

Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (PARC)

The PARC ls organized on the national level as shown in Organizational Chart No
7.

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On this organizational basis. this subversive group. which says it is
affiliated with the Communist Party of Colombia. succeeded in carrying out the
following criminal activities between 7 August 1978 and 9 October 1979:

Troop personnel killed............................ 36
Troop personnel wounded........................... 3a
Private assassinations............................ 145
Attacks on settlements............................ 16
K‘dmppinssOOOOOOC0.......00....O‘COOOIDOOOOOOO... 9

The greater percentage of these criminal actions were carried out by the Fourth
and Fifth Fronts of this organization. which are those located in Uraba.
Santander and Puerto Berrio. The troops themselves. for their part. inflicted
the following losses on the PARC:

Since 7 August 1978

HUHHHUEDE
(“—IIIEIIII‘1 3‘
(3)W—3W‘"°‘ —IIIEIIII-
(4) I—IIENEIIE
(5) _NWIIEIIIII-
‘6) z—IIIEIIIIE -
(7’ WIIIIIIIIE "’°
(”—IIIIIIII-l ’

 
    
     
 
     
    
   

<9) _IIIIIIIIM 5*
Key-
1. Urban Front 6. Long-barreled
2. Criminals killed guns captured
3. Auxiliaries killed 7. Dynamite plugs
b. Criminals captured 8. Single-side band

5. Auxiliaries captured radios
- 9. Miscellaneous
ammunition

As the honorable representatives will be able to see. it is not for their polit-
ical ideas. but for their actions. which are criminal rather than political.
that we have clashed with the PARC.

Meanwhile. the nilitary forces made the following sacrifices between 7 August
I978 and 7 August I979:

 

 

Killed Epunded
Military forces 39 100
Police 88 775
Civilians 162 18

111
All they do. seeking to represent itself to the country as a decent. altruis-
tic republic of thinking people. people who are seeking new horizons. is a lie.
The government is faced with subversion of its institutions, subversion which
is supported not only by domestic individuals. some of whom have had occasion
to come to the national congress. but has also been aided by Uruguayans. Argen-
iines. Chileans. Germans. Hungarians. Frenchmen. Venesuslans and Arabs.

The Communist Party and Subversion

And the most serious aspect of all of this confusion. Mr President and Honor-
able Representatives. is that in the specific case of the PARC, as I have al-
ready said. they continue to indicate that they are the armed branch of the
communist party. And concerning this we must speak the real truth. because the
fact is l have not seen. nor has the country. any unanimous rejection by the
communists regarding the assertion the PARC is making. and on the other hand.
every time an individual in one of these groups is arrested. there always
appears another from Connittee A. B. or Z of the party to demand his provision-
al release.

Without being asked to say anything. honorable representatives. they have begun
to make statements to the effect that they were not supporters of violence. but
of the mass phenomenon and some of the things on which. if you will allow me to
say so. they have been vacillating. But the fact is that with regard to this
statement made by the PARC. and the failure of the leadership of the communist
party to make any statement against it. and in view of the statement made by
the intellectuals of the party. it has to be concluded that someone. as I have
already said. who has had the opportunity to occupy a seat in the congress it-
self. is involved, if only in a spiritual sense. in subversion.

Let us note the statement by Luis Horantes (Jacobo Arenas). one of the leading
ideologists of the PARC and a member of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Colombia. on page 66 of the DIARIO MARQUBTALIA: "Manuel Harulanda
Velez. alias Tirofijo. is an outstanding member of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party."

Issue No 113 of ALTERNATIVA for the week of 9-15 May l977-and I also hope
that this paper will not claim to be a government publication—says that Luis
Horantes (Jacobo Arenas) has been a ”member of the Central Committee of the
Party since 1958. and is today one of the main ideologists and leaders of the
PARC." also commenting that "he had been linked with the armed struggle for
more than 13 years when he was sent to Harquetalia by the communist party."

And this individual. whom this paper interviewed. said the following:

"He have a general staff which directs and checks on the plans drafted by the
national conferences of the FARC. Then each front. or more exactly each column.
has a general staff. or. not to be immodest. a leadership command elected by
the general staff.

"Getting into the organic structure of the PARC. What is called a squad in the
army and a guerrilla unit in the PARC. made up of 12 men. there is here another

h? \
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leadership mechanism for a given radius of action. This mechanism is called the
political cell and it is in essence a communist cell. More clearly. our
smallest unit is the guerrilla unit of 12 men. which is at the same time the
political group or a party cell.

"These leadership mechanisms. beginning with the general staff. are guided by
the general line of the PARC. set forth in national conferences of the movement
with a view to concrete action. and. as is natural. by Marxist-Leninist prin-
ciples. and in politics, by the program and political resolutions of the commu-
nist congresses. I am speaking of the congresses of the Communist yarty of
Colombia.

"Our organization as a party is governed by the party statutes, which deal with
the life and the activities of the communist membership. But if something is
lacking. we have available to us the internal military regulations of the PARC
and the norms of the general staff and commands."

And what do Articles 2 and lo of the internal regulations of the PARC say? Let
us see.

Article 2 says that "The PARC are an integral part of the party. Each squadron
or basic or smallest unit is at the same time a party cell.

"The conclusions and plans of the national conferences of the PARC are avail-
able to the Central Committee."

Article 10 says that "The discipline of the PARC is political—military. and it
is covered in the party statutes."

And what about Article ll of the PARC Command Norms?

ii: “The highest authority in political matters is the Central Committee of
the party. and therefore the members of the Central Executive Committee are
worthy of military honors in the PARC."

And this. Honorable Representatives. is not being said by the minister of de-
fense or by a government publication. but by an individual who is an active mem-
ber of the communist party. and in a journal which. as I said before. cannot be
considered as a government publication.

0n the other hand. the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Colombia
says In a historical summary published under the title "30 Years of Communist
Party Struggle" (Los Comuneros Publications):

a. Page 94: “Our party salutes the guerrilla fighters as heroes of the popu-
lar resistance." The 14th Plenum of the Central Committee expressed the view
that “The armed struggle which has been waged in some regions is a heroic ex-
pression of the resistance of our people to the terrorist repression of the
dictatorship and the violence of the reactionary gangs."

1:3
son crucm. use can
b. Page 96: The léth Plenum of the Central Committee urged that "We should
talk to the guerrilla fighters in full frankness'and honesty. trying to educate
them politically. showing them that they are waging a prolonged struggle with
great prospects for the future. when it will be combined with a revolutionary
mass movement." Our party made contact with representatives of various guer—
rilla detachments. which established a national coordination council and organ-
ized multiple forms of aid to the popular combatants. and was able to make wise
orientation decisions on various occasions. In 1952. our party collaborated de-
cisively in the preparations for and holding of the National Guerrilla Pighters
Conference. known since then as the Boyaca Conference. which was attended by
delegates from the majority of the guerrilla forces. At this conference. a plat-
form of struggle designed to link the guerrilla resistance with the achievement
of agrarian reform was approved. -

And Representative Gilberto Vieira. who is also secretary of the Communist
Party of Colombia. said in his report to the 10th congress. which was included
in a publication entitled "For the National Liberation Patriotic Front" printed
by the Colombia Nueva Publishing House in January of 1976. the following:

a. Page bl: "The armed struggle is emerging and developing in Colombia. in
its guerrilla warfare form. even though no revolutionary situation yet exists
in the country."

"There is no contradiction at all between the mass struggle and the armed guer-
rilla struggle. The guerrilla war is one of the highest forms of the mass
struggle."

Again. and this time in the political report he submitted to the llth Congress
of the Communist Party of Colombia. which was included in the publication en-
titled "Forward to the Battle Against the oligarchy and Imperialism" (Colombia
Nueva Publishing House). Representative Gilberto Vieira said:

a. Page 35: "The guerrilla movement of the PARC has been maintained and devel-
oped in these recent years with singular firmness. working against very diffi-
cult conditions. The solidity of this movement shows that the persistence of
this iorm of struggle corresponds to the social realities."

b. Page 36: “The guerrilla movement. with its heroic resistance. has shown
that it responds to real needs..."

c. Page 37: "The active fighters in the SLR and the EPL are revolutionaries
with whom we differ. but in whose resistance we join in solidarity."

And to be still more explicit. Gilberto Vieira. in reasserting his thesis set
forth in the book "Politics and Revolution in Colombia" (Alcaravan Publishing
House. 1977). said under the subtitle "The Leninist Tactics of the Comunist
Party of Colombia." the following:

a. Page 16: "He communists have been. and not just recently but since 1969.
committed to the activities of many guerrilla movements."

uh
son orncm. use 01m
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The above quotations. Mr President and Honorable Representatives. confirm what
I said before to the effect that there are people participating in this body
who are encouraging subversion in Colombia and who have the authority at the

same time to summon ministers to explain the reasons they are defending our
institutions.

Mr President. I believe that it is my duty to refer again. if only briefly. to
some statements. which as I said at the beginning of my address. were made in
this chamber by representatives who have claimed to be friends of the govern- '
ment but have surprisingly joined in the debate being promoted against it and
against the armed forces.

It has been said here by Representative Leon Arango Paucar that he came from
the very scene of the events, that things were terrible and that he wanted to
help the government. There is a tactic according to which when an attack is
directed at subordinates. one says that "Their superiors do not know what they
are doing." And when the attack is directed at their superiors. one says "They
were functioning without the support of their subordinates."

But I will take the liberty of reading to you the document drafted in Puerto
Berrio. which makes it clear what happened with regard to the meeting which was
held in the central square. in connection with which the honorable representa-
tive said that the chief of the general staff of the Fourth Brigade had
threatened the peasants. saying that there would be more bloodshed and more
orphans and widows. This superficiality. perhaps due to a hasty analysis and a
lack of time before the plane was to leave Puerto Berrio for Bogota. is com-
pletely contradicted by what I will show. based on a document in my possession.

115
Table of Content:

Editor's NoteoooooeoeeeooooeoooooeeooeooooooOooeooeooeeeooaoooeeoeeo

Introduction..........o......o..........o.-.........................

Chapter 13 I A” conﬂ.nder Ice-00.0.no...a.I00.00.000.00000000000000

1“! Am c°.mander Io.ooooaaooeoootoo.oooooooonooooooaoooooooo
2-0ne: He want to Report That There Are Political

Prisoners and Torture....................................
3--Int¢rvlew With Alfredo Vasquez carrt:°‘.ooooooooaooooaooeo
a--T¢St1lony on In Experienceooooeoeooooeeeooooeeoooeeoeoeele
S-‘Intefvieu "1th Alfonso Lopez "tchelsenooooooe-eooooooooeoo
6-Intervieu With Hisael Paatrana Borrero....................
7--A Freed Hostage Speaks....................................
8--The Government Warns: "No Threat Will Make Us Haver".....
9--Colombia's Position Regarding Terrorism...................
lO--Group of 15 "ostase Ambassadors-o-ooooeoaooaooeeoooeoaoooo
ll--L€tt¢t From Commander Ieoeeeeooeooeooeooeeoooooooeeooeoooo
12-Advanc¢ Or Retreat for “-19700ooeeo-ooeooooaoooooooaoeocoo
[Jo-Statement of the Priests for Latin America (PAL Group)....

Chapter II: Chronology of the Embassy Seizure......................
Chapter II]: The “-19 Speaks.......-...................-..o....o.o..

"-The Leadership of the "-19 speaks-coo.oooooeeoooooaoooooeo
2"The Prisoners of the “-19 Speak...........................

Chapter Iv: Documents Of the ”-19.0000nocoooooooooeoeoooeeooeoooeea

|--Open Letter to Maria Eugenia Rojas-eo-eoooooooeoeeeooooeoe
2--Concept and Structure of the H-l9 Political-

H‘l'tary Organization.....o..o...........................
3--Conclusions of the Seventh Conference of the H-l9.........
a-‘1nterV‘eV "1th the “-19.0000too-oeaoeoeoooeaoeoaoooaooooeo

Chapter V: The Securlty statUICSOCoooooeooooaeoeooaoooeoooaoeaooaaa
Chapter VI: Subversion of the Armed Forces.........................
Chapter VII: Testimony on Torture in colonb‘aooeooooeoooooooo-ooeooo
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GMTD‘IALA

om suavsnsm amour sewnm MATERIAL
MATERIAL DE sswamnn in Spanish Mar 80 pp 1-40 [Since or publication unlmovg7

[Security Material by the Revolutionary Q‘gmizatim of the People in Arms,
ORPA Reprint, March 1980]

[Mt] Table of Contents

Part I: What Security Means
A) Security: A Cmstmt in the War Process

8) SeCurity of the Militant

C) Security of tie Unit
D) (be “salutes: Laxity in Individual aid Collective Security

Part II: Some Cmcrete Security Norms
A) Comnicaticns
B) Cmtacts
C) Meetims
D) Liaisms

Part III: Imortmce of Lgality in Clandestine Activity of when Militant

A) Ttree ﬁroneous Attitudes
8) Cover and Pretext: Resumes and Guarantees for Clandestine

Activity
C) Don't Give Indications to the Enemy

Part IV: Compartmentalizatim
A) Political and Operational Work
8) Operational Aspects
C) Attitudes of the Militant

Oomlusim

Pat I: what Security Means

Secwity meals keeping the organintion out of danger or harm Eran the enemy.
To achieve this, criteria aid memes that guarantee its mnctioning md de-

velopment met be adopted. Those security measures or norms must permit clam-
destine militaicy at all levels n'om collaboratcrs to militmts and soldiers.

1:7
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
Right here we can state that constant militancy, constant mistrust and complete
clandestineness have maximum aoplicatim. These principles inherent to any
revolutionary organization are indispensable reqnirements to guarantee success
in our work.

A) Securit : .-‘. Constant in the War Process

In the first place, we nust state that security is accpired to the degree that
we a~e clear about our position witrnin the system and achieve a high degree of
responsibility within the organization. This is a constant for all stges of
war which, ‘by necessity, implies maintaining ich the beginning solid acurity
criteria and'appropriate methods and procedires for the situations we are in.

Clandestineness, our best weapon within the war prccess, must be veil imple-
mented from the very beginning cf our revolutionary activity. We feel that
absolute perseverance‘in this keeps us safe and strong in order to advance in
any stage or phase of the'war. '-

Security is the constant tint permits us to do ;cur work efficiently (You the
beginning to its expansion or growth. Security nust always be present in the
development of war if we do not want to meet serious obstacles or failtres arnd
endanger our lives, the life of the organization and, consequently, the cause
itself of our people.

B) Security of the Militant

We do a large part of Our militant work as individuals. Therefore, it is an
indispensable remirement to be sure ttat we are free iron danger than the re-
pressive machine. We achieve this security ttrough constant effort and system-
atic attention to our legal and clandestine activity and tit-own the timely and
precise application of norms to preserve Optiuum security. ‘

At this level of individual security of the militant, we met be extremely ca'e-
ful about the following points:

1. We must not reveal our clandestine activity and our political position to
people outside the organization.

2. We must not make cements to people in our ”confidence." This way we will
not reveal our position and we will avoid raisirg suspicions about us. If we
do political work, the level of each prospect mst be carefully determined, we
must be trained for this and, especially, we must have the proper authorization
to do it.

3. He must not leave sensitive documents in view of people outside the organ-
ization, whether in the hanse or in another place. We must be ca‘eﬁnl to keep
them in a suitable place, even anticipating a search by enemy agents.

A. We must maintain and polish our pretext or cover for all our clandestine
activities. The pretext or cover must not have contradictionsnthat is, it

he
won onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oust seem completely reasonable and justify even the snallest details of our
activity.

5. We oust organize our activities so that our arrivals and departures are
normal 31d correspond to ow cover.

6. He mst not read books or docunents in unsuitable places like vans or
some house where anyone could discover our reading.

7. He nust not talk (11 the telephone about political matters. We especially
must not establish contacts or meetings by telephme, whether for cmvenience,
ease or overconfidence.

8. He nust not wear "mafioso" clothes or unsuitable clothes for the site of
our activities. For example, excessively long hair can give the enemy a clue
or ca: make us look like comm criminals.

9. He met always carry all or identification documents with us. when leav-
ing the house, we nust check to see if we have our residence card, milita‘y
inscriptim. work verification or card, etc.

10. He must not do political wa'k to recruit anyone if we we not suffi-
ciently trained for it and if we are not authorized by the responsible person.

11. we must not directly participate in political activities like, for exam-
ple, student activities or unimportant demonstratims. In other words, we
met not publicly reveal our positions except in exceptional cases for which
we must have the express authorization of the organization.

12. He must use a pseudonym for our clandestine work tr use several for work
of greater scope. This pseudonym must be complete with first and last nane
and mst have a baclground.

13. He must not use or carry military eqiipnent if we do not have authoriza-
tion or when it is unnecessary and dangerous.

14. He must avoid relations with people of doubtful political position, peo-
ple who might be monitored and also with the lumpen proletariat.

lwhen we receive principles. procedures and work methods that are the product
of knowledge and experience, we accept them most of the time and we say that
they are accepted. However, it is all just good intentions and wishful think-
ing. 01r- obligation and our responsibility are to practice them constantly
and strictly and evaluate them in practice. This is basic to guarantee our
individual security.

C) Security of the Unit

Individual work has great risks as does the work of units (two or more mili-
tants). The security of this work trust be guarahteed by a collective effort.

£9
to: omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We must all be aware of the responsibility implied in working in teans and we
trust all cmcern ourselves tqether with the security of all.

Below are some criteria and norms for the security of the unit:

1. He must periodically discuss and evaluate the clmdestineness aid secret-
iveness of the unit.

2. Within the internal structure of the unit, we nust designate one person to
be specifically responsible for security altth this task is also collective.
That person will have certain specific tasks concernirg this activity.

3. He must establish canmnications systems and contacts to avoid dispersion
and lack of cmtinuity in the mrk. Basically we must plan commications so
that they are quick, precise aid timely.

4. We met establish work sites that offer the necessary conditions to pro-
tect the militants aid resources used. This includes places for political
study, discussion of problems and any type of milita'y training.

‘3. We trust be careml about talking loudly. We mist also replace certain
words with others in order not to reveal our activity. We mist never mention
words like socialian, communism, guerrilla, policy, etc.

6. We mst maintain absolute compartmentalizatim with respect to other units,
other sectors or individuals outside the unit based on the appropriate criteria.
It is sometimes necessary to practice comprtmentalization within the unit
itself.

7. We nust establish quick and effective commications to detect or solve
any security problem. He must establish a quick and precise system of compu-
nications and contacts within the unit.

8. We nust have emergency plans to anticipate any difficult situation that
occurs during the collective work.

9. As to cmtacts in public places, we should wait 10 minutes under normal
conditions and 5 minutes in critical situations. In both normal and critical
situations, punctuality must be our principle. It is also advisable to es-
tablish emergency points for subsequent comnunicatim.

D) the Weakness: Laxity in Individual and Collective Security

Laxity basically means weakening and relaxation of security observed in some
militants and units with the passing of time. We are talking about it in
order to prevent or overccme this laxity.

Both at the individual as well as the collective level, the length of time as

a militant operates negatively because of acquired confidence and imprudent
frimdliness.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Knowledge and azquired confidence with carades lead to knowing than lqally,
guessing the scope of work dcne, knowing the sites of legal and clandestine
work, exchanging secret infa'natiorl, etc. In other words, compa'unmtaliza-
tim is gradually lost.

This weakness is also obsa'ved in the functioning of the unit. This is a
greater daiger since mistrust and vigilance toward the enemy or politically
undefined people are gradually lost. If we do not uproot this wealmess, it
can cause very serious consequences as occurred in the past.

Below are sane cmcrete cases where we have observed laxity: '

1. The sane work sites are used without prior check; the a'gunent is tint it
has always been used without problems.

2. The same cmtact places are uwd for convenience cr ignorance of the
method.

3. Waiting fa- a courade gets longer each time and work meetings go on too
lorg.

lo. The telephone is used to pass on information related to a certain politi-
cal or organizational situaticn instead of doing it by a direct and safe means.

5. A vehicle is no longer compartmentalized due to a false idea of solidarity.

6. Marked places or places in the process of beirg marked are used instead
of seeking less known and more secure ones. Most of the time, places are
used inappropriately--for exanple, coffee shops or other places that we know,
by principle, are monitored by the repressive forces.

In a word, the sane methods and mechanisms for the development of our acti-

vities we followed routinely without changing them or adapting them to in-

creasingly more complex aid damerous situations in tin urban and rural en-

virmment. Sticking to a routine definitely does not constitute part of our
work style and must be eliminated.

Part II: Some Concrete Security Ncrms

in urban clandestine activity, camnmications, contacts and meetixgs are the
most delicate part. Past experience demonstrates this to us. Neglect and
noncompliance with basic security norms caused unfortunate casualties in revo-
lutionary ranks. He could sumarize the reasons for the vulnerability of
these activities in the city as follows:

1) Host of our aztivities have to be done ttrough legal channels of conmunica-
tion: telephones, telegrans, buses, etc. There must be public contact;
houses and public recreational areas must be used where the operational situa-
tiOn is adverse for us due to the specific physical and social conditions of
the city.

51
m orncm. use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) The enemy concentrates massive rum and tectnical resou'ces in the city:
many policemen, informers, radio patrols. lookouts. military barracks, etc.
This implies better vigilance and mobility on the part of the enemy.

3) Wemently the urban militait conducts his activity in a loose, disorgan-
ized, liberal or undisciplined way. This is the most important reasm. We
trust fight strictly and intransigently from now on to canpletely eliminate it.

The repression is not an unfortunate, uncontrollable force; its success or
lack of it mainly depends on us. The militants' mistakes give the enemy a
chance to identify us and cause serious and regrettable problems. Therefcre,
the elimination of those mistakes is extremely urgent. He cannot blindly
trust or adapt comfortably to temporary calm periods. He must have security
habits capable of resisting the most ferocious repression. We mast not lose
the initiative in this aspect or permit events to overtake us and slrprise us.
We nust immediately put all the security ncrms into practice in coumnications,
contacts and meetings.

A) Comunications

The greatest enemy to security is convenience. This tempts us to use channels
of commmication monitored by the enemy such as the telephone, letters, tele-
grams, etc.

The enemy periodically monitors the telephone of any person suspected of c131-
destine activities; for this reason we say it is a resowce at the service of
the regression if not used correctly and prudently. The enemy has tecmical
equipment to monitcr all telephone calls. Even when a public telephone is
used, there is the risk that the telephone we call is monitored. For this
reason, its use for clandestine conmunications mist be very limited. All
those "clever" calls that we improvise ("are you goirg to the fiesta tomtr-
row," "lring the book I loaned you to the pa‘k at 1200 hours tomcrrow," etc.)
leave enough clues to an expert in decoding messges. The only ones deceived
are the alleged deceivers.

The use of letters a1d telegrams is less Neg-tent in our area. He met not
use these communications in the city and we must use extreme caution in cor-
respondence within as well as outside the country. The counterinsurgency
forces have offices and experts for examining letters and decipherirg codes:
collecting false names and addresses, messages between lines. number codes and
all those resources used to hide a message. The same thing is true about
telegrams.

He met not view the enemy as omnipotent. It is impossible for it to exer-
cise absolute control over all these types of comunication since it would
need a very large budget to monitor everyme. However, it invariably mmi-
tors all people who have shom signs of clandestine activity. Calling or
writing a courade through legal channels using a pseudonym is a direct denun-
ciation. The risks that this implies if it is not done properly, usirg your
legal name, can be seen.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sane ncrms in the use of vehicles must also be observed:

1. It is not usually necessary to drive at great speed.
2. Traffic signs dust be strictly obeyed.

3. It is not necessary to look back suspiciously; it is better to use the
rea'view mirror.

lo. All vehicle docunents must always be carried.
5. It is not necessary to use vehicles directly in operations.

6. Vehicles must be given lgal, correct and compartmentalized use to keep
them from beirg marked.

7. They must be kept in good condition with sufficient fuel and minimal
repairs.

01 urban [uses any conversatim on political aspects, militant work a' any-
thing that can reveal us must be absolutely avoided. It is necesst to re-
member this because, on every bus, there is someone interested in detecting

us—passengers, inspectors, etc .

Preferably buses with two dome should be used and you should place yourself
where you have perfect control of the situation. He must not go to a courade's
house my time we want him; this is very easy but it is very daygerous and is
a bad habit. He must not leave messages with his relatives.

One resource that can be used is passes. They have the great advantge of
being a completely clandestine and compartmentalized chamel since mly-those
who use it know of it. This is a fast way to cmnicate; a written message
is trmsnitted, covering up the contents well aid destroying it after readim
it.

Passes can be done in two ways: personally and impersonally.

A personal pass is when it is done directly--for example, making the pass
cpickly on a corner and continuing to walk separately as if nothing happened.
It can also be done while looking in a store window, etc. This must be done
with planning and with preestablished sites where there is knowletge of the
operational situatim.

The impersonal pass is dme using the resources of the environment. specifi-
cally hiding places: cracks in a wall, the hollow of a tree, gaps in a bench
at a public pa‘k, etc. In other words, anything that 0.1!“ imagination can,
discover to increase our operational resources can be used. This pass re-
quires more planning, control of the operational situatim, good coordination,
naturalness in filling and emptying the hidirg places and absolute security
tint no one observed. This is very functioual during harsh times of the

53
ran OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

repressim when it is necessary to restrict personal contacts. Useml hiding
places nust be found.

B) Centacts

When a militant has given the first sign to the enemy of his activity and
suspects that the enemy is investigating him, it is indispensable and obliga-
tory that he comtercheck before making a coutact.

The objective of the cauntercheck is to confirm the investigation and, if it
exists, to misinform and defeat it. It is very important that we not showmy
sign of our intention and activity or shoe: tnat we know countercheck tecl'nicpes.

The enemy has two basic objectives for the investigation:
a. To detect 31d verify the clandestine activity of suspects.

b. To detect people, hmses, places, etc., where the suspect ca‘ries out his
clandestine activity.

We can define two types of investigations:

1) Subtle investigation: done with the intention that the ta'get not realize
that he is being investigated. The investigator usually stops his activity
when he is detected; he is replxed by another so that the target is not store
of the monitoring.

An investigating tean generally cmsists of ttree men using different modali-
ties: ordinary, zig-zag and stationary. They coordinate throLgh hand simals.
When the man near the target is detected by him, he is replaced by his ances-
sor and so on. They use a support vehicle; its characteristic can be (al-
though not always) a radio transmitter antenna to comunicate directly with
the center of operations where the investigation is monitored. This is when
they follow on foot. There are different modalities for following ta‘gets in
different types of motcrized vehicles.

There a~e fixed control points--kiosk vendors, janitors, street sweepers,
waiters, etc.-in streets, schools 31d coffee shops frecpented by the person
of interest. There are also moving control points like salemn, electri-
cians, funigatcrs, etc., to check the aspect's house.

In addition to these resources that the enemy puts into play, there are also
technical resources: different vehicles, binoculars, small telescopes fer
long-distant: monitoring, portable and vehicle radio transmitters, caneras,
etc. (A detailed list of these and other aspects exceeds the objective of

2) Obvious or Japanese investigation: done so that the target realizes that he
is being watched everywhere and at every manent to pressure him psychologi-
cally and limit his mwanents. In or area, this type of investigation is
generally done for purposes of elimination and intimidation.

5h
eon omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some norms tint we must observe for a successful countercheck are:

1. In the first place, it mst be done with naturalness, not giving any in-
dication of this mtivity. Otherwise. the countercheck will not have the de-
sired resilt.

The countercheck tectnique permits us to neutralize the enemy's activities if
we do it carefully and intelligently. Homer, if we show knowledge of these
tecrnicpes, if we do than crudely (r if we treak the countercheck by running
(showing that we realized that we were being watched), we will automatically
be revealing our militaicy, fulfilling the first basic objective of the
investigation.

2. When entering or leaving our house, we must check to see if there is any
stranger, looking at aspects that he cannot easily charge like obvious physi-
cal defects, etc. We must not look at superfluous and easily charged fea-
tures like mustaches, clothing, hats, etc. We must also check vehicles in the
area and their characteristics.

3. In a countercheck, it is very impcrtant to establish a route in advance,
making a careful study of the operational situation, the physical, social and
economic environment, the movement of the enemy, etc. It is necessary to
stipulate tie time of the trip, points of verification and treak-off points
--in other words, everything that guarantees successfully reaching the contmt
at the agreed upon time.

lo. The route mist be cmsistent with the direction of the contact place.

For example, if I live in oiajitos and I have a contact in kebol, it would
be a mistake to include Sixth Avenue on my route with the pretext of seeirg

a movie poster. Then I would have to turn around to go to the contact plate.
This route is abnormal and illqical. The correct way is to establish a route
with a probable treak-off point at the School of Engineering, pretendirg to
have school work, leaving there calmly and securely fcr the contact. This is
done with the objective of confusing the enemy with a number of activities.

5. The verification point tint is part of crdinary life gives us a pretext
or justification to use as cover so we can do this with naturalness. It can
be a movie poster, a store window, an ice cream shop, etc., where we can
ca‘efully verify whetmr we are being watched. He can use resources that the
occasion itself provides as a good pretext: a girl walking by, a luxury ca',
peOple who tress strangely, etc.

6. The break-off point is the place that, due to its particular nature,
forces the investigator to show himself clea'ly or lose sign of us; he can-
not be imediately replaced in the first case and the investigation is frus-
trated in both cases. EZxanples are an elevatcr, a stairway, a na'row alley,
open ground. etc. If we try, we will find many places with these cha~acter-
istics. Docept in extreme cases, there should never be a violent lreak off;
it met be dOne with naturalness.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7. 'de must avoid aispicims actions: lookirg behind us all the time, walkirg
without a definite route, etc. He mst arrive at the cmtact with canplete
security that we are totally free of investigators. When we verify the exist-
ence of an investigation aid cannot break it, we unist avoid the cmtxt since
this would mark the other courades. After the last verification point, we met
so to the contact without comtemhecking and we must always walk against traf-
fic to monitor the movements of vehicles and keep them from following us by
the same route.

Below a~e some important security norms for contazts:

1. We met not make contazts in mafioso plxes frequented by drug addicts,
criminals, prostitutes, etc.

2. He nust not melee contazts in centers of political xtivity, especially
those of the opposition: political parties, student associatims, unions, etc.
There is vigilance and monitoring in these places since they constitute cen-
ters of interest for the counterinsurgency faces.

3. 'de must not make contazts in inappropriate places.

1.. Punctuality demonstrates our degree of awareness and respOnsibility.

Lack of punctuality greatly increases the possibility of detectim by the re-
pression because of the time risked while waitixg for someoae who is late.

As we have already noted, the waitim period :1le is 10 minutes maxiunm
and, in bad times, 5 minutes mxinum.

5. Before rea:hirg the point agreed upon, we trust make a quick study of the
operational situation at the contazt place.

6. It is useml to coummicate with people, askirg fcr directions, the time,
etc., in order not to go directly to the contxt who will be only one mg
different people we have encountered.

7. If we sometimes have to make contact with some unknown conrade, we nust
use signs and cmntersigns which can be certain micles of clothim a" ob-
jects that are carried in an agreed upon way, all azcanpanied by a dixreet
verbal sign or countersign. This must be established by courades with
greater responsibility when the contact is planed.

8. We must dress according to the contact place in order to be cmfused with

the people there. Fa‘ example, if we make contact in a residential me, it
is necessay to be well dressed. He must imitate the environment.

9. we nust not show caution, vigilance (r mistrust to avoid attraztixg
attention.

10. He must not carry any comn‘omisirg papers or other types of things. If

it is necessa'y, the responsible courade will centralize them and transport
them by a more secwe means. This is also true for weapons which mist never

S6
roe omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be carried unnecessarily but only for strictly operational objectives. The
maturity of or militants mst help them understand this aspect well.

11. He met carefully Justify why we we at the contact place at that time.
This has to be prepared befa'ehand, making Sire ttat the pretext is consistent
with the place md time.

12. When a militant contacts his collaborator, he mist do a prior countercheck
for him of a rmte established beforehand, many times without him realizing
it, since the collaborator is not used to security kabits.

The different types of cmtact can be:

I) ler contact: made the same day of the week and at the same time or
four different plxes a month.

2) Reserve contact: established for another time trat day or on subsecpent
days in another place if the regular contxt fails for any reason.

3) Emergency contact: made at a stipulated place and time in case there is
an unexpected situation which remires urgent treatment. A warning signal
ttrough my lqal aid safe charmel at a permment time is indispensable: a
completely normal, ordinary telephone call; a greeting ttrmgh a radio sta-
tion; etc. We mst create and prxtice all these security mechanisms, avoid-
irg improvisations which are so dangerous for our work.

Signals are an excellent security measure for contacts. Every militant and
every unit must establish a signal code. Q'eativity and initiative (not
merely abstrazt requirements fcr the militant) are indispensable here. Fcr
example, in the sectors near the contact there migm. be a post, a wall, etc.
The person responsible—(r any other militantngoes to the contact place
beforetnnd; if he notes danger, he warns the rest of his comrades by a very
safe means without running any risk so that the otha‘s can spread out
calmly. We call these passive signals: a cross on a certain post indicates
darger or a circle indicates normalcy. Using active signals, taking out a
handkerchief will indicate danger, for example, while combing our hair will
indicate normalcy.

C) Meetings
With respect to meetings, we can note the following:

1. Somethirg that we must always remember in our clandestine activity is
not to follow routines. Entering aid leaving a house at the same time, re-
gula'ly frequenting a coffee shop, a movie, recreation parks, etc., usirg
the sane places fa' contacts, not va'yirg meeting places, usirg a bus route
at the sane time, always walkirg trrough the same sectcruall these help the
repressive forces detect our movements. 'l'herefore, we must frequently
charge all these aspects in crder not to fall into this serious mistate of
following a routine.

57
you OFFICIAL use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. He must not hold meetixgs in the same place as cmtacts because if someone
is detected, we would be putting the group within reach of the enemy. He mst
avoid meetings in places that do not offer the right conditions. The place
where the meeting is held must permit central of the situation itself and - ~
movements outside the place; that is, we met not meet where we are isolated
and can be easily surprised.

3. Arrivals to the meeting must be staggered and only the members of a unit
should pa'ticipate. A lage group attracts attention.

‘0. He oust Me a pretext for the meeting—that is, a logical and consistent
explanation that cm stand up under mestioning and verification by the enemy.
This mist be adapted to our personality and the information tint we give nust
be fictitious and simple, without going into great detail. If we are in a
political study meeting, we can use the pretext that we we university stu-
dents studying for an exan. This nust be reinforced with tie cover of havirg
university books (r texts on hand.

5. In each unit there must be one person responsible for security. He must
first study the security conditims for the meetixg aid repcrt on this at the
beginning of the meeting.

6. The meetings mist necessarily be lrief but with enclgh time to cover all
the aspects. The meeting mst not be unnecessarily prolaued fcr inpatinent
matters.

7. There must be an agenda, givirg priority to the more important and urgent
aspects.

8. We trust have a plan for emergency retreat, specifying the duty of each
cmrade ad the order that nust be followed in the retreat. There oust be
a field team and protection dependirg on the legal situation of the coarades
aid the nature of the meeting.

9. We must have all personal identification documents on hand.

10. We must be careful abcut speaking loudly and whisperirg; both fcrms
equally attract attentim. We must avoid explicitly mentionirg words like
guerrillas, skunk, control, squeeze, socialisn, etc. When strainers approxh,
the subject must be changed naturally, not interruptixg the conversation
alruptly md loudly. Our language offers many resources for expressing the
same thing in very different ways.

11. We met not get upset when a courade calls attention to us by speaking
loudly or acting suspiciously.

12. It is not appropriate to have two or more collaborators meetirg at tre
same time since this would end compartmentalization. We met not take my

collaborata‘ to an organization hOuse where a militant lives. He should al-
ways use the resources of the collaborator.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. We must use unsuspicious security signals, the resources that the meeting
situation offers. Fcr exanple when there is a meetirg in a house, if the cur-
tains are closed, it is a signal of danger and if the curtains are open, it is
a signal of na‘malcy.

14. When a house is used, it is advantgeous to turn an the radio to limit
hea'im what we say outside. In open, public plazes, we met remember that
it is easy to hear what is said.

D) Liaisons

The term liaism is synonymous with cmtact but we use it for courades with
greater respmsibility in the crganization. An indispensable factor in every
clmdestine organization is to maintain vertical relations: between the mili-
tants and the unit, the unit and the persm respmsible for the sector and

this person and the members or the leadership. This verticalness meme trat
the detection, arrest and possible "singing" of a courade due to the abominable
methods that the enemy uses will not affect otter courades; that is. it will
not rave repercussims that mrt the rest of the a'gmization.

He mst correctly undestmd that this verticalness is not at all due to a
milita‘y hierarchy of ccmmd cr a desire fa' subcrdination or exclusive pri-
vileges. It is a vital necessity for a claidestine organization that waits
to develop a va‘ responsibly.

He met remember the following points:

1. We met not know the names or residences of these comrades nor meet unne-
cessarily; we nust eliminate tint risk.

2. We met avoid meeting other militants and persons connected with the
movement.

3. We must not learn add'esses, places of work or study of comrades; this
reduces the possibilities of denunciation to the minimum.

lo. He must always use pseudonyms.
5. He must not go directly to the houses of courades.

6. Houses must be used exclusively for the designated operational objectives.
They nust not be used for others and only strictly necessary conrades wst
know about them. For exanple, if it is a security house, meetings tr other
types of ativities must not be held there.

7. We must not interact lgally with other militants in a‘der not to entangle
clmdestine activity and legal activity. This would increase the possibili-
ties of‘ detection. We must not mix places where we do clandestine work with
legal activities. Depending m the nature of meetings and the responsibility
of the courades that attend them, we nust reach the meetirg place several
hows early or even a day ahead.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l‘a't III: Importance of‘ Legality in Clandestine Activity of the Militant

In these observations, we necessarily start with our criteria of general an
gmization, particularly clandestineness and secrecy. The imtance of this
aspect for the preservation, growth and development of our organization is
given. In passing, we should point out tint, uithcut knowledge aid mastery of

gality in Man, material and operational resamces which permits us to ex-
ploit them for our security. We also want to note some tectnical observations
to preserve security in order to avoid the mistakes tint He cannit most

A) Trree Errmeous Attitudes

Some of our militants, due to lack of understanding of the use of Iqality,

fall into trree erroneous attitudes in their clmdestine work. We will list
them azcordirg to their frequency:

1. In the first place, some comrades cmsider their lgal activity a neutral-
izing factor in their militancy aid this causes them uneasiness and mustra-
tion. They think lxal and clandestine activity are irreconcilable, parallel
hit exclusive circumstames; you are ixremediably in one or the other. They

2. There are courades who, cmsziwsly or unconsciously, underestimate legal-
ity and reveal their militancy. They express ideological positims that

3. In the third place (this does not happen in our crganization), Here we
people who seek immediate professicnalism which they cmsider a basic premise
to be able to carry out militant activity. They forget that professionalism
has a training process and a need for cmcrete a‘ganizational develonnent.

It cannot be a subjective decision by anyme or a way to evade personal,

We must not forget that, in the past, there were serious mistakes in organi-
zations that developed "open clandestineness." Those errcrs continue. There
are orgmizations that voluntarily tie their om hands because of an charms
contingent of "marked" members which results in isolation and detectim. This
does not permit rational exploitation of the vast energy of the people; even
more serious, it facilitates repressive aztivity.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unquestionably, this is due to more profound reasons: sectarianisn derived
from the class position of the leaders imbued with colonialisn and the ideo-
logical dogmatism of the left; strategic and tactical corncepts divorced from
the reality of the country-1egalistic and electcral ones at one extreme and
adventurous ones at the other extreme—ignorance of norms of clandestine work,
etc .

It is urgent and necessary to examine this situation. (Naturally, this is not
-the intention of these observations but we have done this in other materials.)
The blood of comrades who ended up firing shots without representing anything
cr anyone is still ﬂesh. There are "mass organizations" that. after dozens
of fights, lost what they had constructed with anch prolonged efforts in one
fateful moment. Whole teams of veteran leaders fell in a single criminal blow
of the repression that continually refines its methods and procedures of coun-

terinsurgency with imperialist advice.

We must not make a mistake in this. Our country is backward in structure tut
it is me of the most advanced in methods of mass repression. A large part
of the natimal budget, the plans for economic pseudodevelOpment, demagcgic
speeches, the genocidal actions of the enemy, etc., all respond to one motive:
counterinsnrgency.

B) Cover and Fretext: Resources and Guarantees for Clandestine Activity

The rural guerrilla has invaluable technical resources: the olive drab that
mimics the environment. vigilance, discipline, constant mobility, the tim-
sand eyes and ears of the people and the physical condition of the terrain.
(Of course, the resources of the guerrilla are not reduced to this alone.)

0n the urban front, it is materially impossible to obtain most of these re-
sources. He cannot dress in olive drab cr count directly on the support of
our neighbor. We we not subjected to constant combat discipline. Therefcre,
we must constantly use all the technical resources that the particular condi-
tions of the city give us. we trust remember that stern individual discipline
is decisive for the urban militant.

We also have effective technical resources, resources that we do not have to
invent or improvise since we would do a mediocre Job and we would create a
situation easily detectable by the enemy. These resources are within reach
and give us our own legal status: our work in a factory or office, our stu-
dies, our friends and relatives, etc.

At times this situation is handled nrorg, giving away concessions through an
incorrect interpretation of revolutionary conduct. If we handle it correctly,
though, it should not become an obstacle. 0n the contrary, it is a resonrce
we can really exploit fa' the development of our organization. ENerything
depends on how we understand and carry out our Iqal life. Our legal life
nust be creative, productive and progessively support our life as revolu-
tionaries. It must not be a legal life that condemns us to imobility, ﬁ'us-
tration or acconmnodatim. Legal life in this sense is completely antagonis-
tic to clandestine militancy. It is obvious that this implies deprivation
and effort. As we rave already noted, each one nust carry out his om figtt
for liberation.

61

FOR OFFICIAL 058 MY
The revolutionary is not someone who comes down from his "ivcry tower" to do
spectacular actions alone, isolated from the economic and social activity of
the system. This inevitably ends in dogmatic and subjective positims. Oar
objective is to keep ourselves, under legal cover, in areas We there we
possibilities, areas which represent sectcrs of orgaiizational interest. It
is not our intention to isolate ourselves as was dme mistakenly in the past.
This gives us four very importamt advantages.

1. The first is cover for claidestine activity (we will discuss this now).

2. The second is cover for enlistment, inccrporation and crganizatim of new
people, adapting and chameling the spontaneous sympathy that our actions
arouse. "We should not close the oven after the first batch is done." That
permits us to penetrate the sector of interest with security, naturalness and
selectivity, this preserving quality in organizational growth.

3. The third is to pay the conventional expenses of the organization ttrough
our legal resources. This is important because it permits us to use all our
fcrces for political, organizatimal and developmental tasks, avoidixg the
aroblem in the past when mere subsistence mmopolized the efforts of the
organizations.

lo. The fmrth permits us to directly experience the problems and needs of
tie people in the different sectors. It permits us to experience tie social,
military aid political activity in the area. It permits us to exploit the
rich flow of different types of infcrmation that we can extract by mobiliza-
tion in all the social and productive sectors and in the institutions that
interest us. In this way, we can rationally open the channels of popular
participation and we can extract work criteria in harmony with concrete
circumstances.

We can use these major resources for clmdestine wank—cover and pretext.

Cover means the legal cover for our clandestine xtivity. It must be solid
and consistent so that it safeguards us from any suspicion. We trust take
care of it and reinforce it day after day.

In general, for militants on the urban front, the cover is work, home. social
relations, studies, etc. Nevertheless, there are small errors that make us
vulnerable, making us the focus of interest for enemy activity. Therefa'e,
we must take special care in preserving it and reinforcing it day after day.

The cwer is a constant and stable resowce like an "intentionally cmtrolled
double nature."

Pretext means a tactical, operational resource adapted to the needs of the
specific task. Naturally, it must also be adapted to our persmality. The
pretext because a coherent, legal and inoffensive explanation for cmcrete
clandestine activities (whether cmtrol, a meeting, material, etc.) blending
in with the work and circumstances in which we develop the work.

62

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The pretext nust be prepared beforehand to prevent possible questioning and
verification by the enemy. It can be profound, serious or ligtt, dependirg
on the legal level of the comrade and his task. We must express it with ease
and natu'alness, without nervousness and without giving details of times,
places, persons, areas, etc., which would not be normal for an ordinary
indivimal.

Knowletge of the operatimal situation where the activity will be developed
is indispensable for the pretext: the social atmosphere, neiends, residences,
enemy posts, etc. He can also count on resources to reinfa'ce it: clothirg,
wigs, uustaches, glasses, etc.

Trrough the above notations, we can measure the importance of legality and the
ore we nust take to preserve it. It is the armcr that makes us invisible to
the enemy and r'ives us good conditions for relaxation and psychOIOgical and
operatimal stability, permitting us to penetrate, confuse aid destroy the
enemy with the least sacrifice.

Anyme who mrts his legality, whetrer through inmaturity, negligence or lazk
of discipline, coumits a serious mistake. The price is often his om life
and always turts the interests of the revolution. Using the classic imge,
the fish voluntarily bites the hook and dies outside the popular sea.

C) Don't Give Indications to the Enemy

The enemy is not omipotent and cannot monita' all the individuals in a so-
ciety. However, he does maintain vigilance on centers and persons of inter-
est: centers openly Opposed to the regime or naive and talkative people who
boast about their position as revolutionaries. A militant can reveal a sign
of his clandestine activity which makes the repression watch his movements in
order to detect, infiltrate and eliminate the largest number of revolution-
aries. Therefore, the security of the militant is not sibject to fate or bad
luck or the infallibility of the enemy; it is his absolute responsibility.

We feel tlnt the security of the militant is guaranteed to a great degree if
all the security norms are observed with discipline includirg the cover and
pretext. In this way, he can operate in the midst of the enemy without the
enemy realizing it.

Below are some examples of indications to the enemy of our clandestine
xtivity:

1. Carelessness in the use, transportation and protection of the materials
of the organization.

2. Wequenting and openly actirg in centers of interest to enemy intelli-
gence like student associations, political parties of the opposition, unions,
etc.

3. A failty counter-check or trite verifications, asswning suspicims posi-
tions or making unnecessary violent treak offs; becanirg easy prey to

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
emotims, making ideological attacks in inappropriate situations aid becoming
involved in unproductive situations without weighing the infcrmation tint the
enemy can get fran them.

lo. El'gqing in relatims with militants or Imam leaders of tie public left;
lrandishirg or radicalism at the slightest oppa‘tunity.

5. Using incorrect places for contacts, meetings, passes, etc., and cowerixg
unnecessarily at enemy movements.

6. Underestimating the importance of the cover and not givirg a pretext fcr
each militant aztivity.

7. Passing m tactical or strategic infa‘matim to give more force to what
we say when we begin political inca'poration work.

8. Isolatim ourselves and not maintaining good neighbor relations, not con-
cerning ourselves with winning their sympathy.

9. Participating in criminal, drunken, scandalous acts, etc.

We have an objective malysis of society and a strategic concept whose valid-
ity is deamstrated to us daily in practice. We have a work style cmsistent
with our ideological and political statements. We are becoming strager or-
ganizationally step by step through ow quiet, daily activity which is fmit-
ful although without "strong emotions." In a word, we we solidly layirg the
foundations of the revolution, not a self-proclaimed revolutim trrough con-
venient pamphlets. '

Therefore, our revolutionary conduct trust adapt itself to the dynamics of the
process and the needs of the present sme of preparation for war. He met
not let ourselves be cwried away by.spectacular actions which is the easy
and irresponsible (and tragic) way not to do anything. The popular war does
not allow unilateral actions; it is a complex and dynamic situation where
the many potentials and initiatives of our people must be exploited.

To conclude these observations, we will say tint we need militants with legal
status on which all our armed systems can be solidly suppa'ted. We emphasize
our opinion that study, information and the armed expression have equal im-
portance in the different tasks of the wa‘ (alttmgh with different cha'ac-
teristics). One could not exist without the other; all are criented toward
the same objective and are part of the enormous popular impetus in the revo-
lutionary war.

We can see the mutual understanding and dialectic identity between lqality
and clandestineness in its full dimension. We know how to rank activities
and problems with the sincere conviction that the interests of the people
have pricrity. (The disiplinary 31d ideolqical training of an mcmcemed
person (r someone without productive experience is ha'der; in the end, the
workers make the revolution.)

61;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Part IV: Compartxnentalization

Although this aspect is different from the previous ones, it is also of pri-
mary importance for all our work plans. 01‘ course, it is nothirg new hit its
neglect lrings catastrophic results. It mist be a cornerstone in the wcrk
method of every clandestine a-ganization.

A) P“.itica1 and Operational Work

Oompa-tmentalizatim is essentially a method of protection and preservatim
of work and resources as well as the security of the militants or cadres (the
most important). It consists fundamentally in keepirg knowleQe and informa-
tion of the operation restricted to the aspects and responsibilities of the
work of each person.

It mist be stated that we mention operational work as an area of restricticn
but not political wcrk. We must demarcate the fields well to avoid connisim
or mismderstandirw .

We understand that everything related to statements, lines, positions, gen-
eral opinions and orientations within the organizatim belong to the scOpe of
political work. There should not be compartmentalization here although there
is responsibility for the militants cr cadres based on the use made of it in
publicity, coununication and circulation, particularly outside the
organization.

This precaution must be well understood since it is tied to security and
corresponds to a very specific aid vital need in this stage. The organiza-
tion must be preserved fran treach of trust, denunciation disguised as "ideo-
logical battle" or any risk of this type. This is achieved trrough collec-
tive vigilance and the correct use of our materials and positions.

There is a boundary that is not marked well initially because political and
operational factors directly affect it. This includes new incorporations,
resources obtained, relations established, new places included, etc. We un-
derstand that canpartmentalizaticn must prevail almost automatically although
the infer-nation supplied is general. or course, there will be enceptions
depending on the case but these must be exceptions, not the norm.

is) Operational Aspects

The operational aspects clearly include tires points:

What is being done a- planned?

How and where is it being done?

Who and how many are doing it?

He include strategic aid tactical aspects on this list. Obviously, compart-
mentalization here must be strict and does not allow doubts a" whimsical

65
FOR OFFICIAL use can
inmrgretatims. Violation shows extreme irrespmsibility, disloyalty (1‘
bad faith that can become treason. in these cases, the causes do not matter
if the effects are the same.

1. The first gz.‘vi:‘.t cmers the particular work plans that are being carried
out or will be in the future.

For anyone who is not failia‘ with security criteria, this type of cautim

cm appear exaggerated and extreme. It suffices to say, in explanatim, that
:he slightest indicat ion or detail of this type, even if isolated, is a lode
of informatim about us to a good intelligence analyst, a lode of greater in-

terest or more important than finding a weapons depot or recording nanes 01‘
militants.

FNen if one believes the opposite, frequently there is not enOtgh experience
to evaluate the significance and importance that apparently useless and unim-
portant information can have in the hands of the enemy. He must not think
naively that the inf ormatim cl‘annels of the enemy are limited to its direct
agents. 'A‘e oculd give the example of a system of sound waves like an echo.

t is not necessary to directly hear the noise mt only to follow the echo to
determine what happened. That is exactly what happens with intelligence net-
wa'ks; they obtain appreciable valuable information in this way.

2. The second question related to where and how thirgs are dme eaters meth-
od. However, it is not reduced exclusively to that since, at the same time,

it shows the type of resources that are available or planned to deve10p which
is very important for obvious reasons.

bet as always remember that the essence of clandestineness aid the point of
its effectiveness are enemy ignorance about us and skillful and consistent

the paragraph above. Any indication in this sense enormously facilitates
enemy activity.

the above observations must help us correctly orient work bit never paralyze
it, immbilize it or lini: it. Irresponsibility is as harmful as a persecu-
t:~:n complex. There are a thouM .d opportunities that can and must be ex-
ploited no matter how fine the net of the enemy is.

.3. Compartmentalizaticn to sai‘lguard the identity of who and how many do
certain work is extrawdararily important. The life and security of these
and other curred—es calf-111;; depend on it.

If we look at the function of operativeness and work possibilities, if the
'3”C..:y can ltcate those win can do legal wk and clandestine fight, it ime»
niately limits work possibilities and better mobilization and yield. There-
l‘ure, this aspect of canparunentalization is always in effect.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C) Attitudes Of' the Militant

To complete our view and practice of compartmentalization, we trust add some
ideas aimed especially at the militant.

The militant will have to rid himself of every feeling of suspicion or mis-
plxed sensitivity. The fact that information an work and plans of the organ-
ization is kept from him nust not be interpreted as lack of confidence in him
in particulan Rather it must be understood as an important and indispensable
work method. Instead of botherirg him, he oust aid its fulfillment.

There are other mistaken attitudes that must be corrected. There are courades
who share information that they have, not related to their specific work and
without any reason to pass it on, with others with whom they rave particular
"friendship and confidence." We want to establish this objective that con-
partmentalization mist not be disrupted just because the me with whom we
share it is a conrade in our complete confidence.

Lastly, we trust cultivate discretion so that even if we are azcidentally de-
positories of some information, we fully guarantee that it will not come out
of us improperly for any reason.

Conc lusicn

Our revolutionary responsibility must prevent us from giving the enemy indi-
cations of our clandestine activity through lazk of fulfillment of these se-
curity norms aid others that pra;tice itself will teach us. Otherwise, the
enemy wild focus his activity on us which would constitute a serious danger
to our lives, limit our movements and our revolutionary activity and hurt the
security and preservation of the crganization.

He mst practice all these norms daily. We trust observe them with persever-
ance and respmsibility until they become part of our very life.

7717
C80: “DO/00%

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

RAF LEADER ON CONCEPT OF URBAN CUERRILLA: BLACK SEPTEMBER
Malmo TEXTE: DER RAF in German 1977 pp75-lll, 337-367, 598-600
lfea§7 Chapter X-Andreas on 26 August 1975

That happened on 26 August

A. was able to speak then-~interrupted by Printing only 21 times-,
because a delegation of French lawyers attended the trial as obser-
vers. he analyzes the course of the trial from its contradiction

--correctly as was demonstrated 7 weeks later
--of course confirmed by the Third Senate of the Federal Court:

We are excluded.

The problem with the motion--at this and any juridical attempt by the attorneys to
defend us (and in the meantime themselves, their legal function and. within it, the
ruin of the constitution)--is its hopelessness, something already demonstrated in

the fact that Printing announced he.vould reject this defense motion for dismissal
in 6 hours, even before it was argued.

The trial cannot be legally stayed since it has been conducted illegally or, in
Haihofer's words, supralegally conducted for 5 years. and conducted not by the

apparatus of justice but as a function of a militarily conceived counterrevolution-
ary mobilization by the executive.

I am using a quotation from Herold at the hessenforum--seeing that he has been
using us so excessively for 5 years--for example to bloat his apparatusi Herold
asks himself about the causes of terrorism, thereby distorting the concept in line
with the needs of psychological warfare--turned upside down as we have already ex-
plained here, because urban guerrilla is to be understood neither as the political
concept of terrorism nor its action in terms of military tactics in the historical
and military definition of this concept. Herold thus asks at the ﬂessenforum '

"whether, in its outward form in Germany and the entire world it is a '.oduct of
the actors brains, of the Baaders and Heinhofs-s strong plural-or whether terror-
ism is actually a reflection of certain social situations in the Western uorld--and
the Eastern world also-~and that terrorism, so to speak, in its superstructure
simply reflects problems that have an objective existence.“

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This must be commented-(because it gets difficult when one gets involved: It must
be dissolved; and Schily is to be reproached for not dissolving it)--that all these
categories are being used wrongly. How silly it sounds for a cop to try and ex-
press himself in Marxist lingo; after all, superstructure here can only mean the
state superstructure of the method of production, of the economy; that term cannot
be used this way in reference to a revolutionary organization--and so that turns
out to be the truth, that we have explained a few days ago-~state terrorism indeed
reflects the problems of capital, existing at the base, as objectives: "Ripeness
of the tendency,” crisis, dissolution of the law of values, economic, political and
ideological repercussions of the wars of liberation, and so on--

While the strategy of the urban guerrilla only-only, he ssys-csn arise only from
the social reflex of the contradictions he calls problems, as a revolutionary
transmission. That would for once be the correct definition.

But then he goes on to ask

"...Uhether terrorism in Germany is not an indication of the objective inevitability
of a historic development, or, to put it briefly, whether terrorism here does not
represent a new kind of substitute war, popular war, guerrilla warfare, whether it
replaces the great war. If we are dealing here with objective rather than subjec-
tive factors, we must adopt a different method of dealing with it, it is then no
good to clout heads or, as some people demand, cut off heads, then it is necessary
to affect precisely the historic causes, the inevitabilities."

It seems to me important to repeat that this reveals two approaches, especially,
that is the approach "to clout heads," and that is the line Printing pursues by his
isolation order, and that is the approach taken by the federal prosecutor general's
office for 3 years now, by torment, by torture, and there is the sttempt--l will
explain that in greater detail lster-to cope with the problem--such as it appears
to Herold-~within legal standards.

We note here briefly--the reason is the break between the base--the socialization
of production, international concentration of capital and superstructure--here to
maintain the bourgeois state in its function, the capitalist production relation
against the worldwide trend of productive forces toward socialism. As a general
definition, guerrilla becomes possible as a revolutionary strategy. is generated
and advances in the course of this break.

At the same time this break foreordains reaction. The governmentally and institu-
tionally handled strategy of capital is able only to try to settle the contradic-
tion by fascist means. This fascism differs from the former--nationalist and ob-
tuse fascism insofar as it does not take over the state and pervades society as a
reactionary strategy of national monopolies, of national capital-filtered through
nationalist moVement/mobilization. Instead, consonant with the trend of the in-

ternational process of concentration and monopolisstion, as the strategy of the

leading capital, that is U.S.cspitsl, it.bends to its pur se the national state as
the function of its world internal politics and, by way 0 the national state, per-

vades the national societies. In other words the national state becomes the engine
of internationally organised capital against the nation, against the people. The
bourgeois constitutional state as the expression of class contradictions within

69
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

the national framework must be dissoIVed or transformed by the strong state as it

is described nowadays-~in other words fascist~-in the antagonistic development be-
7ween the socialization of production and international capital concentration;other-
wise the dissolution of capital positions disintegrates it in the ripeness of this
contradiction and is abolished by revolution.

This is the contradiction within which and against, in other words by revolutionary
initiative. by armed politics in the urban centers, is surrendered the semblance-
and this trial is exemplary here--, I say the semblance. bourgeois ideology. the
bourgeois conception of the state. De-ideologisation is an essential transmission
of insurrection--breaking down against its strategy is the governmental apologia
(of the natural law) of capital-~breahing down against it is the project of the
total constitutionslization of the class contradiction, and the state is compelled
openly to appear as the tool of warring capital, antagonistic toward society.

This process already foreshadows how the attack of small groups assumes a different

and new quality by the means of an open countermovement--a quality in the course of
which it may turn into a mass movement.

In the contradiction fascismzrevolution our politics represent a concrete reflecﬁon
of that which Herold calls 'objective problems,’ in order to offer his apparatus
and his strategy of turning society into a police society as the program of reac-
tionary accomplishment. I would say that this is particularly evident in Berold’s
case, because he is also the man to conduct the war here, ultimately. he says--
"the tendency of turning war into a police action" and "shift of military conflicts
to the interior" and--I am the man who has to run this war, therefore give me the
tools, give me the money, and above all give me the political power. He says that
constantly. For his military apparatus he asserts a "privilege of social acknow-
ledgment"--that is his creation of a totalitarian term and he requests legislative
authority vested in the constitution--in other words he demands to make laws if

the existing ones are inadequate for his requirements. H thereby demands politial
power. In fact this reflects the strategic compulsion of reaction to dissolve the
distinction between police and politics.

That is how we must interpret it, and we can only see it as a whole, when he de-
fines the issue of the 'objective causes' as significant for 'the relation between
police and politics,‘ for 'who needs to combat terrorism'-politics or the police,
and he then follows on quite naturally: 'I mean politics.‘ Justice falls by the
wayside, and he can leave it there because--and in this he is quite correct-~in
actions against urban guerrilla it is completely organized by the political police,
becomes a function of the police.

Of course the historic causes he wishes to affect, presumably with such subtle
tools as the new police law, will escape him--the system he serves and the machine-
ry he is expanding do not affect the historic inevitabilities, they react within
them, and this reaction develops the resistance it is meant to overcome.

Herold propagates the police state, and that is also one of the grotesque constel-
lations, that explains the deformation of the imperialist state where the proceed-
ings are taking place: It is Herold, the policeman, who wrestles for legal stand-
ards against the guerrilla--ultimately international legal standsrds-because they

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USEIONLX

functional with regard to his claim to authority. While Printing, the judge-in
his inability to arrive at the concept of his object, must liquidate them in the
attempt to cope with an explicit confrontation in the puddle of a criminal trial.
where he can chart the course. Retold is at the height of reaction, but both ap-
proaches reflect the legal vacuum and the gap in legitimacy in which the trial is
run--since the first action of the RAF. Both characterize the trial as military
execution, and both are the expression of the contradiction within which the state
can react only against its constitutionality. Emergency laws, professional inter-
dictions, special legislation against insurrection.

-- (the state apparatus) he breaks the constitution, and in this break any ideolo-
gical accommodation is destroyed. All that remains is the ideological surrogate

of the state security state-psychological warfare--it is the content of this event
and therefore this has nothing to do with righteousness, the state here uses every
means at its disposal-and Schmidt has said often enough that any means is good
enough-and that means all organized means of repression, lies, manipulation, tech-

nology-

The self-portrait of imperial omnipotence against the histgric tendency of our po-
litics, consciousl articulated in insurrection, when it iimperial omnipotence--
translator's not: ,turns antagonistic to society, in other words illegitimate.

It is the same development from which the guerrilla derives its legitimacy, the
meaning of its politics, from the failure of legitimacy of the ruling power.

Because the political goals of the guerrilla and that which is conveyed by their
method and structure, arouse expectations and attitudes oriented to use value, not
exchange value; the latter's basis becomes invalid and corroded in the objective
trend to the socialization of production. It loses its social sense, the material
base of its ideological justification. This explains what a false analysis of the
conflict Inst represent as an exaggerated, panicky and excessive reaction of the
state to the politics of the guerrilla, in its tendency in fact as a conflict

about the meaning of political practice. Because the state--as a function of mono-
polistic capital in and from the development of its crisis--is compelled in this
conflict to extend by administrative planning its control to social sectors earlier
eluding its grasp; in the function of maintaing the rule of the exchange value it
is forced toward such expansion.

As a result counterstrategies against de-ideologicalization are necessarily devel-
oped, designed to compensate the above proportional (state) need for legitimacy; a
consequence of its administration of social reproduction that earlier proceeded out-
side its control.

In this development the state attempts to produce the material reality and basis
snatched from its legitimacy ideologies in the process of the nationalization of
society, artificially as a surrogate ideology by psychological warfare, that is by
the planned expansion of its repression. However, repression compels subjection
without being able to legitimize it. On the contrary--growing with the resistance
to it is the legitimacy of that resistance.

Guerrilla politics, illegality, is the opposite pole to the nationalization of so-
ciety. It therefore attracts total state repression but also all hopes for libera-
tion. In addition let us say that the project of the state‘s total pervasion of

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

society--the fascist tendency to the total state, is a process qualitatively dis-
tinct from old-fashioned fascism, because it is scientifically conceived and orga-
nized.

(Should we ever get to a basically conceptual terminology, I will explain that--as
a strategy at least in the conception, though not in reality, because the facts are
the structures within which reaction shapes strategies without being able to arrive
at a strategic notion-in this connection it is crucial how the strategies of re-
pression are developed from the alienated production process as such.)

Last week Schmidt said that the vital threats to the Western industrial countries
are of an ”economic and psychological nature,"--this is what he was talking about.
He, the apologist of the state, psychologises society as a whole in this one sen-
tence .

He replaces politics by psychology as one of the social processes and, thereby,
programs the scientifically orchestrated repression and psychological warfare-for

-ly he also says something about its conditions. The trend toward antagonism be-
tween society and imperialist state, between productive forces and the production
relation, reflected by the state.

comes a capitalist in the increasing significance of his economic role not only as
a forcible (despotic apparatus, monopoly of force) and political (and ideological)
communication-but also as economic communication in the sectors where capital is
needed for social reproduction but which yield inadequate profits). It is just
this antagonism that makes the state react with the fasciststrstegies of internal
security. They determine the conception of this method and the trial here in the
greatest detail. The state represents itself here as the state in the class war at
home--the trial termed by Brueckner the inner-state declaration of hostilities-in
which every political opposition Outside and inside the ideological state apparatus

tiona was there conceived and constructed in accordance with the instructions of
the federal prosecutor's office. The federal prosecutor's office remarks here
"where do they get that from?" It is obvious they want to hide the thing. and if
it surfaces anyway, they display police reflexes--but let's go on--I am talking
about that because just this is a perfect example, most instructive--it is expres-
sed in the nature of the trial as a show trial and even more in the methods used-:
The compulsion to maintain a permanent and transparent lie, to manipulate, the need
to fetter us, such as has been customary so far, the really quite automatic breach
of the trial order, the brusque rejection of all defense motions--actually not a
single defense motion has been admitted in 3% months, not even those concerning

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

small details. it is expressed in the malice on which Prinzing's conduct of the
trial depends.

To return to Herold. He says--and by this he also talks about the program and the
difficulties 'the trend. ..is the conscious build-up of counterforce with the aim
precisely in a trial where the hope is for spontaneity at one or the other stage,
to direct the loyalties of the citizens to itself.

That is why increasingly used in this entire struggle are not only military catego-
ries but also more and more categories of international law. so to speak.’ And he
cites a legal expert who says: 'He are here not simply dealing with a type of
crime but with an international conflict that would require those fighters to be
granted the benefits of the Geneva Convention.’

(Oh well, it doesn't look like that here, the benefits considered here are special
cells: is that thing, that execution machine in Bruchsal that was ready even before
the verdict.)

Herold is looking sideways at the legal standarda--international ones--after the
internal legal standards were dissolved in war in the conception of internal reac-

tion.

And he surely does that in acknowledgment of those public opinion polls in 1972,
1973 and 1976 that sometimes turned up almost 20 percent--referring to the adult
population-as RAP sympathiaers--and that is after all lo times more than voted for
the party of the interior minister. Of course we do not claim that this represents
a solid or even tangible political base, such a public opinion poll. In fact we
consider it useless. But at least they show (after all they were not conducted for
our benefit, but for the state, the state reaction takes these opinion polls very
seriously indeed; we can trace back very accurately in the respective escalation of
the hunt, how these public opinion polls have been built into the mobilization pro-
gram), therefore at least they show that the state tends to develop resistance to
the extent--directs loyalty toward us, by having to try and cer1 it by an unlaw-
ful mobilization such as the hunt for us.

0f course-~given the information standard of his machine--llerold presumes that no-'
thing can be done by the apparatus of justice. There is the fact of the continuity
of urban guerrilla in the PRC, it is not destroyed by our arrest-on the contrary

.it is stronger than in 1972 and anyone with knowledge of the historic analogies
of insurrection is well aware that it is furthered by inept spectacles such as
Stamheim. Insofar the entire concept of the trials has foundered on the actual
development.

It is not as if there were a proper manhunt--they cannot even make an attempt to do
so--I think that has become more and more obvious in these 3 months--the judiciary
organs necessarily seek in prisons and pretrial fortresses to pursue a militarily
conceived operation by unsuitable means-us a military conflict. Admittedly with
prisoners isolated for the past 35 years. That is how I would also explain the ab-
ject propagandiat efforts represented by such a trial.

Now to the notion of the entire matter.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Once the judiciary conducts a war openly and in a public function, it liquidates,
together with the legal Jtandards that legitimate it ideologically as the interme-
diary between state and society, the entire ideological justification for the con-
cept of the constitutional state and thereby sharpens the contradiction it is sup-
posed to mediate. It turns into a judiciary of arrangements, a tool of counterin-
surgency.

Evident and comprehensible in this split--and here particularly obvious, is the im-
perialist state as a function of capital against any attempt--in its psychologized

propaganda and psychological warfare merely reaction to the contradiction--against

any attempt to assert its social legitimation.

It could be that Herold means this contradiction which, historically, has always
aroused resistance. while Prinzing who understands nothing still continues to
"clout heads" by his isolation order and now the attempt to save himself by having
us declared psychiatric cases. However, even psychiatry is unsuitable, is no solu-
tion--it cannot provide him with legitimation--what, admittedly it can get him as

a consequence of his approach--in view of the personality structure of political
prisoners--is this: It may destroy us physically. "Strike off the heads."
Prinzing succeeded in doing that in Wittlich. I do not consider this an exaggera-
tion-nobody who followed the trial can possibly consider it an exaggeration--be-
cause after all what is there for all to see is that this unlawful judge--in his
unlawful step that is supposed to settle the contradiction in hour heads--but tor-
ments and psychiatry, though it did not cone off there-but he beat us down physi-
cally. In this context it occurs to us that the suffering of these so prisoners

in 3 years, at the limits as Schmidt thinks, of limitless constitutionality at all
levels ultimately has a dialectic for us: Because the heads were not to be cracked
despite the use of every possible means in 8Peein 09119 the daily torture of

6 months forcible feeding, the torments of the padded cells, and so on-this demon-
stration just did not work, the state's destructive interest in the prisoners was
bound to progress--(up to its architectural expression in specialcelh of‘Bruchsal.
and 15 others), the trial had to be dragged out until the prisoners were unfit for
trial, but resistance also had to arise--as was shown in Berlin and Stockholm.

And because it did not help to clout heads--the group of prisoners was in any case
more resistant to psychological destruction than to the physical consequences of
psychological torture. Prinzing's trial is running agrOund in propagandist terms
on our resistance and in terms of trial management on our physical weakness.

The solution and watching how he steers toward it--that still remains to him, in
fact clearly emerged for probably everybody to see on the last day of the trial-

Our unlawful exclusion; a journalist discovered--the coup of the court, after it
so carefully prepared the trial by the unlawful liquidation of the defensibility
(and the defense) of the prisoners. it is now reduced to excluding us, in order to
get rid of the contradiction developed by this indefensibility and unfitness to
trial in the course of the trial, but this also dooms to failure the attempt to
stage a trial here. At least as the attempt to provide that section of government
reaction organized as the public with the legal outlines in terms of propaganda and
thereby the legitimation that the military conception of state mobilization had to
swallow in 5 years of unlawful measures. It cannot work-and that is the insoluble
contradiction in which the event dragged on--because revolutionary politics are not

7h
roe omcm. use ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not subject to justice. Political justice does not conquer the contradiction, the
confrontation it is supposed to try—it expresses it-rhere by the coqlete subser-
vience of the court to state security and government. No bourgeois justice is
dealt with here--a military pragmatism, organized in the smallest detail by the
executive, is being executed. All one has to do is look around.

Prinzing is already being reproached for not properly running the show--he is be-
coming dysfunctional because the traditional function of the judge is getting blur-
red in his brutal manipulation of the trial. Getting to be a problem is his mysti-
fication between the interests of his class, to make prevail fascism as the legiti-
Iation of all social relations--in other words by means of and by way of the form
of the constitutional state, and the open breach of law that is constantly visible
in the organization of this trial. It is Prinzing's contradiction that, in his
capacity as judge, he is supposed to convey something that at least bears a sea-
blance of justice--Busche put his finger on that-because his function here is
crucial, in the form of the law to transcend-"here the constitutional trial--its
content--as the systea of rules by which capital controls and rules its social re-
production process: As the propagandist project of the trial.

In fact that could be saved only by dismissing the charges-~which would be a legal
act of resistance against the state security service, itself not sure of its facts
-otherwise he would not sit here as an unlawful judge, as has been nade known in
the meantime.

It had to happen that Printing, since bourgeois law is no longer his frane of ref-
erence, since he left it as per the scenario of the public prosecutor's office--
certainly no later than after Holger's death, but probably already with the hanky-
panky about his chair-that this judge was bound more and more openly and directly
to cling to the powers that be-the line “under, Bubsck, Vogel, Schmidt. Re dan-
gles like a puppet on the wires of the executive, in this case Buback's, pushing
the thing through at any price and with any means available-until it finally ends
in the Special cells at Bruchsal.

By now we are having a kind of fun with it--the trial--the proceedings turn into
an antagonism to its function in the entire RAP trial--to that what was planned
here, what is not working in Stammheim, the representation of inviolate bourgeois
right--(as, so to speak, the eternal natural inevitability of the production rela-
tion it is protecting) and the senselessness of any resistance to it--all that is
happening is the demonstration of its decay and with it the decay of the class for
which Prinzing--the court here, is working.

The RAF--the guerrilla--is not subject to judicial proceedings because the state of
capital as the reactionary side of the contradiction is compelled to persecute us,
the guerrilla in the development of the social crisis and aske an example of us
because we offer the possibility and topicality of a revolutionary develop-ent.

Necessarily in the categories of warfare, because the urban.guerrilla, our politics,
our strategy is part of the worldwide (international) anti-imperialist war of libe-

ration that determines the crisis in the metropolises.

Herold once more-he tumbled to it, 'I see here a process, objectively begun; it
is worldwide and in a certain way has as its aim the turning over of war to the

75
ron omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

police, while major wars between nations are increasingly losing their importance.
because they have lost their power to determine and make history, a new type of
discharge of aggression has arisen that can be understood only from the internation-
al aspect.’ Just so.

... Hhat he offers there is the criminalistic adaptation of the crininological con-
cept of history of American fascists, ideologically founded of course in American
psychology-~‘discharge of aggression.’

We think that the poverty of his ideas is rather comical--the poverty of his compre-
hension and his borrowing from American counterideology shows on whose behalf he is
conducting this war--as part of worldwide U.S.reaction, for American imperialism.

Anyway--at least the cops hawking of international imperialist criminology to help
the people here, the Prinzings who wish to run a political show trial actually as
a criminalistic farce, because they don't even have enough brains of their own.

I will briefly contrast this with our concept of the conflict: If fascism as re-
presented by Herold and Schmidt-~as an institutional and governmental strategy of
capital, is the reactionary expression of the production relation become antagonis-
tic at the international level, internationalism

of the insurrection, the construction of a political and ailitary front in the cen-
ters of imperialism, is the revolutionary reflection of the break in the metropolis-
es and its strategy--or it will be.

1his process of insurrection is the fair proceeding we value, that we aim for, and
we are responsible only to it and we have to answer to it alone.

Chapter XI--Andreas on 18 June

Later Henck (the prison psychiatrist) admitted upon examination that
isolation could be said to be torture but, as such, represented a
'philosophical problem.‘ Prinzing and the federal prosecutors inter-
rupted Andreas l7 times--to prevent him from developing a reasoned
argument. shows the torture/isolation in political terms, that is a
direct part of it--also explains the gaps, and it clearly shows what
is happening here every day.

The course of events was just that: Special cells-and when that did not work, no
confession was produced but the consequences of isolation became apparent--the at-
tempt to send Ulrike to a closed psychiatric ward for 8 weeks-~‘for observation'-
as Goette said on behalf of the federal prosecutor's office. “hen thgt did not
work--the attempt at forcible anesthesia and forcible scintigraphy 11/: The fed-
eral court's notion to have her skull opened to find out where the thoughts come
from--the concrete project of the federal prosecutor's office was stereotactic
surgical intervention in the brain; Hitter was to carry out forcible anesthesia and
forcible scintigraphy, and Loew offered himself for the brain surgery-~both Rodutg/
Saar University. when aobilizstion prevented that project--special cells again,
the hunger strike, the campaign. As reaction to the campaign the law which allows
the exclusion of defense counsel and trials in the absence of the prisoners, in

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

other words the removal of the last remnants of public restraint; because the 'hear-
ing' at which unfitness to plead is noted, is not held in public. The court become
part of the special treatment--as in Stanﬁeim.

Last week in Zweibruecken it was demonstrated in Carl's (Manfred Grashof) case that
prisoners can be made unfit to plead at the compulsory examination before such a
hearing.

He certainly do not want to be identified with the argument on torture as developed
by Schily's motion. I mean we do not make ourselves its object. To define the
term torture by way of the one who is tortured is an ambivalent attempt, and it is
impossible because here it can refer only, and withOut consequences, to the horror
of a liberal interpretation of the constitutional state about the deformation of
this state, and this deformation is inevitable because it derives from the very
contradictions of capital movement. The imperialist state is bound to be clearly
reflected in the state countermovement against revolutionary politics, a counter-
movement compelled to torture. It is merely obscured by the indignation of degene-
rate bourgeois antifascism.That is already so weak in its corruption by social de-
mocracy or fettered by revisionism that is not even able to conduct a relevant ar-
gunent.

An example of the old miserable story--how it entered the service of the state in
the hope of changing it--instead the state changed it, used it as long as it was
opportune to escape radicalization and finally liquidated it as the reflection of
traditional bourgeois ideology, bourgeois humanism, bourgeois freedoms, that inter-
rupts the expanded reproduction process of capital in the sphere of ideological
state systems.

Torture can be discussed only within the texts and the strategy that will abolish
it: Those of revolutionary politics. From the standpoint of bourgeois antifascism
the babble about it becomes a plaint and ends by accusing the victim of torture.

Of course isolation is torture. Lived as he lives it who is exposed to it, it is

a slow and deliberate process of the destruction of revolutionary identity and
therefore more terrible than any physical pain—~and we have experience of that too.
In the trap of the consumer society-~the trap of alienated production and aliens-
ted consumption with its cultural and psychological communications against which
alone identity can develop, political consciousness is always a process that has

to be fought for. This process is to be broken up and revised in the agony of iso-
lation-by the withdrawal of its prerequisites, practical life, conscious social
interaction, the prisoner is deprived of his history. his history, insofar as it
is his conscious, his political history.

That is also the end of his personality.

As history is the process that shapes personality. he loses himself with it. Not
because he loses his memory (although that also occurs), but because the ability to
respond to it, reflect it, recognize it, is destroyed. he becomes incapable of re-
acting to that which is inflicted on him, happening to him.

77
FIN!(HN1CJAI.USIZCNQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The apparatus turns into the relationship. He regresses and struggles helplessly
between the mystifications of bourgeois socialization that catch up with him and

beleager him such as he is--alone--as a total, hostile and no longer comprehensible
power.

He turns white, as we said, victim (and thus possibly also innocent) at the moment
he stops struggling--is no longer able to struggle. ”

And it is the nature of his misery that he foresees that moment long before it hap-
pens and knows that isolation for years on end is just as unequivocal as a shot,

only unimaginable and--that also is part of the method--this unimaginableness-
much more painful.

"Man, in the most literal sense, is a soon politicon, not merely a social animal
but an animal able to assume a separate identity only within society. The produc-
tion of the isolated individual outside society-a rarity which may happen to some-
one civilized accidentally lost in the whilderness, who already by his own dynamism
has social powers-~is as much of a chimera as the development of language without
individuals who live and talk together." (Outlines)

It took us quite a long time in our special cells before we recognized the method
and design of isolation. I would say that this measure has its logic in the out-
look of the entire system: The compulsion to react by annihilation to the contra-
diction it generates, bccause it understands it as its ultimate destruction. Special
treatment destroys that which could be "reeducated." It is not a product of for-
cible socialization-~though that also can settle its obvious problem--social defect
--only by the destruction inside the prisoner.

The attenpt so to interpret and justify the thing and the torture involved in it
comes from Klug, now senator for justice in Hamburg. Of course, because he is a
corrupt liberal mask--who whitewashes its dity job with the illusion of values-
that would also call for reeducation--, but which are no longer available to this
society.

In this detail of the antagonism also-it is its basic problem that reeducation or
brainwashing as projects require legitimation by the apparatus. In other words, to
subject it, the apparatus must be able to constitute the subject. In fact, though,
the repressive state apparatus and the (imprisoned) revolutionary both know that,
in their irreconcilability (as their relation) they are the expression of the ten-
dency by which the legitimation of the bourgeois state has decayed. The suspicion
of the force of this decay is what develops the state's destructive strategy
against us. Posser as a Social Democrat thinks so-(and he learned it in concrete
terms by the ineffectiveness of his panic denials). He was not even interested in
reeducation. just in Ulrike's destruction and the smooth propagandist utilisation
of the destroyed prisoner at the trial to be provided by the confession: The col-
lapse. As functionary of the governing party he is more pragmatic: The "smooth"
ritual of power is the meaning he wants to communicate in order to close the gap
that indicates the abyss of precisely his clique. When friction did ariae--because
the discretion needed for this thing was disrupted by the mobilization of the at-
torneys--he ran true to form, analogous with the truth of social democracy, its

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

venality--after all, the entire party leadership Brandt/Schumacher was bought by
American capital against the German proletariat-and had the idea to buy a witness
for the state. of course at government level. (..."against"...is not sufficiently

accurate. The strategic function of social democracy is that of safeguarding the
initiative of capital in the crisis.)

Therefore the crown witness, the state witness. As an institution he does indeed
serve as a witness for the situation of the entire ideological conception of the
constitutional state and certainly for our politics. Even if he is only an inci-

dental expression of the break by which our definition of state reaction to armed
politics must be comprehended.

Because, in this phase--the crisis of capital and the economic crisis of the state-
of which each guerrilla action is the political interpretation--is to be changed

by the continuity of the attack in a certainly long and contradictory process into
the ultimate political crisis of the state, the collapse.

We will discuss this later.

Well, I cannot talk about the one who is tortured, either. Really he only serves
as proof of the--at last--frank liquidation of the fiction of the object of state
repression's status as a citizen, serves to show that the values of bourgeois ideo-
logy of justice have long turned into bothersome antiques as far as the imperialist
state is concerned, because they no longer meet capital's expectations of useful-
ncss.

He must talk about him who tortures. The state. And the trial where the state
counterstrategy depends on torture and provides itself, in accordance with the de-
velopment of a new fascism in the state apparatus, with the technology, the equip-
ment and--a1ways somewhat limping behid--the laws-(and finally the structural and
organizational prerequisite in mass communications--that neutralizes reflexes),
institutionally presumes torture.

We reiterate once again:
Torture is not a term of revolutionary struggle.

Shedding light on this may have a protective function--but the mobilization needed
must be directed against the politics to which the state reacts by torture (and
therefore ultimately against the prisoners themselves) as long as the vehicle of
their politics is the moral reflex of those who still feel at home in this state--
albeit they wish to take it over as revisionists--in other words mobilization is
bound to go against us unless it is communicated by the proPaganda of armed poli-
tics--propagates its morality and strategy, and that always means it must itself
arrive at armed action.

Chapter XII--A. on 16 July 1975
So what,

Far more clearly than in the attacks of small revolutionary groups--and that is a
transferable lesson of the history of inaurrection--proved again here--

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Communicated is the breakdown of the system's legitimacy in the state reaction and
its dialectic, after all, the tactic urban guerrilla develops and operates in its
wake-~in response to the bloated repressive apparatus and the excessive determina-
tion it reflects.

The RAF, every urban guerrilla group and every armed action is due to and legitima-
ted by--it knows that or learns it sooner or later--the crisis of the imperialist
systea. That is what generates the guerrilla-~it makes it possible as the conscbus
expression of the tendency. The openly repressive reaction of the system to its
politics is also the communication by which the action of numerically small groups
acqiires an entirely new quality. It clearly shows the power of revolutionary po-
litics, when it arms itself, and with it this may become mass politics.

One level of communication by which the guerrilla operates is open repression com-
pelling the imperialist state

point by point to anticipate the fascist settlement of the crisis (which is not
cyclical and in which its role as political function of international monopoly is
absorbed by the militarily and strategically conceived capital movement)--in accord-
ance with the terms of the conflicts, that we struggle for: As publicity. In other
words, it recovers at home the mechanism of its reproduction on the outside-war-,
and it does so in ways bound to disintegrate the legitimatizing system.

The official strategies/organizations of the legal extra-parliamentarian left and--
of course the left in the parliamentary parties, are chained to the reactionary
side of the contradiction. They insist on legality as the terrain of socialist
politics (or complain of its disintegration), that the state has so lightly relin-
quished, because it has lost its objective and its function--the defense of the
utilization terms and the integration of national capitals. The capitalist national
state is the political agency of the monopoliza ion process under the hegemony of
U.S.capital--

In the spheres directly gripped by the process of the international concentration
of capital against the interests of the national bourgeoisie and the fossile na-
tional capitals.

The feasibility of the state‘s 'relative autonomy' assumed by the politics of left
social democracy depended on the competition and contradictions of national capi-
tals or on the non-simultaneities in 6he process of monopolitation. Faced with in-
ternational monopoly. the relative autonomy of the national state ceases to exist.

Consequently even a reactionary mass mobilization--always operated by nationalism
-- is nowadays dangerous in the metropolis and certainly not the form of transition.
It could be directed only against the world domestic politics of international mo-
nopoly--U.S.foreign policy, that is military policy, because that organizes the
capitalist national states in international-and domestic relations. It is also
unlikely within the framework of tactical maneuvers that were at one time discus-
sed, because that strips of his resources the operator of the institutional strate-
gy of capital: Social democracy in power.

Its cause is not the consolidation of the social domination of capital by a type
of political domination by the state-instead it replaces social domination of the

8
FOR OFFICIAOL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

workers by comprehensive political power over work itself. It is the direct commu-
nication of the all-encompassing command of international monopoly over the nation-

al proletariat, and thus it is a progagonist in the process-called "world fascism"
by Italian workers.

Because the constitution as a U.S.dictate

is already the expression of this process, and this is at the bottom of, for exanle,
the parallel constitutions of the three anticommunist counterstate establishments

of the U.S.A.--South Korea, South Vietnam, FRG--it can neither be defended against
it, nor can insistence on the intentions of their legality be the terrain of social-
ist politics. The only necessity for us is to understand the need for their radi-
cal rejection. For example by the fact that it has shaped the contradiction between
national proletariat and U.S.capital--because that was its ticket, that since 1959
virtually all overt and covert wars of U.S.imperialism have been legally conducted
from its territory-arising from s legality that in both aspects of the reactionary
military doctrine at its core-'internal security' and nuclear annihilation by or
against the nuclear arms of the American Army of Occupation on its territory (and
that is interesting here, that the constitution is based on a military doctrine,not
the military doctrine on the constitution) has been a function of American strategy

from the beginning and could therefore never express anything except the nature of
imperialism: Hat.

And:

What is meant by these motions: There is no possibility of antifascit mobilization
as socialist politics (that also applies to strategy decisions of some discussion
or other published by Hsihofer), which could communicate anything except a helpless
and scurrilous morality unless it refers to the illegality of resistances-that meals
against the legality of property, that is the terrain of fascism.

Chapter XIII--The Prisoners on 21 August 1975

This is taken from a statement by the prisoners on 21 August 1975
that originated from notes in the basement of the court building,
here reconstituted as per the minutes.

A. further developed parts of it in his statement of fact in
January 1976.

The struggle in the metropolises against the imperialist state defines this state
not in its capacity as national state in the sense of "official political expres-
sion of the ruling class/bourgeoisie" (Marx, Lenin: State - revolution)--

Rather is the struggle against American capital necessarily confronted with ‘he im-
perialist state. "here there is American capital, there are also American armed
forces, consumer culture, secret services, marketing, and so on, and attacks on
American capital are confronted directly by the structure, the know how. the techno-
logy, quite imply the strategy of American capital on the defensive: Counterinsur-
gency, institutional strategy of the imperialist state-~the national state in its
function for international U.S.capita1.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aim of the urban guerrilla-and that is an essential point-is not the imme-
diate conquest of state power, its assumption, the national revolution, and it_can-
not be simply mobilization within the national framework--

Not in a country where the proletariat was organized by American capital from l9h5
on-by the control exercised by U.s.capital on social democracy and the labor
unions since their reconstruction in 1945. committed to the anticommunist program
of U.S.foreign and domestic politics, infiltrated, influenced and directed by the
C IA--

Not in a country where, since 1945, the U.S.consumer culture has been the vehicle
of the anticommunist brainwashing offensive, where industrial growth and thus
rising living standards have been the vehicle of the depoliticization of internal
class conflicts.-- Standard of living-structured as consumer culture, that is by
the mass production of consumer goods, the condition of which is determined in
production by taylorism and fordism, in the third real subsumption by mtm and auto-
mation, the totality of the alienation of the individual on the assembly line and

piecevork, and at the level of consumption the totality of alienation in manipula-
ted consumption--

Essential there of course also the domination of the entire housing construction
policy in the reconstruction phase by the lobby of building and real property own-
ers, and their interest in housing warrens, tiny units at high prices per square
meter, and their total disinterest in any type of community facilities. (The post-
1945 SP0 program: Village community houses in Hesse, and so on)--in other words a
housing construction policy (social housing construction) that rooted in the living
conditions of the proletariat the interests of building and property owners with
the 000's Catholic family ideology and the structure of the consumer culture, indi-
vidual consumption as a result of the organization of profit production--

(As reaction to the October Revolution, the revolutionary strategy that presumed
the skilled worker, and as reaction to the higher and higher organic composition of
capital, that is to counteract the decline in the profit rate, maximum increase in
productivity by job analyses and rationalization with mtm, and so on).

In contrast to Cucvara's analysis we say that the world revolutionary process is a
uniform process. It does not proceed in stages, but to the extent that the nation-
al territories are liberated from control by U.S.capital and in all states of the
system--at the periphery and at the center groups arm themselves and fight-~to the
extent that the political and economic crisis culminates, counterpower develops by
counterforce, the erosion of the political system of capitl advances as a global
process.

The proletariat in the imperialist metropolis can be organised, accounted for and
controlled by the ideological state apparatus, labor unions and parties in all as-
pects of life by capital and is thus unable to become a class of its own in the
national framework.

When we said (SPIEGEL interview), "proletarian politics can turn into the politics
of the proletariat only in the capacity of armed politics"

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that means proletarian politics can constitute the class and become revolutionary
strategy only as proletarian internationalism.

Inside the state the guerrilla represents resistance and the method of mobilisation
here possible is the polarization of the public by the open and exaggerated beha-
vior of state reaction to the guerrilla.

As we said: Urban guerrilla is the method of intervention by generally weak revolu-
tionary forces. Intervention is armed attack from the underground. The historic
sequence from which it springs-~we have explained that by the history and function
of article lZ9-ever since that has been there, since the time the Reich was estab-
lished-it has been used to criminalize any basic opposition--is political opposi-
tion as the expression of class antagonism in the legality of the constitutional
state that, in contrast to the state security state, was tied to bourgeois values.
As the expression of class antagonism, legal opposition, despite all its ambivalence
as the result of its functionalization, always represented resistance as far as the
state was concerned.

In the break between right and morality by the disintegration of the separation of
powers in the imperialist state, political opposition gets to be illegal to the ex-
tent that the consensus between society and state, communicated by the values of
the bourgeois constitution, itself breaks down. We will explain that here by the
example of the professional bans--

Because the necessity of insurrection by now follows upon any state reaction to op-
position movements within and without the institutions-becsuse by the negation of
bourgeois values in the imperialist state even the legal political opposition citilg
them needs to develop a new political dynamism as the legel reflex of insurrection
in the metropolises and the wars of liberation at the peripheries of imperialism--
for example in the movement against nuclear power plants.

Benjamin comments the bourgeois values in the proletarian revolution as follows:

"The class conflict that a historian trained in Marxism always keeps in mind, is a
struggle for the crude and material things without which there are no refined and
spiritual concerns. Nevertheless these latter arr present in the class conflict
other than as the notion of loot falling to the victor. They live as optimism,
courage. humor, cunning, firmness in this struggle, and they have operated like
that throughout the ages. They will over and over again contest every victory
ever enjoyed by the rulers, just as flowers turn their faces to the sun, thanks to
a secret heliotropism all men turn to the sun rising on the horizon of history. The
historic materialist must appreciate this most inconspicuous of all changes."

Gramsci said the same more succinctly: "The proletariat is the heir of classic
German philosophy." Re are therefore speaking in detail about values, morality and
the problem of legitimation of the imperialist state, because we are interested in
the problem of justification as the problem of revolution. It is interesting in
relation to such events. Its most extreme historic reflection was the Stalinism
of the 1930's in the Soviet Union.

Justification or triumphalism--that is the certainty of ultimate victory not ex-
clusively determined by the revolutionary struggle, the revolutionary use of the

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

crisis by insurrection--were also the features of the theory and propaganda of the
Third International and at the present time are incarnated by the Maoist Marxist-
Leninist groups. They are the expression of alienation, also the alienation of
Marxist theory from critical theory to alienated dogmatism by the absence of criti-
cal practice, in other words a practice confronting the ruling repression and free
of the obligation to have another goal than the development of the struggle.

Revolution needs no justification and therefore no ideology. There are, however,
transitions from bourgeois ethics to the revolutionary ethics of urban guerrilla--
or, in Lenin's words, "the absolute is within the relative." The issue there is
quite simple: Where is the break--where does bourgeois morality begin to turn im-
moral, or what use is bourgeois morality to the guerrilla? He would say nothing.
But that is not all to be said about it.

This matter is topical in the professional bans, the thought police decreed by the
Federal Court decision in reference to article 231 and in the Lower Saxon law on
the defense of the constitution, designed to transform the entire state apparatus--
administration, schools, universities, health system up to and including public in-
stitutions into a giant communication service, acting as an arm of the defense of
the constitution and thereby opinions into the spotlight by which reaction polariaes
society. The ban on opinions amounts to the destruction of ideology as such--and
that also means that wherever groups produce a justification, they must necessarily
move in a social vacuum. A system no longer spitting out ideology, on the contrary
--regarding it as a "security risk"-as for Brandt and Strauss--can no longer be
fought at the level of ideology. Even the notion of the ideological class conflict,
still propagated by the Soviet Union, becomes superfluous now. This matter of val-
ues has many implications.

Bourgeois morality shaped the bourgeois citizen. within this morality--ss morality
of social intercourse--it moved freely. It constituted the scope of society via-a-
vis the state, and it constituted a system in the scope of society vis-a-vis the
state. Within the system of the bourgeois society, the freedom of the proletariat
consisted in its ability to sell its labor by submitting to the command of capital
--or to starve. Consequently freedom was never more than a euphemism for the pro-
letariat within the bourgeois society.

The imperialist state, how its economic base--free competition--is abolished in it
--abolished by its criminalizing those who insist on it as their right to think,
judge and act for themselves. Institutional strategy replaces bourgeois morality
and ideology as the consolidating coununication, with the aim of constitutionali-
zing the class war, bureaucratizing the proletariat, nationalizing the social labor
force.

For example the "individual-democratic constitution" was the object of the special
loyalty owed the state by civil servants. However quirkily formulated in offi-
cialese, this meant constitutional rights: Freedom, equality and human dignity,
physical inviolability. According to the Federal Constitutional Court's judgment
on the ban on the employment of radical democrats in the public service, it is now
'cxpected for civil servants to recognize and acknowledge this state..as an out-
standing and positive value...," and so on.

an
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This Federal Constitutional Court judgment explicitly means the state that suspends
the constitution: The emergency and special state. Because, according to it, the
civil servant must "affirm" the constitution in effect "even insofar as it may be
amended by way of a change in the constitution" and "carry on his office in the
spirit of the regulations." The spirit and the direction of changes and regula-
tions, however, must always be just the meaning and purpose of the latest constitu-
tional change and the topical legislative projects--these are emergency laws, the
legitimation of the execution of anti-imperialist fighters in the streets, the in:
stitutionalization of their smooth destruction in the prisons by isolation in dead
cells, without publicity, by the defense counsel exclusion law, that is special ar-
ticle 231a which legitimizes a trial without defendants.

According to the Federal Constitutional Court's verdict, the civil servant's duty
to loyalty and the right to resistance are mutually exclusive. The civil servant
is put under the political obligation ("political duty to loyalty”) in conflict
situations to "take the side" of the state against the proletariat or the elements
of proletarian organisation and class consciousness that merely exist. Demolished
by the Federal Constitutional Court's verdict is the civil servant's right, still
part of the civil service legislation, to refuse obedience if what he is asked to
do is evidently wrong-~as the antithesis to the compelling obedience by which
National Socialist defendants were able before West German courts to rationalize
their involvement in the execution of partisans and Jews, because this enabled the
judicial apparatus, itself involved in National Socialist terror, to excuse this
involvement. The civil servant's right is abolished by the verdict, because that
verdict elevates the state to an absolute value, against the individual's sense of
justice. The state'scommitmentto the values it pretends to defend can only be
that of the persons through whom it acts. In claiming absolute value for itself,
the state has liquidated its commitment to the social values of its constitution.

The consensus society-state is no longer cmmmnﬁcated by the tertium comparationem
The values, that is constitutional rights--

But by their surrogate: Psychological warfare, as propagandistic camouflage of the
politics of the strong state, its institutional strategy to the nationalization of
society, the purpose of which is war and the medium the militarization of society.

The imperialist state devours the bourgeois state. This process, the relative ease
with which it is accomplished, the weakness of protest, all these show how shallow
were the roots in the state apparatus of the bourgeois values, including freedom of
opinion, freedom of the press, independence of the courts, lawful judges, a free
bar, the proportionality of police deployment, the assumption of innocence until the
verdict, the ban on discrimination for..., and so on. It is clearly visible what
they have always been: Horely an expedient ideology for anticommunism. Freedom in
the Federal Republic never meant freedom from the state. It was always simply
anticommunist ideology and a propaganda postulate without political reality. West
German democracy was rooted in the constitution for as long and as deeply as nothim
corresponded to it in political reality.

It was abolished by emergency legislation upon the emergence of the first mass move-
ment against anticommunism--the student movement--which intended to use it against

85
FOR OFFI(1AL USE ONLY

1..

the state, against the establishment, against the anticomnist elites here. Ever
since anybody who cites article 1 of the constitution must also cite emergency le-
gislation. Since then anybody wishing to cite article 1 of the constitution with-
out citing the emergency legislation must take arms (from the logic of the consti-
tution itself).

The movement against the professional bans cannot turn into a strong movement, be-
cause too few people are affected--all teachers, all journalists, all lawyers are
affected, that is within these professional groups and organizations, within the
ideological state apparatus all those who have not yet ceded the claim to their
right to think their own thoughts, their own critical thoughts, or who, in the pro-
cess of the transformation of the state, discover critical practice to be their
cause.

The movement cannot develop any strength, because it has displaced the motive now
used to justify the professional bans and earlier the strength of the student move-
ment: The protest against the American war in Vietnam, by appealing to bourgeois
values.

Because this movement itself has largely been a process of disappointment in the
dual sense of this word, a process of disillusionment from which this state drew
the consequences, that is recovered the initiative even before the movement had an
opportunity to draw its consequences from having been criminalized at Easter 1968.
Before the movement found its way to illegality and arms, the government offered an
amnesty--

correctly speculating

that the class make-up of the student movement would not enable at to oppose its
corruption, that is their deracination/desolidarization from the Vietnamese war of
liberation.

Of course the right to resistance as a constitutional right amounts only to a pro-
clamation. The fact that it was inserted in the Hesse constitution, inserted in
the civil service law--as a phrase only, because, according to it, every prison
guard would be obligated and have the right to refuse guarding t“~ isolated prison-
ers--was this state's lip service to the dilettantism of the Prussian officer caste
that had attempted the 1944 coup against Hitler to save the honor of the German
monopoly bourgeoisie. Its liquidation now, in the verdict of the Federal Constitu-
tional Court, is the open advance to the total state, the state security state

that completely escapes any checks from the outside or from below.

Resistance is the continuity in the history of internal opposition in the Federal
Republic since l965, from the opposition against the restoration, against integra-
tion with the Heat, against emergency legislation, against American aggression in
Vietnam through the armed struggle of the urban guerrilla against the imperialist
state.

Resistance--not Marxism, the issue of socialization, in short various program poinu
emergging in all these movements, as ideology.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Resistance is the reference back to the values of the French Revolution, in other
words bourgeois democracy in its human content, as the expectation of equality be-
tween human beings, as the frontier to cross which amounts to inhumanity and cannot
be tolerated.

For resistance are the values, in the final analysis their social enforcement by the
revolution-the authority limiting all state action; it determines the limit beyond
which state action becomes illegitimate.

The right and the readiness to resistance stood/stands behind any state intrinsic
opposition. '

It is the reflection of class antagonism in the ideology of bourgeois democracy.

The right to resistance has entered the constitution of the Federal Republic really
to camouflage the real nature of this state as a counterstate of U.S.imperialism,
as lip service (see above) for distinguishing itself verbally, by the letter only,
from the old fascism.

It disintegrates/ia eliminated/illegalized the moment Host German imperialism no
longer needs it as an exchange value (can no longer use it)-

As function value it acquires revolutionary quality, because it has begun to be the
immediate expression of class antagonism--expression of the new society that "ap-
proaches in the lap of the old one," as the topic of history. Its political anti-
cipation is represented by the armed groups of the urban guerrilla, the subjectivi-
ty of the illegals.

Resistance, stripped of its exchange value, its function as make-up of the West
German counterstate, turns into the basic right of the proletariat taking up arms,
and with it the values on which it is based: Liberty, equality, fraternity-all
rejected by the social democratic counterstate with the right to resistance which
necessarily recognizes institutional strategy as antagonism. Because it is the aim
of the institutional strategy to destroy resistance by the legitimation and nation-
alization of all conflicts in society and between society and state. It anticipa-
tes the political crisis, it anticipates it as counterrevolution.

The tie between the state and the bourgeois constitution was its imperative tie to
the libertarian values of the French Revolution which has constituted the bourgeois
state by the passion for the liberation of mankind, secularized the element of the
absolute in the bourgeois state in contrast to the feudal claim of divine right.

(of course it is not by accident that Schmidt now, when the values have been abo-
lished in this state, quotes Kant's categorical imperative on order and freedom.
Philosophy is meant to replace legitimacy.

The regulation in the cop's panmlxmket is raised to an ethical postulate, exactly
to the extent that it lacks any morally justifying relevance).-

The constitution linked to property values could afford to allow the right to re-
sistance; as a concession it represented a means for the reconciliation of the

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-N'l-ll. USE ONLY

classes, the integration of the proletariat and its organizations in the bourgeois
state. It is necessarily illegalized at the very moment when it becomes necessary
to make use of it. illegalized by the state against which it is then directed.

That is important. Because the history of the right to resistance defines in the
superstructure of society the break between society and state, precisely

'ﬂie point at which the capitalist production relation turns into the fetter of the
method of production--socialization of production and advanced organic composition
of capital. In its superstructure it precisely defines the historic moment when
revolutionary struggle becomes necessary as armed struggle, armed struggle against
the imperialist state--

The point where the proletariat becomes the heir of classic German philosophy.
whether or not it assumes this heritage.

"The necessity" of the triumph of reason over myth, the victory of life over death
cannot be proven by logical conclusions. Planck once said: "Logic alone is not
able to lead anyone cut of his own world, it cannot even compel him to acknowledge
the independent existence of his fellow men." This necessity must rely on the
tenet "that the claim to life, development and happiness needs no justification.

It stands and falls with this. It is, though, its only prerequisite, undemonstrable
as well as irrefutable." (Saran) We have advanced from there, because it is re-
sistance which links us, the urban guerrilla. with the political opposition in the
Federal Republic since 1965.

Resistance, whether well or badly conducted, is the spur generating armed resist-
ance. Resistance as a definite, radical, existential and moral identity incorpora-
ting the values ot the French Revolution, in other words not questioning them.
Therefore it needs no justification.

Resistance is the quintessence of proletarian subjectivity as the negation of the
imperialist state and illegal from the very beginning, even where it is not/has not
been criminalized.

This also means resistance in contrast to political ideology/attitude, to matters
of opinion. Because it is in principle outside the market, subject to neither buy-
ing mr selling.

The transformation from legal--albeit always only weak-~resistance by the old left
to the legal offensive of rho new left in the protest movement against the war in
Vietnam, to the tactic of armed intervention. may become strategy, insofar its
action in the imperialist rtatc identifies the reactionary aspect of the contradic-
tlon.

The movement against the construction of the nuclear power plant in Uhyl, for ex-
ample, has shown that it is the state of international monopoly, which sets itself
above the values and proclaims illegal any appeal to them against its measures.

Rhineland-Palatinate Interior Minister Schwarz was quite consistent. (At the
Hessenforum) he called the movement against the construction of nuclear power
plants (which appeals to the right of physical inviolability vis-a-vis the state),

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"an example demonstrating the necessity of criminological research." As a state
of multinational U.S.capita1 it is not interested in allowing energy bottlenecks
to emerge, in other words to break out from the strategy of the oil multinationals
and the U.S.A. against the OPEC countries.

The explosive power of the protest movement against the construction of nuclear
power plants is derived from the fact that it is opposed to a strategic project of
the imperialist state as a functionary of multinational capital, calling upon val-
ues that exclude war as a means of the class conflict. It appeals to the protec-
tive function of the state, so to speak to the factory legislation state of Marx
in the first volume of "Das Kapital," the state defending the proletariat against
the excesses of capital-~excessive exploitation by unduly hard work--, by calling
to account the individual capitalist in the interest of capitalism in general and
making him toe the line of the bourgeois society in answer to the state as its of-
ficial political expression.

However, the function of the state has changed. In the sectors of capital neces-
sary for the reproduction of society but no longer profitable for capital, it now
rust take on economic functions and has also become a direct economic function of
the world market, dominated by the U.S.monopolies.

Marx foresaw the "refeudalization of society, the point where society stagnates
and decays, because the proletariat is too weak by itself-and that always means
that the old state is too strong, bureaucratic and militarized, and therefore the
social transformation and the contradictions induced by machinery cannot find poli-
tical expression.

In its economic functions the state is directly and openly a repressive state.
"Force is an economic potential" has always been its answer not only to revolution-
ary action of the organizing proletariat. Here also in the Federal Republic, where
the proletariat is organized by nationalized labor unions as a capital function, it
is the answer to the reanants of resistance or to its tentative new phenomena:
Bourgeois and declassed protest-and the state cuts it off:

By way of the centralized structure of the apparatus of public opinion, which it is
able to and does control--

and

by police deployment, carried out by units trained and equipped-~physically and
psychologically--for staaping out mass actions.

It becomes obvious here that the assurance of proper living conditions such as was

organically produced and socially developed, has entered into antagonistic conflict
with the reproduction condition of capitalist production decisive in the metropolis
-—the smooth flowing energy supply. This conflict is settled against the people,

for capital, for machinery. The state forcibly represses the antagonism. In the
case of the ERG this process has its counterpart in NATO nuclear strategy: The
Federal Republic--all governments of the Federal Republic-by subjecting themselves
to it, virtually beg for nuclear self-destruction in the interest of American stra-
tegy by the use of nuclear weapons in case of an aggressive or defensive war.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the meantime Schlesinger has openly claimed that this is a "sacrifice" to be ex-
pected from the NATO countries to maintain U.s. "credibility" vis-a-vis the Soviet
Union (sm'r'rcangﬁacumcmn, 11 November 1976).

The protest movement against the construction of nuclear power plants is the imme-
diate expression of the North-South conflict, that is the most offensively develop-
ed line of demarcation between capital and the world proletariat. That represents
the explosive power of this movement and explains why the state as the agency of
U.S.monopoly can neither give up nuclear power plant construction or give in to
the appeal to the constitution, the values "physical inviolability, right to life,
human dignity, freedom of the choice of profession, protection of the family." At
any rate it cannot do so without hazarding its project, the destruction of the re-
volution at the periphery because-as we could see in Vietnam-domestic consensus
is an essential prerequisite for this; however, that broke down on both sides of
the alternative as a formal democratic process.

Before the 1956 Geneva Conference Nixon said: "Our nation is the only one strong
enough at home to adopt an attitude that will save Asia."

This was a wrong estimate: As the consequence and crucial function of the Vietnam-
ese war of liberation it was the breach of the consensus--the FNL described the
protest in the centers of "world public opinion" as its second strongest line of
defense (after Russian anti-aircraft rockets). It forced Nixon to the table and
finally the U.S.Government to withdraw its military machinery from Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia.

Due to the fact that the international corporationshandle the national states now
merely as instrumental media, the national state has nothing left but force for
politics aiming to balance the interests of the ruling class with the interests of
the ruled class. A narrow regional and politically diffuse movenent may thereby
acquire a dialectical and strategic relevance--even if it defends untenable econom-
ic interests of small farmers and traders. Important is its existential dimension
arising from the reference back to bourgeois values, interpreted as the right to
life and happiness, which objectively leads their protest to our side, moves the
dialectic state--revolution against the project of the imperialist state-which is
to freeze it.

Chapter XXVII-Drawing a Clear Line Between Us and the Enemyl Mao
Red Army Faction: The Concept Urban Guerrilla
If the enemy fights us, that is good, not bad.

It is my opinion that it is bad for us--whether for the individual,
the party, the army or the school-~if the enemy does not confront
us--because this would mean that we are in cahoots with the enemy.
If the enemy fights us, that is good; it is proof that we have drawn
a clear line between us and the enemy. if the enemy confronts us
resolutely, paints us in the blackest colors and does not admit any-
thing of ours to be good, it is even better; it proves that we have
not only drawn a clear line between us and the enemy but also that
our work has yielded glittering successes.

Mao Ze-Dong, 26 May 1939

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Support Armed Struggle!
1. Concrete Answers to Concrete Questions

I firmly insist that nobody nay have the right to speak, who has not
conducted an investigation.

Mao

Some comrades have already arrived at their verdict on us. For them it amounts to
"denagogy of the bourgeois press" to couple this "anarchistic group" with the so-
cialist movement altogether. By using it wrongly and judgmentally. their concept
of anarchism does not differ at all from that held by the Springer press. We
would not choose to talk to anyone at such s debased level.

Many comrades would like to know what we think. The letter to 883 of May 1970 was
too general; Ray's tape (excerpts of which were published in SPIBGBL) was in any
case not authentic; it originated in the course of private conversations. Ray
wanted to use it as an aide aemire for a free-lance article. Either she tricked
us, or we overestimated her. If our operations were so precipitate as some of the
phrases there, they would have caught us long ago. D!!! SPIEGBL paid Ray 81,000 for
the article.

Obviously almost everything the newspapers write about us--and the way they write
it--anounts to lies. Kidnap plans involving Hilly Brandt are designed to make us
look like political idiots, the link between the abduction of a child and us, as
crininals without scruples in the choice of their methods. That ranges up to the
"guaranteed details" offered by KONKRBT, although there nerely irrelevant details
were thrown together. 1hat we have "officers and men," that someone is "in bond-
age" to someone else, that at any tile soneone was to be "liquidated," that com-
rades who have left us still need to fear us, that we have drawn guns to gain ac-
cess to apartments or passports. that "group terror" is practiced--all that is so
touch bullshit.

1hose who imagine the illegal organization of armed resistance to proceed on the
lines of the Free Corps and the Vehne. are thenselves pogrom-ninded. Psychological
aechanisus inducing such projections were analysed by llorkheiner/Adornos in
"Autoritaere Persoenlichkeit" [The Agthoritarisn Personslitz'] and by Reich in
"Hassenpsychologie des Faschissus" glass Psychology of Pascisg7 in connection with
fascism. The cmulsive nature of the revolution is a contradictio in adjecto--a
contradiction that does not work. Certainly in the prevailing conditions--if not
at all tines-“a revolutionary political practice presumes the permanent integration
of individual character and political motivation, in other words political identi-
ty. Marxist criticism and autocriticism is not concerned with "self-liberation"
but very much preoccupied with revolutionary discipline. The "headline hunters“
here were certainly not any "left organizations"--supposed to be the anonymous
authors--but KONKRET itself. Indeed, its publisher normally acts as I’ll man and
left hand to Eduard lineman. to maintain this particular bootblacking text in a
particular niche of the market.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Many comrades, too, spread lies about us. They brag that we stayed with them, that
they organized our travels to the Near East, that they are informed about contacts,
about safe houses, that they do something for us, although in fact they do nothing.
Some of them are merely out to show that they are "insiders." That case home-to
roost for Guenther Voigt who told Duerrenmatt that he had been Baader's liberator;
he must have regretted his boast when the cops came for him. Even if true, a sub-
sequent denial is not so easy. Others are out to show that we are stupid, unreli-
able, incautious and spacy. This serves to prejudice people against us. Actually
they assume us to be like them. They consume. we have nothing in common with
these chatterboxes who conduct the anti-imperialist struggle over coffee and cake.
--There are many others who do not gossip, who understand the concept of resistance,
who notice enough foul stinks to want us to have a chance, who aid us because they
know that their bag of tricks is not worth lifelong integration and adjustment.

The apartment in Knesebeck Street 89 (Mahler arrest) was not traced due to neglect
on our side but as the result of treasin. The informer was one of us. There is
simply no defense against such an event for people who do what we do, no defense
against comrades being worn down by the cops, against someone being unable to re-
sist the terror exercised by the system against those who really fight it. If the
pigs did not have the means, they would not retain power.

Some people feel exposed to an intolerable pressure to try and justify themselves
to us. To avoid political disputations with us, to avoid questioning their own
practices against our practices, some manage to twist simple facts. It is still
being claimed, for exalple, that Baader would only have had to serve 3, or 9, or

12 months, although it is easy to ascertain the correct data: Three years for arr
son, 6 months arising from earlier probation orders, roughly 6 months for forgery,
and so on--the trial was still to come. Fourteen of these 68 months Andreas Baader
served in 14 Hesse prisons--9 transfers for bad behavior, the organization of re-
bellions; resistance. Diminishing the remaining 34 months to 3, 9 and 12 was de-
signed to rob the liberation of the perisoners of 13 May of its moral significance.
Thus some comrades rationalize their fear of the personal consequences a political
dispute with us could have for them.

Evidently we can only return a "no" to the question whether the prisoners would
have been freed if we had known that a leftist would be shot in the course of the
undertaking--it is a question we are constantly asked. On the other hand, the
question of what would have happened if...is highly ambiguous--pacifist, platonic,
ethical, unbiased. Nobody seriously reflecting about the liberation of prisoners
would pose that question; instead he would seek the answer within himself. It is
asked because people want to know whether we are really as brutalized as we are
described in the Springer press; we are to be asked for our credo. It is an at-
tempt to fiddle with the issue of revolutionary force, to bring revolutionary force
and bourgeois morality on to a common denominator, and that simply does not work.
Taking into consideration all possibilities and circumstances there was no reason
to assume that a civilian might and would get in between. We had no doubt that

the cops would not have the slightest compunction about someone like that. To sug-
gest that the liberation of a prisoner could be carried out unarmed amounts to a
suggestion of suicide.

On 14 Hay, just as in Frankfurt where two of our number fled when they were to be
arrested, because we will not allow ourselves to be quietly arrested-~the cops shot
first. The cops took aim every time. We either did not shoot at all, or. when we
did, we did not aim the guns.

92
FIN!(MHHC1AI.USE¢)NLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Berlin, in Nuremberg, in Frankfurt. That can be proved because it is true. He
do not "ruthlessly use a gun." The cop who finds himself trapped in the contra-
diction between himself as the "little man" and as the serf of the capitalists, as
a low paid employee and as the executive official of monopoly capital, is not con-
fronted with the compulsion to obey orders. We shoot when we are shot at. If the
cops lets us go, we let him go.

It is quite correct for people to assert that the tremendous cost of the manhunt for
us aims at the entire socialist left in the Federal Republic and West Berlin. The
little money we stole, the few automobile and document thefts alleged to be the
reason for the manhunt, not even the attempted mrder that is to be pinned on us,
really justify the hullabaloo. The rulers haVe been gripped by terror, because
they believed to have a sound grasp on this state and all its residents and classes
and contradictions down to the last and distant recess. They were sure once again
to have the intellectuals reduced to their magazines, the left returned to their
circle. to have disarmed Marxism-Leninism and demoralized internstionalism. Unfor-
tunately the power structure they represent is not so vulnerable as they would make
it out to be. We should not be misled by their outcries and overestimate ourselves.

We claim that, at this time, the organization of armed resistance groups in the Fed-
eral Republic and Berlin is right, possible and justified. That it is right, pos-
sible and justified to act as urban guerrilla here and now. That the armed strug-
gle as "the highest form of Marxism-Leninism" (Mao) now needs to and must be ini-
tiated, that, without it, there can be no anti-imperialist struggle in the metro-
polises.

We do not claim that the organization of illegal and armed resistance groups could
replace legal proletarisn organizations, nor that single actions are class wars,
nor that armed struggle could replace political work in the factory and the city
district. He merely claim that the one is the presumption for the success and the
advance of the other. We are not Blanquists nor anarchists, although we consider
Blanqui a major revolutionary and the personal heroism of many anarchists far from
despicable.

Our actual operations are less than a year old. The time is too short to be able
to talk of results. The large amdunt of publicity provided for us by Messrs Gen-
scher, Zimermann and company does, however, make it appear opportune from the
propaganda aspect to offer some thoughts for general reflection.

"If you really want to know what communists think, look at their hands, not at their
mouths."

lI. Metropolis Federal Republic

The crisis is generated not so much by the stagnation of development
mechanisms than by development itself. As its only goal is the
growth of profits, this development more and more fuels parasitism
and waste, disadvantages entire social strata, produces growing needs
and is unable to satisfy them, and speeds up the decay of social
life. It needs a monstrous apparatus to control the tensions and re-
volts it provokes, and does so by the manipulation of public opinion
and open repression. The student rebellion and the Black Movement in

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

America, the crisis prevailing in the political unity of'Amarican
society, the expansion of student struggles in'Europe, the violent
return and new content of the workers and mass struggle up to the
"Hay" explosion in France, to the tumultuous social crisis in

Italy and the return of dissatisfaction in Germany--these all charac-
terize the situation.

11 Manifesto: Necessity of Commism. From Thesis No 33

In this enumeration the comrades of 11 Manifesto correctly list the Federal Repub-
lic in last place and rather vagely term the characteristic features of the situa-
tion here as "dissatisfaction.“ Only 6 years ago, the Federal Republic was said by
Barsel to be an economic giant but s political dwarf. In the meantime the FlG's
economic strength has not diminished, and its political strength has grown, internal-
ly and externally. The 1966 establishment of the grand coalition disarmed the poli-
tical threat that could have spontaneously ignited at the time as a result of the
imminent recession. Emergency legislation provided the tool for ensuring the rule!
united action in future crises also-unity between political reaction and all those
who are still committed to legality. The social-liberal coalition largely succeed-
ed in absorbing the “dissatisfaction" emerging in the student movement and

The extraparliamentary movement. Insfar as the reformism of the Social Democrat
Party has not yet been played out in the consciousness of its followers, its pro-
mises of reform have delayed the topicslity of the communist alternative for large
parts of the intelligentsia too and were able to disarm the anticapitalist protest.
Its Eastern policy opens new markets for capital, looks after the German contribu~
tion to the balance and alliance between U.S.imperialism and the Soviet Union,
needed by the United States to obtain a free hand for its wars of aggression in the
Third World. This government seems also to be succeeding in separating the new
left from the old antifascists and thereby once more to isolate the new left from
its antecedents, the history of the workers movement. The DKP owes its admission to
the new complicity between U.S.imperialism and Soviet revisionism and organizes .
demonstrations in favor of this government's Eastern policy. Niemoeller-a symbol
of antifsscism--campaigns for the SPD in the forthcoming election campaign.--

Under the pretext of the "common weal," state regimentation complete with wage guide-
lines snd concerted action took the labor union bureaucracies in hand. The Septem-
ber 1969 strikes showed that the scales had been excessively weighted in favor of
profits; their course as exclusively economic strikes demonstrated how firmly the
reins were held.

Thanks to almost 2 million foreign workers the Federal Republic will be able in the
looming recession to use a nearly 10 percent unemployment rate to bring to bear the
terror and disciplinary mechanism inherent in unemployment for the proletariat. He
get a notion of the system's strength by the fact that it will be able to do so
without having to cope with an army of unemployed, without being bothered by the
political radicalization of these masses.

Involved in U.S.aggressive wars by development and military aid, the Federal Repub-
lic profits from the exploitation of the Third World without carrying any responsi-
bility for these wars, without the need to clash with an internal opposition. No
less aggressive than U.S.imperialism, it is even less vulnerable.

9h
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
FOR 0FF1C1AL.US£(MNLY

The political potential of imperialism is exhausted here neither in its reformist

nor its fascist variant; nor is imperialism at the end of its capacity to integrate
or suppress the contradictions it has itself created.

The Red Army Paction's concept urban guerrilla is not based on an optimistic assess-
ment of the situation in the Federal Republic and West Berlin.

Ill. Student Revolt

It follows from the recognition of the uniform nature of the capital-
ist ruling system that it is impossible to separate the revolution

in the "strongholds" from that "in the backward regions." Without a

revival of the revolution in the West it is iapossible to prevent im-
perialism, by the logic of violence, from being carried to the point

where it seeks the way out in a disastrous war, or prevent the super-
powers from imposing a suffocating yoke on the world as a whole.

Il Manifesto. Prom Thesis No 52

To dismiss the student movement as a petit bourgeois revolt means reducing it to its
own exaggerated claims; it means to deny its generation from the concrete contradic-
tion between bourgeois ideology and bourgeois society; it means, with the acknowledg-
ment of its necessary limitations, to deny the doctrinal standard already achieved

by its anticapitalist protest.

To be sure, there was a great deal of exaggeration in the students claim to identify
themselves with the exploited peoples of Latin America, Africa and Asia, just be-
cause the students had become aware of their psychological degradation in science
factories. The comparison between the mass circulation of the BILD-ZEITUNC here

and the mass bombardment of Vietnam represented a crude oversimplification. The
comparison between ideological criticism of the system here and the armed struggle
there was arrogant. The belief itself to be the revolutionary topic--insofar as it
was widespread in reference to Harcuse--amounted to ignorance in the face of the
actual shape of the bourgeois society and the production conditions at its origin.

It is the merit of the student movement in the Federal Republic and Heat Berlin--
its street battles and arson, its use of counterviolence, its declamations and,
therefore, their exaggerations and ignorance too, in brief their practical opera-
tions, to have restored Harxism-Leninism in the consciousness of at least the intel-
ligentsia as that political doctrine, without which the political, economic and
ideological facts and their phenomena cannot be explained nor their internal and ex-
ternal connections described.

Just because the student movement started from the concrete experience of the con-
tradiction between the ideology of the freedom of science and the reality of the
university, exposed to the grasp of monopoly capital, just because it was not ini-
tiated only as an ideological exercise, it did not run out of steam until it had at
least theoretically explored the connection between the crisis of the university
and the crisis of capitalism. Until they and public opinion were convinced that
the essence of this democracy is not "liberty, equality, fraternity," not human
rights, not the United Nations Charter; that the same applies here as has always

95
ms omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

applied to the colonialist and imperialist exploitation of Latin America, Asia and
Africa: Discipline, subordination and brutality for the oppressed and any who take
their side, organize protests, resist, conduct the anti-imperialist struggle.

From the aspect of ideological criticism the student movement has recognized almost
all spheres of state repression as the expression of imperialist exploitation: In
the Springer campaign, the demonstratiomsagainst American aggression in Vietnam,
the campaign against class justice, the Bundeswehr campaign, the campaign against
emergency legislation, the school student movement. Bxpropriate Springerl, Destroy
NATOI, Fight the Consumer Terrorl, Fight the Education Terror! Fight the Rent
Terrorl--all these were appropriate political slogans. They aimed at the topicsli-
zation of the contradictions produced by late capitalism itself, in the conscious-
ness of all who are oppressed, between new needs and the new opportunities for need
satisfaction offered by the development of productive forces on the one side and
the pressure of irrational subordination on the other.

"hat gave it its self-confidence were not advanced class conflicts here but the
consciousness to be part of an international movement, to deal with the same class
enemy here as the Vietcong there, with the same paper tiger, the same pigs.

It is the second distinction of the student movement to have broken through the
provincial isolation of the old left. The popular front strategy of the old left
in the form of the Easter March, the German Peace Union, the DEUTSCHE VOLXSZEITUNC,
the irrational hope for the "great landslide" at some election or other, its par-
lamentary obsession with Strauss here, neinemsnn there, its procomlunist and anti-
communist obsession with the GDR, its isolation, resignation and moral distraction:
To be ready for every sacrifice but not for practical steps. Despite doctrinal in-
acturacies, the socialist part of the student movement derived its self-awareness
from the correct appreciation that "the revolutionary initiative in the West may
rely on the crisis of the global balance and the emergence of new forces in all
countries" (Thesis No 55, Il Manifesto). They made the content of their agitation
and propaganda that which they could mainly appeal to in view of conditions in
Germany: That, confronted with the global strategy of imperialism, the outlook for
national struggles must be internationalist, that only the combination of national
concerns with international ones, traditional types of struggle with international-
istic ones, is able to stabilize revolutionary initiative. They turned weakness in-
to strength, because they had recognized that this was the only way to prevent re-
newed resignation, provincial isolationism, reformism, popular front strategy and
integration--these dead-end streets of socialist politics in postfascist and pre-
fascist conditions such as prevail in the Federal Republic and West Berlin.

At that time the leftists were aware that it would be correct to combine socialist
preopaganda in the factory with the actual prevention of deliveries of the BILD-
ZEITUNG. That it would be correct to combine propaganda among the GI’s-advised
not to let themselves be shipped to Vietnam-with actual attacks on military air-
craft destined for that country, to combine the Bundeswehr campaign with actual at-
tacks on NATO airfields. That it would be correct to combine criticism of class
justice with the blowing up of prison walls, criticism of the Springer Corporation
with the disarmament of its works security forces, correct to set up their own
radio transmitter, to demoralize the police, keep illegal housing ready for desert-
ers from the Bundeswehr, be able to forge identity papers for agitation among for-
eign workers, by factory sabotage to prevent the production of napalm.

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And it would be wrong to make their own propaganda dependent on supply and demand,
no newspaper unless the workers are able to finance it, no car if the "love-ant"...
is not yet able to buy it, no transmitter because no licence is obtainable, no
sabotage because capitalism would not immediately collapse as a result.

The student movelent collapsed when its specific student-petit bourgeois type of or-
ganization, the "anti-authoritarian camp" proved unsuitable for developing practical
operations appropriate to its goals; its spontaneity could neither be simply extend-
ed to factories nor to a capable urban guerrilla, nor a socialist mass organisation.
It collapsed when the spark of the student movement--other than in Italy and France
--fsiled to turn into the grass fire of developed class conflicts. They were able
to enumerate the goals and concerns of the anti-imperialist struggle but unable to

provide its organizational communication, because they themselves were not the sub-
ject of the revolution.

In contrast to theIproletarian organisations of the new left, the Red Army Faction
does not deny its prehistory as the history of the student movement. That movement
had restored Haraism-Leninism as a weapon in the class conflict and produced the
international context for the revolutionary struggle in the metropolises.

IV. The Primacy of Practice

He who wishes directly to familiarize himself with a certain cause
or group of causes, must be personally involved in the practical
struggle for the transformation of reality, the transformation of
the cause or group of causes, because only thus does he get in touch
with the phenomenon of the respective causes, and only by personal
involvement in the practical struggle for the change of reality is

he able to reveal and understand the nature of that cause or group
of causes.

Marxism invests doctrine with serious significance only because it
may offer a guide to action. If someone holds a correct doctrine
but handles it only as something that is talked about and later put
away in a drawer, certainly not translated into practice, this doc-
trine becomes meaningless, however sound it may have been.

ﬁne Ze-Dong: 0n Practice

When the left, the socialists who were also the authority figures of the student
movement, turned to the study of scientific socialism, the tOpicalization of the
critique of political economics as their autocriticism of the student novelent, this
amounted to their retuan to college desks. Judging by their output of papers, their
organisational models; the lavishness of their proclamations, one might assune that
revolutionaries here claimed the leadership of powerful class struggles, that
1967/1968 represented the 1905 of socialism in Germany.

In his 1903 "What To 00?." Lenin stressed the Russian workers need for doctrine and,
against anarchists and social revolutionaries, postulated the necessity of class
analysis and organization as well as revelatory propaganda. He did so because mass

97
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

class struggles were proceeding. "That is precisely the point: The working masses
are strongly aroused by the baseness of Russian life; we are not geared to collect
all these drips and rivulets of popular anger and-—if one may say sor-concentrate
them. though they pour forth in much greater volume from Russian life than we all
imagine)and believe yet need to be combined into a powerful flow." (Lenin: "Hhat
To Do?"

In the conditions currently prevailing in the Federal Republic and West Berlin we
doubt whether it is at all possible to develop a strategy uniting the working class,
to create an organization that may simultaneously be the expression and the insti-
gator of the necessary unification. We doubt that the alliance between the social-
ist intelligentsia and the proletariat can be "welded." compelled by its call for
proletarian organizations. As yet it is the Springer Corporation that collects the
drips and rivulets on the baseness of German life, directing them-to even greater
baseness.

He assert that there can be no unification without revolutionary initiative, without
the practical revolutionary intervention of the advance guard, the socialist work-
ers and intellectuals, without concrete anti-imperialist struggle; that the alliance
can or cannot emerge only from joint struggles where the conscious section of the
workers and intellectuals must not direct proceedings but merely walk ahead.

We consider the organizations paper output mainly another example of the competition
among intellectuals who dispute among themselves about their standing with regard

to the better comprehension of Marx and do so on front of an imaginary jury that

can most certainly not be represented by the working class. because its very lan-
guages precludes the latter's involvement. They feel greater embarrassment when
caught out in a wrong quotation from Marx than in a lie when their practical work

is mentioned. The page numbers of their footnotes are almost always correct, the
membership figures issued for their organizations almost never. They fear the accu-
sation of revolutionary impatience more than their corruption by bourgeois profes-
sions. To ultimately graduate with Lukacs is important to them, to be quickly ex-
cited by Blanqui suspect. They express their internationalism in the grades they
award to one Palestinian commando organization by comparison with another--white
gentlemen who set themselves up to be the genuine executors of Marxism; they expros
this in the manner of patronage by asking wealthy friends to contribute money to

the Black Panthers and claim credit in heaven for their own contributions-not with
an eye on "victory in the popular war" but concerned only with their good conscience.
That is not the method of revolutionary intervention.

In his "Analysis of the Classes in Chinese Society" (1926), Mao contrasted the
struggle of the revolution with the struggle of the counterrevolurion as "the Red
Banner of the revolution, raised high by the Third International and calling upon
all oppressed classes the world over to gather around its banner; the other is the
White Banner of counterrevolution, raised by the League of Nations and calling upon
all counterrevolutionaries to gather around its banner." Mao distinguished the
classes in Chinese society by the criterion how they would decide between the Red
and the White Banner in the course of the revolution's advance in China. He was
not satisfied with merely analysing the economic situation of the variOus classes
in Chinese society. The attitudes of the various classes to the revolution were
also an element in his class analysis.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Harrist-Leninists will not exercise a leading role in future class struggles unless
the advance guard itself raises high the Red Banner of proletarian internationalism
and itself answers the question how to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat ,
how to achieve political power for the proletariat, how to destroy the power of the
bourgeoisie, and unless it is prepared by practical experience to answer these ques-
tions. The needed class analysis cannot be conducted without revolutionary practia.
without revolutionary initiative.

All over the country proletarian organizations have set out "revolutionary transi-
tional demands." They amount to struggles against the intensification of exploita-
tion, for cuts in working hours, against the waste of social wealth. for equal ways
for men and women and foreign workers. against speeded-up piecework, and so on.
These transitional demands are no more than labor union economics unless an answer
is simultaneously provided for the question how to get the better of the political,
military and propagandist pressure that is going to aggressively oppose these
claims if raised in massive class struggles. In that case, however—if nothing is
added to these demands--they are merely economic garbage, because they are not
worth to begin the revolutionary struggle and sustain it through victory, because
"to be victorious means acceptance of the principle that life is not the greatest
possession of the revolutionary" (Debray). These demands are good enough for labor
union intervention--"The trade unionist politics of the working class siuply amount
to the bourgeois politics of the working class" (Lenin). They do not represent a
method of revolutionary intervention.

Unless they raise the issue of arming themselves as their answer to the emergency
legislation. the Bundeswehr, the federal frontier guards, the police and the
Springer press, and stop their opportunist silence on these issues, the so-called
proletarian organizations differ from the DR? only insofar as they are even less
rooted in the masses, are verbally more radical and more knowledgeable in matters
of theory. In practice they operate on the level of civil rights activists who aim
at popularity at any price, assist the lies of the bourgeoisie that something can
be done in this state by the means of parliamentary democracy, encourage the prole-
tariat in fights that can only be lost--and in a barbarous manner--given this
state's potential for violence. "These Harrist-Leninist factions or parties,"
Debray writes about the com-mists of Latin America, "move within the same politi-
cal issues that are dominated by the oourgeoisie. Instead of changing them, they
have helped root them even more solidly. . ."

By their proposal once again to adjust to capitalist exploitative pressure, these

organizations offer no political future to the thousands of apprentices and youths
who, influenced by the student movement, began for the first time to withdraw from
the exploitative pressure in the factory. Confronted with youth crime these orga-
nizations assume virtually the standpoint of prison wardens, confronted with com-

rades in jail the standpoint of their judges, confronted with the underground the

standpoint of social workers.

Without practical consequences, the reading of "Das Kapital" is no more than a
bourgeois exercise. Without practical consequences programatic statements are no
more than idle chatter. Hithout practical consequences proletarian international-
ism is no more than a sham. To adopt the standpoint of the proletariat in theory
implies its adoption in practice.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘Ihe Red Army Pac-tion speaks of the primacy of practice. Whether it is correct now
to organize aimed resistance is something that will be decided by “nether it is
possible, can be ascertained only by tring it in practice.

V. Urban Guerrilla

It is therefore necessary from the aspect of its very nature and
from the aspect of a long lasting strategy to consider imerialisn
and all reactionaries as that which they are in fact, as paper
tigers. He mat base our strategic concepts on that knowledge.

On the other hand they are also living, steely and real tigers who
dezour people. We must base our tactical concepts on that know-
e ge.

Mao Ze-Dong, l Deceaber 1958

If it is true that American imperialism is a paper tiger, in other words that it
can ultimately be defeated; and if the thesis of the Chinese cos-unists is correct
according to whom victory over American iqerialism has been made possible because
the struggle against it proceeds in all corners of the earth, so that the forces of
inerialism are thereby fragmented, and their frag-entation renders then liable to
defeat--if that is correct, then there is no reason to exclude or omit any country
or any region from the anti-imperialist struggle because the forces of revolution
there are particularly weak, the forces of reaction there particularly strong.

Just as it is wrong to discourage the forces of revolution by underestimating them.
it is wrong to suggest to them to enter into conflicts in the course of which they
are bound to be burnt up and destroyed. The contrast between the honest conrades
in the organizations-never mind now the blabberers-and the Red Army Faction con-
sists in the fact that we accuse them of discouraging the forces of the revolution,
and they suspect us of burning out the forces of the revolution. It is true that
this points the direction in which the faction of the comrades working in factories
and city districts and the Red Army Faction put undue stress on the bow-if they
do so. Dogmatism and adventurism have long been characteristic deviations at

times of revolutionary weakness in a country. Since the anarchists have always
been the most severe critics of opportunism, anyone criticizing opportunists exposes
himself to the accusation of being an anarchist. That is old hat indeed.

The urban guerrilla concept was generated in Latin herica. It is the same there
as it can be here: Merely the method of revolutionary intervention by generally

weak revolutionary forces.

Urban guerrilla assumes that there will never be the Prussian marching order pre-
ferred by many so-called revolutionaries for leading the people into revolutionary
battle. It assumes that it will be too late to prepare for armed battle by the

time the situation is ripe for it. That, without revolutionary initiative, no revo-
lutionary orientation will arise in a country with such a potential for violence,
such a collapse and weakness of revolutionary traditions as the Federal Republic,
even if conditions for revolutionary battle were far more favorable than they are
now—due to the political and economic development of late capitalism itself.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Urban guerrilla is therefore the consequence of the long accowlished negation of
parliamentary democracy by its very own representatives, the inevitable answer to
emergency legislation and hand grenade law, the readiness to fight with the means
the system has made available for its own use to destroy its opponents. Urban
guerrilla bases on the acknowledgment instead of the apologia of the facts.

The student movement was to some extent aware of the capacity of urban guerrilla.
The latter is able to translate into concrete terms the agitation and propaganda.
to which left efforts still tend to be reduced. This can be imagined relative to
the Springer campaign of that time, the Cabora Bassa campaign of the Heidelberg
students. the squatter movement in Frankfurt, in reference to the Federal Repub-
lic's military aid to the comprador regimes in Africa, to the critique of the exe-
cution of sentences and class justice, to works security guards and in-factory
justice. It is able to transform verbal internstionalism by the procurement of
weapons and money. It can blunt the illegalisation of communists-~that weapon of
the system--by organizing an underground permanently removed from the grip of the
police. Urban guerrilla is a weapon in the class war.

Urban guerrilla is armcd war, insofar as it is the police that ruthlessly uses guns,
and class justice exonerates the Kurras while condemning comrades to death in life
unless we prevent them from doing so. Urban guerrilla means not to allow ourselves
to be demoralized by the violence of the system.

Urban guerrilla aims to destroy the state ruling apparatus at various points, render
it ineffective in various places, to destroy the myth of the system's all-pervasive-
ness and inviolability.

Urban guerrilla presumes the organization of an illegal apparatus. That means safe
houses, ammunition, cars, documents. In his "Hinimanual of the Urban Guerrilla,"
Harighela described the details to be observed. What else needs to be observed we
will at any time tell those who need to know, if they want to do it. He do not yet
know much, but we know something.

It is iaportant to have gained legal political experience before finally deciding

to take up the armed struggle. Where the cosmﬁtment to the revolutionary left still
originates with a need to be in fashion, it is better not to go any farther than
may be done while leaving the possibility of retreat open.

The Red Army Faction and urban guerrilla is that faction and practice most severely
fought by the authorities, because it has drawn a clear line between itself and the
enemy. That presumes political identity, assumes that some learning processes have
gone before.

Our initial organizational concept included the combination of urban guerrilla with
rank and file work. We wished for all of us simultaneously to cooperate in the

city district or factory in existing socialist groups, help to influence the discus-
tion, gain experience, learn. It turned out that this was not possible. The poli-
tical police control of these groups, their meetings, their discussions, is already

so pervasive that it is impossible to attend them if one wishes to escape surveil-
lance. It is impossible for the individual to combine legal with illegal work.

101
INJR‘OFIWCIAL USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Urban guerrilla presumes us to be fully aware of our own motivation. to be no

longer affected by BlLD—ZEITUNG methods, no longer hurt by the antisemitism-criminal-
subhuman-murder and arson syndrome they use to describe revolutionaries, by all the
shit that they alone are able to produce and pronounce, and that still influences
many comrades in their judgment about us.

Of course the systen does not leave us a free tcrrain, nor is there any means-in-
eluding slander-~that it is not ready to use against us.

Nor is there any media with any goal except that of looking after the interests of
capital in one way or the other, not even any socialist media reaching beyond it-
self, its circle, its newsstand sales, its subscribers, media not mainly dealing

in accidental, personal and bourgeois behavior. There is no media free of capital
control, ranging from advertising to the ambition of the writers to be accepted in
the establishment, to the radio councils, the concentration in the newspaper narket.
The ruling media is the media of the rulers, divided up into market shares, devel-
oping strata specific ideologies. Hhatever it communicates is in the service of
its grip on the particular market share. The journalist category comes under the
heading "sales." News as merchandise, information as an item of consumption. It
is bound to vilify anything that is not consumable. Readership figures for the
advertising-intensive press media. ratings for television--neither of them can af-
ford any contradictions berween itself and the public, no antagonisns, no possible
consequences. Anyone wishing to stay in competition must keep up with the most
powerful opinion shapers on the market. In other words, dependence on the Springer
Corporation grows to the extent that the Springer Corporation grows. It has now
begun to buy up local newspapers too. The urban guerrilla has nothing to expect of
these media than the utmost hostility. The urban guerrilla must orient itself to
Marxist criticism and autocriticism, nothing else. As Hao connents, "he who does
not fear drawing and quartering, dares to drag the emperor from his horse.“

Long-term planning and attention to detail are postulates for the urban guerrilla,
especially insofar as we do not only talk about but act in accordance with them.
Without keeping open the retreat to bourgeois professions, without being able once
more to hang the revolution on the nail in the tract home, without implacably will-
ing that which Blanqui rhetorically expressed by the words "it is the duty of a re-
volutionary always to fight, to fight regardless, to fight unto death."

-- There is no revolutionary struggle, nor has there ever been one, where that tenet
did not apply: Russia, China, Cuba, Algeria, Palestine, Vietnam.

Some say that the political potential of organization, agitation and propaganda is
not nearly exhausted, and only when it is should the issue of armed struggle arise.
He claim: The political potential cannot be fully utilized as long as the goal,
the armed struggle, is not noted as the goal of politicization, as long as the
strategic appreciation of all reactionaries being paper tigers is not visible be-
hind the tactical appreciation of their being criminals, murderers and exploiters.

We will not talk of "armed propaganda," we will make it. The liberation of the
prisoners was not undertaken for propagandist reasons but to get out our comrade.
We are alleged to have carried out bank robberies; we would do that only to get

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

money. Hao says that "glittering successes" need to be achieved "when the enemy
paints us in the blackest colors." These glittering successes are only relatively
our successes. We owe the great howl going up about us to our Latin American com-
rades, to the clear line they have already drawn between themselves and the enemy.
As a result, merely on suspicion of a few bank robberies, the rulers here "confront
us as resolutely" as if there were really something firmly built upon what we have
just begun, the urban guerrilla of the Red Army Faction.

VI. Legality and Illegality

Revolution in the West

The challenge

To the capitalist power in the strongholds

Is the command of the hour

It is of crucial significance

The current world situation knows no place nor forces
Able to guarantee peaceful development

And democratic stabilisation

The crisis tends to sharpen more and lore

Now to insist on provincial isolationism

0r postpone the struggle to a later time means

To be dragged into the maelstrom of the general decay .

Il Manifesto. From Thesis No 55

The anarchist slogan "destroy anything that destroys you" aims at the direct mobili-
zation of the base, youths in prisons and reeducation camps, in schools and training,
aims at those who are worst off, aims at spontaneous comprehension, is the invita-
tion to direct resistance. Just that was meant by Stokely Carmichael's black Power
slogan: "Trust your own experience!" This slogan is based upon the recognition
that everything, absolutely everthing in capitalism that oppresses, torments, ob-
structs and burdens us has its origin in capitalist production conditions, that
every oppressor, in whatever guise he may present himself, is always a representa-
tive of the class interest of capital, in other words a class enemy.

From that aspect the anarchist slogan is correct, proletarian and class combative.
It is wrong insofar as it communicates the erroneous concept that no more is needed
than to hit out, to hit them in the face, that organization is secondary, discipline
bourgeois, the class analysis superfluous. Exposed without defenses to the more
severe repression following their actions, their organization lacking regard for

the dialectic of legality and illegality, they are legally arrested. The tenet of
some organizations "communists are not so stupid as to illegalize themselves" merely
suits class justice, nobody else. Insofar as it affirms that the legal opportuni-
ties of communist agitation and propaganda, organization, political and economic
struggle must definitely be used and should not be frivolously hazarded, it is right
--but that is not what it means. It means that the limits set by the class state
state and its justice to socialist efforts are adequate for utilizing all opportu-
nities, that we should keep within these limits, that we must always draw back when
confronted with the illegal excesses of this state, just because they will always

be legalized-legality at any price. Illegal imprisonment, terror verdicts, police
excesses, blackmail and duress by the public prosecutor--like it or lump it, com‘
munists are not so foolish.

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He is an opportunist. He does not maintain solidarity. He writes off the comrades
in jail, he excludes from the socialist movement the organization and politicizatim:
of all those who, due to their social origin and situation, cannot survive by other
than criminal actions: The underground, the subproletariat, innumerable proletarhm
youths, foreign workers. He serves the theoretical criminalization of all those
who do not join the organizations. He is their alliance with class justice. He

is stupid.

Legality is a question of power. The relation of legality and illegality is to be
defined by the contradiction between reformist and fascist exercise of domination.
Their current Bonn representatives are the social/liberal coalition on the one
hand, Bartel/Strauss on the other, its media representatives the SUBDDBUTSCHB
ZBITUNG, DBR STERN, the Third Program of the WDR and the SFB, for example, and the
FRAMKFURTBR RUNDSCHAU on the one hand, the Springer Corporation, the Free Berlin
Transmitter, the Second German Television Service, the BAYNBRKURIBB on the other;
its police the Munich approach on the one hand, the Berlin model on the other;

its justice the Federal Constitutional Court on the one hand, the Federal Court on
the other.

The reformist approach aims at the avoidance of conflicts, by institutionalization
(codetermination), promises of reforms (for example with respect to the prisons),
the ending of old conflicts (for example the chancellor's kneeling down in Poland),
the avoidance of provocation (the soft approach of the Munich Police and the Fed-
eral Administrative Court in Berlin, for example), the verbal acknowledgment of
abuses (in public education in Hesse and Berlin, for example). It is part of the
conflict avoidance tactics of reformism to move somewhat within and a little less
outside legality; that gives it the appearance of legitimacy, of sticking to the
constitution, that aims at the integration of contradictions, allows left criticism
to spin in a vacuum, that aims at keeping the Young Socialists within the SPD.
There can be no doubt that the reformist approach is the more effective approach
from the standpoint of the long-term stabilization of capitalist rule. However, it
does depend on certain assumptions. It assumes economic prosperity, because the
Munich Police force's soft approach, for example, is much more expensive than the
hard line of the Berlin police--as was succinctly explained by Munich's police pre-
sident: "Two officers with a machine gun can keep 1,000 people at bay; 100 offi-
cers with rubber truncheons can keep 1,000 people at bay. Without any such aids

it would take 300-400 police officers." The reformist approach assumes no organism
anticapitalist opposition--as we again realize from the example of Munich.

Incidentally, the monopolization of state and economic power increases under cover
of political reformisn. Schiller is doing this by his economic policy and Strauss
carried it through by his financial reform--the sharpening of exploitation by the
intensification and division of labor in the sphere of production, by long-range
rationalization in the sphere of administration and services.

We have all learned from the student movement and the Paris May that the accumula-
tion of power in the hands of the few proceeds more smoothly if done quietly, if
unnecessary provocations are avoided that might cause uncontrollable solidarisation
processes. That is why the Red Cells have not yet been banned, that is why the RP
was admitted as a legal institution in the guise of the DKP--without lifting the

101;
FOR omcm. use own
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

KP ban--, that is why there are still liberal television programs, and that is why
some organizations can still afford not to consider themselves so stupid as they
actually are.

The scope of legality offered by reformism is capital's repl to the attacks by the
student movement and the Apo lextraparlismentary opposition -as long as the powers
that be can afford the reformist reply, it is the more effective reply. To rely on
this legality, to extend it in metaphysical terms, to wish to statistically genera-
lize it, iust simply defend it--that means to repeat the mistakes in strategy com-
mitted by the self-defense regions in Latin America, to leave.time for reaction to

assemble and reorganize to the point when it not merely illegalizes but destroys
the left.

Hilly Heyer, for instance, does not even pretend to tolerance; he acts and, in
answer to the accusation by the liberal press that his alcohol checks make poten-
tial criminals of all drivers, returns the brazen answer: "we will carry on regard-
less!"--thereby reminding the liberal media of its insignificance. Bdusrd Zimmer-
mann turns an entire people into policemen, the Spring Corporation controls the
Berlin police, 32 columnist Reer instructs Berlin interrogating magistrates about
the issue of arrest orders. Taking place here is mass mobilization in the spirit

of fascism, drastic proceedings, the death penalty, striking power and deployment
--the new look bestowed on Bonn politics by the Brand/leinemann/Scheel administra-
tion is no more than a false front.

Evidently the comrades who so superficially deal with the issue of legality and il-
legality have swallowed whole the amnesty that, after the event, served to draw
the fangs of the student movement. By amnestying hundreds of students, these got
away with no more than a scare, and further radicalization was prevented. Regard-
less of the university science factory, the students were sharply reminded of the
material privileges bestowed by bourgeois college attendance, including the ascent
of the social ladder. Accordingly the class barrier between them and the proleta-
riat was restored, between their privileged daily life as students and the daily
life of the assembly line workerss who were not amnestied by the sane class enemy.
Thus theory was once again divided from practice. The calculation "amnesty equals
pacification" proved to be correct.

The social democrat voters initiative launched by a few honorable writers-~not only
the fucked up Grass-~as an attempt at positive and democratic mobilization, intend-
ed in other wirds to be a defense against fascism and therefore to be duly noted,
nistakenly considers the whole of political reality to be represented by some pub-
lishing houses and editorial offices in radio and television institutions not yet
subjected to the rationality of the monopolies, institutions which lag behind as
left-overs. The areas of more severe repression are not the ones first encounter-
ed by a writer: Prisons, class justice, speeded-up assembly lines, accidents at
work, consumer debt, schools, BILD-ZBITURG and 32, the residential barracks of the
suburbs, foreign worker ghettoes--writers experience that at most as an esthetic
impression, certainly not as'a political reality.

Legality is the ideology of parliamentarian, social partnership, the pluralist
society. It turns into a fetish if those who boast of it ignore the fact that
telephones may be legally tapped, the mail legally censored, neighbors legally

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0ND

interrogated, informers legally paid, surveillance exercised legally--that the orga-
nization of political work must be legal at one and the same time unless it wishes
permanently to be exposed to the grasp of the political police.

we do not bet on spontaenous antifascist mobilization to be aroused by terror 55d
fascism nor do we consider legality mere corruption. He know that our work provides
pretexts, just as alcohol does for Hilly Heyer, the rise in crime for Strauss and
Eastern policy for Barzel, and as the red traffic light run by s Yugoslav for the
Frankfurt taxi drivers, and the movement of the hand to the pocket for the murderer
of the car thief in Berlin. And pretext for even more, because we are communists,
and unless the communists are going to organize themselves and fight, terror and
repression will arouse only fear and resignation instead of provoking resistance,
class hatred and solidarity. It will depend on that, whether or not everything
here will proceed smoothly in the spirit of imperialism. It will depend on whether
communists are so stupid as to allow themselves to be dealt with at will, or whether
they use legality, among other means, to organize illegality instead of raising the
one rather than the other to the status of a fetish.

The fate of the Baclk Panther Party and of the Gauche Proletarienne prounably had
its roots in that wrong assessment that failed to appreciate the actual contradic-
tion between constitution and constitutional reality nor the exacerbation of this
contradiction once organized resistance emerges. They failed to realize that the
terms of legality are necessarily altered by active resistance, and that it is
therefore imperative simultaneously to utilize legality for the political struggle
and the organization of illegality, that it is wrong to wait for illegalization

as for a blow of fate delivered by the system, because illegalization then simply
implies destruction,and the system's calculations triumph.

The Red Army Faction organizes illegality as an offensive position for revolution-
ary intervention.

To conduct urban guerrilla war means offensively to conduct the anti-isperialist
struggle. The Red Army Faction produces the connection between legal and illegal
struggles, between national and international struggles, between political and
armed struggles, between the strategic and tactical destination of the internation-
al communist movement.

73 be urban guerrilla means, despite the weakness of the revolutionary forces in
the Federal Republic and Berlin, here and now to intervene in a revolutionary
fashion.

cleaver says: Either they are part of the problem or part of the
solution. There is nothing in between. That shit has been exam-
ined and studied from all sides for tens of years and generations.
I simply maintain that most everything happening in this country
no longer needs to be analyzed.

Victory in the Popular War!

106
INJR 0F13C1A1.USEi)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents
I. HolgerHeins' Last better 13
II. Ulrike's Letter to Hanna Krabbe ..... 16
III. Jan-Carl Raspe's Statement of 11 Hay 1976 at the Trial in Stuttgart-

Stasﬂiein ..... ..... ......................... ....... ...... ..... .. 21
IV. Fragment on Structure 23
V. Andreas/Ulrike Concept of Another Trial Bnd April 1976 27
VI. (Pi-om the Stamixeim Discussion. Early Hay 1976!. Topic October Re-

volution-~Third International) .................................. 35
VII. Parts on the Statement of the RAF Prisoners of January 1976 no
VIII. History of the FRG, Old Left, Fragmentnon the Motions on Evidence 55
IX. Ulrike's Speech on Andreas' Liberation, Hoabit, 13 September 1974 62
X. Andreason26 August 1975 75
XI. Andreas on 18 June 1976 ..... ..... .. 89
XII. Andreas on 16 July 1975 . ..... . 95
XIII. The Prisoners on 21 August 1975 98
XIV. 0n the State Security Justice, Psychological Warfare and Imperial-

ist Hedia. Statement by the Four RAF Prisoners on the Appeal

Against the Second Criminal Charter of the Stuttgart Higher

Regional Court ofSAugust 1975 ..... 112
XV. On 19 August 1975, on the Request to Make a Personal Statement .. 136
XVI. Reasons Stated by the Prisoners at the Trial, Reconstructed from

the Transcript ..... 160
XVII, Andreas' Letter to the Prisoners, Three Fragments to the "State-

ment on the Issue" ..... ..... 177
XVIII:1. Transcript Hilde. Brigitte liohnhaupt's Testimony in Sta-ilein on

22 July 1976 ..... ........ ...... 208
XVIII:2. Transcript Leo. Helmut Pohl's Testimony in Stasﬂzeim 231
XIX. SPIEGEL Interview, 20 January 1975 .. ..... ..... 261
XX. LEHONDB DIPLOMATIQUB Interview ...... ... 262
XXI. Irngard Hoeller's Speech at the Trial in Hanburgnﬂay 1975 304
XXII. Ronald Augustin's Speech in Bueckeburg 312
XXIII. RAP Statement on the Bod: Attack in Hauburg's Hain Railway Station 323
XXIV. Gudrun on 19 January 1976 in Stanitein ..... 326
XXV. Letter to the RAF Prisoners. FRANKFURT“ RUHDSCHAU 6 February 1975 332
XXVI. Statement by the Comando Holger Heins of 210 April 1975 33b
XXVII. Red Army Faction: The Concept Urban Guerrilla 337
XXVIII. Red Army Faction: Urban Guerrilla and Class War ..... 368
XXIX. The Action of Black Septeuber in Munich 611
XXX. Conando Statements: Frankfurt, Buddenberg, Springer, Comnique

by the Commando Ulrike Meinhof on Buback's Execution .......... M98
XXXI. Motion for Sun-oning Schmidt and Brandt . 1055
Appendix
Quotations fro-politicians ....... 1069
Motions for evidence on Vietnam ..... .. 1.76
Defense motion on evidence ofloHay 1976 . ....... 6810
Excerpt from Stan-heist transcript, 22 June 1976 ............... ..... (091

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

State-ants by the witnesses rejecred by the court, made at a press conference
in Frankfurt on 23 June 1976 ...............................................
Ulrike's letter to a lawyer .. ....... . ...... ................................
0n lawyers/September 1975 .........................................;........
l. A few basic decisions on trial strategy and on the lawyers ..............
II. The lssue--two levels .................................................
He now decide it this way ..................................................
Vietnam War .......................................................... ..... ..

Notes .............. ........ ................................................

1.96
511
53;
566
554
561
571
571.

COPYRIGHT: RAF/PRC, c/o International Connittee for the Defense of Political Pri-

soners in Western Europe-8ection PRC, Stuttgart
Set and printed GOTAB, Hallo, Sweden, 1977

11698
080: 6000/0004

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1)R 0WNWC]A[.UEEI(HNLY

FRANCE

DEBRB ON SECURITY, COURTS POLICIES: TERRORIST DBSTABILIZATION
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 23 Apr 82 pp 76-77

[Article by Michel Debre: “The French Will Not Pardon Insecurity--the Govern-
ment Risks Losing Its Legitimacy in This Hatter"!

[Text] "We must have an overall approach to the security of the French peo-
ple." This recent declaration by the prime minister would have deserved to be
stated above. Indeed, we have been experiencing for some months an ardor for
reform whose benefit to France and the French people is hard to perceive.

The proclamation of an amnesty so generous that the police receive orders to
follow certain dangerous recidivists from the time they leave prison. Aboli-
tion, in an impassioned outburst, of the death penalty. Elimination, without
serious examination, of the Court of State Security. Elimination of the high-
security sections in the prisons is announced. Promulgation of a memorandum
ordering the Public Prosecutor’s offices not to apply certain measures that
have the force of law. Modification of the Code in order to soften the proce-
dures for rapid punishment. Announcement of the elimination of the armed-
forces courts. Indulgence toward the occupations of factories and the seques-
trations of engineers and managers. Contradictory instructions to the police.
A Justice system that is criticized or disavowed when it seems severe. For
several months. the government has been improvising or appearing to improvise,
for while the laws have been prepared hastily, they all derive from one ideo-
logy: not to be severe, not to be repressive.

Has everything so bad? Even if yesterday's government intervened arbitrarily
in too many judicial matters, we were not living under a regime of tyranny.

So is it desired, by weakening the people's confidence in the democratic insti-
tutions, to provoke troubles from which a so-called popular dictatorship would
emerge? Unquestionably, some trade-union animators are putting their shoulders
to the wheel. In fact, things appear to me to be both simpler and more seri-
ous. During years of opposition, the present majority made promise upon pro-
mise to all those who complained about the existing state of affairs, whether
they were right or wrong. And on top of everything, we are witnessing the suc-
cess of an ideological affirmation according to which the faults of a person
are due above all to society. Thus society is not supposed to have sufficient
moral virtue to mete out punishment.

109
FIHICHHHIJAI.USE(IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But public opinion does not philosophize. It sees the reality and bridles at
it. This haste to disarm the state and society appears all the more incompre-
hensible to it in that every week brings one or more examples of crimes and of-
fenses from which it draws the conclusion that the security of persona and
property is no longer assured.

Does the "overall approach" announced to us express a new awareness of the ill-
considered approach that the ministry has taken, or simply an entirely tempo-
rary retreat due to circumstances unfavorable to the popularity of the govern-
ors?

Let us hope that it means a new awareness.
The feeling of insecurity comes from three quite distinct sources.

1) The information media are giving publicity--as is natural, for that matter
--to the striking but normal fact of the traditional delinquency and criminali-
ty. At the same time, modern technical means are giving some of their manifes-
tations a more spectacular aspect: I an referring to certain hold-ups.

This better knowledge of doings that are as old as the world is creating a new
sensitivity that is a social fact that the government must heed-just as any
government should pay heed to the fact that new means of communication, such as
television, can incite to violence.

2) For a great many reasons, there are situations that provoke an increase in
antisocial acts. This is the case with overpopulated cities, old neighborhoods
or modern apartment houses. Boredoa and promiscuity encourage various forms of
violence, with or without gangs of youth, with or without motorcycles. This is
the case also with unemployment, which leads idle young people and not-so-young
people to join in with the wild ambition of a gangleader or a professional
hooligan.

Apart from the situations that create a state of mind propitious to delinquency
or criminality, there are vices that have the same consequences. This is the
case with drugs, which, along with alcoholism, have become a scourge whose ef-
fect on the insecurity of the citizens is becoming aggravated.

3) In an entirely different area, we are experiencing a phenomenon whose ser-
iousness is too often, for political reasons, hushed up: terrorism.

ls there an Internationale of terrorism? The answer to this question is nega-
tive if one takes it to mean a unity of objective. The Irish terrorists do not
have the same objective as the Palestinian terrorists; the Baader-Meinhof gang
in the PRC does not have the sale designs as the Spanish Basques; the Hoslem
Brotherhood does not have any common point with the Armenians or with the Ital-
ian Red Brigades. But the answer is positive if one means a complicity in the
trade and transport of weapons, the training of people and the networks for
getting the assassins and the bomb-setters from one country to another. Fin-
ally, there is a very strong bond among all of them, albeit a negative one: a

110
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

general desire to "destabilize." That is why, apart from the professionals--

hoth mercenaries and traffickers--one often finds militants who receive poli-
tical aid and support, and also brainpower. The flareup of outrages in Corsica
is in no way an insular creation. External aid has been necessary, and is
still necessary.

This diversity that public opinion feels without always being able to analyze
it puts the problems of security at a higher level. Security is no longer the
affair of the minister of interior, or the minister of justice alone. For some
years now it has been a state problem requiring overall action in which any
contradiction should be eliminated as much as possible. It is useless to in-
crease the police forces if convicted criminals are freed early. It is useless
to blame the antisocial effects of the big prisons if new ones are built with-
out more precautions. Inversely, it is dangerous, in order to justify certain
precautions, to belittle the importance of international terrorism, or to treat
drugs as if they were a fashion that will go away by itself. All the more so
in that beyond the diversity there are bonds among all those who, for reasons
of occupational misfortunes or ideological madness, place themselves openly in
the field of crime.

Prevent the damage of the drug trade-~yes. But one should not be indulgent to-
ward the dealer just because the addict has suffered from an environment that
has exposed him to temptation.

Prevent the tendencies toward delinquency--yes. But one should not be indul-
gent toward the procurer or the gangleader just because the young delinquent
has suffered from an absence of family.

Prevent certain serious social frustrations--yes. But the fact that a confed-
erate is animated by disinterested motives should not close one's eyes to the
crimes of the professional killers or lunatics who do not shrink from recidiv-
ism. Let us therefore know how to associate humane morality and a collective
concept of life with social firmness and national affirmation, for the legiti-
macy of democracy is at stake.

There is, of course, humane morality.

Before punishment, there is education. But in the times we live in, there are
serious gaps in our education. Are children and adolescents ever told that
liberty means respect for others and for the law? "hen school is out, who sup-
vrvises the leisure-time activities of young people whose families are broken
up or nonexistent, who looks after them? Consider also the seriousness of in-
sufficient occupational training, and, since the rise of unemployment, the fact
that young people are not received into the world of work at the end of their
studies.

There is. of course, the concept of collective life.
Urban development is not just the construction of houses and architectural com-

plexes. Are people sufficiently aware of how bad the laissez-faire of the be-
ginning of the century was, with its ill-conceived, ugly and inhuman neighbor-

111
FOR OI-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hoods? It is not enough today to create green spaces in order to humanize the
citadels of concrete. It is necessary, by means of cultural centers that are
not politicized, to orient the new inhabitants toward social solidarity and de-
votion to a collective effort.

But there is also social firmness.

It is possible that the merchant who defends himself is egotistic or that he
once committed tax fraud, or that the policeman who waylays a burglar is too
quick on the trigger. But this does not justify the person who steals from the
merchant. or justify the acquittal of a hardened criminal who fires on a po-
liceman. We are no longer in the times when an incredible poverty could justi—
fy criminal or senseless actions. And while it is good to develop the social
services, we must know how to judge and restrain. It is not shameful for a de—
mocratic society to defend itself and punish, it being clearly understood, of
course, that all offences that fall under the law should be subjected to the
justice system. Let us not be more compassionate toward murderers than toward
those who sponge off savings [as published].

But there is also national affirmation.

The right of asylum that France generously affirms has its c0unterpart: sever-
ity toward those who come to French territory to settle their accounts. Fail-
ure to be severe toward them amounts to compromising the right of asylum. As
regards us directly, political liberty forbids passiveaess in the face of the
attacks aimed at the unity of the Republic. the integrity of its territory and
its national sovereignty. From this point of view, the elimination of the
Court of State Seourity has been a mistake: it was an exceptional court only in
function of the exceptional but real threats posed against France. The war be—
ing waged against us is not to be eliminated by a law.

Finally, there is the legitimacy of the government.

A government, even if animated by the best intentions in the world, cannot
stand up against a popular feeling of insecurity. The path that leads a body
of voters who yesterday sometimes found fault with excessive severity toward
some people to declare that the government, through lack of authority, is being
indulgent to thieves and murderers--i.e., that it is trembling before them--is
a short one. Now the first duty of a government is to ensure the security of
its citizens. Insufficiency in this domain can spell the end of democracy.

Failure to take all action to guarantee the security of the citizens means put-
ting liberty at peril.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse SA

11267
080: 3100/608

112
FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(HHLY
BRIEFS

RIGHWING TERRORIS‘I‘S ARRESTED-Bone, 1 Jun (ANSA)--After lengthy investigations,
Italian police have arrested 5 rishtwing terrorists, one of whom has been in-
plicated in the attenpted murder of Bernardo Leighton, senator and founder of
Chile's Christian Democratic Party, and his wife Anita. The attack on the
Chilean couple occurred in Rome on October 6, 1975. Bruno Di Lilia, 26, a
nenber of the rightwing "National Vanguard" novenent, is accused of taking
part in the ambush. Pour others were ilplicated in the attack: Pier Luigi
Concutelli, Adriano Thilger, Paolo Signorelli and Giulio Crescenzi, all
arrested sole tine ago. The others arrested along with Di Lula in Rome
Monday were: Rodolfo Massimo, 27, Felice Zebbi, 37, Angelo Bartocci, 19,

and Vittorio Basioni, 26. They are all accused of a long series of terrorist
actions, including nurder, attempted nurder, robbery and Wings. [Text]
[A0010839 Rene ANSA in English 0828 m 1 June 82]

cso: 6131/ 510

113
GRAPO TERRORIST TRAINING MANUAL
Madrid EXPERIENCIAS DE TRES ANOS DB LDCHA ARHADA in Spanish May 78 pp 1-36
Published by the 1 October Antifsscist Resistance Groups, Madrid, Hay 1978

[Text] I. Conditions under which Activities of 1 October Antifasciat Resis-
tance Groups Are Developing

The GRAPO [1 October Antifascist Resistance Groups] is not the first organiza~
tion that has taken up arms to fight against fascism in Spain. The peoples
of the various nationalities of Spain have a long tradition of revolutionary
armed struggle directed against the regime of the cxploiter, parasitary, and
reactionary classes. The appearance of the GRAPO means no more and no less
than the continuation of that long tradition under the new economic, politi-
cal, and social conditions prevailing in Spain.

The GRAPO constitute a revolutionary military organization which has sprung
from the heat of the mass struggles to support and strengthen the organized
people's resistance movements against fascism in Spain. The GRAPO are
turning out to be the response of the masses to the lack of real political
and labor union freedoms; they are in line with the defense of the immediate
and future interests of the vast masses of the people; and their objective
is none other than to serve the people at all times and to become, at the
proper time, the revolutionary people's army which the mass movement needs
in order to defeat and once and for all to do away with fascism and mono-
polism in Spain. ~

When the GRAPO appeared, no antifascist and no democratically minded citizen
doubted the necessity for this organization, nor its type of struggle. Indeed,
the blows which the GRAPO have struck against the reactionaries over the past
3 years have greatly contributed to the retreat of the fascist regime in all
areas and very particularly they helped raise the fighting spirit and improve
the development of the organized struggle of the masses. 'Today, after the
electoral and pseudodemocratic masquerades prepared by the monopolies and
all of their reformist lackeys, masquerades behind which they intend to hide
their real countenance and conceal their real setbacks in the face of the
revolutionary mass movement, one must ask oneself the following question:

Do the organization and the antifascist armed struggle continue to be _
necessary?

11h
FOR’OF1NC1AI.USE|MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"He who holds the rifle, holds power." This principle is valid both for Spain
and in all of the countries of the world and our enemies have always been very
much aware of it. All we have to do is recall the operations in response to
the shootings of 27 September or the series of attacks against fascist monu-
ments and centers on 18 July 1976 or the campaign in support of release of
political prisoners which centered around the seizure of the fascist policemen
and other more recent actions of a propagandistic and mass-aid type, which
were so well received to point up the need for our work, its importance to

the mass movement, and to prove that we will be invincible if we continue on
this road.

Fascism tries to camouflage itself but it is present in all manifestations of
the state and of economic, social, and cultural life in Spain; it has not
disappeared, as they are trying to make the popular masses believe,and they

are still waiting for another opportunity to impose themselves upon the Spanish
people with blood and fire. For this purpose, they are strengthening the
entire repressive machinery while the domesticated reformist parties try to
wash the face of that monstrous apparatus and to give it a moral force which

it never had. They are carrying out a real moral and material rearmament of
the forces of the police and the army, of the courts and the repressive laws,
etc.; reaction is throwing dirt into the eyes of the masses so that they will
not see this new preparation intended to keep the country in a permanent

state of war. What does this mean, if not the continued presence of the police
in the boroughs of the big cities? It is not "crime" which worries them (here
the only criminals, thieves and major criminals are "our respectable rulers");
what really worries them is the upswing in the development of the revolutionary
mass movement as well as the spread and strength displayed by its armed organi-
zations.

Under the current conditions of serious economic crisis, with a constant rise
in unemployment and poverty, an increase in repressive measures taken by the
state, etc., and the resultant development of the revolutionary mass movement,
it is necessary and therefore inevitable that popular armed organizations
should spring up which put a stop to the abuses and excesses of the big
capitalists and their state.

He must therefore realize that the revolutionary organization and armed struggle
will not only continue to be necessary but that we are today facing a situation
that is much more favorable than when we began. The regime has been retreating
continuously and today faces major problems and is more beset than ever before
by the struggle of the masses and the armed actions which are assuming great
significance throughout the country. But the situation is not only changing
shape in a very favorable fashion for us; in addition to that one must keep in
mind-and perhaps that is a less favorable aspect for us-—thst the enemy has
learned and now has much more knowledge about us than when we began. This is
why it is necessary to analyze this experience. But we can already say that,
for a long period of time, we are going to have to keep moving under these
conditions which are favorable from the political viewpoint but which are
relatively unfavorable from the viewpoint of our movement's organization. We
must therefore as minutely as possible analyze all of our experiences in order
to bring our methods of organization and all of the actions we carry out into
line with this new situation.

11
FOR OFFICIA USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The First of October Antifascist Resistance Groups, as we said earlier, consti-
tute an organization which has more than 3 years of experience in the intensive
fight against fascism; in other words, the GRAPO already have a history, albeit
a short one, which supplies us with valuable lessons.

We can say that in the beginning, the GRAPO started almost from scratch; they
had no experience and they did not have the means necessary to conduct the
fight and it could not be otherwise in a military organization which has its
roots among the popular masses. This is why we were guided by the principle
according to which "you acquire military knowledge and resources by fighting
the enemy"; this principle continues to retain its full value for us. For a
certain period of time, our activities were developed with relative ease; the
police and other information media of the state lacked data and knowledge about
our organization; that enabled us to keep accumulating the means and experience
necessary to initiate the battle. Indeed, the GRAPO did not reveal themselves
except a long time after they had initiated their actions and after an infra-
structure capable of withstanding the blows of the enemy forces had been
created. These forces, for their part, took more than 2 years to gather the
data necessary to "zero in on us" and, in turn, to launch their repressive

and propaganda operations against us. But it was already late; the initial
battle, the most important in any war, they had already lost. During that
time, we continued developing our strength, we acquired the means necessary,
we struck very hard blows against fascism, and we won the heart of the masses.
The struggle, on the part of the fascist state, was concentrated on wiping

us out before the influence of our actions would make itself felt among the
masses but we can say that they did not attain this objective. The repression
unleashed against our organization did cause numerous losses but did not pre-
vent us from continuing our actions which grew in scope. On the other hand.
their campaign of slander has also backfired against them, ruining those
periodical organs which had initiated those lies. We definitely emerged
triumph from that difficult stage. This was mainly due to the fact that, to
destroy us, the monopolies had to create economic and political conditions
different from those existing in Spain and thus eliminate the resistance
movement which had been growing in Spain for a long time; and this, as we can
understand, is completely impossible for them to accomplish. We must always
keep this aspect of the question in mind: The popular resistance movement

is the thing that nurtures and gives life to the armed organization; we must
never separate ourselves from the mass movement; in that way we will be
invincible.

The conditions under which our military struggle is developing are those of
a capitalist and industrialized country. We have a powerful proletariat

and we have big, heavily populated cities. The government of the big mono-
poly bourgeoisie and all of the reactionaries have concentrated all of their
repressive and administrative functions in a few capitals. This is why our
actions must be carried out primarily in the cities, not in the rural areas.
At the same time one must keep in mind that, both because of conditions and
because of the popular content of the struggle we are fighting, that struggle
has the character of a prolonged war and will have to be developed along a
rising line, from less to more. On the other hand, we have to keep in mind
that, under current conditions and for a long period of time to come, we

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FF1C1AL USE‘ONLN

will not be able to count on foreign aid; this must make us rely only on our-
selves and exclusively fall back on our own forces and the forces of the people.

For a long period of time, we are going to have to face the political police
and the Civil Guard as our main enemies. At any rate, our actions have always
been directed against the fascist state as a whole and this is how it will
continue in the future because it would be very harmful to our movement and

to the popular cause if we were to devote ourselves to a "particular" struggle
against the state's repressive forces.

In their vain attempts to wipe us out, we must keep in mind that the police and
the Civil Guard are familiar with our methods of struggle and organization; they
have arrested and they have files on a large number of our fighters and they
especially seek to wipe out our infrastructure. All of this, combined with

the numerous losses we have suffered, is the price which we inevitably had to
pay for our earlier advances. But this price, as we have seen, has its coun-
terpart and that is that our struggle has contributed decisively to the change
in the political situation in a manner favorable to the masses, a change which
has taken place in Spain over the past 2 years; all of this, along with the
continuation of our actions, puts us in an immeasurably better situation to
continue the development of the movement with ever greater strength each day.

II. Political and Organization Principles of the 1 October Antifaseist Resis-
tance Groups

As a military antifascist organization, the GRAPO want to become the armed arm
of the organized movement of popular resistance. The objectives and interests
of the GRAPO are not distinct from the objectives and interests of the masses.
Re are not fighting for narrow objectives, nor for private or group interests;
we are fighting to defeat fascism, to expropriate the monopolies, and to
restore the true liberties to Spain which were wrested from the people by
force of arms and which can be recovered only by force.

The principles that guide us in our action are those of always serving the
people, always remaining united with the people, at all times being prepared
to carry out any kind of action that can promote the mass movement and our
own growing strength and development and, for this purpose, to keep the
equipment available to us in perfect operating condition, taking care of it
as we would take care of our own lives.

Serving the People

Our struggle has a popular character and therefore must always be based on the
masses and then we will never be lacking in the aid of the masses. Everything
that is good for the working people, everything that advances their organiza-
tion independently of the big bourgeoisie, everything that helps increase
confidence in their own strength, everything that inspires the struggle and
isolates and weakens fascism, all that is good and all that will be supported

by the GRAPO. Experience has shown tine and again that, under conditions of
acute economic crisis, from which capitalism suffers and, very particularly,
as part of the political and social crisis which Spain is experiencing, the

11
FOR OFFICIAL-{USE ONLY
armed struggle directed against the fascist state exposes its extreme weakness
and the real face of the lackeys of the monopolies, forcing the latter con-
tinuously to retreat in the face of the mass movement, clearing the way to
the organization and uninterrupted development of the struggle of the masses.
The popular masses and the real democrats and antifascists in turn view the
GRAPO and the other armed organizations to be the road which they must follow
to their liberation as the only possibility for victory. This is why it is
not at all strange that they hasten ever more actively to support those who
take up arms against the exploiters and the oppressive regime; it is not at
all strange that they are organizing themselves independently of the institu-
tions, the parties, the labor unions, etc., which are controlled by reaction
and imperialismzthey become stronger in the course of their struggles and
they actively join the resistance movement.

Like other parties and organizations with propaganda and political agitation,
etc., we are going to win the minds and hearts of our people with arms; this
is the strategic objective which our organization intends to achieve during
this first stage of our work. To prove the correctness of this line, it
suffices to make reference to the broad solidarity movement with our in-
prisoned fighters, a movement which is spreading throughout the land and
among the most varied social strata and classes, a movement which is bound

to get them out of prison.

To win the sympathy and support of the working people, our military operations
at all times were in keeping with the mass movement's political necessities;
in other words, these were not isolated actions and the workers and other
working people many times asked for them; this demonstrates the necessity

for and correctness of those actions.

From acts of people's justice, such as the execution of paid assassins for
the criminal acts carried out by the forces of repression, all the way to
expropriation and the distribution of food among families of those "without
work," via the capture of notorious fascist forces-all of these.actiona of
ours have always had a very clear political and popular character, that is,
to respond to the fascist crimes, to encourage the masses in their resistance
struggle against exploitation and the terror of the monopolies, to denounce
the electoral masquerades and the continuation of the fascist regime, to
promote the movement of struggle for the liberation of political prisoners,
etc. The masses of the people view all of these actions with sympathy be-
cause they feel and understand the true need for such actions. just as we
do.

The fighters of the GRAPO must study and develop those aspects in depth, along
with the clear political, popular, and revolutionary meaning of each of our
operations because that is the only way we will be able to orient ourselves
during the prolonged and complex fight we make. The correct estimate of the
political situation will tell us when, how, and where we must strike.

118 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlﬂAl. USE ONLY

ﬁvcry CRAPO Fighter Must Always Be Ready To Go into Action

In our organization, as in any military organization, we observe the strictest
and most iron discipline. But this discipline is not based on terror; it is
not imposed through physical and moral coercion, as happens in the armies of
reaction; instead it is based on and is the product of the profound conviction
of its necessity in each and every one of the fighting men because only this
kind of discipline can enable us to accomplish the greatest miracles, to
overcome all obstacles and difficulties, and always to defeat the enemy. This
conscious discipline is complemented in practice through the application of
democratic methods of internal discussion, at the same time, eliminating
everything that smacks of privileges for leaders, fomenting political and
ideological discussion, etc. Freedom of discussion to promote and strengthen
unity of action-~these are our disciplinary principles.

The principle to the effect that “every fighter must always be prepared to go
into action" must at no time be understood as a simple call to discipline.

War is an art and demands sacrifices of those who make it; it is also an
assembly of techniques. This is why, in order properly to master that art
and to reduce sacrifices as much as possible, it is necessary to have a
command of both these things, that is, the art and the techniques. We must
start with the principle to the effect that "knowledge, like weapons, is
acquired with practice, by fighting." During this long process of learning,
which is not devoid of defeats and painful experiences, the study of military
topics also plays an important role, particularly the study of the lessons
learned during the people's war, both in Spain and in other countries or parts
of the world, as summarized by great theoreticians such as Engels or Mao
Zedong. we must force ourselves to assimilate and creatively apply to our
own conditions the rich experiences accumulated by the revolutionary peoples
of all countries over scores of years of struggle.

Every GRAPO Fighter Must Care for and Preserve Equipment, as well as His Own
Life

He acquire weapons, as well as military knowledge, in the course of the struggle
against our enemies. He are fighting a feroclOus enemy who spares no effort,
who is highly professional, and who has resources way out of proportion to

our own. We have two things to use against those differences. First of all,
the masses of the people. This is a strategic weapon which the enemy will
never have. In second place, we have our ingenuity, our tactics, and the
strategy of the people's struggle. Little by little, we are going to get
better arms for ourselves, we are going to create a broader and safer infra-
structure, and we are definitely going to improve the means available to us
for our combat. In this respect, all effort we make will always be little.
But above all, to have superiority over the enemy, the conditions under which
we must fight do not matter; we must establish a correct ratio between men

and arms. It would be wrong and very harmful to forget that, above the re-
sources, above the weapons to be used, there is always the man who must handle
them. The GRAPO fighter at each moment employs some specific work methods

and has some means available to him which have been useful to him under

11
FOR 0FFI£1AL9USE ONLY
earlier conditions, similar to those he encounters at a given moment, but
not identical. He must never entrust our own security, nor the result of
an operation, to the quality or quantity of arms to be used. He must con-
stantly improve our work methods, our combat tactics, we must use all means
within our reach, we must vary them as much as possible and in keeping with
the character of the operations, etc. we must avoid routine like the pest
because the opposing forces are also working and are trying very hard to
discover how we work, how we move, what type of weapons we use, where we
strike our blows, etc., and that means that we must always be on the alert
and completely or partly change our form and resources to do what has to be
done. In short, we must never slip into routine and that duty is another
one of our working principles.

Finally, every fighter must pay the proper attention to the problem of re-
sources; he must obtain for himself everything needed to conduct the fight,
he must have a perfect knowledge of the employment of equipment, and he must
always keep it in perfect operating condition.

Organization

The strength and unity of a certain number of individual wills aimed at the
attainment of certain objectives are impossible without organization. Organ-
ization is a basic and fundamental question for every army. The form which
this organization may assume will vary according to the character and the
objectives pursued. Independently of that, we must keep in mind that the
correct distribution of forces, the possibility of their efficient employ-
ment at the proper place and moment, constitute the center of the organiza-
tional problems which we face daily.

Throughout the struggle, the organization of our forces will be perfected
continually through the lessons we are learning. 0n the other hand, the con-
ditions under which our activity must be developed also change constantly.
The basic objective pursued by any military organization is to conserve its
forces and destroy those of the enemy, in other words, to shield our army and
its equipment and to find a way to strike so as to weaken and ultimately des-
troy the opposing forces. To this end we must get the most out of our rank-
and-file fighters, out of the leadership cadres, and the available resources.

Our organization has always taken this very much into account, analyzing each
of its actions. in this sense, we are going to present some experiences
below.

"Operation Cromo," that is to say, the capture and detention of Oriol and
Villaescusa, was mainly aimed at the release of political prisoners and the
denunciation of the fascist election masquerade; in other words, the fundamen-
tal objective was political denunciation and the attainment of political re-
sults. Hilitarily speaking. the operation, throughout its entire execution,
was the most complex of all of those we had undertaken until then. It was

the first of its kind;we 1ackedexperience and that came out in the course of
the operation.

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation became increasingly complicated after the strikes which permitted
the capture of the two bosses something which was carried out with great mili-
tary precision due to the prior experience we had here. Holding them for a
long time, in an organization as weak as ours, in the midst of a vast display
of enemy forces, facing the entire repressive machinery of the state-that was
a very complicated and risky task. But we were sure of being able to carry it
out and this is why we started it; indeed, in spite of the display of enemy
forces, we managed to attain our objective to a good extent in holding the
prisoners for almost 2 months. This enabled us to revive the propaganda cem-
paign for the release of antifascist prisoners and to keep the fascist elec-
tion masquerade out in the open.

What was it that motivated the outcome of the operation which ended with the
rescue of Oriol and VillaesCusa and the arrest of a large number of our
fighters? Could we not have avoided this outcome? We always maintained that
this defeat was the result of our own mistakes. The arrest of the team that
was watching the prisoners and the capture of a portion of the equipment by
the police and, what is even worse, the subsequent arrests of a good portion
of the GRAPO leadership--all this was due to the fact that we made serious
leadership mistakes during "Operation Cromo.“

This leadership mistake began the moment when--due to the necessities that
arose—-the team that was to direct the entire operation was little by little
sidetracked into carrying out minor tasks which were not within its assigned
mission. In that way, almost without realizing it, we found ourselves with-
out leadership for the entire operation. Difficulties, minor failures, un-
foreseen events, etc., kept piling up; many of them could have been avoided
or corrected if we had had firm leadership from the beginning to the end.
Instead of that, we quickly faced a situation of rather very considerable
discoordination among the various parts of the detachment, along with a lack
of information; the forces we had available were not correctly distributed
and we faced a situation in.which . the leadership almost without
knowing it left its post and carried out functions that it was not supposed
to carry out; along with that, a considerable segment of our forces was kept
inactive and was aISo rounded up by the police.

Lack of leadership, incorrect distribution of forces, incorrect ratio between
the primary mission--such as holding the prisoners-—and secondary tasks, such
as responses to the criminal attack at Atocha, etc.--these were the mistakes
that led to the failure of Operation Cromo which we are all familiar with.

After this setback, we analyzed all of these experiences and on the basis of
that we corrected the mistakes and strengthened the organization.

we established strict division of labor and of responsibilities in each group,
starumgwith the principle that nobody, not even a leader must know anything
about any other fighter, nor anything about the equipment depots, unless the
men and the equipment are directly under his command. The men in charge of
Central Command must not be known to the members of any group and, to be able
to do their leadership work, they must be connected only and exclusively with
the network of the group that is under their responsibility. To make sure

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that the work is done properly and to prevent possible casualties among the
leadership group, it is absolutely necessary for both the leadership group
and its links with the groups not directly to participate in the operations.

This structure and functioning of the military organization raise a series

of problems concerning cadre training. Since there are no direct relations
between men with greater experience and training, who are members of the
leadership, on the one hand, and the rank-and-file fighters of the groups,

on the other hand, there may be a weakening inlhe political, ideological, and
military training of the teams and this can delay their own training and
development. Nevertheless, experience, the new conditions under which we
find ourselves forced to work, and the very requirements of the overall develop-
ment of the organization obligate us to proceed in this fashion although in
practice this may turn out to be very expensive for us and nay take us more
time in fully developing our work.

This new structure and operating procedure, adopted because of the loss of
the commando involved in "Operation Cromo“ demonstrated their effectiveness
after the failure in the month of August, a failure which to a considerable
extent was due to a kind of continuation of the earlier one. Two members of
the Central Command and a part of the Madrid group fell into the hands of the
police. In spite of that, no other fighter-~except the female comrades of
some of the men who were arrested--were affected by these losses and did not
even have to move from their homes. The police caught nothing more than a
small portion of the equipment under the control of the Madrid group. In
spite of the damage such a loss always inflicts on our organization-espe-
cially if some lending members are included--we can say that there are some
positive aspects in this setback. This loss again confirmed in us the idea
of protecting the members of the Central Command even more, putting various
firewalls between them and the direct action groups.

New Stage

We can say that we have covered a highly important stage in our struggle against
fascism and in the area of organization. The strategic objective we had pro-
posed to attain during that stage--winning the masses over to us and demon-
strating the vulnerability of fascism's repressive apparatus-~was attained to
a good degree. But, as we saw before, the conditions under which we had to

do our work became more difficult. Many of our fighters were identified and
arrested and the combined repressive forces of the state were unleashed against
us. Now, one of our main tasks in the area of organization is to prevent or
to hinder as such as possible the identification of the major portion of the
GRAPO members who are so necessary both because of the relative ease with
which they can move around and in order to keep setting up a strong and safe
infrastructure.

Recruiting

Most of the GRAPO fighters come from the popular sectors who have a greater
degree of organization, preferably from the working class and the students;

122

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NHLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this could not be otherwise. To the extent that new social classes and strata
find themselves facing fascism and monopolism in a more resolute fashion and
obtain for themselves an organization independent of the reformist parties,

we get members of those strata, especially peasants, professional men. etc.,
in our ranks. Our link with the masses is now relatively weak; but we are
going to broaden and strengthen it as time goes on and through the development
of our activities. In any case, we must keep in mind that it will be the
maintenance of the antifescist, democratic, and truly popular character of

our actions and our participation, whenever possible, in the mass movements
and organizations, which will guarantee us-as is already happening in prac-
tice--a situation where a growing number of fighters joins our ranks, thus

by far making up the gaps which inevitably will arise in our ranks during the
struggle. He must make sure that for each of our fighters who falls, 100 new
fighters, ready to take up arms, will spring up in our popular ranks. This
will make us invincible.

In recruiting new members for the organization, we must always very much keep
in mind that the police and the Civil Guard continually seek to infiltrate our
ranks. An infiltrator can cause heavier losses than a hundred battles fought
against the enemy. This is why all measures we take to prevent infiltrations
will never be sufficient.

On one occasion, the Civil Guard managed to infiltrate an agent provocateur
who caused an entire group to be burned. This experience must serve us as a
lesson and make us always be vigilant. But we must at all costs prevent the
creation, in our ranks, of a climate of suspicion which would be utilized by
our enemies to destroy us. He must handle applicants who want to become mem-
bers of the GRAPO in a just and judicious fashion, subjecting then to a trial
period which must extend as long as necessary before they can be considered
full members ready to join our ranks. During that period of time, we must
conduct an extremely detailed investigation where the applicant was picked

up or came from and during that trial period, when the applicant is ordered
to perform various actions, he must not get to know any leaderamlhe must
have contact only with one or two militants. The applicant must prove his
valor and discipline and above all his determination to comply with the three
fundamental principles of the GRAPO.

III. Always Keeping in Mind the Political Necessity of Every Action

All military actions carried out by the GRAPO must be aimed at promoting the
development of the popular movement of resistance to fascism and must there-
fore always be aimed at the overthrow of that regime. Losing sight of this
great mission will cause us to become a group of adventurers. This is why it
is very important for all of our actions to be in accord with the political
situation at any given moment and we must therefore know how to differentiate
that which is of primary importance from that which is of secondary impor-
tance. Let us give some examples. Here the executions of 1 October necessary
or were they not? During the summer of 1975, the regime had unleashed an
escalation of terror to nip the mass movement in the bud; this escalation
culminated in the shootings of 27 September. They had also planned to carry

123
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out other actions of a similar nature. Our organization had for some time been
preparing itself to confront this new terrorist escalation by fascism which

we saw coming; even before that we found ourselves forced to come up with

some forceful response to these murders. The fact that we had a clear poli-
tical view was the thing that persuaded us first to carry out our preparations
and then to make the decision to carry out the action which was accomplished
without any mistakes. The combination of these conditions, the broad mass
movement which was triggered. both at home and abroad by the shootings of

27 September, and the fact that the enemy had not expected our action, obli-
gated the ruling class to pull back on all of its plans and permitted the
masses again to take the initiative in the class struggle. And so we can
say today without fear of contradiction that the action of 1 October was
correct in all of its aspects and thiswasdue to a correct political situation
estimate and a correct political leadership. Another one of the operations
carried out by our organization and against which the government marshalled
the very last lackey of the domestic opposition. was the seizure of Oriol and
Villaescusa. Let us recall that the election masquerade—-with which the regime
was trying to camouflage itself--was being prepared at that time. On the
other hand, the masses were out in the streets, calling for release of the
antifnscist and patriotic prisoners; the government had refused to release

the prisoners and went ahead with its camouflage plans. Our action was carried
out under these conditions, after an operation aimed directly against the
principal means for spreading lies, against the fascist state. "Operation
Cromo" kept the result of the regime's demagogic campaign in suspense for more
than 2 months and in fact promoted a higher level of people's struggle for

the release of the prisoners. At the same time we demonstrated that fascism
is not as strong as it appears to be, that it can be hit. that it can be made
to withdraw and finally that it can be defeated by means other than the polls,
which will never give the people victory. Today, the facts speak for them-
selves. The government found itself forced once again to retreat by releasing
many prisoners; its political maneuver was brought to light in the best possi—
ble way and after that the masses continued the resistance struggle on a
higher level.

These and many other experiences enable us to conclude that we need a certain
type of action at each particular political moment; at a moment of relative
calm, it is generally not a good idea to undertake actions directed against
the forces of repression. 0n the other hand, during those moments we must
make use of the situation to carry out another type of action, such as an
action of a propaganda nature or we must supply ourselves with weapons and
strengthen the organization's infrastructure so that we may be prepared in
all areas when the moment comes to take action against the enemy's most sen-
sitive nerves.

From this we can deduce that it is not sufficient to have clear political
ideas; if we lack the willpower and the means necessary to intervene in the
political process in a manner favorable to the masses, then we can do little
or nothing. Hence we must include in our consideration of our political
mission and of the operations aimed at that goal all those whose objective
it is to supply ourselves with equipment and to strengthen the organization
as such.

121;
mu OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It sometimes happens that a sudden change in the situation or the measures
taken by the enemy force us to change our plans or to postpone some of the
operations we had scheduled for a certain date. Failing to take these even-
tualities into account in a struggle as complex as ours more than once caused
us to improvise and to turn everything upside down, with a resultant danger
to the fighters, to the equipment, and to the organization's prestige. we
must avoid this at all costs and this is why the only solution is always to
be prepared for several types of actions in order, at each particular moment,
to mount the action we consider most opportune for the attainment of our
strategic objectives. Keeping this in mind is one of the most important
missions of the Central Command; but all of the organisation's groups must

in turn be prepared to act at any moment and to attain a wide variety of ob-
jectives.

Confidence among All Members Is Essential for Smooth Operation

It is vitally important that all members constituting a group are completely
united and together not only politically but above all in action. Having a
liberal or lukewarm member in a group creates bad relations and lack of con-
fidence among the rest of the members and has very negative repercussions
throughout the entire group and therefore impairs the effectiveness of its
actions. During all actions carried out by a group, one must keep one fun-
damental principle in mind which keeps the unit united in an iron fashion and
makes for a high degree of confidence and aggressiveness in the entire group:
"Everybody goes into action and everybody has to come out.“ It is the leader
who initiates the operation and who gives the order for withdrawal. Another
important detail to keep in mind is to try to make sure that the same members
of a group will operate during the various action: since this enables them to
get to know each other better. It also strengthens confidence, it facilitates
the study of each and every one's reactions and ways of acting and in the end
this is the way you achieve total togetherness. In the course of an operation,
one must speak as little as possible so as not to provide any data and members
with less experience must be accompanied by the stronger ones. It is a very
good idea for all members of a group to discuss an operation before carrying
it out, to bring themselves up to date on the smallest details of the opera-
tion and to have each member express his opinion on the various problems that
might arise until, if possible, the group arrives at unanimity. In no case
is it permitted to discuss an operation's necessity or convenience before

the action is carried out or to debate the orders which for that purpose may
be issued by the higher organ. This will promote the group‘s unity and the
execution of the assigned task even more. Only after the operation has been
carried out can the group's members discuss and analyze the lessons learned,
both from the operational and from the political viewpoint.

Hinor and Major Actions Must Be Given Same Importance

we must start from the principle that all major or minor operations have the
same importance; there is no good enemy and there is no target that does not
offer resistance. Very often, the execution of some apparently "easy" actions
causes us to drop our guard, to leave ourselves exposed and move without
sufficient preparation; this is why many of these actions fail from the very
beginning. Here is an example: The seizure and interrogation of an agent
provocateur are carried out without taking all of the measures necessary in

125
FIHICMHHCJA1.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this case. The men in charge of this mission consider it a picnic from the
very beginning; they fail to understand the response capacity of an cornered
individual and they almost always fail to leave him under guard. Under these
conditions, the provocator cleverly manages to escape and one of the inter-
rogators is arrested shortly thereafter. Here is another example: Placing
our banner at a bridge in Leganes (Madrid). There is no doubt that this is
a very simple thing, almost child's play, when we compare this operation to
others carried out by the GRAPO. If the proper precautions are not taken,~
if the information obtained is not considered, if we go out at a time that
was not the specified time, then as a result of all that. the group will be
caught. We suffer two casualties who are arrested at tne time. Mistakes
such as these have been made and continue to be made every day. This is the
result of a liberal concept which can cause much damage to the organisation
and to those who permit these infractions. If we keep in mind the manner

in which the enemy proceeds, we will see that it is not only the fear among
the members of his forces of repression that causes them to take all kinds
of measures to back up their operations. They are guided by an elementary
principle in military art and technique and that is that one should always
assume that anything might happen at any moment and that one must therefore
be prepared to respond accordingly. Failure to keep this principle in mind
very often causes us to engage in daring adventurism with the consequences
known to all of us.

Operations Must Be Planned Minutely

To carry out any kind of action, we must absolutely from the very first moment
on have the most complete information possible on the place, the persons,

etc. The information has to be checked out in the field by the group that
must mount the operation; the group must have a detailed knowledge of every-
thing that may be of interest, such as how many persons will be in the place
and their characteristics, how they are deployed; whether there is anv alarm
or whether there are firearms, whether there are any guards in the surrounding
area, picking the best time, seeking routes of escape, etc.

The group leader, who knows every member and his capacity, must know how to
distribute his manpower and assign to each member the mission best suited to
his qualities or temperament. We must avoid operations dragging out longer
than necessary; the fighters become nervous when they have too long and be-
sides that causes auspicions to arise. It is of the utmost importance for
each group member to have a perfect knowledge of his mission and to carry it
out perfectly; it is recommended that the strongest members take over as look-
cute and that they protect those who actually carry out the operation since
it has been found many times that this is one of the key posts where we can
be taken by surprise. As an example of this, we have the failure during the
assault on an armory in Barcelona; when the lookout job was assigned to a
rather inexperienced fighter, the latter did not know what to do when the
police arrived; he acted nervously and the entire team was machinegunned.
Result: Several wounded and two arrested.

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A well-prepared and planned operation is an operation in which the forces are
properly distributed and in which the men are taken into action without causing
any suspicion. An operation must be launched by the entire group at the same
time.

The best guarantee for success springs from the element of surprise, in other
words, hitting the enemy unawares and not giving him a chance to respond.
This prevents unnecessary casualties and accidents.

There is one aspect which is ignored entirely too frequently and which must be
taken more seriously. It involves cover and tracks. In order not to leave a
trail that can facilitate the work of the police, each group must provide a
suitable cover for itself before launching an operation. Tb comply with this
requirement, the group leader must appoint someone who will have the job of
obtaining the necessary elementsand making sure that the procedure is carried
out in practice. Bach action requires a different cover and the elements
necessary for it must be considered like the weapons we need in our work.
Upon termination of the operation, it is necessary to abandon the vehicles
and means used which can identify us, of course not before they have been
wiped so as not to leave_any fingerprints. He must not complete an operation
before contacts or security checks have been carried out. If some group mem-
ber does not show up, it must be considered that he has fallen and all proper
measures must be taken.

Determination, Initiative, and Discipline

Once an operation has been carefully studied and all steps have been laid out
and once the group is in the position from which the action is to be carried
out, the main factor is determination, boldness, and discipline. Indecision
can create serious problems and permit the enemy to take the initiative, thus
causing the failure of the aission and the possible arrest of the group.

Once the operation has been launched, another very important factor is to
retain the initiate from the beginning to the end. It might happen that
conditions change after the information has been checked out, as we launch
the operation, or in the course of the operation itself. This will force us
to improvise and to keep solving the problems that arise as we go along and
without hesitation since hesitation is the first step before losing the ini-
tiative. Only if conditions have changed very considerably will we decide to
abandon the operation before launching it; but in all cases, the group leader
must be the one to give the order. In case of danger, we must resort to the
nasses and ask for their help and collaboration.

Finally, another important factor involves the observance of discipline during
the course of the operation itself. The entire group must submit to the orders
of its leader, no matter how crazy they may seem. One must never discuss an
order given by the leader in the course of an action; his orders must be
carried out as one nan, with audacity and initiative. The success of any
operation depends on that.

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The GRAPO leadership must take special care in picking the leaders for each
group, selecting the best trained for these positions and always trying to
make sure that they win the confidence of the group and in turn can have con-
fidence in the group. In this way, operations can be carried out with great
probability of success.

IV. 0n Cadres

The task of training cadres and employing them properly has always been a '
matter of great concern for our organization.

He must above all keep in mind the objectives which we have set for ourselves
and the vast scope of the job to be done in order to grasp the real impor-
tance of this question. In the final analysis, it is the cadres, the persons,
not the weapons that decide everything. Now, how do we train our cadres?
Military cadres are trained in the practice of battle, in daily combat opera-
tions, as they confront and resolve the most complex situations and problems
with determination. This is sufficiently clear among us because, as we said
before, we started from scratch and all of our knowledge on military questions
comes from noplace other than combat and from the fact that we confront or-
ganizational, political, and other problems that spring from coabat.

Today we can say that we already have a good number of cadres and that many
others are being trained in the daily struggle of our people against fascism.
Analyzing the lessons learned during our operations, summarizing them in

order later on to apply them again, all of this along with political discussion,
also presupposes another fundamental part in the task of training military
cadres. Finally we must also study military topics to enrich our knowledge

and to try to apply it to our conditions.

But all of this is not yet enough. we must not confine ourselves to fighting,
discussing, studying, and trying to apply the lessons we have learned. In
addition we must also arm ourselves with a concept of the world of the working
class. At this time, as we still constitute a weak and small army, at a time
when we lack experience, at a time when our work is essentially military and
when we do not have very direct relations with the masses, it is of the utmost
importance for us to pay much attention to ideological questions. This means
not only considering each combat action and its imediate political context
but taking a look at the war as a whole and our ultimate objectives. We al-
ready have some very bitter experience which shows us that neglect of the in-
depth study of the classical authors of Marxism-Leninism, excessive orienta-
tion toward practical aspects, etc., very often creates lack of confidence in
the justness and invincibility of our cause; if this spreads among the organi-
zation's leading cadres, this can cause us much damage.

Most of us were drawn to the GRAPO by action, by the firm conviction that you
get nowhere with little words and proclamations and that what really has to
be done is to strike the enemy, to strike and strike at the enemy. This is a
good quality which we must feel proud of. But it is not enough to want to
strike at the enemies; in addition to wanting to strike we not also know
how to strike, where to strike, and all of this requires study, it means
putting an end to the tendency toward blind activism. 0n the other hand,

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this activisn leads to a rather disorderly, anarchic way of life, it leads to a
lack of relations anong members so that each member stays by himself. Under
our condition, this is very dangerous.

It is the responsibility of the organization's leaders or higher-level cadres
to train, support, and properly employ the cadres and for that purpose they
must know them well, they must help then continually improve thenselves in
their work.

Brotherly relations and real conradeship mat be established among leading
cadres and the group's fighters since this is the only way to create good
togetherness anong all, to strengthen discipline, and to create an environ-
ment very propitious for study and discussion, for the exercise of criticism
and the developsent of initiative as well as the qualities in each and every
melber.

V. The Man and the Weapon

He nust at all tines establish a correct relationship between the sen and the
weapon and we lust not assign an excessive inportance to the resources we may
have since that can have grave consequences. What is the most important
thing between nan and weapon? we saintain that the most important thing is
the man; it is the nan who handles the weapon and not the weapon that handles
the man; therefore, no matter how good the weapons and the means available to
us may be, if we do not know how to put them into their subordinate place
with respect to the individual, then we will never be able to make proper

use of then and in the end they will turn against us. An example well known
to all involves vehicles. In the course of Operation Crone, due to its great
usefulness, we placed excessive confidence in this instrument without realiz-
ing that the police would be able to track us down through that instrument.
There is no doubt that vehicles, like any other weapon or working instruments,
are very necessary for us in obtaining our objectives. But material things
do not think, they have no "brain"; they serve at all times for the kind of
use which man wants to make of then and if we use then badly, for example,
then we can run into trouble. This is why we mt always keep in nind the
relationship existing between nan and the scans he uses to attain certain ends;
we must always be very alert because the enemy is also using certain means
which most of the time are very superior to ours and that superiority of enemy
resources we can compensate for only through our ingenuity, our astuteness,
our inventiveness, at all tines avoiding to become victims of then. For this
purpose we must always know how far we can go in using a weapon or a certain
tool and we must discard it at the right time or exchange it for another one.

To supply ourselves with the necessary resources, we must always start with
the principle that those resources are obtained by fighting, by grabbing the-
from the enemy. This is something only we ourselves can do.

Our struggle is prolonged in nature; it is developing under the conditions of
a capitalist country where we cannot count on a single foot of liberated area
nor can we count on any foreign aid, at least for a long period of tine.
These features and conditions of our struggle determine our necessities and

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the type of weapons and equipment to use during this first stage: Light
weapons, apartments, warehouses, workshops, documentation, support points,
vehicles. It is of vital importance for us to learn the functioning and
handling of all these resourches and to know how to use them; a good part
of those resources are supplied to us by modern industry. For this purpose
we must assign a certain number of cadres to research. We not only need
capable militants but we also need a good quantity of weapons and equipment
and we must create a safe infrastraucture which will enable us to develop
our struggle with success and effectiveness.

On Arms

Arms are one of our main combat resources; this is why we must get them for
ourselves and this is why we must take care of them as we would of our own"
lives. We must not forget that a weapon in poor condition threatens our

life and that of the other comrades and can cause the failure of the opera-
tion we are carrying out. This explains the importance of familiarizing our-
selves with weapons, learning how to handle them properly, keeping them in
perfect condition, ready for use, etc. He must do the same thing with ammu-
nition and explosives.

All groups have the duty to supply themselves with weapons and other equipment
so that they will not have to depend on others.

VI. Intelligence and Investigation

The intelligence services are like the eyes and ears of any army. Without

this kind of information we would have to grope our way and provide ourselves
with the staffs of blind men and we could not detect the actions the enemy
might undertake against us in time. Knowledge of the enemy's movements,

prior reconnaissance of the place where an operation is to be carried out,

the study of its various aspects. etc.-these will enable us correctly to

plan our operations. Having good information on the place where we are going
to go into action will strengthen the confidence of the fighters in the leader-
ship and in the possibilities of success; this will considerably reduce the
risks and unexpected developments that might arise during the operation.

Information is all the more important when, as in our case, we are fighting
an enemy who has forces and resources very superior to ours. He must keep
in mind that, in spite of that great disproportion of manpower and resources
between the enemy and us and his tight vigilance, the latter can be made a
mockery of and through good information on our part we can make up for the
disadvantage in manpower and resources. The enormous complexity of the mono-
polist state and the latter’s need to employ individuals coming from the
popular strata renders useless all of his efforts to keep secret his vital
installations, his files, etc. All of this can be penetrated by the revo-
lutionary organization because, in reality, if we work hard and if we remain
linked to the masses, the fascist state will present itself before us like

a big box of glass.

130
FOR OFFICIAI.USEIJNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On the other hand, it will be impossible for the enemy to place guards at all
those points which at any particular moment may be the target of our attack.
The enemy cannot place a platoon of guards at each TV repeater station, at
each high-voltage station, in each government building, in each police station,
etc. How many mercenaries will they need to protect each army headquarters.
each finance office, each torturer, or each informer? Experience shows that,
no matter how hard they may try, we will continue to get information through
ever more varied and safer channels; good intonation will be true, objective,
concise, and complete and we will have to check it out to determine the

source of the information.

It is very necessary to check the information out. Conditions keep changing
continually; this means that something which is easy today, because the
place is not guarded, for example, may on the next day not be so easy be-
cause they have posted a guard or they have reinforced the guards. Besides,
our eyes will always see military targets in a manner different from those
of our informers. Experience in this field teaches us to distinguish the
primary from the secondary and to separate the wheat from the chaff; that
enables us to complete the original information item.

Information Sources

The main information source for any revolutionary army consists of the popular
masses. The organised people's resistance movement is our best information
source and in the development of that movement we are going to find an in-
exhaustible quantity of data, of first-ranking military and political impor-
tance. In the barracks, there are soldiers, men of the people; in factories
of strategic importance to the regime of the monopolies, there are thousands
of men and women workers; in the neighborhoods live millions of workers who
every day observe the movements of the components of the repressive forces.
Everywhere, thousands of eyes and ears among the broad popular masses observe
and gather information on the enemy. If we organize the reception of this
abundant infomtion well, this can become a very powerful weapon in our
hands.

Throughout the past 3 years of military activity, our organization has re-
ceived thousands of addresses of police officers, members of the Civil
Guard, military personnel, etc.: we have received scores of reports on the
movement of large sums of money; hundreds of data on how to get explosives,
weapons, and equipment of all kinds necessary for our struggle.

The legal media constitute another important data source. The very complexity
and the necessity of the bureaucracy of the monopoly state mean that the
enemy himself must publish, for his m use, abundant information which is

of great value for us.

Finally, a very important source in getting information consists of direct
observation of everything that goes on in the surrounding area by our own
militants. Host of our men and women come to the GRAPO "with their loaf of

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bread under the arm,“ as we put it; they come to us with extremely valuable

information, taken from their own prior experience which in most cases is very
useful for us.

VII. Behavior in Dealing with the Police

A good number of our militants have gone through the tough test of torture
with intrepidity and valor; we are very proud of that; but it 18 no less
true that others have broken and did not come up to the high expectations
we had placed in them.

Going through the DGS [General Directorate of Security] or through any other
police precinct or barracks must be considered as another battle to be fought
against fascism. It is true that this battle takes place under conditions
that are very difficult for us but this is no reason to jump to the wrong
conclusion that the battle is lost before we start. Before getting down to
work, the torturers try to create a feeling of defeatism and pessimism among
the fighters so as to get all kinds of information out of the them and to
turn them into collaborators.

Any member of the GRAPO must be prepared to face an interrogation. He must
keep in mind that he may be caught at any moment. Failure to view the ques-
tion from this angle has caused some of our fighters to underestimate the
enemy, to drop their guard, thus facilitating not only the work of the police
but also being completely disarmed in ideological aspects at the moment of
their arrest. This is what later on led to almost complete demoralization.
Carrying out an adequate political discussion within each group is a funda-
mental thing not only in order effectively to carry out all actions that are
ordered but also to confront the most difficult situations with determination
and valor. Torture can accomplish nothing against a fighter who is imbued
with the reason for and unquenchable faith in the final victory of our cause.

0n the other hand, one of the best guarantees for making sure that police
interrogations will not yield the desired results is for each militant to
know as little as possible about the organization and about the life of the
other militants in his group. This increases the feeling of self-confidence
among the arrested individuals because they know from the very beginning
that, no matter what the police may do to them, they will not get far in
their interrogations.

If we keep our fighting spirit high and if we strategically despise the enemy,
we can face torture with equanimity and we can win victory. The time we
spend in barracks or with the 065 is always a relative factor. We must
keep in mind that they cannot hold us there indefinitely and that, if we
remain firm during the first few days, time will work in our favor and will
continually demoralize our torturers. To that end, it is important not to
allow oneself "to be prepared" for torture. One must abandon all peaceful

or passive attitudes. One must insult them, one must pull them below the
level on which they are. In this way we can make them nervous and we will

be taking the initiative, thus winning the first skirmishes.

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He must also defeat the enemies at the police station and we must turn a rela-
tive defeat into a victory.

We must follow the examples of Eierro whose hands they burned with a blow-
torch without getting a single word out of him; of Angel Collazo who remained
firm as a rock in spite of the fact that he was in the hands of the Civil
Guard for 10 days, being burned with electrodes all over his body; we mat
follow the example given by Louis Alvarez who did not sign the statement
drawn up by the police; we must follow the example of many other fighters
who managed to counter the sadistic tortures of men such as Coneeea and
company with their faith in the victory of our cause.

5058
080: 6000/ 0001

133
Iron orncm. use ONLY
TREAT P088!) 3‘! ETA-H WHASIZED
Madrid EL SOCIALISTA in Spanish 28 Apr-6 May 82 pp 28-30

[Article by P. Castano: "The ETA Hill Strike Before the 1982 World Soccer
Champ ion ship s"]

[Text] Neither Operation Hint planned by the state security bodies in con-
nection with the coming world football championships nor the warning given

the government by the secret service concerning the iminence of an ETA [Basque
Fatherland and Liberty Group] attack on a major scale have been able to stop
the most recent terrorist campaign, which. according to information obtained
by BL SOCIALISTA, is a part of a definitive effort to put the democratic system
on the ropes, making use of the full potential the military branch of the

ETA has available at the present time.

Police sources consulted by this magazine stress that the Basque terrorist
organization is beginning to feel pressured by sectors which formerly enabled
it to continue. morally and strategically, with its bloody pursuit. The more
or less unplanned consolidation of the Basque left wing in the direction of
socialism, following the merger of Buskadiko szerra and the communist faction
of Lertxmdi. the criticisms by the ETA (political and military) of the hard-
line faction in the organization. culminating in a long-term truce. and finally.
the constant blows being dealt by the police to the weakened information infra-
structure of this organization have contributed to a great extent to wresting
the entire apparatus thanks to which, years ago, the ETA managed to deal with
the government on an equal footing.

In the experts' opinion. there is sufficiently clear data to support this
diagnosis. First of all, the terrorists' use of semiheavy war materiel, in
the knowledge that it has more disastrous and logically, therefore, more spec-
tacular effects. cripples the vulnerability of the terrorists if their con-
mandos are made inoperable. The abandonment of the grenade launcher and the
weapons used several weeks ago by the group which attached a light tank be-
longing to the National Police in Pamplona was no happenstance, by my means.

On a different level. but within the context of the same analysis. are the
appeals to the government to negotiate, first by the ETA (military) and later
by Herri Batasms. This is the only occasion on which both the terrorists

and the political organization which supports their beliefs have simultaneOusly

13h
launched a campaign in all directions which can only be interpreted in terms
of the muddy and bloody weakness of a terrorism which is lacking in the atti-
tudes and rational goals that might justify it to the people.

The Decline Begins

The decline of the more murderous branch of the ETA began on the very day

its executive committee gave the order for the assassination of one of the
country's leading nuclear energy experts. The death of Jose Maria Ryan. chief
engineer at the bemoniz plant, affected the Basque population much more force-
fully than the 300 attacks perpetrated against the Iberduero installations.
The hatred of the ETA by thousands of Basque citizens who had maintained an
indifferent attitude toward the continual shedding of innocent blood began
then.

The 23 February coup and the clarity with which the Basque people are begin-
ning to understand the syabiosis between terrorism and the efforts to promote
a coup are forcing the two branches of the ETA to revise their attitude. With
a logical weakening in the already reduced unity of the activists in both
groups. While toasters of the political-military faction agreed to initiate

a truce, broken by a minority faction at the beginning of this year. their
hated comrades in arms persist in sowing terror, making capital of the residue
of fear left in Spanish society by the February coup venture. But the ETA
assassins do not have everyone behind them. They have come up against the
loss of the support previOusly provided by an "abertzale" sector of the popu-
lation, the progressive weakening of its infrastructure, the new French atti-
tude toward the refugees on the other side of the Pyrenees, the intensive
internal debate between the supporters of a technical truce and those desirous
of continuing desperate killing, the then firm policy of the political—military
[action and, finally, the reorientation of their terrorist strategy toward
much more selective action.

The goals of the ETA have then been temporarily buried, thanks to the meritori-
one work pursued jointly by the security bodies. ThroughOut last year, the
executive comittee of the terrorist organization had to deal with the break”-
up of 51 comando mits--37 of them intelligence groups-and the arrests of
600 militants. including activists and collaborators. The figure of 1.0 murders
from the beginning of 1981 to the present means nothing if compared with the
carnage which the activities planned by the ETA would have caused had the

pol ice not intervened in time.

The collapse of the Madrid comando unit, headed by Antonio Hadariaga Brezuma.
was one of the keys allowing intensification of the police campaign, with
satisfactory results, in the last lo months of the year. Toward the middle

of November the security forces broke up a comando youp made up of eight
persons. whose plans included blowing up the headquarters of the civil guard
in Algorta, Biscay, on the same day it was to be commissioned by the high
command of the security forces. The cautious, silent work of the police has
given the country much more than some people believe. For example, just days
before the last anniversary of Franco's death, the police frustrated the plans
to blow up a bus carrying 50-some commissioned and noncomissioned officers
of the armored division in Madrid, which the ETA thought w0uld put its army

a step forward in combating democracy and the constitution.

13S
The police campaign against terrorism of Basque origin has revealed the iden-
tity of a large majority of the intelligence comando mits serving the ETA
throughout the nation. The police investigations even turned up the terrorists
blacklist, containing the names of more than 600 persons, the majority of

them highly placed militia, political and court personalities. on whom the

ETA plans to turn its machineguns sooner or later. Prestigious military
officers such as Jose Gabeiras, former head of the Army General Staff, leaders
of the main political parties, outstanding national law court Judges and
businessmen on the level of Eduardo Amar and Luis Olarra can see their uaual
daily movements noted in the reports of the operational comando units of

the terrorist organization.

Economic Blackmail

But the decline of the ETA also involves, setting aside the police strategy,
a firm attitude in opposition to terror on the part of the political forces
with the greatest influence in the Basque territory. Barely 3 months ago

the Basque terrorists dispatched from France several hmdred letters to Basque
businessmen and leading property owners forcing them to choose between two
equally tragic fates: economic blackmail or death.

The terrorist threats against some outstanding PNV [Basque Nationalist Party]
militants have led the Basque government to seize control of the situation
for the first time. and Caraicoechea has publicly stated the negative aspects
of filling the ETA coffers. The response of the terrorists to this attitude
was seen some months ago in the kidnaping of industrialist Jose Lipperheide.
who was released after his family paid the ransom demanded by the terrorists.

The attitude of the PNV and the Basque government concerning the inaptly named
"revolutionary tax" has been clearer since that time. Despite everything.

on official of that government said recently that "the terrorist factor is
that which has exerted the least influence on the economic crisis in the Basque
territory. I do not believe that the behavior of the ETA," he added, "has
halted any investment here." Other parties, such as the P83 [Spanish Socialist
Partyl-PSOB. do not share such singular opinions. The secretary general of
this latter party. Txiqui Benegas. thinks where the economic blaclunail of

the ETA is concerned that "the national government. the autonomous government,
the police. the political parties, the trade mions, and finally the business
organizations should deal with this phenomenon as a collective threat and

to provide the ways and means. both human and material, as well as measures

of so] ldarity and the mobilization of society. to ensure that the tax will

not calmly be collected in the bars of the south of France." In the opinion

of Txiqui Benegas. economists should be clear about the fact that in the Basque
Country "violence. terrorism and extortion must be ended or the possibility

of economic recovery will be very remote for our people."

The ETA Revival

when analyzing the ETA revival and the recent attacks won the security forces
and the telephone building in Madrid. experts in the antitetrorist struggle
make clear reference to faur circmstances coinciding in time with this new
campaign: the last phase of the 23 February trial. the iminent parliamentary

136
debate on the LOAPA. the legal basis for the establislunent of the autonomous
state. and with special importance for the Basque territory. the advancement of
the entry of our country into the Atlantic alliance and the beginning of the
1982 world soccer championships.

According to reliable sources. the executive comittee of the ETA has decided
to bring all of its operational couaando units into Spain in order to lamch
its attacks at the moments best suited for the plans the organization has
established. The Spanish police know this from informers who work confiden-
tially for them in France. and also in part thanks to data provided by the
police in that neighboring country. It must be borne in mind that in recent
months the collaboration between the authorities in the two countries has
become increasingly close, to the point of making available to the Spanish
police entirely reliable information about front-line comando mits of which
our secret service was previously maware.

The investigations pursued to date by the police have established the certainty
of the entry into our country of some of the bloodiest—-and commonly known

as butchersucommando units included in the ETA organization. They include
those organized by Maria Belen Gonzalez Penalva, Jose Maria Bereciartua Echarri,
Jose Leon Hazusta Astidia and Martin Apaloaza Azcagorta. These two last-
mentioned terrorists are being sought in Madrid because of their possible
involvement in the attack on the telephone building on Rios Rosas Street.

From what we have learned. they may have gained entry to the company building
by using false identification belonging to the two Spanish police inspectors
who were found murdered several years ago on the beach at Bayonne.

"The ETA needs blood like a fish needs water," a police official close to

the antiterrorist campaign told EL SOCIALISTA. "If its activities did not
have the publicity given them by the mass media, their effect would be reduced
by half...."

In the view of another police source consulted by this magazine, the optimism
concerning the antiterrorist campaign created by the Statements made by high
Ministry of Interior officials should not be bandied about so joyfully. "(he
cannot speak of a final blow, because we all know that the struggle may be
long, unless certain factors which facilitate the efforts of the ETA are
changed." he added.

These factors can be smarized in the following points: The ETA continues

to have some safe and certain sources of financing through economic blackmail.
Secondly, this organization continues, logically. to keep its leading cadres
abroad. so that the head of the terrorist monster remains invulnerable. Thirdly.
the Basque terrorists continue to have safe places for training themselves

in the handling of weapons and explosives. Through publicity, the ETA has

seen to it that on the popular level there is talk of armed struggle. the
revolutionary tax, revolutionary warfare. etc. These are terms which place

the terrorist phenomenon on a higher pedestal than is merited by assassina-

tion and mere monetary blackmail.

If these considerations are set aside, there are facts which justify a hopeful
view of the future. It will be necessary to wait for this coming month of May

137
to see what role the new autonomous Basque police force, of 700 men initially.
in which more than 3 billion pesetas have been invested, will be called upon
to play in this struggle. 0n the other hand. new results can be expected
from the men which the Central Intelligence Brigade has skillfully placed as
informers in the Basque provinces. It is known that the Spanish police have
succeeded in infiltrating the ETA and that in the next few years it is hoped
that a much greater advance can be made in this realm. Hope can be placed

in the strengthening of one of the statutes, that of Guernica. to which the
Basques cling, persuaded that this is the only tool for achieving their iden-
tity as a people—the only one and that which can provide the greatest quota
of political justification for an organization which have of no form of dia-
logue other than a bullet in the back of the neck.

5157
680: 3110/1257

138
CARRILLO SPEECH T0 CC DEALS H111! TERRGIISH. POPULAR FRONT

Madrid HUNDO OBRERO in Spanish 30 Apr-6 May 82. pp 9-12

[Text] In his address Monday afternoon. the secretary general of the 1/03.
Santiago Carrillo, began by stressing the importance of the report submitted
during the morning by Nicolas Sartorius "as a whole political style, involving
making the basic problems of the workers class and the peoples masses the

focus of our debates."

It is a matter of a style, and Hauricio emphasized it rightly this morning.
which tends to locate the political work of the party within the framework
of the real concerns and preoccupations of the people, the framwork of the
specific reality. and to rise above ideological abstraction as the sole con-

tent of debate .

In this connection. an effort is being made to overcome something which thanks
to practice was in danger of becoming a concept--the idea that the major so-
cial problems affecting the labor world should be dealt with by the trade
unions, whereas these problems constitute the basis of what should be our
policy, the specific field of the class struggle which should concern the
workers party, although this does not mean interfering in the specific sphere
of the trade mions. It does not suffice for us to have a trade union policy.
which is without a doubt very important, in order to assert our influence

in the labor world. We need to integrate the concerns and the worries of
this world in our daily policy. experience then and embrace them daily. and

not only in election periods.

Sometimes our discussions may give the impression that we are a party which
is constantly preparing for the final battle and that we do not give the daily
battles, left to the trade unions as their problem, all of their due inpat-
tance. By denying the reformist principle to the effect that the movement

is the only thing which is justified. we may take on the appearance--which

on the other hand would be wrong and dangerOus--that we are a party valid
only for the day of total change, which in reality takes us farther from in-
stead of closer to that transformation in society which must come about through
an accuulation of quantitative changes prior to qualitative changer-the
kind of quantitative changes in which the party must be ever increasingly

the active and dynanic protagonist.

139
A Distorted Image of the Party

And this attitude, which we may have seemed to reflect at some times, can

on occasion provide certain workers sectors with a distorted image of the
party--an image which suggests that in a period in which reforms-must be ef-
fected. it is better to support the PSOE [Spanish Socialist workers Party].

which works toward this, while the communist party is a kind of revolutionary
reserve for the day when grandiose dreams of liberation can be made a reality.

And then. these-same sectors which allow the #808 to engage ﬁ'pacts. Ms .
[Framework Collective Bargaining Agreement], LOAPAs [Organic Harmonisation

Law of the Autonomous Process] and to support the "CD [Democratic Center Union]
government,which contradicts itselfdsily.snd which continue to vote for it because

they think this is useful voting,do not allow the comnist party to en age in 1pacts.
in alliances which are indispensable if the crisis is not to pro uce da y

more catastrophic consequences. in order to achieve intermediate solutions,
and think that the communist party must keep itself rmcontaminated and vir-
ginal. in the final analysis like a testimonial group awaiting the great day
of the radical revolution.

Without a doubt we are faced with the need to undertake a great ideological
effort to educate our party, our sympathizers and our voters, the broad workers
masses. to the effect that the revolutionary party, the party of radical change.
the columnist party, must also engage in politics every day. must negotiate
intermediary solutions. must promote reforms, must engage in pacts if it wants
to put itself in a position to achieve this radical change. we must make

a stubborn effort in the ideological sector to reassess political action, the
prestige of politics as a task of the party and the masses themselves. as a
commitment for all.

And although objective circusstances may be unfavorable due to the economic
crisis. due to the persistence of characteristics, styles and even aspects
of the preceding regime in this one. politics. not only where main principles
but also daily questions are concerned, must be rehabilitated. If we do not
succeed in this. the popular masses will continue to regard politics as an
alien issue, one which concerns only what in an ambiguous and false phrase

is called the political class, and they will not be active protagonists in
the destiny of the country, deciding not for what is good, but for what is
least evil in each election. And this ideological effort must be sustained
by practical political activity. As we have done today with social security,
we must continue to do with the great social problems which affect the majority
of the population in all sectors.

This is the first conclusion 1 would like to extract from today's discussion.
Terrorism Conceals the Risk of a Coup

The second subject on which we have been informed and which we will have oc-
casion to discuss more fully when it is over has been the court proceedings
against the 23 February rebels. And I would warn you that we have superimposed
upon it the subject of terrorism, despite the fact that there was a discussion
on this issue in the Cortes last week, in the awareness that what gives the
current terrorist campaigi its most dramatic aspect. serious though it is in
itself. is not so much the ETA action as the reaction it is attempting to
provoke.

11:0
And the attitudes of those who are the defendants in these proceedings and
of all of those behind them. both in military institutims and in civilian
society. are evidence of the dangers of this reaction.

In the morass of statements contained in thousands of files and in the long
weeks of questioning, there is clear evidence of a desire to divert responsi-
bility, attributing it basically to the chief of state. whose attitude was
decisive on 23 February in revealing and frustrating the coup.

But even clearer than this lack of graceful acceptance of responsibility is
the desire to begin again to regard 23 February as a failed attempt which
there are plans to try again. turning for the purpose. above the interests

of Spain. to the corporative spirit of the Iilitary institutions. which a
collective effort is being made to compromise by the uprising. The nature

of the extremist propaganda designed to create rebellion in the armed forces
is well known and public, with El. ALCAZAR as its boldest expression. one which
this government does not dare silence, despite the fact that we have provided
the legal means of doing so through the Cortes.

The public has the clear impression that the plot continues. although its
dimensions are not known. nor are the capacity. strength and even the determi-
nation of the present government to thwart it. There is an impression which
it is very difficult to cast off that this government sees no solution but

in multiple and repeated concessions to the positions of the rebels or those
who are behind them. with the justification of depriving them of their pretext.
it surrenders to their demands. And in the political sphere we are seeing
how the situation is shifting daily farther to the right. disarming democracy
instead of strengthening it. Thus the discussion on terrorism in the Cortes
can be regarded. and not without a certain justification. as excessive. as

an effort to assert the strength of the government on this front in order

to excuse its weakness on others.

The terrorist campaign conceived within the framework of the 23 February pro-
ceedings has every aspect of a provocation leading to a coup d'etat. The
ETA. which had some legitimacy in opposing the dictatorship and which has
lost it entirely under the democracy. becoming a monstrous degeneration with
assassins' methods. which can be termed nothing other than fascist. is trying
to provoke another coup d'etat. in the belief that a new dictatorship would
justify its methods and its ends.

Therefore we must denounce and conbat terrorism, that of the ETA and any other.
with full energy. Therefore we are ready to support the perfecting of the
necessary action. which does not alter the fact that the main weapons against
terrorist are the reduction of its current social base, and not emergency
measures. To an even lesser extent can Spain reduce and eliminate terrorism
with any dictatorship. Spain has experienced states of emergency. Spain has
already experienced a dictatorship. and that did not prevent the spread and
the development of terrorism.

Democracy Against Terror ism

Terror ism is coabated in the political realm by broadening and strengthening
democracy. by correctly applying the statutes of autonomy. by opening ever

11:1
clearer paths toward self-government for each of the peoples which make up
our country. Terrorism is combated in the political realm not by LOAPAs.
not by restrictions on autonomy. but by the sincere and strict application
of the statutes of autonomy. which absolutely do not threaten or cowromise
the unity of Spain.

in other words. the base for terrorism will be reduced the more readily when
the peoples of Spain feel that the freedoms won are not endangered by the
threat of a coup.

Just as we have said that terrorism nurtures and encourages coupism. it must
be said that the treat of a coup nurtures and encourages terrorism and de-
prives those who are basically omitted to combating terrorism of key argu-

ments.

Confidence in the stability of democratic development will in the final analysis
be the factor contributing to stifling the support terrorism has today in

the social environment of the Basque Country and Spain. Therefore. one of-

the basic weapons for eliminating terrorism is the conclusion of the pro-
ceedings against those who promoted the 23 February coup with a just sentence
consistent with the law, which will persuade everyone of the potential for
maintaining. developing and deepening democracy in our country.

And the argument put forth by Frags Iribarne to the effect that it is Spain
that is threatened by terrorism is a dangerOus sophistry. It encourages those
who speak of promoting a coup in order to save Spain.

And what is in danger is not Spain. Because the people or a complex of peoples
is indestructible and can survive the harshest and most difficult tests. that

' is in danger is democracy and freedom in Spain. It is indeed freedom and
democracy which are threatened, and which we have a priority duty today to
defend.

Faced with the threat of a coup. faced with terrorism, we commists are pre-
pared to defend the democratic institutions. Moreover, this is the only way
of saving Spain in the sense of guaranteeing its progress. its economic, cul-
tural and social growth.

And we bei ieve that one must not compromise with terrorism. We believe that
terrorism: must be eradicated. But as we said in the Cortes. the government.
giving guarantees of its sincerity. must offer those who put dom their weapons
an opportunity to participate in social life and to defend their ideas. what-
ever they may be, within the realm of democratic legality, of the constitution.

The Jurisdiction Problem

And as to coupism, there is an aspect into which we must go deeper at a time
when we are going deeper into a study of the court proceedings. And this
reflection leads me to two questions: is it not necessary to correct the
error we committed in eliminating the unwary proceedings for crimes of a
military nature? I think that we should consider seriously whether this was
not an error on our part, and on the part of the left wing. with this defensive
attitude the left wing has traditionally had. thinking that if repressive

laws are approved they will be applied to it. forgetting that if there is

a coup. a reversal. in this country, those in command will not be board in
any way by the laws which have been passed in this period. They will in prac-
tice pursue their can law and their repression, without being bound by any
considerations of a legal nature.

And the other aspect into which we should go deeper and into which I propose
we look further in the development of this discussion. when the time comes.
is whether we shOuld not think of a single civil jurisdiction, preventing
the military from being judged by the military in peacetime. which creates,
among other things. the problems of conscience which have aggravated the du-
odenal ulcer of the president of the Higher Court of Military Justice.

In any case, this situation—the coup. the court proceedings. the idea of

a continuing conspiracy which has a civil extension which we see not only

in El. ADCAZAR but on the third page of YA—-it is mder the weight of this
situation that the elections in Andalusia will take place. And possibly,

as a result, in tin best of cases, of the appeal the defenders may make, the
general elections too, when they are held.

The Specter of the Popular Front

And I believe that it is worthwhile to devote a moment here to the unipola-
tion taking place with the specter of the Pepular Front. In the mind of the
public in our country. the concept of the Popular Front is linked with that
of civil war, because of the propaganda pursued for long years. among other
things. And it should be said that the Popular Front was not in the first
place a coalition of "reds." as there seems to be an effort to get the public
to believe. It was a coalition which mder the current conditions would in-
clude a large part of the DOD. even one sector of the Democratic Coalition.

It would. naturally, include the Basque and Catalan nationalists. In other
wrds. socially and politically, this specter of the Popular Front represented
something which is basically a component of the present Cortes. the present
political situation. And the transition of the Popular Front to workers class
hegemony with the outbreak of the Franco uprising. and the declaration of
war. is something else. And the Popular Rent would now have acquired, be-
cause of a war which it did not cause. which the Franco uprising caused. a
much more advanced and more radical nature than it had at its origins.

And the regrettable thing is that it is precisely the Spanish Socialist workers
Party which is pushing the effort to create an atmosphere of fear where the
concept of the Popular Front is concerned. Because the P508 veto on coopera—
tion with the communist party basically means engaging in manipulation of

the fear of the Popular Front created by many years of right-wing propaganda.
And therefore, it simultaneously means an attitude which weakens the socialist
party and the left wing in this country.

And in this connection, the step taken in Asturias is of importance on the
level of Spanish politics. because the Asturian comrades have succeeded in
breaking with this veto. with the P808 strategy in that region.
But what does this break show? And this should be the link we should seize.
This break shows that there is a spirit of unity at the PSOB base. among the
P808 ranks and many of its cadres. A spirit of leftist mity. And we must
strengthen this spirit of unity, this inclination toward unity on the left.
Vb must develop it. issuing an appeal to such unity throughout our campaign
and being very cautious as to how we criticize the socialist leaders.

I believe that both in Andalusia and in other places we should avoid crude
breaks with the socialist leaders. while seriOusly criticising their policy.
in order not to clash. not to womd the feelings of the socialist base. mo-
bilizing them. on the contrary. for use in comteracting anti-mitarian posi-
Lions.

I believe that in this whole process. activities such as those undertaken
the other day in Getafe. in which we socialists and commists spoke to 15
or 20,000 workers. and we had. of necessity, to speak of unity. are of great
importance.

The coming 1 May holiday is of great importance. In fact. the party should
make an effort to make it a great 1 May. a great united mass mobilization.
for it is these mass mobilizations which can contribute to influencing the
P808 leadership in the direction of unity.

I want to say in connection with our relations with the P302. with our policy
of cooperation with it. that there are levels on which we can temporarily
agree to support. to participation from Outside in support of the P503. if

it can acquire the necessary parliamentary strength. And there are levels

on which we cannot accept what would simply be discrimination. In other words.
if tomorrow there were to be a leftist majority in the chamber-«I am not antici
pating any judgpent here--I believe that the CC would have to assess whether

or not it is desirable to impose commist ministers in a situation like this
in a government on the national level. But on the level of municipal govern-
ment. on the level of the provincial governments, on the level of the govern-
ments of nationality and regional groups. we cannot accept discrimination

in any form-—discrinination which would serve only to classify the columnist
vote as a useless vote. a vote which decides nothing. changes nothing. when

the contrary is the case.

And I believe that the importance of the Asturian decision lies not only in
the break with the P503 strategy. but in that it graphically shows that the
communist vote is a useful vote, a vote vorth casting.

And I will not further stress the importance of the Andalusian elections.
Comrade Antonio Romero has provided a report which seems to me brief and con-
cise but complete. concerning the situation with regard to these elections.

Both the elections in Andalusia and the coming general elections will be a
test for our party which is not easy. And they will not be an easy test be-
cause there can be no doubt that the dogmatic split which has been confirmed
in Catalonia and the spread of which to the rest of the country is being pro-
moted. and on the other hand the project being discussed—it is still not
very clear how far it will go--call for transforming the ARI into a political
party. may have a negative influence on our voters. Not in the sense of giving
these groups the possibility of winning representation. but rather in terms

of limitation. causing us to lose. in some cases. representatives who could
have been ours by some hundreds or thousands of votes.

Therefore it seems to me that we should already now begin to study our elec-
toral camaigi. We should begin to prepare our electoral programs. persuaded
that it will be a harsh battle for the party. in which we must maintain and
increase our strength. something which I believe is possible if we wage our
campaign well.

Because even though I stress the difficulties we will face and which we did
not have in 1979. for example, I an persuaded that the party can maintain
and evm strengthen its support if we prepare well for this campaign and if
we use all our energies. all the combativity there is in our party and all

of the climate of thinking which can be created. in my view. following the
Asturias affair. in the sense that there will not readily be a government
inclined toward the left in Spain. but that the communist party, for which

in this connection there is no Substitute. can indeed have strong representa-
tion. representation which can have real weight in national politics.

And as the desire of our country for change. for ever more real change. for
ever more profound change. is certainly authentic, we can base Our effort

to counteract the difficulties which lie ahead of us on this feeling. on this
desire for change. in order to maintain and even exceed our 1979 electoral
results.

5157
C80: 3110/1237

1115
CARRILID SEES TERMRISH AS LINKED WITH coumsn
Madrid HIIIDO OBRERO in Spanish 30 Apr-6 May 82 p 13

[Text] The secretary general of the PCB, Santiago Carrillo. spoke during

the debate last Thursday on the recent terrorist activities. His speech was
preceded by those of Prime Minister Leopoldo Calvo-SOtelo; Minister of Interior
Juan Jose Roaon; the spokesmen for the PM] [Basque Nationalist Party]. CD
[Democratic Convergence]. PSA [Socialist Party of Andalusia] and the Catalan
minority; and Francisco Fernandez Ordonez and Juan Maria Bandres, speaking

for the Mixed Group. The following is the text of the address by Santiago
Carrillo.

"Mr President and esteemed deputies: The coamnist parliamentary grow momts
this l'OStl‘llI to indicate its desire to support both such measures as this
government may take and any others which will be effective in the struggle
against terrorism.

The prime minister was asked 'the reason for this accmulation of assaults
sponsored by the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] in this recent
period, and the answer is clear. The answer lies in the court proceedings
which have been pursued and are still being pursued against those responsible
for the 23 February coup. These proceedings, and some of the events which
have occurred in the course of them. have encouraged the ETA terrorists to
undertake these activities, with a view to seeing if they can provoke a coup
d'etat to justify what has thus far had no political or moral justification-
the terrorism of the ETA.

It must be said that the ETA did not develop nor was it born under democracy.
The ETA developed in opposition to the Franco regime, to a dictatorship. and

if at that time, faced with a dictatorship which repressed all freedoms and
all the rights of the Spanish people. it was legitimate-although we did not
share in it. the use .of terrorist methods. of criminal methods. today against
a democratic system is intolerable. whatever the ideas of these men who sip-
ported it in other eras may have been, they are revealing now that a deteriora-
tion has occurred among them, producing behavior suited to fascists and not

to those who truly want to struggle for the freedom of their people.

I want to say that legal measures, police measures. are needed to deal with
terrorism. It is necessary to improve the police apparatus further every day.
Perhaps it is necessary to provide better equipment and training for the bodies
responsible for public order. But there is only one defense against terrorism,
and that defense is the exercise of democracy.

11:6
No Limitation on Democracy

The only opportunity there could be for terrorism to continue to enjoy popular
support would be if freedoms were repressed, states of emergency declared
and liberties reduced to combat it. And in this connection, I endorse some

of the ideas expressed here.

One basic weapon against terrorism is the integral application of the Basque
statutes, because these statutes do not destroy the mity of Spain. Let there
he no threat to the Basque statutes, or the others, by those who do not realize
that the unity of Spain and the battle against terrorism are only possible

in freedom.

1 want to state that there is no revolutionary warfare on the part of the

ETA. the ETA is not waging any revolutionary war. The ETA is engaging in
fascist terrorism. And that is not revolutionary war. And we cannot challenge

the crimes of the ETA by saying that we must kill more people than the ETA
does.

That is not the solution. The solution is to strike at the ETA by defending
democracy, and above all, ensuring that the Spanish people, and in this case
the Basque people, have increasing confidence in democracy and autonomy. There
must be deeds and confirmation to show the country that the government, just
as it has come forth here to say that it wants to put an end to terrorism,
also wants to put an end to coupism (golpisno), which is basically the greater
danger and which nurtures the ETA, just as the ETA nurtures coupism.

The Main Concern of Spanish Citizens

For, gentlemen, the fear of Spanish citizens at this time is obviously fear
of terrorism and the consequences of terrorism, but the greatest fear, the
greatest concern of Spanish citizens is that the government may not be able

to defend democracy against coupism. that this government may not be able
to safeguard democracy. that the present public authorities are not strong
enough to create confidence in the Spanish people in the fact that this demo-

cracy is indestructible .

For Spain will not be destroyed as a country. A country cannot be destroyed.
Nothing destroys it, unless nuclear bombs should fall here. What can be de-

stroyed is democracy .

And this is what we must defend so that Spain can be Spain and so that Spain
can present itself to the world as a modern, democratic and free country.

I w0uld like to add that there has been talk of negotiations and pacts. We
believe that it is not possible to join in a pact or to negotiate with ter-
rorists. We believe it is necessary to isolate them, to limit them and to
coubat then, knowing in fact that it will be a long and difficult struggle

in which it will be necessary to avoid overoptimism and the tendency to regard
each battle as the last battle.

11:7
But at the same time. while we reject any negotiations. what we believe must
be done is to offer all those who put down their weapons. all those who are
ready to defend their ideas, if ideas they have. on the grounds of democracy
and the constitution, an opportunity to join in civil life if they give suf-
ficient evidence that they will respect democracy and freedom. This is what
we believe is necessary, and this is what we believe must be done.

Gentlemen, first of all and above all, what we must achieve in the struggle
against terrorism in order to win the support of Spanish citizens and to redme
the base for terrorism is to see to it that the Spanish people gain real con-
fidence in the fact that democracy is a solid force. If we achieve this,

we will have dealt the decisive blow to terrorism. but we will not achieve it
only by combating terrorism. We will achieve this if we present to other
terrorists tha- same image of firmess and solidity we are presenting to ETA
terrorism today."

5157
050: 3100/1237 END

1118