FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10128
19 November 1981

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 53/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT lAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10128
19 November 1981

HORLDHIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Danes

(FOUO 53/81)

CONTENTS
ASIA
BURMA
Briefs
Heroin Seizure in “Damggyi l
lashio Heroin [halers Arrested 1
hrgui Opium Seizure 1
H016 KONG
Briefs
Hinor Heroin Offenses Increase 2
INDIA
Narcotics Conissioner Addresses (alcutta Parley
(“'8 STARS“. 22 sep 81)....00000000000000000000000000.0000... 3
NEW ZEALAND
Air New Zeeland Planes Allegedly Used To I-porr Drugs
(“in "w mo HERALD. 21mt81)..O...0.00.00.00.000000000000 1.
PAKISTAN

'DAHN' Calls for New Program To Control Opium
(Ediwr1313m' 27 mt 81)osossesosessesesoosoosoesoeesoeeoeeo 7

Briefs
Drug Factory Rmnd
auras Seized in Badin
Contraband Omras

000
BAHAMAS

Brie fs

BARBADOS

Record Five-Year Tern Ilposed for Phrihusna Smuggling
(m8 NATION. 8 Oct 81)oo-oooooaoaooaooosoososoouossssooosososso

BERMUDA

Briefs

BOLIVIA

Publication of Hales of Accused Drug Traffickers Urged
(Editorial; ULTIM “0M, 16 (kt m)OOOOO.DOCDOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Poppy Cultivation (heck
Heroin Snuggle: Arrested
Smuggling Bid ibiled

(hares Seizure

MTIN ”ERICA

Three Held for bhrihusna

Bermdians Held in Cuba

Drug 'I‘rsffickers Employ lbbile Laboratories

(Pmmm. 13 Get 81).so.000000.00.0.0000000senses-ooooosssoooo

Farm Census To Include Coca Production

Briefs

COIDHBIA

(BL DIARIO. 17 mt 81)0000.00.00..000..-OOOCIIOIIOOOIOIOOOOOOOOQ

Anti-Drug Trafficking Gawain
Institutions Under Interior ministry

Increased Ant i-Drugs Effo rt Pledged

Administrative Department of Security Seizes Cocaine in

(BL ﬁPECTADOR, 17 oct 81)....sooossososooossoooooooossssooooot

Risaralda

Briefs

(BL ESPECTAWR. 19 Get 81)assossootisoososoooss000.00.000.00...

Various Cocaine Raids
'(bcaine Queen' Employees Killed

Cocaine Isb Rsided
Trafficer Freed

mo I‘WTFYA' "GP nmv

10
10

10'

11. .

12

13

14

16

18

20
20

21

23

24
21¢
25
25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAMAICA

Briefs
thrihuana Sentence

BXICO

Official Describes Antidrug Program to 11.8. Police Chiefs
(LA v02 DB 1‘ anmm’ 18 sep 81)....0'000000OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOO

Missing Plane Loaded Uith )hrihuana Held in ‘hxas
(BL SOL m SINALQA, 16 Sep 81)oooooooeooooosoooeoooooeoeoooaoooe

Drug Ship. Crew Seized Near (hetunal
(Rafael ltdina Cruz; EXGISIOR. 22 Sep 81)......................

Drug Ship Found Abandoned
(Rafael lbdina Cruz; EXCBLSIOR, 15 Sep 81)......................

lhrihuana Trafficker Given 7-Year Prison Sentence
(BL DIARIO DE NUEVO IARBDO, 26 Sep 81).

Briefs

Police, Traffickers in Shootout
PGR Anti-Drug mmaign Success
Seamn Seized With Cocaine
Cocaine, Marihuana Seized
Heroin Trafficker Sentenced
Harihuana Seized in Guadalajara
mrihuana on Boat Adrift
Police Helicopter Shot Down

PERU

Briefs
Coca Traffickers
Drag. Traffickers Ring Disbanded
Drug Traffickers Ring Detained
Drug Traffickers
Drug Trafficking hthods
Drug Traffickers Arrested

ST. KI'I'l'S-NBVIS

Briefs
Crackdown on Pushers

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

26

27

28

29

101

62
42
62
43
43
43
Mo
’04

45
65
65
65
I46
106

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEAR EAST AND “ORE AFRICA

IRAN

Briefs
Opium Seizures
Narcotics Discovered in Khoruen

Jiroft Bullish Find

SUB-SAHARA" AMCA

SOUTH AFRICA

Briefs
Dam Smggling to 0.8.

WEST EUROPE

ITALY

Turk. 15 [(1109 of Heroin Seized in Milan
(Gen 333an HURRIYBT, 22 Sep 81)...............................
BRIEPS

HEROIN SEIZURE IN TAUNGGYI—Acting on information. police personnel from the Shan
State Drug Suppression Force on 11 October raided the residence of Dow Shwe Kyaung
Hi at No 1808, Rungyi Road, Ye-syekwin ward of Tamggyi and seized 2.5 kg of heroin
worth 250,000 kyat. The owner of the heroin, Sein Than, alias Ail: Saik, alias Kyon
Chew of Nawng Lai Village, Tangyan; houseowner Daw Shwe Ryamg Hi; and three other
heroin dealers were arrestd and charged under Sections 6.b, 10.3. 16.0 and 11 of the
Narcotic Drugs Law. (“301530 Rangoon mm ALIEN in 3urnese 20 Oct 81 p 6]

LASRIO HEROIN DEALERS ARRESTED-dash“ Township people's council. people's police
force and regional intelligence force snashed a gang distributing heroin in the
township. The gang leader and six others were arrested and charged under sections
6.3. 7.3. 10.3 and 11 of the Narcotic Drugs Law. Acting on infomtion, a combined
investigating tean seized two packets of "two lions" brudheroin, weighing about

1 kg. hidden in a forest near Kong Nyaung Village. Lashio |township. on 2!. Septenber.
The seizure led to the arrest of Law Air, Talon Kha end Lew Her. Hith the infom-
tion provided by the three, police raided the residence of II Baung Teung at No 5,
Aung Hingala ward's Dhanna Yeiktha road, and fomd two lore packets of "two lions"
brand heroin, weighing about 1 kg. The leader of the heroin distribution gang who
was at. U llaung Taung's house. Yen Phu Myint. his father and heroin carrier U Mat-1g
Saing and his sister Daw Kyin Yone were also arrested. [3901530 Rangoon HYANHA
ALIN in Burnese 15 Oct 81 p 6]

HERGUI OPIUH SEIZURE-Police subinspector 1! M70 Hyint of Mergui City police station,
together with ward people's councillors. on 13 October raided the residence of

Than Sein, 30, in Kysndaw ward and found 8.5 visa [1 vise . 3.6 lbs] of opiul powder
from a guest at the house—Than Sein [as publishedlwfron Bokpyin Township. 30th
the homeowner and the guest were charged under sections 6.3. and 10.3 of the Nar-
cotic Drugs Law. ”(301530 Rangoon mm ALI“ in Burmese 21 Oct 81 p 6]

C80: 5300/6532
BRIEFS

MINOR Hanan: OFFENSES INCRFASE-eofficisl statistics show that there hes been n

28 percent incresse in the nusber of minor drug offences involving heroin which
were investigated by the police during the first six months of the year. A police
spokesman said yesterday that there were lsrge qusntities of drugs from the
"Golden Triangle" which had been flowing into internstionsl mrkets. ‘l‘here hsd
been a corresponding fell in the price of drugs. A number of significant seizures
had been nede from drug couriers during the year as they srrived in Houston.

But the proliferation of "auteur treders" constituted the bulk of the under of
minor offenders. "they are trying to cash in on the nerket, but they sre not
experts," the spokesman said. Figures show thst during the first six months of
the yesr there were 2,130 offences for possession of heroin conpsred with l,659
during the lest six nonths of lsst yeer. The hunter of offenders for possession
of opium dropped from 197 to 179 over the seas period. ‘rhere were 1,891 prosecu-
tions for sll minor dangerous drugs offences during the first nine months of the
year. [Text] [lions Kong scum cane mmm rosr in. English 18 Oct 81 p 71

cso: 5320/9097
NARCOTICS COMMISSIONER ADDRESSES CALCUTTA PARLEY

 

“mimﬁmam ”2mm” MM mu m
_ m .mmwwwmmm m E r
«WWWMMWWW Wammmmmmw “mm «mummm
muumumw Emma ”mam” www
“mam in? mm wwwmw “me
MWm mm ummmﬁmw a,
mm?” #3. ”Mm...
mm? «mm mwwmmmmmnmmm m.

m um.» .mmumumum. : dawn ..

3 Sam? 3mm mm .
.mm Ammmmum Mm. WW“ Em Tum

m. “amt. amummumwmm m

m mummm ”mg"? .m%

5300/7001

CSO:
AIR NEW ZNAND PIANES ALLEGEDLY USED TO IMPORT saws
Auckland 1113 N89 ZHIAND HERALD in English 21 01:: 81 p 3

[Text] A High Court jury was told yesterday it will hear evidence of an Auckland-
based drug importing conspiracy using Air New Zealand DC-lOs and false identities
taken from dead children in Auckland csneteries.

Mr David Morris, for the Crown, was opening the prosecution case against Colin
, James Prast, a 41-year-old coupany director, and Glenda Faye Menzies, a former
bank teller, aged 26, on the second day of a trial expected to last at least
three weeks.

Mr Morris told the jury it would probably be the first in New Zealand to hear

conversations "bugged" by the police under powers given then in the Misuse of
Drugs Aaendrsent Act 1975.

The recordings made from electronic listening devices my be played to the court,
he said.

Frost and Menzies have each denied 10 charges-none of inorting heroin, a class A

controlled drug, two of ilporting morphine, a class 3 controlled drug, one charge

of conspiring to import heroin, one of conspiring to import morphine, two charges

of supplying heroin, one of supplying morphine, one of conspiring to supply heroin
and another of conspiring to supply norphins.

Prsst has denied a further charge of importing morphine into Mew Zealand at
Christchurch on Septeﬂer 24, 1980.

Accomplices

Mr Morris told the jury: "All charges relate to drugs running, peddling and
dealing, in a say which involved very substantial sums of honey, international
travel on a regular basis and large quantities of drugs.”

He claimed the evidence would "establish beyond doubt that the brains behind the
scheme was Prest."
Menzies, he alleged, was the distributor who, overseen by Praet, fed the narcotics
to drug-users and suppliers within New Zealand.

Drug deals were allegedly arranged overseas by accomlices travelling from New
Zealand on false passports to avoid the close scrutiny the Customs Department
gives frequent travellers, said Mr Morris.

False passports were allegedly gained by using the birth certificate of a dead
person who would have been the same age, had the person lived, as the individual
seeking the passport, he said.

Late in 1979 Mr Norris claimed one of the alleged conspirators borrowed the
identity of a six-year-old boy who died in 1946 and is buried in Purewa Cemetery.

"mat became the modus operandi of the group," he told Mr Justice aolland and the
Jury.

Ruse Outlined

Evidence would be given of other trips overseas allegedly made on several false
passports issued to names appearing on gravestones in the Hillsborough Cemetery
near Prast's home.

The deception is possible, he said, because a person's death is not stamped on
his birth certificate.

He said police who searched the liillsborough home of Prast in April allegedly
found an American publication detailing the birth certificate ruse which was
"adopted literally to the letter" by Praet, he claimed.

The police search also allegedly found "a library of airline timetables that would
do justice to a travel agent," said Mr Norris.

Strict Curbs

‘lhe drug importing scheme allegedly also involved a senior Air New Zealand cabin
steward who knew a method of bringing goods into the country avoiding Customs.
checks, he said.

It involved a compartment on 00-10 aircraft. Prast allegedly told another person
in a bugged telephone conversation that the system could be operated only until
Hay this year when Boeing 747s, which do not contain the compartment, were to
replace the Dc-lOs. '

Hr Morris told the jury the police power to use electronic listening devices
was "strictly controlled" by the terms of a warrant ﬁnch had first to be
obtained from a liigh Court judge.
Corroboration

Some of the recordings which night be played to the court were clear, he said.
Some were not clear because of background noise.

Mr Harris said the court would hear testimny from alleged co-conspirators whose
names have been suppressed.

Some of then had pleaded guilty to charges. Others had been granted imity
from prosecution by the Solicitor-General.

They were "tainted witnesses" and the jury shOuld look for corroboration of their
evidence, he said.

Mr Morris continues his opening address today.

650: 5320/ 9098
'DAUN' CALLS FOR NB" PROGRAM TO CONTROL 0PM
Karachi DAHN in English 27 Oct 81 p 9
(Editorial: "Getting To Grips Hith Opium")

[Text] Addiction to opium or one of its derivatives, or any one of the 'hard'
drugs. is one of the worst fates that can he wished on a nan. but it would appear
that this habit is on the increase in Pakistan. This stetenent is not based on
statistical data. since data of this nature are not easily available. and could
very well be wrong. Habits of this nature tend to spread alaost autosatically~
witness the fact that ‘peer pressure' is by far the most important reason for the
beginning of the drugs habit in this country. Apart from this. there is the im—
pression gained from reports that trafficking in drugs is on the increase—much of
it aimed at illegal export. but part of it catering for local demand also. In
fact. one former official of the Pakistan Narcotics Control Board went so far as
to claim in a book that drug addiction nay becoas endemic in Pakistan. referring to
the growing number of addicts and the easy cultivation and availability of poppy
and canabis.

The situation is serious. to say the least. and sons very intelligent steps are
needed if we are to avoid being saddled with a large. and growing. opium-addicted
population. The difficulties of nounting such a campaign. though. loom as large
as the problem itself. and new ground in the way of narcotics control will have to
be broken if drug addiction is to be effectively curtailed. In the first place,
of course, there is the historical backgromd-dwe have an old history of drugs
use. and it was not until the 1950s. for instance. that opiu snaking was made a
crime. Then there is the utter of availability. Pakistan is along the biggest
growers of opium in the world and. in fact. along with Iran and Afghanistan, is
believed to be the world's largest source of illicit opiates-«his region having
outstripped the Golden Triangle recently. In addition. a considerable portion

of the opium grown in Afghanistan, whose production is more than this country's.
finds its way here to be ultimately smuggled abroad. With a lSO-ton crop here
and the few hundred tons grown in Afﬂuanistan, the amount of opius which is traded
in Pakistan is. therefore. huge and. consequently. local users can find opiu-
relatively easily and cheaply. Another difficulty is that the Govern-eat does not
wish to crack down on growers. partly because of the serious conpletities involved
in interfering in the Tribal Areas and partly because officials feel that. along
with enforcement. income substitution for poppy growers should constitute the ba-
sic solution. One more important consideration is that narcotics supply to the
addict just cannot be withdrawn abruptly-wit hea to be done under medical super-
vision. in many cases by substituting another. less harnful drug, for opium or
heroin or whatever.

All these difficulties notwithstanding-wand these are by no means all the problem
that are faced--the Government will have to crack down on poppy cultivation and
sale if the habit is to be controlled and eliminated, and if we are to avoid the
dubious distinction of being the largest drugs exporter in the world. This is not
to say, of course, that efforts have not been made or are not being node to cur-
tail the habit. There was a crop substitution prograue in the Buner poppy grow-
ing area of Swat; there are effortsnnininal no doubt—to wean addicts off the
habit; and the crime control authorities make frequent seizures. Nevertheless.

as a former PNCB official wrote. the rupees 60 nillion spent by PNCB in the last
seven years has had no tangible effect in checking the habit. A totally new
control programs has to be devised. or perhaps the existing one can be revamped--
in any case, a new. re-vitalised thrust is needed and ways will have to be found
to deal with the difficulties mentioned earlier. for instance. if some political
nerves have to be rubbed in the Tribal Area. then the Government will have to face
up to it, rather than risk awamping the entire country with deadly narcotics. It
is possible, of course, that crop aubatitution or the provision of other sources
of income will tone down the ire of the tribal people. It should be mentioned
here that eventual reduction of addiction to much lower levels is by no neana a
hopeless task. A 1975 survey by PNCB showed that over 81 per cent of the eanple
group of addicts was illiterate. 37 per cent wished for treatment and rehabilita-
tion and only less than eight. per cent were against it. These figures are certainly
a pointer to the fact that a properly planned campaign can be successful.

CSO: 5300/4546
BRIEFS

DRUG FACTORY POUND—An illegal drug sanufacturing factory was un-earthed on Tues-
day by the Provincial Health Department. says an official handout. The unlicensed
factory nanely M/s. Lucky Industries was being run in Pederal Capital Area with
packing and labelling arrangements. A large quantity of drug, raw saterisl and
packing material stored in the factory was seized while the factory was sealed and
a case was registered. Samples of drugs have been sent to testing laboratory to
ascertain the quality of the drugs. Recently three sadical stores in hyderabad
and five in Karachi were raided and allegedly pilfered Govth Iedicines were
recovered from there. [Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 30 Oct 81 p 110]

CHARAS SEIZED IN BADIN-diyderabad. Oct 27, The Excise and Taxation Inspector (In-
telligence branch), Hyderabad, Hr ﬂoor Nabi Pethan, arrested two allegedly notori-
ous charas snugglers--Aurangzeb and Yahya-mand recovered from their possession

201 kilograms of contraband charas worth Re 20 million in foreign market yester-
day. According to the Excise Police, Aurangzeb belongs to a gang of international
narcotics smugglers which has chosen Badin as its centre of activities. The case
is being investigated under the supervision of Mr Qansr Ansari, Director, Excise
and Taxation, Hyderabad and Mr Sakhi hohs-asd. Divisional Intelligence Officer and
the accused will be challaned under the Excise Act read with the ﬂadood Ordinance.
[Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 28 Oct 81 p 6]

CONTRABAND CHARAS--The Provincial Excise police yesterday arrested two accused
persons in a raid on a house in Gulshan-i-Iqbal and seized 150 kilograms of con-
traband charas. The accused persons were identified as Mohamed Ismail and lb-
haa-ad Ahmed. [Text] [Karachi mm in English 30 Oct 81 p 14]

POPPY CULTIVATION (:HBClto-Islassbad, Oct 25--Pakistan Narcotics Control Board
(PNCB) is taking arrangements to keep a close watch at all such areas in MP
which are known for mass illicit cultivation of poppy as its sowing seasons is
about to begin. The arrangements are being nde in collaboration with the MP
Government. PRO Chairman hire] Hussein told Dawn the cultivation of poppy, the
only source of opium and heroin, will be niniaﬂsed with these arrangements. The
Frontier Governeent, he said, has recently warned the local growers to refrain
from cultivating poppy in their fields. They have been asked to grow some other
crops for which the Government will give then utmost cooperation. The PM;
Chairman, who recently made an extensive tour of the country to determine the
illicit sources of narcotics, said he was deeply shocked to see the growing trend
of drug abuse among the youths. He specifically mentioned Quetta and Peshawar
where the situation was quite alarming." The cause of this situation was mass
production and easy availability of narcotics in the area, he added. It is
reported that men men during the last one nonth alone recovered 5.87.811 kilo-
grams of charas, 747.765 kgs of opiua and 66,000 kgs of heroin from various

raids in the country. l‘rextl [Karachi gum in English 26 Oct 81 p 131
HERDIX SNFCULER ARRESfFﬂ--Vux(mnauﬂllvors at lslsnah~l Inluunatlnual Ainuut
arrested Tajuddin. a passenger who was bound for Canada through loudon. on

30 October. Tajuddin was carrying 3.2 kg of heroin worth 3.5 million rupees on
the international market. [CF041860 Karachi HASHRIQ in Urdu 31 Oct 81 p 1]

SHUGGLING BID FOILED-lslamabad customs officials seized 33 kg of heroin from a
Canada-bound Pakistani passenger at Islanabad International Airport on 29 October.
The value of the drugs is estimated at 35 million rupees on the international

market. [CF081530 Karachi NAHA-E-HAQT in Urdu 31 Oct 81 p 1]

CHARAS SEIZURE--Badin, 6 Nov--The director, excise and taxation, Mr Qamar Ansari,

along with his staff in a surprise raid has recovered about five naunds of charas

worth RS 10 crore in the international narket. The excise staff has also arrested
one Aurangzeb in this connection. Further investigations are in progress.-—PPI

[Text] [CF091331 Karachi DANN in English 5 Nov 81 p 5]

C30: 5300/4565

10
BRIEFS

THREE HELD FOR MIMMHM Cuban-Americans end one Pusrto Ricsn were refused
ball when they eppesred before mgistrete shirin Bdun on drug charges yesterday.
Retresented by Ortlsnd Bodie were Alejandro nodes, 21, Ernsn Hurtsdo, 24, end
Henrique Sulusgo. The men ere sccused of being in possession of 220 beles of
marijuana when they were srrested on Eleuthere on Monday. Each bail weighs shout
70 lbs. Their lswyer, in pleading for bsil, esid that during the arrest one of
his clients was shot, not for trying to resist arrest, but rather to svoid
getting shot. [Excerpt] [Nasssu ma mom in English 1 Oct 81 p l]

080: 5300/7512

11
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070043-3

RECORD FIVE-YEAR TERM IMPOSH) FOR HARIHUANA SHUGGLING

Bridgetown THE NATION in English 8 Oct 81 p 1

[Text]

A CRATE loaded M nu In (lull/)0! “man
W a Ayn-pa Baud/m W 3 «ya Him
ya “ﬁngMJWSvWIII/nwuhmﬂo.§c

0.66;?” 3am, cum» hem-Qua” 1h 0:
paw-to m W! W on, my.
mmnmmhmwmehcmhhavymavtq.

Warm/oaths? Ila/thumb“
mining all (can! Mum {mm m
Porno-C»: “mthMCWIh-M
lukeyulctdny. . '- - -

Quimb Mmmthcmdmfw.dlnm§
(In Ink .SI.M‘ .(otmmtkwclmmmwc-u
H .111an Hiawatha”.

thmhmmhtotummubhd b
_ Pam Vilhplomordmﬁomﬂumdaoto/aﬁoomdg..
. ' Pom. tom. - WI h the m
“(It been“ of“nu 0".ud cumin-0w the
pawn who m altered the job We Gel/Wm! b.“

The uncle: MI and women in wavy. bu mung w
to know ”album the «mm at lie box. Wu- an m
named on. and unmet/howl: tmwmww
have Masai the box from I!» Whom. eﬂd not reply. ' 2-.

Heated lo mum: Mwummmlhcoé
«36¢».th {not IowMMa-dcpodhhw.

Mm uh: mom omens [and Io ﬂop Qulnby. lh pour: wt:

and in. lhebolmopadlndllwdmdlblmuﬂm

- mnuly and Holy I6 when at ”It mum count wuh o!
,um.

imb um subs wily mold I" chased with unlawful
mention 0’! some “8.ququ (us II» at mar/luau.

Police. pleat-d u the outcome of the cut. a“ mud-3 I w}
major Rue-lumen In an. Int/Seth. In Dubai”. and hood M

"armored wmwuwumulmmmm
dab".

(280: 5300/ 7511

12

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070043-3
BRIEFS

BERMUDLANS BELD 1N CUBA--Hamilton, Bermuda, Saturday (CANA-Reuter)-Three Bermu-
dians end a Canadian have been held in a Cuban jail on drug charges since July.
Bermuda's Deputy Governor Peter Lloyd said. Mr Lloyd said he learned from
British diplomats in havana that the British ”any was not told of the arrests
until October 3 and the aen were not seen by Embassy officials until October 9.
The three Bermudians were Thomas Pitcher, 29, Donald Burchall, 29, and Carlton
Minors, 31. The Canadian was named as Jaques lelay. The man were arrested
aboard a 50-foot fishing boat, the Sea Yatsy, accused of entering Cuban waters
illegally and carrying marijuana. The British Consul in Havana, Michael Connor,
said the nen were being held in a new jail just outsi;e Havana which housed
mainly foreigners. "I have visited them and they were in good health," he said.
'Wbey are being treated fine and have no complaints. It is not known if and when

they will come to trial." [Tea] [Bridgetown summer mom's-mus in English
18 Oct 81 p 3]

C80: 5300/7512

13
PUBLICATION OF NAMES 0P ACCUSED DRUG TRAP?ICKEBS URGBD
La Paz ULTIHA HORA in Spanish 16 Oct 81 p 3

[Editorial: "Coca and Cocaine")

[Text] Peasants working in tropical agriculture in the El Chapare region reported
to the La Paz Department prefecture the existence of alarming discrimination on
the part of officials of the office of Coca Control and Surveillance who are pro-
hibiting sales of coca by small producers but on the other hand are authorizing
such sales by wholesalers. They said that trafficking in large amounts of leaves
is permitted at night.

The facts have the last work in regard to allegations and statements. There has
been talk of implementation of a thorough antidrug trafficking campaign; however,
the small peasant landowners and settlers say that the above-mentioned office is
confiscating even 5-pound bags from them, while "baskets" and "shipments" of coca
are leaving Bl Chapel: for parts unknown. presumably as the result of influence
and bribery.

The night-time operation clearly shows the complicity and facilitation offered by
certain authorities, once the military forces controlling Highways 1 and 6 call a
halt to traffic by all motor vehicles during curfew.

The natural consumption of coca. by means of injections or "mates" and by masti-
cation or "acullico" [chewing] is part of the customs and traditions of our people,
with beneficial effects as it permits sustained effort by the man working in the
fields and on long treks. What is more, it has been proved that the chewing of
coca leaves keeps the teeth in excellent condition; and recent studies conducted
in Peru demonstrate that the leaves have proteins and vitamins.

The dittortion of natural use came with the introduction of sethods of chemically
processing coca leaves to convert them into cocaine sulfate or base paste for
the manufacture of the evil drug. The inhabitants of our country were never drug
addicts or traffickers in the past and they are not now. This vice is being ad-
ministered. on the world clandestine market for dangerous drugs, by "mafiss" or
transnationals of crime and marginally by independent groups or traffickers.

Hhat is happening is that the'increase in the manufacture of cocaine by other
"connections" in the business, existing in Latin American countries, such as

14
Colombia-which has becase the principal processing 1aboratory--creates a constant
incentive for the expansion of plantations. because of the fact that there is no
product of the agriculture of the torrid nicroclimate which can conpete with coca
plantations: one planting for many years and four harvest per year.

The core of the question in the antidrug trafficking war is the intermediate links

ranging free coca leaf purchasers to exporters of base paste or pure cocaine, links
which are made up of illicit processors and dealers.

The campaigns conducted in Bolivia up to now, in spite of their thrust or serious-
ness at their high points, unfortunately lack international credibility because of
stories circulated abroad that the cocaine "nafias" have the national government
in their pocket. There are facts, circumstances. lists and even "curriculues
vitae" of drug trafficking criminals who are nenbers of the civilian and military
sectors, which are circulated persistently in publications characterized by their
seriousness. As we have already stated. at this point in tine, the Bolivian people
are the only ones in the dark. Presumably. a certain number of these allegations
are imagined or exaggerated; however, it is proper that all the information avail-
able in the country be known so that the accused can exercise their right of legi-
tinate defense. For example, why not publish a list of the cocaine "fat cats"
which the American authorities handed over to the Bolivian Foreign Ministry via un-
official channels?

If an all-out sntidrug trafficking capaign is to be conducted as we have been as-
sured, there should be no exceptions, so that the image of our beloved country will
be washed and will remain clean.

8153
C50: 5300/2038
DRUG TRAFFICKERS EMPLOY MOBILE LABORATORIES
PY062320 La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 13 Oct 81 p 8

[Text] Captain Javier Guerrero. director of the National Dangerous Drugs
Department. yesterday stated that "the drug traffickers have changed their
tactics and have been operating mobile laboratories, thus hampering the
ant idrug camps ign .

He said, however. that the results of the antidrug campaign could be considered
satisfactory, taking into account the limitations of the state organization
which for the time being has no international cooperation to rely on.

He pointed out that proof of these positive results is the arrest of 38 persons
involved in cocaine manufacturing and trafficking in the course of operations
carried out in the country over the past 15 days.

Guerrero explained that once the investigation and other police requirements are
completed. the prisoners will be brought before the court.

Guerrero did not provide many details about the operations which resulted in the

arrest of the 38 persons. but said that among them are men and women "the majority
of whom are foreigners."

He added: "This clearly proves that our country is being victimized by the immoral
and ignoble activities of drug traffickers, an activity which originates abroad."
He also reported that a British citizen was arrested in Santa Cruz this weekend
while trying to leave the country with over 2 kg of cocaine which he was carrying
in strips taped on his body.

The director of the dangerous drugs department indicated that a new system used
by the drug traffickers was discovered recently.

He explained that in view of the strict control currently being implemented,

the drug traffickers have installed mobile mini-factories which can move easily
from one place to another, thus eluding official control.

16
He explained that despite this new development. a few of these new mobile
laboratories have been discovered.

'This forces us to work harder, doubling surveillance and increasing the
frequency with which checks are made in the so-called critical areas where

most of the drug is being produced," Guerrero said. He emphasized that these
increased duties demand more funds.

CSO: 5300/2050

17
FARM CERSUS 1'0 INCIDDB COCA PRODUCTION
La Pa: 21. MARIO in Spanish 17 Oct 81 p 5

[Text] Beginning Monday, 19 October 1981, pursuant to a contract signed with the
National Antidrug Trafficking Council, the Military Geographic Institute
[INSGDilL] will send emissions into the field to conduct the Agriculture-Live-
stock Census. including coca production.

The emissions will be made up of approximately 1.50 persons and will be assigned
to the districts of La Paz, Cochebamba and Santa Cruz.

The task in the La Paz district will cover the provinces of For Yungaa, Sud Yungas,
Pranz Tamayo and lnquisivi. In Cochabamba, the provinces of Csrrasco and Chapare,
while in Santa Cruz Department work will be done in lchilo Province.

As background information authorized spokesmen of 1118630811. said that in October,
1975, the 0.8. Barth Satellite Corporation granted technical assistance to the gov-
erment of Bolivia through the 3m [Barth Resource Technical Satellite] program
for geological exploitation; its objectives were identification and location of
coca fields and others of lesser importance; however, the objectives were not car-
ried out in detail.

It was also brought out that the objectives of the second census are: l) deter-
mining the factors inherent in the production of coca leaves; and 2) planning
future production and couercialisation controls.

what is more, the cosnissions will attempt to determine the socioeconomic aspects
and to prepare indicators to make possible the creation of new, specific projects.
with a view to the integral development of this sector, following the guidelines
established by the present government through the standards set by the Minister of
Planning and Coordination.

Census work on all parcels containing coca fields consists in the collection of
data concerning the size of these fields. counting of personnel engaged in the

growing of coca, determination of annual production on the basis of the periodicity
of harvests. etc.

18
Concurrently with the collection of the above-aentioned data, an effort will be
made to identify other crops being grown and the species of livestock. All this
will be useful to the program of the government of the Arned Forces in the estab-
lishment of focuses of development based on the formation of agroindustrial enter—
prises which will not only permit replacement of coca leaf cultivation but also im-
provement of the peasant's socioeconomic standard of living.

Recomendation

The commander of the INSGBOMIL has reed-leaded that the peasant population to be
covered by the census cooperate with personnel to be sent into the field, as their
task is specifically technical: they have no authority or responsibility to carry
out any nission other than that of control or repression of the production or con-
nercialization of coca.

8163
C50: 5300/2038

19
BRIEFS

ANTI-DRUG TRAFFICKING CAMPAIGN—La Fab-The director of the National Dangerous
Drugs Department, Capt Javier Guerrero, reported today that Bolivian officials
have confiscated about 1.000 kg of cocaine in the last 8 months. He noted,
moreover. that more than 500 drug traffickers have been arrested in many
operations and all of them are now in local jails. he added that since the
amed forces have been in charge of this campaign, drug trafficking has decreased
considerably. Guerrero noted that the coca that is produced by the Chapare
peasants is of excellent quality and this is why drug traffickers have made

this town the center of their operation. He also reported that note than

20 percent of those detained are foreigners having connections with international
drug trafficking rings. [Paris APP in Spanish 2047 GMT 28 Oct 81 FY]

INSTITUTIONS UNDER INTERIOR MINISTRY—According to a decree signed today by
the executive branch, the National Investigations Directorate [Direccion de
Investigacion Nacional] will now be subordinate to the Interior Ministry.
Likewise, by order of the president of the republic and his ministerial
cabinet. the command for struggle against drug trafficking will also be
subordinate to the Interior Ministry, with the objective of intensifying the

campaign at the highest level. [La Paz Radio Illimsni Network in Spanish
0100 GMT 10 Nov 81 FY]

C80: 5300/ 2050

20
INCREASED ANTI-DRUGS EFFORT PLEDGE!)
Bogota BL BSPBCTADOR in Spanish 17 Oct 81 p lO-A

[Text] The Governments of Colombia and the United States yesterday took another
step in their struggle against anti-drug trafficking and anti—dope smuggling

fight by putting into service the coast guard vessel that was donated by the
North American nation to our country.

On that occasion, the Coloubian Government emphasized in Cartagena how coopera-
tive the United States has been with respect to anti-drug trafficking and anti-
drug smuggling operations.

Through Minister of Finance Eduardo Hiesner Duran, the Ayala Turbay administra-
tion reiterated its pledge to combat that type of transgression and said that
"only by uniting our efforts will we be able to eradicate the corruptive criminal
proceedings that do incalculable economic and more harm to both Colombia and the
United States."

Yesterday, in Cartagena, Minister Uiesner Duran spoke as a representative of the
Colombian Government upon receiving a coast guard veuel donated by the North
American government to our National Customs, pursuant to the "Ban on Narcotics--
Customs" agreement.

The official said that that donation will redound to great advances in the fight
against drug smuggling and drug trafficking.

In acknowledging the presence of Thomas Boyatt. ambassador of the United States.
the minister imediately pointed out the special desire of the u.s. Government
to cooperate with the Goverment of Colombia in one of the moat-difficult and
most urgent tasks that face our two countries.

He added that the Ban on Narcotics agreement clearly expresses the reciprocal
pledge of both countries that is being successfully carried out.

"The incorporation of the new coast guard vessel into our National Customs will
make it easier to control drug smuggling and to prevent the trafficking of drugs
and dope," said Uiesner, and emphasized: "He will thus have an effective means
of implementing our national goverment's anti-smuggling policy. As has been

said on various occasions. our national government. and in particular the Hinis-
try of Finance. has adopted the policy of countering drug smuggling through all

21
means within its reach. This new vessel now reduces the possibility of the
access of drugs to consumer markets; it removes the main stimulus for its pro-
duction and processing. with this strategy and with the complementary efforts

that are made within the United States, we can look with justifiable optimism
to theultimate success of these campaigns."

Hiesner said that the majority of our National Customs officials "are honest,
industrious people" who "realize that now their task will be less difficult

and that it will be easier to accomplish the duties and responsibilities that
have been entrusted to them."

The new coast guard vessel was christened in the name of the now deceased former
president of Colombia, Enrique Olaya Herrera. The minister said that this is a

well-deserved homage "to one who, in truth, is the founder of our National
Customs."

8255
030: 5300/2037

22
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 0? SECURITY SEIZES COCAINE IN RISARALDA
Bogota EL ESPECTADOR in Spanish 19 Oct 81 p 22-A

[Text] A big cocaine processing laboratory that was in operation on a farm
located in the town of Risaralda, Dos Quebradas, was discovered by units of the
DIPEC during an operation that resulted in the seizure of more than 80 kilos of
alkaloid, an appreciable quantity of armament, several vehicles, and the arrest
of two drug traffickers.

The raid on the cocaine nafias occurred at the "Les Margaritas" fern, in the
above-mentioned town. after a long series of investigations over a period of
several weeks.

As a result of the operation. 80 kilograms of cocaine and 180 grams of hydro-
chlorate of cocaine that had been processed in the sale raided laboratory were

seized. They were valued at 12b nillion pesos.
Two Arrests

Oscar Eduardo Larrota Yepes, with citizenship document No 10'095,435 fro-
Pereira, and Juan de Jesus Suarez Sandoval, holder of document No 10'100,l83
from the sane city, were arrested in the building and were inlediately placed
at the disposal of a circuit crininal judge.

Armament

In addition to the cocaine. the following were seized: a 22-caliber Colt pis-
tol, 2 Snith and Reason revolvers; a lZ-caliber Zabala shotgun; a 20-caliber
Winchester; e 6.35-nillineter caliber Beretta pistol; 60 cartridges, 22-caliber;
12 cartridges, 6.35-caliber; 18 cartridges, lZ-caliber; 3 long cartridges,
32-caliber; and 6 cartridges, 20-caliber.

Vehicles and Other Articles

Also seized were a 1976 stationwagon with license plates No Ls-S3l9, and a
1973 Toyota camper with license plates No HL-1473.

The secret agents also confiscated all of the equipment in the laboratory,
including six different-size containers, six special lights for drying purposes,
a scale, an appreciable quantity of sulphuric acid, and two film spools.

8255
cso: 5300/2037 23
BRIEFS

VARIOUS COCAINE RAIDS--Twenty kg of very pure cocaine arriving by plane from the
Peruvian capital were seized by officials of the Antinarcotics Group of the
National Attorney General's Office at the Bldorado Airport. The alkaloid ship-
ment. packed in three plastic bags wrapped in newspaper, was found in a suitcase,
and it arrived Saturday aboard Iberia Flight 938 proceeding. as noted. from Lima.
The subject carrying the luggage apparently noticed that officials of the Attor-
ney General's Office had suspected something, for he declined to claim the suit-
case, and he disappeared when the 20 kg of alkaloid were discovered. The blow to
drug trafficking mafias was the second for Saturday, being that in the morning
another 2 kg of cocaine were seized in a double-bottomed suitcase carried by
Hector Velasquez Morales. who was preparing to take Avianca Flight 050 to New
York City. It should be added that at the same airport on the ninth of the cur-
rent month, the F-2 captured Rodrigo Mejia Guzman, Guillermo Galeano Guzman and
Aydee Palomino Ortega, and seized from them $120,000, with which they planned to
travel to Leticia in order to acquire there paste for the refining of cocaine.
Another 5 kg of cocaine had also been confiscated several days before at Eldorado
from Mauricio Pachon, who arrived on another flight proceeding from the Amazon
capital. [Text] [Bogota EL ESPECTADOR in Spanish 15 Sep 81 p 23-A] 9746

'COCAINE QUEBN' EMPLOYEES KILLED--Hedellin, 22 Sep--Two employees of Griselda
Blanco, a woman known in the country asthe "Cocaine Queen," were shot to death

on a farm in San Antonio de Prado, southwest of this capital. The lifeless
bodies of Jose Ignacio Zapata Gallego and Horacio de Jesus Montoya Osorio were
discovered a half kilometer from the ranch "La Plancha," property of Ms Blanco.
Zapata Gallego, 21, and Montoya Osorio, 32, had several hmuiwounds and were
gagged. The first victim worked as caretaker of the farm, whereas it is not known
what sort of ties the second had with the narcotics trafficker, who is a fugitive

from justice in Colombia. The police reported that the two men were killed by
unknown assailants who took them by force from their work places in order to kill

them later. [Text] [Bogota EL TIBHPO in Spanish 23 Sep 81 p 8-A] 97h6

24
COCAINB LAB RAIDED--Pereirs. 15 0ct--A very sophisticated cocaine processing
laboratory was discovered by the authorities in Dosquebradaa, a town located
10 minutes from this capital. Members of the DA5 [Administrative Department
of Security] and of the F-2 police announced that, in addition, 18 kilos of
cocaine, valued at approximately 105 million pesos, were found at the "Los
Fuentes" county estate. The luxurious country mansion, with its two swimming
pools and several guard dogs, the property of Fidel Garcia, was disguised as a
country home in order to conduct the illicit operation. In addition, there
was equipment for the production of coffee. The raid resulted in the capture
of Juan de Jesus Sandoval Suarez, Oscar Eduardo Yepes, and Aristobulo Pulgsrin
stares, who were placed in the custody of the Risaralda police. In addition,
the following were seized: two shotguns, two revolvers, one pistol, and one

case of ammunition. [Text] [Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 16 Oct 81 p 9-A]
8255

TRAFFICKER FREED—«A person who had been charged with drug trafficking and

from whom the F-2 had recently seized 13 kilograms of cocaine, was freed by

the criminal court judge who examined the case. Apparently the person was

freed because of "lack of evidence." This past 27 September, agents of the P-Z
narcotics squad arrested Alberto Rodriguez Valencia, who had the above-mentioned
drug in his possession. The arrest was made in house No 22-55 of the La Soledad
neighborhood, where a valuable vehicle was also confiscated. The case was
assigned to the second criminal court judge, Gabriel Rendon Arango, who last
Friday freed the person who had been charged. A similar case was denounced
several months ago by the press throughout the entire country, when criminal
court judge 48 of Bogota, Leonor Izquierdo de Pave, freed Harleny Orjuela
Sanchez, better known as the "Coca Queen." Included in Izquierdo de Pava'a offi-
cial communication was an investigation of the "godmother's" trafficking of
drugs. The judge was dismissed from office because of this case through the
intervention of the High Judicial Council, but later the High Court of Justice
of Bogota definitively stayed the Judgment regarding the alleged betrayal of
trust by the judicial official. [Text] [Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 16 Oct 81
p 20-6] 8255

C50: 5300/2037

25
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA SENTENCE--Alphanao ﬂhite. l9. labourer of Winter Heights, known also as

Sufferers Heights at Central Village in St. Catherine, was fined $1,000 or twelve
months imprison-ant after he was found guilty of possession of ganja in the
Spanish Town R.H. Court on Tuesday, Septenber 29. Resident Magistrate was

Mr. C. H. Berry, and the prosecution's case was conducted by Mr. L. A. S. Green.
Clerk of Courts. Evidence was led that on Monday, July 13, Constable Lloyd
Phillips of the Central Village police station, along with other constables,
acting on a tip raided a house occupied by the accused. In a search they found
one crocus bag and four plastic parcels containing ganja weighing sixty-seven

. pounds. The accused was subsequently arrested and charged. White. in his
defence said rain was falling end he went into the house for shelter. Another

man. Samuel Thonas, jointly charged with "hits was disaissed. [Text] [Kingston
THE DAILY CLEANER in English 16 Oct 81 p 6]

C80: 5300/7511

26
OFFICIAL DESCRIBES ANTIDRUG PROGRAMS T0 0.3. POLICE CHIEFS
Mexicali LA V02 03 LA FRONTZRA in Spanish 18 Sep 81 Sec 3 p 12

[Text] The assistant attorney general of the republic. Samuel Alba Leyva. announced
today to a group of American police chiefs that the PGR [Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic] is spending $60 million per year to support the permanent
campaign against the drug traffic in our country.

The official explained to the American group, which came to Mexico expressly to learn
about the technological systems used to combat the trafficking and consumption of
drugs, that during the current administration over a thousand criminal organizations
have been broken up.

Also. 58,000 marihuana plantations and 150 poppy plantations have been destroyed over
a total area of 22,000 hectares. with an average aresof 1,000 square meters per plan-
tation.

Moreover, Alba Leyva said that 69 laboratories forhsroin production and 19 for other
types of drugs, have been detected and destroyed. The seizures total 571 kilograms
of opium, 583 kilograms of heroin, 417 kilograms of poppy seed, 2,005 tons of mari-
huana and 864 kilograms of hashish.

Also, 13 tons of marihuana seed, 667 kilograms of cocaine, #3 million psychotropic
pills and 3 tons of peyote have been destroyed.

The assistant attorney general remarked that the Mexican campaign has been organized
through 13 regional coordinating entities in the national territory, in which agri-
cultural engineer pilots, Federal Judicial agents and Army forces participate.

The aerospectrographic equipment to detect growing areas has brought optimal results
making possible their immediate destruction. However, he noted that, in these
operations during the current government administration 37 agents. mechanics and
pilots have lost their lives.

The American guests, for their part. acknowledged the system for combatting the drig
traffic coordinated by the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic as being
first-rate, attracting the attention of the United Nations Narcotics Commission.

They also remarked that the drug addiction problem is more intensive in the United
States than in our country, and that therefore the purpose of their visit was to
assimilate the experience gained by Mexico in this respect.

In attendance at the meeting were: Colonel Scott, of Agriculture and Mining, and the
(Police) Law Enforcement School of Texas; Bobby Austin. deputy from Texas; and David
Polon. director of Field Studies Programs of Texas A. and M. University.

2909

C50: 5330/53 27
MISSING PLANE LOADED WITH HARIHUANA HELD IN TEXAS

Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 16 Sep 81 p 6

[Text] Mexico City. 15 September (08H)--The DC-3 airplane owned by the Secretariat
of Finance, which was mysteriously stolen while loaded with marihuana which had been
seized in the northern part of the country and which was to be transported to this
capital, is at the disposal of the Texas customs authorities.

Nevertheless. according to their statement. although the necessary procedures are
being undertaken by the General Administration of Mexican Customs. it will be
difficult for them to return the aircraft, because the Treasury agents allegedly
found it with the drugs on their territory.

while this has been occurring. according to orders from superiors, questioning is
being continued of Comdr hector Gomez. alias "Hueca". an individual to whom the
aircraft was "lent", as well as of 14 customs guard members who were with him.

As was reported yesterday. the general director of customs, Guillermo Ramirez, put at
Gomez' disposal the 06-3 plane owned by the Secretariat of Finance, supposedly so
that he might pick up 10 tons of marihuana which they had seized in Tuxpan, and
subsequently take it to the Federal District, as that it might be later delivered

to the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic.

However, this did not happen. because. without "knowing how," they "stole" the plane
from "Hueca". with the drugs and everything; and despite the fact that it was all
to be kept "secret" the matter came to light.

Moreover, it was learned that Ramirez intended to resign soon, but the resignation
was nor accepted when his superiors learned about the matter. However, a desertion
began in the customs administration.‘since some of the individuals who had been
with "Huecs" chose to go to their homes rather then become involved in the affair.

2909
C50: 5330/53

28
DRUG SHIP. CREW SEIZED NEAR CHETUHAL
Mexico City EXCRLSIOR in Spanish 22 Sep Bl p 8-D
lArticlv by Rafael Medina Cruz]

[Text] A 5.5. shrimphoat that was carrying 8 tons of marihuana of Colombian
origin was seized yesterday off the coast of Chetumal. Quintana Roo. by the
chlcan Navy and agents of the Federal Judicial Police [PGR].

The drug. packed in sacks and parcels, is worth more than 100 million pesos,
according to the attornov general's office.

Thr Sea Hitch's crew was Capt John Mueller and seamen Roosevelt Hylly and Frank
Lennon. ".5. citizens, and Arnulfn Christoferm, a Colombian.

1hc arrested persons said the marihuana was obtained and loaded in Colombia,
and that it would he delivered on a beach in Miami, Florida.

in loss than [5 days. the Mexican Navy has seized two shrimpboats loaded with
dtuus. A week :uu» lhvy acizvd a boat that was carrying 13 tons of marihusna,
:||;.-n ul Colombian origin.

The agent of the Federal Public Ministry of Chotumnl has already started the
rvspcrtiVu investigations to turn over the prisoners and the boat to the appro—
priutv authorities.

The naval authorities. as well as the Federal Judicial Police, after seizing
shrimphuats with marihuana. have intensified their surveillance off the coast
in prvvonl the continuing oi marihuana traffic.

95h5
650: 5300/2024

29
DRUG SHIP FOUND ABANDONED
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 15 Sep 81 p 31-A
[Article by Rafael Medina Cruz]

[Text] Units of the Mexican Navy found an abandoned shrimpboat off the Cozumel
coast containing 13 tons of marihuana, apparently from Colombia. They immedi-
ately informed the Attorney Ceneral's Office, which estimated the shipment at
more than 150 million pesos in the 0.8. drug trafficking market, where it is
supposed the marihuana would be sold. '

The boat Far Horizons. which has no registration number. is 68.5 feet long and
22 feet wide.

Mexican Navy units discovered the ship while on routine patrol. The drug was
found in 750 bundles. ‘

Also several sacks of marihuana were found floating in the sea, which are be-
lieved to have been thrown out by another boat.

The Mexican Navy, as well as the Federal Judicial Police, are investigating
the reasons for which the boat was abandoned, and they are looking for the
crew members in Islas Majeres, Cozumel and Cancun.

According to initial investigations. the ship is from the United States, and
it was abandoned because of engine damage.

During the year, off the Cozumel coast, three boats were seized that were car-
rying Colombian marihuana. which would be transported to the United States for
sale.

Also, small boats have been seized, and in order not to he discovered. ships
at sea have thrown out hundreds of sacks of marihuana, which is an illegal

action.

The Far Horizons was towed away by the Mexican Navy to Isla Mujeres, where the
ship was inspected.

9565
C50: 5300/2025

30
MARIHUANA TRAFFICKER GIVEN 7-YEAR PRISON SENTENCE
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 26 Sep 81 Sec C p 6

[Text] A prison term of 7 years and a fine of 10,000 pesos or, in default thereof,
2 more months in prison for economic insolvency was the sentence that the third
district judge, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal, handed down against an individual
found guilty of crimes against health in the degrees of marihuana possession.
transportation and exporting.

Guillermo Pelafox Martinez commutted these crimes in March 1980, when he brought seve-
ral grams of marihusna into the country from the state of Florida. in the United
States in a Ford Ranchero truck. The marihuana was discovered by customs guard

forces at kilometer 30 of the Reynosa-Honterrey Highway.

Upon inspecting the vehicle in which Guillermo Palafox Martinez was riding, the
customs officials found over 850 grams of the injurious grass in the rear section

of that truck; whereupon he was turned over to the agency of the Federal Public Hun-
istry where penal proceedings were initiated against him.

In his first statements, he said that the drugs were owned by a woman with whom he
worked in the state of Florida, who had forgotten to remove them from the vehicle
in order to sell them in that location.

He explained that the marihuana which they had found in the truck was part of a ship-
ment that he had bought in the state of Guanajuato, where he was going again to
purchase more cannabis indica.

Despite his defense. the third district judge found him guilty of the aforementioned
crimes and imposed on him a 7 year prison sentence and a fine of 10,000 pesos.

2909
£50: 5330/53

31
BRIEFS

POLICE, TRAFFICKERS IN SMOOTOUT-Igua1a, Gro., l9 Sep—-Pive drug traffickers
and a policeman died last night during a shootout in the district of Tlacote-
pec. Three other perpetrators, who were wounded, escaped. Francisco Vargas
Najera, director of the Judicial Police, said that during the shootout the
following persons died: Emilio Ignacio Rodriguez, Proceso Delgado Nunez, Heri-
berto Figueroa and the brothers Leonidas and Plorentino Gonzalez Miranda,
besides the policeman, Pedro Gonzalez. Vargas Majera explained that the offend-
ers had their hideout at the BI Carrizal settlement camp in Tlacotepec. The
perpetrators had among their possessions several sacks of marihuana, which were
confiscated. Vargas Najera said that the names of the wounded individuals are
not known. "They also were engaged in cattle rustling," he said. [Text]
[Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 20 Sep 81 p 33-A] 9565

PCR ANTI-DRUG CAMPAIGN SUCCESS—-Speaking before North American authorities who
are visiting Mexico to learn about the work being done by the Attorney General's
Office against narcotics trafficking, the second assistant attorney general and
national coordinator of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking, Samuel
Alva Leyva, stated that from 1 December 1976 to 30 August of this year, they de-
stroyed 58,000 marihuana patches and 150.000 of poppy, plantedon 22,000 hectares;
they broke up mafia rings and they found 88 laboratories in which heroin and
cocaine were being processed. Also, Alva Leyva stated that throughout Mexico
they seized 571 kg of opium, 583 kg of heroin, 417 kg of poppy seeds, 2,005 tons
of marihuana, 866 kg of hashish, 13 tons of marihuana seeds. 667 kg of cocaine,
43 million hallucinogenic pills and 3 tons of peyote. In seized cocaine and
marihuana alone the drug traffickers would have achieved profits above 6.47 bil-
lion pesos. Alva Leyva explained that the Mexican Attorney General's Office
spends a budget of 1 billion pesos a year to carry forward this "successful
campaign." [Text] [Mexico City EXCBLSIOR in Spanish 18 Sep 81 p 3S-A] 9505

SEAMAN SEIZED VITM COCAINE--Pure cocaine worth more than 15 million pesos was
seized yesterday by agents of the Federal Judicial Police at the Mexico City
International Airport, and a U.S. seaman who was transporting the narcotic was
arrested. Ramiro Vazquez Salazar, a native of Texas, was carrying the cocaine
taped to his ankles. He arrived in Mexico from Ecuador on flight 062 of
Ecuadoran Airlines. The agents noticed that Vazquez appeared to be quite ner-
vous. 0n checking him, the agents discovered the cocaine, which Vazquez was
carrying taped to his ankles in two polyethylene bags. After questioning
Vazquez, the agents found out that the cocaine was bought from one Gustavo at

32
a boarding house in Cuzco. Peru. Also. Vazquez disclosed that from Peru he
traveled by land to Quito, Ecuador, and from there by plane to Mexico. Vaz—
quez's arraignment will be held in the next few hours before the sixth judge
of the district for criminal cases, Rodolfo Moreno Ballinas. [Text] [Mexico
City EXCELSIQR in Spanish 19 Sep 81 p_28-A] 95b5

COCAINE, MARIMUANA SEIZED--In two separate strikes, Federal Judicial Police border
agents seized 200 kilograms of marihuana and two small.bottles containing cocaine.
according to the report made available yesterday by the offices of that entity. The
seizures were made in Camargo and Matamoros. 0n the banks of the Rio Bravo,on the
site of the settlement called 31 Bbanito, in the municipality of Matanoros, the agents
discovered 20 nylon sacks packed with plastic bags each containing 10 kilograms of
marihuana, ready to be taken over to the American side. At one side there was an
inner tube, two planks and a length of hemp rope that the traffickers were presumably
going to use to take the injurious grass to the other shore of the river. Although
the agents kept watch in concealed places to catch the owners of the grass, no one
showed up. and they opted to pick up the shipment and place it at the disposal of the
agent of the Federal Public Ministry. In the settlement of Camargo. agents detailed
to Reynosa captured Antonio Alanis Lopez, who had in his possession two small bottles
containing 2 grams of cocaine, and 14 marihuana cigarettes. At the time of his
arrest he was riding in a 1967 Porsche car, with California license plates 165-6056
which was also confiscated to investigate its origin. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA
in Spanish 10 Oct 81 Sec 8 p 7] 2909

PEROIN TRAFFICKER SENTENCED—-A few days ago, in the third district court, the notorious
drug trafficker. Carlos Jasso Trevino, alias “El Piteco", received the decree of offi-
cial imprisonment for his guilt in the con-ﬁssion of crimes against health in the
degrees of possession. trafficking and importing of pure heroin. This individual was
captured by Federal Judicial Police agents at a local nightclub, with 46 grams of pure
heroin in his possession. Upon being questioned, Jasso Trevino said that the drugs
were not his, but that he had them in his possession in order to turn then over to
someone named Raul Villalobos. who has not yet been located by the federal police.

He later changed his story. claiming that he had purchased the heroin in Laredo,
Texas. and had intended to sell it to addicts in this locality. In view of the guilt
borne by him personally, Carlos Jasso attempted to commit suicide in the cell of the
federal jail. to avoid at all costs revealing the names of his suppliers; and he
therefore had to be treated by the doctors at the Civil Hospital, where he underwent
surgery. Hhile in the hospital, he made his preliminary statement. claiming that

the wounds were inflicted unintentionally, because the federal agents had beaten him
and. in falling, he was thrown against several pieces of glass in the cell, which was
how he was cut on the neck and hands. Despite his claims, the federal judge found

him guilty of the aforementioned crimes, and issued the decree for his official
imprisonment. He was placed at the disposal of the personnel at the Social Rehabili-
tation Center. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 29 Sep 81

Sec C p 3] 2909

MARIHUANA SEIZBD IN CUADALAJARA--Guadalajara, Jalisco, 14 September (EXCELSIOR)--
Federal Judicial Police agents seized a ton of narihuana in the settlement of
Emiliano Zapata, and arrested six drug traffickers. Comdr Margarito Mendez Rico
reported that the drugs were being transported in a truck with license plates
HS-ZAIO. in which Crescencio Morfin Orozco, Emedel Serrano Barreto. Jose Trinidad
Serrano. Manuel Bernal Gonzalez Garcia and Juan Cortes Bernal were riding. he said
that they admitted that they were taking the drugs to the port of Manzanillo, where
they intended to deliver them to some U.S. marines who would take them into their
country. The individuals in Custody added that they had harvested the marihuana

in the settlements of Taito, Tomatlan and Mascota. and in other areas on the Jalisco
coast. [Text] [Mexicali LA V02 DE LA FRONTBRA in Spanish 15 Sep 81 Sec 8 p 12] 2909

33
HARIHUANA 0N BOAT ADRIFT--Hexico City, 16 September (INFORMEX)--The Federal Judicial
Police. together with the Mexican Navy. discovered a drifting hunt on which 13 tons
of marihuana were found. The incident took place in jurisdictional waters of the
island of Cozumel. A Mexican Navy vessel tugged the boat "Far Horizon" to Isla
Hujeres, where the pertinent authorities took charge of the case. The Federal
Judicial Police assigned to that locality reported that 700 bales had been found
aboard the "Far Horizon" with a total of 13 tons of marihuana of various qualities,
which is priced up to 10.000 pesos per kilogram on the black market. It is thought
that the boat. which did not carry any flag or documentation, was coming from Colom-
bia. a country which has become a springboard for the international drug traffic
bound for the United States. The 13 tons of drugs were immediately burned by the
Isla Hujeres authorities. Ho arrests were made. It is believed that the boat's
destination was Miami, Florida. [Text] [Mexicali LA V02 DE LA FRONTBRA in Spanish

15 Sep 81 Sec 8 p 12] 2909

POLICE HELICOPTER SHOT DOHN--Acapulco. Guerrero. 17 September (EXCELSIOR)--A heli-
copter from the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic. with two occupants.
which was flying over the Las Cruces communal land in search of drugs. was shot down.
The agent of the Federal Public Ministry, Jose Luis Valadez, confirmed the incident,
but said that it was merely an accident, and that the causes thereof are not known
as yet. He did not provide the names of the occupants either. However, he said
that the other inspector. Teofilo Gonzalez Rubio, together with Federal Judicial
Police commanders and agents. were touring the Las Cruces area and the Carvali
communal land. because it is known that the aircraft fell into a stream. The autho-
rities were careful to point out that the helicoper fell because of a mechanical
failure. and that its crew is alive, but this has not been confirmed. since the site
where it crashed has not yet been determined. People from the area claim that the
aircraft was brought down by drug growers. [Text] [Mexicali LA V02 DE LA FRONTERA

in Spanish 18 Sep 81 Sec 8 p 12] 2909

C80: 5330/53

34
BR IEI-‘S

COCA TRAFFICKERS--The pol ice have reported that a parcel of 11.10 bars of soap
made of cocaine paste and sent by unknown traffickers. and 65 kg of coca
leaves have been seized. The coca leaves were being carried by (Rolando

Camarera Daverico) and by (Lucia Cobert Rojas). [”281859 Lima Domestic
Service in Spanish 1200 GMT 27 Oct 81 PY]

DRUG TRAFFICKERS RING DISBANDED--The PIP [Peruvian Investigative Police] have
reported that in an antidrug operation it disbanded a powerful cocaine hydro—
chloride trafficking ring that operated at the international level. The PIP
estimates that the drug trafficking ring was able to market about 7.3-billion
soles worth of pure cocaine. A clash ensued between PIP officers and the
drug traffickers but ring leader Alvarado Carbonel was able to flee. Later
drug trafficking departaent officials arrested chemists Marco Antonio Alva
Espinoza and Gabriel Lostanau Rubio from whom the police confiscated 1 kg of
cocaine hydrochloride. PIP Gen Berly Baca Valdivia reported that the
trafficking ring had a sodern laboratory to process the drug. The center of
operations was located in chorrillos. He added that the ring had been
operating for the past 2 years and that during this period it processed

180 kg of cocaine hydrochloride; [PY030225 Lima EL COHERCIO in Spanish
8 Oct 81 p A-lO PY] .

DRUG TRAFI-‘ICKERS RING DETAINED-- The Iquitos civil guard has confiscated more
than 500 kg of cocaine base from a drug traffickers ring that operated in the
outskirts of Iquitos and it detained five persons. With this operation the
police have confiscated more than 958 kg of cocaine base in the rural area,
particularly from river boats. The drug traffickers are perfectfy well
organized with speed boats, planes without licenses that operate at clandestine
airports and on rivers. The police also confiscated three speedboats.

[Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 9 Oct 81 p 10 FY]

DRUC TRAFFICKERS—-The civil guard has seized 40 kg of cocaine from two Colombian
drug traffickers. It has been reported that the names of the traffickers have
not been disclosed because they are believed to have connections with an

international drug ring. [PY3ll735 Lima Domestic Service in Spanish 1200 M
29 Oct 81]

35
DRUG TRAFFICKING PETRODSnColonel Julio Herino, chief of staff of the Drug
Trafficking Investigations Directorate [nmm] has reported that during 1981
BIRTH) has discovered about 29 drug traffickers methods. He added that more
than 500 drug traffickers, foreigners and Peruvians, have been arrested and that
DINTID has confiscated large quantities of cocaine base, cocaine hydrochloride,
and other types of drugs such as marihuana and hallucinogenic drugs valued in
millions of dollars. He noted that drug traffickers use dead bodies to
Inca-designed handircraft to traffic drugs. [PYOJOZOA Buenos Aires LATE in
Spanish 0819 GMT 1 Nov 81 FY]

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED-4t has been reported that with the'unconditional
support of the Peruvian Air Force (PAP) DINI‘ID was able to detect several
laboratories of cocaine base and clandestine airports located in almost
unaccessible parts of the central jungle. DINTID also discovered grinders
and several tons of coca leaves. A DINTID specialized group overflew areas
like Tingo Maria, Huanuco, Honzon, Aucayacu, Cachicoto, Naranjillo, Bella
Alta. and photographed clandestine airports and laboratories belonging to
several drug traffickers rings that manufactured thousands of kilograms of
cocaine base to be shipped abroad. Bernardo Vega Soto, Aurelio Vega Espinoza,
Florencio Cruz Soto, and Canixto Henchego Llerena were arrested in
Huanganapampa, (Tingo Maria); Paulino Cajas Abarca, Genaro Pozo Quispe, anilio
Omonte Albornoz, Florencia Ventura. Leon Quispe, Saturnino Leon Espinoza,

and Honorato Obregon Amillon, were arrested in the "Alegria" ranch; and
Rullier Saldana Silva. and Zelda Silva de Saldana, were arrested in Tingo Maria.
[Lima E. COHERCID in Spanish 23 Oct 81 p A 16 FY]

CSO: 5 300/205 1

36
BRIEFS

CRACKDOHR 0N PUSHERSuBssseterre, St. Kitts, Saturday (my-The St. Kitts-Nevis
government will be taking a toud: line against drug pusher-s who have now pene-
trated the schools, Comications and Works Minister Ivor Stevens has said.
"Drug pushers and peddlarenwe shell soon he bounding than down mercifully,"
the Minister said. "He shall do everythingugood, had and indifferentuto stanp
it (the drug trade) out in our country.“ The Minister issued the naming in
Nevis last night when the government flicked a switch on a new 720 kilowstt
generator to provide electricity for a section of the island. He said: "Let
(the drug traffickers) start to mend their ways now for very soon, and sooner
than they know, all powers at our disposal will be brought to bear upon then."
The instsllation of the generator wss partly financed by the British Government.
Mr Stevens said its introduction meant that nost of the schools on the island
would have adequate lighting. The generator will also feed private hones and
industries. [rm] [Bridgetown summ moon's-nus in English 18 Oct 81 p 3]

650: 5300/7512

37
BRIEFS

OPIUH SEIZURBS--According to PARS, personnel of the Islamic Revolution Committee
in Torbat-e Heydariyeh yesterday discovered 56 kg of opium in a Zhiyan private
car which was heading for Mashhad from Zahedan. The driver and the two other'
occupants of the car were arrested and handed over to the Islamic revolution
public prosecutor's office in Torbat-e heydariyeh. The Torbat-e Heydariyeh
gendarmerie also seized 12.4 kg of opium from a truck which was traveling

from labor to Mashhad. The truck driver was handed over to the responsible

authorities. [Text] [L0042122 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT
4 Nov 81 L0]

NARCO’I‘ICS DISCOVERED IN KHORASAN--Hashhad police department drug squad personnel
have discovered 5 kg of opium in a light truck and arrested the driver.

Sabzevar police have arrested an individual who had 1 kg of opium in his
pOSSession. Revolution guards in Fariman unearthed 15 kg of opium yesterday

and arrested individuals. [CF041818 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian
1430 GMT 4 Nov 81]

JIROFT HASHISH FIND--The drug squad of Ahvaz revolution guards has announced
in a communique that personnel of the division had discovered 5 kg of opium
and 5.5 kg of hashish on a number of drug traffickers in the cities of Ban
and Jiroft in Kerman Province. Two have been arrested in this connection and
delivered to the Ahvaz Islamic Revolution Court. [Text] [CF051701 Ahvaz
Domestic Service in Persian 1330 GMT 5 Nov 81 0F]

C50: 5300/5319

38
DAGGA SHUGGLING IO U. S.-—1'hree busineemn who allegedly intended mggling dagaa
worth R250 000 out of South Africa in hollow wind-surfers yesterday appeared
briefly' in court. Magistrate Mr H Hilken granted the request of Mr Jonathan Myers,
defending, for a further pootponenent. Kr G Huller of Rendburg, Mr Henry Clarke
also of Randburg and Mr Trevor merecht of Durban will appear in court again on
December 8. The charge against them arises from the confiscation of approximtely

CSO 5300/5606

e.

39
TURK, 15 KILOS 0F HEROIN SEIZED IN MILAN
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 22 Sep 81 pp 1, 19
[Article by Cem Basar]

[Text] Athens (“URRIYET)--Pormer convict Bulent Lastikcioglu, well known to
Turkish police and having taken asylum in Greece claiming that he "was under pres-
sure in Turkey as a member of an ethnic group," was arrested with 15 kilograms of
pure heroin in Milan by agents of the DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration).
Bulent Lastikcioglu, said to be a partner of arms smuggler Bekir Celenk, is also
known as a leading Mediterranean narcotics smuggler.

Bulent Lastikcioglu. who also uses the names Pahrettin Ustabas and Fahri Usta,

had applied for "political asylum" in Greece after 12 September and moved to Ath-
ens, renting an apartment on Amphitritis Street in the luxurious "Paleon Phaliron"
suburb. he set up new smuggling plans with other members of the ring and bought

a 1,500-ton Greek vessel named "Elikaki" in Greece. The vessel, after 9 months

of clandestinely plying the Mediterranean, was seized in the Italian port of
Ravenna following a collision.

Attorneys for the narcotics smuggler, meanwhile, said that Lastikcioglu was a memr
ber of an ethnic group and was unable to endure the "heavy pressures to which he
was subjected in Turkey" because of this, had taken refuge in Greece, the "mother
of democracy," and had obtained a residency permit. Greek police, as they had
earlier in the case of Bekir Celenk, ignored the settling in Athens of this fugi-
tive from the law, who deposited in Greek banks the thousands of dollars he
brought with him.

Setting up his headquarters in Athens, Bulent Lastikcioglu ran his narcotics busi-
ness from an office in Piraeus, with Turkish police aware of these activities all
the while. Because Greek officials did not want to cooperate with the Turkish
police, the DEA and Interpol were informed of the situation.

Lastikcioglu's activities began to be traced from that time. It was discovered

that a great many people were coming and going from Turkey to Lastikcioglu's home
on Amphitritis Street. It was found that these people supplied "the stuff" to the
ring in small consignments. Interpol and DEA agents, tailing Bulent Lastikcioglu,
who lived only 100 meters from arms smuggler Bekir Celenk's home, discovered that

60
he had Lebanese partners and was engaged in widescale arms and heroin smuggling
via Cyprus and Lebanon. It was learned in this connection that Syrian smugglers
involved in these matters did not like either Bekir Celenk’s or Bulent Lastikcio-
glu's activities and had threatened to kill them.

As known, Bekir Celenk, like Lastikcioglu, had set up a shipping company in
Piraeus and had bought a 3,800—ton ship which he named "Benil," an abbreviated
form of his own name and that of his wife, artist Nilufer Kocyigit.

Interpol and the DEA decided that it would be risky to arrest Bulent Lsstikcioglu
in Greece as the dangerous heroin smuggler might learn of their preparations be-
forehand and they laid a trap for him in Italy. Two weeks ago. an American agent
of the DEA got in touch with Lastikcioglu in Athens and made an agreement to buy
15 kilos of pure heroin.

The American agent posing as the buyer asked that the stuff be delivered in Milan
instead of in Athens.

Meanwhile, the DEA and Italian police got set up to arrest Lastikcioglu in Milan
and brought the operation to a successful conclusion. Lastikcioglu was arrested
redhanded while attempting to sell to the American agent 15 kilos of pure heroin,
worth millions of dollars.

The DEA, the organization responsible for the in flagrante arrest of Lastikcioglu,
familiar to Turkish police and arrested four times. the latest in 196k for smug-
gling, usually operates on its own.

Meanwhile, circles close to the police in Athens say that the Mafia is trying to
bring all of the bigumoney narcotics smuggling operations in Greece together and
that it could create enormous problems if it succeeds. It is said in this con-
nection that they will try to get a monopoly on hashish products by paying growers
in Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries in advance.

8349

CSO: 5300/5302 END

41