NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10303
4 February 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 8/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[0TB

J'PRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lC

4 Februaz

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 8/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Suzuki's Reelection Possibilities Discussed
(Editorial, Raisuke ﬂoods: m DAILY YOHIURI. 8 Jen 82)....

General Election Rumors Becase Rite
(Keiichiro Kuboniva; 1‘83 JAPAN monourc JOURNAL,

12 Jan 82)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeo

Japan, 0.5. Agree To Begin Joint Study on Defense Cooperation
(Editorial; MAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 12 Jan 82)................

Content on Ambassador Mansfield's Rmrks on Bilateral Relations
(Susunu Chara; THE JAPAN mm JOURNAL. 12 Jan 82) .....

Planning for Emergencies
(Editorial) ma DAILY YOHIURI. 10 Jan 82)..................

Suzuki Bares Instructions for Joint Security Studies
(THE DAILY YOHIURI, 13 Jan 82).............................

Suzuki Issues New Defense Concept
(Yuji Koido: THE JAPAN WC JOURNAL, 19 Jan 82)........

Soviet-Japanese Relations
(Editorial: MAINICHI DAILY news, 9 Jan 82).................

Editorial Outlines Important Aims of Political Circles in 1982
(Editorial: THE JAPAN ”W1C JOURNAL. 12 Jan 82) .........

Complicated Ties Between Nakasone. Natanabe
(Takehiko Takahashi; HAINICBI DAILY NW5. 13 Jan 82) . . . . . . .

Editorial on Administrative Reform
(MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 11 Jan 82)...........................

- a - [III - ASIA - 111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreign Minister Warm: sun To Prepare for ‘Rough Neather'
(Hinoru ﬂirano; TBS DAILY YUAIURI, 10 Jan 82)..............

MI LITARY

Security Panel Approves Joint Defense Study
(MAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 9 Jan 82)............................

Bi fects of Increased Defense Spending on Bconany Viewed
(Editorial: MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 10 Jan 82). . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

RONOMIC

U.3.-Japan Perception Gaps, Trade Imbalance Problens Discussed
(Aritoshi Soejina: JAPAN acououtc JOURNAL. 12, 19 Jan 0)..

Few u.s. Makers Take Part in m Procurement Biddings
(JAPAN mm JOURNAL. 12 Jan 02)........................

MIN Studies Ways To lielp Ailing 0.8. Auto Producer
(JAPAN RONOHIC JOURNAL. 19 Jan 82)........................

Domestic Auto Sales Last Year Showed Dip. Excluding Midgets
(JAPAN NOMIC JWRNAL, 19 Jan 82) ........................

Fujitsu 'i'o Carry Out Large-Scale Capital Increase
(JAPAN WIC JOURNAL, 19 Jan 82)........................

Toyota. Nissan 'i'urn Efforts To Boosting Snell Truck Exports
(JAPAN mmlc mep 19 Jan 82)eOIOOOOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Auto Parts Mission to Spain
Nontariff Barrier Reduction
Toyota Auto Part Imports
Iraqi Vehicle Purchase

SCIENCE AND WNW!

Information Processing , Hitachi Terminal System Discussed
(Niroyuki Osaka: HITACHI HYOION. Aug 81) ....................

NR: ' s Vice President Discusses How To Iuessen Semiconductor 'i'rade
Fr ictions
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 8 Dec 81)..........................

Organization of Daikyo Oil Coapany Viewed
(“1110“ KBIZAI, 21 Dec m)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Coal Imports Prom Soviet Union Delayed
(YWIURI salmwl 25m81)OOIOIOOOIOOOOOIOIOOO..0....00...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finance Minister. MITI Discuss Relief of Aluninun Industry
(ASAHI SBIMBUN, 25 Dec 81).................................

Toyota President Discusses Commy's Plans
(“IRON KEIZAI’ 28 Dec 81)e-seeoaoooeeoeoeoe-oasessoeeeesaoo

MITI To Purchase Additional 10,000 Tons of Aluninun Ingots
("I“w Kalml 30 Dec 81)00......0......OOOOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOO

MIT! To Begin Efforts for Reorganization of Alunimn Industry
(YWIURI SBIHBUN, 30 Dec 81)...............................

Japan-0.5. Atomic Study To Begin in April
(JAPAN RONNIE JOURNAL, 12 Jan 82)........................

Japan, 0.5. Steel Firms Move To Boost Caplementary Product Ties
(JAPAN RONOMIC JOURNAL, 12 Jan 82)........................

BPDC. TVA of 0.5. Agree on Technical Exchanges
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 12 Jan 82)........................

Five Power Utilities To Help MRI Develop APNR TYPO Reactor
(JAPAN ”NOMIC JGJRNAL, 19 Jan 82)........................

N11": Data Division May Be Made Private Company
(lchiro Kifune; JAPAN BCOMIC JOURNAL, 19 Jan 82) .........

Gene Recombination Test Guideline To Be Altered
(JAPAN RONOMIC JOURNAL. 19 Jan 82)........................

Indonesia Brown Coal May Be Utilized for Methanol
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 12 Jan 82)........................

Hitachi . General Motors To Develop Car Electronic Control System
(JAPAN BCONGJIC JOURNAL. 12 Jan 82)........................

Race Begins To Develop Servo Valve for Robot
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL. 12 Jan 82)........................

Toshiba Freezes Original Plan To Mass Produce 64K Ran Chips
(JAPAN RONNIC JOURNAL, 12 Jan 9)........................

Nagaoka University Successful in Ion Beam Thernonuclear Fusions
(JAPAN ECONMIC JOURNAL. 12 Jan 82)........................

Fujitsu Panuc Cooperates With Tatung on Robot Marketing
(JAPAN ROWE JOURNAL, 19 Jan a)........................

Yamaha To Enter Into Aircraft Engine Field
(JAPAN WOW“: me, 19 a." 82)asasossaeeseoeeasseeooos

Ministries Differ as How To Revise Data Calsunications Laws
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 19 Jan 82) ........................

Toray To Commercialize 'Strongest ' Pine Ceramic
(JAPAN NOMIC mep 19 Jan 82)sssssseeseaeaesaeaeoeeoo

- c -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

.1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI'S “ELECTION POSSIBILI'IIBS DISCUSSED

Tokyo m mm YOliIURI in English a Jan 82 p 3

[Editorial by Reieuke Honda: "Suzuki's Hard Yeor"]

[Text]

It seems likely that Prime muster Su-
unwinbereeiectedpresidentiitheut»
eral-Democretic Party (LDP) next Novem-
berbutthisdoeenotmeantheyearwiil
be without political turbulence or critical
tests for him.

Suzuki displayed ﬁrmness in hie New
Year‘e press conierence and in an inter-
viewoverteieﬂmm'lineedthiebe-
cause he must overcome some obstacles in
the wey at his reelection.

no em obetacle will be to achieve pro-
gress in overcoming deﬁcit-ridden eteie
ﬁnancee and handling the normal session
0! the Diet.

mommiereaideariy lost yeer thatbe
would stole his political lite on admin.
lstratlve and Manual reform. promising
that deﬁcit-covering government bonds
wouldbediscontinoedbyneceililﬂio
establish sound stete ﬁnances.

But his promises seem lees veiid now.
Therewasaremarhbledrcplntaxre-
venue ior ﬁscal mi. The government has
decided to issue government bonds worth
'ms billion next ﬁscal year. but even this
is expected to leave the government in the
red by moo billion.

Under there circumstances. the ﬁnence
Ministry is considering borrowing funds
which were to be used for redeeming gov-
erninent bonde to tide the government
over the revenue shortiau.

Because at theee develovments. pessimiso
tic voices are being heard within the gov-
ernment and the LDP that there will be
no choice but to deter ﬁnancial rehabilita-
lion.

At the some time. criticism ls being
leveled at the iinsnce minister. who is

l

etrongiy trustedby
thereeeemsiobegro
primeminleterhimsel

lnthecunentniei

stole income tax redui
condemn the govern:
cies.

How well will the 1
melanin?

Another dinicuit pt
be the expected eerie

Judging from the we
there Is little chance
mauled. ‘

And ii. to expected.
this will Jolt the mil
poeeibiiity that iorma
acain reise the dem
party oi Tanake's M

This could undermir:
the coﬂapee oi the tin
run edministratlons—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
and ma “cums. And an: could dun-
ue Sunni annual to: reelection as
LDP preddent.

Suzuki cannot word to Luke ml reelec-
tion tor gnawed. Be ahould remember use
the; neither mu not mu no: Mud:
succeeded tn “mung reelection a [DP
president.

WPYRIGII‘I: THE DAILY YOHIURI 1982

680: (0120/ 128
GENERAL ELECTION RUWRS BECOME RIFB

Tokyo ‘l‘llF. JAPAN ECOMHIC JOURNAL in English 12 Jan 82 p 10

[Article by Keiichlro Kubonlwal

[Text]

Then- have been rumors cimtlatmg
muting ntlmg and Opposition parties recently
that a dissolution ol the Horse 0! Repre
scntatlves and an ensuing general election.
long considered to be scheduled in tail.
might be held this year. Althouh there are
many who predicted the general election
would be held simultaneously with the Upper
llouse election stated in m at the earliest.
some ohservers have started saying. since
late last year. that "the general electhn will
be held in woo belore the court ntliru on
Kakuei Tanaka" or simultaneously with na-
tionwide local elections in April. m.“
tlu'rehy casing ripples over electioncon-
xciuos Dietmen.

tltlt' rumor. circulating «more; the ruling
Lulu-ml lh-nun-mtie Party and the (lpptsition
New IJ'K‘I‘IDI (‘lub and the Korneito. had it:
“l'runu- Minister Suzuki might dittaotve the
Lower liar-to in an attempt to hrcnlt the
deadlock ll administrative retornt does not
no Sltltllthly." The other minor had it: “It
Tamika: ts Mire to he Merl guilty in the tint
I.tlt‘lt|lt't'd puyuti trial this tall. the general
t'lt't'tltll is" very likely to take place hetore
that ruling " Even one memher ot the
Klinmln tm'lttut Vtitt til it\ tilt-nary mt‘t‘llllu
Iatonm your "I have heart! a rumor Ital the
urn-rat l'k‘l't ton ls liht-ly in tau." causing an
ummr :mumg laction members [resent at
ttlt' tum-tutu. ‘

'I‘tmt- rumors are ampliﬁed even lurther
In ttu- tut-t that the Tomb tau-lion. the mutt
Imirt-rt‘ttl among the IDP. is making ﬁxedly
tm-mrttlttets tor the general election. In
Vim-miter last year. the I.|)l"s National 0r-
ttmtmtttm ('«mttttitlw. which was con-idem

in he the bastion (It It! TI
mapped out secretly "a list
dates tor the next getter:
mcmher ot the Suzuki tact
mmdtodropinandscet
plt‘lt‘l)‘ astounded. saying '
all 1.0? members are in a
over the reehutt‘ling at th
LDP leadership. the Ti
steadily making preparatic
election."

The Tanalta [action took
LOP secretary general in
reahullle. and tirtltermon

taln Accounting Bureat
Raye-hi. their own man.
vehemently rejectlm tht
Suluki tactlon that the
bureau chiet must he in
tton which holds the Lt)!
retention at their own ma
another more to prepare l
oral election among ID? I‘
Foreign Minister Yuhl
took command ot mane:
one elections two year: t
tary general. and led the
whelmitu victory. said: "
cause of simultaneotl ele
one Prime Illnlster Ma
denly died. It is dangerot
can win another almoltan
next time. When we lae
tions. that will he a cor
risks involved are too hi5
Salturauchi voiced a atrot
double elections and com:
the preaent LDP leaderah
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR (WHOM. USE ONLY

ttut semi at Japan's biasimss circles have

- reportedly told the prime minister that "they

cannot stand the idea oi havim three elec-

tions in Im." That is. it tic general election

is held sometime in we: Aside from nation-

- wide local election in April and the Upper

tlouu Election in June. the laminate circles

could not attord to pump out the political

tent needed for thoee election. Probably

\iith this cnmldcrntion in mind. Fukudo te'o

tion memhemdeclaredlut yc-arthatitienu

turnl to think the electionsyc will be double

lx-rrelrd ” Suzuki tnction members also

said "i'nme Minister Sunki. who will be

able to win the reelection tor the LDP [resi-

dency this tall. will not complicate the politi-

cal scene by dimilving the Lowcr lloue."

thereby denyitc the early dissolution oi the
bowerlloisc.

Despite all those argtunents. the only time
possibly miocrcd tor the general election
Ill any event is either at the same time as nu-
tionwide local elections or the Uwcr House
election. or one year earlier or later than
that

COPYRIGHT: 1982, The Nthon Keizai Shiﬂmn, Inc.

(:80: 4120/128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600030012-0
JAPAN, 11.8. AGREE TO BEGIN JOINT STUDY ON DEFENSE COOPERATION
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 12 Jan 82 p 2
(Editorial: "Joint Defense Study"!

[Text]

Japan and the United States agreed during the
18th Japan-US. Security Consultative Committee
meeting last week in Tokyo to begin a joint study on
deiense cooperation in cases oi emergency in the Far
East outside oi Japan.

The joint study “on emergency" means bilateral
consultations on the possible use oi Japaneee'S'eli-
Deiense Force bases by the American iorces or
Japanese logistics support to the 0.8. in military
conflicts on the Korean Peninsula. The study is also
based on the guideline oi the U.S.-Japan'cooperation
adopted at a previous committee meeting.

The guideline stipulates. among others. the roles
to be played by the United States Forces and the
Japanese SelioDeiense Forces to prevent possible
aggression against Japan and to cope with the
possible emergency cases in the Far East which may
seriously aiiect the security oi Japan.

The agreement on the joint study on the
emergency cases in the Far East is regarded by some
as the coming into the open oi the “most dangerous
point" in the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty.

As a prerequisite. the guideline said that the
committee meeting would not discuss three problems
- the prior consultation system. Japan's con-
stitutional restriction and the three noanuclear
principles. The Japanese government has said that
Japan's action would be limited within the present
regulation and the interpretation oi laws.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

D'UK UfHLIAL Uhl'. UNL‘

Lt. Gen. Charles Donneily. commander. us.
Forces in Japan. earlier called lor the joint use ol
transportation systems. airport and harbor laciiities
and also sell-Defense Force lacilities and equipment
in cases 0! emergency.

These points may contradict Japan's basic
delense policy and go beyond the scope at "individual
sell-delense right." Apparently aware at this. the
government has been reluctant to begin the joint
study on the emergency cases. Why then did the
government reach the decision? The biggest reason
tor this was the government's ellorts to improve 03.-
Japanese relations which have esperienced rough
sailing due to the socalled trade and delense lric‘
tions. We wonder ii the emphasis on the delense elo
torts would help the two countries to erase such
lrictions. .

The agreement also contradicts Japan's basic
principle not to become a big military power and its
pledge to create peacelul relations among Asian
nations. Since the end at World War [1. Japan has
lollowed makeshilt ways in its relations ' ‘th the
United States. The Japanese government must now
establish comprehensive relations with the us.
based on ideals and practices.

- Decontroi 0! Information

Kanagawa and Sattamaprelectures are expected
to become the first prelecturcs to implement the new
ordinances lor the deeontrol ol inlormation in the
hands ol preiectural governments in September and
December. respectively. Abundant inlormation and

materials should not be monopolized by the central or
local governments became they are gathered tor the
people by the people's tax money.

The speed ol inlormation decontrol has been slow
in the central government which has to deal with
diplomatic. delense. and public peace and order. On
the contrary. local governments have inlormation
closely related with the public lite and some ol them
have actively studied the possible decontrol at in
lormation.

According to the Kansgawa outline. inlormation
compiled in the term oi “oilicial documents" would
be available to the public in principle. Only seven

items related with residents’ privacy or police In.
vestigation ol crimes would remain controlled. The

outline said that business lirms' must also open their

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012o0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iniormation which will he “necessary to protect local
residents from disasters. pollution and dangers irom
commodities.”

Some questions remain. Should the proceao oi
decision-making leading to the decontrol he kept
secret? How can preteetural midents acquire an
enormous amount oi information? We hope the
prefecturai authorities will 1tu examine the various
caneainthenewordinancewhich'ili-heoomothe
modeitorotherpniem.

COPYRIGHT: MINICHI DAILY NEWS 1982
C50: “120/128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
FOR OFF“ 1M. USP. ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

COMMENT ON AMBASSADOR MANSFIELD'S REMARKS ON BILATBRAL RELATIONS

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 12 Jan 82 p 10

[Article by Susumu Chara:

[Text]

The addrees by us. Ambas-
sador mike Mansﬁeld at the
Foreign Correspondents" Club
of Japan last week remarkably
differed in approach from his
preview public statements on
the U.S.-Japan bilateral rela-
tionshlp.

True he first expressed high
regard for Japan's special
effort in inereasina its defense
budget for ﬁscal 1902. he. be
repeated his ""soeu that the
relatiaahip between the United
Stats and Japan to ”the most
imported bilateral relationship
intheworld— harm”

But the address was clearly
difterete from his previotl
ones in that it urged only Japan
to take actions to solve the
current trade trictiooa ”We
can poait to the problems as we
see them. but only Japan can
take theactiona to solve them."
he stressed In contrast. he
never mentioned in the speech
the need for the us.
to matte greater efforts to
penetrate into the Jamnese
market. although he said in his
answer to a question later that
his view on this remained the

COPYRIGHT :

CSO: 4120/128

name.

The press luncheon was held
at the request of the ambas-
sador himself because he
wanted to ﬁve his aaeeeament
of the current trade friction
before he leaves («I Item tor

multatlons and heme leave. '

lie was "uneasy and concern
ed" aboutwhat might haahead
ot the bilateral economic rela-
nonstop to the months teeome.
The message was clear. lattit
ls doubtful whether it rally
reached anu’audiooe ha alm‘a:
at. With one mulch.
the major vcnaeular daily
papa-a to Tokyo carried ids
spot-ch only In brie! stories
the next day. The ambae
sador knew that his remarks
werr'hard worth formyJap;
neae friends and e
hear." But it seems that they
were not so hard at least to his
triendsin theJapaneae maﬁa.
Or was this beeeuu the
Japanse pma did not like to
hear any hard words from a
forum swrce‘.’ Prohebly not.
The Japanese are rather overly
sensltm to any critical wort

ofthemtryfonl‘opeople.

"Another Perception Gap?"]

eepeeially a great friend like
Ambassador Mat-field.

Themthmlwuehmy
mi touts-imputed
thattha'emnoJapaoue

club"mmprumt
amat tltepre-hm-
dm‘I’hereweremaylapa-
nuclear-nationalism

prepared
text without showing up at the
FCC).

Mfalledtotaltenotaofthe
nee of the amba-
aepaeehwhiehtmttdl

-offritndlyadvteeandvarn

imaftieyaawnothiunem
the addresain terms of
Thief:

3%, mm m...
example of “perceptions-ow

the m of them
mic ant-tied between the

Japaaeee and American

1982, The Nihon Keizai Shiabun. Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LOGICAL

INCIBS

1mm in English 10 Jan 82 p 2

The Japan-US Consultative Committee on Security
Friday agreed to launch a study covering bilateral
cooperationtocopewithanemergencyinthe Far
EasLIncomretetemtheatudyistodeterminein
what ways Japan can support US military operations
in case of another war in Korea.

The Japan-US security setup is a hollow promise
it both sides are unable to cooperate with each other.
ArticledofthetreatyailowstheUStousehasesin
Japantodefendthiscountryasweilasthepeace
and security of the Far East. Naturally. Japan has
'to cooperate. And Japan cannot reject the planned
study for that reason.

Butthestudyshouidhecarriedoutstrictlywithin
the limits of existing laws, including the constitution.
'l‘hestudyofanemergencyintheFarEastshould
not he conducted unconditionally.

No Prior Obligations
- As a precondition of the joint study, it is stated
that both governments are absolved from taking
mandatory legislative and administrative ateps to im-
plement the ﬁndings of the study. This means that
'Japan is under no prior obligation. Under this prin-
ciple, Japan will be able to distinguish between areas
where it can cooperate and where it cannot. Further-
more. the prior consultation system should be strictly
applied in carrying out the joint study.

The restoration or Sino-Japanue and Sino-Am'ea:
can relations has drastically changed the Korean

equation. The US military preacnce in South Korea
virtually rules out another military clash on the

peninsula.

Contingency Planning

_ But. one must prepare for the worst. Igever there
should he another clash in Korea. the possibility

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

arises that Japnn could get involved, perhaps "on the
of collective defense, although the constitu-
tion forbids such an excuse.

- TheUSisnotalwaysrightinitsjudgmenQJspan
noedstosetupssystemunderwhlchltcnnjudge
situations coolhendedly. The prior consultation sys-
_ten: serves this purpose. Japan should also prudently
study the repercussions of allowing US aircraft based
in Japnn to engage in dinect bottle.

During negotiation for the neturn of Okinawa.
thenprimeministerEisakuSatognveadefacto
“yea" to_the sully of US aim-aft from Okinawa To-
day. such consent needs reexamination when it bears

_on the fate of this country.

Prime Minister Suzuki and other cabinet mlnisten
should he kept directly informed of the nature of the
studies. Otherwise. they may not be able totninlte a
free decision in the face of a tait accompli.

The Diet. on its part. should conduct an in-depth
study on security. Otherwise. the study of emergency
situations may advance to such an extent that it by
passed civilian control.

(January 10)

AILY YWIURI 1982

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUZUKI BARES INSTRUCTIONS FOR JOINT SECURITY STUDIES

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 13 Jan 82 p 1

[Text] Prime Minister Suzuki Tuesday announced a set of 'brinciplee for national
security studies." emphasizing the need for establishing a defense setup "well

suited to Japan as a country encircled by the seas."

The premier's views on
the nation's iuture deiense
priorities came in the iorm
oi instructions to Defense
Agency Director - General
Solchiro ito and Chiei Ca-
binet Secretary Kiiehi Mi-
yauwa aiter a cabinet
meeting Tuesday morning.

in the extraordinary
nine~point instructions. the
prime minister also called
ior the Deiense Annoy to
be "as prudent as possible"
in its Joint studies with the
US on contingencies in-
volving the Fur East region.
so as not to cause disarry
with the Foreign Ministry
and other government
agencies.

Chiei sovornment spokes-
man Mlyaaawo said later
Tuesday that the premiers
concept oi "deiense setup
befitting to a seasirt couno
try" can be interpreted as
meaning that Japan in its
deiense ciiorts should give
priority to maritime and
air defense capabilities ra-
ther than around iorces.

The new concept is in
line with the premier's be-
liei that the coal oi Japan's
dciense eiiorts should be
set at msltlnc this country
a spiny "hedgehog" capable
oi driving back military at-
tacks on anon beiore
enemy iorces land. Hiya-
eawa explained.

The “bsdsehos theory."
however. runs counter to
the around deli-Deleon
Force’s i080?! argument
that land troop are the
"core oi miiiury power” of
a country.

The Deiense Agency as a
whoielsiniavoroiade-
iense setup based -on a
"wall-haianced buildup" oi
the nation's wound, mari-
time and air tones.

indications are that the
premier“: “sea-encircled
country's hedgehog deiense
setup" theory Will cause
sirens reactions and opposi-
tion ior ‘1hinkin3 light oi
around iorces."

Resardins relations be-
tween the premier-proposed
hen~ deianse concept and the
esistins dsieme buildup
program. mymwo suggest-
ed the poaaibillty oi the
prom beins replaced by
a new deienie outline in
invor oi greater emphasis on
the maritime and olr de-
iense capahilitles.

Miyasawa quoted \b.
premier as saying that the
nineepoint Motion were
aimed at uniiyine views
within the sovernment on
deiense matters, since de-
fense iseues are certain to

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

become a icons of discus-
sions in the ordinary Diet
session to be reconvened
January 16.

Besides the "deieme ei-
iorts veil geared to Japan
as a maritime country.“the
instructions also gave spe-
cial importance to keep any
“arbitrary moves‘ by the
Deiense Asoncy in check in
dealing with defense-related
problems.

in cousins in the recent-
ly screed Japan-08 joint
studies on deiense coopera-
tion in the event oi con-
tlnsencies in the Far East.
the premiers instructions
said. the Deiense Agency
should use utmost prudence
and be in close consulta-
tions without iai) with other
ministries and agencies
concerned.

'11» annoy should bear
in mind the opinion that
the Japan-U3 Joint deiense
studies might lead even-
tually to a sort oi collec-
tive deianse setup. which
was banned by Japan's
constitution. the premier
told ito.

Adding to the constitu-
tional issue. the premier
instructed the asency head
to be in close touch with
the loreicn Ministry and
mr Cublllt'l usuluuon Bu-
ruu rem-ram; podhle re-
vision of deluxe-related
laws tn commence with
tel: Juana-US defense nud-

Reiuenung use need tor
the Deienu Agency tn be
circumspect not to so
arbimrhy. the premier um
remhnded In of the need
(or close muluuon In
proceeding with the pun-
ned Japan-U8 uchmce of
axillary technology.

COPYRIGHT: THE MILY YOHIURI 1982

C50: (0120/128
SUZLKI ISSUES NEH DEFENSE CONCEPT

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMC JOURNAL in English 19 Jan 82 p 10

[Article by Yuji Koido]

[Text]

Prime Minister Zeniio Suzuhi recently in-
structed Director-General ol the Defense
Agency Soidiiro ito to strer'then the Mari-
time and Air Sell-Deleon Forces by "map
ping out a deter-e plan or system appro
priate lot a maritime nation " ,‘l'he premier
also enameled ito that Japan needs to be a
porcupine" to be able to inﬂict hut/y
damages upon an invader.

Suzuki's instruction are. oi eotrse. de«
signed to cope with an expected heated de-
bate on delense in the coming Ordinary Diet
sesion slated to reopen next Monday. The
Defense Agency is planting. however. to re.
view a itmdamentai delense buildup pro
gram again

in addition, Prime Minister Suzuki has in-
structed lto on the ioilowlu points:

—The deiense budget was expanded as a
step to achieve _the ms detense buildup plan.
not to cope with the deteriorated interrltion-
al environment.

—The remaining deienu budget outlays
will be distributed equally in later years.

—The personnel cost accounts ior to per
cent at the 1m deiense budget 0!sz bit
lion or 0.93 per cent oi GNP). but the Delerne
Agency should consider a more eiiicient
utilization of its budget.

—Japan and the United State agreed in a
recent consultation to start formal eludes on
possible joint military actions in case a
emergencies in the Korean Penlreuia and the
Far East. Such studies should not be done.
however. in such a way that they invite criti-
cism suggestiru they will portend the on«
lorccrnent ol the right oi collective seilde-
icnse. That is banned under the Constitution.

Commenting on Sunk
Directorceneral [to said, '
time that the Premier has
iense eomwehernively._lie
search lot ways to “end
ways. so his instruction ab
upon the Mine course of on

Yet. some oillcials oi the
have wondered why Stu
these instructions now." 11
Japan should be "a porcupil
its maritime and atr-ioree
has been duct-std time i
past. Why then did So:

delense now in such a con
ner? Replies .to this tpsasti
told:

-it is inevitable that ther
debate on deletne in the
Diet session slated to rec
warm...“

goverr

-stnulxi wanted to pit
the deiense MIL whit:
more substantially than oi
wants to reduce the wetgll
in the budget and put more
air iores to build up major

—1'he emphasis on mariti
is desioied to meet the us
tense buildup in Japan's
This m clariy illustrate
US. Congressimal delegai
oi the ruling Liberal Dem
they highly appreciate sin
budget which increased by
the prevlotn year. but urg
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

Hill (WI-THAI. USE ONLY

lurthrr «totem rttorts in tit/(mt am: late
securing sealamtotramportcrudeotllrom
the “idle East toJapan.

Among various imtluetions given by
Snail. Detenee Agency omctals are
especially concerned over repulsion o! In-
vadnc lorcee at Japan's watera‘ any; a
"pot'cupine"-li|te dame ol Japan by «tilin-
tnt hishly-oophiattcatod aurtaoe~tt>air
missus ardtheooetoetlinaontheupm
ot personnel. Nrthermore. contrary to
Suzuki's unphuia on maritime and air
tones. the Deteme Agency is setting
balanced growth In all three (am-nurt-
timanoo'trNranotudthetrlmnothe
uremia”: imtmetton will tnvlte another
hateddebate withintheDelenseAaency.

Another problematic! point to W
Suzuki's instruction were tanned otter hia
emulation with the mungwl’. There Is a
puaihility mot Na Instructions came out
{tom a recanmendatton from Chic! Cabinet
Secretary latch! Hiya-Ira alone. ‘l‘ht-
chances are likely that the Sth'a instanc-
tiomvillheatargetotdehtowithinnot
mtytheDieLbutabotheGover-nrnentaw
the LDP.

comment: 1982, The Nthon Kauai Stu-bun. Inc.

CSO: 6120/128

1‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
roe (mum. usr. (mm

OLOGICAL

:IATIONS

:LY NEWS in English 9 Jan 82 p 2

Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki called on the Soviet
Union to exercise prudence in dealing with the Polish
issue. sounding a warning that the Soviet government
has been interiering indirectly in Polish aiiairs. ile
conveyed the warning through Soviet Ambassador
Dmitrii Polyansltii who visited the prime minister on
the occasion oi his departure irom Japan ior
reassignment.

There is no knowing exactly to what extent the
Soviet Union has been involved in Poland's crisis.
Judging irom the position oi Poland and Soviet-Polish
relations. we cannot say that the Soviet Union had
nothing to do with the recent turn oi events there.
Polish Prime Minister Wojclech Jaruzelski said he
had taken the step toward military rule in order to
avoid "a civil war." There is little doubt that by civil
war he meant Soviet military intervention as in the
case oi Hungary and Czechoslovakia.

The biggest concern oi the world in connection
with the Polish problem is whether or not there exists
Soviet military intervention. in this regard. the
United States and Western European countries
recognized the existence oi the Soviet Union behind
the developments oi the Polish situation and called on
the Soviet leadership to exercise seli-restraint. Prime
Minister Suzuki has taken a similar step by issuing a
warning to the Soviet Union.

The Eastern European crisis poses a very dil-
iicult problem ior the West because it is impossible to
expect radical neiorm or a change-by iorce hi this
area, giventhestrength oitheSovletUnion which
regardstheareaasitssphereoiinnuenceasaremit
oi victory in World War it. The Western side believes

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0ND

that iuidamental human rights are not iulli
guaranteed there. ~-

Against such a background. the West has been
very careiil in dealing with the Eastern European
problem. Their cautious manner, on the other hand.
has helped the Soviet Union to strengthen its control
oi Eastern Europe. The only thing leit ior the West is
to keep on expressing its concern and calling on the
Soviets to exercise restraint. All we can do is to wait
ior a gradual liberalization oi the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe as a whole through a revival oi
detente. The liberalisation oi Eastern Europe through
increased exchanges between the West and the East
made little headway mainly because detente was on
the wane.

Thus viewed. tbeiuture oi the Polish issue lies in
the diplomacy visa-via the Soviet Union. The keynote
oi diplomacy toward the Soviet Union is to speak out
when we must without closing the road leading to
dialogue. Prime Minister Suzuki also expressed high
expectations ior the topicvel consultations between
the two countries scheduled ior Jan. so in Hoecow.

it was the iirst time since February me that the
Japanese prime minister had met the Soviet am-
bassador. in the iace oi the chilled relations. we
sincerely hope that bilateral dialogue will soon be
revived.

:1“ DAILY REVS 1982

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EDITORIAL OUTLINES IMPORTANT AIMS 0F POLITICAL CIRCLES IN 1982
Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 12 Jan 82 p 10
[Editorialz "Politics in 1982"]

[Text]

The three most important acts demanded of Japan's
mlitical circles in the new year of 1902 undoubtedly will
vigorous promotion of administrative reforms. elimi-
nation of trade frictions. and adequate handling of the
expected serious aftermaths of the court decision on the
Lockheed payoff case.

Why is vigorous propulsion of administrative reforms
so important? it is not simply because the Suzuki Ad-
ministration's fate virtually depends on it It is vital,
first of all. because a complete review of the nation's en-
tire administrative and dependent systems is manda-
tory. now that the Japanese economy has definitely run
into a slow-growth period

Administrative reforms are also necessary if Japan
truly wants to prevent its economy from developing a re-
calcitrant disease of its own. similar in nature to those
plaguing other advanced countries. A complete review of
welfare systems is especially urgent.

Another rationale for administrative reforms ia'the
fact that if the government deficits are long left at the
current exhnrbitant levels. it will not only rob ﬁtbllc‘
finances of highly-needed maneuverability and effee
tiveness but also may very well lead to vicious inﬂation.

As to international frictions. the crisis had barely been
avoided for the time being as Japan hiked the growth
rate of its defense budget for the new fiscal year to 7.75
pt‘r t‘cnl at the end of last year. This apparently appro
priate step. haw-ever. seems to be highly unpopular not
only among politicians but also among the general pub
lic. Many of those who are opposed to higher defense out-
lays maintain that as long as Japan is under the Peace
Constitution. it should do its part in international co
wwratinn not in the field of military hardware but in eco-
nomic assistance. Some. on the other hand. believe that
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan need not follow the fwtsteps of the Reagan Ad-
ministration which seems to be committed to outright
confrontation with the Soviet Union.

The contentions of those to greater defense ap-
propriations are understa ble to some extent. it is
true. Are those people. however. really aware of the fact
that not only the Americans but also EC member coun-
tries are convinced that Japan's economic prosperity de-

primarily on its penny-pinching in the field of de-
fense? It is futile in the face of such a strong conviction to
try to reasm with them that economy and defeme are
two different things. We cannot simply ignore the fact
that such a view is widely prevalent in Western countries
and that this conviction is now being further fanned up by
the reality of the severe” per cent unemployment rate.
Japan has to pay “social expenses" for the sake of peace.

Moreover. it is doubtful whether the Japanese people
are willing to increase the nation's economic cooperation
to other countries by all that much. At present, Japan’s
ODA (official development assistance) represents a
mere 0.34 per cent of the nation's GNP. Are the Japanese
people truly willing to increase the ratio to the 84 per
cent level. the ratio of defense expenses against GNP in
EC countries?

The final outcome of the Lockheed payoff case involv-
ing tamer Prime Minister Kaituei Tanalta is. of course.
‘ anybody's guessat the moment ltis. however. clear that
' the court decision on the case. when it comes. will have

serious repercussions not only the Tanaita faction and
the Liberal Democratic Party as a whole but also on the
entire Japanese people. How will the ruliru party cope
with the expected repercussions? As long as Japan's
democracy and the people's confidence in politics depend
strongly on the conservative party's reactions to the final
cwrtdecision. it isnecessary from now tobefully pre-
pared for the eventuality.

COPYRIQT: 1982, The Nihon Keizai Shiiiiun, Inc.

080: (0120/ 128

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

COHPLICATED TIES SENSE“ NAKASONE, HATANABB

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY REVS in English 13 Jan 82 p 2

[Article by Takehikn ‘l‘ekahashil

[Text]

OnJan.latenttvasputinthe
garden oi Administrative
Management Agency Director
General Yastltirn Nakesone‘s
residence which is being
rented trorn iormer Giants
Manager Shigeo Nagashima).
Tables were placed here and
there in the garden. ltany New
YearcallerswerethereAmong
those who stood out were
Foreign Minister Yoshie
Sakurauchi and Finance
ItinisterilichioWatanahe.

. oreiot ulnlster Saturanchi
is a member at the Nakasone
(action. Finance Itinister
Watanahe belonged iorrnerly to
the Nakasonc tactlon but lett it
over a ditierence oi attitudes
toward the Ohira ad-
ministration. Nakasone was
anti-Ohira while Watanabe
supportedOltira.

Watanahe later termed his
own group but then began to
have contact with Nairasone
again and on Jan. 1 Watanahe
was one at the callers at the
Nairasons residence to express
New Year greetings.

Nakasone smiled broadly as
he welcomed Watanahe. This is
because it was tell that tor
Wotanahe. who is gaining

stature as a new leader. to call
and express greetings to
Nakam on New Year's Day
would have value in
strengthening Natasone's
political position.

Foreiot Minister Saturaiichi
asked Finance Minister
Watanahe. “What is your.
cm today?" To thb. Ista-
nahe replied. “The same as
yours." When Saknranchl
continuedeithﬂvhatahoutthe
shadow ?” Watanahe
answered. “That too is the
sameaewithyou.”

Below calling on Nakasone.
Finance Ittnister Watanahe
visited the leilmrestdence ot
tormer Prime um Kennel
Tanaka and expressed his New
Year greetings to Tanaka.
Gathered at the Tennis
residence nere many
politicians at the ‘i‘anaka (ac-
tion. Speattng to them.
Watanebe said. ”i ask tor your
oooperaMHadraiaedatoel
telicitating the him at the
‘l'analtaiactioe

InﬂuenccOt‘l'analta

itissaldthatthisyearagain.
shots 400 persons called to

expreasNewYearmat

19

IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
torNakaaoneshovedablgdmp
tNakasone is iron the same
third electoral district ot

Gamma Prelecture as
hm».

Contrary to the earlier
predictionhiraranhedtlrstm
tbeptelimtnary vottltgi‘ulmda
declined candldacylnthemain
election (by Diet members
alttilated with the Liberal-
Denaocrattc Party). "it the
leatlt that Ohlra became the
party president. l-‘otlovtng the
birth ot the Ohlra ad-

ministration. Fulthda. Kornoto
and Nattasone became an anti-

mainstream existence But in
be voting on the noncontldence
Inotlon against the Ohlra
cabinet. Nakasone separated
'trom Fukuda and Kornoto and
supported the Ohira ad-
ministration.

Nakuone today is thinking
that receiving the backing ot
the Tanalta inﬂuence will open
the paihtothe premiership. liis
policy is theretorv to cooperate
with the Smith! administration
that the Tanaita (action is

supporting

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following the death ot lchiro
Kain. Nahasone acceded to
his faction. Natasone is lacing
ditticulties a the host ot a
taction. Not much time has
passed as yet alter Konioto
became a lactlon'a boas.
More. the only has ot
eatahllahedtactbnsvhohasnot
yet become the prime minister
isNakaaone.Forthatreaaon.lt
is perhaps only natural that
Nattasnne is strongly detring
theLDPprealdent-y.

For Nakaaone. the
taken by Watanabe. who is
gaining strength as a new
leader. is a nutter at great
concern.

When Watanabe called at
Nahasone's residence.
Nahasone stepped toward
eagerly. bowed tint and
grasped Watanahe'ahaad.‘l'his
manlndtcationolhlahaaone's
expectation being placed In
Wannabe.

it is questionable. however.
whether Wannabe will take
political action in exactly the
way desired by Nahaaone.1'hls
is clear iron the tact that
Watanabe visited the ‘i‘analta
residence tint on New Year's
Day belore calling on
Naka‘one.

COPYRIGHT: MINICIII DAILY “BIS 1982

C50: I0120/].28

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
EDINRIAL ON WINISTRATIVE R3088

Tokyo MINICHI DAILY ms in English 11 Jan 82 p 2

(Text)

The Second Ad lloc Council on Administrative
Reform is scheduled to submit its interim report this
month and a basic recommendation in June or July.
and Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki will face the cruaal
moment when he must give lull play to his Ieadership.l

The prime minister has often declared that he has
been staking his political career on administrative
reform. in this regard. we hope that he will demon-
strate his “unlaltering posture" to tackle the issue. in
reality. however. we are disappointed with him as he
has been lukewarm toward the realization of the
council's first recommendation during the past year.
Even Chairman Toshiwo Dolro and other members of
the council expressed their dissatisfaction. it seems
that the prime minister betrayed the expectations of.
the nation.

Prime Minister Suzuki submitted a package bill
calling for reforms. but he had simply picked up those
items in the recommendation that might encounter
least resistance from the bureaucrats and other
pressure groups. Many vested interests were left
untouched. The proposed cut in government subsidies
was insufficient. in the compilation of the 1982 fiscal
budget. he also failed to trim the budgets related to
agricultureand forestry.

it is thus small wonder that Chairman Doko
declared he was greatly dissatisfied with the out-
come. The government ltsell was reluctant to carry
out a scale-down. while attempting to increase
revenues in an easygoing manner. The essence ol
administrative relorm is for the government to trim
its overly expanded size. This the government
neglected completely.

No matter how splendid the recommendation
may be. the reform will make little headway unless
the government is determined to carry it out. All
depends on the determination of the prime minister.

In the first place. the prime minister should not

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

mix administrative reform with fiscal reforms. The
prime minister contends that the administrative and
fiscal reiorms are like both sides of a coin. it may be
so as a matter of consequence. but the two problems
are originally on different planes. Administrative
reform should not be subsidiary to fiscal reform. The
primary purpose of administrative reform is to
realize a “simplified. effective" government by
paring the lat off the administration to meet ad-
ministrative demands in the new age. As a matter of
consequence, it may lead to fiscal reconstruction. but
that is not the final aim.

An opinion is prevalent in some quarters that
administrative reform tends to invite repression.
Such a voice is heard even within the government
circles. but the Suzuki cabinet should overcome such
a negative view since the realisation of a small
government by administrative reiorms is the only
way for the govermnent to meet the expectations of
the people. Thoroughgoing review of government
spending is the unanimous call of the people now
suffering from an increased burden of taxes and
public utilities rates. «

The prime minister should also pay all-out
respect to the recommendations of the council. So far
he has capitalized on the recommendations to cover
the shortcomings of the administration. lie has shown
a posture as If he were willing to delegate part of his
authority to the council. but it turned out to be a mere
gesture..an empty stance. This is nothing more than
the negligence of political duties on the part of the
prime minister.

We must call on the prime minister to redouble
his efforts in smashing the uncooperative attitude of
bureaucrats toward administrative reform. lie must
overcome the reststance of interest groups. The
administrative reforms of the past failed simply
because they were watered down before being sub-
mitted to the Diet. largely due to the uncooperative
attitudes of the bureaucrats. in order not to repeat the
same mistake. the prime minister is urged to
demonstrate strong leadership through his cabinet
ministers.

Now that he has repeatedly promised the nation.
we believe that not only his leadership but his own
cabinet is at stake. Any half measure designed to
postpone the execution of reforms will only speed up
the collapse of the government.

it is regrettable to note that the nation is losing
interest in reform. The prime ministershould be held
solely responsible for this.

COPYRIGHT: MINICHI DAILY NEWS 1982

C50:

4120/135

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOREIGN MINISTER WARNS STAFF T0 PREPARE FOR 'MUGH WBA‘I'HBR'

’lbkyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 10 Jan 82 p 2

[Article by Minoru Hiram]

[Text]

torelcn Minister Satursuchi noted in his
New Year address to the ibreign Ministry
staii on January t that Japan was blessed
with ﬁne weather on the ﬁrst three days
oi January. that he wished the world's
weather would stay lust as line this year:
but that this wes unlihsly to happen. He
thus warned the stall to be prepared ior
rough weather.

Saturauehi's warning was pertinent. The
domestic situation in Japan is peaceiui
and tranquil. The Japanese think they are
living in the most peaeeiul country on
earth and are the happiest people in the
world. They were slightly uneasy about
their future at the outset oi the 1980s.
Now they are conﬁdent of the iuture be-
cause they believe Japan will be able to
lead the nest oi the world in such frontier
technoiocies as electronics. robotics and
biotechnology. Most Japanese newspapers
in their New Year supplements ieatured
industrial robots. and this is symbolic or
the future oi Japan. Optimism in Japan
has expanded further as the specter oi
OPDC's dominance over the world was laid
torestand oil priceshavebegnntode-

cilne.
What is the actual international situa-

tion surrounding Japan?
The Foreign Ministry sites up the situa-
tion as ioliows:
0 All problems requiring quick solutions.
such as the Soviet occupation oi Ai-
ghanistan. the Iran~iraq War and the
Kmnpuchea problem. have been brought
iorw'ard. unsettled. into the ﬂew Year. '
0 The eniorcelnent oi martial law in P0-
land and israel's annexation oi the
Golan Heights have intensified tensions in
Europe and the Middle East.
0 Because of these reeionai disputes. it is
dlnlcult to predict what course the as.
Soviet nuclear arms reduction talks will

tabs.
The torsion Mlnlstr:
1902 will be an even
uncertain year than
Quite a law scholar:
an international clinia
sing the praises oi p:
sell-conndence té'the
that Japan is earninl
its excessive emphasis
that Japan should nol
and Western Europe's
military strength am
the Middle East is be
tlon between Japan an
and that 1902 will be
isolation from the re:
become prominent.
Aware of such a p
anese Government
spending in the ilseal
percent over the pm
Japan's willingness to
role within the West
retary oi State Alena
retsry oi Deiense Ce:
mediately addressed
anese Government say
appreciated the Japan
The Japanese Oover
allay trade friction til
iense spending becaul
plained that Japan.
Japan-US security trel
little ior deiense. we:
pluses in its trade wit

However. U8 Anibal
Mansﬁeld crusiud thi
6 when he made a dis
deiense problem and 1
ing that the cause 0
tween Japan and the
Western Europe was ii
ter ol’ the Japanese I
FOR 0mClAL USE ONLY

Criticiatn of Japan by the 08 and West-
ammopelealaodirectedaninatthe
tact that Japan depends on exporia tamer
than domestic demand to spur m eco-
nomic growth. In the government budget
ruMIManducdonotmwu
the only step aimed at stimulating do-
mestic demand While both decal policy and
the tax mm are to perform the role:
0! dampening domestic demand.

Then, trade Motion between Jepen and
wmm countriee will eeeaiate in ma.
Fania Vice-Minister Byoeo aunobe pre-
dicts a violent atom.

HIURI 1982

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MILITARY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MRI“ PANEL APPROVES JOINT OMS! STUDY

Tokyo MINICRI DAILY ms in qulish 9 Jan 82 p 1

[Text]

Another milestone
Friday. The

(500 agrecdtohegln

of emergency in the Far

The joint study was proposed
in the yidelineo ior Japan-U5.
deiense cooperation. which

wereadoptedattheprevlous
oitheSCCheldtn

November ms.
agreement. the
will start working

deienae scenarios.
consideration existing con-
stitutional restraints and
ateddonleoiiclan

The SCC is the hluieot con-
stdtattveorganontheoperatlon
oi the Japan-US. Security
Treaty which went into iorce in
i960. -

Japan's contribution in an
emergency would mostly con-
cern logistics — swply. m
portatlon and communication.
More importantly. however. it
could also involve pmidlnt
Sell-Deleon l-‘oroe oases ior
theU.S.armediorcea. -

The Japan-0.8. deienae
guidelines also called lor
stools on actions to be taken in
case oi a direct attack on Japan
and measures to deter

a
The studies were completed
last year. and the only

18th Japan-v.8. Security

was set in Japan-US. defense cooperation

a joint study on
East outside Japan.

remaining subject was defense
cooperation in caaea oi
to the Far East.

Inns. commander oi the US.
Forces. Pacliic. U8. Am-
bassador to Japan like

“told and other 05. ot-

ilclals.
TheJa delegation was
led by Yoshlo Saknrauchl.

Japan
wouldheiargreater.
it would also run cotnter to
the Japanese Constitution.
which doeo'oot allow Japan to
take action in collective
security. '
However. the Suzuki gov-

Unlted States. has apparent!
decided to align liseli more

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consultative Committee
deiense cooperation in cases

appraisals coining irotn
Washington.

The indications are that the
joint study on Far East
emergencies and the sharp
increase in deiense spendotg

ButSoutlIKoreaBpollticaliy
stahieandiiitiaootnhioedwlth
a nun American commitment
and steady deiense buildup, a
military conﬂlotontheiiorean
Peninsulaiaunllltelyhesaid.

Both Long and Ambassador
iianoileld otreaaod attention
It‘d. Gala... (a ll-‘II ll!
.88.. a «8B 333 as»
53 I. :88 32.. a. :85
as 8 .8 Sr 388 8 88
a noun—2o 38a 8 1.: 3
3.820 8 on u 3:»... 53..
FEE-«8833.

..= 93 28383 .52..
3523.3383333?
no 98% 2. 3a: 855. 3
use; 8 23.3.. 8 81a
93.. to $88 :8 a. 253
2.2.9 3 .33 .5 =8...

gasuzpﬁrazao.
...... 5 E3 5 a" b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

D DEMSE SPENDIM ON ncouomr VIEWED

.3! NEWS in English 10 Jan 82 p 2

We have noticed the emergence oi a dangerous
sign in Japanese economic circles. Yoshihiro
lnayama. president of the Federation oi Economic
Organizations iKeidanren) and three other top
business leaders have told a joint press conierence
that national deiense and social weliare must be
treated as two diilerent things. and also that the
deiense expenditures in the iiscal no: budget drait
are reasonable. .

In the statements oi these business leaders. we
noticed a generous chorus oi support tor an expanded
defense capability. At the same time. we also know
that not a small number oi businessmen. especially
those in the service industry. are opposed to the
deiense expansion. But the statements at the press
conisrence seem to have exposed an undercurrent
among business leaders who have become tolerable
toward military expansion alter the repeated
American requests ior a bigger Japanese role in this
specilic iield. We regard this as a dangerous sign
because we doubt that military expansion and civilian
vitality or economic development can coexist.

in the postwar days. Japan achieved the highest
economic growth rate in the world. it has been
regarded as a model in this respect because oi its
light military outlay under the war-renouncing
Constitution. This has also been proven by historical
(act when we compare Japan with the United States.
In short. among the democratic nations. the
productivity oi Japan, whose military burden was
light compared with its gross national product
(GNP). has been exceptionally high while the
productivity oi the United States. the super military

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power. has been the lowest.

Japan's defense outlay remains less than one
percent oi its GNP and the total production oi the
delense industry is also less than one percent ol the
total industrial output. According”. economic circles
still remain optimistic that the vitality oi the
Japanese economy and economic development would
not be hampered by the militarization oi the
economy.

Japanese economic circles believe that civilian
vitality must be maintained and that the tree
economic system must be protected. We believe that
the business leaders must bear the responsibility oi
thinking about the iuture oi the Japanese economy
irom a long«range viewpoint.

II DAILY NEWS 1982

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECOWHIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

U.S.-JAPAN PERCEPTION GAPS. TRADE 1W3 PROBLWS DISCUSS-

‘l‘okoy JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, lie 988, 12 Jan, Vol 20. No 989,

19 Jan 82 pp 19, 24

[No-part article by Aritoehi Soejina:

Imbalance Problems (1)")

[12 Jan 82 pp 26, 19]

[Text]

aneariyuyeendeerw
ioewiththeJapaneeeGovu-Ir
mentlretlredlmmwclile

cwntriee. all oi the Japaneee
people worked eaheutively.
Fmtely. thou were the
years when a free trade volley
of the Weetern countriee
prevailed under the GATT-INF
syetem. lrom winch Japan
greatly beneﬁtted.

During tile period. the Java
nerve Government wee able to
adopt a protectionist policy
which was legitimately ac-
mrded to the developins coun-
tria. In order to protect
donutic mum iron for-
eign oompetitim. both trade
and toreiot each-nu trainee.
gran were abject to atrict con-

‘l'ne to year- from me tutti
my nth-alien eaw Japan'e
trautonnation Into the rent (I
an “imtrielleetl calm-y"
m the III-GATT eyeteln.
Japan‘s GNP yew at an on-
precedented rate thrush
active Importation d («eta
capital and teehnoioc ae well

as databaiente
mmlmnandte
«pendent

of Finance. The tint uyeare a
my work were haelcally
devoted to the meta d
mode iron: the tin/World
Bank or (m the capital man
inete d the industrialized coma
triee. I Japan wae eta-unite“!
altering from a shortage d
(mien «dune. Butt eyes! a

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"0. 8.-Japan Perception Cape and Trade

pereonally
mama”
and their adaptability to
changing external cir-
ounutaneee. i took peat pride

Candltlly eeeahlna. who I
rennnetltm military‘lriee

lehdedaea “deveioouooun-
u-y"ontilodyuyoareagoend
that overeeae eighteeein;
travel. tor lnetance. wee then
when This led at knowl-
edoeahwtthenoldhchenaed
economy ol‘ Japan also applies
to Westerners. Many («dances
do not realise that Japan had a
"developing country" status
tattil ts years so and simply
name that we have always
enjoyed the same hind of living
standard that they have long
ind. Heel that the major per-
ception up between the US.
and Japan is based up on lids
point.
Experiences lathe 0.8.

Mceihave hedocoaaioneto
live in the 05.: tor six years
from t”: to linseed min (or
two years lrorn ms to last i
personally witnessed' chum
these two periotb law sub
stantlally the Amerian per-
ception ol Japan has changed

When I first went to live in
America in ii”. the US. was
still a global giant and Jenn a
small Far Eastern mtion
Hardly any news oi Japan was
ever seriwsiy treated in the
mass media theta When there
was a writeup on Japan. the
tone was warm. as though an
adult were observing a good
child Needless to say. a knowl-
edge at Japan by average
American was then virtually
nil Only the lew who had spent
post-war occupation years in
Japan as solders or e handtil
at people acmeinted with
Japan ind e renter pro-Jepa
nesesentiment then.

But the second time I went to
live in Washiruton in am. the
American perception of Japan
had changed greatly. The
Americana no longer heated
Japan as a child but reurded
us a their eqsai. News and
write-ups about Japan ap
peared almost daily in US.
newspapers the tone of the
articles also chewed lrom

positive to nuttral to negative.

At the same time. the Amer-
ican began to ltnow more
about Japan althouotdiltering
in dame by stats and some
what inﬂuenced by negative or
critical voices oi Amerian
tatsinees nouns which had lost

Fl DR (li-‘I-‘It‘lAl. “SI-I ONLY

out to increasinly competitive
Japanese indtatries. There are
some who are (entitle: with
Japan and espru their con-
eern over the prueot sitution.
but they are generaliyleas
voai

An image oi Japan. which is
so distant from what Japan
really is. bean to m.
What worried me most was the
loot that the misperoeptio‘n «1
Japan was etreuthulnu in the
American political circle.

This concern led me to per-
sonally visit all so states to
lecture and to erect-n. views
with the American people at
large. I also contributed to uti-
versity mausines ntblhhed by
ilarvard. Yale etc. to
eredcate the American mie

' olJapan

However. its us. is a large
cottmry. As a ledaral nation.
individual states have. more
autonomous stree'th than Otl’

misperoeptionolJapanheldby
menyAmericens. itiadpara~
mount nee lor the
stability (1 the world tilt the
US. and Japan — the lamest
and the second largest eeo
nomna oi the tree world—

developmutua tualunderatandlnc
Particularlyw worrisomeia lathe
impactllItU Sprotectlordam
would have on the world eon-
nomy Suchetrndencytowald
protectionismonthepa dtha

30

U 8. must he prevented
“Wit“! 1‘ W I'll
develop attributable to such a
move.
itmaybeuaetultohridlyre-
View the chemo. rdative
positions of the us. and Japa-
nese economies in the past 1)
years. At the risk ol over-
simuiﬂcatlon. l mid like to
point out the lollowinc lot:
futures:
l. The up between the us
and Japanese economic

narrowed tremendously.
m the per capita ineeene
oi the 0.8. was it timesthet
«Jennie tseo, ltiea nice
Latinos my.

2. Japan's bilateral trade
balance with the 08.. witch
showed cinonic deﬁcits in
the 1950s began to yield
stable mph-ea We:
in the mid-m.

3.VIldletheU.S.econoeny

showedstren‘hthroudioot
thetmandonilthemld-
00s.inﬂationeeetnstehave
heenbutltlntotheeoononty
sinnetheVietnamwarJhe
ecommyheonlotalterend
its pctormenoe has been
particularlypoorhitheiest
three years The GNP
growth rate (hopped to
minteeitnlmthetdle-
tion role has been dotble
delimandthep'odictivity
yowthratehaabeennela
tiveslmeim.

e. The Japanese economy
aimed remarkable M
Want the post-war
years. Male it stunted
alter the first oil crhls it

lubaenuowteustably

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mmm05~ rt! ol mos. mu- the
”and iiiretoeonﬂoerny “WWW. underline
thnproblansdthe 0" ”m-hm OII’
increasincandperpetnal Japa- enmity W man or

neaesin-plus.
Trade issocrueially vital 1‘1:
the Japanese economy.
only means ol survival for
Japan. with a population (1
nearly in million and withotit
any meaninuul natural
resource WWI. is to
import raw materials. prootas
them and export maratlaetured
abroad. it shows a

and a large
that "'3'“ en markets
rather phero import
ance. at least to the eoueienoe
ol most Americans. until

recently

Virtually evcy Japanoa is

[19 Jan 82 pp 26, 19]

[Text]

The Japanese have started
lrom literally zero at theendol
World War it. Km tlat
mival ol the Japanese eco
nomy was only attainable
throudi trade. both the rivets
and public sectors ol Japan
attached priority to training
their stall. seeuranoe (i raw
materials and exports 0! menu-
lsctured nods.

The lirst priority was to send
younger people abroad to study
and receive training. Most
Japanue organizations started
this system immediately (tor
the war. which was by no
means an easily manageable
task under the limited eon
nomic strength ol Japan in
those days.

Not only large ﬁrms but vir-
tually all entrepreneurs who
are interested in loreign trade
have maintained this system a
sending their stall abroad. The
tact tint a large proportion d
Jopanae students in American
ysdtnte schools are sent by
their employers indicates the
degree to which Japanae lirrns

invest in training theirstall lor
oversees business.

The second notable leaning
Japanese lirrna is their .-
nose to secure m a-
Japan Mach relies lor mat 41
its natta'al reson'ce needs on
lorein simpllu. seniranee 11
resources is crucial. Ibis ex-
ﬂains nhy initial Japanue lor-
eiui investments in South-at
Asia. the ram. Bast. MI-
tells. the U3. and Gouda
werea eveninthedays
ol scarce lodge eachane
menu. The «tent to wldch
the m1 US. embargo ol agi-
culiurai products to Japan as
neilasthetmoticrislaputthe
entire comm-y into a state d
panic describes out total
dependence upon impala

'lhirdly. Japanese lirrna have
made irnproaive elm-ta to
deulop apart markets. When
-I was an economic advisor in a
West Alrican country some is
years ago. I was astorashed to
meet a representative o! an
ohsuire Japanese company
selllua their mounts in the
rernoteat villus. There mint

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be over 100.000 Janene: w.
neasnian livin in the us.
NOV-1h! number mun ex-
ceed the total btalnesenien
h'omtheECliviuinAmer-ioa.

MuenveranIheyurl
Mmtotlnus..1am

“I‘V'W'herepuiationJa
nese robots enjoy an:
rellsctsthecrystalisatlondthe
Wanner-yum

madewlthmanytriahand
errors as ed] a ﬁnancial
losses over the past in
(boobs.
structtons tPenta-ticeant.
odds and ends among the
machineries thubahimoto
Grain). and a wide assort-
ment of scattered others
whose only characteristir in
common was then:
manipulation by many ad
hoc task iorces oi corporate
treasurers. financial institu-
tion fund managers. "in-
vestment comments." and
securities salesmen operat-
irg with large discretionary
accounts. Par tor the
course.inotherwords.

A segment 0! the non-
ierrnus metals rates special
cornmere. Sumitomo Mani
Mining, plaything oi oid
(linen Korehawa. came alive
again as nostrils ﬂared over
the rich gold seam it's
supposed to be diggitg up
down arwnd Kagmhima.
maduieitratingdaysit
acctnanted for to per cent oi
total iirst section volume.
and on Tuesday that and 2
others tMitsui letals.
htitsubtshi Metals) absorbed
no less than as per cent. in
Mitsui's case the incentive.
boiled down to its easerlials.
was that it owns a gold mine
in Kaguhima riyit nest
door to Sumitorno's. In lids
and almost all other easo.
interest in the new laces
arose primarily because
their margin balances and
share prices were relatively
low: the search tor respect-
able ratiomles i
with mults oi varying
degrea oi believability. At
bottom it was that simple:
Kabutocho Is not a
sopissticated mtliev.

All this was oi course a
continuation oi the ﬂavor
shownsotarthisyesr—snd
the last curler oi lﬂl too.
ior that matter; it'sjust that
the speculation became
more blatant andthe iunda-
mental iideaves smaller. lt
arose became in'eimen
were still largely absent.
what with US. shirt-term

i'th OFFK'MI. USP. ONLY

irleresl rates upand the yen
slighuy down and all in
Kabutocho's new thelsctic
tsince last year) that was

problem oi very complicabd
thstribution chan-.:'..< .n Japan
Many layers of intent-diam.
including tradir; cmnpanies
and wholesalers. exist between
promicers and «summers. But
itisatatiqueintureotthe
Japanese market which has
been developed against a corn-
pleteiy isolated historical back-
yomd. These are (acts at tile
in the Japanese society which
are not intended to dis-
criminate exclusively against
loreighers.

Admittedly. mastering the
Japanae langtnge is next to
impossible ior many lor-
cigners. The best alternative to
overcame that handicap is to
select and train promising
Japanese nationals tor their
management.

the one encomgim trend n
that many American iirma are
increaslrgly promoting Japa.
nese to their top maneprisl
positions. The more succusltl
an American canpany is in
Japan. the more adapted they
are to the Japanese society and
the more Japanese stall they

tend to have.
Ideas ler alleviation

Ever since the Tokyo Rand
oi negotiation started. Japan's
bilateral trade surplus with the
US. has been a serious issue
with the us. Government. in
deed. the increasim sun-pita
must be irritating to many
Americans.

l. ior one. however. who was
involved with the Tdyo Mild
oi negotiations and served 6
the Financial moist. to the
U.S.. am not completely con
vinced that American corn-
plaints are always valid. Part
of the reason i am not con»
vinced is tilt the mplalnts
are often based on the outihted
image. or the mispcrceptlon as
described earlier. oi Japan held

32

by marot Americans. And that
is the closed nature oi the mar-
itet.

While i think the Japanoe
economy is as open as many
Ewan economic with the
sole exception (1 West Ger-
many. I dosdmit that trequi-nt-
ly mentioned import inspection
procedures. medical inspection
procedures. auto inspection
systems are too complicated by
any intemuoml standard.

Fortunately. the 0.8.
Government recently came in)
with a 9-item speciﬁc proposal
ta Japan to improve imports.
one covering tariil redrctioaon
as products and the other eidtt
relating to N'l'Bs. Many d
thee items are rather con-
vincing. While i don't thitt lull

acceptance oi the ml will
staistaatially impovs US. as-
ports to Japan. we must do
what we can immedatety in
view (I today's massive trade
imbalance.

Wilt i would like to strae
here. however. is that 1 draft
tltimt arty measure taken by the
Japanoe aide alone can solve
the bilateral trade imbalance

inthetirstptacs.ltlsnot
even appropriate to duct-s
bilateral trade sin-phases or
deiicits. Hall oi Japan's im-
ports is . in order to
pay tor the oil. Japan rot-t
earn ioreign «change else
where. Moreover. our invisible
trade account ins been yielding
large deﬁcits. in order to
more ioreign assistance and
investment. Japan mint earn
surplus in its trade balance.

Excellent management at the
Japanese economy has been
envied by many countrio.
What mustbenotedhereisthat
it is the «torts made by enter»
prises as well as the seine oi
rupensibility and discipline 4!
individial labor in this cotnttry
thstshouldbesdmired.

Ware we to leave the situa-
tlon as it is. Japan‘s surplus h
bound to accrue even more. it
will iurther exacerbate the
American public opinion. and ii

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e wont comes to the wast. it
uh invm a simtion when the
modicum tendency «and.
2 [Invented in me US. me
.8. Ammismuw M ban

‘ ml in «am (no
rule and ﬁght": macaw
hack and

Then how should the im-
balance probkm be alleviaud‘!
I would like to give
thoughts below:

pa
helping emu cot-Ivy. The.

pa volunury rainwa- :1
mal or W m was! an
pom. The main: unto me
blmewmmmmuulmm
result:

I). musmmmm
but me «mam hum-tn
inﬂuuon Ind futon 3
"am Anetta-3' Am.
ha. the inndomonul
smut. Adams! mach
nolog which unded men on
the moon or counted the
space shuttle is simply awe-
some: Then are many othet
IN; the

FOR (WHUAI. USI". ONLY

tion induolry. Parole“)
‘mdullry. service induu-y. \o
mmulememmlhe
very ﬁrst to my the

raped to the W
potentms o! the us.
economy m We out it
an reviuliu if only count!»
minnow

3. M the Ion-urn alum I
an manned. am

«has.
a. I'm-the: grandson d

33

A: an duct-l d nu Jay-nae
Governm‘ with M :9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BCOtDHIC

mu [1.8. MAKERS TAKE PART IN MT PROCUREHERT BIDDINGS

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 9

[Text]

lore tluan a year has
penned since Japan carved
with the United States in
December. uoeo to open pro
cutement oi Nippon ‘l'ele~
mph and Telephone Public
Corp. equiipenent to imernao
‘ bidding. Nl'l'haekept
it: mid thing this pa'iod

implemented ita Munch
mnment procedures.
thereby opening up it:
market more epeeilly than
scheduled.

Out the US. Government
and Convene. lruuetrated
over the country's ll: billion
trade deﬁcit with Japan.
still complain tint N'l‘l'o
open door policy is not nulli-
cient. Their inspiration in il-
iuatreted by the proposed
amendment to the com’
muuicatinm act. pending in
Came. to exclude loreign
lirunn (com the US. com-
muoicatinna equipment
market.

The items N1'l‘tuea opened
to international bidding
love reached to oince the

t with the 0.:
tool: ellect. 0i thine. at are
categorized tor "track I"
winch applies to pnernl

t and are procured
lluroudi competitive bid-
dn. One item h cleanilied

lot "track it" wldch applies
to maidine commutation
equipment already available
in the market end utilized by
MT with eome modilica.
tione. The remaining ei’it
items are lor “Track ill"
winch in applied to key parts
at mainline communication

equipmentandcallelorjoint
research by N'I'l' and wl~

vate iii-nus tar evautuiel N'l'l’

m.

In the “Track 1" category.
bidding has been completed
tor as items ouut oi the ti
totaling $1.4 billion in
value. and dietfibuted
amom ti llrma. Nine lon-
eign time have won tendon
tor eight items. including re
search emulpment- totaling
vm million: they are seven
American and one Dutch
time.

So lat. 13 lirme have ap
plied to participate in bid-
drug [or nine items under
"Prod: ii" and "Track III"
in which only one loreign
lirm. ﬂotorola inc. 0! the
0.8.. tools part in a bidding
ior automobile telephone
equipment. N11": expecta-
tions that more ioreiou
llrme will take part in bid-
uﬂnge have. upuunil now. not
come tnie.

11qu. the tact remain
that contrary to N‘l'1'e ex-
pectation. loreiguu ﬁrms do

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opecilicat
Packard
perm lt
Wheaten!
none :3:
unit
taco. the I
umb‘l .
doee not I!
an make
no mud
an actuall
Second!
to the of!
line coin:
meat in:
"met
tional et
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V11“ Prmtement tum Penis-i Firm

item _ cm W
mom-elm"! inﬂict-Ct mam Jon-m 1M. 00m We m.

Lemme-"CVO . . .W WU Mortar
ovum uni.» Intent" . . . (AW (0.
elm-cmmnmm . . Aunt-ants.
Dmtmmuwvtm .7" mm Inner (em
(maintain .... .. .otostuI-IW

Mom cunt-moi may» nun-n ... Jun..-

mum-mun .V . .vulen Ana-om toe.

mootedpointﬂ’l‘l‘ma 0n the m hand. .
W 'M [011“ cm ‘wmn [a m ”A
ly the standard set up by the "The rotten: at specific:-
Consultative Committee for tiom will be resolved with
Interaction! Telephone and time. But since thin in I
Telegraph (CCITT). but competitive bidding. we
U 5. am. like Western mot buy proact- t! the
Electtic. do not care much price are too Not. Tint is.
atmt mn standatd. Con when tonic: um ennnot
sequently. mu d tot- win bidding: beam at
etgn items do not set into innit high prices. the not
even ptocutementbiddim. lam will be more com-

' N'l'l‘ otﬁcials said those plicntedthlnbdore."

0.5 "ms nu somewtut a:-

«punt in their meaning N11“ u planning to

. list more mam tor
"ﬂ.“mwmw f'“m"°”u'§‘ international many and
mainlhccgttnemnc': "m '“ Mfgdmt
coating to us. mama. 5%.3 :31 ”mm“
An incrusttu numb" d alter their Buchanan“
Ionian rim lave vbited 9" ion MT
in: m heed omen in '0. W W" .
Tokyo to sell their producb. mil stile: trout ("all not
but President Siinto told “mime!" (grain “a;
them.“llyouliketosellto "' " none min:
N11 you amid cum: 89“” New“ 0‘ Huh
you. ts suited to ones. Unless ‘Mdiﬁ
speciﬁcations.“ NTT. wan Muir!» 0‘" g- “d m
out such efforts. you just tints in them it" N‘I'l'
cannot blame us toe not "09 m 30 u will at-
opening up out "ark“ ptocurement ue
enough " my: be Vinnenble to at-

. uekslrom abmd.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nthon Keiui Shinbun, Inc.

(230: 4120/1210

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

[Text]
in compliance with a request MlTl'a plamed help boils xloclts as collateral.
made by the us. Government. down essentially to two points: Ml’l‘l feels that ha

the Ministry of International
Trade 0 Industry has buckled

l) how to asalat the us. com
pany ﬁnancially. and 2) how to

bank and mm
cooperate inoculation

down to study comretely what incl-m its cornpetitiveoeu an serve to help Chryali
sort oi financial assistance. in- to sales in the Amerieen auto the credibility it has
eluding financing by the Ex- market. pivate llnallctal try
port-import Bank of Japan. A: to the first point. Hm I theUS.
miyitbedtereoascooperation midering the paeihittty it However. as to ho
to help relabilitate Chrysler having Extra bank attend Chryaler'a stocks 0! i
Corp. new staggering in a financingmcnua harklosn Hotel-a. it needs to
serious business crisis. or aupplier'o cndit. intern-ob that the 0.8. autanal
The assistance steps being said thatextenaionolsuppller's time such a m
weighed by mm are said to credit appeared to he the most was mushy theJapi
includethelollwing: maritime: “could beamed Mattheaodot
- openingaway tor the Exim most Nd“, in ”it “GM In 0m M Y‘
bank to cxtatd help to the Mitsubishi Motors expwta m m m m
ailing US. automaker thrush body and mechanical com- (nu-pier -.a .‘
Mitsubishi Motor. Corp. which ponents to Chrysler Itotou to My bad
istiooupwitnChryaler. In such a case. "item but then tricky rat:
4an Ititoubiata Motors Motors will Ibtltldet' the tor- .
to buy bad: its shores now held an exchange M. but the An {or mm I

by Cluster or altering the
latter financing with the stares
takcnucollateral.

—ltoving Mitsubishi Motors

Government can hook it up
from the tact thatltwilihedile
to apply the export immooe
system to the linanciu as it

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of its top men said

scale «1 the {bunch
small. it would not a
in promoting (

undertake joint production at willlnvolvetheEximbank. rehabilitation. and :

technical cooperation for aiding Chrysler in mm inc-limo actively on
. restoruu Chrysler's cornpeti- togetMitauh'lhi Motoutobuy such a cue to tat

uvcneoswithintheus. tact its shares in CW8 problem.

Ml'l‘ltopesthatitwctiatep poseeeeionorupercemdthe Ontheothorhond.

ll" realized. thiawillamountto total. at the prevailing price 3". "'9 “I.“ N

Japan «bouldering the Reagan within a W at m Japanese awake

Administration's additional "no,” million. or having a, w. obvlom that it

d9“ ”NM” 0‘ “'9 "-5- Japanese automaker extend isnoro My ml

automaker. m with! 0W- mummies toChryalar with the tier eothn- and l

sler reg-trim: its (eel will norm: “'4! to the

to prevent a «kindling d the asked.

Japan-US. trade (ﬁction over

Japan's auto expats.

36
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l'nudrm 'l‘uuuo Kuhn 0!
Mitsubishi Motors mid um u a
general problem. his company
was not again! helping the US.
ﬁrm. put that it wished to deter-
mlng It; Ialtltnde thtd the
1:! _ ,. .... , . .. ,

mutter ally after recdvmg a
concrete mum from Chrysler.
llwupmlbkuapnﬂd
technical convention, to con»
sider having Cll'yﬂer undu-
uke 1km production a
Mitsubishi Mom-3‘ can. but
the wiorily now was tot
Chrysler itself to rationalize in
ptodnction setup and Imoothly
carry wucmdown.heu|d.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Kauai shinbun, Inc.

C50: 6120/131

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030012-0
ruK urrlum. um. ONLY

ECONOMIC

DOMESTIC AUTO SALES LAST YEAR SHOHED DIP, EXCLUDING MIDGBTS

Tokyo JAPAN economc JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jul 82 p 7

[Text]
SIB 0‘ MW IMﬁib. ex- “er ”mm m”.
eluding midget which 11 [us
than 550 cc. In Japan In! yen TN lm will“ brute

moped below the yer-earlier
level [or the secmd you In a
m.

The Japan Automobile
Deals: mutton said "It

redundant a new W
an. trucks and m to!

mom than 1.000 cc) In 101 let]

down Into 2.101.156 met
an. n» 0.8 put out. 1.118.“?
was. down 9.1 pet can. and
22M Inna. down 11 yet cent.

wmmﬁetvelucbmln-

eluded.
moblls

madman»
lnthoyurmled

5.1mm «am. up 2.: per cm

by 2.8 wuutmnyurm- tram 1m.
[ht-mk- Sales at New Auto- {excl-Ila: align vehicles)
I- MI by Main
('7 brick” ia‘olll W)
Oceanu- m!

"#2:.” . mm" tum: .8: mm “(mm

urn-mu: . .. ........ Q”! ",0“ ﬂ LIIIJIH- u)

mm m .. ".5. 0.0" I. "IMF-'1!

an Item mu mo u nun u- w

um m 5.4» mm as was :— w

m M m I)” -' m (01,."

mm m . a“ '4‘ - "Ml-”1)

nu mm mu... up mo - mm- m

ooh-mm. . . - my m awn—um

”man m M — mac n m- (-1“)

mm m . - o — apt-aw

Ina-noon" . m - - nun-n."
COPYRIGHT: 1982 , the Nihon Kauai Shtdaun . Inc .
cso: 1.120/ 131

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUJITSU m CARRY OUT LARGE-SCALE CAPITAL INCREASE

Tokyo JAPAN eoonomc JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 p 9

[Text]

Fujitsu. Ltd. Japan“: blunt
computer manufacturer. to go
in: to carry out a large capital
inrreow on a public suburlp
tion basis. with payment set lor
the latter part of February.

it will involve a total at U
million shares - so million
shares authentically and so bil-
lion shares in the form oi Euro
pean Depository Recelpt in
dicntions are that the money
procured will reach nearly two
million.

in considering money- pro-
curement by means oi capital
increase. ll slant to become a
capital increase mating next in
scale to the V99 billion increase
hy Toyota Motor Co. in July.
last year and the vote millim
increase by Tahiba Corp. in
September at the nine year.

Fujitsu in been briskly
building up its facilities. cen-
lvrmg nrl semiconductors. and
IN t'xpurl oi amputees also
have started to become con-
spicuotb‘ lately. it la regarded
to have decided on a capital in
crease in considering the need
lur lurtlu-r strongll'cninit itit
ﬁnancial position. such as ior
competing against lnternation»
:il Iiusinoss Machines Corp.

Fujitau': caning capital in
crease will become its third I
to proctn'in' funds. The amount
ol its share iaaue will outstrip
the 70 million by Toyota and
ranlt next to tin 200 million
allre issuance by Toshiba.

A: to the caplhl incrouo on
the European market. it ap
pears tint the oil-proﬁting
matric- will secure I coo-
siderahle amotml at our.
throudt Nlltho Seatﬂtiee Co.
which will not as lead moan
ol the oaﬂtal loam alaro in-
stance.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the “then Keizai Shiﬁun, Inc.

CSO: lt120/l.31

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
ECONOMIC

Men. (ha upon at Toyota
tha-Mouuusjuc»
timed to he love: "In the are-
vious year's level up to la!
Aum

In the use at Nissan. the
lots! number a! an and (melt:
exported to the us. mum
In he lawn than year-«rue:-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Keizal Shilbun, Inc.

CSO: 4120/13].

‘0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3
IEE‘
52313-1

mm

Jams-y «III. W the“!!! human
BRIEFS

AUTO PARTS MISSION TO SPAIN-The Japan Auto Parts Industries “societion is
scheduled to send a mission to Spain next my to confer with its local counter-
parts on how to cooperate with each other in the field of automotive parts and
components. This will be a followup to similar missions so far dispatched to
South Korea and Canada to exchange information about parts business trends. In
April, 1980, Spanish parts makers sent a fact-finding team to Japan to probe the
"secret" of international competitiveness of Japan-built parts. Japanese parts
builders hope to have more contact with Spain which is due to join the European
Conuunitiea in 1985. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOUMAL in English Vol 20,

No 989. 19 Jan 82 p 8] [COPYRIGHT: 1982. the Nihon Keizai shisﬁun. Inc.)

NONTARIFP BARRIER RBDUCTIONnPrime Minister Zenko Suzuki wants to reduce or
ilprove the nusber of non-tariff barriers cited by the 0.8. to Japan--51
instances—by over one half. Last week, he made this known at a meeting with

the ruling Liberal Democratic Party's three top executives and Masumi Bsaki,
chairman of the party's special study conittse on international economic policy
measures. The Prime Hiniater issued a directive to them that the Government and
its party swiftly should work together to draft concrete steps on the following
points: Reduce or iQrove over half of the cited non-tariff barriers; adjust
views among the ministries and agencies concerned for reducing the number of items
on the residual inport restriction list; grant western enterprises which have
entered Japan the same business opportunities and benefits accorded by their
governments to Japanese enterprises in their country. In line with Suzuki's
instruction, the party's special study cousittee on international econonic policy
measures will have a meeting of its chairman and vice~chsirman this week to work

out a final plan on the matter for presentation to the Prime Hinister. [Text]
[Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 1]
(COPYRIGHT: 1982. the Nihon Keizai Shidwn. Inc.]

TOYOTA AUTO PART IMPORTS-Toyota Motor Co. has announced a plan to procure 926
billion worth of automotive parts and comonents in 1982 from abroad, 18.2 per
cent more than an estimted U22 billion in 1981. The planned inorts for this
year will break down into 915 billion worth of parts and #11 billion worth of

supplies and equipment. The estimated imorts in 1981, consisting of $13 billion
worth of parts and ’19 billion worth of supplies and equipment, represented a

37.5 per cent increase over the cowsrable ilports in 1980. Of the 1981 inorts,
North American products accounted for r12 billion. Besides, Toyota's American

subsidiary, Toyota Motor Sales U.s.A., Inc., bought 928 billion worth of parts

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ion figure does not include

do by Toyota's local dealerships and Toyota Motor Manufacturing

the purchases as
U.S.A. engaged in production of truck cargo beds in long Beach. A Toyota spokes-
S. producers last year

can said that the coqany's imports and purchases iron 0.
accounted for a considerable share in the annual $300 million anomt demanded by

the 0.8. for Japanese autoaskers to buy 0.S.-nsde parts and cosponents. {Text}

[Tokyo JAPAN coonomc JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 7]
[COPYRIGIT: 1982, the hihon Keizai Shidmn, Inc.]

IRAQI VEHICLE PURCHASliuToyota Motor Sales Co. and trader Suaitono Corp. have
won an order from the Iraq Iwort Corporation to supply 36.000 autonobiles in
1982. The vehicles ordered break down into 135,000 I-ton pickup trucks, 6.500
snall buses, (0,500 four-wheel drive vehicles, 1,500 2-ton pickup trucks and
10,000 subcowact cars. Iraq suggested in October, 1980 that the country night
suspend purchases from Toyota if the cot-pony tied up with Ford I‘btor 00. listed
as an anti-Arab enterprise by the Arab nations' Israel-boycotting cousittee.
Toyota's sales talks with Iraq thus were stalled for some tine in the first half
of last year. but Iraq resumed ordering from Toyota in Decelber to buy 15,000

the joint car-asking plan with Ford. Sources took the preceding and latest Iraqi
orders as an indication that the moves of Arab nations to boycott Toyota cars

have tapered off . Iraq placed orders for automobiles with foreign producers in
t the prolonged Gulf Har forced the coun-

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI!0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

SCIENCE AND TECNNOLOCY

INFORMATION PROCESSING, HITACHI TERMINAL SYSTEM DISCUSSED
Tokyo HITACHI HYDRO“ in Japanese Aug 81 pp 1-6
[Article by hiroyuki Osako]

[Text] In conjunction with quantitative growth and wider application of infor-
mation processing systems, the terminal equipment or system has recently under-
gone various changes. The terminal system, in other words, is assuming an
important role in the area of information processing, permeating to every par: of
institutions.

This paper will discuss these trends along with ﬂitachi's product development,
R80 philosophy and future trends in terms of technologies which support the
realization of terminal systems consistent with such trends.

1. Introduction

According to statistics compiled by MIT! in FY-80, Japanese production of digi-
tal electronic computer systems topped the remarkable l-trillion-yen mark in
FY-79. This is 1.000 times greater than the 1-billion-yen performance of FY-60.
Among the increases, the proportion of terminal-related equipment, including
communications control systems, grew as much as 25 percent in FY-79, in contrast
to 5.5 percent in 1965, when the "online system" was beginning to be coalnrcial-
ized. This indicates a 330-fold production growth in simple comparative terms.

This growth is largely due to liberalization of public telephone circuits and
reduction in communications cost through utilisation of the 00X (digital data
exchange) network; however, the major reason is the harmony between the reduc-
tion in total cost of information processing. including communications costs due
to the progress in semiconductor and magnetic memory technologies, and the devel-
opment of software technologies including complex online system controls.

Under these conditions, a significant recent trend in "network architecture“ is
the polarization between intelligent terminals, which are moving toward all-pur-
pose and more sophisticated models, and terminals designed to exhaust their
application by liaiting their usage to a certain degree.

In coping with these market trends, Hitachi has developed and marketed terminal
equipment with a wide range of applications. In this brief paper, however, I
would like to report on the development of products, particularly those in the
front line of information processing, and the technological development support-
lug each of these products.

43
itﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II. Changes in Market Needs and Data Processing Systems

One characteristic of recent trends in information processing systems, in addi-
tion to that of substantiating management control, is a strong demand for the
system to function as a tool for upgrading working conditions and for providing
full service to customers. Accordingly, we see many cases in which the appli-
cation, control, and operation of a system are either partially or totally taken
out of the hands of specialists and put into the hands of the final users. This
tendency is particularly strong in regard to terminal equipment and terminal
systems.

This means that the circle of information processing systems has widened in terms
of space, quality, and quantity. Here we can see the birth of factors contribut-
ing to the realization of such concepts as decentralized processing, network ar-
chitecture, and codeless information processing.

0n the other hand, as seen in the cooperation among banks on matters of savings
operations and their coterminal centers and as seen in the establishment of
mutual communication "protocols“ among chain stores and textile industries, data
communications among different industries or plane for promotion of such coopera-
tion is being carried out.

With respect to information processing systems that can deal with these market
conditions, I provided details of decentralized processing and network architec-
ture in the May issue of this journal under the title, "Recent Trends in the
Decentralized Processing System."1 Here,I would like to make observations mainly
from the standpoint of terminal equipment.

2.1 Meeting the Increase in the Volume of Information

In terms of both space and time. the manner of presenting information handled
through terminal equipment located in the vicinity of the source of information
has expanded from the conventional coded style to a codeless style; the contents
of presentation now include both fixed and nonfixed forms. Examples are infor-
mation expressed in terms of images. Japanese language. voices and shapes. In
comparison with fixed coded forms. such information requires a great deal of data
before it can be presented.

In order to process a large amount of data efficiently within the time required,
improvement in the speed of transmission can only go so far. Therefore. a method
is needed to dccentralize the processing as much as possible so that it can be
handled locally. For efficient exchange of data between sites, such a system
that usesthe coded information which has necessary and sufficient data is neces-
sary to recognize the information being exchanged. In order to accomplish this,
both large capacity and high performance are required of either the terminal
equipment or its control system. This is gradually becoming a possibility within
an acceptable price range through the development of various technologies dis-
cussed in section III. Examples of this are the various types of terminal equip-
ment for the Japanese document information processing system, the shape process—
ing system. and the document control system.

4‘

FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
I’Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.2 Meeting Diversified Operational Needs

The major requirements for the terminal equipment cited above are reduction in
cost of the equipment itself and its operation, even greater adaptability to
business, and easy handling. In order to meet these requirements, it is indis-
pensable, while maintaining a low price, to diversify input-output methods,
strengthen support software, and facilitate operation. More precisely, the
following measures can be taken.

In terms of input and operation, in addition to various keyboards and key sets
for different usages, the OCR (optical character reading) hand reader and bar-
code reader, both of which can directly read data from the source, can be con-
nected, and the system which produces the necessary control codes through a one-
touch operation (code key function) can be improved. Also, an input check by
means of various displays and an operational guidance function are effective ways
to improve the operation of the equipment.

In programming the terminal equipment. adequate and simple language, and conver-
sational programming that requires minimal learning, are effective. Furthermore,
program packages are being consolidated for standard operation.

On the other hand, in conjunction with popularization and more sophisticated util-
ization, increasing the system's overall rate of operation is inevitable. In
order to do this, its reliability undoubtedly must be improved and consideration
must be given to a backup system in case of breakdowns.

The role of the backup system for terminal equipment is to prevent bringing
ordinary business operations to a halt, totally or temporarily, when the system
including the backup breaks down. A design that will make this possible requires
that it not only be suitable for operation of the entire system within a certain
tolerance range but that it also be accomplished at minimal cost.

In this respect, the system design based on the "store and forward" and "delayed
online" methods has been rated higher than designs based on conventional methods.
The popular decentralized processing system is considered an extension of this

concept.
2.3 Consideration for System Environment

In connection with the popularization of data communications among various indus-
tries, the use and support of public data communications networks, such as public
circuits and DDX are now indispensable elements in terminal equipment. The same

applies to data communications within a single industry that has accompanied the

expansion of box usable areas.

0n the other hand, coordination with the software that controls the entire system
is critical, for unless various software assets, which require a great amount of
development expense and time, are sufficiently utilized, the system cannot become
a useful tool. It is believed that software will control the information process—
ing system increasingly in the future, and that its full utilisation will lead to
increasing the overall adaptability of the terminal equipment.

45

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Also, from the standpoint ul mnklng the software structure applicable to the
systems environments as much as possible, stratification of the software struc-
ture for the terminal equipment is being carried out. This has been greatly
influenced by the strata structure system based on the concept called network
architecture; however, this is a technology widely used as a means of comprehen-
sively improving the efficiency in the changing, maintenance, and production of

software, even for terminal equipment which is not directly subscribing to the
software.

In software which is developed on the basis of this concept. the functional
definition of each stratum and the specification of the boundaries between
strata are. in general, clearly unified. By combining existing modules that
comply with the definition and specifications, or newly developed modules if
necessary. the software can easily support the system with a wide range of
applications.

III. Technologies That Support Terminal Equipment

The basic technologies involved in terminal equipment are: printer, display,
keyboard, electronics, data communications, mountings to make the equipment
compact and light, handling of paper, and programming. But what is important

is not that these basic technologies be used independently in making the equip-
ment, but that they be comprehensively and systematically integrated to produce
equipment which can then serve its purpose. For example, the "Automated Machine
for Banks (ATM, CD teller window equipment)." introduced in the special issue of
this publication, materialized only when these technologies were brought together
and the final product designed; it could be manufactured by combining individually
existing functional units.

Since the principal basic technologies have already been discussed in the special
issue under "Printer Technology," "Display Technology." "Making Terminal Equip-
ment Compact and Light," and '"rhe handling of Paper in the Printer Terminal,"

I want to summarize other technologies.

3.1 Use of Microprocessors

To control the operation of terminal equipment at a rate faster than or just as
fast as the human senses can reset, it is sufficient to use the consecutive con-
trol of a microprocessor. For example, in 30 ms, which is said to be the limit
of the motion-recognition capacity of humans. a microprocessor with an average
command execution time of 2 us can handle 15 x 103 steps of command. Even if
two-thirds of this. or 10 x 103 steps. is used exclusively for performing a
program which becomes the overhead for simultaneous movement, it is possible,

if the operation moves at an average step number of l x 103, to control less
than five functions simultaneously.

Also. if higher performance is required, it is possible to install microproces-
sors specially adapted to each functional unit. Even with this arrangement, the

cost ratio of the microprocessor and its accessories to the total equipment is
not large, and an allowable cost—performance ratio can be obtained.

‘6

ﬁOR<lWIJA1.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand, specific microprocessors can be selected on the basis of the
performances and functions required. For instance,for those which are used as
single units and whose functions are relatively simple, such as printers, dis-
plays, and keyboards, 6-8 bit microprocessors are often used. For equipment
processing compound functions as a result of the combination of single units,
8—16 bit microprocessors can be used selectively, either singly or in multiples,
depending on the required function and performance.

In view of the diversified functions of the terminal equipment, the use of micro-
processors plays an important role. In conventional equipment, using "hard
wired logic," changes in standard functions, the addition of different functions,
and changes in performance distribution for various functions would be likely to
necessitate modifications in the entire design of the equipment. However, equip-
ment with microprocessor control can accommodate the required functional changes
and additions in a relatively short time either through the manufacturer changing
the program or through the user's programming.

In addition. we are striving to improve the efficiency of programming. To meet
the sophistication in program language, the development of a "cross-compiler" by
means of large models is in progress; this will supplement a decline in efficiency
deriving from a lack of resources at the time of programming the microprocessor.

3.2 Mechatronics Technology

Mechatronics technology refers to the fusion of mechanical engineering and elec-
tronic engineering technologies. This technology owes a great deal to the utili-
zation of microprocessors, as mentioned in section 3.1. Its results are seen
clearly in printers, keyboards, various inserters for printers, paper and plas-
tic and transport mechanisms, and in various automatic cash processors for cash
and for cash transactions.

This technology applies electronics to a large part of the mechanical controls
previously achieved by combining various mechanical functions. This simplifies
the complex mechanical parts and the mechanism comprised of these parts. In
addition to reducing the manufacturing cost and increasing reliability, this
technology provides diverse functions not carried out by conventional terminal

equipment.

For example, let us consider the serial print . A matrix printer with a print—
ing speed of 20 letters per second, TELETYPE model 37, for instance, was
formerly composed of several thousand mechanical parts. As against this, the
number of parts used in a "wire dot matrix printer" with a speed of 120-250
letters per second is less than 500 at most. By electronically controlling the
X and Y directions of the printing head and the print wires, it is now possible
to handle various fonts, including Chinese characters, and print shapes, neither
of which could be done by conventional printers. In comparison with previous
printers, reliability has improved 20 times and manufacturing cost is down by
more than 80 percent.

By using mechatronics technology, similar improvements are being made to products
previously based only on mechanical engineering technology. This makes it pos-
sible to supply popular terminal equipment models where the installation and

maintenance environment are not always good.

47

F0!:0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOI(MHNCIAL.USEZONLY

3.3 Magnetic Memory Technology

The appearance of 8-inch floppy disk equipment drew a line between conventional
terminal equipment and new models, in that it added a filing function to the
terminal and made exchange of information more efficient. With this as a turn-
ing point, file equipment such as the 5-inch floppy disk and the 5-inch and

8-inch hard disks was developed. This improved the function and performance
of the terminal equipment.

The floppy disk can be used widely as an internal filing device, but it also
plays an important role as an information exchange medium. For this purpose,
it is important that the information be handled by a memory system which has
mutual convertibility; however. even though it is technologically possible to
increase the memory capacity. the restrictions are great, so we cannot expect
much in terms of achieving greater capacity. Rather, it will contribute to
popularization of terminal equipment if it can be made smaller and consume less
power.

The 8-inch or 5-inch hard disks can be effectively used to make the file device
of the terminal faster and smaller and to increase its capacity. At present,
the 8-inch disk has a capacity for lO-lOOH bytes, the 5-inch disk, for 5-20
bytes; the average access time is 30 ms and 80 ms, respectively. But these hard
disks are most appropriate for terminal equipment because of their compactness
and low powerconsumption. The power consumption during normal operation is

100 U for the 8-inch disk, 20 H for the 5-inch disk, which is one-fifth to one-
twentieth of the consumption than that of the conventional 14-inch disk. The
lower power consumption was made possible by minimizing the friction created
when a disk rotates and by improvements in high density memory technology which
provide needed memory capacity and at the same time permit the reduction of the
radius of the disk.

To obtain greater capacity while maintaining the compact size, the disk equipment
is so structured that the disk surface itself is fixed to the rotating axis of
the equipment. When operating a terminal with file equipment, it is important
to consider a backup system to cover damage and file breakdowns caused by opera—
tional error. For smaller capacity equipment, a floppy disk is more desirable;
however. it is insufficient as a backup system for a file whose capacity exceeds
tens of megabytes. A floppy disk with l H byte requires tens of sheets, and the
problem is the time required for backup operations rather than capacity. For
this purpose, an open reel-type magnetic tape device was used in the past;
however, its load is too great for the terminal equipment. Because of this.
recently a magnetic cartridge has been attracting attention. This device, al-
though there still remains the problem of convertibility with conventional sys—
tems, is compact and is expected to achieve a memory capacity of 10-40 H bytes.

The magnetic bubble, which is theoretically different from the conventional mag-
netic memory system, has advantages in terms of resistance to adverse environ-
ment, particularly changes in temperature, a problma coupon to disk and tape
equipment. The magnetic bubble tolerates temperatures from ~10 to 70'C. But

at present there are problems of capacity and cost, so it will take 2 to 3

years before it can be realized.

48

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.4 Other Technologies

In connection with the above-mentioned utilization of microprocessors, the
semiconductor technology for memory, LSI. and VLSI is important for terminal
equipment. In particular, a move toward higher integration of the memory
system is likely to become a factor in radically changing the economical dis-
tribution of functions of the equipment. For example, in the Chinese character
font, which is expressed by 26 x 26 bite, the character generator, which gener-
ates approximately 8.000 characters of JIS's No 2 standard, requires a memory
of about 5 H bits. To install this in a printer is impossible in terms of size
and cost. Therefore, it is more practical to consider it in common use with
other equipment, install it within the file of the control mechanism, and design
it so that the portions necessary for operation can be extracted onto the main
memory device. But in the near future, when it is expected that a mask-type
read only memory of 128 kilobits or 256 kilobits per chip will be developed,
this character generator will appear with a 36-chip or lS-chip LSI, so that it
can be built into the printer. This will contribute greatly to the performance
of small-scale Chinese character systems.

In conjunction with the popularization of mechatronics technology, the role of
the power semiconductor must not be neglected. In this area, it will be possi-
ble to use highly integrated units as a result of utilization of power HOS Onstal
oxide semiconductor)-type PET (electric field efficiency transistor), which has
good control efficiency.

Various input devices are needed for the terminal equipment. The operation of
most conventional keyboards has switched from a mechanically driven system to
electronics. In addition, new technologies such as keyset and CRT (cathode ray
tube) touch-keys along with image sensor based image input, voice recognition,
voice synthesizing, and voice output are being utilized in codeless devices.

IV. Development of Terminal System

The development of Hitachi's terminal system has been in the area of all-purpose
terminals. specialized terminals for specific purposes, and custom-made terminals.
For these terminals. Hitachi has been developing and strengthening a number of new
products in the past 1—2 years: these include the BITAC T-560I20 video data sys-
tem; HITAC L—320/30ﬂ and 50B terminal computers; the HITAC T—SSO/30 decentralized
OCR; HITAC T-5862, T-5866, T-5869 automatic cash transaction systems; and the
HITAC T-S80/10 parking terminal system.

in addition, responding to the market trends and needs as mentioned in section II,
Hitachi has developed new terminals by applying technologies discussed in section
III. The basic developmental concepts of these terminals are as follows:

I) Data processing in the vicinity of data source.
2) The ability to make inputs with least amount of change in the original

form of data.
3) Easy operation even for nonspecialists.
4) Minimizing space, cost, and other factors in installing the terminal.

‘9

51)R‘0i1ﬂ(1A1.LEﬂE(nULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'

)) Haintnining maximum convertibility with different terminals so as to allow

for maneuverability with future products or mixed operations with different
terminals.

6) Maintaining interchangeable character sets and a code system for than.

The development of new terminal equipment in each of these areas of application
is as follows.

4.1 Chinese Characters and Japanese Language Processing Terminal

For terminals which can be used exclusively for processing information in the
Japanese language, the following have been developed.

l) HT-5217 Chinese Character Printer Terminal. This is a terminal for process-
ing conversation, with English, numeral, and kana, the Japanese syllabary, inputs.
and Chinese character output; the output device is a thermal printer.

2) Bil-20 Japanese Word Processor. This has diverse input methods which can
meet a wide range of demands; the output devices can be selected for various pur-
poses. from matrix printing type to dot matrix type.

In addition, in order to support the function of Japanese language processing

for all-purpose terminal equipment, share-load type and stand-alone type systems2
are available for the HITAC T-560/20 and the HITAC L-320/301i and 50“ respectively.
Since they can be used as they are for various functions of an all-purpose terminal,
they can be applied to establish comprehensive office automation in the future.

5.2 Shape Processing Terminal

As a full-scale shape processing system, the HITAC 0-710 and HITAC 6-7303 are
available; further-ore, a shape processing function suitable for office process-
ing has been added to the HITAC T-560/20. This function is reinforced when backed
by a printer which provides color displays and hard copies.

4.3 Terminals for Banking Institutions

As a general teller device the HT-5821 and PIT-5822 have been backed up by Chinese
character processing. The ilT-5825 teller window device has been developed by
retaining the functions of these models but reducing the size so that it can

be used on the teller's desk. A "teller's cashier," which handles all currencies
and types can be connected to this equipment as well.

In the area of automated equipment, HT-5862 automatic cash payment and HT-5866
and HT-S869 automatic transaction equipment have been developed to meet a wide
range of needs. These items of equipment are installed with new mechanisms,
including "guidance" by CRT display and "offline" processing by a built-in floppy
disk. In addition, consideration has been given to adjustments in terms of in-
stallation, operation, and interphase. so that these items of equipment can pro-
vide a unified system for all cash transactions.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.4 All-Purpose Terminal Equipment

For all-purpose terminal equipment. regarding which the main objectives are
low price and popularization, the following products are available.

1) HT-SlOl Telephone Terminal. This is a multipurpose terminal for public cir-
cr ts whose data entry is diversified and which can be used as easily as a tele-
phone.

2) HT-SbSS Display Terminal. This is a CRT display te inal whose functions
and interphase are equivalent to those of the TELETYPE . which is used exten-
sively for Tss (time sharing system) and other conversation-processing systems
and minicomputers.

These terminals are available not only as standard equipment but they can also
become a developmental base for individualized terminals for different businesses.

In addition, custom-made systems, using the resources developed in conjunction
with all-purpose systems such as the HITAC L-320/30H and T-560/20, are used in
various areas; they are highly rated for their operational convertibility and
for their development within a short period of time.

V. Future Terminal Systems

Terminal systems are becoming popular and are being used in many areas; there
are, however, many problems to be solved and new technologies to be developed in
the future. Some of these are:

1) Popularization of high-speed data transmission network using optical fiber.
2) Recognition and accumulation of image information.

3) Efficient processing of codeless information.

4) Making the system compact, lightweight, and highly reliable.

But more important than these problems as a future issue is the matter of secur-
ity control. As the utilization of information processing systems'expands, pre-
cautions must be taken against crime and secrecy must be maintained. The demand
will naturally arise for the addition of a function which can recognize lawful
operators from unlawful ones. In addition. the popularization of decentralized
data processing will bring about decentralization of the files in the vicinity

of the terminal equipment or its control system. The majority of the security
work in connection with a terminal system is related to these decentralized files.
A great deal will depend on developments in software rather than hardware.

Furthermore, in order to achieve even greater popularization, it is necessary
to develop portable high-performance terminal equipment. For this purpose, in
addition to compactness, light weight, and low powerconsumption, it is important
to make software into firmware.

0n the other hand, in terms of utilization of terminal equipment, the trend will
still be toward polarization between all—purpose and specialized systems.

51

FORiOFIICJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the standpoint of the former, realization of a multifunctional terminal
must be worked out. This does not mean providing what is essentially single-
function equipment with many applications, as in the case of conventional key-
board displays and keyboard printers; it means connecting the terminal with
equipment with individualized functions such as OCR, various wand reader
[phonetic] and keysets, and providing the appropriate software for various needs.

For example. the terminal OCR must be provided with functions in addition to
those available to conventional OCR, such as OCR with keyboard data entry,
inquiry, and remote batch processing, and numerous other functions required when
the terminal is seen abstractly as a data input system, or functions that may
emerge from this.

In supplying these functions, it is desirable to have the system perform as con—
currently es possible those functions which can be realized by using resources
which do not interfere with one another during simultaneous operations.

Also. in the area of specialized terminals, it is believed that the populariza-
tion of the "full-turn key system” which most meets the user's demand will be
promoted even more. This trend will aid in establishing a bulk sales market.
supported as it is by a preference for cooperation among industries. as repre-
sented by the trend mentioned above of establishment of “protocols summon to
different industries._ A terminal system suitable for this would be a packaged
product in which the advantages of both hardware and software have been incor-
porated to the maximum.

It would seem inevitable to promote a system design based on special terminolo-
gies and customs which are used in business daily, and to provide products by
which mechanization will spread smoothly.

VI. Conclusion

I have approached the topic under discussion on the basis of existing products,
those being developed. and existing and future technologies.

On this and eight other articles in this special issue, I would appreciate it if
the reader would provide us with critique and guidance concerning Hitachi' a
product development discussed above.

REFERENCES

1. Ikeda, et a1.: "Recent Trends in Decentralized Processing System." HITACHI
HYORON. No 63. PP 297—302 (1981-5).

2. Ito, et a1.: "Development of HITAC L-320/30H and 50H Systems," HITACHI
HYORON. No 63, pp 303-308 (1981—5).

3. Hayakawa et al.: "CAD/CAM Systems in Manufacturing Business," HITACHI
HYORON, No 61, pp 619-624 (1979-6).

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Hitachi Hyoronsha

9711
C80: 8129/0551 52

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬁ(1kl.lﬁﬂ!(ﬂﬁl¥
SCIENCE AND TRHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEC'S VICE PRESIDENT DISCUSSES 809 1.0 1.3588" SMICONDUCTOR TRADE FRICTIONS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V0 19, No 984. 8 Dec 81 pp 20, 15

[Text ]

Nihea Keirai tlhlmhen: What
is your outlooh {or technological
competition between Japan and
the United States?

Onchl: We may be ahead at the
Americana in mane production
technologies at iteeireletl cit»
cults. 1he America. .

tecinoloo‘el at a whole
We teared that Japanese
maitere' Wat tint
they were gain; to ma
arcane M-ltilohlt random
access memory (RAM) chive.
the lint-generation of very
largeecale haunted clrcolta
(Vista). would unduly povde
the Americana. We heaved a
sigh ol reliei when we iottnd
that there it no (rent tech-
nolocioal difference: in tile
held between Japaneee makers
and their u.s. counterparts.

The am superiority oi
Japan's mate promotion tech
nolociea primarily comer from
the fact tint Japaneae centi-
eonductnr makers placed extra
emphasis on eutometiutlon at
their own domeetic plants.
while their Western counter.
parts depended on Aaian labor
for assembly work. The are oI
automatic seemhly machinea
not only y'vu extra quality and
reliability to the end products
but also helps reduce promo
tlon costs by minimum had
indicts.

Complacency on at: part,
however. it totally on-
warranted. ‘lhe yield rate (the

rate at "good promote" agalnat
the total) in rapidly lmprovint
in the United Stem. II we

remain emu about the victory
oi Pearl Harbor. we m a yet
lace another tragedy a! Kid-
way.

The llnal “cameo! the "[81
war" will not become clear
until abotn 1* when the bone
tide VLSla—SG-kllolm RAMs
—- made their debut. IBM la
phonon. back name ”no
billion MD ltatde oer anmtm
into VlSla and other lull tach-
nnlny holds.

NR8: How will the price war
between Japan and the United
Staten [oral
Oneet: ‘lhe price ot a «K
RAM. which stood at ahoottloo
at the time at mlmental
delivery a year aco, has now
come down to only about 810
and la bound to Mae further.
Price competition in the 0.5.
market ll certain to Intensify.
The deﬁnite deadvantace [or
ualnthenercepricewarlathe
existence oi the 0.8. trade law.
According to the law. Japaneae
makers have to rail their prod
tietsintheus. marketatthe
prices which mailed in the
Japaneae market two month
weviouaty. The rationale it
that US. distributor; willurry
two montln' lnventnrlee The
mole la tint we eatetot aell

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3
l
E
l
g

3.

i
.3
are-
at}:

a greater competitive edge in
patented tedtnoloﬂd — Japan
or the United State”

anhh Although Jananandthe
United Stataa are hit about
equally matched in tech-
nolaaicel matron. Japan in
Plylld more in patent
royaltlea. Our own comm la
moaily trade; tadtnoloaiu
mus tirmeona mien-
chance haaia. Some u.s.
pater». beaver. have been
mired hy patrolaun enm-
penlee. and we naturally

earnot obtain arch patents on
acroeellceneinahaab. Wehave

lopaycaahiorauchpatentaand
our payment cameo in the
netera field will onetime tor

eometlme.

Technolodoaldevalopnemla
breatlttaltluly awlllinthetield
oi aemiconatctore. Our own
companyiainveatlnaaometno
billloninnewequltlnentinthe
comet fecal year. Equip
menteareaauoodaanewaltar
three‘yeanotuae.Wehaveto
eaten there. however. or we
wlilleaeouttoourenmoetitore.
We. thereiore. try to recover
the invested amount in the first
two years. turn a profit in the
third year and me the proiit tor
reinvestment in newer
taciiities. To tee a metaphor.
we are a runner in an endless
marathon race.

NKS: Aren‘t U.S. manufac.
turers having chest pains in
their ruthless marathon race
with their Japanese rivals?
(ladii: i t 0.5 semi-
conthictor makers havinu only
several hundred workers on
their payrolls are bednniru to
have management troubles. it
is true. and they are putting
themselves up [or sale. Our
own company has purchaed
Electronic Arrays Inc. a
specialist semiconductor
manutacturer in the Silicon
Valley. while Siemens oi West
Germany has acquired another
semiconductor matter.
Advanced Micro Devices. inc.
Philips oi the Netherlands. on
the other hand. has bounht into
Signetics. while saw.
an oil prospecting company at
France. has pmhased Fair-
child

NKS: The Americans are
I'l’IIItIIIM as unlair Govern-
rm-nl subsidies and research
unions etc. Japanese manufac-
turers are enioyiu. . .
anhl: There are moves in the

United States tor the Federal
Government to guarantee loam
to semiconductor manulacue-
ere - a welcome development
Eleopean governments are
already providng subsidies to
LSl makers 'tolloving Japan's
example. in the United States.
the Department ol Detensc is
extending a helping hand In
development oi very high
speed le. alled ViiSl.

What we fear most is the rise
oi wotectionism In the United
States. We are stronaly op
posed to the protectionist belief
amoru the Americans that the
United States should have

FOR OFFICIAL USI". ONLY

absolute superiority in the field
at le and computers etc. [root
the national security point at
view. It must be pointed out
clearly here that there is econ
siderable diilerence between
proaction tor the military and
that for the civilian use.
Makers ot military products
are liable to latte their con-

protectionist armor.

NKS: The Americana are
claiming that Japanese earni-
eonductor matters are shutting
out US. products as they are
concurrently enmed in pro-
duction of computers. . .

Oaclil: The claim is aimﬂy on

As there are many
thousands oi le with ditleront
proper-tic. it is simply uneeo
nominal to arcane in m
tion at all at thorn. Amerian
manutauurera boast at on»
rivalted competitive one in
many tea. i believe that Texas
instruments Japan Ltd. a
wholly-owned subsidiary d
Texas lnstrurnaila Inc. know
much more about our com-

pany‘s computer sales than air
company's divi-
ainn.

NI“: Do you think that Japan

and the United States will be
able to eliminate trade {ric-
tions?

Oeebl: i think that uteblish
ment at manulaeturina plants
in each other‘s markets will so
a long way to tone down trio
lions. The trouble is that we
earmt simply atablish our
plants just anywhere. For
promotion oi such sophisti-
cated commodities as semicon-
mctors. we need a pretty hi0:
industrial basis. it we cannot

buy special gases and chanical
etc. nearby. we won‘t be able to

54

build truly inteu’ated aemlv
conductor plants. This is the
reason we have to limit our
ﬂantatabllalllleuin

areas in advanced catntrtes
We arenowaetlvely adnncinc
irao the United Stats and
Emma countries. while such
u.s. companies as Texas
Insu'umenu and Motorola are

theblarneonany single

MKS: Will
tranaler thrive?
out: Some say that estah
lisbmeni ot wholly-owned
plants will not promote tech»
noiulcal trantor. I do not
ages with tile opinion ‘l‘eeh-
nolocieal transter can be
neatly spaaded up by plant
entries. Winn we bandit at
American company. we invited
some at the company's an»
aneers to Japan and trained
them at our Kyushu plant.
Several oi the Americans slnoe
were taken over by other on
earripanies as (polity control

an

willaadtodiaaatrotlendl‘w
atmhquidtdeciaionwehaveto
beuuependentwhenwepto
«harem-tries andatabliab
manttlacturtnaplanta.8orned
thatachraclanswareertataad
traintherearecartaintomove
on to other countries.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”011:3th
(«\chmﬂanblum
such devolopment. I! In true.
mmmuchuwemmln
to develop an (new.
Mmmodlﬂuonwom
Mmdallcvthblou'y
Mud-muypmctone’lown

new.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

ORGANIZATION OF DAIKYO OIL COMPANY VIEHBD
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI in Japanese 21 Dec 81 p 8

[Text] "Suspend, at any rate, the manufacturing of steel plates for crude oil
tanks." This was the directive given the procurement department by President
Yoshiro Nakayama (67) at the beginning of June, this year. The project for the
construction of a crude oil depot with a capacity of 800,000 kiloliters in a
zone contiguous to the Yokkaichi Oil Refinery had already been started. with a
ceremony of purifying the building site held in April. Just after the end of
the consecutive holidays in May, however, shipments of products fell to an
abnormally low level. Also, the yen rate on the foreign exchange market was
falling at an increasing tempo. So, it was necessary for the company to study,
for some time, whether it should continue this project as scheduled.

Liaison Conference of Executives Is Theater for Free Discussion

The liaison conference of executives, which conference is held on the morning

of every Tuesday, became a theater of fierce controversies for some time there-
after. The subjects of controversies were such as whether the present decline

in demand is only temporary and what prospect it is possible to establish for the
demand for crude oil tanks in the country as a whole in the future. In the
meantime, the downward trend of the yen rate made unexpected progress, to reach
the level of N230 to $1 in the end. Crude oil prices. which must be paid in yen,
rose drastically and the deficit in the company's account swelled rapidly.

'111 plans for the construction of depots should be frozen, with the exception
of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks." This was the final decision made by
President Nakayama in early August, after deliberations at the meeting of execu-
tive directors (held in the afternoon of every Tuesday). Although resistance
was offered by those concerned with the work of construction in the field, it
was dangerous for the company to invest a sum of N70 billion in total in con-
structnnaprojects under the circumstances prevailing at that time. Fortunately,
the manufacturing of steel plates for tanks had been suspended just before enter-
ing the process of rolling. So, it was necessary for the company to pay only
several hundred million yen to the construction enterprises concerned in compen-
sation for the freezing of the construction projects.

The president does not attend the liaison conference of executives, so that "the
participants can speak as they like" (President Nakayama). This conference,
which is presided over by Vice President Hiroto Sumiyoshi (59), is a theater

56

FillflﬂﬂCIAl.lﬂﬂi(HVLY
FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAL USE ONLY

for the exchange of information concerning the details of everyday business
and discussions on various problems including the strategy of the company.

On the morning of every Thursday, a "tea party" is held with the participation
of Chairman Birotaka Hitsuda (74). President Nakayama, Vice President Sumiyoshi
and Managing Director Satoshi Kobayashi (60), who has jurisdiction over the
technological field. This party, too. does not take up any specific problems
for discussion. It can be seen, therefore. that free discussions are held at
two different stages, to provide a "lubricant" for this company.

However, the dominant view is that it is President Nakaysma who is the most
effective “lubricant" for the company. President Nakayama is a man of open-
hearted character, as can be seen from therepresentative view that he is a man
who "can hold heart-to-heart talks with everybody" (Chairman Hitsuda). Because
of such a character, both those within the company and outsiders are favorably
disposed toward him.

He has an established reputation as a man who controls his special agents most
firmly in oil industry circles. Within the Petroleum Association of Japan, too.
he has become an important candidate for the chairmanship on every occasion of
change of the chairman, because his ability as mediator is appreciated within
this organization whose members harbor "different speculations." Also, Chairman
Hitsuda turned over the post of president, in which he had served for a little
more than 15 years, to Nakayama, because he placed expectation on such an ability
of Nakayama.

The four members of the "tea party" are assistedby eight executive directors.
There is the impression that this company has too many executive directors for
its scale. The reason is that President Nakayama decided to "clarify the loca-
tion of responsibility in every department."

With Executive Director Keizo Suemasa (60), who is in charge of planning, at the
top, the company has such executive directors as Shigeo Homma (62) who is
director of the Yokkaichi Oil Refinery, Koichi Tsutsumishita (56) who is in
charge of supply and transportation, Takaaki Hakino (58) who is in charge of
procurement, calculation control and environmental problems, Katsuji Saito (56)
whoisin charge of crude oil and youngest of all executive directors, Hiroshi
Harayama (55) who is in charge of general and personnel affairs, Shots Kikuchi
(58) who has the exclusive jurisdiction over the field of business, and Hisashi
Tnnaka (59) who is in charge of accounting.

Exchange Between Groups of Part-Time Executives

The executive staff is characterized by the existence of six part-time direc-
tors. In late June this year, Daikyo Oil offered the post of part-time direc-
tor to four executives of Asia Oil (head office: Tokyo; President: Ryutaro
Huscgawa; capital: v7,soo million), including President Hasegawa (72). An ex-
change of personnel took place between the two because Daikyo Oil established
its control over Asia Oil by its acquisition of 48.7 percent of the total shares
of this oil company.

57

FKII()FFICJAI.I§HB(HVLY'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lmtkyu Oll smut in Asia 011. rakduhlgc- Kltaudn (00) (now a part-time director).
who was the senior executive director at that time and who had a reputation as
a top theorist within the company, and Tatsuji Takanashi (53) (now a part-time
director) who was the director in charge of technology. These two executives
of naikyo Oil took the post of managing director and that of director, respec-
tively, in Asia Oil. At the same time, five executives of Daikyo Oil-Hitsuda.
Nakayama Sumiyoshi, Tsutsumishita. and Kikuchi--became part-time directors of
Asia Oil. Especially, Kitsuda took charge of demand and supply (production
plans and distribution of products), which can be regarded as a key department
for any oil company, to serve as a bridge between the two oil companies.

It may be unnatural, in the light of the logic of capital, that an exchange of
executive personnel is carried out, on a nearly equal footing, between two com-
panies, one of which isvirtually in control of the management of the other.

This step was taken, however, from the standpoint that "the two companies should
unite together, as early as possible, to form a group in the true meaning of the
word, instead of making use of their own strength" (President Nakayama). About
6 months have passed since the exchange of executive personnel was started, and
this exchange has begun to produce such an effect as follows: "The special
quality of the business information from Daikyo Oil, which is the seller of
crude oil, and that of the technological information from Asia Oil, which is a
refining enterprise. have begun to be connected together" (Vice President
Sumiyoshi) .

The biggest purpose of Daikyo Oil's acquisition of48.7 percent of the total
shares of Asia 011 at the request of Mitsubishi Chemical Industries was to im-
prove the efficiency of the refining department. Daikyo Oil has only one oil
refinery (Yokkaichi), but Asia Oil has three (Hakodate, Yokohama, and Sakaide),
including those of its subsidiaries. Moreover. Asia Oil has facilities to
handle crude oil of inferior quality, including the apparatus for direct desul-
furization, while the Yokkaichi Oil Refinery handles mainly gasoline and other
kinds of light crude oil. Besides, it was attractive for Daikyo 011 that Asia
Oil maintained a long-term crude oil supply contract with Mobil 011.

It is difficult for any one oil refinery to improve its production efficiency
independently beyond a certain limit. Also, the weight of heavy oil in Japan's
crude oil imports has been increasing, year by year. The first purpose of Daikyo
Oil's acquisition of Asia 011 shares was to break such a stalemate.

with the transfer of shares, Asia 011 deserted the group led by Kyodo 011. In
late September this yenr,however, Asia Oil concluded with Kyodo Oil a contract,
whereby "the delivery ofproducts will continue as before for 5 years to come."
Daikyo Oil, too, emphasizes that "We do not intend to increase our market share
unnecessarily" (President Nakayama).

The market share of Daikyo Oil is 5.7 percent (recorded in 1980), but the share
of the Daikyo group in regard to refining capacity is 8.25 percent. 80, the
so-called reverse refining-sales gap is about 2.5 points. Daikyo Oil, there-
fore. will be burdened with excessive facilities for a long time to come, even
if it makes effective efforts for the combined operation of crude oil tankers
and the proper distribution of refining work.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even under the 3-year management plan (1982 through 1984) which is in the making
at present, "It must be expected that demand will remain rather stationary
throughout the 3 years" (Executive Director Suemasa). Excessive competition for
the expansion of sales will only increase the blow already dealt this company by
the losses amounting to $28.8 billion, which losses were recorded on the occasion
of the interim settlement of accounts as of the end of September.

Sumiyoshi Is Likely To Take Next Presidency

If we want to foresee the future of the Daikyo group, we must keep watch on the
Japan Industrial Bank, which is the major bank connected with Daikyo Oil. At
one time, Daikyo Oil had three executives hailing from this bank. At present,
however, only Chairman Hitsuda and Vice President Sumiyoshi are the executives
who came from this bank. The Industrial Bank played a leading role in Dsikyo
Oil's acquisition of Asia Oil shares. It also served as an intermediary in the
establishment of business tie-up between Daikyo Oil and Fuji Kosan, which tie-
up has produced such effects as unification of asphalt sales departments since
1979.

These past circumstances provide an important foundation for the prevailing
view that Daikyo Oil is the eye of the moves for the reorganization of oil in-
dustry circles. At this time when the necessity of reorganization of oil indus~
try circles is advocated, not a few people think that it is a matter of time
that the Industrial Bank and Daikyo Oil will take a new step to strengthen the
Daikyo group. With consideration for such a possibility, it is proper to think
that the next presidency will go to Sumiyoshi.

Conditions for Being President

President Yoshiro Nakayama says as follows: "An ordinary person is desirable

for the post of president. It is very good to have a president who belongs to
the elite. However, a person with strong elite consciousness is not acceptable.
It is important for the president to join the members of his company and walk
together with them. The post of president is not an honor at all. It is a try-
ing post. This post must be buttressed bythe trust of the members of the company
in their president. There is no reason to think that the president can win the
trust of the members of his company, without assimilation with their feeling.

"Nevertheless, the primary mission of the president is to display leadership.

I think that it is most desirable for the president to make decisions, on the
basis of future prospects and the present situation combined together at such a
ratio as seven to three. Any person, who is induced to make immediate gains,
must be qualified as president. Especially in oil industry circles, where the
circumstances concerning crude oil and foreign exchange are changing too rapidly,
it is most terrible to lose sight of the general situation."

Daikyo on

Number of Executives: 25 (including two auditors).

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Average Age of Executives: 3 are graduates of Tokyo University; 2--‘l‘okyo
Institute of Technology; 2--Hitotsubashi University; 3--other national uni-
versities; 3--Hssede University; Another private universities; lo—~higher
technological and comercial schools; and Another schools.

Terms of Office ﬁeld by Presidents: Eiji Saito--3 years and 3 months; Masso
Tankard-~17 years and 1 month; Birotaka Mitsuda--15 years and 7 months; and
Yoshiro Nahysnaufron August. 1975 to the present.

Renlneration for Executives: Regular payments-4228 million. and bonuses--
‘130 million.

Annual Income for President: 135,060,000 (according to his final incone tax
return for 1980).

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1981

C80: 4106/ 38

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNMDGY

COAL IMPORTS FROM SOVIET UNION DELAYED
Tokyo mums! SHIMBUN in Japanese 25 Dec 81 p 9

[Text] It became certain on the 210th that coking coal exports from the Soviet
Union to Japan for the current fiscal year will be far below the annual tonnage
of the 1 million tons which the Soviet Union guarantees. This is because the
coal received from April through November was $145,000 tons, which tonnage is
only half of the target quantity. Consequently, a Japanese steel industry
source says that "He cannot expect additional receipt. henceforth, either."
The Soviet Union has promised to export "1 million tons" as collateral for the
bank loan provided by Japan in connection with the development of South Yakut
coal mines. Because the matter is incorporated in the Government-to-Goverment
agreement between Japan and the Soviet Union, it seems that this sharp decrease
will leave problems in the future.

It is viewed that the sudden decrease in the shipment of Soviet coal to Japan
has been affected by the fact that the Soviet production of coal has not neces-
sarily been smooth and that the annual supply of 10 million tons of Polish coal
to be shipped to the Soviet Union has almost stopped due to the unstable politi-
cal situation in Poland.

Soviet coal exports to Japan increased approximately to 2.5 million tons per year
during the peak period of S or 6 years ago. Bowever. exports have been on the
gradual decrease since then. Nevertheless, 1.76 million tons and 1.85 million
tons of coal were exported to Japan during fiscal 1979 and fiscal 1980, respec-
tively. Thus, the Soviet Union maintained a fairly good level, being a strong
supplier after the United States, Australia and Canada.

However, the situation completely changed during the current fiscal year, as
Soviet coal exports to Japan sharply dropped. Negotiations for the current fia-
cal year on Soviet coal exports to Japan between the steel industry and the

Soviet Union were delayed more greatly than usual. They reached an agreement
finally in early September. The contents of the agreement are that (1) Shipments
from April through December will be from 700,000 tons to 750,000 tons (including
quantities carried forward from the previous year), and (2) consultations will be
held once again as to shipments from January through March. next year. Thus, the
Soviet Union was to strive for the aim of reaching the 1-million-ton level. anyway.

The fact that there are no prospects for January-March shipments, next year,
blocks the attaiment of the 1 million tons. Consequently, a person in the

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

steel industry in charge of coking coal foresees that "l-nillion tons is hope-
less. We wonder if the tonnage will be substantially below that." The Soviet
side has recently made representations, saying "If ve end up not attaining the
target. we want to move the target forward beyond April, next year. Thus, the
Polish situation is affecting Japan in the form of a decrease in the shipment of
Soviet coal to Japan.

As Japan imports approximately 70 million tons of coking coal, the decrease in
Soviet coal imports does not directly affect Japan's iron and steel production.
Because of the sluggish econonies at hone and abroad, the production of iron and
steel is falling. As a result. there tends to be leftover coking coal. However,
it neans the Soviet side's "breaking its promise" that coking coal. which is
collateral for the repayment of the loan on the development of Yakut coal nines,
is not supplied smoothly. Consequently, measures to be taken by Japan are to

be noted.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1981

(:30: 4106/38

62

POI! OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FINANCE MINISTER. MITI DISCUSS RELIEF OF ALUMINUM INDUSTRY
Tokyo ASABI SBIMBUN in Japanese 25 Dec 81 p 9

[Text] According to what was clarified by a source concerned on the thh,

how to spend the balance (about Ib.800 million, including the interest of some
$500 million) of the funds for disposing of excessive facilities. which funds
had been pooled through the ingot tariff allocation system for fiscal 1978 and
1979, for the relief of the aluminum-refining industry. was decided upon through
consultations between the Finance Ministry and MITI.

This breaks down into the following: (1) About ‘1 billion for the latter half
of fiscal 1980, as scheduled, as partial aid in expenses for disposal, and
about U2 billion for fiscal 1981, by extending the time for granting by 1 year,
in regard to the facilities which were discarded or frozen when the annual
facilities capacity was reduced from 1 64 million tons to 1 million ton through-
out the industry circles; (2) about 9500 million, which is equivalent to the
interest, will be spent for research and development in industry circles of a
refining method under which much electric power is not used, including the blast
furnace method; and (3) the remaining funds. amounting to some l1,300 million,
will be returned to the Treasury.

Under the tariff allocation system in the past. unlike the tariff exemption sys-
tem which is to be carried out for 3 years from fiscal 1982, the tariff rate of
9 percent was reduced to 5.5 percent in fiscal 1978 and to b.5 percent in fiscal
1979, with the necessary volume of imports as an object. At the same time, an
amount with an equivalent of 0.25 percent deducted. in the amount of reduction
of the tariff burden, was contributed by ingot importers, and it was distributed
among various refiners who were to dispose of excessive facilities, through the
Aluminum Industry Structural Improvement Promotion Association. The contribu-
tions in fiscal 1978 and 1979 amounted to a total of some 98,100 million, and of
this. about 93.800 million has already been granted.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1981

050: 5106/38

63

mohauuseonu
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

TOYOTA PRESIDENT DISCUSSES COMPANY'S PLANS
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI in Japanese 28 Dec 81 p 8

{Text} President Shoichiro Toyoda (56) said that "The decision was made without
heated discussions." looking back on the moment when the production and sales
plans for next year (January through Decesber) were decided upon. In recent
years, fierce controversies took place over such a kind of plans between leaders
of Toyota Motors and Toyota Motor Sales. However, the joint conference of the
two cospanies. which conference was held on 1 December for discussion on poli-
cies, seems to have been peaceful.

Strong Inclination Toward Passenger Cars "111 Be Corrected

Toyoda says as follows: "Toyota Motor Sales and Toyota Motors draw up business
forecasts for next year, with the Planning and Research Department and the Re-
search Section, respectively, in charge. 0n the basis of such forecasts, they
establish prospects for demand in the future. There was not a wide gap between
the prospects established by the two companies on the secretarial level."

Toyota Motors tends to establish a relatively high goal, because it aims at in-
creasing profits by reducing the“ production cost by means of mass production.
0n the other hand, Toyota Motor Sales is inclined to take a cautious attitude,
with consideration for such problems as the profits to be gained by dealers.

A conflict of opinions between the two companies gives rise to strained rela-
tions in the favorable sense of the words. To outsiders, however, the two cots-
panies sometimes appeared to be in discord with each other.

When Toyoda was transierred from the post of vice president of Toyota Motors to
that of president of Toyota Motor Sales in June this year, it was said that this
transfer is a step for the unification of the two companies. It may be said
that this step has begun to produce the expected results. The sales plan expects
that exports will remain at the level of 1.73 million, or about the sane as that
in the present year. but that sales on the home market will amount to 1.65 nil-
lion, or 10 percent more than the estimated sales in the present year. This ex-
pectation is to be realized only "When the market environment is favorable."
Toyota Motor Sales. however. seems to be rather confident of success in attain-
ing this goal.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When Toyoda became president, he announced that his basic policy is to establish
a structure for the sale of 2 million cars at home. as well as to turn out
attractive commodities and push overseas strategy in a positive way. The goal
of 2 million cars had been established earlier, but it had not been clear when
this goal should be attained. Toyota Motor Sales has now decided upon a target
year, with the establishment of a "prospect for the attainment of the goal in
1985." From next year, therefore, it must expand sales by stages. Such circum-
stances, too, are behind the bullish sales plan.

President Toyoda says as follows: "The attainment of the goal of 2 million
cars depends partly on the trends of the market. Yet it is difficult to attain
this goal without securing a market share of 40 percent or more. Especially,

we must increase in some way or other truck sales which are decreasing slowly.
Until now. Toyota has been strongly inclined to concentrate on passenger cars.
It is necessary for us to prepare many specially-equipped cars, to increase de-
mand for trucks in everyfield." This is one of the conclusions he reached after
he traveled throughout the country. almost ceaselessly, following his assumption
of thepresidency, to listen to the opinions of the dealers affiliated with his
company. As a matter of fact, Toyota Motor Sales created a truck division in
October this year, to establish a new structure for the expansion of truck sales.

It goes without saying that these measures are decided upon not by the president
alone but by a conference of top leaders. The problems straddling both of the
companies, such as the formulation of annual production and sales plans. are
taken up and settled at a joint conference of the two companies. The partici-
pants in the joint conference are limited to the executives in the post of
managing director and above. At present, there are nine participants from Toyota
Motors and five from Toyota Motor Sales (managing director Isao Makino, 59, is
excluded, because he is in the United States as president of U.S. Toyota). The
joint conference is held once a month. usually at the head office of Toyota
Motors in Toyota City, Aichi Prefecture.

For the solution ofthe problems related to Toyota Motor Sales alone, a manage-
ment conference, in which full-tune executives take part, and a conference of
directors including dummy directors, are held, each once a month. It is the
conference of managing directors which is attached with importance as an organ
to make speedy decisions.

This conference is held as occasion calls, with Chairman Seishi Kato (74),
President Toyoda, vice presidents Susumu Otake (65) and Shinichi Kanda (66)

and Managing Director Kozo Minowa (59) as participants. In the case of Toyota
Motor Sales, those engaged in sales at home are mostly working at the head
office in Nagoya, and those in charge of experts are working at the Tokyo branch.
The top executives are constantly going back and forth between Nagoya and Tokyo.
The conference of managing directors is held at a place, where both the chairman
and the president are present. This conference is not an organ to make formal
decisions. The basic direction to be followed by the company, however, is deter-
mined at this conference.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

President Toyoda ls "Good Listener"

President Toyoda had been serving in the technological field of Toyota Motors
for a long time before he came to the post of president of Toyota Motor Sales.
So, he is a "green hand" at sales business. It is said that he often remains
a listener at the conferences of managing directors. He has an established
reputation as a "good listener."

The most drastic change. which the internal organization of the company under-
went with Toyode's assumption of the presidency, was the abolition of the
vehicle headquarters and the export headquarters. When Teizo Yamamoto (now
consultant. 69) was president. the then Vice President Shinji Araki (now con-
sultant, 70) and Otake headed concurrently the export headquarters and the
vehicle headquarters. respectively. The information concerning exports and
internal sales was absorbed by these two vice presidents in the end.

Today. Otake is in charge of internal sales, and Kanda is responsible for ex-
ports. in general. These two vice presidents are free to express their opin-
ions as assistants to the president. With the exception of Managing Director
Minowa who is in charge of the administrative department including Personnel
and general affairs. all executives in the post of executive director and below
are leading first-line sales activities directly.

The export department is divided into sections according to markets. such as
North America and Europe. and the internal sales department consists of five
sections which are in charge of the five different sales channels. respectively.
The executive directors and the directors are equally in charge of these sec-
tions. At present, however. Executive Director Mikio Hayashi (58) is preoccu-
pied with the task of reconstructing Sapporo Toyopet, which went bankrupt due
to the well-known case of speculation in stocks. So. it is rumored that Execu-
tive Directors Tsutomu Oshima (57) and Hideo Kamio (61). who are in charge of
the affairs concerning vehicles and exports, respectively. and are in a posi-
tion to supervise internal sales and exports as a whole, are likely candidates
for the "next" presidency or the presidency "after next."

However, a problem lies in age. All the executives in the post of executive
director and above are older than the president. The late Shotaro Kamiya. who
was the first president. reigned over the company for a quarter of a century.

As a result, the average age of the executives has risen, and the age composi-
tion of the company's personnel has become distorted. Not a few executives will
become too old to be suited for the presidency, if President Toyoda serves two
terms. to remain in his post for 4 years from new.

President Toyoda is the direct—line grandson of Sakichi Toyoda who was a re-
nowned inventor, and the eldest son of the late Kiichiro Toyoda. founder of
Toyota Motors. Among members of the Toyoda family. it is hoped that "he will
become president of Toyota Motors some time in the future." Chairman Ksto says
that "it depends solely on his ability." The "post-Toyoda" situation will
change delicately, depending on the course of action to be taken by President
Toyoda hereafter.

66

FOR¢NHHCJALIEIZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another factor, which makes it difficult to foresee the future personnel shift,
is the "rumor about the merger between Toyota Motors and Toyota Motor Sales."
Not a few people think that Chairman Kato, who pulled Toyoda out of Toyota
Motors for the purpose of unifying Toyota Motors and Toyota Motor Sales together,
aims at eventual merger of the two companies.

Both Kato and President Eiji Toyoda (68) of Toyota Motors say that "It will be
better for the two companies to merge together, if the separation of sales busi-
ness from production loses its merits and begins to show demerits conspicuously."
Toyota Motor Sales was separated from Toyota Motors according to suggestions

from a group of creditor banks in 1950, to overcome the financial difficulty of
Toyota Motors at that time. Toyota Motors has now established itself as a com-
pany in a superlative financial position, eliminating all its debts. The separa—
tion of sales business is no longer necessary for the procurement of funds.

Allergy to Merger

However, there is a strong sense of resistance against the merger of the two
companies, especially among the young members of Toyota Motor Sales. Also, some
people fear that the marketing functions of Toyota Motor Sales, which functions
have been built since the days of the first president Kamiya and are now most
powerful in Japanese automobile industry circles, may be reduced, if the mer-
ger is carried out.

To strengthen the ties between the two companies, the exchange of executives

and officials of the section chief class, too, has been carried out. Hill the
two companies go as far as to merge together? Chairman Kato has made such a
statement of delicate implications as follows: "At present, the demerits of the
separation of sales business are not particularly conspicuous. It may be said,
however, that it is a demerit of the separation that Toyota Motors has become
somewhat indifferent toward the fact that Toyota Motor Sales has been serving

as a bulwark against the storms within and outside the company."

Conditions for Being President

President Shoichiro Toyoda says as follows: "I am not in a position to say some-
thing about the conditions for being a president, because I am a newcomer as
president. I can only cite such conditions as good health, which conditions

have been mentioned generally.

"Upon taking the post of president, however, I felt strongly that my responsi-
bility has increased further, because every statement I made has naturally come
to be attached with greater importance than before. Whatever statement the
president made is apt to be regarded as a final decision. I keep in mind that
I must be careful at all times."

Toyota Motor Sales

Number of Executives: 26 (including 3 auditors).

Average age of Executives: 58.6 years; the oldest is 76 years old, and the
youngest is 51 years old.

67

FOR‘0FFKJALIEE§0NLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Educational Backgrounds of Executives: 6 are graduates of Tokyo University;
6--Nagoya University; 2 each--Kyoto and Rikkyo Universities; and 12-other
schools.

Terms of office Held by President: Shotaro Kamiya--25 years and 8 months;
Seishi Kato—-3 years and 7 months; Teizo Yamnmoto--2 years; and Shoichiro
Toyoda--from June, 1981 to the present.

Remuneration for Executives: Regular payments-~not revealed to the public.
and bonuses--¥l70 million (in the business year ending 31 March 1981).

Annual Income of President: U257.96 million (according to his final income
tax return for 1980).

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

080: 6106/38

68

FINICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE1ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HITI TO PURCHASE ADDITIONAL 10,000 TONS OF ALUMINUM INGOTS
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI in Japanese 30 Dec 81 p 7

[Text] HITI has firmed up its plan to make an additional purchase of about
10,000 tons of aluminum ingot for stockpiling within the 1981 fiscal year. as
part of the measures to meet the surplus stockpiles in aluminum industry cir—
cles. The precise quantity for purchase and the date of purchase will be
determined shortly after the turn of the year. This step will help the aluminum-
refining enterprises financially, because it is to be taken in their most trying
period which will last until April next year, when tariff measures will be taken
for their relief.

The purchase of aluminum ingrt for stockpiling is carried out by the Light

Metal Stockpiling Association (Chairman: Ichiro hakayama) under MITI's guidance.
The stockpiles of aluminum ingot began to increase rapidly in the summer of 1980,
and this association purchased 21,990 tons of ingot in total from aluminum-refin-
ing enterprises in the February-March period of 1981. For the purchase in fiscal
1981, a budgetary appropriation of #6 billion was made. Later, however, it be-
came necessary to review the policy for structural improvement, from the medium-
and long-range points of view, instead of only coping with the increasing stock-
piles. This led to a delay in the preparations for the purchase on the
administrative level. Recently, however, medium- and long—term measures,
including a revision of tariffs, have been decided upon. So, HITI has decided
to carry out the purchase of stockpiling.

At the present price of aluminum ingot. about 10,000 tons of ingot can be pur-
chased with this budgetary appropriation. The stockpiles of aluminum ingot in
aluminum industry circles amounted to 329,000 tons as of the end of September,

and decreased in October and in November due to the curtailment of production.

As of the end of November, however, it still remained at the level of 316,000

tons, reflecting an extreme state of oversupply. Under the present situation, it
cannot be expected that the reduction of stockpiles will make rapid progress. It
Is thought that the stockpiles will decrease by about 10,000 tons a month, at best.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

«50: 4106/38

69

FORIOFFKJAI.USB(HULY
FIHICMHHCJAL.US£GDNLN

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HITI To BEGIN EFFORTS FOR REORGANIZATION 0F ALUMINUM INDUSTRY
Tokyo YONIURI SNIHBUN in Japanese 30 Dec 81 p 9

[Text] NITI on the 29th consolidated its plan to exercise guidance in a posi-
tive way over aluminum industry circles, where structural depression is reach-
ing serious proportions, to help them take drastic measures, such as vertical
or horizontal merger of enterprises within the respective groups of enterprises
and amalgamation and abolition of companies, for their survival. Especially,

it thinks that the problem of merger of three Sumitomo firms (Sumitomo Aluminum
Refining, Sumikei Aluminum and Snmitomo Light Metal Industries), which problem
has now entered a final stage, will serve as a test case for the reorganization
of aluminum industry circles. So, it will start positive efforts for the co-
ordination of views, to bring this problem to a settlement directly after the
turn of the year. The aluminum-refining enterprises at home have been involved
in a structural depression due to the stagnation of demand at home and the in-
creasing inflow of low-priced aluminum ingots from abroad. In spite of the vol-
untary reduction of production by six companies concerned, the rate of operation
fell below the level of 50 percent in November.

Such a production level, which is equal to 610,000 tons on an annual basis. is
dangerously low, because it is even below the level of 700,000 tons, which level
was proposed by the Industrial Structure Deliberation Council in October this
year as a "condition for the survival of the home industry." Moreover, the
recovery of the market cannot be expected even after the turn of the year. So,
it is likely to become unavoidable for enterprises to merge together or carry
out amalgamation or abolition in order to meet the drastic decline in production.

Because of such n situation and because a series of measures for aluminum indus-
try circles, such as the compilation of a report by the Industrial Structure
Deliberation Council and revision of the tariff on aluminum imports, has already
been taken, NITI has firmed up its plan to start full-scale efforts for the re-
organization and structural improvement of aluminum industry circles. Especially,
it has decided that the problem of merger of three Sumitomo firms in accordance
with the proposal for horizontal or vertical merger of enterprises within the
respective groups of enterprises, on which problem the negotiations among the
three firms concerned have entered the final stage under the leadership of the
Sumitomo Bank, has decisive bearing on the reconstruction of not only the alumi-
num industry but also the other structurally-depressed industries, such as the
petrochemical and paper and pulp industries. 50, it intends to offer powerful
backing to the efforts for the early materialization of the merger of the three

companies.

70

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The negotiations nmnnn the three Sumltomo firms have already entered the rlnnl
stage. but the following problems remain to be settled: (1) Aluminum refining
at home is not likely to be put on a paying basis, even in the future; and (2)
the three companies must decrease their respective burdens, if they want to se-
cure the merits of merger. However, a leader of the Sumitomo Bank, which is
playing a leading role in this case of merger, has stated categorically that
"Merger is the only wayof survival," clarifying a determined policy of carry-
ing out the merger as early as possible under the leadership of banks. It is
certain, therefore, that the problem of merger will make a sudden advance to-
ward settlement with the turn of the year, if HITI exercises positive guidance.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1981

C50: 4106/38

71

FOR!0FFKJAI.USB(MVLY
SCIENCE AND TBCIIMLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL llSI-I ONLY

JAPAN-0.8. ATOMIC STUDY TO BEGIN IN APRIL

Tokyo JAPAN aoonomc JOURNAL in English V01 20. No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 17

[Text]

The projected join J.“
0.5. melear reaearch will in-

clude reproceenim ot a feat
breeder reactor's spent tool
and will start. pet-bps. in
April Experts ot tinth the
Power Reactor and Nuclear
MDevdopmm Corp. (PNCi
andU.S. «Energy
(DOE) lave alrmdy shuttled
between the two capital: in an
attempt to start the new re-
seanhproiect

In in. PNC and the Atomic
Energy Commission (which
has been tramiormetl into
DOB) signed a bilateral FDR
cooperative pct. tndudiiu co-
opention in iuel helm (tail-L
cation. spent fuel reprocessing.
disposal ot wastes).

But lormer presided Jimmy
Carter chore to treeu the us
FBR development etlorta. torc-
in PNC to stand idle without
doinanyjotntatudiee.

The situation has chm.
with Pruiderd Ronald Reagan
opting tor reaming FER re-
search and development pro

jectn. In Japan. PNC recently
completed what it call: a
chemical facility at

its ‘l‘ohi Village voila. Mich
is talented tor rmearch on
unholevel reductive mate-
rials. The Japanme Govern-
ment's nuclem' arm in elated to
utilise CPI" in March for ex-

COPYRIGHT:

080: 4120/!“

perimentat reproach: ol
FDR apenttuel.

Poeaible memo mated
by PNC and DOE experts in-
clude criticaltty m. indie
pensahle lor reproceuin;
piant'a data. with US. facili-
ties. PNC harm that it can lb
patch its engineere to join the
Hillard tests.

In addition. it is likely that
the two mutilation will in-
clude remote control toehnitpe
to handle new“ unopen-
tion. Preaence ot‘ Mlevel
radioective material: realm
tbvelopment or remote cattrol
teaming.

Alto minced is equipment
development. such In large-
scale tanks tor minim and ii:-
tolvirq and material auction
columns.

The spent tuel trom m in
coruiilmhiy ditfereminnature
trim the conventional epent
fuel generated by twinnin-
reactors. That prompt: FDR
maneen to conalchr tachmcal
wot-it tor poems development.
imhidincchemicalknowm.

The two peril. started their
preliminary attempts at man.
ingoodthetﬂpactinthelali
ot int. Speciﬁc rmearch
themes will he dieataeed in

tot'thcanin‘meetimsothat
joint research canatart in

April.

1982, the Milan [(21:31 Shinbun, Inc.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR Ol-‘FK'IAI. llSl’. ONLY

JAPAN, 0.8. STEEL FIRMS MOVE TO BOOST COMPLEMENTARY PRODUCT TIES

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 6

[Text]

A new lorm d industrial
cooperaticn appanmetoma-
terislise between the as. and
Japan.

Kaiser Steel Cup. the ninth
largest American steelmaker.
has asked Japan to apply it
with steel slate (semi-ﬁnished
steel for uniting ﬂat-rolled
steels). and ﬁve major Japa-
nese steelmakers have ac-
ceptedtherequest.

u.s. Steel Corp. also. has
asked Japanese steelmakets to
supply it with steel shapes.
wire rot and other rolled steel
promote on an origiml equip
menl manulactta'er (08M)
basis.

Mitsubishi International
Corp. is acting as a goobetween
on this pmpective deal.

t' S Steel's supply capacities
Inr lltrsr markets have become
short partly because it its shut
down some of its works. It
intends to sell Japanese steel
goods throughout the us.
mainly in the West Coast
regions.

Imt November. ﬁnancially-
mlinu Kai!" Steel gave up
being an integrated iron-steel
prothicer by stopping the up
stream «pig iron melting to
semi-finished steel making)
operations and specialiaim in
rolling and subsequent process
(mentions in an attempt to
shore up its business by con

centrsting on production 1!
high value added steel promm

The US. Department d
Cominerce is said to have wel-
comed this USJapsnese divi-
sion ot labor srrsruemers and
have shown resdiness to at:-
elude slab "apply to Kaiser
from Japan‘s steel exports to
theus.

As other major American
steelmakars. suchales.Steet
Corp. and Bethlehem Steel
Corp. also have sanded out
Japanoe staeltnahers on their
slab wanna. the cornpletnen
tsrydiviaiondlaborislikelyto
gain momenm between the
us. .and Japanese steel indis-
tries.

The live major Japan's
steelmaker! which have ac-
W m ”i -
NI om. ppon
Km K.K.. Kawasaki Steel
Corp. Stimltomo Hetal indu-
tries. Ltd. and Kobe Steel. Ltd

Nippon Koltsn. a technical
partner with Kaiser. is acting
as a go'between in negotiation
with Kaiser.

Kaiser M M6 ‘0
purchase mono ions (1 steel
slabs tram Japan (hiring in:
and increase the ptscltase
volume to 25 million tons in
I”.

Kaiser prelers Japanese steel
slabs became Japanese steel
slabs are eaoellent in both

COPYRIGHT: 1982. the Nihon Keizai Shiiiaun, Inc.

(380: [0120/1210

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

investment
matly for on
and seamla
lacilitiea. The
the iron-steel
are still inset
struction ol ti
ties anally is
more.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

rm: urn-mun. nail: ONLY

EPDC, TVA 0F “.8. AGREE 0N TECHNICAL “CHARGES

Tokyo JAPAN EOOROHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988. 12 Jan 82 p 6

{Text}

Electric Pom: Developcwu
Co. and few Vanay Au-
Mty will up a mutual»
openuve wt to Feb
mry.

The two swmw
trolled own-mm will in»
unuy swap Mamie-l how-how
on cod-{ind pout plans. in-
cludnc mum and mu-
mud. Email). thymmy
up um woven to'
include hydroelectric and In.»
vamp electricity mm
non.

TVA is intended In ohm»-
irg EPDC's cal know-how.
such as mum coll cum-
busuon. ﬁne no Its-uncut and
call as): utilization EPDC. on
its part. want: to W tach-
nical know-hm on Who
and running lame-M cou-

tindpowecplanb.
momma lean-
Mon W by 5900
"m wlput d
Ilium odds-ad
MIMIC-.mnmhloulm
awumu one
with lam-tom agave-bed
mlbldobobﬂndeVA
“Within-tu-

IM'NIOEPDC
mnedwluulphuulb
Wulmnauu union In July,
181.

u-
mmeuuh
hemadnncdmwm
mmmuth

In :-
lum The Tokyo company :-
mammal-bowie:
mum: ﬁance-l
aha—mommalhw
«MTVA 11:20.8. cranks-

OOPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Keiul shidaun. Inc.

CSO: 6120/1th

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OED-"TM. “SI-Z ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

FIVE POWER UTILITIES TO HELP MHI DEVELOP m TYPE REACTOR

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 p 5

[Text]

Kanaai Electric Power Co.
and tour other utiliti. live
agreed with liitwhiahl Heavy
industries. Ltd. (now to
ﬁnencially help the reactor
melter's advanced plumbed
water reactor (AM) woject.
Mill and its PVIR perm
intend to complete APWR

deaiotby tmuthattheyonn-

atnrt conatructlon o! commer-
cial APWR: in an.

The project will cont an esti-
mated no billion 0! the total.
'ltoblllion eachwillbepmup
by tan and the live electric
utilities — Kauai. oku.
Kyushu and Hokkaido lectric
Companies as well as Japan
Atomic Power Co - and V0
billion by weatinchotne Elec-
tric Con-p. The remaining to
billion is expected to be aub-
sidized by the Mitts-y d lnter~
national Trade a indtntry.

The utilities. led by Kauai
Electric Power. are dimming
how they Md ahere their

COPYRIGHT:

C80: 4120/131

cat totalini U to union

In additon. the Decimal Crow
and atiteuhiahi Electric Corn
and other; in the Mitauhlau
not». also pie“ to Join the
project to improve the prev
attired water reactor-a. Some
construction oovtltltoaniu. winch
undertake ci W

at meta nib;
participate by the end oi thia
year. -

The project is aimed at im-
pmvin‘ motor rdiabtllty and
fuel econorny. The latttwillbe
made poeaihle by heroin. plu-
tonium. as generated in a reac-
tor. Them-l to induce enrich-
ed uranium mumptlon by a
per cent.

in the tail of taat. Mo
Electric Power Co.. other utili-
ti. and two hoiliu water
reactor makers - Hitachi Ltd.
and Toshiba Corp. — atarted
Joint eliorta (or advanced
Rm.

1982. the Nihon Keizal Shitimn, Inc.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHIDLOGY

H”! UH-ltlisl. USE ONLY

NTT'S DATA DIVISION MAY BE MADE PRIVATE COMPANY

Tokyo JAPAN BOOMHIC JOURNAL in English V01 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 pp 1, lo

[Article by Ichiro Kifune]

[Text]

Nippon Teleg'aph l: Tele
phone Public Corp. tN1'l').
which is Japan's duneslic teie
communications services
monopoly. is contemplating
separating its data com-
munications division as an
entirely private. sellmaining
enterprise. This was disclmed
last, Tiiursdsy lor the first
time try its president. Hiaashi
Shinto. lie thclared at a prss
conlerct'ce. ”Separation seems
to be thebestwayloruiiiising
NTPs technologies for Jur-
theringdata communication."

1he Second Ad lioc Commie
siun on Administrative Retorm
now is studying the possibility
oi cluitging N11 to a semi-gov-
ernmental “special corpora-
tion" similar to Japan Air
Lines Co. and Koltusai Dean
shin Denna Co.. which mom
polizes Japan's overseas tele-
communication service.

Signs thus are that the
wobicm oi altering N'I'T's data
communications division to a
ts-ivatc basis. together with the
issue at modiying the praent
managerial stmcturc oi the
corporation itseil. is going to
have major cussions on
private industrial ﬁeltb in the
future.

ilovtevcr. even in the event
the data cmnmunications divi-

sion is severed irom N11. the
separate iirm's operation will
br- limited to a data com-
munication lacilities savior
competitive with new
this communications inthtry.
such as the science a tech
nology computation service
tDEhtm-Ei and the salts
inventory service (DRESS)
which N11“ has eluted by
using its communications
circuits and is merit; to
general enterprises.

N'l'l' intent to retain [or
itself ihe'service oi offering its
circuits to private panic and
also the simultaneous teie
phone. laaimile and this corn-
mmicaiions system. dibhed
"US. which it is now developing
torinaquratioainthezlstcen
tury.

Data communications are
one oi the principal services
tattered by NT'I's this corn-
mimicatiorn division slam with

telephone. teicgraph and leased
circuits. The corporation's data
communication service in
fiscal in recorded a thllcit til
it no.9 billion. and its iacilities
arrvice in particular ran up a
rod oi it 43.9 billion.

Up to now there have been
voices that N'l'r's data com-
munication division should be

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

placed on a sen-pay
torthelollowing resst
—‘l‘he corporatiot
communications serv
greater advantages

vate enierwtsu’ in thi
sell hnith the circuit:

corporation does not
pay the corporate tax.
-'l‘ha data comm
services continue a_‘
N11": ﬁnances. and ti
W with
derived lrom its teie;
other profitable lielt.
-lt is [referable to
data commutation
compete on the simel
private erserprisa it
enlnnce its techno
boost money.
The Government's
irative Ma
recommended am
July. last year that
communications
shotld be made llnani
sustaining and sirean
Amid such circu
opinion also increas
the Govermnent in
having N‘l'l' beet

trivate entsru'ise.
commission studying
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trative rciorm said then in its
ﬁrst report that it \v- coin. to
study the issue from such a
viewpoint.
N11 itself worked out three
poasible piano to change its
. manayrial unsettle. They

—lt ahouid be converted to a

special corporation like JAL
and ROD. set up jointly with
povermnerl and private funds.

-0r N11 should be made a
malady privately man-zed
iolnt stock company like Ame

Elan Telephone l telegraph
0.

-0r N1'l‘ should keep its
managerial form at helm a
government corporation but.
legally. should be ireed from

budgetary restraint and be less
bound by necessity to secure
approval constantly ior new
projects- . _
- The corporation shortly is
going to submit the three plan
to the administrative retain
commission ioratttdy.

N‘i'i' thus hip. to have in
data communications division
at oil and set up as a private.
soil-paying enterprise. For
swiitiy erasing the deficit 0! its
data communications division.
N11 is intending to do away
with five centers of its sales
inventory service and slash its
personnel by about 1.000 per-
sons. .

However. it is generally idt
that in order to set in the data
section as an entirely private
company. N'l'i‘ inevitably will
have to undertake a radical
review oi its praent mam
iteriaistructure.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon 1631211 Shidbun, Inc.

CSO: 6120/1231

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENE “COMBINATION TEST GUIDELINE TO BE ALTERED

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 pp 1, 6

[Text]

No oiﬁcial standardr to
cnsnrc the salety of gene
recombination experiments in
the country in lorcc since m9
are expected to be radically
relaxed to about the same level
as their emivalents oi the US.
and other advanced Western
countries by May.

“icy are an experiment
guideline made public by the
Ministry oi Education in March
term. and an almost identical.
guideline established by the
Prime Minister in August of the
same year.

Respectively applied to
universities and other
academic research facilities
under the Education Ministry's
JUflSdlCIlfl‘l. and all national.
public and private research
I; cilitiiis under the Science and
Tortstoiogy Agency's jurisdio
lino. the two standards are so
closely related with each other
that not hit: ri-visiuii at either is
(‘i‘l'lillll to loud av u correspond
mi: l'hﬂllﬂt'ttf the olht'r

With il'r Education Minis-
try's guideline. the Itccom-
hiiiiint DNA ulcoxyribonueleic
il'tdl Experiment Guideline
Examination Subcommittee oi
the Ministry‘s Science Council
mt wet-ii came up with an
interim recommendation
cziltiru [it such radical relaxa-
tion iii the Ministry“. guideline

According to the Ministry.
the interim recommenihtioo
will be prooemiraily mplaced
shortly with the ﬁnal one. and
the council will process it into
its own ultimate revision plan
for the guideline alter con
suiting all schools and
academic instittsions with
general engineering resear-
ches. But the Ministry already
visualizes acceptance «(the
plan and hopes to reclaim in:
relaxed guideline by thesecond
week at May.

According to sources close to
the Science ti Technology
Agency. the Science and Tech-
nology Council oi the Prime
Minister's Ollicc will quickly
review the Prime Minister's
guideline to match the Educa-
tion Ministry's relaxation. and
the Prime Minister's guide
line‘s similar easiiu could be
made public almost simultane-
ously.

The Education Ministry says
the interim recommendation
was to the effect that the Min-
istry's original guithline based
on its Science Council's initial
apprehension about maximum
possibilities of artilical creation
of utitimwn species at livitﬂ
"um. mpecuilly new danger-
iiiisdiseusecausinumieroornan-
isms. it not the sciencetictioo
style chimera or monstaa. has

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY _

been unnecessariiyst
light oi all sorts of so
hination researches
both in Japan and alii
1m. Such” apprehens
come to be count
exaggerated or imagii
The equivalent sit
America is quite
became there are a
similar aperiment
but another closely
safety guideline cone
handling ot discs:
microoranisnis. It
there is even a rising
US. for abolition d a

experiment guidel
Japan has no diseai
nicroorganiam handt
line. which poses
problem with the p
relaxation. The inter
mendation has of
answer by most
new mandatory rule
dangerous microorg
to be used for gene r
lion tests. should be
adopting the Nation
of Heal:lt's inten
control standardonnt
Anyway. the exit
standard requiringin
sealed study laciliti
as the P iPhyaical)
class. even in t
human genes with
bacillus genes. will
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tapedively lo the P3 and P2
elm. almot the same as the
cmvattimel micrwmm
experiment laboratories. 06
men 'looked lorwerd to
the relexation's effects 0!
having e new impetus on
Japan's entire gene recombine-
tlon researches. especially
industrial ettunpt: to mite the
most at gene recomblmtion
tectmotogy.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Keiui Shimbun, Inc.

CSO: 4120/131

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0
FOR ill-’l-K‘IAI. US}: UNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

INDONESIA BROWN COAL MAY BE UTILIZED 170R HETHANOL

Tokyo JAPAN acouomc JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 6

[Text]

The Ministry 0! International
‘n'ade 8i Inﬁnity will under-
tahe a methanol tuaibility
study joimly with lntloneala in
fiscal not. The Jakarta
Government already has
agreed in principle that the two
countries will jointly utilize
brown coal in aouthern Suma-
tra [or methanol production.
with a part oi the gaailied coal
likely to he commed for ler-
tiliaer production.

The basic agreement was
relayed to “Hi via a (act-
tinding mission outlined by
the Institute 0! Energy Eco
nomice. Sumilomo Metal
Iridium. Ltd. (which has the
uniﬁcation technoiou) and
Mitsubishi Corp.

Southern Sumatra has brown
coal deposita totaling an
eelimated l5 billion tors. in-
cluding as million tom in the
Banuo area alone. an earlier
(mind by the Royal Dutch Shell
UMP. The coal resources.
however, have not been
developed until now berm oi
the high (about as per cent)
moisture content. Such a '"'wet
coal is generally expensive to
carry.

The Japanue tum prqmed

COPYRIGHT :

CSO: 4120/1210

use of Sumitomo lletal'e
gaailication technique
leaturing blowing pulverized
coal and oxygen into molten
iron. The steelmaker plain to
develop a gaeiticetion plant
based on the teclaiique with
daily capacity at 1.500 tone. The
gas can be converted into
methanol by exiating. proven
tecluioloy like the poem «1
mam-tawny" .

Several ideeewereeubmittad
to Indonesia by the Japanqe
team. including consumption (1
part 0! the gas (or ammonia
production. At Palembang.
lndoneata runs a lertiliaer com-
plex. where ammonia and tree
are produced. Another idea
centered on gas utilization for"
power mum.

The teem eatirnated tint
brown coal totaling 5300.0”
tons a year can be com-nod
(or methanol production to the
tune of 1.6 million tone and
ammonia tor (ally outwtduo
tone as well no runnim a
500.000 kilowatt power plain.

On its part. the induieaian
Government expecta that the
new lndutrialhatlon program
will contribute to diaperalu ite
populatim lrom Jawa (with 10
percent oi its total population).

1982, the Nihon Kelzai Shinbun, Inc.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HITACHI, GENERAL WTORS TO DEVELOP CAR ELECTMNIC CONTROL SYSTEM

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 20, No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 7

[Text]

iiitachi Ltd oi Tokyo. one oi
Japan's toprated electric and
electronic equipment and corn-
puter makers. will shortly start
fullscaie cooperation: with
General Motors Corp oi the
US. in jointly developim
microcomputer-involving elec-
tronic control systems for Gli's
small. iuel-eiiicient passener
car series to be produced in
tuttire. it was recently learned.

According to source close to
Hitachi. a blanket contract {a
suchatech ltieuponan
eqtnl. reciprocal basis will be
concluded shortly between ill-
tachi and (Eli's Delco Division
in char.e oi electrical equip
mont for oil GM vehicles.

The tieup will be naturally
quite diierent irom Hitachi's
peel expat supplis oi auto-

COPYRIGHT:

CSO: (0120/1219

mobile electronic parts to GM
because Hitachi will he chieﬂy
in charge oi the iutune micro
cornputer-bullt-in electronic
control systems oi all GM cars.

it will be all the more aiytiii.
cent as Hitachi it. recently
launched a joint "microcom-
puter-equipped car" research
and development venture with
lsuzu Motors Ltd end small
Motor Co.. both middlerated
Japanese automobile corn-
penies ﬁnancially aiiiliated
with GM as members oi Ohi's
global tarnily oi automakers.

Hitachi would thus be one oi
the direct participants as GM's
new ally in the letter's chive
Ward its victory in the
current "small car war"
anion all the world‘s auto-
mobile industries. includinc

81

Japan’s leadng automakers.

As reported. the prospective
HitachiGM tleup will be so
extensive it will encompass not
only all typo oi engine contra
jobs based upon driving cir-
cumstances; but also all other
electronically controlled auto
mated car timctiore.

Domaiically. Hitachi has
long been closely cooperating
with Nissan Motor Co. in elec-
tronic automation oi the lat-
ter‘a can. hat June. Hitacld
also supplied learn with its
microcornputeriaed engine con-
trol system (or the latter's
Piam series oi small cars. the
first oi lstm‘a electronically-
engine controlled vehiclq
lsuzu is said to have learned
sortie oi the (ill technology
involved "I'm ordering this
system irorn Hitachi.

1982, the Nihon Keiui. Shinbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USP. ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RACE BEGINS TO DEVELOP SERVO VALVE FOR ROBOT
Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 988_ 12 Jan 82 p 8

[Text] Japan's major industrial hydraulic machinery and robot makers have started
a new technological race to develop robot-operating hydraulic servo valves.

At least three such companies--Kayaba Industry 60., Kawasaki Heavy Industries. Ltd.
and Tokyo Keiki Co.--are engaged in the race with such intensity as to attract
wide attention of 0.5. and European hydraulic machine makers and technological .
mentors of Japan's hydraulic machine industry. Until recently, there had been
only imported valves of the kind on the Japanese market.

Kayaba has recently come up with its own HK-II servo valve of electronic-

hydraulic type, on which it had started a research and development project at the
end of last year jointly with a machinery and equipment technological research

group of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.

The new servo valve, with a built-in high-output motor working its control revolu-
tion axis, is said to have few troubles due to clogging by dusts contained in its

hydraulic oil and at least twice as responsive to electric signals as the imports.

Its development had been chanced by the need for a specially precise valve to
build into steel rolling plant labor saving and various experimental machinery.

Japan's top robot maker, Kawasaki Heavy Industry (1011), has developed its own xs
Valve to apply to the robots it has been producing under a technological license
granted by Unilation Inc. of the U.S.

The KS Valve is said to have brought an inquiry from Unimation itself for its
good performances. KHI plans to apply the valve to all of its future robot pro-
ductions.

Tokyo Keiki has emerged with its own Digital Valve, an improved version of the

conventional robot electronic-hydraulic mechanism with the latter's analog con-
verter replaced with a pulse-code driving circuitry to make a built-in micro-

computer directly control the hydraulic circuits through digital signals. Com-
mercialization of the price of imported equivalents is planned, starting early
next year.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

050: 6120/126
82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
its plan to mass produce 64-
lnlobit random access memory
(RAM) chips. intend o! in-
creasing its capacity at Gilt
RAMs irorn its current monthly
output 0t IMMminu units to
300.000 units in next Marchasit
Ms earlier plamcd. Tashiba

Nippon Electric Co.. the top
maker

Upon settlement c.’ detailed
discussions now underway be
tween Toshiba and .
latter will probably start sup
plying Toshiba 64K RAMs be
ginning next month at the ear-
iuzsi. Initially by around 30.000
units on a spot basis

Toshiba's p

COPYRIGHT: 1982 ,

CSO: 6120/1210

Mass production at 64K
RAMs. the alumina”
product 0! “Sb. n only
last year. Success in this field

' is believed to be indispensable

tor manutacturen to survive in
theiutureandasastepupto

the new actuation. “kilo '

prediction
ascarlyas next autumnotzssit
tum, which have a tour tints
larger memory capacity than
the “K.

in a bid to secure as large a
share as possible oi the market
and to beneﬁt from large scale
production. Japanese manufac-

83

. capi-
tal spending. Milli and NBC
have a joint ‘computer
sales/software development
business under Ministry at
international Trade 6 industry
atldance.

"‘i'hls doa not mean we are
withthwing

types at
and other Vlsls.
which we could start marketing
this autumn." a top executive
oi 'i‘ostiba said.

the Nihon Keizai Shilbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR ill-'l-‘K 1M. USE ONLY

NAGAOKA UNIVERSITY SUCCESSFUL Iii ION BEAM THERMONUCLEAR FUSIONS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20. No 988, 12 Jan 82 p 17

[Text]

The Technological University
oi Nagaolta. Niiuta Pretee-
ture. recently reported a eerie
oi remarkable success in
acting high-speed and high
energy beam at ions oi hy-
drogen. boron and carbon ior
coming thermonuclear (more.

The university's Etignl ex-
perimental iacility to create
such ion beams. Japan's tirst
toll-fledged device oi the kind
completed at the end oi 1900.
is intended (or starting a nu-
clear fusion reaction
non in a small test spherical
reactor less than t millimeter in
diameter packed with deu-
terium and tritium. multi-
mnlcculur types oi hydrogen as
"iucl." by bombardnc the two
itcms in the reactor with strong
ion beams.

1he mclcar iuaion typc oi
energy creation. one oi the two
ideal sunlilte energy genera-
tion swat by all the world's
nuclear energy researchers.
roughly dinde into two kinds.
tine oi them is to pen to such
tools in a 8m magnetic field
as am «timely hot and dense
plasma «electronically separat-
«l condition as to their mole-
t'tllt.‘ and atoms;

The other is a more recently
developed way. an inertial
pen-up type. toputaueh“it|els"
In a small spherical reactor
and make the iuela explode by
aorne powerful energy ban»
bardment. and; cause the
wanted very hot plasmd cond-
tior. by utilising the ioree oi
commasion meta-ring in roan
tion to the ioroe oi explosion.

The new way to best de-
veloped in the 0.5.. where an
actual nuclear fusion trial by
that way is said scrawled by
was.

Accordin‘ to the university,
its Etigol iacillty. built ac-
cording to the new Inertial
penup principle. in a cyiln
Meal aliair lyiu on one side
and measuring tt meters long.
3.5 meters high. and its ion
beam generator lnaide is also a
cylinder at 5 meters in length
and 2.5 meters in diameter.

A pair oi concave mlrrtr-
style ion generating source of
12 centimeters in diameter in
the heart oi the double cylinde-
emits ion beams through iilm~
lmoisomeltlndoiiuelwhena
at on; electric pruaure is ap-
plied to it. Duriu the past ate-
year period. the urivaslty'a
raearch team has carried wt

COPYRIGHT: 1982. the Nihon Keizat Shiabun, Inc.

CSO: 6120/126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as many as 0.000
ion beams. The
succeeded in t
beams oi at lea:
ends in beam ptll
1 million electro
celeration elec
(speed). thing :1
gen. but also bar
In the noose:
churn oi the been
its currem der-
ance oi effectiv
oi the beam to
team has suoce
in the beam's
11 centimeters ta
raising the bean
sity irom 40 a
centimeter t
ampere/smart
about zoo tim-
ing about It [1
been trammitt:
The team is e
line in achieve
target oi to r
volts in electr
the earlleat pea
pan'a m nuclt
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FUJITSU PANUC COOPERATES "In! TATUNG 0N ROBOT MARKETING

Tokyo JAPAN economc JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 p 8

[Tex' ]

Fujitw i-‘enue Ltd. has
reached basic agreement with
Taiwan's Talon; Engineering
('0. to tie up on sale! of indur
lrul robots.

Under the arrangement. the
Taiwanese company will be
granted the exclusive right to
sell all kinds oi Fujitsu l-‘amc':
robot: in Taiwan over the next
seven years. The top-rate Japa-
nese robot developer now
munidactures handling robots
tor machine tools egiipped
with numerical control device.
assembly robots loi- mchlrery
parts. and other high elliciency
robots

Fujitsu l-‘unuc President
Summer lnulu will ﬂy to Taipei
moo to lornialue the basil: It‘-
mnl luutn said the sale: lie-up
may develop into a [ruler
ImlL including production
skills. it Tulunu wishes to do so.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Taiwanese enterprise.
based in Taipei. is a con-
glomerate eruued in a variety
ul limitless lines. including
electronics. compilers, com-
munication: equipment. heavy
electrial machinery. and iron
and steel. The company recent-
ly puts a strut on machine
tools and other mechinery ree-
ton. It tho Ihmestrmual
to branch out into the robot
held. .

COPYRIGHT: 1982. the Nihon Keiui Shinbun, Inc.

650: 4120/13!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL lLGI-I ONLY

YAMAHA TO ENTER INN AIRCRAFT ENGINE FIELD

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 p 8

[Text]

Yamaha Hotor (‘43.. one at
Jupnn's largtst narturcycie
mailers. is Venturing into the
aircralt engine industry this
year as its new
«ﬁvendication step.

it already had attained the
permission ol the Itinistry at
International Trade A Industry
[or doing so larder the Alma“
Prediction Enterpriaea tam.

Sources close to the company
said that in ﬁscal tin. starting
next April. Yamaha will
prodrce and deliver to the
Deleon: Agency several piston
engines lor dram. that is. un-
manned target Nana. lor the
"Start SAM" (slant-range
munltnair missilcal oi the
(irranat Scll-lMcnae Face
The rmnpany is planning to
lurid its pnsllrun tn the traits
try, skirting with such target
plane engine prudta‘llun

Though Ion. lierceiy unn-
putmu wrth llunth Moira" t'o.,
the world's largest naitnrcyt-le
mailer oi Japan. both on the
tMlﬁlK‘ and cums motor-
i-ycie markets. Yanulha Hutu

has been aapuruu tor such a
business dvmsilication. be
cause oi its disadvantage d
heir: a motorcycle and enp‘ne
nialtinc apecialiat. compared
with llooda'a muslin motor-
cycle and automobile Mines
hoes.

The company oi lwata.
Quinton Prel. will be the
lwrth Japanese air «in
pmdrcer under the law alter
ishtitawaiiina-iiarirna Heavy
Industries 00.. Kawasaki
lleavy Imitiea. url and
Mitsubishi lieavy lnduatria.
Ltd.

But the meet said urn
plans to guide Yamaha Molor'a
development as an air alpine
niaiterinanchawayasto
matte a special kind at air en-
gine maratiacturer apart lrorn
the established trio onthehaats
oi Yamaha llotor'a experience
and skills in automotive engine
production. Mi‘i‘l hardly thinks
the tmupuny is qualiﬁed at
present to participate in any
international joint air engine
tievclnpnuatt venture.

(DPYRIGHT: 1982. the Nthon Kelzai Shidmn. Inc.

080: “20/131

86
MINISTRIES DIFFER AS 80%) TO REVISE DATA (”WICKHONS LAWS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 p 9

[Text]

The Ministry 0! International
Trade In hiduetry and the Min
istry ot Posts I: Telecommuni-
cations (MP‘I‘) are at oda over
revision ot laws related to data
mmunicatioos who“ lib
eralisation or open me has
been smly demanded by the
Urited States and Japan's bui-
nees community.

Both ministries hsve had
eight sessions «1 negotiation
over revision oi data commuti-
cations laws since mid-Decem-
ber. last year. but their views
still are wide apart and seem
diiicult to he bridged in the
near future. MP1” demands that
a new law. tentatively named
"Data Communications Law."
mt be mapped out and
cnected. while Ml‘l‘l erases
revision oi the present Public
Telecommunications Lee.- is
adequate to cope with the situa~
Iinn

Data communications cir-
wits In Japan hsve been
monopolized by the govern-
mental Nippon Telegraph &
Telephone Public Corp. tN‘l'l‘i.
hut MITI and the business corn-
munlty have long been criticiz-
ing that such a monopoly
nmvicn progress at data com-
munications. and have beende-
manning “liberalization in
principle“ 0‘ joint use d lined
lunw' by private businesses.

argued by the Pats A Tele
communication ulnlstry or be
entirely lett to opéi competi-
tion anions more. as him eon-
cedes.

On these two points. the two
ministries canpietely ‘diﬂer.
Ml'l‘l ls all-out to athnit to a
maximum depee the partici~
petlon at private arms in data
communications except for
such main bishiemes as tele-
phone and telecam scvices
handled by MT. but im-
argues that the btllneee of pri-
vate firms in «its commun-
lions ﬁeld must be checked to
protect um. Betind these
widely-chem views lies the
tact oi bureaucratic "jawbon
in" between the two thirds-
tries in an attempt to place
under their respective control
the dsta communications in
dairy which is expected to
make (tunic progress in the
cominc decade.

Up tntil time, all reports or
recommendations mode by
Keidanren (Federation oi Eco

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nomic Omani:
ministrative
Aswcy end
Commissionhl
ol the N111 l
terim report it
Hoe Commi-
istretive Reta
mended ant
tion at an
circuits. follot
Mﬂ‘laruimai
Barthes-more
musty demo
liberalisation
cations circuit
tint the‘lml
Posts It Tell
Ministry exeh
patlon at (out
pan's chta .
thereby likely
other some i
tioobetweentl

Why

m'l'lhedreee
tiesottilibtrst
plea of the P
mutilation h
teen demend
eral‘utioooh
tionscircultsl
slon oi enistl
withthis.the:
astumbtiubi

Aliblltsmus
theatrrento
slonbyrnld-M
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030012-0

run utnLuu. val. URL!

But tt the cumnt deadlock to»
times. it will be extremely dit-
ﬁcult tot both ministria to
cane to terms over the matte.
Clam are likely that nvised
hills lawn just cover tho-e
area where both ministtia
have [mad the esteemed. be-
ilg tar tram the complete lit>
eralintion cl «ht: commun-
tions circuits aimed at the be-
:tnntw ot museums. In this
sense. observers said. even it
both minismes have come to
agreemnt on some area to:
the time being. complete lib
enliution of data coriander
tions is very likely to be post-
poned.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the "then K212“ Shinbun. Inc.

cso: «120/131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030012-0
SCIENCE AND TECHROLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TORAY T0 CO‘HI‘IERCIALIZE 'STRONCEST' PINE CERAMIC

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 20, No 989, 19 Jan 82 p 17

[Text]

Toray lndustriee. Ltd re-
cently dscloeed intention to
commercialize the new line
ceramic it has developed and
conﬁrmed as being the am
at oi its sort so iar made in the
world.

The leadim multibtsinese
Japanese synthetic ﬁber maker
will start test production oi its
new ceramic by around June at
an experimental plant to be
wilt within its Stay lactory
complex in Oteu City near
Kyoto.

The company said the veoo
million plant lor [I'm
several hundred kilovams oi
the ﬁne ceramic will cerium
all sorts oi tests to develop
many diilerent applicabilitis
oi the ceramic andsetthestaae
[or lull commercialization d
the Cﬂ‘llﬂlt in about five yen...

The company explained its
new engineering ceramic Is ear
sentially a 3 per cent yttria
added and sintered version oi
Zirconia. (Yttria is an oxide 1!

yttrium. wldle erconia ie a
kind at zirconium oxide de-
veloped by thecompeny itself.)

its new engineerim ceramic
has attained anywhere between
150 and 170 kilowame per
square millimeter in handing
strength. tar surpassing the
Ntherto known world record at
1:» try. pr equare millimeter
for each materials. the corn-
pny said

in addition. its new product
he: proved to he so ternciom
and free from the idiot-em brit-
tlonees «1 ceramic as to dety
ordirmy hammer-in. let alone
its high raistance to heat and
lchemicals and lain moldaﬂl-
ty.

So tor. the company an teed
its new prodtict as an oxygen
demity moor (or its ow ion
conductivity and also tried it
for making ltdree by that“
the moot its pyaical proper-
ties. But the company visual-
ian mew more nan d the new
Meta. including Motion
oi electrode parts and lndue
trialctltlm «lace.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, the Nthon Keizai Shitbtm, Inc.

cso: 1.120! 131

END

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY