FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10039
8 October 1981

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 6/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
HUMAN RESOURCES
(P000 6/81)

CONTENTS

WNRAPHY

Bilingualism in (Immunity of Soviet Nations
(H. No RutkeViCh; Ism‘ m, Jul-Aug 81) otooooo-o 000.... I 1

Population Dynamics of Siberian Territorial-Production Complexes
(V. I. Chudnova; GMRAFIM I PHIRONYYE RESURSY, Apr-Jun 81). 1h

- a - [III - ossn - 38c F000]

mo nmnu “CF "NI V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEMOGRAPHY

BILINGUALISM IN COMMUNITY OF SOVIET NATIONS

Moscow ISTORIYA SSSR in Russian No b, Jul-Aug 81 pp 22-32

IXrticle by Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences H. N. Rutkevich:

1"Bilingualism Is an Important Factor of the Development of the New Historical
Comunityﬂ/

15ers? In the documents of the 26th CPSU Congress the task of broadening the
studies on theoretical problems of mature socialism is set as one of the most im-
portant tasks in the area of the social sciences.1

At the 25th CPSU Congress it was noted that "the indissoluble alliance of the work-
ing class, the peasantry and the intelligentsia with the leading role of the work-
ing class, the friendship of all the nations and nationalities of the country is"
the basis for the new historical community of people-the Soviet people.2

Thus, the Soviet people have two inseparably interconnected attributes. First,
there is the new social community which is characteristic only of socialism and in
which there are no ruling. exploiting classes. The socialist community at the
stage of maturity consists entirely of friendly classcs and social groups, which
base their labor on the public ownership of the means of production and are dis-
tinguished by the unity of basic economic and political interests. Second, there
is the new international community which is characteristic only of socialism in a
multinational country and in «hicn there are no ruling nations. The Soviet people
consist of tens of socialist nations, as well as nationalities and ethnic groups,
and are distinguished by the unity of the basic economic and political interests of
these nations, nationalities, groups and all the Soviet people.

Both the social unity, that is, the friendly alliance of classes, social groups and
strata, and the international unity, that is, the friendship of the peoples of the
USSR, are manifested in all spheres of public life: economics, politics, ideology
and culture. We stress the indicated circumstance because the interpretation of
the new social community only as a sociopolitical cummnuxy is encountered at times
in Soviet scientific literature.3 In our opinion. the social community is a socio-
political community to the same extent that it is a socio-economic and sociocul-
tural community.

Under the conditions of mature socialism the political alliance of the three main
social forces with the leading role of the working class expresses in concentrated
form the community of their economic interests, which is determined by their place

1
FOR 0F11CLAL.USEt)NLY
CUR UI‘DILIAI. Ubl'. ONLY

in the system of production relations. The commity of objective interests and
political goals finds its reflection in the sphere of ideology as the realization
of the social unity of Soviet society in political views, the norms of morals,
world outlook and so on, as well as in the social psychological sphere.

The Soviet people as a multinational community, which was formed on the basis of the
friendship of peoples, have a number of attributes which are characteristic of eth-
nic communities of various types: the tribe, the nationality, the bourgeois nation,
the socialist nation, such as the community of territory, economic life and culture.
The unity of the economic and political interests of all the peoples of the coun-
try, who are making their contribution to the functioning and development of the
unified national economic complex with the intensifying division of labor among re-
publics and regions, nations and nationalities, is reflected in the social consci-
ousnesa of Soviet people. The cmmmunity of economic life-such is the objective
basis of political unity, the highest embodiment of which is the state unity of the
USSR. Thus, the dialectics of the interrelationship of the economic. political and
cultural ideological factors in the development of the Soviet people should be re-

garded simultaneously in the social and international aspects, which also interact
dialectically.

Language is the most important means of communication of people. The community of
language is a mandatory attribute of ethnic communities, including nations.

Let us emphasize first of all the need for a historical approach. The development
of a unified national language was, as a rule, a very lengthy process. which took
place at the same time as the development of nations and often continued within al-
ready formed nations. Among many nations, moreover developed nations, it has not
been completed even in our times. The causes of this phenomena are varied. In some
instances this is explained by the fact that an indigenous population, which has not
rejected completely its native language, which has historical traditions, at times

a system of writing and a literature, but is now used primarily in daily life, lives
on a certain portion of the territory of the nation. Such is the situation with
Provencal and Breton in France. In other instances the incompleteness of this
process stems from the ethnic heterogeneity of immigration. Thus, in the formation
of the North American nation the waves of immigrants from Europe (and then Asia and
Latin America), which superseded each other during the 19th and 20th centuries,
were gradually assimilated by the English-speaking nucleus, which formed back in
the 18th century. However, even today bilingualism, that is, the speaking of two
languages--the "state" language, English, and one's 'bmn," native language, occurs
in the United States.

It is possible to judge the degree of assimilation of emigrants to the United States
from the following data of American statistics. in 1977 of the 199,310,000 people

4 years of age and older 15,354,000, that is. 7.7 percent, spoke English and some
other language. However, of this number only 6,389,000 usually use the other lan-
guage; for 8,965,000 English is the customary, that is, primary language. And, fur-
ther, of the indicated 6,389,000 only 62.1 percent, that is, approximately
2,690,000, experience difficulties with English. Thus, only 1.3 percent of the

U.S. population have not fully mastered English--they are almost entirely first-
generation emigrants. in the overwhelming majority (1,780,000) people who have come
from the countries of Latin America.“

2
FOR'OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A historical approach is also needed in another respect. In exploitative multina-
tional states the problem of the "state" language, which was used not only for the
purposes of government, ensuring the political domination of a specific nation (na-

tionality), but also for the purposes of economic and cultural exchange, arose re-
peatedly both in the past and in our times.

As is known, the many centuries of domination of the Romans led to the dissemination
of Latin, which in a number of areas of the Roman Empire was used in the beginning
along with the local languages, but later became the basis of a number of modern
Romance languages (Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian).

The conquests undertaken by the Arabs in the Middle Ages led in a number of coun-
tries of the Near East and Northern Africa to the complete supplanting of the local

languages, in some this process has not been completed (the Barbers in Algeria and
others .

The languages of the European conquerors, who founded colonial empires, in a number
of regions supplanted the local languages. That is the situation in Latin America
where, however, a portion of the indigenous Indian population (the Quechua in Peru
and others) was able to preserve its language. In Africa and Asia English, French
and Portuguese functioned bathe colonies along with the local languages. And now,
when after World War II the colonial empires have declined under the blows of the
national liberation movement, the "state" language of the former colonial power
still plays a certain role. As the result of the multinational composition of the
population of the freed states, as in India, or the multitribal composition, as in
a number of countries of Africa, in most cases it continues to remain the "state"
language, in some cases sharing this function with the most prevalent local lan-
guage (Hindi in India. Swahili in Tanzania and so on).

The Russian Empire, which gradually formed on the basis of the Russian national
state, was distinguished from the colonial empires, which were created by the naval
powers, by two essential features. First, it was a single territorial block which
embraced the entire northern part of Eurasia, one-sixth of the dry land. On this
truly boundless territory the Russians along with the Ukrainians and Belorussians,
who are close to them in language and culture, owing to the unity of origin, made
up seven-tenths of the total population. The East Slave in the course of a mil-
lennium settled the European North, the Cis-Ural region, the Urals, Siberia, the
Far East, the southern and, in part, the Kazakh steppes, mixed with the people who
had previously settled these expenses, and by the time of the October Revolution
had partially assimilated them. Second, the cruel national oppression, to which
the non-Russian people were subjected on the part of landowners, merchants and capi-
talists of the ruling nation, could not prevent the convergence of the working
classes, that is, the bulk of the peoples of Russia. Not only the reunification
in a single state of the fraternal Russian, Ukrainian and Belorussian peoples,

bu: also the entry into the Russian centralized state of many other nationalities
were of extremely progressive historical importance. It created the conditions
for the emergence and strengthening of the alliance of the workers of different
peoples in the liberation struggle against the exploiting classes. The leading
role in this alliance belonged to the progressive social forces of the Russian
nation.

In Russia before the revolution a number of bourgeois nations formed. Among tens
of nationalities this process was not completed. But already by that time, as a

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UIPILIAI. USE. DULY

result of the requirements of economic development, national-Russian bilingualism
had spread to a certain extent, although the forced spreading of Russian and the
assimilation policy, which were pursued by taarism, hindered this objective process.

At the proletarian stage of the liberation movement, starting in the late 19th cen-
tury, the combination of cruel class and national oppression in its most diverse
forms brought about the national liberation movement of the peoples of the outlying
regions. the allies of the Russian working classes in the revolutionary struggle
against the sutocracy. The leading and guiding force of the working class move-
ment--the Bolshevik Party founded by V. I. Lenin-~proclaimed as its goal the com-
plete liberation of all the peoples of Russia from social and national oppression,
the granting to them of the right to self-determination, up to seccession and the
formation of an independent state. At the same time, while consistently implement-
ing the principle of proletarian internstionalism, the party envisaged not only the
possibility, but also the desirability of preserving state unity on a voluntary
basis with the establishment of the complete equality of peoples.

The social liberation achieved in October 1917 truly opened the way for the complete
elimination of national oppression and inequality in all its forms. In our country
socialism was built for the first time in the world, the prediction of K. Marx and
F. Engels: "Along with the antagonism of classes within nations the hostile rela-
tions of nations with each other will also disappear,"s was transformed into
reality for the first time.

The accomplishment of this world historical task in a gigantic country, in which
more than 100 nations, nationalities and ethnic groups lived together, was compli-
cated by the fact that the regions and peoples of Russia by the time of the October
Revolution were at the most diverse stages of historical development: from a com-
munal system to developed capitalism.

The building of socialism in the USSR signified the radical transformation of the
social class structure of society. The social nature of the working class, the
peasantry and the intelligentsia changed. For the peoples who had not passed
through the stage of capitalism (and in some instances the stage of a class antagon-
istic society in general), the transition to socialism signified that transformation
of society, in case of which the kolkhoz peasantry was formed directly on the basis
of tribal society with the gradual isolation from its midst of the working class

and the intelligentsia as social groups which were socialist in their nature.

The rapid transformation of social relations in the outlying regions of the country
was impossible without a development of their economy and culture, which led the
central regions in pace. The legal equality of the peoples, which was proclaimed
after October and was consolidated by the creation of the USSR, became actual
equality owing to the assistance which was given to the nations and nationalities,
which had been oppressed in the past, on the part of the more developed peoples

and first of all on the part of the Russian people and their working class.

Such are the historical prerequisites, which had formed by the late 1930‘s and cre-
ated the immediate basis for the formation of the Soviet people as a new social
community and at the same an international community.

The most difficult ordeals of the period of World War II promoted the further uni-
fication of all the nations and nationalities of the USSR around the Russian people,

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who bore on their shoulders the main burden of the struggle against the invaders at
the front and in the rear. 0n the other hand, the reunification of the Ukrainians
and Belorussians in 1939-1945 and the restoration of Soviet power in the Baltic re-

publics and Bessarabia enlarged the family of Soviet peoples and required the solu-
tion of many social and national questions.

That is why the assertions, which are encountered at times, that the Soviet people
formed as a new historical community in the 1930's or even the 1950's, seem unjusti-

fied to us, since all the complexity of the historical process is not fully taken
into account in them.

The notion of the Soviet people as a fundamentally new historical community of
people became firmly established in the late 1960's. This, too, in our opinion,

did not coincide by chance with the advancement of the thesis, which substantially
enriched Marxist-Leninist theory, that the USSR had entered the stage of a mature
socialist society. Under present conditions the development of the entire set of
social relations of socialism is taking place on its own, collectivistic basis. The
process of the consolidation of the Soviet people as an economic, political and cul-
tural comunity of people is continuing. And in this process the further spread of

the language of international coammmication, which the Russian language has histori-
cally become, is an important factor.

After the October Revolution this process accelerated and acquired qualitatively
new traits. First, the extension of the use of the language of international com-
munication is taking place in the USSR at the same time as the flourishing of na-
tional languages and national culture, enriching the language and culture of each
Soviet nation and nationality. Second, this process is based on complete voluntari-
ness. In the GPSU Program adopted in 1961 it was noted: "The process taking place
in life of the voluntary study, along with one's native language, of the Russian
language is of positive importance, since this is conducive to the mutual sharing
of experience and the familiarization of each nation and nationality with the cul-
tural achievements of all the peoples of the USSR and with world culture."6 The
CPSU has always proceeded and is proceeding from Lenin's statement of the issue:

we ”insist that every inhabitant of Russia would have the opportunity to study the
Great Russian langua e. We do not want but one thing: the eleaent of lcompulsori-
ness/ Lin italicgl."

How far has this process advanced? Are there sufficient grounds to consider the
existence of an international language one of the attributes of the historical com~
Illunity in question?

L. I. Brezhnev noted in 1972: "Under the conditions of mature socialism the Russian
language [has already become the languagg of mutual intercourse of all the nations
and nationalities of the Soviet Union/ lemphaaired by interspacingy.”8 This author-
itative statement provides an affirmative response to the question posed above. It
is clear that at this moment not all USSR citizens without exception speak Russian
fluently, that the process of learning it as a second language has not been accom-
plished in full among all the Soviet peoples. Processes of this sort, as the ex-
perience of the formation of nations in general attests, requires some time-if only
because the second language is learned by the bulk of the people usually in child-
hood and youth, while the change of generations takes decades. It is important to
note that at the stage of mature socialism the process of learning Russian is
accelerating owing to the intensive increase of economic and cultural exchange

5
ms omcm. use ONLY
av. vs's'sslnl. var. UI‘LI

between regions. the rapid development of the means of mass communication. especial-
ly radio and television, the implementation of a universal secondary education and
the increase of migration flows and tourisn.

So far considerable work has been done on the study of the process of the spread of
the Russian language andits influence on the languages of the peoples of the USSR.
The results of empirical studies and interesting attempts at theoretical generaliza-

tions are contained in a number of scientific works of historians, ethnographers,
linguists and sociologists.9

Hhile referring the reader to these works, we want to nake here in addition a com-
parative analysis of the results of the 1959, 1970 and 1979 censuses.

The changes which occurred in the spread of the Russian language by the late 1970's
have been reflected in Table 1. In 20 years, in spite of the slight decrease of
the proportion of Russians in the population of the country (by 2.2 percent, as a
result of the comparatively low birth rate), the percentage of people speaking Rus-
sian fluently (as a native and second language) steadily increased.

Table 1
Spread of the Russian Language in the USSR
1959 1970 1979

nillions millions nillions

of people Percen‘ of people ’°'°‘“‘ of people P“°°“‘
Total population 208.8 100.0 2bl.7 100.0 262.1 100.0
including:
Russians 116.1 56.6 129.0 53.6 137.4 52.6

people of non-

Russian nationali-

ty, for whom Rus-

sian is their na-

tive language 10.0 4.8 12.8 5.3 16.1 6.1
speak Russian flu-

ently as a second

language 23.7 11.4* 41.9 17.3 61.3 23.4
Total who speak
Russian fluently 147.8 70.8 183.7 76.0 214.8 81.9

 

‘The estimate of the 1959 census for this item was obtained by the author by extra-
polation of the process in retrospection.

In order to create a more complete picture it is necessary to take into account the
entire set of circumstances, which both are established by the census and are not

established by it.* First of all, to the question about "fluency in Russian" the

 

*Strictly speaking, it is impossible to confine ourselves to the examination of
only the data of censuses. since censuses do not always give a direct answer to
questions which are of interest to the researcher. It is necessary to enlist the
data of current statistical reporting and concrete sociological studies.

6
F0R10FFNJAI.USE(MELY
people being surveyed often give an inadequate response: some people. who know the
language well, answer it negatively, and vice versa. The distinction of different
degrees of fluency in the second language is necessary. The differentiation of
thought and psychology, language and speech can serve as the theoretical basis of
such a distinction. Therefore specialists usually differentiate three things:

1) linguistic competence (the degree of fluency in any of the languages); 2) speech
activity (the frequency of use of each of the languages in different situations);
3) linguistic orientation (the social psychological orientation toward the use of
each of the languages or, in other words, the psychological i8titude in relation to
the language and its use for the purposes of comunication).

Simpler gradations are usually used in empirical studies. For example, when con-
ducting a survey in Moldavia the following degrees of fluency of the Moldavian popu-
lation in Russian were distinguished: "I think in Russian"; "I think in Moldavian,
but speak Russian fluently"; "I speak Russian with some difficulties"; "I do not
speak it." Other approaches, of course, are also possible, but the overall conclu-
sion from the set of sociological studies of bilingualism is unquestionable: Ia
considerably larger number/ [caphasized by interspacingf of representatives of the
indigenous nationalities in the republics understand Russian and speak it to a cer—
tain degree, which is sufficient to read a newspaper, understand the content of
radio and television, converse on everyday themes and so on, than is established

on the census sheets. For example, according to the 1970 census, 45.2 percent of
the Latvians living in the territory of Latvia speak Russian fluently; according
to the data of concrete sociological studies, about 80 percent of the Latvisns
speak the language of international communication (at a varying level of its knowl-
edge), while in some socio-occupstional and demographic groups nearly 100 percent
do.11 This is especially characteristic of the urban population, which is more
mixed in national composition. According to the data of a comprehensive study of
the Institute of Ethnography of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 87.6 percent of the
Tstars of Kazan'-practically the entire able-bodied population--spesk Russian.12

In this connection we should especially speak about Ukrainians and Belorussians.

As a result of the closeness of the Best Slavic languages and the activeness of the
intercourse between the three fraternal peoples, in our opinion, it is possible to
consider as already realized the prediction made in 1913 by V. I. Lenin: 'hbre
than seven-tenths of the population of Russia belongs to kindred Slavic tribes,
who with free school in a free state would easily obtain. owing to the requirements
of economic circulation, the opportunity to come to an agreement without any
'state' privileges to one of the languages."13

Let us try to represent this general conclusion in numerical terms on the basis of.
the data of the last two censuses. In 1970 85.7 percent of the Ukrainians indi-
cated Ukrainian as their native language (it can be assumed that for the remaining
16.3 percent Russian is their native language, although in a few instances it might
be Polish, Belorussian and so on), and, moreover. 36.3 percent noted that they were
fluent in Russian. In all 69.4 percent of the Ukrainians did not belong to these
categories, which amounts to 20.1 million people. A similar calculation for the
Belorussian population provides 17.2 percent or 1.6 million people. In all

21.7 million people did not indicate that they spoke Russian fluently, but in prac-
tice they know it to a degree sufficient for communication. If we add their number
to 183.7 million (see Table l), we will obtain 205.4 million, that is, 85 percent
of the population of the country in 1970.

7
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
run urn-lust. use ONLY

For 1979 the similar calculations of the people, who did not indicate that they
spoke Russian fluently, yield respectively 33 percent of the Ukrainian population
and 17.2 percent of the Belorussian population, that is, 16 million and 1.6 million
people. As a result this comes to 15.6 million people-data which were not in-
cluded in Table 1. Adding this figure to 214.8 million people (see Table l). we

will obtain 230.6 million people, that is, 87.9 percent of the population of the
ussn in 1979.14

It is more difficult to give an accurate quantitaLive appraisal of the phenomenon
noted above for the other nationalities. For this it would be necessary, first, to
estinste the number of those who know Russian (but have not mastered it) among the
representatives of the indigenous population of the union and autonomous republics,
especially city residents. Second, it would be necessary to appraise quantitative-
ly the knowledge of Russian in practice by nearly all the representatives of those
nationalities which have been settled apart entirely (or for their most part) over
the entire territory of the country. Such is the situation with Gernans, Poles
(except some regions adjacent to Poland), Jews. Bulgarians, Koreans and so on. To
a certain extent this also applies to the Armenian population; in 1970 38 percent
of the Armenians and in 1979 34.4 percent lived outside the territory of the
Armenian SSR.15 For some nationalities the method described above is quite admis-
sible for such a calculation. Thus. in 1970 85 percent of the Bulgarian popula-
tion living in the USSR named Russian as their native language or noted that they
spoke it fluently; thus, 15 percent (about 50,000 people) did not belong to both
of these categories; in 1979 these people already made up 10 percent of the total
number of Bulgarians in the USSR. But practically all the Bulgarians living per-
manently in our country understand Russian. It is also possible to make similar
calculations for the other nationalities which are dispersed in various regions of
the count ry .

If we take into account both things indicated above and appraise them approximately,
the following conclusion seems reliable: Ion the threshold of the 1980's more than
eight-tenths of the population of the USSR has a cal-land of Russian to a degree
which as a whole is sufficient for international communication/ Lin italicgl. And
this means that the existence of a cannon language (either as the native language
or as the second language) has already become an attribute of the new historical
community of people--the Soviet people. But what has been said-and this has al-
ready been stressed by us-nust not be interpreted in the sense that this attribute
of the new historical community of people has formed absolutely, completely.

"The dynamics of the development of such a large multinational state as our state
gives rise to many problems which require the sensitive attention of the party,"

L. I. Brezhnev said in a report at the 26th CPSU Congress. In the report it was
also noted that "in recent years in e number of republics the number of citizens of
the nonindigenous nationalities has increased considerably."16 The indicated fac-
tor is conducive to the intensification of international intercourse, and therefore
to the increase of the use of Russian. But the still unsolved problems require so
much more attention. One of themconsists in the inadequate mastering of Russian by
the young generation while studying in school. In this connection it is expedient
to recall how this question was posed back in the later 1930's. that is, during the
period when the task of implementing a universal incomplete secondary education
arose. At that time it was decided that "The students who have graduated from the
incomplete secondary school (the seventh grade) should know how to express their
thoughts fluently and correctly in Russian both orally and in writing....”17

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

More than 40 years have passed since that time and in the USSR the next landmark
task--the acquisition by all young people of a complete secondary education-has
basically been accomplishe. in the USSR. In 1977 more than 98 percent of the gradu-
ates of the eighth grade continued their studies at.asecondary school and at other
educational institutions giving a secondary education.18 The universal secondary
education of the young generation has been implemented in all the union and autono-
mous republics. The remaining differences in the number of people who have a com-
plete and incomplete secondary education (for the USSR on the average 663 per

1,000 people over the age of 10, with she minimum figures for Lithuanian--558, and
the maximum figures for Armenia--73l)l are formed due to people of older ages.

However, so far in many national schools, especially in rural areas, the instruc-
tion in Russian has been organized unsatisfactorily. As a result the increase of
the proportion of people who speak Russian fluently in a number of republics lags
significantly behind the increase of the general educational level of the population.

The comparative data of the 1970 and 1979 censuses by regions are cited in Table 2.

As the cited dat1 attest, during the 1970's the increase of the proportion of the
population speaking Russian fluently (as the main or the second language) is char—
acteristic of all the indigenous nationalities (except Estonians) which live on the
territory of the union and autonomous republics. Especially significant changes
occurred during this decade in Uzbekistan. In the autonomous republics, which are
located in the central part of Russia and are distinguished by a mixed composition
of the population, 7-9 out of every 10 representatives of the indigenous nationali-
ties apenk Russian fluently; it should be added that among the urban population
practically everyone does. The process of the emergence of national-Russian bilin-
gualism among these nations is coming to an end.

At present appmdnsteb' 5 out of 10 representatives of the indigenous nationalities,
which live in the union republics of the Soviet Baltic region, 6 out of 10 in the
republics of Central Asia and 3 out of 10 in the republics of Transcaucasia note on
the census sheets that they speak Russian fluently.

The question of the increasing importance of the mastery of Russian for the solu-
tion of economic and political problems and the education of all citizens in the
spirit of proletarian internationalism is justly posed in the documents of the
Central Committees of the Communist Parties of the union republics and in the
speeches of their executives. First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Com-
munist Party of Georgia 3. A. Shevardnadze says: "In our republic we pose the
question as follows: along with the native language, everyone should master Rus-
sian--the language of the brotherhood of all the peoples of the USSR, the language
of October, the language of Lenin."2° First Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of Uzbekistan Sh. R. Rashidov writes "that the Soviet people

of all nationalities are studying the Russian language voluntarily, that this study-
ing has become their fundamental need."2x

In a number of union republics in recent years steps have been taken, which conform
to local conditions and are aimed at the improvement of the teaching of Russian in
national schools, at the increase of the opportunities for cultural exchange, and
thereby the familiarization of the broadest strata of workers of the indigenous na-
tionalities with the Russian language and Russian culture, and through their media-

tion with the culture of all the peoples of the USSR and world culture.

9
FOR OFFNJA1.lﬂﬂElDNLY
WU“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fluency in Russian of People of the Indigenous Nationalities
Living on the Territory of the Union Republics*

Table 2

————————__—_—_____—_

Nationality

native lan-
guage is

(percent)

1970 1979
speak native lan- speak
Russian total guage is Russian

total

Russian fluentlz Russian fluently

a) Volga - Cis-Ural region

Tatsrs. . .
Chuvash . .

Hordviniana
Udnurts . .
Mari. . . .
Koni. . . .
Bashkir . .
Average for

Lithuanisns
Latvians. .
Estonians .
Average for

Kirghiz . .
Average for

Georgians .

so...
case
use.
so...

region.

'region.

0....
sons
sees

as...

region.

Azerbaijanis. . . .

Armenians .
Average for

 

region.

a—

N .—
NOONMON
O
NOOONNU’

0.2
2.2
1 0

o

GOOD-O
O
buubé

On—oo
O O
O‘OU!

1.5 54.7 56.2
5.5 58.3 63.8
3.8 75.6 79.4
12.3 68.4 80.7
4.1 66.5 70.6
13.3 64.7 78.0
1.5 47.9 49.7
68.3
b) Baltic region
0.2 34.8 35.0
1.8 45.3 47.1
0.7 27.6 28.3
36.8
c) Kazakhstan-Central Asian region
0.3 13.1 13.4
1.1 41.6 42.7
0.4 16.6 17.0
0.6 14.8 15.5
0.2 19.8 20.0
21.7
d) Transcaucasian region

0.4 20.1 20.5
0.8 14.9 15.7
0.2 23.3 23.5
19.9

65.9
68.1
81.0
70.6
77.7
66.8
62.5

c c

o

NNNSUI
at‘ﬂ N
c
UNOO‘O

0

27080
NV!
. 0
NOW

0

68.2”
76.3
86.7
88.2
84.3
86.8
65.2
79.7

26.0
28.9
3‘. .8***
29.9

‘Calculated according to "Ito i Vsesoyuznoy perepisi naseleniya 1970 gods" [Results
of the 1970 All-Union Census , Vol IV, Moscow, 1973. Tables 5-29; VESTNIK STATISTI-
KI, Nos 8-11, 1980.

**Of the total number of Tatars, 26 percent live in the Tatarskaya ASSR. Among them
(for the USSR as a whole) 83 percent of the population (1979) speaks Russian flu-
ently (as the native or second language).

iii

In all two-thirds of the Armenians live in the Armenian SSR.
the USSR as a whole) 47.9 percent of the population (1979) speaks Russian fluently

(as the native or second language).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10

Among them (for
FOR OFIWCJAI.USE(3NLY

In some republics the Russian language is studied starting in the first grade in
all the national schools. The scale of the training of instructors in this disci-
pline is being expanded at the pedagogical higher educational institutions of the
republics. Schools, at which parallel classes are in operation, are becoming more
and more widespread; the instruction in these classes is conducted in Russian and
the national language, which creates additional opportunities for contact between
children, promoting both the mastery of Russian and the mastery of the national lan-
guage of the republic by the children of the Russian population living on its terri-
tory. Thus, 15.5 percent of the Russians living in Georgia indicated that they
speak Georgian fluently; 35.2 percent of those living in Lithuania and 20.1 percent
of those living in Latvia indicated that they speak Lithuanian and Latvian fluent-
ly.22 Among the Russian population living permanently in the republics this per-
centage is higher. The Russian population in the Ukraine and lelorussia understands
Ukrainian and Belorussian owing to their closeness.

The national policy of the CPSU, which takes into account both the general laws of
the flourishing and convergence of the socialist nations and the specific nature of
their manifestation in different regions and republics, is a mighty factor of the
accelerationcﬁ the process of the further strengthening of the unity of the Soviet
people. L. I. Brezhnev, speaking about such interconnected traits of Soviet people
as Soviet patriotism and internationalisn, noted that "they are being cultivated
among the workers by Soviet life itself, by all our reality. But the conscious ef-
forts of the party, of all workers of the political and ideological front are also
needed here." 3 what has been said also fully applies to the sphere of "language
building," including the task exaained here of the more and more complete mastery
of the language of international intercourse. The extension and intensification,
which is cultivated by all of Soviet life, of international intercourse and of the
knowledge of the language, which in practice ensures this intercourse,areat the
same time a process which is consciously directed by the party.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda K385" listerials of the 26th CPSU Congreséf, Moscow,
1981, p 145.

2. "Haterialy XXV s"yezda KPSS" [Eaterials of the 25th CPSU Congresgr, Moscow,
1976, p 81.

3. See, for granple, "Osnovnyye napravleniya izucheniya natsional'nykh otnosheniy
v SSSR" LThe Main Directions of the Study of National Relations in the USS§7,,
Moscow, 1979, p 76.

4. "Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1979, National Data Book and Guide
to Sources,“ Washington, 1979, p 39.

5. K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [gork§7, Vol 4, p 445.
6. "Programs KPSS" [The cpsu Progra27, Moscow, 1961, p ns.

7. v. I. Lenin, "Pol. sobr. soch." [Ea-piste Works], Vol 21., p 295.

11
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
8.

9'

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

19.
20.

21.

run vernal“. 03!. URL!

1.. I. Brezhnev, "Lenigskin kurson. Rechi i stat'i" [5y the Leninist Course.
Speeches and Articles], Vol lo, lbscow, p 60. The interspacing is nine-41.11.

See, for example, Yu. 1.. Desheriyev, "Zeitgnonernosti razvitiya i vzaimdey-
stviya yazykov v sovetskom obshchestvg" [The Laws of the Development and Inter-
action of Languages in Soviet Society], Moscow, 1965; I. R. Beloded, "Lenin-
skaya teoriyg natsional'no-yazykovogo stroitel'stvs v sotsialisticheskom oh-
shchestve" Ame Leninist Theory of National Language guilding in Socialist So-
ciet17, Moscow, 1972: Yu. Kakhk, "Cheny skhodstva" LTraits of Sinilaritzl,
Moscow, 1974, and others. 0f the articles of late let us note: H. N. Guhoglo,
"Toward the Study of the Prospects of the Developnent of Bilingualism Among the
Peoples of the USSR," ISTORIYA SSSR, No l, 1978; K. Rb. Rhanaurov, "An Impor-
tant Direction of CPSU Policy in the Area of the Solution of the National Prob-
lem and the Development of National Relations," VOPROSY ISTORII KPSS, No 1,
1978; Ya. V. Garipov, K. D. Argunova, "The Analysis of the Factors of the Spread
of Bilingualism in the USSR," SOTSIOLOGICEBSKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA, No 3, 1980;

s. I. Bruk, "Ethnodenographic Processes in the USSR (According to Materials of
the Postwar Censuses)," IS‘mRIYA $881!, No 5, 1980. See also the materials of
the round table on the theme "The Emergence and Development of the New Histori-
cal Comunity—the Russian People," ISTORIYA SSSR, No 6, 1980.

See on this "Osnovnyye napravleniya izucheniya natsional'nykh otnosheniy
v SSSR," p 105.

A. I. Kholnogorov, "International Traits of the Socialist Nations in the USSR,"
"Sotsializn i natsii" LSocialisn and Nations], Moscow, 1973, p 292.

See "Sotsial'noye i natsional'noye" ﬁhe Social and the Nationaﬂ', Moscow,
1973, p 235.

V. I. Lenin, "Polo. sobr. soch.," Vol 23, p 317.

Calculated on the basis of the__data of the USSR Central Statistical Administra-
tion. See "Naseleniye SSSR" LThe Population of the US$57, lbscow, 1980,

Pp 23-25.

See "Itogi Vgesoyuznoy perepisi naseleniya 1970 gods" [Results of the 1970 All-
Union Census], Vol IV, Moscow, 1973, pp 9, 15.

'Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS," pp 56, 57.
See NARODNOYE OBRAZOVANIYE, No 12, 1972, p 80.

"SSSR v tsifrakh v 1977 g." _/_The USSR in Figures in 19717, Moscow, 1979, p 22b.
For the RSFSR in 1979 it was 99.2 percent (SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA, 3 August 1980).

See VESTNIK STATISTIKI, No 6, 1980, pp 53-106.
KOIMUNIST, No 13, 1977, p ’09.

Sh. R. Rashidov, "0n the Path of Unity and Fraternity," PRAVDA, 23 Hay 1980.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
22. VESTNIK snusnn, No 10, 1980, pp 67, 71, 72.
23. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim Rut-on," Vol 4. p 66.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Nauka", "Iatoriya SSSR", 1981

7807
C30: 1828/1107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DDJOGRAPHY

POPULATION DYNAMICS OF SIBERIAN TERRITORIAL-PRODUCTION COMPLEXES

Novosibirsk GEOGRAFIYA I PRIRODNYYB RESURSY in Russian No 2, Apr-Jun 81
(manuscript received 28 Oct 80) PP 84-90

[Article by V. I. Chudnova, Institute of the Geography of Siberia and the Far East

(Irkutsk). Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences: ”Development and
Distribution of Productive Forces")

[Text] Geographic Research on Shaping the Population of Siberian IPC's [territorial
production complexes].

Shaping the population of territorial-production complexes (TPC's) is a complex so-
cioeconomic process determined by changes in the dynamics and structure of the po~
pulstion, in indicators of natural reproduction. migratory movement and the settl ~

branches into operation. functioning of the system which has evolved, its further
interlinking and improvement). The time boundaries on each stage depend on the pro-
duction specialization of the complex. the use of raw materials, degree of utiliza-
tion of the territory. and the priority tasks of the country's national economy.

sources situation. degree of employment in the country and in adjacent areas, as
well as in regions similar in terms of production profile exert a significant in-
fluence on the nature of external migration ties.

This work generalizes geographic research on the population of TPC's developing in
Siberia (Heat-Siberian, Sayanskiy. Bratsk - Ust'~Ilimskiy, KATEK). As a result, we
have revealed the features of population formation for these complexes which charac-
terize their stage of development as determined by the creation of basic enterprises
of specialization branches. For certain TPC's (Sayanskiy. Bratsk - Ust'-llimskiy),

tabliahment of the TPC’s.

IMMIIMHHCIAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFTICIAI.USE¢DNLY

Depending on the degree of utilization and settlement of the territory in which the
TPC's being studied are located, they can be divided into two types. The first ("est
Siberian. Bratsk - Ust'-Ilimskiy) are being developed in northern Siberia. in regions
with harsh natural conditions. little settlement or utilization. The creation of a
TPC in this instance is associated with the necessity of building up the territory.
demanding the attraction of considerable labor resources from other regions of the
country. The harsh natural conditions complicate population formation and create

an unfavorable living and working atmosphere for settlers. For a majority of mi-
grants. such territories turn out to be a sharp contrast. in terms of natural and

socioeconomic conditions. from their previous places of residence. which negatively
affects settlement levels.

A second type of TPC evolved in the southern regions of Siberia (Sayanskiy. KATEK).
which are well-populated. long settled and utilized. in direct proximity to the in-
dustrial centers of Western and Eastern Siberia. and characterized by conditions
favorable to development of the economy and people's lives.

Population formation was studied using the main centers of TPC's of different func-
tional types and with different levels of development. In the Bratsk — Ust'-Ilim-
skiy TPC. they included the cities of Bratak. Uet'-Ilimsk and Zheleznogorsk-Ilimskiy;
in the Sayanskiy - Sayanogorsk. Abakan. Chernogorsk and Minusinsk; in the West-
Siberian -- Surgut. Nefteyugansk and Nizhnavartovsk. in the KATEK - Nazarovo. Sha-
rypovo and Achinsk. We traced the dependence among indicators determining the for-
mation of population and the functional typology of the center: national economic
structure. features of the economic-geographic situation. number of people and time
of settlement. role in forming the region and place in the settlement system.

Our study of population formation in TPC industrial centers was based on combining
materials from current statistical records. the results of processing primary data
sources (tear-off coupons from arrival and departure address lists) and surveys of
the composition and movement of workers at leading enterprises. The forms of sta-
tistical reporting enabled us to obtain only the most general idea of the size of
population migration in the cities and rural administrative regions. The develop-
ment of data on the direction of migration ties is ordinarily done for the whole
aggregate of urban settlements and rural regions of oblasts. krays and autonomous
republics. Such generalization of statistical materials does not correspond to the
tasks of a geographic study of population formation. Particular difficulties arise
when analyzing the migration ties of complexes whose boundaries do not coincide with
statistical reporting units. This is observed when the territory of a complex occu-
pies a portion of an oblast. kray or is situated within various administrative sub-
divisions. Studying the formation of population in individual industrial centers

15
FOR OFIWCJAI.USE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second stage is the actual processing of the information indicated on the sheets.
The main task in this stage is to select the most appropriate groupings and classi-
fications of criteria being analyzed and to develop model output tables. They are
determined according to the goals and tasks of the research. In order to establish
the features of migration ties of the centers and changes in them as the complex de-
velops. the data processing program anticipates the receipt of data characterizing
the zones of migration exchange and the flow structure. The following criteria re-
corded in the primary reporting sources were used for the analysis: migrant's place

of departure (settlement). place of birth. sex. age. nationality. employment branch.
length of stay (for those leaving).

Particular attention was paid to obtaining data describing in detail the migration
ties of each center. For convenience of analysis. the migration flows were sub-
divided into external and internal relative to the city being studied. This di-
vision is also determined conventionally by the boundaries of the administrative-
territorial units which are the basis of the analysis. The necesity for this is
dictated by the significant differences in near and far migration flows in terms of
volume. intensiveness. structure and role in shaping population. External migration
ties mean population exchange with other parts of the country (excluding one's own
oblast or kray). They can be examined at the oblast. kray. autonomous or union-
republic. migration exchange zone or large economic region level. As experience in
studying population formation for various TPC centers has shown (2. 3). it is appro-
priate to analyze external migration ties in terms of fractional units of the coun-
try's administrative-territorial divisions (oblasts. krays. autonomous and union re-
publics). This approach will subsequently make it easier to establish migration ex-
change zones. Internal (intraoblast. intrakray) migration ties characterize popula-
tion exchange between a given center and cities, settlements and rural population
centers within that oblast (kray).

Processing arrival and departure sheets results in the compilation of tables which
enable us to calculate the basic parameters of migration ties. In addition to
simple tables reflecting migrant distribution by sex, age. place of birth, place of
departure or settlement. branch employment and length of stay. we also compiled com-
bined tables which provide an opportunity to reveal differences in the qualitative
composition of migration flows. Tables showing the degree of permanent settlement
of migrants as a function of place of birth. former residence. anticipated next move
and the composition of the migrants. comprise a separate group.

The third and most important stage in collecting and preparing the data is to con-
vert the materials obtained into a form suitable for economic-geographic study. The
results of processing primary migration reporting sources can properly be represented
in the form of matrices. graphs and maps. Maps occupy a special place in geographic
research on population formation. Their subject matter is diverse. They ordinarily
show the size. intensiveness and results of migration exchange and the structure of
the flows. "hen studying population formation in TPC centers. maps using a single
legend are compiled for the migration ties of each center for different dates which
mark characteristic stages of development. The amounts of direct and return flows
(or migration volume) and an overall migration ties intensiveneas factor are used as
indicators. Such maps were developed individually to show external and internal mi-
gration ties. The compilation and conjugate analysis of migration ties maps enabled
us to establish the general features of population fonmation for various centers. as
well as the features of each center as a function of number of people. functional
type. level of development and place in the settlement system.

15 sen—nr"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When studying migration ties. both their spatial differences and their temporal
changes are of important significance. Analysis of maps reflecting the migration
ties of centers on different dates enables us to reveal changes in the size and
structure of the flows and the boundaries of zones of different levels of migration
exchange intensiveness in connection with continued development of the complex and
its settlement system. It is possible. using such maps, to compile maps of the dy-
namics of migration ties which show the degree of stability and trends in change in
the size. intensiveness. direction and results of external and internal migration
exchange. Materials thus prepared served as the base for geographic research on
the process of population formation in the main centers of the Heat-Siberian. Sa-
yanskiy. Bratsk - Ust'-Ilimskiy TPC's and KATEK.

The creation and development of TPc's is usually accompanied by urban population
growth (especially in the large industrial centers) and reduction in rural popula-
tion. This feature of population dynamics is typical of a majority of the regions
of present industrial utilization. However. the initial stage of TPC formation in
the southern and more settled regions of Siberia (Sayanskiy. for example) did not
cause so pronounced a jump in population as compared with the northern regions now
being utilized. Moreover. in individual TPC's developing in sparsely populated re-
gions. the rural population often increases as a result of the siting of nonagri-
cultural enterprises there.

Graphic analysis of population dynamics and the role of its components (natural in-
crement and migration results) enables us to group urban settlements and rural re-
gions of TPc's into four types most commonly encountered. based on these indicators.
The first is characterized by population growth with migration influx playing the de-
cisive role. This type is inherent foremost to centers of present TPC industrial de-
velopment. Higration influx often comprises 60—90 percent of the total population
increment there. In the second and third types of dynamics, a slight increase in
population is noted, with natural increment of leading importance, and in the third
- a population outflow. The fourth type of dynamics is distinguished from the pre-
vious types by a reduction in population as a consequence of significant migration
outflow. This relationship of dynamics elements is observed most often in rural re—
gions and old urban settlements with poorly developed industry.

The population of the main industrial centers of the TPc's is shaped under the in—
fluence of a migration influx which introduced substantial changes into the age
structure of the population and natural reproduction indicators. The level of na-
tural population increment in these centers reaches the highest values for the gi-
ven region. The most favorable relationship of natural reproduction components
evolves in them: birth rate indicators are considerably above the average level

for the territory and mortality rates are considerably lower. Migration intensive-
ness coefficients are also highest in the centers of present TTC industrial develop-
ment. Graphs depicting three indicators -- birth rate. mortality and natural incre-
ment or arrival. departure and migration results —- are a convenient method of ana-
lyzing territorial differences in natural movement and migration mobility. Graphs
of dynamic types, natural movement and migration mobility enable us to establish

the place and role of TPC industrial centers in the TPC sociodemographic system.

The highest amount of migration is noted in the developing industrial centers,
which also determine the level of TPC population migration mobility. It results
from the significant direct (arrival) and return (departure) migration flows. Hi-
gration ordinarily is appreciably higher in the initial develop-eat period in

17
FOR1DFFKJALIEEZONLY
FIHI()FFIC1AL.USB!JNLY

connection with the intensive construction. Subsequently. migration stabilizes, re-
latively speaking, although the nature of change in it is dissimilar from year to
year.

One feature of population formation in TPC industrial centers is the broad range of
migration ties. Migration exchange occurs in nearly all the economic regions of the
country. Five zones of migration exchange are delineated for each center on the ba-
sis of indicators of direct and return flows (or amount of movement) and the general
migration ties intensiveness factor (4): extremely high level of intensiveness.
high. above-average. below-average and low.

1. Zone of significant amounts and an extremely high level of migration ties inten-
siveness: includes an oblast (or kray) within which a given center is located and
describes its internal migration ties. It is distinguished by a very sharp contrast
in all migration indicators as compared with other migration exchange zones. The
intensiveness of internal migration ties is highest and exceeds the average level
10-fold. As a result of migration exchange with this zone. a perceptible migration
influx of population to the center is observed.

2. The zone of high migration ties intensiveness level includes territories border-
ing an oblast (kray) in which a TPC is being created and often comprise with it one
large economic region (Eastern or Western Siberia). Participation of this zone in
the overall migration exchange of the center is substantial. and the intensiveness
of migration ties is 2.5- to 5-fold higher than the average indicators. The re-
sults of migration exchange are positive. especially for the large centers.

3. The zone of above-average level of migration ties intensiveness includes other
territorial subdivisions of Siberia. and the Far East to some extent, not in the
first or second zones. The intensiveness of migration exchange with this zone is
1.5- to two-fold higher than average. The zone plays an appreciable role in the
volume of movement and provides a slight population influx.

4. The zone of below-average level of migration ties intensiveness occupies a
large portion of the European USSR. Along with the first zone. it plays an import-
:nt role in migration movement. but a population outflow is often observed in ex-
change with it. It is quite an extensive zone in terms of area and is the most
settled part of the country. Reverse migration flows are distinguished by signi-
ficant amounts. Along with this, some oblasts in the zone. especially ones similar
in terms of production profile with the developing oblasts in Siberia. provide the
necessary amount of skilled personnel.

5. The zone with a very low level of migration ties intensiveness includes the Bal-
tic republics. Transcaucasus. Central Asia, Belorussia and Moldavia. This zone oc-

cupies a small proportion of the overall migration exchange of the centers. and the

intensiveness of migration ties with it is extremely weak.

Internal migration ties deserve particular attention, inasmuch as they play an im-
portant role in population redistribution and transforming the settlement system.
The relationship of internal to external migrations evolves for each center as a
function of the settlement. utilization and migration opportunities of the sur-
rounding territory. Thus. external migration ties. which were especially pronounced
in the initial development period. have predominated in exchange in centers of the
Bratsk - Ust'-Ilimskiy and Heat Siberian TPC's. For the industrial centers of TPC's

18
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being formed in the southern and central portions of Krasnoyarskiy Kray (Sayanskiy,
KATEK), internal migrations of significant volume are characteristic.

The internal migration ties of the centers are the most intensive and stable, espe-
cially with the rural population of adjacent administrative regions. Migration ties
between urban and rural areas are direct and unilateral in nature and facilitate po-
pulation influx (a small number of residents leave in the return migration flow).
Population formation in the centers is also associated with the migration of urban
residents. This type of movement has recently occupied an appreciable place in mi-
gration exchange. The leading migration ties in terms of volume are ordinarily es-
tablished with the oblast (kray) center and the closest urban settlements. In this
regard. territorial proximity and similarity of economic specialization are of im-
portant significance. Another direction of displacement is from old urban settle-
ments of lesser rank in terms of number of people into newer. rapidly developing.
multiple-function centers. The intensiveness of internal migration ties diminishes
with distance from the center.

The effectiveness of migration exchange is relatively low. A migration influx is
formed as a result of large direct and return flows. A significant portion of those
arriving are migrants without jobs ["unsecured"]. who will live in the center for
less than a year. Comparing the initial point of departure for those migrants
leaving a given city and their new place of settlement enables us to trace the con-
tinuing territorial redistribution of the population. In this regard, movement
through three points is recorded: place of departure, city, place of new settle-
ment. More than half the return-flow migrants return to their previous place of
residence. Some of those arriving from other regions of the country participate in
internal migrations, leaving for other cities or settlements of the same oblast (or
kray). And only a small number of migrants plan to move to a new place of residence
in Siberia. At the same time, local residents leave their own oblast (kray). in-
cluding for places outside Siberia.

Forecasting TPC population formation relies on a knowledge of the initial status of
migration ties and their tendencies as the complex develops. In order to purpose-
fully influence migration. we need to establish not only the role of various fac-
tors influencing this procesa. but also the nature of change in migration ties over
time. Using centers of the Bratsk - Ust'-Ilinskiy and Sayanskiy TPC's as an example.
we succeeded in tracing the dynamics of migration ties parameters over several years.

Migrations are the most effective and dynamic component of population movement. As
analysis has shown. the basic parameters of migration for TPC centers change signi-
ficantly in the course of their development. An increase in one of the components
of migration movement (arrivals) invariably involves growth in another (departures).
The results of migration exchange can change within considerable limits in a brief
period of time. Maximum migration volumes coincide with the start of construction,
putting large industrial facilities into operation and expanding production.

In the course of development of a complex, the relationship of components of popu-
lation dynamics of TPC centers also changes. Whereas in the initial period a mi-
gration influx dominates significantly, its size then decreases and stabilizes
somewhat. The importance of natural increment in population formation increases.
The old cities which had been further developed thanks to the creation of a TPC
change the type of population dynamics.

19
FORTOFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic directions of the migration ties which have evolved are distinguished by
their stability. Changes consist not so much in the range of migration exchange as
in the size and significance of the corresponding flow direction. With time. migra-
tion ties with specific regions can intensify or abate. but the leading importance
of ties with the closest and adjacent regions is retained. A comparison of migra-
tion ties maps of individual TPC centers which were compiled using a single legend
for different dates shows that only the role of internal migrations has intensified
significantly. The importance of external migration ties with other parts of Si-
beria remained unchanged. The proportion of regions in the European portion of the
country in overall migration exchange has decreased. External migration ties ordi-
narily predominate for a while at the start of TPC formation in sparsely settled
territories. As a city develops. its functions become more complex and social and
personal services are developed. the role of internal migration ties increases. In
the concluding stage of creation of a complex. they have become the determining
ones.

Changes in the overall demographic situation in the country, and especially the mi-
gration opportunities of the population of regions with which close migration ties
have evolved. exert a substantial influence on the direction and structure of mi~

gration ties.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vorob'yev, V. V., "Naseleniye Vostochnoy Sibiri (sovremennaya dinamika i vo-
prosy prognozirovaniya)" [Population of Eastern Siberia (Present Dynamics and
Forecasting Problems)]. Novosibirsk. Izd-vo Nauka, 1977. l60 pp.

2. Misevich, K. N. and Chudnova. V. I., "Naseleniye rayonov sovremennogo promyshlen-
nogo osvoyeniya severa Zapadnoy Sibiri" [Population of Newly Utilized Regions in
Northern Western Siberia], Novosibirsk, Izd-vo Nauka. 1973, 209 pp.

3. Chudnova. V. l. and Kozhukhovskaya, N. F.. "Naseleniye Sayanskogo TPK (formiro-
vaniye i rssseleniye)" [Population of the Sayanskiy TPC (Formation and Settle-
ment)]. Novosibirsk, Izd—vo Nauka. 1979. 120 pp.

4. Rybakovskiy. L. L.. "Metodologicheskiye voprosy prognozirovaniya naseleniya"
[Methodological Questions of Forecasting Population). Moscow, 1978, 208 pp.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Geografiya i prirodnyye resursy". 1981

llOSZ
C50: 8146/1615 3ND

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY