FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10586

14 June 1982

Korean Affairs Report

(Fouo' 4/32)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain inforlation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted..

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the polic
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED RERBIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIOR
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OPTICIAL USE ONIY.
KOREAN AFFAIRS REPORT

(2000 mm
CONTENTS

scum KOREA

MILITARY AFFAIRS

Japanese Journal Analyzes South Korean Defense Policy
(GURJI m, J“ 82) OOOOOOOOOOOO...0.0.0.0...0......

NORTH mm

POLITICS AND W

Speculation on Possible Power Struggle Presented
(Isuke Hoshino; 3mm 8mm, 10 Apr 82) ............

~e- [III-ASIA-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JAPANESE JOURNAL ANALYZBS SOUTH KOREAN DEFENSE POLICY
Tokyo GUNJI KENKYU in Japanese No. 195 Jun 82 pp 168-170

[Article "The 1982 ROK National Defense Policy"; originally published in
JAPAN MILITARY RBVIEH, June 1982]

[Text] The Republic of Korea [30!] this year started isplenenting the
"Second Plan for Strengthening Its Fighting Capabilities." The plan
reportedly requires $23.8 billion.

Coinciding with this, President chong himself delivered a "Policy Speech

for the Year 1982" on 22 January 1982. In it, he set forth the 1982 national
defense policy, including the "establishment of an actual fighting defense
structure" and the "productive operation of national defense budget." The
National Assembly also carried out intensive interpellations on a govern-
nent national defense policy which is designed to cope with a threat fro-
North Korea.

National Defense Policy, 1982

l. we will exert our efforts to establish an actual fighting defense
structure, to consolidate a national mobilization systen, to strengthen
spiritual fighting capabilities and to nsnage and operate national budget
in a productive way so that an iron-like defense posture both in the front-
line and in the rear area may be naintained. Such a defense posture is
needed to defend national security and peace, and the life and property of
the people, fron a threat of war.

2. He will continuously exert our efforts to improve new strategies and
tactics which are designed to strengthen our national defense posture and
to foster the highly developed conbat capabilities of our armed forces
through joint military exercises.

3. By continuously promoting the develop-ent of the defense industry we

will establish the system of research and development for highly developed
precision weapons and the systel of uses production.

FOI‘OI'IC1A1.lﬂﬂ£(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instructions Given By President Choc: To the Ministry of National Defense

After receiving a briefing from the minister of national defense at the
Blue House (presidential nansion/office) on 21 February regarding the
ministry's operational plans for this year, President Chang gave the
minister or‘ national defense the following 3-itea instructions:

1. To insure that the structure of the sraed forces be reorganized and
developed into that with a prinary e-phasia placed on the improvement of
fighting capabilities and that a defense posture be naintained to the
sexism by strengthening the spiritual fighting capability of the armed
forces.

2. To make efforts to thoroughly carry out education and nanagelent of
reserve forces and to aanage and operate the budget in a productive way.

3. To insure that the arsed forces delegate a substantial scope of respon-
sibility and authority to their subordinate units at each level so that
the creativity and capability of each unit nay be naxinized.

The president used to receive an annual briefing froa and to give necessary
instructions to each ministry at the ninistry concerned; however, it scene
that this procedure has been replaced with a report sade by each sinister
at the Blue House. .

Answers by the Government at an Extraordinary National Assenbly Session

The 110th extraordinary session of the National Asaalbly was convened fron
26 February through 13 March. At this session there were intensive inquiries
from opposition party members regarding the question of national defense.
Following are answers given by the governaent to the inquiries nade by
opposition party members.

1. 0n Developing Nuclear Weapons

Judging fron the fact that it would be more advantageous to rely on the
0.8. nuclear unbrella than possessing Korea's own nuclear weapons, the
governaent has no intention of developing nuclear weapons. (Answer by
the sinister of national defense.)

2. On the Length of Military Service

Right now the length of ailitary service for the navy and the air force
is 35 nonths, whereas the arsy and the marine corps require 33 Iontha'
service. The length of nilitery service is scheduled to be reduced to 30
aonths for the army and the aarine corps by the year 1986 by reducing one
nonth per year. (Answer by the vice minister of national defense.)

MWMONLY
3. 0n the Defense Industry

Since we have a capability to produce most of basic weapons and some of
highly developed precision weapons, we maintain a level identical to that
of North Korea. It is believed, however. that the ROK will outnumber
North Korea in all of the fields by the first half of the 1980's. (Answer
by vice ninister of national defense.)

3n the defense industry, the minister of conserce and industry on 5 March
also said: "Fighter aircraft ass-bled and produced in our country will
make a debut swtine this year."

lo. 0n Military Preparations by North Korea and Our Countermeasures

Although there always exists a possibility of provoking a reckless southward
. invasion by the North, we are taking a perfect-combat-readiness posture.

The ROK arsed forces are taking a defense posture for a showdown with the
North while firmly defending the present frontline with an emphasis on
the cosmopolitan area. We are strengthening a'defense posture against
the infiltration of North Korean irregular warfare troops and are also
continuously augmenting the capability of an early warning.

It is important, however. to strengthen the fighting capability of reserve
forces in irregular warfare. There have been some problematic points
thus far in training reserve forces and auglenting arms.

Five islands in the western Sea (Yellow Sea) are the area where the possi-
bility of limited provocations by North Korea is quite great. However,

we have already fortified these five islands and are taking a posture which
would enable us to inediately cope with and retaliate for any enemy
provocation.

Moreover, North Korea has deployed some 20 conventional sub-arines and a
small number of minisubmarines in the eastern and western seas. These
submarines plan to blockade major South Korean ports and bays and to jeop-
ardize sea lane traffic. Nultidefensive measures are worked out in the
critical zone of both the eastern and southern seas in preparation for such
an attack by North Korea. Such countermeasures as the installation of
barricades and the reinforcenent of antitank weapons to cope with an attack
by North Korean tanks are wo:ked out. North Koreans are capable of simul-
taneously infiltrating some 2,500 personnel by some 260 AN-2 planes. We
have already worked out a set of regional defensive measures; for example,
a network of an early warning system in the area where the enemy infil-
trators are assumed to be parachuted and a deployment of snared striking
forces. (Answer by vice minister of national defense.)

“MUSEMY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

5. On the Hansgenent of National Defense Budget

We have already compiled a budget based on zero-point. We plan to carry out
productiye budget management by actively promoting an armywide conservation
caspaign. (Answer by vice sinister of national defense.)

6. 0n Military Diplosacy

We intend to achieve superiority over North Korea by formulating a median-
and long-range plan for silitary diplomacy, under which invitation and

visitation diplooacy and the activity of public information will be strength-
ened.

To achieve these objectives, we intend to strengthen and promote military
cooperation not only with our allies but also with nonaligned countries.
(Answer by sinister of national defense.)

Others

1. Evacuation Training In Tile of An Earthquake As Part of Civil Defense
Training

To cope with oft-repeated recent earthquakes. the Ministry of hone Affairs
conducted its first evacuation training on 15 March. the "Day of Civil
Def ense." The Ministry of home Affairs has decided to conduct further
education as part of civil defense training neasures which will be taken
in tins of an earthquake.

2. President Chang naphasizes the "Accumlation of Strength"

President Chang attended graduation ceremonies which were held at ailitary
acadenies-n-the Any 38th class, the Navy 36th Class and the Air Force 30th
Classnon 6, 7 and 9 April respectively. In his speeches. President Chong
stated: "Peaceful unification is our historic mission."

Delivering an address to academy graduates. President Chang said: ”Our
biggest enemy is nothing but a war. The best way to prevent a war is to
possess more powerful strength than our enemy which intends to touch off
a war. Only when we are lightier than our enemy is it inevitable for our
enemy to abandon its intention of subjugating us by force of arms.
Accordingly, the accmulation of strength is the best way to prevent a
war. This is also the best way to accelerate national unification in a
peaceful way." Thus, President Chong stressed the need for the "accumula-
tion of strength."

COPYRIGHT: JAPAN MILITARY REVIEH. 1982

(:80: (0105/11?

MWWMLY
SPECULATIO“ 0N POSSIBLE POHBR STRUGGLE PRESENTED
Tokyo SANKBI SHIHBUN in Japanese 10 Apr 82 p 3

[Article by Isuke Boshino, deputy chief of International News Division: "What
Is Happening Now in North Korea?"]

[Text] Contrary to the predictions of many, Kim Chang-11, the
crown prince of the "Kim Il-song dynasty" and the secretary of
the Korean Labor Party (commmnist party), was not appointed to
any important positions in the government at the Supreme People's
Assembly (held on 5 April) of North Korea (the Democratic Peo-
ple's Republic of Korea). As if related to this mystery, many
unprecedented "abnormal" phenomena were observed in the Supreme
People's Assembly on this occasion. It seems to be an indica-
tion that the power structure of North Korea has begun creaking
and that there is a possibility of a power struggle coming into
the open hereafter. Although North Korea has been in extremely
difficult economic circumstances, it has been making unusual
efforts to strengthen its military power. Hhether or not such
tendencies have anything to do with the creaking at the center
of the power is unclear, but the tendencies are interesting in
relation to trends in the USSR and the PRC.

Abnormal Conditions in the Supreme People's Assembly

Contrary to the optimistic reporting in party and government newspapers, Kim
Chong-il was not chosen vice chairman, which had been rumored, or even a member
of the cabinet. Not only that, there are also indications that the Supreme Peo-
ple's Assembly was held in unprecedentedly "abnormal" conditions.

1. Prior to the Supreme People's Assembly held on 5 April, the Central Committee
was summoned for an unusual 3 April meeting to discuss items on the agenda for
the Supreme People's Assembly. This has never happened in the past. Specialists
on North Korea assume that the constitutional amendment and personnel matters re-
lating to the successor issue were manipulated behind the scenes at this meeting
of the Central (kn-sittee. In particular, they speculate that the issue of Kim
Chong-il was intensely discussed in the meeting. The result was to postpone the
appointment of Kim Chong-il to a national-level post. It is questionable, how-
ever, whether or not one is allowed to express publicly opposite opinions in
North Korea.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. The Supreme People's Assembly lasted only 1 day this time. Usually it con-
tinues 2 or 3 days. and in 1950 discussion in the assembly lasted 8 days. There
is no past example of discussions ranging from personnel matters to the budget
ending in a day. In ordinary years, Chairman Rim Il-song discusses budget plans
and such in his "Horde of the New Year." This year, however. he did not say any-
thing about the budget. Concerned sources think that the economic condition in
North Korea has worsened considerably. Beginning with Premier Ti Chrng-ok, an
economic technocret who had been expected to be transferred this time. most cab-
inet members remained in their posts. This seems to oe related to economic con-
ditiona.

3. In this personnel change the most important cabinet posts, defense minister
and public security minister, were not announced. Considering the characteris-
tics of the country. these two posts can be strengthened but never abolished.
These posts have been occupied by 0 Chin-u and others of the Rim Chong-il line.
Kim Chang-11's strength was his control over the pivotal military and security
services. At the same time, be grasped control of the Three Revolutions (thought,
technology, and culture). Teams which are elite youth groups certified by Chair-
man Kim Il-song. These forces have been maneuvering for Kim Chong-il'a early
succession to the chairmanship.

South Korean intelligence agencies think that these two posts will eventually
fall under the actual direct control of Kim Chong-il. But will this actually
happen? The power of Kim Chong-il's line depends on how the issue develops.

He do not know the true reason why Kim Chong-il was not appointed to an important
position in the national leadership. However, it is easy to imagine that im-
portant reasons were the reported repulsion of senior party leaders and the re-
sistance of the country's two closest friends, the USSR and the PRC, which basic-
ally oppose Kim Chong-il's succession even though they formally approve it.

Strongly Criticized Three Revolutions Teams

Although criticism of Kim Chong-il himself has not come into the open to the ex-
tent reported to the outside, the high-handedness of the Three Revolutions Teams
which are said to be under the control of Kim Chong-il and the adventuristic
leadership of Kim Chong-il himself have been severely criticized.

Kim Chang-11 has also been said to be the leader of the Panmunjon poplar incident
that led to a hair-trigger war crisis (note: on 18 August 1976 in the Panmunjon
guard area, 0.5. and South Korean soldiers cutting poplar trees were attacked by
North Korean soldiers and two u.s. officers were killed with axes). Many hugh
memorials and monuments have recently been built in Pyongyang and other places.
This work is also reported to be under the leadership of Kim Chong-il. while
North Korea continues in an economic slump, construction of these unproductive
monuments and triumphal arches has a high priority in the allocation_of huaan
resources and materials. This course of conduct cannot go uncriticized. It has
been reported that military forces and laborers clashed in Chongjin last Septem-

ber. There is also information about a clash between military forces and labor-
ers in Sinuiju-during November. One specialist says that "disturbances have
been occurring in various places."

6
FOR 0FFNJA1.lEH!(MNLY
0n the other hand, both the USSR and the PRC have been opposing Kim Chong-il's
succession to the chairmanship. Understandably, their opposition was reflected
in the personnel changes. The PRC. in particular, straightforwardly opposed
his succession as chairman and pressed North Korea for "an explanation concern-
ing the issue of a successor" in January 1980. A hereditary transfer of power
from Kim ll-song to his son, Kim Chong-il, violates the principle of communism
that makes the people the heroes of history. Not only that. the PRC fears that
approval of a hereditary transfer of power would bounce back to China where the
divinity of an individual has just been denied.

Assuming a Second Korean War?

While offering warnings and criticism, the PRC began reducing economic aid to
North Korea in 1980. It reduced the supply of crude oil from the promised amount
of 1 million tons to 800,000 tons (in 1981). As a reason, the PRC explained that
North Korea did not export primary products to China. The USSR also decreased
crude oil supplies from the planned 750,000 tons to 500,000 tons. Its reason
was that North Korea did not export nanferrous metals to the USSR in payment.
Nevertheless, China reluctantly approved Kim Chong-il's succession last October.
Expertsnbelieve this was done because of Chinese fears of North Korea's "adven-
turism.

One example is Kim Yong-nam's (a member of the party’s Political Bureau. then

the secretary) visit to China last November. At that time, Kim Yong-nan is said
to have asked the PRC not to participate in the Seoul Olympic Games as well as
sounding out the likelihood of Chinese military cooperation in the "event of a
second Korean war." According to experts, Kim Yong-nan said: "South Korea will
provoke military action on the Korean Peninsula with the support of Japan and

the United States in 1982. North Korea wants China's assistance." Thus, he
sought the PRc's cooperation. The PRC rejected the request by saying that "North
Korea's view is totally different from the Chinese analysis of the situation."
But there is the fact that North Korea carried out large-scale military exercis-
es involving both the government and the people starting last November. The
training held from late November through December was of an unprecedentedly large
scale. Twelve regular army divisions, special attack units, and militia corps
(laborer and farmer red guards) participated in the training. Ordinary trains
and ships were also mobilized.

Surprised by the training, the PRC sent Premier Zhao Ziyang to North Korea on
20 December. Although Zhao Ziyang talked with the North Korean side, no joint
statement was issued. Even though Kim Yong-nam's request was authentic, North
Korea's true intention was unclear. It cannot be said that the danger of war
was eliminated by China's rejection. If people's dissatisfaction with economic
hardship builds up, governments often start wars in order to divert people's at-
tention to the outside.

It is also unclear whether these movements are in any way related to the issue

of Kim Chong-il's succession. Nevertheless, it seems clear from the results of
the Supreme People's Assembly that there has been friction in the North Korean

power structure and that it has begun creaking.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keisai Shimbunsha 1982

9896
cso: «105/101 sun

7
FOR 0i11CJAL USIZ(MNLY