FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

JPRS L/10038
8 October 1981

China Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 17/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentLeses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/1003
8 October 1

CHINA REPORT

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(r000 17/81)

CONTENTS

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

Tank Units Overrun Cao Bang
(JIEFANGJI’N 8A0, 1 Apr79) 0......l0000OOIOOCOOIOOOCOOOOOIOC.

Young Cadres Gain Combat Ebcperience
(JIEFANGJUN 3‘0, 1 ”1.79) CDC...00......OIQIIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO

Military Schools Apply Combat Experience in Teaching
(cao Yin81°n8;JIEFANGJUN 8‘0, 1 Apr 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO‘O.

Vietnam Border War Provided Experiences in Modern Warfare
(JIEFANGJUN 8A0, 11 Apr 79) OCOOOCOIOOIOOOO0.00000I0.0.0.0...

Experiences in Vietnam Border War Sumed Up
(JIEFmGJm 8A0, 11 Apr 79) O...U'00...IOOOCIDOGOOOCCOOUOOOOQ

Compilation of Battle Examples, by Zheng Jian
Public Comendation Stressed, by Xing Shicao

Heroic Battle To Take Cam mong Described
(Pan Kuangfu, Sun Zhibo; JIEFANGJUN BAO, 11 Apr 79) .........

Capture of Mountain Peak Daring Vietnam War Described
(Zhang thngyang; JIEFANGJUN, 11 Apr 79) e e... o e e e o coco-.000.

Test Pilot Recovers From Injuries, Flies Again
(Li Ciying; JIEFANGJUN BAO, 11 Apr 79) .......................

Training Reform Stresses Simplicity, Practicality
(Tan Ji'an, Liu Shitong; JIEFANGJUN BAO, 1 Apr 79) ..........

- a - [III - CC - 80 POUO:

"A" AFF'F- - 'lh" “bl! II
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE1DNL¥ '

Political Education Course on Agricultural Economic Policies
(Ma Ronggui, et a1.; JIBFANGJUN BAG, 8 Jun 79)

Concepts 'Hodern' Warfare, 'Hodernized' warfare Distinguished
(Jin 1m, Ye Xing; .113?me BAO, 21 Jun 79) 00.000.000.000

Article Discusses Training To Meet Demands of Modern Hhrfare
(JIEPANGJUN 8A0, 29 Jun 79) 0.0.0000.00000000000000000000I0.

Flame Throwing Training, by Yu Qiguang

Infantry, Artillery Coordination, by Li Songlin, et al.
Connendcrs, Troop Coordination, by Zhou Nan, “bi Youlong
Army, Air Force Coordination, by Ii Yongan, Jin Zhifu

Briefs
Artillery Hartime Experiences
Value of Multiple Skills
Lessons From Border Her

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

TANK UNITS OVERRUN CAO BANG
Beijing JIEFANGJUN 8A0 in Chinese 1 Apr 79 p 1
[Article: "People's Armored Cavalry Carry All Before Them"]

[Text] Editor's note: People have been delighted to see that our young armored
soldiers have leveled every dangerous difficulty in the recent defensive counter-
attack, carrying all before them in a great display of martial prowess! The
China--Vietnam border is hilly and forested, with cliffs, canyons, and narrow passes
everywhere. Using tanks in this kind of terrain calls for dauntless heroism and s
high degree of proficiency in fighting skills. Our heroic tank soldiers were able
to overcome all manner of unimaginable difficulties. cut paths and seized passes,
moved ahead boldly, and created marvels in the history of tank warfare, relying on
a combination of the spirit of revolutionary heroism and superb fighting technique.
Our army's powerful political work constantly nurtures and tempers the heroic

spirit of our officers and men to suppress all enemies; our army's military training
is strict and arduous, constantly strengthening th. tactical skills of the soldiers.
It is true that education and training can produce fighting strength.

Our Guangxi border defense forces made a 100-11 long-range attack directly on Can
Bang, delivering a killing blow to the Vietnamese forces in that area. What con-
tribution did our young tank units make to the battle? This is not only of interest
to all of the officers and men of the army, it is something that concerns the

people of the whole country.

The road to Cao Bang is rugged and rough. The terrain of the battle area is peri-
lous, the enemy situation was complex, they were heavily guarded and able to maintain
themselves. The key to implementing a combat plan for rapidly surrounding and
annihilating the enemy was the speed of dividing and penetrating them, and under
these circumstances, the difficult task of taking the lead position falls naturally
on the shoulders of the tankers.

Before dawn on 17 February, six red and green signal flares rose high in the air and
the ground was shaken by the artillery fire of the counterattack against the
Vietnamese invaders. In the flash of the artillery fire, tanks full of power and
grandeur roared forward one after another, bearing down on the enemy with the weight
of Tai Shan. Tank treads smashed the bamboo stakes that the Vietnamese had set in
the ground within our borders, tongues of fire pursuing and destroying those enemy
who had been awakened from dreams and fled in confusion. In an instant, the
Vietnamese army's painstakingly built first line of defense had been breached.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Having broken through the pass, our tanks braved a rain of shells and penetrated
deeply. swiftly, and violently toward the enemy over perilous karat terrain. Here,
beginning with land captured on precipitous cliffs, the road snaked through inter-
locking dogtooth peaks connecting with one small basin after another like "a long

vine growing melons." Every so often there was a narrow pass to cause difficulty
for our tankers' swift advance.

In this kind of terrain. tanks have no way to take up battle formations and can
only move along in single, serpentine file. If one tank breaks down, those behind
it find it very difficult to advance. As the troops penetrated into that pass, the
road became more impassable, the width of the space between the two mountains being
as narrow as the body of a tank, with rocky cliffs on both sides. There was no
time to wait for the engineers to open the way, and no way to detour around it.
”hat to do? First company commander Lin Nengzhu [2651 1125 3796], riding in tank
No. 101, inspected the width of the pass, relied on the practical experience of his
years of military training, and according to the tank's capabilities decisively
ordered driver Zhang Dongfn [1728 2639 1127]: "Blast ahead, and use your horse-
power!" Tank No. 10] suddenly went up against the walls of the pass. Once, twice,
it collided continuously four or tive times, the rock on both sides broke and fell.
and the tank finally broke a way through the rock walls and the tanks of the unit
followed closely in bursting out of the pass. What courage and resourcefulness!
This kind of ramming was not rash, it represented a high degree of coordination
between the commanders' heroism and their scientific spirit. It is just this kind

of coordination that made this pathfinding tank unit into a sword that will
never dull.

When the brigade's tanks got to Na Cuong, they encountered a river. An old dilapi-
dated wooden bridge collapsed before more than a few tanks had crossed it. The
commander at once ordered the remaining tanks to ford the stream. Tank No. 406
began towards the middle of the river. some water got into the engine, and the tank
suddenly stopped running. Facing this unexpected circumstance, commander Li Wujun
[2621 2976 0193] of the 5th Company, following them, decided promptly and oppor-
tunely to send in another tank as they might as well make a bridge of the two tanks.
Under his direction tank No. 503 was driven into the river and drawn up to No. 406.
With the order to move forward, one tank after another rumbled across the river on
the auxiliary fuel tanks on the sides of N03. 606 and 503.

Taking measures like this requires a steadfast determination. Hhen this situation
was reported to the unit command post it was universally approved of. Even the
most cool-headed and experienced commanders did not withhold their praise: "How
daring! Our tank soldiers' comprehension of the battle plan is truly deep, and
their implementation is resolute!"

The tanks proceded, fighting as they went. penetrating 31 kilometers, and arrived
at Dong Khe [2639 3305], an important Vietnamese strongpoint, in two hours and 65
minutes, which opened the door for the advance to Cao Bang. The enemy was dreaming
and had not imagined that our army could be on their doorstep so amazingly fast, so
they began waving at our tanks, thinking we were their own. They did not wake up
until we legan to fire. but by then it was too late.

Our tank units are not ashamed of being steel men on iron horses. From the time
they were dispatched outside our borders to Can Bang, on the whole endless advance,

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what people along the way saw was our tank soldiers crossing a natural barrier,
the bloody battlefield where a stubborn enemy was annihilated, heroic forms.

Near Thong Son. tank No. 507 was hit by an enemy anti-tank rocket and caught fire.
There is a deep ditch on the right side at this place and an overhanging cliff on
the left, so tank No. 507 was blocking the narrow way completely. At this time,
enemy shells were exploding continuously all around our blocked tanks, sending
shrapnel and rock fragments whistling by and clattering against the tank turrets.
The whole battle situation did not allow them to stay there, and at that instant
the terrain and the enemy situation especially did not permit them to tarry long.
The tank soldiers knew that tank No. 507 contained several dozen shells that would
explode in a few moments. what to do? The wonders that occur in combat are fre-
quently beyond expectations and are more often than not within reason. Commander
of the crack 5th Company Deng Ji [6772 4580], who led in tank No. 508, roared
forward out of the raging flames engulfing tank No. 507, followed by commander Li
Hujun's tank No. 502, three tanks of the 2d Platoon, and two tanks of the 3d Platoon,
all of which broke through! When tank No. 507 exploded, seven tanks had already
come through safely. This was truly a case of an army dedicated to a just cause
having great wisdom and great courage! The speed of advance of this stream of
iron was not impeded, and under the accurate fire of our tankers the enemy firing
points were reduced to rubble one by one.

The heroic tank units charged through Non kim Son, Na Xuan Son, Qua Cuong, and to

a point where Bac Son was right before them. Bac Son is only seven kilometers from
Goa Bang, and is a thoroughly important position. The steep slopes on both sides

of the highway were studded with pillboxes, bunkers and hidden trenches. Here they
had Soviet-made "Hail" anti-tank rockets, American-made anti-tank rifles, recoilless
rifles, 40 mm. rocket launchers, and anti—tank mines deployed in a staged arrangement
according to their different capabilities, the fire pattern becoming denser toward
the rear. From the foot of the hill to its peak there were more than 80 different
firing points arranged densely in tiers, and there were even anti-tank personnel
hidden in the road culverts. This was the Vietnamese army's strongest ambush ring.
The enemy arrogantly threatened: We will demolish the Chinese tanks at this place.

Good will inevitably triumph over evil. You tend to your anti-tank, I'll tend to
my anti "anti-tank." The commanders, eager for a fight, determined to raise hell!

when our 6th Company reached the Bac Son bridgehead, they discovered that the
40—melcr long bridge had been demolished. Because of the enemy's tight blockade,
follow-up units were not able to come up for a time, and the 6th Company had enemy
on three sides, a desperate situation. Commander Ren Zhu'en [0117 2691 1869] took
over the responsibility for directing the battle from the wounded company commander.
The headphones of the tankers carried his resounding, powerful voice: "Comrades,
the time [or the party's testing of us has arrived! The time has come to win honor
for the people! Every tank must pay attention to demarcate fire, and fight with a
cool head..." The voice was abruptly cut off as an enemy anti-tank rocket hit tank
No. 602, killing comrade Ren Zhu'en.

"Take a blood price from the enemy, avenge the commander!" The commander's unfi-
nished order was immediately translated into combat action on the part of the

officers and men. Third platoon leader Zhang Chengzhong [1728 6134 1813] straightened
his back and led the whole company in a fierce counterattaek against the enemy. The

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-"K'ML [ESE ONLY

arrogant enemy, thinking themselves clever, opened fire from all sides at once,
little thinking that in doing this, they were revealing the positions of all of
their fire points to our alert tankers. Despite this enemy sabre rattling, the
soldiers met the a tack calmly. aiming at and annihilating the enemy positions one
by one. Along with the roar of the tanks. the enemy's firing points were destroyed
one after another. and his position started to become confused. In this way the
battle continued from three o'clock in the afternoon until nightfall. when the
sounds of firing on the battlefield gradually died out.

To completely destroy the enemy anti—tank positions, the superiors ordered the 6th
Company to secure the area and wait for the follow-up units. Under the direction
of Zhang Chengzhong, six tanks and the 23 men on them combined with some of the
comrades of the fourth infantry company, the first to reach them, to form eight
combat teams. They removed four machine guns from the tanks. quickly occupied the
advantageous terrain, and organized a ring-shaped defense poaition. The heroic
tankers leaped out of their tanks. Taking up infantry weapons, they again began
a new special battle.

Fighting day after day, the soldiers were exhausted, hungry. and cold. But these
warriors had only one thought: the men were there, the tanks were there, the
position was there, and they would not rest until the stubborn enemy had been
destroyed. At two a.m.. the enemy stole down from the mountain under cover of
darkness. Our soldiers stayed calm and waited for the enemy to get close. then
opened fire with all weapons at once, throwing the enemy into a shrieking, howling
headlong retreat. Not long afterward, the enemy organized a second attack that
was similarly beaten back.

These few iron soldiers, protecting their own tanks, held out for 17 hours within
the enemy's much-vaunted anti-tank ambush ring.

At dawn on the next day, tanks of our battalion arrived, accompanied by infantry.
The enemy's Bac Son anti-tank positions, already shot up by the 6th Company, needed
only little more than an hour to be completely wiped out by a strong coordinated
tank-infantry attack. In this battle they fought bravely and tenaciously, as well
as resourcefully and agilely, annihilating the defending enemy impassionately and
forcefully.

In perilous karst terrain, this heroic tank unit spent more than three days in

rapid penetration and gallant battle, moving more than 70 kilometers in length and
breadth, right up to Cao Bang. With a dauntless heroic spirit, they penetrated
forests, crossed ravines. charged across nine places where the enemy forces had
destroyed bridges and roads, carried on 12 relatively large-scale battles with the
enemy in five principal areas, destroyed more than 70 enemy bases and positions,
Victoriously completed the penetration and withdrawal and the mission of surrounding
and annihilating the enemy. We have worked hard for 20 years to establish our
armored forces and today saw their combat strength.

9286
080: 4005/2098

11
FOR OFFICIAL USl-Z ONLY
H“! OFFICIAL IJSE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

YOUNG CADRES CAIN COMBAT EXPERIENCE
Beijing JIEPANGJUN BAD in Chinese 1 Apr 79 p 1
[Article: "Large Group of Outstanding Cadres Mature Rapidly in Battle"]

[Text] A certain unit of the Cwangxi border defense troops has tempered a large
group of outstanding young cadres, both brave and resourceful, competent commanders.
in the self-defense counterattack. More than 600 men were nominated as cadres and
nominated to positions from the firing line. Some old comrades who had been through
the Japanese war and the liberation said: "Hitb the talent that has emerged here.
we can set our minds at ease!" The masses of soldiers also made it known that we
can trust in the fine cadres forged in battle.

The cadres of this unit at battalion level and below and some of the regimental
cadres had never been in combat before. In the self-defense counterattack, they
learned combat in combat. and modestly studied under those old cadres who had combat
experience; they developed military democracy, focused the wisdom of the masses;
they conscientiously summarized experience. fighting and advancing alternately.
becoming more proficient as they fought. rapidly improving their command skills.
Commander Hen Yuzhu [3306 3768 2691] of a certain regimentis a young officer 36 years
old. As he was able to study with Deputy Division Commander Li Pu [2621 4395], a
veteran of the liberation and the war to assist Korea. and is also able to think
things out for himself. he was bold in seeking out experience. Before any battle
started, be repeatedly organized battalion and company commanders to look over the
terrain, analyze the enemy situation, study specific methods in accordance with

the superiors' overall battle plan. and formulated a relatively thorough combat pro-
gram. After the battle started. he moved the regimental command post as close to
the front as possible, went repeatedly to the battalion and company positions to
understand their circumstances. calndy and cool-headedly judged the verious complex
circumstances. and dealt with them quickly and resolutely. In battles to annihilate
the enemy at Dong Dang, he extracted great victories at a relatively small price,
and was commended by the front line headquarters of the Gwangxi Border Defense.
Battalion Commander Xu Yuanran [6079 6678 3566] of the first battalion of a certain
regiment Joined the army in 1968 and was just promoted from company commander a few
months ago. In battle he pays close attention to communications so that his troops
can be deployed and drawn back in; he is adept at using his firces in complex
terrain, and he always forms a fist; he pays attention to good coordination of in-
fantry and artillery and develops tr} fighting force of the whole unit. In the
battles at Dong Dang and Lang Son. this battalion had the honor to get two banners

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
Hm ()FI-"IfMI [SI-7 ONLY

from the division party secretary reading "Fast penetration. swift advance, with
the power of a steel sword," and "In the attack on Lang Son, they chewed on two
tough bones in succession."

This combat was carried out under conditions of complex terrain and changeable
weather, and although it didn't last a long time. they encountered many kinds of
unexpected difficulties. The various grades of young cadres in this unit passed
this severe test very well. All of the cadres of the first company in a certain
regiment are young men in their 20's, some having been in the army two or three
years, some having been promoted as cadres for only a few months. In the battle to
capture Lang Son, they led their company in cutting off the enemy retreat at an
unnamed high point on the west side of the Ky Cung River, prevented reinforcement,
and fought fiercely against an enemy that outnumbered them several fold for ten

days and nights. Cut off by enemy fire and unable to be resupplied with food or
ammunition, the company went without eating for a day or two at a time, whereupon
the cadres distributed their own dry rations that they had saved among the enlisted
men. in the continual rainy and overcast weather, they were all wet and muddy. but
they took the lead in frequent battles to defend their position, were unable to
close their eyes for days at a time, and still their will to fight was vigorous.
Eight times they attacked out of their position and the cadres always took the lead
in the assault. With such a staunch style, the first company cadres lead an unshak-
eahle, unbeatable company. The company heat back 21 enemy counterattacks and
annihilated more than 270 of the enemy. They always held their position like a
nail driven into it. The division party connittee has asked the superiors to recog-
nize He Xixiang l01b9 6932 4382], a commander of that company. as a "model commander"
and to give the first company the name of "Hero company of Qiqiong River.“ Six
comrades were promoted to positions and promoted to be cadres under fire. and all

of the cadres established their merit.

In this combat, a large group of young cadres became brave and dauntless pathfinders
who dare to fight and dare to risk all. When the troops break through, they put the
dagger battalion, the dagger company, the dagger platoon, in the front; when they
come across something tough, they take a bite; when they encounter a fire point.
they stand up and fight. While organizing rear services personnel to transport
ammunition to the front, deputy commander Lu Kuiquan [7120 lle 3123] of the second
company in a certain regiment suddenly encountered an enemy fire point. He reso-
lutely directed the comrades to take up a dispersed formation, organized fire cover,
and himself quickly stole up on the enemy emplacement. He had with him no explosive
devices, but suddenly, in the emergency thought of attaching a detonator to an 82
mm. recoilless refle shell to make a hand grenade and throw it into the enemy
emplacement, killing all six of the enemy. Lu Kuiquan established second degree
merit and was given a battlefield promotion to commander. Acting deputy company
commander Lu Honggang [0712 3163 4854] of the first company of a certain regiment
was once leading a squad and encountered a reinforced platoon of enemy. Lu coura-
geously and coolly ordered his soldiers to take up positions in advantageous terrain
quickly, waited for the enemy, surrounded on three sides, to approach to within 30
meters or so, he gave a command, and all their various weapons began to fire at once.
On this occasion we suffered not a single casualty and all the enemy were killed
except three who escaped.

In a short ten days of fighting, a large group of young cadres also learned how to
develop political work under combat conditions, how to handle rear services security

6
ma omcm. l-sr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

work, and how to improve the capabilities of administrative units. Political
instructor Li Kongqu [2621 1313 5112] of the engineer battalion, leading a conpany
from Friendship Pass to Dong Dang, helped command the company, immediately deve-
loped a rally on the spot, citcd cases of heroism and model beha.ior, passed the
news of the victory, and encouraged everyone's fighting spirit. Re braved the
enemy firepower to take the lead in clearing nines. Powerful political work and

the model actions of the political cadres encouraged the men of the company to
advance. cleared away 13 obstacles. and received the praise of the superiors. Many
young organizational and political cadres advanced with the battalions and companies
and vigorously developed battlefield establishment of merit and front—line recruit-
ment into the YCL and the Columnist Party. There were casualties among the cowany
political cadres, and these men spontaneously took over for them. The lass of
young cadres in rear services and on the line have been tenpered and tested in
battle and have completed their logistical, ammunition transport, and casualty
rescue missions relatively well, guaranteeing the combat requirements of the troops.

9281.
C50: 4005/2098

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (ll-'FK'IAI. l'Sl-Z ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

MILITARY SCHOOLS APPLY COMBAT EXPERIENCE IN TEACHING
Beijing JIEFANCJUN BAO in Chinese 1 Apr 79 p 2

[Article by Cao Yinglong [2580 2019 7893]: "Integrate Our Army's Traditional
Combat Methods with Pesearch into Defensive Counterattack Combat Experience"!

front in their teaching practice. They did not demand perfection not seek note,
only studied each bit as it came, striving to reduce the distance between teaching
and actual combat and to accelerate the pace of training commanders.

student body and faculty. Each teaching and research section developci a mass
study and research movement. Just as the second unit was conducting teaching in
regimental attack, they compared the tactics being studied in the classroom uith

with regard to tactical thinking and tactical methods, all the traditional combat
methods, like deep penetration and return. separate and surround, close combat,
night fighting, and small groups taking many routes, were all effective in the
defensive counterattack combat. In organization and command, being composed and
resolute, resourceful and quick, with all echelons of command getting as close to
the front as possible, closely organizing coordinated actions between the various
branches are all bits of traditional experience that are still appropriate for use
today. In combat actions. full utilization of terrain features. contacting the
enemy from under cover, coordination of fire and movement, alternating cover,
alternating advance, head-on suppression. flank attacks, etc. can still be employed
today. As for combat style, heroism and tenaciousness, quickness and resourceful-
ness, not fearing sacrifice, fighting continuously, etc., still developed a great
deal of power in the defensive counterattack. Through comparisons. the students

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

modern warfare and apply our army's traditional combat methods cleverly to be able
to defeat the enemy. This raised the students' interest in study of tactical
subjects, and they were all even more conscientious and meticulous, whether
studying theory or operations on the sand table.

In the defensive counterattack. the officers and men of our heroic border defense
not only fully developed the power of our army's traditional combat methods, they
also studied many new tactical methods on the basis of their opponents' combat
characteristics. This new experience, for which they exchanged blood and life, is
the precious wealth of our army and provides new content for teaching in the schools
and academies. The leadership of this school and each teaching and research section
have already assimilated this new experience into their teaching. In uniting up
teaching plans. they increased research classes on the Vietnamese army and prepared
their classes in ten short days and continuously enriched the teaching materials

and teaching cases with relevant data from the front. In arranging the curriculum,
they increased classes in mountain and jungle combat. The armored teaching section
developed a second period course in knowledge of service arms, and when they were
writing notes for the combined force commander on the employment of tanks, they
particularly increased two items: one was that in complex terrain where it is
difficult to move and under circumstances of poor visibility. tanks must not become
separated from the infantry, but infantry must lead the tanks forward; second was
that to prevent their employment beyond their capabilities. it is intended that
students will get more training on tanks during their observation and familiari-
zation. In his teaching, tactics instructor Zhang Qunbo drew on new experience

from the counterattack and enriched the educational portion of combat implementation
with lessons on alternate fighting and mopping up, earthworks construction. political
offensives, etc. At present, many teachers are collecting material and researching
problems for the next step in using the combat experience of the border defense
troops to lay down a foundation for comnd education.

9286
C50: 4005/2098

9
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY
FOR OFFII'MI. USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

VIETNAM BORDER WAR PROVIDED EXPERIENCES IN MODERN WARFARE

Beijing JIEFANCJUN 8A0 in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p 1

[Article by staff commentator: "Transform the Experience of the War of the Self-
Defensive Counterattack Into Health for the Whole Army"]

[Text] The first spring after the focus of the party's work was shifted, our
Guangxi and Yunnan border defense units. in order to defend the peace and
tranquility of the motherland's border and the motherland’s construction of
socialist modernization, was forced to carry out the war of self-defensive

counterattack against Vietnam. In this war, they won a major victory both
militarily and politically.

This war of self-defensive counterattack occurred at the end of the 1970's. With
regard to its time period, it was a modern war, and looking at it from the aspects
of weapons and equipment, defense works and facilities, the participation by all
arms of the service, as well as combat command, communications and transportation,
and logistics support of both the enemy and us, it also contained certain

features of war under modern conditions. In this sense, it was a form of modern
warfare. Even if the war had a definite limited nature, it cannot be denied

that it provided a very good basis for our exploration of the rules guiding
warfare under modern conditions. It can be said that this war was one of the
tests in military science that are hard to come by; we traded our blood for
experience which could not be bought with money. Speaking cf this war and looking
at its outcome, everyone showed much concern for soldiers killed, wounded, or
captured and the vehicles, horses, and cannon captured on the battlefield. This
is quite natural. But we still should see that through this war the units that
participated in it were tempered in an overall manner and were tested in a
rigorous manner. and obtained rich experience. This is an outcome of the war
which has far-reaching significance. Conscientiously summing up the experiences
of this war of self-defensive counterattack and using them to guide in all aspects
of building the entire army will be a powerful motivating force for further
implementing all the policies and tasks set by the 1975 enlarged meeting of the
Military Commission, the 1977 meeting of the Military Commission, and the 1978

all-army political work conference. The effect and power of these experiences
are very hard to calculate but they are extremely valuable.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By saying that they are valuable, first of all we mean that we were tested
encompassing all aspects in actual war. For the armed forces, peacetime training
is very important, but actual warfare is the most authoritative training. Every
item of work that is done by units in peacetime is done for the purpose of ensuring
that they will be victorious in battle. We could see clearly. when the guns
sounded, in our units' establishment and organizational system, weapons and
equipment, strategy and tactics, education and training, political work, logistical
support. management systems, border defense construction, national defense
projects, etc. In relation to the adaptability to the demands of modern warfare,
those things that must be adhered to, those that are useful and those that are

not, those that must be improved, and those that must be developed. For many
problems which had not been grasped or about which there were different views, a
common language was relatively easy to find on the battlefield. With regard to
combat-preparedness training, in peacetime, one can, of course, shoot at targets
and drill. and be tested and examined on tactics and techniques, but the most
rigorous test conditions are not as rigorous as the real guns and bullets on the
battlefield, are not as rigorous as the life-and-death struggle between armed

men on two sides; the most true-to-life conditions of training exercises can only
approximate but cannot be a substitute for actual warfare. It is just as the
fighters say: "In peacetime training, you can hit targets at will, and the targets
cannot hit you." There is a great difference between having been on the battle-
field and not having been there. Precisely because of this, the experience gained
on the battlefield is particularly valuable for us.

Its value lies in the fact that we obtained direct experiences of modern warfare.
With regard to anything, including those things found in war, if one wants real
knowledge and real insight, one must experience it firsthand. Are we not studying
modern warfare every day? It is like looking at a person in a fog. That is,

we have only a blurred picture, and there are many unknowns. Now, having fought
this war. our ideas have been straightened out. At any rate, to the realm of our
understanding has been added the new concept of the "special warfare of special
warfare," breaking thrOugh a certain rigidness and set patterns in understanding
modern warfare. It is like not being able to swim unless one goes into the
water; if one doesn't go to the battlefield one will not learn how to "swim” in
war. In this war, many of our old heroes and cadres of the war period obtained
new experience, and the great number of fighters and the overwhelming majority

of middle— and lower-level commanders--all of whom were taking part in battle

for the first timc--were tempered in the fire of battle, learned through practice
what combat was all about, and learned the skills of actual warfare, thereby
training a large group of excellent leading cadres and a backbone of combat
contingents. The actual warfare experiences that they had will surely have a
long-term effect on the building of our army.

its value also liesinthe fact that we found, in the spirit of seeking truth from
facts, some basis for studying the laws of warfare under modern conditions. All
wars conducted at specific times. places, and conditions have their own special
ways of manifesting themselves and their own laws. This war of self-defensive
cuunterattack against Vietnam really had many new features in comparison with

the Middle East wars and some other wars. By looking at the summation of the
experiences of these features. we can enrich the treasure house of military science
and deepen our understanding of modern warfare. Our understanding of warfare

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL ITSF. ()Vl)‘

under modern conditions. like the underStanding of anything, always proceeds

from the special to the ordinary, from the particular to the general. To study
conscientiously and fully understand the features of this war is of important
significance for our understanding and grasp of the universal guiding laws of
modern warfare. The general resides in the particular. The things learned by

the people during the brief 17-day war of counterattack are extremely important.
From the practice of the big and little hegemonists, we can and should find
certain tactics for dealing with the big hegemonist. The strategy and tactics

of "killing a chicken with a cattle knife," the close combination of courage and
skill. the close coordination of all service arms. the vigorous political work
during warfare. the timely. uninterrupted logistical support, the people's war
coubining soldiers and civilians, etc--all these things are fully effective for
guiding training and combat in the future. what is precious must be recognized.
cherished and used. if we neglect to sum up our experiences because we consider
that the war has been completed. then this victory will not be complete; only by
summing up these experiences can the victory be called complete. This is like a
farmer's grain crop that must be harvested when it matures; now is the harvest
season and it is precisely the time when we must conscientiously sum up these
experiences. A bumper crop requires a bumper harvest, and grain must be put in
storehOuses. By truly sunning up and spreading these experiences in good fashion,
we can transform them into the common wealth of the whole army. The summation of
experiences must be syscematic. comprehensive, and complete. Both the
'Kmtermelons" and the "sesame seeds" must be selected, and we certainly cannot
lightly cast aside the props provided by things exchanged for blood. The
experiences of each and every service arm under all sorts of conditions must be
summed up. The qnescion of cadres' organizational command should be the focal
point for the summing up of experiences. The experiences to be summed up in
horizontal sections are military affairs, politics, and logistics; the experiences
to be summed up in vertical sections are tactics, techniques, and work style. Big
experiences must be summed up and so must medium-sized and small experiences. The
armed forces' system of organization, the policy for building up the armed forces,
and how we conduct training must be the first series of questions to be considered.
The experience of a specific battle and a model example of battle, including the
experiences of the tactics and techniques of individual soldiers, must all be
summed up from the level of the squad. platoon. company, battalion, and regiment
all the way up to the level of the division. The large number of successful
experiences must be summed up. and the lessons of certain setbacks must also be
conscientiously summed up. Our own experiences must be taken seriously. and we
must also study the strong points of the enemy in order to draw lessons from them.
If, in doing things according to these demands. we depend only on a small number
of experts and scholars, we will do them poorly. He must fully mobilize the
masses, get everybody to use their brains. get each and every person to talk and
hold lively discussions where everybody comments on these matters, and thereby
bring about an atmosphere of democracy and of study. The units with practical
experience from the war have the most right to speak; the units who did not take
part in the war can use the great amount of written materials about it to make

comparisons with their own practice in training and in combat-preparedness work,
discuss these things well. and formulate plans to improve education and training.
In this way. a campaign of widespread military democracy will be launched

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

throughout the army. and all aspects of the experiences will be summed up and a
complete set of teaching materials will be formed.

In summing up the experiences, we will be trying to formulate laws. This

requires that we take as our guide Mao Zedong's military thought. apply the view—
points of dialectical materialism, develop perceptual understanding of the war
into theoretical understanding. raise the large amount of fragmentary and
unsystematic practical materials to the level of military science, and from these
experiences extract things that will serve as laws for directing war. Two things
are important in truly seeking these laws: The first is that we must have the
spirit of storming fortifications that is displayed on the battlefield. We must
immerse ourselves in investigation and study, possess a wide range of materials,
set our minds to working arduously and thinking diligently. when the fighting was
good. in what respect was it good and why was it good? When the fighting was not
good, what lessons can we learn from it? He must carefully make concrete analyses
and strive to make a leap in cognition. The other thing is to maintain a down-to—
earth attitude and to uphold the principle of seeking truth from facts. One is
one, two is two. right is right, wrong is wrong. 0n the basis of trying to make
the facts clear and correct, by carrying out the processing work of eliminating
the false and retaining the true. discarding the dross and selecting the essential,
proceeding from this to that and from the exterior to the interior, there must be
a great effort to make the experiences we have summed up scientific and of high
quality.

of utmost importance in summing up experiences well is to be concerned about the
total situation and to operate from a strategically advantageous position. There
can be numerous specific experiences in war. but all of these experiences are
subject to a greater problem that controls and restricts them, viz, the relation-
ship between war and politics. If this problem is not clarified, the so-called
experiences will lack ideological content. "War is the continuation of politics,"
"war is the continuation of politics by other means," “politics is bloodless war,
and war is blood-shedding politics"--this is the theoretical basis for our approach
to the meaning of all wars and is the fundamental starting point for our investiga-
tions of every kind of war. The war of self—defensive counterattsck against
Vietnam obviously cannot be an exception. Only from this political approach of
opposing the global strategy of Soviet hegemonism and scientifically analyzing all
kinds of contradictions, can we understand and grasp more profoundly, through the
war's essence, the goal and meaning of this war of self-defensive counterattack

and can we weigh more correctly all kinds of experiences from this war. Some
comrades possibly will say that these big questions are matters for the leadership
organizations and high-level cadres to consider, and that they themselves are

only concerned with concrete experiences. Not so. If one doesn't have the whole
in mind. how can one deal with the parts? With regard to the questionof'taking
seriously the study of the laws of the total situation in war, Comrade Mao Zedong,
in the third section of the first chapter of his famous work, "Problems of Strategy
in China's Revolutionary Hat." made a brilliant dialectical exposition. he pointed
out: “Why should a campaign or battle conmmnder have some understanding of the
laws of strategy? Because a comprehension of the whole makes it easier for one to
handle the part and because the part belongs to the whole.“ "hen summing up
experiences, we would remind the comrades that it is profitable to look at military

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operations from the perspective of political struggle and to grasp the total war
situation when analyzing concrete experiences.

revolutionary armed force. To realize the "four modernizations" is a heroic
undertaking and not n short-term matter. During this long process, we cannot

the international environment. One main reason the "four modernizations" are
imperative is to free ourselves from the situation of being passive and vulnerable
to attack. And we are also rapidly constructing the "four modernizations" in an
environment of international class struggle. Therefore, to defend by arms the
construction of the "four modernizations" should become a completely unequivocal
idea of our comrades throught the army. Through this way of thinking and looking
at problems, the awareness of using war experiences in modernizing our army

will be greatly strengthened. Based on the defense of construction of the "four
modernizations" by armed Struggle, we must apply the experiences of this war in
studying how to improve our military establishment and organizational system.
Some things must be readjusted, some things must be replenished, and for even
more things we must do good work in reducing the "swelling." If we are always
content to have too many people doing things, and the superstructure is still
gigantic. topheavy. overstaffed, and low in efficiency, then a great amount of
precious time will be wasted in taking turns in drawing charts and in making

official trips. How can modernization be rapidly realized? And also how can the
demands of war under modern conditions be met?

Based on armed struggle to defend the construction of the "four modernizations."
we must uphold the guidance of Marxism-Leninism—Mao Zedong Thought, closely
integrate theory and practice. and vigorously purSue ideological and political
work in our army. In this war, our equipment and technology were certainly not
superior, but the spirit of patriotism and revolutionary heroism displayed by

the units that took part in the war was meritorious. The source of this spirit
lies precisely in vigorous, revolutionary political work. in a high degree of
political awareness on the part of the revolutionary fighters. By conscientiously
learning from and applying the experiences to political work in this war; by

principles and fine traditions to new historical conditions, we will fully develop
the power of political work. This is something that will be effective in both

peacetime and wartime, and will be a major factor in permanently improving combat
effectiveness.

Based on armed struggle to defend the construction of the "faur modernizations,"
we should improve our army's weapons and equipment. In this war, the fact that
we were able to inflict a large number of casualties on the enemy's effective
strength, destroy his modernized defense works, and insure timely and
uninterrupted supply, besides being related to the high degree of political

1b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lESI-I ONLY

awareness on the part of our units, was directly related to the continual upgrading
of our army's weapons and equipment over the past several years. At the same

time we must see that if it were not for the previous years of disruption and
destruction caused by Lin 8130 and the "gang of four," out army's weapons and
equipment could have been somewhat more modernized, and we can admit that a bigger
victory in this war could have been bought for a smaller price. Just think about
the modernization of our army's weapons and equipment in this way: If they are

not modernized it will not do; if they are not modernized rapidly it will not

do, if they are not modernized we will be subjected to bullying, and if they are
modernized slowly we will be vulnerable to attack. Obviously we must pay attention
to the fact that hand grenades and satchel charges played a not inconsiderable

role in this war. However. it would be incorrect in any case to depend on these
things to win victories and to lose the sense of urgency about improving weapons
and equipment. He should become proficient in the weapons at hand and rely on
existing equipment to win victories; we should also by every means quicken the

pace of modernizing our weapons and equipment. We must have the atom bomb while
not casting aside the hand grenade: this is quite in accord with materialist
dialectics.

Based on armed struggle to defend the construction of the "four modernizations,"
we must put education and training in a strategic position and speedily draw

them along on the right track. Actual war is the best yardstick for testing
training. how can training meet the demands of modern warfare? "hat are the good
guiding thoughts, contents, focal points, and methods of training? By studying
the experiences of this war, we should find the correct answers. If only we do a
good job of combining the experiences of this war with the reality of every unit's
combat mission and training, proceed from our army's existing equipment and the
reality of modern warfare, and truly reform training, a new situation will emerge
and a qualitative leap will take place in our army's education and training.

War is a great school. The experiences of the war of self-defensive counterattack
are rich and precious teaching materials we have learned in this school in various
aspects including military, political, and logistical. If only we are willing to
study, are adept at study, and draw nourishment from these experiences, transform-
ing them into our flesh and blood, they will become a powerful motive force that
gives impetus to all our work, and will strike root and blossom with radiant
splendor in the construction of our army's modernization!

9727
C80: 4005/2099

15
ms OFFICIAL usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

EXPERIENCES IN VIETNAM BORDER UAR SUMMED UP
Compilation of Battle Examples
Beijing JIEl-‘ANGJUN BAO in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p 1

[Article by staff Correspondent Zheng Jian [6774 0256] and staff reporter Cao
Jinhua [2580 6930 5478]: "Organizing a Special Force To Conscientiously Compile
Battle Examples"]

[Text] A certain regiment of the Yunnan border defense units, during the war of
self-defensive counterattack, took part in 21 fairly large battles in the 4 areas
of Hengkang. Dongjia. Heima. and Iongkeping in which it obtained many combat
experiences. In order to sum up well these experiences. the regiment's party
committee decided to form a battle-example compilation group composed of several
comrades led by a deputy regimental commander. By the end of March, the group had
compiled six important battle examples.

The compilation group, by laying stress on investigation and study and by upholding
the principle of seeking truth from facts, made the battle examples reflect battle
conditions accurately and authentically. First of all, they repeatedly studied
and made selections from the battles that the regiment had engaged in, and

decided to compile examples of battles that possessed different features. Next
they went down to the basic level and held informal discussions with the cadres

and fighters there, and through careful investigation of the enemy's situation

and the terrain of every battle. and on the basis of mastering a great amount

of firsthand material. wrote preliminary drafts. Then they again met with the
cadres and fighters in the companies and made repeated verifications and revisions.

When the compilation group was compiling the battle examples, they also
conscientiously studied Chairman Mao's 10 great military principles and his
relevant military writings, and used Hao Zedong's military thinking and tactical
principles to guide the summation of experiences. The Ist battalion of this
regiment, in its attack on Hengkang, in the complex terrain of high mountains,
deep valleys, steep slopes. and dense woods. at one stroke annihilated over 200
enemy soldiers. Training section chief Chang Yejia [7022 0673 1367] and staff
officer Hong Zhengquan [3163 2973 0356]. when compiling these battle examples,
stressed the application of Chairman Mao's tactical thought concerning fighting
battles of annihilation with regard to five experiences in mountainous jungle
regions.

16
FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, this regiment has already examined and finalized the drafts of the
six battle examples it compiled, has mimeographed and distributed them to the
companies, and has organized the cadres and soldiers to study them for guidance
in the unit's training.

Public Commendation Stressed
Beijing JIEFANCJUN BAO in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p 1

[Article by staff reporter Xing Shicao [6717 4258 2347] and staff correspondent
Zhang Guangtong [1728 1639 2717]: "Upholding the Principle of Giving Priority
to Public Commendation and Giving Pull Play to Positive Factors"]

[Text] In its appraisals of combat performance, a certain regiment of the Guangxi
border defense units, by giving priority to public commendation and by looking

at the positive factors of every person and every thing, has made the combat
appraisals and the summing up of battle experiences truly play the role of
enhancing morale and strengthening unity.

Owing to his lack of command experience, a company political instructor of this
regiment, when leading his unit to storm and capture an unnamed hill south of
Lang Son, conducted the battle less than adequately. In its combat appraisal. the
leading comrades of the battalion and regiment affirmed and commended his
courageous fighting spirit. At the same time, they helped him to sum up the
lessons of his experiences in command, without attaching any blame to him, which
completely convinced the political instructor of his shortcomings.

The leading comrades in their combat appraisals put much stress on encouraging
the new soldiers who had not received systematic training. A new soldier, who
had joined the army this year, was slow to advance in a battle because he did
not utilize the surface features of terrain. In their comments and appraisals,
some fighters blamed him for this. After discovering that he was being blamed,
the leaders actively guided everybody to a correct evaluation of the new fighter.
The company political instructor along with everyone else made a concrete analysis
of every phase of the new fighter's behavior, from marching at night to plunging
into battle, so that everybody had an all-round view of him. During the combat
appraisals, the merits of this new soldier were publicly commended, thereby
arousing his enthusiasm.

The polivy of this regiment in upholding the priority of giving public commenda-
tion in guiding the combat appraisals and the summing up of war experiences has
obtained fairly good results. Now, the officers and men of the regiment, on

the basis of announcing commendations and achievements, are using the war
experiences that have been summed up to guide training, thereby bringing about a
vigorous upsurge in mass military training.

9727
CSO: 4005/2099

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

HEROIC BATTLE TO TAKE CAM DUONC DESCRIBED
Beijing JIEPANGJUN BAO in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p 2

[Article by staff special correspondent Pan Knangfu [3058 0562 1133] and staff
reporter Sun Zhibo [1327 1807 2672]: "Sweeping Away a Rotten Evil-the Fall of
Can Duong"]

[Text] On 25 February. our Yunnan border defense units at one stroke captured
Can Duong. a place of strategic importance in northwestern Vietnam.

Amid the sound of scattered rifle and cannon fire. as the smoke of gunpowder was
being slowly dispersed, reporters accompanied the troops as they advanced toward
Cam Duong. All the way, they saw, scattered in disorder on the ground. only

the dead bodies of enemy soldiers, guns, ammunition, and backpacks; the defense
works on both sides of the hilltop had collapsed, and the artillery positions

and the guided-missile positions had become ruins; and on the outskirts of and
inside the city of Can Duong were over 200 overturned and askew vehicles....

Yes: the Vietnamese soldiers suffered a crushing defeat and throw away everything
in a headlong flight for their lives.

A few days before, one main ringleader of the Vietnamese authorities sternly
ordered the Vietnamese Army to "defend Cam Duong to the death" and resolutely to
protect this strategic place. well-known for its abundance of apatite. They
assumed the posture of fighting a "decisive battle" against us, boasting: "If
the Chinese Army wants to capture Cam Duong, it will need at least a year." But,
in the twinkling of an eye, strategic Cam Duong was captured.

Why did this happen? "as it because their military force was weak? No.
Stationed in Can Duong were units of the 345th Division of the Vietnamese Regular
Aruy and also the special service forces. the youth assault forces, etc. To the
southwest, prepared at any tine to come to the city's support. was the "elite"
316th-A Division. This military force could not be said to be small.

Has it because their firepower was not strong? No. On every hill and at every
important road. they had deployed weapons of all kinds, which night be called
an integration of short- and far-range weapons, an arrangement in pairs of
light and heavy weapons, indirectly and directly aimed weapons which supported
each other.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Has it because their defense works were not sturdy? Again, no. As early as
several years ago. they had painstakingly built many defense works of steel-
reinforeed cement on several of the main hilltops, linked by tunnels and

communications trenches that crisscrossed and formed a network as tightly knit as
a spider's web.

In that case. what in the final analysis, was the reason that the Vietnamese Army
collapsed so suddenly and suffered such a disastrous defeat? The reason is
simple: Facing them was an army as powerful as a thunderbolt, fighting for _a
jusr cause, troops armed with Marxism-Leninism-Hso Zedong Thought, heroic troops

long tested in the fire of battle--a rolling torrent of steel that could not be
blocked!

Early in the morning on 23 FebruaryI our border defense units commenced a
tremendOus artillery barrage. which sounded like mountains collapsing and the
earth cracking. The enemy positions were instantly transformed into a sea of fire
and thick smoke hid the sky. Under cover of this powerful artillery fire, our
infantry split into four columns and, like a fierce tiger coming down from a
mountain, attacked the hills on the periphery of Cam Duong. The 3d Company of the
"Steel Battalion" of a certain unit, like a sharp knife, thrust straight into the
enemy 's lair. When the company commander was wounded, political commisaar Yang
Xiuqing [2799 4&23 3237] took command and shouted: "Comrades, make a resolute
charge for the motherland and for victory!“ The warriors made a fierce attack
and swiftly occupied the enemy's first and second lines of trenches. Just then,
two concealed firing points raked them frenziedly and the unit's charge was
checked. Fighter He Junlin [0169 6511 2651] jumped out of the trenches, rushed
forward and blew up one of the enemy's concealed firing points. Just as he was
about to blow up the second concealed firing point he was wounded in the chest.
"is comrades-in-arms wanted him to go back. but he remained in front and would
not turn back. resolutely climbing forward. "hen he was 4 or 5 meters from an
enemy bunker. he pulled out a hand grenade and threw it accurately into the bunker
entrance. After a tremendous roar. the enemy machinegun fell silent and six of
the enemy were dead or wounded. He Hunlin had given up his young life for the
motherland. his comrades. following the path made by the blood the martyr had
shed. charged up the main peak.

Our fighters attack boldly. vigorously, and tenaciously, and they are resourceful
and flexible. After the 4th company of a certain unit had captured two hills in
Sucvession. at 1500 on the same day it came to the foot of Hill 369. When it

was preparing to outflank the hill from the right. it was blocked by enemy fire.
The cunning enemy also lighted a fire on the hill that. fanned by the prevailing
winds, burned with a crackle toward the company. At this grave juncture. Li 01
[2621 0796], a new fighter who had been wounded in his left leg, rushed into the
sea of fire and drew off the nnemy‘s fire. Seizing this opportunity. the assault

platoon swiftly outflanked the hill on the right and quietly closed in on the
enemy entrenched on the main peak. Zhang Dehai [1728 1795 3189], resourceful

leader of the 6th squad. crawled straight over to the front of the enemy
hattnlion's command post without being discovered by the enemy. A fellow wearing
the insignia of a senior captain was gesticulating there. Zhang Dehai fired off
a cartridge clip and followed this up by throwing several hand grenades, sending

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
59R OFFICIAL ESE ONLY

the battalion commander and three others to the Western Paradise. 0n the other
side. platoon leader Li Shicheng [2621 0099 2052] and 5th squad deputy leader

Li Shuming [2621 2611 2494] groped their way to the enemy's machinegun defense
works on top of the hill and suddenly leaped up and fired fierce bursts. The
enemy threw down their guns and fled. Discovering that their battalion col-lander
had been killed and that their defense works on the peak were occupied by us, the
enemy at once scattered in all four directions and fled for their lives. We took
this opportunity to destroy each and every one of the enemy soldiers, and a
reinforced company and a battalion command post were thus wiped out.

On other hills, the attacks mounted by our border defense units were also extremely
fierce. The enemy hurriedly reported the emergency to his superiors and asked

that he be reinforced posthaste by the 316tb-A Division. But the 316th-A Division
was still being blocked by the warriors of the 2d and 6th conpanies of a certain
unit and was like a mad dog shut up in an iron cage running about in an effort to
break out and bumping against the bars. The division launched 18 assaults in
succession, and all were repulsed, so it could only haul away the dead bodies in
carts and flee in panic. The "elite" division could not stave off the crushing
defeat of the enemy defending Cam Duong.

During the battle to capture Cam Duong. where did the great intelligence and
courage of the officers and men of our border units come from? During the days
they were gathering material for their story, the reporters felt strongly that

the spiritual term "motherland" gave the border defense fighters inexhaustible
strength. The solemn slogan "Uin glory for the motherland" encouraged the officers
and men to charge and take the enemy positions, energetically and bravely to kill
the enemies, and impelled the torrent of steel to surge forward with irresistible
force.

Xu Xianguo [1776 7341 0948], a new fighter of the 3d Squad, 3d Company, Red Army
Regiment of a certain unit, is a lad who came from the hometown of Qiushaoyun.
After arriving in his unit, he took part in denouncing the Vietnamese authorities
for their frenzied crimes against China, heard the political instructor relate

the glorious traditions of the 3d Company, and understood that the fighters
shouldered the responsibility of defending the motherland. Not long afterward, he
received a letter from home. which urged him, like the heroes of the volunteer
army [during the Korean War]. to defend the motherland and charge forward.

Reading the letter warmed Xu Xianguo's heart and added strength to every fiber of
his being. On 23 February, the company to which Xu Xianguo was assigned attacked
Hill 191, northeast of Can Duong. After the assault began, owing to the deep
grass and thick woods. he lost contact with his comrades in the squad. Without
the slightest fear. he fought bravely alone, and seized the opportunity to
fiercely return the enemy's fire. Singlehandedly he held fast to his position and
did not let the enemy attack break through. Afterward, Xu xianguo, again on his
own initiative, joined the battle ranks of the 2d platoon and, together with his
comrades, attacked the hill. For his meritorious service to the motherland he was
honored by being admitted into the party.

"Win glory for the motherland by going forward to the last man and charging to the
last breath!" This was the pledge taken by Wu Yong [0702 0516], deputy leader of
the 5th Squad. 9th Company, of a certain unit. On a day before the assault on Cam

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Duong. Kn Yong wrote on his backpack the words "Win glory for the motherland,
charge as long as one has a breath in one's body." Filled with this kind of
determination, he flung himself into the battle to attack Hill 280 on the north
side of Cam Duong. At noon on that day. ﬂu Yong saw that 18 enemy soldiers were
desperately trying to seize an unnamed hill west of Hill 280, so he boldly charged
toward them. Unfortunately, a bullet struck him in the abdomen. ﬂu Yong.
clutching his lower abdomen with his left hand and with his right hand holding
his weapon hanging from the gunsling on his right shoulder, continued to charge.
When he had advanced about 50 meters, another bullet hit him in the left arm.

Hu Yohg, with the strength of steel, still did not fall. Lifting his left hand,
which had been pressing down on his stomach, he calmly selected favorable terrain,
assumed a kneeling posture, and, holding his submachinegun steadily in his hands,
sprayed the enemy with fierce fire. Before long, an enemy bullet ripped through
his chest.... The political instructor and fighters of the 9th company, at a
briefing given to reporters afterward, said: After the battle, we shouted Ru
Yang's name and ran forward. only to see "u Yong leaning on a bank of earth still
maintaining his posture of firing in a kneeling position, his open eyes looking
at the unnamed hill in front, and sprawled before him were four enemy corpses.

Our fighters, with this kind of incomparable love for the motherland and
inveterate hatred for the enemy, and with the heroic spirit of prevailing over
all enemies, relentlessly punished the Vietnam aggressors.

By 1800 on 24 February. we had captured all the enemy hills on the periphery of
Cam Duong. and our border defense units, with irresistible force. pressed

straight on to take Cam Duong. The remnant enemy forces fled in disorder to the
Hai Bo [phonetic] River south of Cam Duong. Every one of our columns of deep-
thrust units, at rapid marching speed, thrust powerfully toward the Val Bo
[phonetic] River to pursue and deStroy the fleeing enemy. By 25 February. we had
captured all of Can Duong. After our border defense units entered and garrisoned
Cam Duong. they immediately began to comb the hills and mop up the enemy. As if
they were hunting rats, they dug out the defeated and dispersed enemy soldiers

from their hiding places. we annihilated over 2,000 enemy soldiers. This signaled
the end of the battle of Cam Duong, which was a victory for our army and a crushing
defeat for the Vietnamese Army.

9727
C80: 4005/2099

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

CAPTURE 0F MOUNTAIN PEAK DWRING VIETNAM UAR DESCRIBED
Beijing JIEPANGJUN 8A0 in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p 2

[Article by special staff correspondent Zhang Zhengyang [1728 2973 7122]: “Mass
Meroisn and Daring-—Pressing Forward Hith Indomitable Spirit")

[Text] The 9th company of a certain unit, a company which during the battle of
Lang Son took by strategy the highest peak of the Me Bien Mountains and cut off
the enemy's line of retreat, was awarded by the superiors with a silk banner
inscribed "Heroic Company of the Me Bien Mountains."

At 1200 on 3 March, the 9th company, after a rapid march, came to the banks of the
Ky Cung River and by clever means crossed the river. Before dawn on the next day,
the 9th company began an assault on the main peak of the Me Bien Mountains. The
2d platoon, which was charged with the mission of conducting the main attack,
advanced to an unnamed hill. when platoon leader Chai Chaohe [5591 0877 3109]
discovered that the enemy had set up artillery on the opposite hilltop. he
immediately ordered the 82-mm mortar squad attached to the platoon to open fire.
Striving to be the first to get at the enemy, the gunners blew up all the enemy's
artillery pieces. Taking advantage of these circumstances, the fighters charged
forward and the company rapidly approached the main peak.

Then the 9th company, directed by company commander Yu Lijin [0205 0632 6855],
adopting the tactic of a multipronged attack, fiercely assaulted the main peak.
Luo Chunsheng [5012 2504 3932], leader of the 6th squad, rushed to the extreme
front and killed four of the enemy in succession. The enemy, seeing the ferocity
of the 2d platoon's assault, thought we wanted to storm and occupy the main

peak from this direction and moved its main force to counter the 2d platoon.

Then the 7th and 8th squads of the 3d platoon, seizing this opportunity, stormed
up the peak. The outcome of our attack was that the enemy was wiped out,

leaving 56 dead bodies on the peak. The 9th company, at an extremely small cost,
had Victoriously occupied the main peak of the Me Bien Mountains, thereby insuring
that our army could use its main force to assault the enemy defending the fortified
city of Lang Son.

9727
cso: 4005/2029

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIS

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

TEST PILOT RECOVERS FROM INJURIES, FLIBS AGAIN

Beijing JIEl-‘ANCJUN SAD in Chinese ll Apr 79 p 1

[Article by Li Ciying [2621 2945 5235]: "‘Lei Feng-‘l‘ype Pilot' Hang Guanyang
Ascends Into the Blue Heavens Again"]

[Text] Air Force "Lei Feng—type pilot" Hang Guanyang [3769 0385 2254] has
recovered his health and is again flying into the blue heavens.

On 19 June 1977. when carrying out a scientific research test flight mission,
Hang Guanyang was flying at the high altitude of 8,000 meters, when the engine
of his aircraft suddenly stopped. Unable to restart the engine, in order to

protect the scientific research equipment on the plane and the safety of

people's life and property, Hang firmly abandoned his chance to parachute to
safety, and. steering his aircraft so as to avoid on three occasions, factories,
schools, villages. and crowds, made a successful forced landing outside the
airfield though he was seriously injured. An examination revealed that his first
lumbar vertebra suStained a multiple fracture from being compressed, his lower
vertebrae were cracked. and his lower limbs seemed to be paralyzed.

The party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua showed extreme solicitude for
Wang Guanyang's injuries. 0n Hang's 2d day in the hospital, Vice Premier Wang
Zhen. who was inspecting work in that locality, rushed to the hospital and
expressed his sympathy and solicitude for Hang on behalf of Chairman Hua and Vice

Chairman Ye; he commended Hang Guangyang as a "heroic model pilot" and presented
a bouquet of flowers to him. The Air Force Party Committee bestowed on Hang the

honorary title of "Lei Peng-type Pilot." and selected him to be a delegate to the
Fifth RN: and a delegate to the national scientific conference.

In order to help Wang to make an early recovery. the hospital set up an emergency

treatment team composed of its leading cadres, professors of medicine, and
nurses. After repeated studies, the team decided on the ideal treatment program,

which would not only cure Hang but also allow him to fly again. The team decided
not to operate but to use a traction method which would effect a reduction of
the vertebrae. But this method would require the patient to endure a considerable

amount of pain. Wang said with determination: "If only you can cure me so that
I can fly again, I will stand any amunt of pain." During the treatment process,

Wang carried on a tenacious struggle against his pain. In October 1977, he left

2 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the hospital. He persevered in such activities as running. swimming. playing
ping-pong, and scaling hanging ladders. and never discontinued them during the
frigid winter days or blazing hot smmmer days. Because of this regimen, his
body rapidly recovered its health. At the beginning of this year, after an
examination conducted by the Air Force General Hospital he was pronounced fit
and was permitted to fly.

One day in the first part of March, the sun shone brightly. Hang Guanyang and
instructor Hue Jun [3323 0193] took the controls of an aircraft and flew into the
sky, where they put the aircraft through a series of movements such as circles.
dives. climbs. and rolls. When the aircraft landed, his comrades came forward

to greet him, warmly shook his hand, congratulated him, and urged him to obtain
even greater successes in his scientific research flights.

9727
080: 4005/2099

2h

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HILITARX AND PUBLIC SECURITY

TRAINING REFORM STRESSES SIMPLICITY, PRACTICALITY
Beijing JIEPANGJUN 8A0 in Chinese 1 Apr 79 p 2

[Article by Tan Ji'an [6223 0679 13b4] and Liu Shitong [0691 0013 6639]: "Employing
Existing Equipment to Improve Training Has Bright Prospects"]

[Text] There is one view which holds: "Infantry elements don't have much bayonet
training and there is not much training involved in throwing hand grenades." and
"With our present equipment, it is useless to reform training." Recently, the Jinan
garrison organized a demonstration by 21 elements advanced in training reform, and
it was a powerful answer to this do-nothing attitude.

The units taking part in this demonstration were units from the Jinan garrison that
had emerged in the past few years as showing the first successes in training reform.
This demonstration centered around the "three attacks" and "three defenses," namely,
having technical training as well as tactical training, having training of combat
elements and also having training of rear services and security elements, and having
nighttime as well as daytime training. Some units demonstrated the skill of fighting
speed with speed in dealing with enemy motorization. Some demonstrated "tricky
moves" for attacking enemy tanks. Each of these demonstrating units had its own
strong points, and the weapons in the soldiers' hands each had their own wonderful
effects, causing the spectators to open their eyes wide, and to open their minds

as well.

Strengthen Research on Adversaries in Future Wars. and Make the Research "Heticulous"

Many of the demonstrating units came to know that strengthening research on the enemy
situation is a prerequisite to reform of training. This has two effects: One is
that it is conducive to breaking out of our mental rut. The more deeply we carry
out our research on the enemy situation. the stronger will be the compulsion to
reform training. The second is that the more meticulously we do our research on the
enemy situation, the better directed our training reform will be. Therefore,
research on the enemy situation can not be done by and large, but must be "meti-
culous." We must put in the time and energy to study it all, from the enemy
equipment to their strategic and tactical thinking, from combat principles to combat
methods, from the attacks. amphibious landings. and airborne drops of the initial
stages of a war to enemy combat characteristics in all the stages of development,
from enemy movements in large unit operations to the combat movements of individual
elements, even the movements of single soldiers. Practice has shown that those
units carrying out their research on the enemy situation well will be relatively

2'5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SI'. ONLY

accomplished in reforming training. The first company of a certain regiment, having
ordinarily taken research into the enemy situation very seriously, determined, in a
skirmish with enemy force advance units during the demonstration, that their enemy
commonly opened up a way with tanks and moved in motorized vehicles. So in seizing
the advantageous terrain, they did not, as in the past, race to control the high
point, but seized the hilltop, the slope, and the foot alike ahead of the enemy,
launched their movement ahead of the enemy, and opened fire ahead of the enemy.
They deployed their forces in depth and in echelons. They said that in this way
they could prevent the enemy from skirting the commanding position and continuing
forward. If they had taken the high point as in the past, they would have been
doing exactly what the enemy wanted. Further, in surrounding and annihilating the
enemy, they took note of the enemy's armor characteristics and struck first at the
enemy tanks and armored vehicles, then at enemy troop concentrations, and finally
at the dispersed enemy, utilizing advantageous terrain, surrounding the enemy,
carrying forward the fine traditions of close combat and night combat, and, all-in-
all, fighting a beautiful "skirmish."

In Technical Activites, Convert "Slow Hark" to "Past Work," and Learn the Knack of
Fighting Speed with Speed

Hotorization and high speed will be major characteristics of future wars. Speaking
in a certain sense, speed is victory. In the past, some comrades always felt that
any future war would come suddenly, enemy units would be motorized, and it would

be difficult for infantry elements to fight speed with speed. The experience of
some of the elements in this demonstration showed that to deal with the suddenness
of war and changes in the style of combat we must on the one hand depend on improve-
ments in our military equipment, and on the other hand depend on our strict training
to accomplish it. Under present circumstances of our having poor equipment, if we
reform all those complicated operational regulations, reform those cumbersome acces-
sories that may or may not he needed, and reform all those routine methods of
operation, we can greatly strengthen the mobility of combat infantry. The 82 mm.
mortar that has accompanied infantry elements in the past is not itself a heavy
weapon, but the accessories like the mortar base and mortar frame are heavy. In
previous training, not one step was left out, from aiming to firing. The 82 II.
mortar squad of a certain mobile artillery battery taking part in the demonstration
often thought about the suddenness and speed of future warfare while in training.
since last year, they have reformed the conventional training methods of past years.
The equipment was changed from heavy to light, the firing procedure was simplified,
the number of members participating was reduced, actions were speeded up, they
practiced hard at range finding and aiming, simplified firing, and after a year of
effort, the whole squad had acquired a body of special skills. No matter what the
terrain, a mortar barrel can be carried on the back and fired when you stop. In a
year they carried out 13 firing exercises with live ammunition, fired 166 rounds,
and scored 160 hits. 0n the day of the demonstration they were seen to operate a
single mortar barrel, changing the firing direction frequently and changing their
position frequently, using it smoothly, and the shells, as if they had eyes, hit

the target every time. In past infantry element training in the 82 an. recoilless
rifle, many units were overcautious in selecting a base and setting up their

weapon. Since last year, the officers and men of many 82 mm. recoilless rifle
elements were concerned because these weapons were used principally against enemy
tanks and armored vehicles, and tanks are fast and attack with ferocity, so we are
not allowed to move at a leisurely pace and must reform. The 82 am. recoilless

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rifle squad of the second battery of a certain unit participating in this demon-
stratlon changed the former ovcrelaborate positional attack to a shoulder firing
method that stresses training. While moving the soldiers carry the weapon on

their shoulders, and when the situation arises they squat and fire, unrestricted by
positional considerations. greatly reducing both preparation time and preparation
procedures for firing. Comrades watching the demonstration said that the acces-
sories and operating procedures for various kinds of weapons all have a certain
scientific rationale and all have a certain use, but in accordance with the demands
of modern warfare and without violating scientific laws, it is extremely necessary
to learn several more "fast" skills. and it is something we should advocate

vigorously.

Consider the Host Complex and Most Difficult Areas and Popularize Soldiers with
Multiple Skills and More Training for Warfare

A certain "tiger attack company" participating in this demonstration, in past
firing training, thought a great deal about results and thought little about actual
combat, and often conducted their training in relatively good weather and terrain.
In the reform of training, they trained more in how to adapt to complex circumr
stances and made this an important part of their training reform. To temper their
combat capabilities under circumstances where the enemy is using nuclear, chemical,
or bacteriological weapons. they spontaneously changed their firing training to

conditions of having to wear gas masks. At first, being physically unaccustomed to

it, their results were not good, but they did not think about results and kept on

with this kind of training. Although there was wind and snow at the demonstration
and the circumstances were complex, they obtained the second most outstanding results
for live ammunition firing even wearing gas masks. There were some companies parti—
cipating in this demonstration that also reformed the problem of too fine a division
of labor in some of the former specialty training and stressed allowing the soldiers
to learn several combat skills. After comrades in an artillery squad learn to be
gunners, they can also be aimers, ammunition handlers, and loaders. when comrades
on an infantry squad learn how to handle a rifle, they can also use an assault

rifle and machine gun. and some master enough scientific and technical knowledge to

be able to study the use of any advanced weapons that may be captured from the enemy.

ln Combat Training, Pay Attention to Carrying on Traditional Combat Hethods and
Studying New Combat Methods Boldly

training to leading the officers and men to carry on our army's traditional combat

y study new combat methods, according to the composition, equip-
ment. and tactical thinking of the enemy. The seventh squad. fifth company, of a
certain unit. in training on squad attack, kept in mind the enemy's defensive
characteristics and Studied three questions: one was with regard to an adversary
in a future war, pay close attention to the characteristics of their fire dispersal

and study how to penetrate the enemy's front—line
quickly and covertly; second, with an eye to enemies using a broad defense front,
great depth, and many obstacles, study ways of opening up and passing over roads
through it; third, with an eye to enemy defense that emphasizes the development of
_the use of tanks. study methods of using small groups over multiple routes in a
coordinated attack on the tanks. In this demonstration the comrades watching were

very inspired. The eleventh squad of the garrison company of a certain regiment,

27
FOR OFl-‘IﬂAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in their individual defense. with a view to the fact that enemy combat thinking
ordinarily involves infantry moving forward behind tanks in an attack, separately
rehearsed a set of methods for striking at the enemy tanks and at the enemy
infantry. In the demonstration, soldiers were seen meeting the enemy tanks,

drawing near rapidly, placing an explosive device, leaving and taking cover imme-
diately, opening fire on the enemy infantry, and moving with precision and
dexterity. Comrades watching the demonstration said, our training of soldiers

ought to be like the way they have been trained, actively exploring ways of striking
with an eye to the enemy charcteristics, this is truly vivid training.

In addition, these demonstrating elements also carried on active reforms of teaching
methods. For example, full development of democracy, inspiring the cadres and men
to think about and discuss combat methods: in training, development of small group

training, organizing revolutionary competition, carrying out criticism of both
teachers and students, giving even greater development to our party's and our army's

mass line in the training of soldiers.

9285
C80: 4005/2098

28
FOR OFFICIAL usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

POLITICAL EDUCATION COURSE ON AGRICULTURAL ECONOMIC POLICIES
Beijing JIEFANCJUN BAG in Chinese 8 Jun 79 p 1

[Article by Ma Runggul [7456 2837 27101, An Dewei [134a 1795 0251] and Dong Xiangqi
[5516 4382 6386]: "Help Fighters Get Rid of Their 'Hang-ups'—-a Report on a Political
Education Session by the Political Instructor Liu")

[Text] Recently, several fighters from the Seventh Company of Unit 81268 received
letters from home reflecting certain conditions concerning the implementation of
economic policies in rural areas. The subject attracted the attention and discussions
of the comrades. On that day, fighter Zhang Yirong [1728 5030 2837] from ﬂunan showed
his letter from home to the political instructor, Liu Wenzheng, saying, "Tell me-from
mutual aid teams to cooperatives to people's communes, the road has always been one

of collective prosperity, but now they come out with a "contracting to the team"
idea-~is this conducive to carrying out agricultural modernization?" Several fighters
present joined in and started a lively discussion with everyone eager to put in a
word. Some asked, "This was dealt with during the cultural revolution, so why bring
it up again?" The fighters had hoped that the political instructor could explain it
to them, but Political Instructor Liu could not off-hand explain it too clearly-he
could only give them a few words of advice which obviously did not satisfy anyone.

Seeing that the fighters' mental hang-ups were not dispelled, Political Instructor

Liu felt disturbed. But he felt that he was in a difficult position. Since his
superiors had not arranged any education program concerning policies, could he say
anything on the subject? It would be easy indeed for him to use a few big empty words
to stifle the fighters' questions. But would that rid the fighters of their ideological
hang-ups? As a political cadre during the transition of the focus of party work,

he should be receptive to the discovery of new situations, to the study of new problems
and incessantly try to dispell ideological obstacles blocking the progress of the
cadres and fighters--this was his duty. what especially disturbed him was the vague
understanding demonstrated by the fighters there which showed that their thinking

still had not broken free from the ultraleftist line of Lin Biao and the 'Eang of
Four." If the fighters were not lent a positive guiding hand, how could they catch

up with the new situation where the party is switching work emphasis. At this point

in his thoughts, Liu became imbued with courage and strength and was determined to

help the fighters shatter the mental shackles that were placed on their heads by

Lin Biao and the "Gang of Four". Furthermore, he would help them correctly under-
stand the present policies so that they could march forward with confidence.

29
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An understanding of the correctness of the present policies would be the best

argument for persuasion. Political Instructor Liu earnestly studied Central policy
regulations concerning agricultural villages and familiarized himself with each of

the fighters' hometown situations in seven provinces. He went, furthermore, to locally
stationed commune production brigades to make investigations. One of the fighters'
father was a secretary of a Party branch in an agricultural village. Through this
fighter. Liu came to understand the current situation concerning economic policies.
Then after comprehensive analysis, he began to educate the fighters, First, he lectured
on the good trend shown by implementation of Party economic policies in rural areas.

He explained from all aspects that "contracting to the team" was a method to strengthen
the production responsibility system, to mobilize the labor enthusiasm of the vast
number of farmers and to develop agricultural productivity. In direct response to

the suspicion that "contracting to the team" was a step back, he pointed out, "whether
or not it is a step back depends on whether it is beneficial to the consolidation and
development of the socialist collective economy. During the Cultural Revolution,

under the ultraleftist influences of Lin 8130 and the "Gang of Pour", the "contract-
ing to the team" form of production organization was incorrectly criticized. Now we
are working from reality to apply methods that were effective before the Cultural
Revolution--this is liberated thinking. "Contracting to the team" is a positive

policy for the development of production and not step back at all." At the same

time he explained that a few individual areas carried out 'ﬂivision of land to
fanilies"-—this was a deviation a few units committed during the implementation of
policies and was not a problem of the Central policies themselves. The fighters

must believe that local party organizations and the masses would eventually correct
this tendency.

This lecture completely won over the fighters. That night, many fighters wrote home
educating their families on a correct understanding and on a determined implementation
of the Party's current agricultural policies. The fighters expressed that they would

devote themselves to the work of the army and guard the four modernizations with real
actions.

9796
C80: 6005/2086

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

CONCEPTS 'HODERN' WARFARE, 'MODERNIZBD' WARFARE DISTINGUISHED

Beijing JIANFANGJUN 8A0 in Chinese 21 Jun 79 p 2

[Article by Jin Yan [2529 3508] and Ye Xing [0673 2502]: "A Dialogue On Modern
warfare and Hodernized Warfare")

lText) Recently we overheard an interesting conversation between two staff officer
comrades concerning modern warfare and modernized warfare and have organized and
recorded it as follows:

Staff Officer Zhang: 01d Li, there were many opinions concerning our latest defensive
counterattack at the combat evaluation meeting yesterday. Some said it was modernized
warfare, others said it cannot be considered modernized but only nodern warfare. what
is your understanding of the two concepts, modern and modernized warfare?

Staff Officer Li: My understanding is that modern and modernized warfare are two
different concepts. Modern warfare refers to the time during which the war occurred.
Hodernized warfare (also called warfare under modern conditions) refers to the appli-
cation of the most advanced modern scientific technology in battle, complete with
modernized military equipment, modernized combat comanding and modernized combat
methods.

Staff Officer Zhang: I agree with this point of view. I feel, however, that the two
are different yet also related. The concept of modern warfare is broader, encompas-
sing a wider range. It can include modernized warfare with its advanced military
equipment. but it can also include various specialized warfare where relatively back-
ward military equipment is used. For instance, the war to help Korea resist the U.S.
and the Middle Eastern War would be modernized warfare. African guerrilla wars and
the Cambodian war against Vietnamese invasion would, however, be modern wars but not
modernized wars. Often we say that "training must be tailored to the needs of modern
warfare"--that is using the concepts "modern warfare" and "modernized warfare“
interchangeably. '

Staff Officer Li: Right. After clarifying these two concepts, we can understand
clearer what we should call the latest defensive counterattack. This retaliation

is a war which occurred at the end of the seventies. From the point of time, it is
modern warfare. Due to the scope of the war, the limitation of battle site conditions
and other factors, both sides used only conventional weaponry. It could have been

a three-dimensional war, but it did not become a reality. Hence. it is not a typical

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

modernized war. Naturally, this is not to say at all that it is totally unrelated
to modernized warfare. During this war. the military equipment, the defense works
and the coordination of the various types of arms all revealed in differing degrees
certain characteristics of modernized warfare. From this definition, this self-
defense retaliation war is a special war within a special war that possessed charac-
teristics of modernized warfare. It probed into the characteristics and laws

of modernized warfare, provided research material and contributed a definite basis
for study.

Staff Officer Zhang: I furthermore feel that clarifying the two concepts of modern
warfare and modernized warfare and making clear what this last counterattack was is

and in applying the experience in future training and warfare--it can prevent blind-
ness and can raise our political consciousness. In the first place, we will not
equate this war with modernized warfare and will not make all warfare experience
absolute. Having fought and bled in battle, and therefore highly valuing the summa-
tion of war experience is undoubtedly correct, but if we do not seek truth from
facts and merely regard the part as the whole, using the specific to arrive at the
universal prematurely and taking modernized warfare to be only this kind, then it
would simplify modernized warfare. As a result, we would consciously lower the
standards of our education training and battle preparation work unconsciously. we
would not earnestly pay attention to special points and developments and to study
warfare laws under modern conditions. If we do this, we will definitely sustain
great defeats in future wars.

Staff Officer Li: Let me add to that. Clarifying these two concepts can also
prevent us from another one~sided error--that is, we should accept and recognize

the special characteristics of modernized warfare which this war possessed and trea-
sure the valuable experience which was bought with blood. In the summation and
application of the experience of this war, we should consciously apply scientific
methods to use the parts see the whole. the specific to see the general, to see
peace time in war time, and to extract ways to deal with big hegemonist powers from
our experience with fighting the little ones. 0n the other hand, if we belittle

the special characteristics of modernized warfare which this war possessed and over-
look the necessity of summarizing and studying war experience, what would that lead
to? The result can only be: after one experience, we will not have gained an ounce
of wisdom; after one war, we will not have progressed one step; education and training
would still stay the same and when war comes around again, we may even take a more
tortuous road.

Staff Officer Zhang: Our points of view are comparatively similar. Of course,
that doesn't mean that our points of view are necessarily correct. Let's bring our
viewpoints up and discuss them with the others.

9796
C50: 6005/2086

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

ARTICLE DISCUSSES TRAINING TO MEET DEMANDS 0P MODERN WARFARE

Flame Throwing Training

Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO in Chinese 29 Jun 79 p 2

[Article by Yu Qiguang [0827 1142 0342] from the headquarters of the Antichemical
warfare Corps: "From the Use of Flamethrower Soldiers to a Combined Training of

Specialized Soldiers"!

[Text] A flamethrower is a close contact weapon, used by the infantry in attacking
the enemy's sturdy firing points, blockhouses, tunnels, trenches, caves, shelters
and in destroying the enemy within buildings. This weapon gave play to a special
combat power during the self-defense retaliation war against Vietnam and compensated
for the insufficiencies of rifles, artillery and tanks during close contact fighting.
For instance, when a unit of border patrol in Yunnan was assaulting enemy fortifica-
tions in Man Chan and Lao Cai, rifle and artillery fires were helpless against the
enemy's zigzagging defense works and the tanks were unsuited to move in to destroy
them. The commander then mobilized a platoon of flamethrowers to participate and
aid in the combat by carrying out close contact flamethrowing at the enemy's defense
works. Thirty-eight of the enemy's combat targets were wiped out and the fighting
was ended quickly. In any type of fighting, if the commander has a relatively deep
understanding of the principle of using flamethrower soldiers and can utilize them
in a relatively suitable manner. the flamethrower troops would be able to demonstrate

great effectiveness.

And yet, under the same fighting conditions, the flamethrower units under some of

the troops are unable to give play to their powers and may even sustain greater
casualities. The major reason is that commanders of some platoons, companies,
battalions and even regiments lack general knowledge about the flamethrower as a

weapon and do not know how to utilize this specialized troop. Unnecessary casaulities
would result especially if the commander does not know to organize firing to neutra-
lize, interdict and contain enemy fire and is not able to give cover to the flamethrower

unit while it is in the act of flamethrowing.

The use of flamethrowers is not supposed to be complicated, so why should there be
Such occurrences contrary to our general knowledge. There are three major reasons.
First, it is because we "never burn incense during peacetime and only clasp Buddah's
feet during wartime." The flamethrower unit is usually assembled on the spot to work
with the infantry. Normally, the flamethrower soldiers are not even trained with

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'Sli ONLY

with the foot soldiers, so the two groups do not understand one another and are
unable to coordinate. Secondly, in training and leadership, some commanders of
combined arms forces have only one type of arms in mind-~they value the infantry

and overlook special troops and specialized units and do not want to take specialized
soldiers like the flamethrowers. Only during combat do they recall that there are
such specialized soldiers to be used. Some combined arms forces commanders lack even
the most basic knowledge about such specialized troops. Third, the training of the
specialized troops is in itself not up to standards. Many cadres and soldiers of
specialized units reflect that "specialized soldiers are noncombatant public works
soldiers." They are indispensible for construction work, road repairs and production
work. It is not even Sure that they can complete their own technical training, let
alone learn about the infantry. How can we change this situation? The lesson that
we learned from this self-defense retaliation war gave us the following enlightenments:

1. Specialized soldiers are not dispensible to modern warfare, but they can have a
very important role. In our present equipment organization system, specialized arms
occupy a high ratio, and from the developmental trend of modern warfare, special
troops and specialized troops will have an increasingly greater ratio. But specialized
soldiers have always been neglected. Take the instance of the flamethrower troops.
Since their establishment in the fifties, they first distinguished themselves in
action during the Jiangshan Island war and then again during the Indo-China border
defense retaliation war and were considered to be the second most effective weapon

for the destruction of enemy fire points. But in the years of peace afterwards,
people began to forget about these specialized soliders, and after many cuts in the
equipment organization system. these specialized troops became only a seedling,
occupying an extremely secondary and subordinate position. Scientific study of this
type of weaponry was almost terminated. Yet. it was these undervalued and pitifully
few flamethrowers which once again demonstrated their combat prowess in this last
defense retaliation. All commanders who took part in the war cried out for a
reinstatement and an increase in the organization and equipment of flamethrowers

and a strengthening of the building of the troops. The facts showed that specialized
soldiers are an important source of power in the coordinated combat of all types of
soldiers. In the cases of foreign military. specialized soldiers are not being
undermined but are being increasingly strengthened. At the same time that the United
States and the Soviet Union are racing to develop nuclear weaponry, they are continuing
the building and training of the various specialized troops. The Soviet Army in its
combined arms forces not only includes light flamethrowers but also heavy flamethrowers,
and is busily carrying on training with the flamethrowers fighting in c00peration.

The American Army in its combined arms forces not only has flamethrowing and smoke
emitting specialized troops with battalions and companies equipped with oil bombs,
each infantry platoon also carries flamethrowers. In the British, French, German,
Japanese and other East-Nest European troops, there is similar flamethrower organiza-
tional equipment and great emphasis is placed on the building and training of this
specialized unit. The answer as to whether we should increase or slacken the building
of specialized troops such as flamethrowers is evident without further explanation.

2. The commander of combined arms forces must change his habit of depending on only
the infantry and quickly change his attitude to emphasize a good grasp of all differ-
ent kinds of special and specialized units. The lesson taught by this defense
retaliation tells us that giving play to the organic power of all the various types
of arms is the key to gaining battlefield victory and that the inexperience of
commanders of combained arms forces with special troops and specialized troops and

3h
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their inability to utilize them suitably are the basic reasons for the poor
coordination of th; various types of soldiers. Therefore, from now on, we must
especially stress that commanders of combined arms forces grasp the importance of
training special troops and specialized units and that they familiarize themselves
with these types of soldiers and learn how to utilize them.

3 Normal practice must be like real combat--specialized units like the flamethrowers
must be coordinated with infantry companies for combined drilling. The self-defense
retaliation also tells us that last minute cooperation cannot form the soldiers into

a fist; only strengthened training during peacetime can bring about coordination
during wartime. Hence, after completion of its own technical training, the specialized
unit should be sent to infantry battalions or troops for coordinated combat training.
Flamethrowers and foot soldiers must be trained together on all battle formations with
actual weapons, artillery and flamethrowers. This way, it would, on the one hand,
familiarize the comrades of the infantry unit with the use of flamethrowers and enable
them to learn how to give flamethrower soldiers cover to enable the latter to complete
their task. And on the other hand, it would enable the flamethrowers to learn
infantry knowledge so that they would understand the combat aims of the infantry and
better coordinate with them to complete the mission.

Infantry, Artillery Coordination
Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO in Chinese 29 Jun 79 p 2

[Article by Li Songlin [2621 2646 2651], Huang Nenzhou [7806 2629 5297] and Gang
Yongxiang [5567 3057 4382] from an artillery platoon of the Jinan Forces: "Contents
and Methods on Improving Artillery Training Encircling Infantry-Artillery Coordination"]

[Text] Ground artillery is used by the army as a surprise fire attack force during
combat. The army is responsible for using artillery to interdict enemy fire, destroy
enemy fortifications and support the infantry in its fighting. Hhether the infantry
can fight together in coordination with the artillery will have direct influence on
the outcome of the battle. But for how many years now have artillery and infantry
under the same division never met. The training of artillerymen is basically a
technical training of a single type of arms; ordinarily training consists of a single
vehicle, a single artillery piece, a single man. Firing practice at the end of the
year is according to the training assignment which is to shoot a few firing exercises
at a fixed shooting range. Coordinated training is mostly limited to one's own
coordination of sighting, and clearing and maneuvering the artillery piece. Once,
when we were drilling in coordination with the infantry during practice with live
ammunition, a great number of problems arose. A commander of combined arms forces
was not familier with the artillery unit and firing was based on guessing. The
commander of the artillery unit did not understand the infantry's combat goals and
laws of mobility, so that even after the infantry had occupied the "enemy's" forward
position, the artillery firing arrangement was still not completed so the unit was,
therefore, unable to give the infantry support fire at the right time. Nor did the
infantry understand the military function of the artillery and it was unable to take
advantage of artillery attack and fire power to penetrate deep into enemy lines. At
the end of the practice drill, both commanders said with deep feelings: "Had there
been a real war, this type of last minute coordination would indeed result in great
losses." How can we change the situation where infantry and artillery never meet

for practice. After the self-defense retaliation war against Vietnam, we gave a great
deal of thought to this problem and feel that we should do the following:

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We feel that a key factor would be to have organizations above the division rank

create conditions for the artillery to practice together with the infantry. The
artillery unit under regimental counand belong to the same organizational regimental
system as the infantry, so the coordinated practice of these two is relatively easier
to carry out. But the artillery regiment under divisional command is fundamentally
unrelated to the infantry part except during large-scale practice when all are assembled
together. This situation cannot be resolved by the artillery regiment itself. We

hOpe that divisional leaders and organizations can plan many medium- and small-scale
combined drills during the year. By mediumwscale we mean using the division as the

unit to organize artillery regiments to take turns to have combined practice with

the infantry under divisional command. By small-scale we mean that there must be
artillery participation in infantry battalion practice. In order to heighten the
effect of combined practice, we suggest that officers of the combined arms forces
carry out artillery practice with live ammunition. This would enable the officers
and cadres above infantry battalion rank to familiarize themselves with the organiza-
tion, equipment and military function of the artillery and with live ammunition
practice enable them to understand the principle of the use of artillery and better
apply it and enable them to give the artillery reasonable assignments. The artillery

can, on the other hand, learn the various coordination techniques during combined
practice.

———.-—-—- .-.‘

He must center on the coordination of artillery and infantry and strengthen the
artillery's tactical training. At present, the artillery units are basically doing
technical training. Tactical training is minimal, so that when they do have combined
practice with the infantry, the two cannot cooperate and are unable to bring about a
consistent coordination. Therefore, artillery tactical training time should be
increased, centering closely on infantry-artillery coordination problems; cadres and
soldiers should he organized together to study the infantry regiment's organization,
equipment, weaponry functions and tactical characteristics. The artillerymen should,
furthermore on their own accord, review and study infantry practice, with emphasis

on understanding the duties of the infantry during all kinds of combat and the movements
of the infantry during the various stages of combat. They should study the many
battle formations (such as attack, defense, ambush, contact battle) and learn how to
aid the infantry with artillery support during the variOus stages of combat. The
tactical arrangements of companies, battalions and other groups during live ammunition
practice must be completed before the conclusion of the practice. Rigorous demands
must be made on the troops based on artillery-infantry coordinated combat standards
and the main aim of artillery planning, deployment and movement must be placed on
supporting the infantry to achieve victory.

We must center on artillery-infantry coordinated training and impove the technical
training of the artillery units. The speed, accuracy and the ability to give surprise
attack form the basis of support for combat infantry. In the past, because there

was not much consideration given to coordination, the elements of speed and surprise
attack were often neglected. in the future, technical training should be firmly set
up with service to the infantry as the guiding thought, centering on quick preparation,
quick and accurate shooting and surprise shooting. Reform and readjustment in technical
training content should be implemented, and at the same time, based on the experience
of this self—defense attack, new training topics should be added in order to meet the
need of artillery-infantry coordination, such as intermittent neutralization shooting
(sudden stopping and shooting to create illusion and impede enemy action) and the feint
removal of artillery and feint stoppage of fire in order to coordinate with the
infantry's feint attacks and surprise flank attacks and other such war tactics. We
must especially strengthen the training of the artillery's forward observation posts
so firing can achievv suddcnness, accuracy and fierceness.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVIA

Contenders, Troop Coordination

Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAO in Chinese 29 Jun 79 p 2

[Article by Zhou Nan [6650 0589] and Wei Youlong [7614 1429 7893] from a troop
of the Beijing Forces "Comandera Must Have a Broader Range of Knowledge"]

[Text] It is said that "Comnding lies not in bravery but in resourcefulness." The
coordination of the various arms in count, to a commander, especially a high level
one, lies in his versatility in the art of war. If a cor-sander is to master the art
of war, he must have a broad range of knowledge. The most basic requirements is

that he be familier with the various types of arms and with the principles of how

to use these arms correctly. 0n the complex and ever changing battlefield, in order
to be able to judge the hour and size up the situation so as to be able to correctly
connand his own various troops as well as to manoeuvre the enemy's commanding talents,
the commander is required to understand and master many fields of knowledge. Lessons
from foreign and domestic wars from antiquity to now and the knowledge of how to make
use of weather and geography are all very important to the commander. Clausewitz

in his book. "On War," said that "Military talent is the harmonious union of various
spiritual powers." This is very true. Especially under conditions of modern war-
fare, modern sciences such as high energy physics, space technology and computer
science are continuously being applied to military affairs. The range of knowledge
that a military comander is exposed to becomes increasingly broader. Therefore,
increasing the sphere of knowledge of comanders is an important step in the culti-
vat ion and elevation of the cadres' organizational and comanding abilities.

At present, the majority of our military counanders have never gone through
institutional schooling and their cultural level is relatively low too. During

job training, the cadres were limited to organizational and comanding duties on
their own level; hence, their range of knowledge is relatively narrow. We feel that
all levels of commanders, especially those in higher ranks, should increase their
range of studies, centering on the topic of elevating modern warfare organizational
and commanding abilities. They should learn, on their own, foreign and domestic
theories of military science, step by step and in a planned way. For example, they
can center their studies on foreign military thoughts, strategies and tactics of
World War II: They can read the memoirs of Eisenhower, Zhukov, Roosevelt and Churchill,
the "War Documents" of Romel, and "The General Staff Headquarters of the War Periods"
of shtemenko. They can analyze what the changes in political and military situations
during the Great wnr brought about in terms of strategic and tactical problems and
problems of combat methods, how these problems were handled, why they were so handled
and extract useful lessons from them. Reading Sokolovkii's thoughts on the problems
of modern military strategy and Grechko's thoughts on future warfare would be very
helpful in the study of Soviet revisionism. The comnders must study astronomy,
geography, history and space technology. Only broad knowledge can lead to great
resourcefulness. After the commanders have been enriched by a broad range of knowledge,
they will then be able to correctly make use of the art of war during combat, based
on knowledge or the enemy's situation, their own situation, on the weather and on
geography. But to truly accomplish this will indeed be difficult.

37
FOR OFl-‘IClAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Army, Air Force Coordination
Beijing JIEFANCJUN BAO in Chinese 29 Jun 79 p 2

[Article by Li Yongau [2621 3057 1366] and Jin Zhifu [6855 1807 4395] from the Air
Force of the Jinan Forces: "The Army and the Air Force Should Carry Out Confrontation
Drills"!

[Text] For a long time, the army and the air force have carried out training
independent of one another. When the army trains against planes and defending against
air raids, the situation and the targets were always make believe; and because the
air force training is not in conjunction with the army, coordination, reconnaissance,
diving, bombing and attacking are done from the air into "empty air." Even during
large-scale exercises organized in military areas with the air force part of the
fighting, it is still only a display type of joint exercise. For instance, during
joint exercises when airborne units of the air force are to bomb certain key ground
targets, they just fly to a designated battle area, dive and go through the motions
of bombing. As to how to carefully choose air routes, how to avoid ground fire,

or how to adopt sudden attack methods to bomb targets, there is little study or
training. Likewise with the army. During anti-bombing joint exercises, the battle
position is not even camouflaged--when the planes arrive, the artillerymen take aim,
make a few gestures and that completes the joint exercise. This type of joint
exercise cannot bring about good training results. But even such demonstrations

of joint exercises are rare.

The army and the air force should have more joint exercises. They must drill on
fighting with one another as the enemy. This way, with coordinated exercises, the
air force can meet with participating army units to study how to discover targets,
how to approach under cover without detection, and how to make surprise attacks.
The army, on the other hand, can study how to disperse, take cover and organize
anti-aircraft surveillance and firing while there are actually planes in the air.
At the same time, they can discover one another's problems which come up during
training and make corrections in time. Both sides would be able to avoid wasting

a great deal of man power and material resources in setting up fake targets. This
would be less troublesome and more economical as well as realistic. Such training
would indeed have a great advantage. As a matter of fact, all the military areas
possess the facilities [or such training-~the problem is one of lack of organization.
If all the large military areas have a supervisory organization for coordinating
exercises and often call for the meeting of the leaders of the army and the air
force to study problems of joint exercises and organically combine the contents of
army training with the subjects of air force training, it would make it possible to
promote the improvement of the training quality of both sides and enable them to
understand one another so that a foundation can be laid for wartime ground-air
cooperation.

9796
C50: 4005/2086

38
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

of experiences in the war of self-defensive counterattack. Deputy regimental
commander Li Dianhua [2621 3013 5678], during the course of taking charge of a
positional command. was well organized, decisive in command, and corrected
mistakes when he discovered them in a timely manner, thereby satisfactorily
completing his task of contend. He summed up his experiences in "getting a good
grasp on the four links in order to insure that cannon fire is accurate."

Deputy regimental leader Hang Junhai [3769 0971 3189]. for leading an observation
team to a forward position, where it reconnoitered the enemy situation and
accurately directed our artillery bombardment of targets, was awarded the Merit
Citation, Second Class. He then summed up the knowledge gained from his
experience in setting up a frontline artillery observation post for mountain
warfare. [Text) [Beijing JIBPANCJUN BAD in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p l] 9727

VALUE OF MULTIPLE SKILLS--A certain unit of the border defense units, in summdng
up its experiences, has integrated battle and training, viewed training from the
angle of actual warfare, and further clarified the direction of training reform.
In the battle of Bo Shan [phonetic], the second gunner of a type 708 battle
vehicle of the 7th company was wounded by a bullet. The chief gunner hurriedly
came forward and bound up the wound. The driver of the vehicle immediately took
the place of the chief gunner in firing the cannon. The vehicle continued to
engage in the battle and wiped out the enemy firing points. From this battle the
cadres and fighters further saw the usefulness of being expert in one thing and
good at many things, and resolved to learn several combat skills in future
training. [Text] [Beijing JIEFANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p l]

LESSONS FROM BORDER HAR--In summing up its experiences, a certain artillery
regiment of the border defense units employed the viewpoint of "one divides into
two" in looking at its successful experiences without evading its weak links.

For example, because the distinguishing marks of some companies were not clear
enough. they failed to timely annihilate the fleeing enemy; because some fighters
fired artillery shells that were not equipped with fuses, the shells failed to
explode, etc. Through the Summation, the cadres and fighters, from the lessons of
their personal experiences, saw the importance of strict training and strict
demands. [Text] [Beijing JIEPANCJUN 3A0 in Chinese 11 Apr 79 p 1] 9727

C80: 4005/2099 END

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY