ma OFFIGAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10690

27 July 1982

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 7/8 2)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

ma OFHGAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING UHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUELICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Economc Armns

(9000 7/ 82)
Comeu'rs

WC POLICY. ORGANIZATION AID Hm

Effective Utilization of Capiul Inn-mt and Find Capital
(mu JA roman. 302. 170582) ......

0n the Basis of Nov Scone-1c Methods
(mu JA m. no ‘. AP! 82) oooooo‘onooooooooooooo

- I - [III - USSR -

m. oi'i'lﬂu. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mac POLICY. MIMI“ AND W

BYPBCI'IVB 0!le!!“ W “PIT“. MST)!“ MO FIXED CAPITAL
Tellinn 131mm JA TWIN! in letonien llo 2, Peb 82 pp 22-26

[Article by L. Kuhn, Cendidete of Economic», In.titute of Economic., 388R
Academy of Science.)

I Passage. in boldtece enclo.ed in .lentlineel

[Text] The 25th end 26th CPSU Congreeu. .et the long-term couree for the
economic end .ociel development of our country". cour.e towerd rei.ing the
netionel .tenderd of living through more exteneive end effective economic
activity. Th1. cour.e require. thet productive potentiel be improved,
.trengthened. end ueed een.ibly.

Since lebor i. .trictly limited, e retionel on of cepitel inveetment and
fixed cepitel will become the determining fector in incrming the intensity
end effectiveneee of production. |leving eddreeeed the meet urgent queetion.
of econonic development et the 1981 0980 Member plenum, Comrede L.
Brezhnev .teted thet next to the food problem, cepitel conetruction pre-
eented the .econd decieive .egment of the iive-yeer period. A beeic chenge
muet be echieved to increeee the effectiveneu of cepitel inveetunt. For
the tint time in the hietory of plenned netionel economy. netionel income
will eazceed the growth of cepitel inveet-nt. Thi. i. illu.treted by the
following det. (20. pp 39, lol. 63, 333; lo).

Growth in Cepitel

Inveeteent
(Percentege .
of Previou. Growth in
Pin-leer Period) Netionel Economy
1971.197: I 1.2 32
1976-1980 29 23
. 1931-1935 (plen) 10.4 18

”WNW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such a relationship between production and capital investment requires the
application of comprehensive measures to increase the effectiveness of
capital investment and fixed capital. Such measures have been out lined in
the decisions of the 25th end 26th CPSU congresses, the materials of the
l98l CPSU November plenum end the 6th session of the 10th USSR Supreme
Soviet, end the CPSU Central Conittee and the USSR Council of Ministers
directive "0n improvement of planning end strengthening of the influence
of the economic mechanism on increased production efficiency end work qual-
ity."

Next, let's discuss some of these measures in more detail.

In his report to the 26th CPSU Congress Comrade L. Brezhnev stressed that
the llth five year period would be "characterised by a general cancentra-
tion of forces to speed the construction and the coming on line of enter-
prises able to insure the greatest increase in production, and a widening of
bottlenecks." (2, p 69). This would secure a more effective use of capital
investments. From the standpoint of increasing the effectiveness of capital
investments it is especially important that the proportion of funds el-
located for replenishing fixed capital and for new construction be changed.
Since the former is the only way to intensify expanded reconstruction, the
proportion must change in favor of fixed capital replenishment.

Compared to new construction I the reconstruction and technical retrofitting
of plants has several advantages./

First, investments made for modernization, reconstruction, and technical

retrofitting will pay for themselves up to three times as fast as invest-
ments in new construction. Utilization of productive capacity will in-
crease.

Second, with retrofitting the proportion of construction and installation
expenses within capital investment budgets will decrease. The role of ac-
tive fixed capital will increase, while that of capital investment will

decrease. It should be noted that construction and installation expenses

within capital investment budgets of our republic’s production facilities
decreased in the 8th, 9th, and 10th five year period by 0-5 percent.

Third, modernization, reconstruction, and retrofitting often result in a
more practical labor use. After all, labor expended for site preparation,
auxilliary construction, road construction, etc., is avoided or reduced.
This is a precondition for increased productivity.

In our country the role of assets devoted to reconstruction is a rela-
tively important one within total capital investments, but it is still in-
sufficient to effectively intensify the economy and increase its effective-
ness. With this in view, plans were made to increase funds for retrofit-
ting and reconstruction of existing industries by 21.2 percent; their
proportion within all industrial capital investments will amount to 32.5
percent (29.2 percent in the 10th five year period).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same tie: the importance of an extensive increase of productive
capacity must not be underestimated. But new construction should take
place only when it is urgently needed (i.e., when even reconstruction of
existing facilities will not increase production to the required degree)
or if it permits a broader application of scientific and technical achiever

ants end results in higher labor productivity.

An essential rosem for increasing the effectiveness of capital invest-
ment consists [of strict adherence to plan discipline./ Here, too, we
have weaknesses. There were difficulties in our republic in fulfilling
the capital investment plan of the 10th five year period. It was met
monetarily end larger also by projects, but in the service area (cultural
edifices, nursery schools, and hospitals) and in some industries the con-
struction end installation plan was not met. . This was due to inconsisten-
cies between construction capabilities and plans, and deficiencies in the
work of construction organisations.

In order to strengthen plan discipline the amber of projects under con-
struction at one time must be reduced. Only such projects may be included
that are backed up by plans, construction capability, end the limits of
capital investment.

According to the 26th CPSU Congress guidance and the 1981 (2le Central Com-
mittee November plenu, it is especially important that the projects and
resources be balanced. This requires that materiel-technical supply be-
come more efficient, and that strict conservation in resource utilization
be practiced. In order thet the capital construction plan be brought into
conformance with resources and construction capacity the government found
it necessary to initially reduce the amount for capital construction in-
cluded in the llth Five Year Plan by 30 billion rubles. Plan discipline

is also strengthened by improved planning, especially by adoption of con-
tinuous planning.

The central direction for improving the effectiveness of capital investment
Ilies in the reduction of their use cycle.l According to the above-
mentioned party and govern-mt directives the interest of construction and
installation organisation in a faster conclusion of projects and in putting
them on line will be increased by isplementation of accounting procedures
regarding those completely finished plants, stages, units, etc., that are
ready to cosmence production of offer services.

The use cycle of capital investnnt can also be shortened by better job
coordination. At the same tin this allows for implementing scientific

and technical progress. This task is best filled by compilation and use of
comprehensive plans. These programs allow for coordination between the var-
ious stages of use of capital investments and scientific and technical de-
velopment (birth of a scientific idea, developent and experimentation, and
implementation), provide for planned milestones, reduce lead times to a

minimus, and provide for a faster implementation of the results in the
economy.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<OF1NCIAL,USE(MVLY

At the 26th CPSU Congress such effective forms of joining science and pro-
duction as scientific-production collectives were praised. At the same
time they shorten the use cycle of capital investments. In such collec-
tives it is possible to join or synchronize the activities of all or most
of the concerned links. The cooperation is coordinated by one end the
came management who is also interested in maximum results. Our republic
has already had some experiences in this area. Almost ell branches of the
national economy and industry have producting collectives end enterprises
with their own institute, laboratory, development bureau, end experimental
station. It is necessary that besides solving scientific-technical prob-
lems of production, these collectives pay more attention to raising the

effectiveness of capital investment.

One way to use capital investment better is Ito assure that it is correctly
balanced between the branches of the industry./ This balance must be in
conformance with the comprehensive development of towns and rayons. Dur-
ing the current five year period particular attention will be directed to
the development of the food industry; therefore, samewhat more resources
will be devoted to foster industries supplying agriculture with productive
means and processing agricultural products efficiently, and at the same
time more resources will be granted directly to agriculture to expand
production of feeds and agricultural products, and to improve their preser-
vation. The latter is especially important, since storage losses of
potatoes, vegetables, and fruits are large and do not seem to be declining.
Capital investments for warehouse construction will increase 1.6 times,

for intra-farm hard surface roads 1.4 times. Warehouses must also be built
in towns. This allows for transportation of agricultural products di-
rectly to the stores and dining facilities, and reduces storage loss.

From the standpoint of achieving good results, an increase of capital in-
vestments in the basic branches of industry is of decisive importance.

In the llth five year plan large sums will also be expended to develop
transportation. As a result of increased investments /the volume of

fixed capital has steadily increased, its structure has advanced, and its
productivity has increased./ For example, in 1971-1980 our country began
exploitation of fixed capital in a value of almost 1049 billion rubles, in-
cluding almost 7 billion rubles in the 2853. The total volume of fixed
capital in this period increased 2.16 times in the USSR as a whole, 1.93
times in the ESSR (20, p 328).

In the last 10 years more than 3000 large state industrial enterprises
were constructed in the Soviet land, more than 10,000 enterprises were
reconstructed or expanded to conform with modern technology. In the BSSR
mighty complexes were producing ammonia and sulfuric acid were completed
in the 10th five year period. as were several projects for producing com-
plex fertilizers. The first block of the Iru Energy Station was built.
In the oil shale industry capacity was increased by 3.5 million tons of
oil shale a year. In Pussi a modern particle board plant for furniture
parts was finished. Fundamental reconstruction work at the Sindi Textile
Factory imeni 1 December was performed. Several production projects in

FOI¢0F1NCJA1.USE2(N9LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transportation, trade, etc., were also conpleted; the uterial-technical
base of agriculture was expanded.

The extent of fixed capital equipage was increased narltedly. For example,
fixed capital per an industrial worker in the USSR amounted to 7,100
rubles in 1970, in 1980 it was 13,600. In the agriculture of our country

fixed capital rose by nore than 2.6 tines. (19).

The increase of technical equip-ent is the basis for increased productiv-
ity. the latter is usually the higher the greater the anount of fixed
capital. Generally, labor productivity depends on the use of fixed
capital; productivity increases as fixed capital use inproves, with the
final expression of this being an increase of production per ruble of
fixed capital, or profitability. fro. the standpoint of effective use
of fixed capital it is also important that profitability be acconpanied
by a rise of quality, decrease of coats, and inprovenent of working con-
ditions. Profitability is an important indicator of fixed capital use.
Generally it is expressed as a relationship between production and fixed
capital, but it can also be expressed as a relationship between labor
productivity and fixed capital. Consequently, when labor productivity
increases faster than fixed capital, profitability increases (and vice
versa).

The national economy of the USSR as a whole, and ale'o of the 38811 has been
characterized for some time by a tendency of lower profitability. Frau
1971-1980 labor productivity in our country increased 1.06 fold, fixed
capital, however, increased considerably faster in the basic branches of
the national economy. The tendency of lower investnent returns is also
evident fro- the relationship of production and fixed capital increases.
The latter is evident frou the following data for 1971-1980 (20, pp lol,
52, 379; 11, p (.7)

Production Fixed Capital
USSR as a whole 162 216
ESSR 161 193

The decrease of returns is due to many factors, including objective ones.
For example, due to bad weather agricultural production in recent years has
increased much more slowly than expenses made to strengthen the material-
technica‘. base of farming. In some industries the decrease of returns is
also due to difficulties in obtaining certain raw naterials, especially due
to nore difficult nining conditions. For this reason, returns in these
branches have decreased faster than in the industry as a whole. An illus-
tration of this is provided by a comparison of variws total productions and
capital)assets in our country (1971-1980 growth rates in percent) (20, pp 127
and 161 .

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLV
POI Ol-‘II'IOAI. USE ONLY

‘l'otal
Production Fixed Capital
‘l‘otal industry 178 216
Fuel industry 15!. 212
Iron industry 161 193
lbchine construction and metal
industry _ 256 253
Food industry ' 140 188

Mostly, however, diminished returns are due to imperfect use of productive
potential. Discussing this question at the 26th CPSU Congress Comrade L.
Brezhnev stressed: “There are great opportunities in better use of pro-
ductive resources-machines, implements and transportation facilities.
Reduction of downtime, increases in turnover rates, and design of techni-
cal plans to save raw laterialsuefforts must be concentrated in these
areas." (2. p 52)

The level of finned capital use is greatly determined. by the effectiveness
of capital investments made to create new technology. For enaple, the
efficiency of fixed capital depends primarily on the structure of capital
investments.

A considerable reserve for increased returns lies in the inrovement of the
technical level of fixed capital, with the basic thesis being, as stated
above, that operating enterprises be reconstructed to conform to modern
technology, and that machinery be modernized. It is useful to modernize
machinery in the course of a general overhaul. The faster outdated tech-
nology is replaced by new, nore productive ones, the more vigorous the
increase in labor productivity. It is most useful to retool at a time
when the age of the basic machinery corresponds roughly to economically
justifiable age, when the nachinery is on the verge of being depreciated.
Of course, this must take place in coordination with the development of
other branches of the economy. Istooling depends greatly on the develop-
ment of the toolmeking industry, and on the progress of new development.
For this reason toolnsking Inst proceed at an accelerated pace.

Fixed capital is being vigorously reacted in our country. For example, in
the 9th five year period alaost so percent in industry and 56 percent in
agriculture were renewed. In the 10th five year period 36 percent of in-
dustrial fixed capital was renewed. (l, p 65; 19) Unfortunately, the

new fixed capital is not always sufficiently effective, troductivity tends
to rise slower than its price. and for this reason it does not guarantee a
rise in returns. In the current five year period modernization of machinery
will be considerably accelerated, and there is consideration of effective
sanctions against production of outdated nodels.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A reserve for better utiliretion of fixed capital is [the optimum use of
machinery end production fecilities ./ This must begin with the timely re-
ceipt of new machinery end in the echievement of projected cepscity. There
heve been frequent slowdowns here due to extensive experimentation in de-
bugging the machinery, or due to the fact that preperetions for production
heve not been made (materiel or energy supply has not been developed,
personnel hes not been hired, etc.).

The optimal use of mechinery presupposes that bottlenecks in plents end
departments be removed end thet unused reserves be discovered. An in-
portent reserve is the better menegement of euxiliery work. This is not e
new problem. Measures have been teken to solve it, but epperently they
hsve been insufficient. whet other reeson is there to explain the fect
that elnost helf of the industrial workers (including the bulk of euxil-
iary workers) ere still performing menuel labor. The main emphasis has
been on mschenizetion of basic production, euxiliery work hes been less
mechenired. The comprehensive plens for scientific end technicel develop-
ment must include means to meechnize end eutomste ell production, includ-
ing suxiliery end warehouse lebor. The production of machines end devices

to perform euxiliery, werehousing end trensportetion functions effectively
must be fo:ced.

An important path to increased productivity is I the rise of the turnover
ration of machinery]. The tesk for increased turnover retion went un-
filled during the 10th five year period (in machine building this was to
have been from 20-30 percent). This is apparently due to e lack of etten-
tion on the pert of menagers. All the more reesm to deal with this prob-
lem during the current five year period.

In some enterprises machine use hes been negatively effected by excessive

downtime. Heesures not be taken to reduce plenned stoppages (for example,
by improved meintensnce end better cere) end for liquidating unscheduled

stoppages. This presupposes that fecilities be assured e supply of raw
materials, parts, end equipment, that the technical docunentetion be in
order, and that labor end technicel discipline be strengthened.

The ways to gein better returns ere different in the verious branches of
'he economy end the verious enterprises. 0n the besis of a plant's spe-
cific function eech collective must [constantly seerch for ways to use
fixed capitel better./ If the rete of return hes decreesed for some

time, then this meens thet the equipment is being used unproductively.
This slows the comprehensive development of the economy, the expansion of
machinery end consunr goods, end the rise in quelity. Even if the rate
of return (production per one ruble of fixed cepitel) would rise by just
one percent. industriel production would rise by more then 6 billion
rubles a year. rising to 8 billion rubles in 198$ (19). For this reason
it is important thet effectiveness of fund use and labor productivity rise

in step with increeses in investments end fixed capitel. The necessery
reserves cen be found in every productive unit.

POI! OFFICIAL [5E ONLY
Se

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

hterials of the 25th CPSU Congress. Tallinn, 1976.
Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress. Tallinn, 1981.

"Comrade 1.. Brezhnev's speech to the CPSU Central Cos-ittee plenu- on
16 NM: 1981," MINA MAI. 17 Nov 81.

"The state plsn for the USSR economic and social development for 1981-
1985, the state plan for the USSR economic and social development for
1982, and the fulﬁllment of the 1981 plan. Report by ll. K. Baihekov,
deputy chairmen, USSR Council of Ministers, chairmen of the USSR
Gosplen, at the 6th session, 10th USSR Supreme Soviet," RAHVA “MI.

18 Nov 81.

On the improvement of planning and strengthening of the influence of
the economic mechanism on increased production efficiency end work
quality. Directive of the CPS!) Central Couittee and the USSR Council

of Ministers dated 12 July 1979. Tallinn, 1979.
The 18th BC? Congress. Tallinn, 1981.

"The results of the 1981 CPSU Central Connittee’November plenum and

the tasks of the republic's petty orgsnization that stem from the
decisions of the plenum end the plenul speech of the CPSU Central
Con-ittee Secretary Cenersl, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. Report of Com-

rade K. Veyno, member, CPSU Central Co-ittee, First Secretary, BCP
Central Comittee to the BCP Central Connittae's 6th plenum," RAHVA
“ML, 1 Dec 81.

"the stste plan for the 388R economic end social development for 1981-
1985, the stete plsn for the 388R economic and social development for
1982, end the fulfillment of the 1981 plan. Report by C. Tonspoeg,
deputy chairman, 388R Council of Ministers, chairmen of 83811 Gosplen
at the 10th 2881! Supreme Soviet's loth session. Tallinn, 1981.

The 10th five yesr period in the BSSR economy. Tallinn, 1981.

The efficiency of social production in the 388R. Tallinn, 1981.

The ESSR nationel economy in 1979. Ststisticsl slmsnec. Tallinn, 1980.

12-20. in Russian

comma: Kirjastus "Perioodika", "Tehniks js Tootmine", 1982.

9260
cso:

1315/31.

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECW011112 POLICY, ORGANIIATION MID mam

ONTHBMSISOPWBCWHICW
Tallinn TBHNIKA JA 100mm: in Estonian No lo, Apr 82 pp 6-8
[Article by R. Toomsnlu, section chief of the 3888 Gosplen]

[Text] This suumer three years ago the 0780 Central Comittee and the USSR

Council of Ministers passed their decree "On the improvement of planning and
strengthening of the influence of the economic mechanism on increased pro-
duction efficiency and work quality." The ministries, other agencies, and
collectives and enterprises of the republic have taken some steps to imple-
ment the measures outlined in this docusent. The new economic methods have
been widely explained. The ministries have provided the enterprises with
the necessary normative documents end methodological instructions, end
practical exercises have been held in their use. A republican emission
was established within the 3588 Gosplan to audit the implementation of new
planning and economic stimulation methods. At the conission meetings the
fulfillment of the joint party and government directive has been regularly
discussed, and reports by leaders of several agencies have been received and
discussed.

First, let us take a look at what has been done to improve planning and to
implement new plan indicators and economic norms.

The above-mentioned directive stresses the need to raise planning to a
qualitatively new level by increasing the role of long-term planning, by
broad use of management by objective programs, and the implementation of
scientifically justified norms and regulations. The document states that
the most important ways to improve planning consist of the selection of

the most effective measures to achieve high final economic results, a
rational adaptation of functional and territorial development plans, and of
long-term and current plans, improvements in the balances between productive
branches and within them, and the assuring of a balanced economic develop-
ment.

To increase the efficiency of long-term planning the scholars of the BSSR
Academy of Sciences' Institute of Economics developed a concept of the de- '
velopment and location of the republic's productive forces. On this basis
a schematic representation of the development and location of productive .
forces until the year 2000 will be developed. This will state the tasks and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basic indicators for the development of the entire republic and of the var-
ioun regions, envision a comprehensive use of natural resources, and ef-
fectively harmonize functional and territorial development. This scheme
will become the basis for preparing the basic directions for the republic's
economic and social development for ten years, at the same time it will be-
come a component of the USSR amin scheme for emplacement of productive
forces (until the year 2000). The 3881! Academy of Sciences has been tasked
by the republic's government with developing the scheme.

The list of comprehensive long-range programs was also approved. It con-
tains ll most imortant economic, social and territorial programs, such as
the food program, increase of productivity in industry and construction,
development of transportation, Tallinn development, etc. They will become
components of the state five year plan. In addition, there are plans to
develop long-range comprehensive programs for establishing mines, construc-
tion of new electrical stations, and the mining and use of oil shale. To
assure the balance of planned tasks a balance method was widely used in
the compilation of the llth Five Year Plan. Thirty total balances were
established. For the first time the financial income and expenditure of
the population for every year of the five year period was established, as
well as the general ledger of all of the republic's financial resources.
To improve functional and territorial planning the soviets of the towns
and rayons are consulted more extensively. This will assure the compre-
hensive economic and social development of the respective areas.

Last May the ESSR Gosplan developed the tasks and means for use of progres-
sive technical and economic norms and standards in planning. These stand-
ards improve justification and balancing of plans. In October the repub-
licen commission analyzed the implementation of these measures in the na-
tional economy. It was stated that they were being implemented slowly.
Several ministries and other agencies (388R Truck Transport and Highways
Ministry, "Estonian Kolkhoz Construction" collective, ETKVL [Estonian Fed-
eration of Consuiser Societiesl, etc.) did not submit required documents in
a timely manner (improved normative plans for 1982-1985, audit system for
norms and standards, etc.). The connission drew the ministries' attention
to the necessity to develop the standard system rapidly and to implement them
broadly in planning.

One of the most extensive measures for improving the evaluation of planning
and an enterprises' activity is the implementation of a system of net
production indicators. Net production represents a new value that a
specific enterprise has created for society. The new indicator does not
include labor expended in other enterprises, i.e., the cost of raw meter-
ials, parts, energy, semi-finished goods, and depreciation. It goes in-
clude salaries (base pay and supplementals and contributions to social
security) and profit. The net production indicator is used in evaluating

the rate of increase, planning for salary funds and in auditing its ex-
penditure, and in calculating fund efficiency and other indicators.

Thus, the net production indicator will become the main general indicator
used in industrial planning. At the end of the last year 68 enterprises

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the republic were using this indicator, including all the enterprises of
the Procurement Ministry, the that and Dairy Industry Ministry. the Forest
and Lumber Industry, and the Food Industry Ministry. This year the
overwhelming majority of the republic's industrial enterprises will begin
to implement the new indicator (11.3 union-republic and republic, and 12
all-Union collectives, plants and factories). But in several enterprises
insufficient attention is being paid to the analysis of the content end
function of the indicator. Some of the engineering-technical personnel do
not understand completely the nature of the net production indicator and of
the changes in the economy associated with its imple-ntation. After all.
we are dealing with a basically new economic indicator, with several prob-
lems undoubtedly to arise with its implementation. Therefore the nature
of the new indicator not be carefully analyzed at all levels of manage-
ment, and steps must be taken to remove deficiencies as they arise.

The develOpment of an enterprise passport in new form and on the basis of
new indicators has been basically concluded. The passport is a docment
that contains objective data regarding the existence and use of productive
means, the structure of the nachinery. the construction of new departments,
the seasonal aspect of labor, the technical level and quality of work, etc.
A precisely and objectively compiled passport allows for the development

of an economically justifiable state plan, the removal of imbalances in the
development of enterprises and branches of industry, an improved use of
resources, and increased profitability. To increase'the benefit of the
passport the BSSR Gosplan provided for processing of the resulting data
electronically. Electronic data processing requires that unifora data be
used in A-l enterprises. For this reason new uniform passport forms were
developed. Unfortunately, some ministries (primrily all-Union) developed
their own pass formats that make comprehensive data processing more dif-
ficult. Currently the first automated processing stage is underway, the
passports of the meat and dairy industry enterprises have been incorporated
into the 'Dohnsent" system. During the next stage all the passports of the
republic's enterprises will be processed autonsticslly, and the results will
be used in planning.

According to the above-mentioned coupon party and government directive thr.
five year plan will become the basic planning form, with the plans for
single years considered parts of it. The directive provides for an active
participation of labor collectives in the compiling of five year and single
year plans. In further socialist competition and discover internal reserves
the collectives develop their individual plans that exceed the five year
plan target. It is renrkable that in recent years the nud>er of collec-
tives compiling their individual plans has decreased.

In 1979, 63.1 percent of the enterprises of the republic had their in-
dividusl plans, last year the nunber was only' 8.6 percent. Almost (.0 per-
cent of the enterprises that did not develop their own plans exceeded the
state production plan by 2-7 percent. Had these enterprises developed and
not their own plans, then their stimlation funds would have increased con-
siderably. But these enterprises did not take advantage of this opportunity.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Besides improving planning it is necessary to strengthen discipline in
meeting plan and contract provisions. Planning discipline in some enter-
prises does not yet meet the standards established in party and govertssent
docunents. The above-mentioned directive stresses that the ministries

and other agencies must guarantee stable yearly and quarterly plans for
their nterprises, and rust not promise to adjust the plans downward
(according to the actual level of plan fulfillment). But in spite of

that some agencies, plants and factories change their quarterly and

monthly plans. This is usually due to deficiencies in material-technical
supply, arythmical work, the slow implementation of new machinery, poor
maintenance, etc. Last year 77 industrial enterprises did not meet their
proeuction obligations for various reasons. To assure better contract
fulfillment economic sanctions are being strengthened. The economic organ-
izations have to improve control over plan and contract fulfillment, inter-
fere effectively in any instance of production discipline violation, and

assure that the deficiency is quickly eliminated.

In connection with the complicated demographic situation the competent use
of labor resources and the increase of labor productivity have become key
tasks. The plan limiting workers and employees was distributed to the

ministries already in 1980. But some industrial enterprises and construc-
tion organizations do not abide by it. The establishment and approval of

labor limits in the non-productive enterprises and agencies of the national
economy has been slow. The limits mst be established in 1982-1985 in all

the ministries and other agencies of the republic, and control measures
over their fulfillment must be organised.

Certification of manual labor was concluded in most enterprises by early
1981. But still, there were 16 enterprises that had not completed that
task by the end of the year. Some ministries and all-union enterprises

did not take the results of certification into account when compiling the
plans for the llth five year period and the individual years, and for this
reason manual labor is decreasing slower than anticipated. This is true,
for example, in enterprises of the meat and dairy, food, and construction
materials enterprises, the Estonian Fishing Vessel Maintenance Collective,
the Electrotechnical Pactory imeni Kalinin, the mardu Chemical Plant, and
other enterprises, wrucre manual labor could decrease more rapidly than
planned. Observations indicate that where labor is carried out by brigades
and pay is dependent on final results the activity of the workers, the
creative initiative and discipline is stronger, consequently, labor is more
fruitful. This is true in the "Baltijets" factory, the as: production com-
bine, the "Ilmarine" factory, etc. last year almost a quarter of the re-
public's industrial workers worked in brigades under a cannon mission state-
ment, but only 9.3 percent of the workers received the contributory coef-
ficient in their pay. The ministries and plant nnagers must pay more at-
tention to the implementation of the brigade method, make material-technical
supply more effective, improve accounting and control over pay procedures,
and implement self-mnagement within the brigades. Sou enterprises plan
to include only 30-60 percent of the workers in the brigade method of work
and pay during the llth five year period, even though according to the
directive this must become the predominant form for work arrangement by the

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

end of the five year period. Ministries and all-Union enterprises must de-
vise means that will assure that at least 60-65 percent of industrial work-
ers and up to 75 percent of the construction workers are included in the
brigade method.

Effective reserves for increasing labor productivity are also contained in
the application of the Chtchokino method and the development of socialist
competition on the basis of the vorkers' personal end brigade plans, as
practiced by the Moscow electrical machine factory "Dynamo." Only 22
enterprises heve comprehensively implemented the Chtocholtino method.
Personal and brigade plans are the basis for work of 57 percent of the
republic's industrial workers, but this percentage is considerably lower
in the construction materials industry (21.8) and the mm. industrial
plants (21.2). The ministries met design means to apply the Chtochokino
method comprehensively during the llth five year plan. In order that the
application and improvement of that method be taught and applied (taking
into account the peculiarities of production) a base plant Inst be desig-
nated in each branch of the industry.

It is most important that existing productive equipment and fixed capital
be treated more effectively and with greater care. lhthods must be applied
to increase the time of optimal use of fixed capital, be it in the year.
month or day, without neglecting care and timely maintenance. Nev capi rel
investments must primarily be directed to reconstruct plants and depart-
ments and to retrofit them technically.

Something has been done to increase self-management. Last year the economic
stimulation fund establishment was improved. New indicators for fund es-
tablishment were approved, as were the norms for material stimlation funds,
which will more effectively stimlate intensive development of production
and improvements of ultimate results in the national economy. To apply the
principles of self-management. 12 ministries and agencies have modified the
stipulations of union and republic labor collective regulations. This work
is continuing. From the standpoint of applying self-management in minis~
tries it is important that the normative profit distribution system be im-
plemented. Since 1981 the 888! Food Ministry and the hat and Dairy Indus-
try Hinistry have been using that system. The Hinistry of Local industry

plans to implement that system in 1986. The other industrial ministries have
not yet exhibited any initiative in this area.

Scam ministries have paid insufficient attention to the need of establishing
a canon fund for technical and scientific development. It is now permis-
sible to establish this fund in non-industrial ministries and agencies. But
to date only the 3581! Truck Transport and highway liinistry has such a fund.
In order to accelerate scientific and technical progress and speed up nev,
highly efficient production, there are plans to iqlement self-management

in the industrial ministries' research, construction, development, and con-
structionctechnological departments on the basis of performing tasks in

development and application through contracts. here, too, the greatest work
still lies ahead. The ministries must establish self-management in these

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizations more rapidly. and assure a more fruitful financing of science
and technology through a canon fund.

The above-listed represents only one part of the complex for improving the
economic mechanism that uill be applied in the republic's economy during
the current five year period. Ministries and other agencies and enter-
prises must develop specific plans for implementing the above-mentioned
directive. The msjority or industrial ministries and enterprises have
done so. But innovations are only slowly being applied in the residential

and conmunel system. in meintenance and construction organizations, and in
sane other systems es well.

Local party and soviet organs should constantly observe hour the means for

improving the economic mechanism are being applied in enterprises and or-
genisations.

9260
(:80: 18 15/34 END

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY