FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10149

1 December 1981

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND‘HYDROLOGY

No. 9. September 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE-ONLY

JPRS L/10149
1 December 1981

USSR REPORT
METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 9, September 1981

Translations or abstracts of all articles of the Russian-language
monthly journal MBTBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by
Gidrometeoizdat .

CONTENTS

*Seasonal Reatructurings of Circulation in the Meteor Zone (80-100 km) and
Their Relationship to Stratospheric Processes.................................. 1

*Analysis of Very Simple Zonal Models of Circulation of the Equatorial

AmospherEeoosessencesasaaoaaasooasoeooeaeesssosseessssovosaeooosoooosoesaassse 2

*
Numerical Investigation of Frontageneais Hith Allowance for Phase Transitions.. 3

*Use of Observational Data on Clouds in Numerical Forecasting of Surface

Air Tmeratureesaassssooosseoooosoooooesooeaoesssessassss'ssesssoooeoaaoososes 5

Some Features of Structure and Evolution of Hail-Generating Cumuloninbua Clouds 6
‘Prediction of Radiation and Radiation-Advective Poss........................... l7
*Prediction of Evaporation Poss by the Quadratic Discriminant Analysis Hethod... l8
‘Nunerical Modeling of Tropical Cyclone Landfall................................ 19
*Allouance for Heat Receipts Prom Solar Radiation on Slant Surfaces............. 20

Spatial Variability of Current Fields in the Shallow Water Part of the Shelf... 21
*Heat Runoff of Rivers in European Territory of USSR............................ 28

*Use of a Probabilistic Travel-Tine Model in Computing the'high-Water Rydrograph
(In the Example of the Chuly‘ll River)....u...nnuunun...n.u.......o.... 29

'Spatiai-Temporal Variability of Current Discharges in the F662 Atlantic
Equatorial Polygon..nn....u”a.na.oioo.u......nn.uu...oo...unoon... 30

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

*Considerations on Determining Mean Watershed Slopes.............................
*Further Considera'ions on Hean Watershed Slopes.................................

Work of an Unofficial Conference of WHO Experts on Long-Range Weather

Forecastinoooosooepeooososoaoasotsssoooolosootsoooosso.ooeoosoooooesosossssosoo

*SiXticth Birthday of Givi Cedeonovich Svanidze..................................
‘Sixtieth Birthday of Arkadiy Yefrenovich Cherenkov..............................
Awards Given to Soviet Meteorologist: and Oceanographera........................

*Obituary of Petr Karpovich Yeweyev (1911‘1964)osoooeeooossooaooosoeeoeooesooaaa

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- b -
FOR OFFKJAI.US£1ONLY

31
32

33

“0
61

62

58
FOI:0IFNCJAI.[EHE(M'LY

UDC 551.513(215-17)

SEASONAL RBSTRUCTURINGS 0F CIRCULATION IN THE METEOR ZONE (80-100 IN) AND THEIR
RELATIONSHIP TO STRAIOSPHERIC PROCESSES

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
20 Feb 81) pp 5-11

[Article by L. S. Hinina. doctor of geographical sciences, M. A. Petrosyants,
professor. and Yu. I. Portnyagin, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
USSR Hydrometeorologicsl Scientific Research Center and Institute of Experimental
Meteorology]

[Abstract] The authors, on the basis of an analysis of the results of long-term
wind measurements by the method of radar observation of meteor trails. endeavored
to clarify the most important patterns of the wind regime st altitudes 80-100 km
for periods of seasonal restructurings of circulation. A study was also made of
the problem of the relationship between the characteristic times of development
of seasonal restructuring processes at the altitudes of the meteor zone and in the
stratosphere. It was found that the spring restructuring of circulation occurs
rather consistently at different altitudes. Characteristic changes in some wind
regime parameters are observed in the middle latitudes at altitudes 80-100 km

as early as March, that is, substantially earlier than in the corresponding lati-
tude zone of the stratosphere. This is possibly associated with low atmospheric
density at the altitudes of the meteor zone. and as a result. its low inertia. In
such a case the considerably earlier spring restructuring in the meteor zone of
the temperate latitudes in comparison with the stratosphere is evidence of its
more rapid reaction to radiation conditions changing during the spring. In the
meteor zone the transition from a stable summer regime of circulation to a winter
regime is briefer and is expressed less clearly than the transition from winter
to summer. In contrast to the spring regime, the autumn restructuring of circul-
ation in the meteor zone lags by almost 1 1/2 months in comparison with the
stratomesospheric circulation. The process of spring restructuring of circulation
in the meteor zone is therefore of the greatest interest from the prognostic point
of view. It can be surmised that a determination of the date of the spring re-
structuring at altitudes 80-100 km on the basis of data from radiometeor stations
will be extremely useful in predicting the restructuring of stratospheric circul-
ation and for further improvement in long-range weather forecasting methods. Pig-
ures 4; references: 10 Russian.

lllltlﬂﬂCJAl.lﬁlE(NULY
FOI(INHC1AI.USI(HVLY

ANALYSIS OF VERY SIMPLE ZONAL MODELS OF CIRCULATION OF THE EQUAIORIAL ATMOSPHERE

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
5 Mar 81) PP 12-22

[Article by Ye. M. Dobryshman, professor, Institute of Atmospheric Physics]

[Abstract] One of the features of atmospheric dynamics in the equatorial zone,
where the role of nonlinear interaction and vertical movements even in the small
terms of Coriolis acceleration is great, is a great diversity of possible circul-
ation mechanisms. If there is a more or less clearly expressed zonal flow, the
zonal velocity component u (usually easterly in the troposphere) varies with time
and coordinates more weakly than the meridional v and vertical w components. With-
in the framework of zonal models, that is, with discarding of the derivatives of

r (along the equator) there can be different regimes for v and w with one and the
same zonal component u. Taking this into account, the author presents a qualita-
tive analysis of a nonlinear system of equations describing very simple zonal
models of circulation mechanisms in the equatorial zone. It is shown that the sys-
tem has two stationary points. One, corresponding to a stationary geostrophic zon-
al flow, is an unstable saddle point, whereas the second, corresponding to a sta-
tionary easterly zonal flow in the presence of the meridional velocity component,
is a degenerate node. The node is stable if in the case of an easterly flow the
meridional component is directed toward the equator. This can be interpreted as
stability of the Northeast Trades in the northern hemisphere and the Southeast
Trades in the southern hemisphere. These findings are compared with data collected
during the GATE program. There is a good agreement between the theory and observa-
tional data. Figures 5: references 9: 8 Russian, 1 western.

FOR1OFFHJAI.USEINNLY
FINRIJFF1C1AI.tEﬂE(NVLY

UDC 551.515.8
NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION OF FRONTOGENESIS "Ila ALLOHANCB FOR PHASE TRANSITIONS

Moscow HETEORDLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
24 Feb 81) pp 23-36

[Article by B. Ya. Kutsenko, Central Aerological Observatory]

[Abstract] The article describes a numerical model of formation of a front and fron-
tal stratiform cloud cover in the entire thickness of the troposphere, including the
tropopause layer and the stratospheric layer adjacent to it. The described model was
formulated on the basis of a joint solution of a system of nonlinear equations of
motion, heat transfer equations, equations for the balance of humidity and liquid
water content. It is shown that the degree of influence of the phase transitions of
moisture on circulation in the frontal tone is dependent on atmospheric stratifica-
tion. With a decrease in the stability of a warm air mass the frontal zone is inten-
aified. The region of increased gradients of teapareture, specific moisture content
and also vorticity has a much greater vertical extent. The following explains.the
influence of the heat of phase transitions on the formation and evolution of a
frontal zone in dependence on atmospheric stability. As a result of temperature ad-
vection, under the influence of the macroscale deformstional wind field there is
formation of a corresponding vertical distribution of macroscale divergence, and ac-
cordingly, of ascending air movements. In addition to the macroscale wind field,

a contribution to convergence at the lower levels of the atmosphere is also made by
the boundary layer. Ascending movements lead to the appearance of a frontal cloud
system with release of the heat of condensation. The degree of influence of phase
transition processes on the characteristics of the frontal zone is dependent on at-
mospheric stability. In the case of a very stably stratified warm air mass the phase
transition processes exert virtually no influence on circulation in the frontal zone,
forming under the influence of the macroscale velocity field. With a decrease in at-
mospheric stability the influence of release of the heat of condensation on the dy-
namics of frontal processes increases. The ascending movements, creating a condensa-
tion zone, favor the appearance of a large additional energy source. This gives rise
to a secondary closed transverse circulation‘vhich in the lower layers intensifies
the effect of the macroscale wind field, creating an additional influx of heat and
specific humidity. This leads to a considerable intensification of convergence, and
accordingly, the velocity of ascending movements, as a result of which the release
of the heat of condensation is intensified. The increasing temperature gradient
causes an increase in the pressure gradient and a deepening of the disturbance. As

a result, the frontal zone with time becomes increasingly sharper, there is an in-
crease in the rate of its formation and an increase in the nonuniformity of meteor-
ological elements in this zone. The intemification of the frontal zone will persist

FOR OFTWCJAL USEZCMULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

until the influence of turbulence is counteracted by the influence of frontogenetic
factors. Transverse circulations in the frontal zones lead to the formation of re-
gions of strong cyclonic and anticyclonic wind shears in the zone of maximal temper-
ature contrasts. A sharp front appears in the field of specific moisture content,
whose position coincides with the region of maxim gradients of other characteris-
tics of meteorological elanents. The heights of the zones of increased gradients of

temperature. specific moisture content, and also divergence and vorticity accordiin-
ly increase vertically upward uith a decrease in atmospheric stability. Figures 3;

references ll: 6 Russian, 5 western.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.313+551.509.323+551.576

USE OF OBSERVATIONAL DATA ON CLOUDS IN NUMERICAL FORECASTING OF SURFACE
AIR TEMPERATURE

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
17 Feb 81) pp 35-60

[Article by I. A. Alekseyeva-Obukhova and I. A. Petrichenko. candidate of physical
and mathematical sciences, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

{Abstract} Data from visual and satellite observations of clouds are used extensive-
ly in synoptic work in short-range weather forecasting as necessary information in
an examination of the thermal and humidity transformation of air masses. Despite
this, observations of cloud cover are not used in a number of Soviet numerical
schemes for the forecasting of meteorological elements. Certain numerical synoptic-
hydrodynamic schemes are exceptions. However. in the latter data on the quantity of
clouds are replaced by dew-point spreads by use of empirical expressions The use

of this indirect method for taking cloud cover into account reduces the accuracy of
the corresponding computations and this naturally has a negative effect on the fin-
al results of synoptic-hydrodynamic forecasts of meteorological elements. In order
to determine the possible errors associated with the indirect method for taking

data on the quantity of clouds into account in forecasting schemes the authors carr-
ied out numerical experiments for predicting air surface temperature. Among the dif-
ferent types of averaging of dew-point spreads at different levels in the atmosphere
in the prediction of surface air temperature the best result was from a variant of
use of the dew-point spread at the single level 850 gPa. The use of initial data on
cloud cover in the prediction of air surface temperature during the summer gives an
advantage of 111 and in winter even 402 in comparison with the use of the dew-pont
spread at the OSO-gPa level for these purposes. During the summer the accuracy in
predicting air surface temperature increases considerably with the use of data on
cloud cover or the dew-point spread for two observation times (0300 and 1500 hours)
in comparison with one of these observation times. These and other data indicate

the possibility of increasing the accuracy of short-range numerical forecasts of
meteorological elements by including cloud cover information in the initial data.
Under operational conditions the volume of data on cloud cover will be approximate-
ly twice as great as the volume of data used in the numerical experiments and ac-
cordingly it would be possible to obtain more precise results.than obtained in this
study. Figures 2, tables 1; references: 13 Russian.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFICIAI.UEI:CH§LY

UDC 551.509.616:551.509.617
SOME FEATURES OF STRUC‘IURB AND EVOLUTION OF HAIL-GUERATING CUMULONIMBUS CLOUDS

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA 1 GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 (manuscript received
5 Jan 81) pp 61-109

[Article by L. A. Dinevich. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences. Hol-
davisn Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service]

[Text] Abstract: Statistical observational data were
used in determining the polarization character-
istics of a radar signal reflected from droplets
of shower precipitation and hail. It is demon-
strated that it is possible to detect hail on
the basis of depolarization of the reflected
signal. 0n the basis of signals detected from
cumulonimbus clouds in shower. hail-threaten-
ing and hail stages of development it is shown
that it is possible to determine the hail-for-
mation process with a reliability of 952 10-15
minutes prior to the falling of bail to the
ground. The collected data and the patterns es-
tablished on their basis were used in develop-
ing a method for determining the danger of hail
falling from clouds and modification schemes.

Formulation of Problem and Volume of Experimental Data

Numerous investigations of convective clouds carried out in the USSR and abroad
applicable to the problems involved in the artificial modification of hail clouds
have considerably broadened our knowledge concerning cloud physics and the pro-
cesses transpiring in them [5. 6. 10. 16]. However. there is also a whole series
of problems requiring further investigation. The most important of these is ob-
taining detailed information on the mechanisms of formation and growth of hail. as
well as on differences in the structure of hail. hail-bearing. shower and cumulo-
nimbus clouds.

Such a problem is related to the fact that despite the relatively high effective-

ness of antihail protection. attempts at the modification of hail clouds in many
cases are fruitless.

INJIiOFFICIAI.IIBI:(N'LY
FOO¢IHWCJAI.USE(MULY

An analysis of cases with negative modification results indicated that their
causes can be reduced to methodological and organizational-technical. The or-
ganizational-technical factors, despite their complexity, for the most part are
understandable and in principle can be eliminated. The methodological factors
for the most part are related to an inadequate knowledge of the structure of
shower and hail clouds, which makes difficult the unambiguous determination of
the degree of hail danger of clouds in an early stage in the hail-formation pro-
cess and the places in the cloud where it is best to introduce artificial crys-
tallization nuclei. A solution of these problems requires a deeper knowledge of
the structure of clouds in different stages of their evolution.

Several models of cumulonimbus clouds have now been developed [5, lb, 17, and oth-
ers]. However, despite considerable successes in the field of study of cumulonimbus
hail clouds, there is still no final clarification of the problem as to the part

of the cloud in which the processes of formation, growth and falling of bail be-
gin and how they transpire.

In this article we give new data on the differences in structure of shower, hail-
dangerous and hail cumulonimbus clouds. In order to clarify then we used the re-
sults of ordinary radar observations of these clouds in Moldavia. supplemented by
a polarization analysis of radar signals reflected from clouds [9]. supplementing
the radar data we used the results of investigations of features of intracloud
air currents using radioactive tracers [6. 15].

These data make it possible with a great accuracy to solve the problems involved

in routine detection of the moment of transition of clouds from the nonhail-danger-
one stage to the hail-dangerous stage and to find the places in a cloud into which
it is most desirable that a reagent be introduced.

The essence of the polarization method for tracing the evolution of Cb for the most
part is reduced to the following [18]: if the electric vector of an incident plane-
polarized wave is parallel to one of the axes of the ellipsoid of the hydrometeor.
a dipole moment component is excited only along this axis and there is no compon-
ent along the axis perpendicular to the radio wave polarization plane. Accordingly,
in this case the scattered wave will have the same polarization plane as the in-
cident wave and there will be no transversely polarized coeponent of the electro-
magnetic field scattered by hydrometeors.

If the ellipsoids of the hydrometeors are arbitrarily oriented relative to the
polarization plane, a depolarized signal component also appears in the scattered
field.

In general. the scattered energy is determined by the polarization plane of the
incident wave. the spatial position of the reflecting particles and the degree of
their asphericity. phase state and dielectric inhomogeneity.

In the case of a random distribution of particles in space

M - svhl I. —.-1—,(&" +%-EE’+'§'?’)' ’4 =.1: 5-?"

 

FOIiOFFICIAI.UBEZ(NULY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(IVLY

Here In is the intensity of the energy scattered in the polarization plane of the
incident wave. 14_ is the intensity of the energy scattered in the plane orthogonal
to the polarization plane of the incident wave, g and g' are the functions of ellip-
ticity of a particle and its dielectric constant.

At the same time it is known that cloud droplets. hailstones and raindrops differ
considerably with respect to form and are oriented differently in space (1. 12].
Cloud droplets are spherical and their predominantly horizontal orientation in
space remains characteristic for raindrops. According to the experimental data of
Henry and McCormick [20], large flattened drops are oriented for the most part in
the horizontal plane and the deviation of their vertical axis does not exceed 10—
15‘. At the same time. the hailstones have a random orientation.

Accordingly. the difference in the form of raindrops and hailstones, as well as
anisotropy (change in density and size along the radius) of the latter hydrometeor
should differently reflect a plane-polarized wave. creating an orthogonal compon-
ent. Therefore. knowing the quantitative values of the orthogonal component of the
reflected radar signal for hailstones and droplets, it is possible to solve the
inverse problem. that is. determine the presence of hail in clouds.

0n the basis of the data cited above, over a period of years radar stations of the
ARS-3H and "Uragan" types and a polarimeter developed at the Central Aerological
Observatory [19] have been used in carrying out investigations of the characteris-
tics of hydrometeors in shower and hail clouds. The observations involved obtain-
ing vertical and conical sections in clouds situated at a distance up to 50 km
from the radar. The radar radiated waves with horizontal polarization and received
both orthogonal components.

The method for such observations was described in detail in [9]. This complex of
observations and registry of the signal occupies a time interval of not more than
2 minutes, that is. the time during which there are virtually no significant
changes in cloud structure. The matching of series of photographs made it pos-
sible to determine the "relief" of intensity of the reflected signal and its de-
- polarization structure in conical or vertical cloud sections.

The described method was used in making observations of 123 hail and 117 shower
clouds; the evolution of SO clouds was considered with their transition from
shower to hail-dangerous and hail stages.

Characteristics of Structure of Cumulonimbus Rain and Rail Clouds and Their Evolu-
tion According to Data Obtained by the Polarization Research Hethod

An analysis of the experimental data indicated that in all cases of the falling

of hail in the vertical sections of Cb there were channels with an increased de—
polarization value Ap ) -10 db, whereas among the 117 vertical sections of shower
clouds there were only 5 such cases, accompanied by heavy showers without hail.
Here the depolarization Ap - 10 lg PL/P' is the ratio of the intensity of the
orthogonal component of the reflected signal to the main component or

Ap:=:n. — n..

where n; and n are the values of these components. db.

8

FOR OFIICIAI.USE(HVLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be noted that the maximum depolarization is created by water-encased
aspherical hailstones. Although with a definite orientation of an individual par-
ticle the transverse component for it may be absent, in general for a cloud or
zone of precipitation consisting of a great number of randomly arranged par—
ticles the mean depolarization value for the echo signal attains considerable
levels.

In the experiments which were carried out the actual place of the falling of hail
dn the ground always coincided with the surface projection 0f .in enhanced (char-
acteristic for hail) zone of depolarization in a cloud, detersined using a polar
ized radar. The typical vertical sections of hail and shower clouds are shown in
Pig. 1, where R is the distance to the radio echo, 8 is the altitude of the radio
echo, lg z is radar reflectivity. 1°C is temperature read from the radiosonde
measurement closest in time; the dashed lines correspond to the lg z inclines
and the solid lines correspond to depolarization isolines.

According to research data, in hail clouds with a channel of increased depolariz-
ation extending to the earth's surface there was, in almost all cases, falling of
hail to the ground. In shower clouds of a region of increased depolarization
with Ap 3 -10 db the falling of hail was observed in only 102 of the cases. How-
ever, these regions, being situated randomly, that is, in different parts of the
cloud above the 0°C isotherm,did not undergo transition into a form characteris-
tic for hail clouds. In 52 of the cases in shower clouds there was a channel of
increased depolarization which touched the earth, but hail was not forthcoming
from the clouds.

Thus, an analysis of the cited results of the investigations indicated that mak-
ing joint use of the depolarization characteristics of signals reflected from
the clouds and the radar reflectivity value it is possible to classify clouds as
hail and shower clouds. The zone of ambiguity (that is, the Ap and 1g 2 values
at which both showers and hail can be observed) is extremely narrow and with a
radar reflectivity lg z>3.2 falls in the limits from -10 to -15 db. (The meas-
urement accuracy is A p 1-2 db.)

The results served as a basis for determining the hail danger of clouds on the ba-
sis of the polarization characteristics of the radar signal reflected from them.
Then, for solving the formulated problem it was necessary:

— to find an adequate method for predicting transition of a cloud from a nonhsil
state to a hail stage not less than 10-15 minutes in advance;

— to find a method for routine radar determination of the region in the cloud in
which the process of formation and growth of hail transpires most rapidly and in-
tensively.

In order to solve these problems we used the data which we had accumulated on the
evolution of the structure of cumulonimbus clouds in the course of their "life-
time." Experience in routine work on the modification of hail processes gives
basis for speaking of the absence (with existing technical apparatus) of .criteria
which at any specific moment in cloud development would make possible an unambig-
uous determination of its hail danger. The radar criteria [2] adopted at the
present time can only divide clouds into hail and nonhail or with a definite

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOIIOFEMJAI.USE(NVLY

accuracy evaluate the probability of their transition into a hail state. Even

in those cases when the thermodynamic and serosynoptic characteristics of the
atmosphere are favorable for the falling of hail,-it falls only from some of the
clouds observed in these cases. It is possible to cite many examples when during
the most intensive hailfalls in the group of clouds there were those which al-
though having the same hail danger criteria did not yield any hail at all.

In. 1‘:

 

Fig. 1. Typical vertical sections of hail (a) and shower (b) clouds according to
depolarization data. 1) isolines (Sp; 2) isolines n, db; 3) isolines lg a - 3.2;
I.) region with Ap - -10 db.

0n the basis of the possibilities of detecting hail particles by means of depolar-
ization characteristics of the echo signal we analyzed data on the evolution of
cumulonimbus clouds with their transition from shower to hail stages. The results
of these investigations indicated that zones of increased depolarization are
usually formed in clouds 10 or more minutes prior to the onset of the falling of
hail. However, it is highly difficult to evaluate the dynamics of the life cycle
of a cloud prior to the beginning of hail formation in it on the basis of the de-
polarization characteristics of reflected signals. Moreover, in multicell clouds
the different cells can be in different stages of development. Some of these may
be in the hail stage already. whereas others may only be developing. Accordingly.
prior to the onset of hail formation in clouds, in addition to the depolarization
characteristics it is desirable that the hail danger of clouds be evaluated by
the stochastic-statistical method [2, 6].

Thus, the method for determining the hail danger of clouds is based on the follow-
ing:

10

l")! 0iﬂﬂ€1al.lﬂiECﬂVLY
FilR13FF1C1AI.lElE(NVLY

l. The principal initial data for determining the hail danger of clouds are data
on evolution of the structure of clouds, determined by changes in the degree of
depolarization of radio echoes from regions within which lg z)’3.6. Reference is
to the appearance in the radio echo region where lg z)’3.6 of considerable sec-
tors of increased depolarization and the dropping of their lower boundary below
the level of the isotherm o'c. The value lg zj>3.6 was selected because the inves-
tigations revealed the absence of cases of the falling of hail from clouds in
which there are no regions with a value lg z) 3.4.

2. Data on the values of six radar parameters - per boun;
Tnzm‘x; lg 2; h Ih+ [2] should serve as additional Bucharacteristicsx in ngpggaikoun

ing the stage of cloud development in the prehsil period. These criteria are used
in determining the complex hail danger criterion K?1 and P1 -- the total probabil-
ity of the hail state of a cloud: .

 

" "'72 n +In, ‘wh'

[F- hail; Jl . shower] on: ﬂ '1

where “haili . “showi are the numbers of cases of the falling of hail or showers
respectively for a given value of the i-th parameter. The P - f(Kp ) value is de-
termined statistically. For this purpose, on the basis of experimental radar data
for a specific orographic region and simultaneous visual surface observations of
falling precipitation a statistical series of KP values is prepared.

During the initial period of cloud development, when the clouds still contain no
regions with a value Ap> -10 db, it is possible to trace the dynamics of the
cloud or cell in it using the method set forth in i2, 6] by means of one of six
parameters, the most convenient of which are an per boun, “Zmax' lg 2 (recently
in practical antihail protection work use has also been made of the H parameter
at the level lg z - é.0) and the temperature at this level.

If the value of at least one of the parameters is not characteristic for an unam-
biguous determination of the stage of cloud development, it is necessary to employ
the entire set of parameters.

3. In order to obtain the depolarization characteristics of a signal it is neces-
sary to use a radar set with the possibility for radiation of a plane horizontally
polarized electromagnetic wave, reception of two orthogonal components of the re-
flected signal and discrimination on the circular-scan display screen and "range-
altitude" indicator of regions of isoechoes with stipulated devels of depolariza-
tion and radar reflectivity exceeding the values

Ap> -10 db. lg 93.1..

In order to study the evolution of the depolarization structure of a cloud in the
region of maximum radar reflectivity we constructed series of horizontal and ver-
tical sections each 1- 2 minutes. An increase in the region with radar reflectivity
lg z>3. I. in the zone with Ap) - 10 db, a decrease in its lower boundary, an in-
crease in the horizontal gradient lip with a simultaneous decrease in the vertical
gradient [3 p constitute a basis for assuming that the focus is hail dangerous.

ll

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FORtMﬂﬂCJAl.USE¢NVLY

 

Fig. 2. Diagrams of development of cloud from shower to hail stage. 1) isolines

n" db; 2) isolines n; db; 3) isolines lg z - 3.2; 6) region 4p; -10 db, the fig-
ures denote the depolarization values.

‘ I":

m
#31
4m

40:

1}

4k!

   

Pig. 3. Dimensions of axes of droplets freezing in the nucleus of a hailstone as
a function of their diameter (a); nonograns for computing hailstone melting time

(b) and dependence of coefficient of depolarization of a reflected signal on the
configuration of ellipsoidal particles (c).

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIMIIJFFICLAL llﬂitﬂﬁlﬂ

A typical scheme of development of a cloud fron the shower to the hail stages
is represented in Fig. 2. We note that already on the basis of the position of
the zone Ap>-10 db, shown in Fig. 2b, with a guaranteed probability of 952 and
with an advance time of 10 minutes it is possible to conclude that there is a
transition of the cloud into a hail stage.

The advantage of the proposed nethod for detarnining hail danger of clouds is that
it makes it possible to solve this problem with a high guaranteed probability 10-
15 minutes prior to the beginning of falling of bail to the ground. The adequacy
of such an advance tine for practical artificial modification work can be demon-
strated by using Pig. 3.

Figure 3a is a curve of the dependence of the ratios of the axes of droplets (a/
b) freezing in the nucleus of a hailstone on their diameter D (constructed by G. s.
Bartishvili).

Figure 3b shows the nonograms of B. A. Geyvandov and I. P. Hazin [7] for computing
the melting time of hailstones during their falling in the warm part of the atmo-
sphere ('1' >'C) and under the condition that all the water forming during the
melting is blown from it, as is characteristic, in the opinion of the authors, for
hailstones with a radius exceeding 0.3 cm. Using the nomogram there is graphic so-
lution of the equation

Fm = (1 - P7") - *3 (I - P5") = k.” -'k,H‘.

3.54040. + 8.3- 10-7 (4-4,“)
_7°___

. 4 . .o-2
k,= 1.110 14’s.“ . (L’M’).

*1 u ('flc‘L

 

. -O
k,- no a

_ V’s .

where P- the shows by how many times there was a decrease in the radius of the
hailstone during falling; H is the upper level iron which hailstones, falling,
begin to melt; or. and Y are the humidity and temperature gradients respectively;
60 and do are the tenpersture and humidity at the cloud base: 6'0 is vapor elas-
ticity at the hailstone surface; u is the velocity of ascending currents.

Using these nouograns and the computation nethod cited in [9). it can be demonstrat-
ed that n hailstone with a radius 10 In, with falling from an altitude of 3 km, a
temperature at this altitude 0°C. a velocity of the vertical flow 5 m/sec and with
the meteorological conditions most frequently encountered during hail processes,
would have a radius 7 II. With these same atmospheric parameters a hailstone with

a radius of 6 an, falling from an altitude of 3 Inn, at the earth will have a

radius r - lo us.

If we also take into account the increase in heat transfer as a result of'turbulent
exchange, it can be expected that hailstones with a diameter of l on falling from
an altitude of 3 Ion will reach the earth having a dianeter less than 5 mm.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I!!! CHEWCIAL HEIZCNVLY

It is known that hailstones with a diameter of less than 5 mm will not inflict
substantial damage on agricultural crops [10]. Accordingly. we will use a dis-
meter d a S amnof hailstones falling to the earth as the minimum size of danger-
ous hail. As stated above, at an altitude of 3 in these hailstones have a dia-
meter d - 1 cm. According to the G. s. Bartishvili curve. such hailstones are
aspherical and the ratio of the axes of the droplets freezing in their nucleus
can exceed 0.3~0.6. with a random spatial orientation of these freezing droplets
and assuming correctness of the wet growth hypothesis, using computations and
the A. B. Shupyatskiy curve. taken from [9] and shown in Fig. 3c. it can be dem-
onstrated that the depolarization coefficient for the reflected signal is M -
15-172, where H - P; I?" , which corresponds to Ap} -10 db. According to this
same curve, the minimum ratios of the axes of ellipsoidal particles, for which
15p remains greater than ~10 db. is approximately equal to 0.7, which according
to Fig. 3a corresponds to a hail diameter d - 4 mm. It follows from these approx-
imate computations that in a cloud it is sufficient for there to be hailstonee
with a radius greater than 2 mm and by means of polarization techniques and the
developed method it is possible to detect them and proceed to modification with-
out awaiting an increase in the hailstones to dangerous sizes (d;>10 mm).

Using information on cloud structure, employing data on the depolarization of re-
flected signals it is possible to determine the region of formation and growth of
hail, and on the basis of the results of the investigations cited in [3, b, 6, 8],
select the optimum scheme for introducing the reagent in order to prevent large
hail.

The generalized schemes for introducing the reagent can be represented in the fol-
lowing way:

1. with the discovery of individual small foci in a cloud in the region of the
isotherms -lO,..., ~lS°C with the value A§p;> -10 db the reagent must be intro-
duced at the level of the isotherms -a,..., -6°c in the entire region described
by the isoline lg z) 3.1..

2. If the zone of increased depolarization is situated in the leading or central
part of the cloud lg z:>3.4, and its lower boundary has reached the level of the
isotherm 0°C and continues to drop, the reagent must be introduced directly into
this region, at the level of the isotherms -10..... -lS°C. closer to the level of
the maximum rate of the ascending flow. The lower the lower boundary of the re-
gion Ap) --10 db drops down, the more important it is to introduce the reagent
under the level of the maximum velocity of the ascending flow, determined as the
level of maximum radar reflectivity.

3. If the zone of increased depolarization takes in the entire region 1g z)>3.4,
including its rear part. and reaches the ground level, it is not necessary to
introduce reagent into such a cell, since hail is already falling from it and
the hail formation process ceases.

In this case it is very important to note the formation of new cells near the
decaying cell. These new cells are usually formed in a leading part of the cloud
(relative to the direction of movement), but sometimes they can develop in the
rear. If such cells, described by the isoline lg z;>3.6 appear. and especially
at the level of the isotherms -10.....,-15°, the reagent must be introduced

14

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIIVLV
FIHIGDFIWCJAI.IINE(HWLV

directly into them, without awaiting the appearance of regions of increased de-
polarization.

In conclusion the author expresses sincere appreciation to Doctors of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences A. B. Shupyatskiy and S. M. Shmeter for valuable advice in
the work and to R. P. Tychin and T. Ye. Sizova for assistance given in the col-
lection and processing of data.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bartishvili, c. 8., "Irregular Porno of Hailstones,“ TRUDY ZakNICMI (Transac-
tions of the Transcaucasian Scientific Research Hydro-eteorological Insti-
tute). No 25(31). 1969.

2. Borovikov, A. M., Kostarev, V. V. and Shupyatskiy, A. 3., "Instrumentation
and Method for Radar Observations of Evolution of Hell-Developed Cunulus
and Cumuloninbus Clouds," TEDDY VSBSOYUZNOGO SOVBSHCHANIYA P0 ARTIVMYM VOZDEY-
STVIYAM NA GRADOVYYE PROTSESSY (Transactions of the All-Union Conference on
Artificial Modification of Mail Processes). 1964.

3. Buykov, M. V., "Possibility of Formation of Large-Droplet Zone of Accumula-
tion of Cloud Moisture on the Periphery of the Ascending Flow in a Cumulo-
ninbus Cloud," TRUDY UkrNIGMI (Transactions of the Ukrainian Scientific Re-
search Hydroneteorological Institute), No 179, 1980.

4. Vebrene, B. K., Styro, B. 1., Dinevich, L. A., et al., "Hashing-Out of Radio-
activity by Rain Droplets of Different Size,” TKUDY MEZHDUNARODNOY ROMPER-
ENTSII P0 PIZICHESKIM ASPEKTAM ZAGRYAZNENIYA ATMDSFERY (Transactions of the
International Conference on Physical Aspects of Atmospheric Contamination),
Vil'nyus, 1974.

S. Veyknan, Kh. K., ”Progress in Investigation of Hail Clouds," TRHDY VIII VSE—
SOYUZNOY KONFERENTSII PO FIZIKE OELAKDV I AKTIVNYM VOZDEYSTVIYAM (Transac-
tions of the Eighth All-Union Conference on Cloud Physics and Artificial
Modification). Leningrad, 1970.

6. Voronov. G. S., Gayvoronskiy, I. I. and Seregin, Yu. A.. "Investigations of
Artificial Modification of Mail Processes." TRUDY VIII VSESOYDZMOY KONFBR-
ENTSII P0 FIZIKE OBLAKOV I AKTIVNYM VOZDEYSTVIYAH, Leningrad, 1970.

7. Geyvandov, E. A. and Mazin, I. P., "Simple Method for Computing the Melting
of Hailstones During Falling," TRUDY TaAO (Transactions of the Central Aero-
logical Observatory). No 51, 1963.

8. Cronova, T. N., Dinevich, L. A., Mikandrov, V. Ys., Sveshnikov, G. 3., Toro-
pova, M. 8.. Ungernan, T. M. and Shiahkin, R. 5., "Investigation of Chlorine
Content in Precipitation in the Region of Implementation of Antihail work
and Analysis of Several Cases of Modification for the Purpose of Hail Pro-
tection," VESTNIK LCU (Herald of Leningrad State University), No 12, Vyp 2,
1980.

9. Dinevich. L. A. and Shupyntskiy, A. V., "Polarization Investigations of Hail
Clouds in Moldavia," TRUDY TsAO, No 126, 1977.

15

FIIIGDFIIClAl.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

roaomauustomv'

Zaychenko, N. H., Gayvoronskiy, I. I. and Dinevich, L. A., "Investigations
of Hail Processes and Results of Antihail Protection in Moldavia," TRDDY
HEZHDUNARDDRDY KONFERENTSII P0 AKIIVNYH VOZDBYSTVIYAM NA METEOROLOGICHBSKIYB
PRDTSESSY (Transactions of the International Conference on Artificial Modif-
ication of Meteorological Processes), Tashkent, 1973.

Leakov, B. N., "Method for the Modification of winter Orographic Clouds in
the Basin of Lake Seven," TRUDY UkrRIGHI, No 137, 1975.

Litvinov, I. V., STRUKTURA AIHDSFERNYKH OSADKOV (Structure of Atmospheric
Precipitation), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat. 1974.

Hinervin, V. Ye., Horgunov, S. P. and Shupyatskiy, A. 3., "Polarization In~
vestigations of the Structure of Cunuloninbua Clouds," TRUDY TsAD, No 95,
1971.

Sulakvelidze, c. K.. "Mechanism of Rail Pornation and Principle of Modifica-
tion of the Rail Process," TRUDY VGI (Transactions of the High-Mountain Geo-
physical Institute), No 14, 1969.

Shalaveyus, S. 5., Vebra, 3. Yu., Dinevich, L. A., et a1., "Investigation
of Character of Propagation and Hashing-Out of Poloniun-Zlo and Phosphorus-
32 Introduced Into a Local Space of a Cumuloninbus Cloud," TRUDY HEZHDU-
NARODNOY KDNFBRENTSII P0 FIZICHESKIM ASPEKIAH ZAGRYAZNBNIYA ATHOSFERY,
Vil'nyus. 1974. ‘

Shneter, S. H.. "Stages in the Development of Cunuloninbus Clouds and Char-
acteristics of Distribution of Meteorological Parameters in Their Zone,"
TRUDY TsA0,-No S3, 1964.

Shneter, S. H.. PIZIKA KONVEKIIVNYKB OBLAKOV (Physics of Convective Clouds),
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1972.

Shupyatskiy, A. B. and Horgunov, S. P., "Use of Elliptically Polarized Radio
Waves for Investigating Clouds and Precipitation," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports
of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 140, No 3, 1961.

Shupyatskiy, A. 8.. Dinevich. L. A. and Tychina, R. P., "Renata Sensing of
Hail in Clouds Fran the Polarization Characteristics of a Radar Signal,"
TRUDY TSAO, No 121, 1975.

Henry, A. and McCormick, c. S., "Polarization Properties of Precipitation
Particles Related to Storn Structure," Radio and Engineering Division,
National Research Council of Canada. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 1973.

16

FOR'OFFKJA1.U8840NLN
FOI:OFTWC1AL,USEIMVLY

UDC 551.509.315+551.509.325

PREDICTION OF RADIATION AND RADIATION-ADVBCTIVE P068

Moscow WROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian Do 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
24 Dec 80) pp 50-57

[Article by P. K. Dushkin, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences]

[Abstract] In an earlier article OﬂﬂnKDKHOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 2, 1980) the auth-
or developed a method for the statistical alternative forecasting of radiation and
radiation-advective fogs at Hoscow. Independent observational data were used in
checking the success of the forecasts for various Hoscov airports. 0n the average
estimates of the forecasts were at the level 0 - 0.60, where Q - l «IL-ﬂ, “and p
are errors of the first and second kinds. A major series of observations has now
made it possible to separate the sample data into three groups, rather than into two
groups. as in the earlier study: No l - January. November. December, No 2 - Feb-
ruary, October, No 3 - March, April. May, September. The number of the group is in
essence a component of the vector-predictor. The other components used are: quantity
of clouds in tenths in the form of two gradations “<5 and “>5, where N is the mean
total quantity of clouds during the period _f_rom 1800 to 0600 hours; dew-point spread
4518 at 1800 hours; averaged wind velocity V22 - 0.8 V22 + 0.16 V20 + 0.04 V13, V20,
V22 are the wind velocities at the height of the vane. The alternative forecast of
fog is made using the discriminant analysis method. The analysis shows that the pro-
posed method has a clearly expressed regional character; for example, the graphs con-
structed for Hoscov cannot be used for Khar'kov and Minsk. At present the methods em-
ployed in predicting fogs are based on initial data for evening observations. It is
important to have a method making it possible to predict fog formation on the basis
of initial data obtained at earlier observation times. This problem is solved. It was
found that the series of hourly meteorological observations necessary for construct-
ing the discriminant functions graphs should be approximately 15 years. As a first
approximation it is possible to use a sample of a lesser volume: 5- and 10-year ser-
ies, combining groups Nos 1 and 2. This and other simplifications lessen the quality
of the forecasts by 10-15%. The necessary accuracy in measuring air temperature must
be 0.l°C. The area for which the forecast is valid is dependent on the physiographic
character of the region. It must be determined experimentally. Figures 1. tables 7;

references: 3 Russian.

17

FOR 0FT1C1AI.US£(NVLY
FIIICNNNCJA1.USEGDNLY

UDC 551.509.325+551.573(268.3)
PREDICTION OF EVAPORATION FOGS BY THE QUADRATIC DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS METHOD

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
2 Feb 81) pp 58-66

[Article by A. P. Polkhov and P. s. Terziyev, candidates of geographical sciences,
Murmansk Affiliate, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute, and State
Oceanographic Institute]

[Abstract] The author proposes a new approach to the prediction of evaporation

fogs based on the use of asynchronous correlations between the effect (the meteor-
ological phenomenon) and its cause (thermodynamic state of the atmosphere). As the
initial data for the forecast this makes it possible to use data taken from actual
weather maps characterizing the thermodynamic state of the atmosphere (synoptic
situation) on the eve of the considered phenomenon. Quadratic discriminant analysis
is used as the mathematical approach. The investigated region was the northern
coast of the Kola Peninsula, where during the cold half of the year (October-
March) evaporation fogs are formed rather frequently. The study was based on the
meteorological archives of the Murmansk Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service for the periods 1960-1965 and 1975-1979 in the form of surface and high-
altitude weather charts and also TH—l meteorological tables. In the formulated
problem synoptic situations are divided into two classes: class of fog-forming sit-
uations and class of non-fog-forming situations. In turn, there are subclasses: a
subclass of situations causing a strong fog with a horizontal visibility <'50 m;

a subclass of situations causing moderate or weak fogs with horizontal visibilities
<:500-50 m and <:1000-500 m. Such a forecast, involving preparation of initial in-
formation, ita input into the computer, forecast and printout, is completely auto-
mated and requires 5 minutes. This fog forecasting scheme provides for operations
similar to those performed by a weatherman. The weatherman, like the "decision
rule" derived in this study, analyzes the initial and future synoptic situations,
scrutinizing the actual and predicted information for the fields P, 3350, H500,
Tsutf' T850 in order to draw a conclusion concerning the possibility of develop-
ment of an evaporation fog. However, the possibilities of the weatherman are more
limited because he is unable to make an objective evaluation of the enormous vol-
ume of data handled by the computer. Figures 1, tables 3; references: 17 Russian.
IKII(NHHCIAI.USE1INLY

UDC 551.515.2
NUMERICAL MODELING OF TROPICAL CYCLONBIJUINMLL

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
12 Jan 81) pp 67-74

[Article by A. P. Khain, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, USSR Hy-
drometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] A study was made of the reaction of a model tropical cyclone to a change
in surface roughness. The model was based on the solution of primitive equations in
z-coordinates. It includes a parameterization of convective and macroacale precip-
itation, convective transport of heat and moisture and parameterization of the
boundary layer. Nacroscale precipitation falls when the mixing ratio at the points
of intersection of the finite-difference grid exceeds a saturating value. The moie-
ture excess is condensed and forms macroscale precipitation. Convective precipita-
tion is caused by condensation in cumulus clouds. Boundary layer parameteriaation
was carried out by the Deardorff method, whose suitability for the conditions of a
tropical cyclone has been confirmed. The method makes it possible. using the mean
values of potential temperature, mixing ratio, velocity in the mixing layer, its
height, surface temperature and roughness parameter to determine the fluxes of heat,
moisture and momentum at the surface. It was found that the principal reason for
attenuation of the model cyclone was a limitation of evaporation from the land sur-
face. Attenuation of a tropical cyclone (TC) occurs when the moisture flows from
the land surface do not exceed the moisture flows from the ocean surface which pre-
vailed in the TC zone prior to its movement onto land. The attenuation of the Tc
occurs the more rapidly the lesser the quantity of evaporation from the land sur-
face. Hithout a limitation on evaporation an increase in roughness leads to an in-
crease in the flows of heat and moisture, an increase in the convergence of mois-
ture into the eye of the TC, and thus, an intensification of the TC. At the time

of movement of the TC onto the land there is a brief increase in precipitation as

a result of moisture convergence in the lover troposphere. In the first few hours
after the TC moves onto the land the eye of the TC disappears and ascending move-
ments develop at the center of the TC. with movement of the TC onto the land the
radius of the maximum winds somewhat increases. An increase in pressure, decrease
in integral moisture flows and attenuation of the TC begin when the land occupies
the central zone under the TC. The central region therefore plays a decisive role
in the attenuation of the TC over the land. Figures 6; references 13: 3 Russian,

10 western.

l9

F0!:0Ilﬂ(1Al.UBEIMNLY
FOIilﬂﬂC1A1.U$£(MVLY

UDC 551.521J
ALLOHANCE FOR HEAT RECEIPTS FROM SOLAR RADIATION 0N SLANT SURFACES

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9. Sep 81 (manuscript received
2 Dec 80) PP 75-78

[Article by V. A. Pataleyev. Far Eastern Scientific Research Institute of Hydro-
engineering and Land Improvement]

[Abstract] In connection with construction of the Baykal-Amur Railroad and the in-
creased volume of construction in the northeastern part of the country a precise
allowance for the solar radiation balance on slopes is becoming especially impor-
tant. Radiation computations are also necessary for determining photosynthetical-
ly active radiation used by the plant cover in the photosynthesis process. that
is, in evaluating the suitability of the territory for cultivation of agricultural
crops, since in the northern regions the southern slopes, in contrast to a hor-
izontal surface. often receive the quantity of photosynthetically active radiation
necessary for the harvesting of stable yields. The author therefore has developed
a method suitable for practical application which makes it possible to ascertain
the quantity of heat from solar radiation incident on slant surfaces. The basis
for the method is a generally accepted expression for the radiation balance of a
slope which by means of the heat transfer coefficient and the temperature compon-
ents for the slant surface is transformed into a linear algebraic equation with
an unknown value of heating due to the effect of solar radiation. The solution of
this equation is a formula making it possible to compute the receipts of solar en-

ergy on the slant surfaces of artificial structures. Figures 1; references: 6 Rus-
sian.

20

FOI‘DFHKJAI.USB(H‘LY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(IVLY

UDC 551.665.S

SPAIIAL VARIAﬁILITY OF CURRENT PIBLDS IN THE SHALLOH HATER PART OF THE SHELF

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian lo 9. Sep 81 (manuscript received
22 Dec 80) PP 79-84

[Article by Yu. 6. Zotov and Yu. P. Masterov and S. Ye. Saks, candidates of tech-
nical sciences, Soyuztekhmorneftegaz]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the prob-
lem of determining the spatial variabil-
ity of current fields constructed on the
basis of data from a survey of currents
in a polygon in the coastal zone of the
sea. The method for evaluating the vari-
ability of the current fields is based
on an analysis of the random vectors.
which are represented in a complex form
Recommendations are given on the choice
of an Optimum network of hydrological
stations when carrying out geological
engineering work in one of the regions
of Southern Primor'ye, and an evaluation
of the proposed method is presented.

The matter of validating methods for hydroengineering work is assuming a timely
importance in connection with the exploitation of mineral resources in the shelf
zones of USSR seas. The results of such engineering field work are necessary both
for the designing of petroleum and gas structures and in supporting construction
and diving work and measures for preserving the environment. Waves and currents
are the most important hydrological factors for technical work on the shelf. Due
to the lack of reliable computation methods for studying the characteristics of
currents. the principal method in specific sectors is in situ measurements.

The problem of choosing the optimum distanca between stations for observing cur-
rents is the most difficult in the planning of hydrological field work in the
coastal zone of the shelf. This zone is characterized by an extremely differen-
tiated and complex pattern of circulation of water masses with considerable spatial
and temporal variability. A statistical analysis of the spatial characteristics of
currents in characteristic polygons is the most acceptable method for validating
the optimum distance between stations.

21

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
FOI!OFFK3A1.USE(HVLY

At the present time the State Oceanographic Institute [4-6]. on the basis of aer-
ial photographic survey work for the measurement of currents by means of dyes,has
discovered some statistical patterns of change in current velocity in regions with
straight shorelines far from capes and bays in the absence of islands and banks.
In particular. in the coastal zone (up to 4 in from the shore) it is recommended
that observation points be placed at an interval of 2 km in order to obtain a syn-
chronous pattern of distribution of currents [6]. Directly near capes it is common
to discover small circulatory systems (with a scale of about 10 km) [5].

These recommendations and conclusions were based on a correlation analysis of abso-
lute current velocity values [4] without allowance for change in current direction.
Such an approach is legitimate when determining absolute current velocities but

the mathematical approach employed by the authors does not make it possible to
evaluate the variability of current directions.

Other methods are also known for evaluating the correlation and spectral character-
istics of the current fields [7]. For example, in [1]. for evaluating the spatial
variability of the vector f eld the authors propose that the cosine of the angle
between the vectors V3 and 2 be used as the parameter of degree of correlation.
However, this p ramete determines only the degree of variability of the directions
of the vectors 1 and 2 and does not take into account the variability of the ab-
solute values. Accordingly. for obtaining more generalized characteristics of var-
iability of the vector field it is desirable to carry out processing of the para-
meters of currents not separately by components (direction. absolute value or two
projections). but on the basis of the total velocity vectors.

In this article we examine one of the possible variants of this evaluation and the
first results of its testing in specific polygons. The linear variability of the
current was determined by evaluating the correlations between two time series of
observations carried out at two stations situated at different distances lib from
one another. An evaluation of the spatial variability of currents was made by find-
ing the correlations for all possible pairs of stations.

The basis for the method is an analysis of random vectors represented in complex
form [2]. This makes it possible. using one complex correlation coefficient, to
express the degree of interrelationship between current direction and velocity.
The current vector can be represented in complex form as

[7, = 1', cos 6. + 111‘ ill! ‘1:
where v1 is the absolute value of the current vector, ‘11 is current direction.

The correlation moment of the two complex variables Vi and V; is represented as
K- .' =Krlxl+KyI ’I+‘(K’i’i_K‘il’i);, . (1)

V: V:

where ,r, :.-. 9, cos a". y. = 1), sin a.: x, = v, cos :1; y, = o, sing,

and Kx1x%- Kyiyz, Ky1x2v Kx1y§ are the correlation moments of the values (xlxz),
(mm). mm . (ylxz). (xlyz .

' 22

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1al.lﬂﬂ£lﬂ1l¥
where “I; mean, is the modulus of the mean current vector. ‘11 neon is the nean cur-
rent direction.

The correlation coefficient is

K.‘
- = -l. -
' 7555? R‘ ‘3’
I 1 '

where R is the sodulus of the couple: correlation coefficient; Qis an argument
characterizing the mean deviation of current directions with transition fro- one

station to another.

 

Pig. 1. Polygon of current nessurenents and diagram of zones of coastal circulation.
l) boundaries of circulation zones; 2) hydrological stations.

A numerical experinent was carried out for obtaining a physical understanding of
the essence of these complex correlation coefficients. The dispersion 0'2 of the
random value of the angle between two current velocity unit vectors was a vari-
able. He selected the following O'gradations: 15, 30. b5. 60, 90 and 120°. It was
assumed that the random value of current direction was distributed in conforlity
to a normal law. Below we give the relationship between the modulus R and the
standard deviation 0’ obtained in a numerical experiment:

'- " (A)
. Rze 1B5_

23

MOWUSEONLY
FORIOFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

It can be seen from (4) that, for example, with R - 0.6 the standard deviation is
0" 160°, but with R . 0.1 0"- t127°.

The method presented above was tested in the coastal zone of the Sea of Japan. As
the experimental polygons we selected two morphologically different parts of the
shelf. The first sector (Southern Primor'ye) is characterized by a complex configur-
ation of the shore (Fig. 1). whereas the second sector (southwestern coast of Sakh-
alin) is characterized by a straight shore.

In evaluating the spatial variability of currents in the first sector we used the
method of a survey of currents at fixed points situated at different distances
from one another. He used: a) squares with sides 250. 500 and 1000 m (the surveys
were made at the corners and centers of the squares); b) profiles perpendicular to
the shoreline, the distances between which were 250. 500, 1000 and 2000 m (on each
profile there were three measurement points: at depths 10, 20 and 30 m). The total
number of measurement points for variant (a) was 11, and for variant (b) - 18.

It was impossible to set out the appropriate number of automatically recording in-
struments. Accordingly. we used the method of single depth measurements at fixed
points with the VHH current meter. The network of profiles or squares was broken
down by means of theodolite tie-in with the shore. A high-speed boat was used in
making the measurements. The full cycle for surveying one square (with depth meas-
urements at each of five points) required from 2 to 2.5 hours. It was assumed that
during this period the general pattern of currents does not essentially change and
the collected data can be interpreted approximately as the results of a simultan-
eous survey.

     

m mum mu

 

I 1 I “M

Fig. 2. Dependence of modulus of correl— Fig. 3. Dependence of T argument of
stion coefficient on diatancelll.between complex correlation coefficient on
observation stations. 1. 2) values of R distance (11“

modulus for variants (a) and (b) respec-

tively: 3) value of R modulus R1(2.._5).

In accordance with variant (a), in each square we carried out 20 measurement cycles
and in accordance with variant (b) -- 18 cycles. He studied the characteristics of

bottom currents, which are especially important for geological engineering problems
and at the same time are the least studied.

24

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FIIRCIWNCJA1.USE¢0NLY

In the second sector (Sakhalin) there were six measurement cycles, each with 14
points. The distances between profiles were 10 km, and between points on the pro-
file ~- up to 1. Ian. .

The results of processing of the series of observations of currents for three
squares for the sector shown in Fig. l are represented in Figures 2 and 3. The
moduli of the complex correlation coefficients vary in the range 0.16-0.72 and
the corresponding values of their argument.99vary from 10 to 80°. The series of
observations of currents at points situated not more than 200 m from one another
are most closely correlated. The correlation coefficient modulus is 0.6 for this
same distance. Its variation characteristic does not exceed 22.

Figure 2 also shows the results of processing of current measurements along six
profiles (variant (b)). With an increase in the distance (3 L between profiles

the modulus of the correlation coefficient R decreases and at a distance greater
than 2 km attains 0.1-0.15. with such distances between observation stations it

is impossible to determine the presence of an interrelationship between individual
points of the current field, that is, discriminate zones with a transport of water
masses which is sustained in direction.

Using the curve of the dependence of the correlation coefficient modulus R on dis-
tance 13L, similar to the graph shown in Fig. 2, and expression (4), it is possible
to select the optimum distance between stations in accordance with the required
accuracy and engineering problem. For example, in the considered sector in the case
of large-scale reconnaissance work in order to determine positions on the plan of
circulatory movements of water masses the distance between adjacent stations must
not exceed 200-300 m. 0n the other hand, when it is necessary to clarify the qual-
itative picture of the field of currents, that is. to determine the general direc-
tion of transport of water masses (the standard deviation of current direction is
about 160°), it is possible to hold the interval between stations in the range
600-700 m.

In this same sector, using the R value, it is possible to discriminate characteris-
tic zones of interrelated movement of bottom water masses (circulation. eddies,
stationary currents). Two such zones are located in the region of capes (Fig. l)
and are evidently determined by the influence of the shoreline. A third zone, sit-
uated in a seaward direction. is in a region adjacent to the stationary Primor'ye
Current. '

The spatial and alongshore variability of currents in the second sector (Sakhalin
Island) differs considerably from the variability of the coastal zone of Southern
Primor'ye and is characterized by a transport of water masses which is sustained
over the entire polygon. The correlation coefficient modulus R is not below 0.6
with a distance between measurement points up to 30-40 km.

In addition to the processing of results by the method described above, in order to
determine the reciprocal influence of the entire group of measurement points we
carried out processing of observations using the multiple correlation approach [3].
As the experimental polygon we selected a sector in accordance with variant (a).
The multiple correlation coefficient [3] is

._——.. .- -......

- "' l
Rm. . .n = H - (1 - :1)“ ‘Rgu‘ ' ' - a " prm. . .(s-IMT'

25

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FINI(HWNCJAI.IENE(HVLY

where p is the number of variables; R13. kL is the special correlation coefficient
between the variables X1 and X1 with exclusion of the influence of Xk and XL.

Special coefficients of three or more variables are determined_using the formula

R -R -R
R = l7.d...p m..., 1‘...)
"" ' IU-Ruai...pi('- M...)

It can be seen from formula (5) that the special correlation coefficient of p vari-
ables is determined by the coefficients of p - 1 variables. Accordingly, knowing
the coefficients of two variables, it is possible to determine all the special cor-
relation coefficients of three or more variables. The special correlation coef-
ficients of two variables among all the combinations of series of observations at
the corners and at the center of the square were computed using the formula (3).

. (5)

The values of the total multiple correlation coefficient 81(2,,,5) are given in
Fig. 2. The correlation coefficients computed earlier using formula (3) can be re-
garded as special coefficients relative to R1(2...5) for the case p - 2. It can be
seen from Fig. 2 that the total coefficients give an upward limit of the field of
scatter of the special coefficients. whereas the latter give more complete informa-
tion on the spatial variability of the field of currents. Due to the great amount
of work involved in computing the multiple correlation coefficients the problem of

the need for using them requires further study and testing on the basis of adequate-
ly representative data.

Thus. after analyzing the results. the following conclusions can be drawn:

1. The necessary density of the network of points where currents are observed is es-
sentially dependent on the region where reconnaissance is carried out.

2. In each new region when deternining the method for carrying out hydrological work
it is necessary to perform preliminary work for determining the optimum network of
hydrological stations in dependence on the tasks to be executed and on the require-
ments for final information.

3. The described method for studying the spatial variability of currents is the ba-
sis for carrying out preliminary work for validating the density of hydrological
stations in geological engineering work on the shelf.

6. An evaluation of the spatial variability of the current field also requires fur-
ther investigations of applicability of multiple correlation methods.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bugayets. A. N. and Dudenko, L. N., MATEHATICHBSKIYE HBTODY PR1 PROGNOZIROVANII
HESTOROZHDENIY POLEZNYKH ISKOPAYEHYKH (Mathematical Methods in Predicting Hin-
eral Deposits). Leningrad, Nedra, 1976.

2. Venttsel', Ye. 8., TEORIYA VERDYATNOSTEY (Theory of Probabilities), Hoscow,
Nauka, 1966.

26

FIN!(NHHC1A1.USEIHVLY
3.

7.

IOI10FFKJA1.USE(NNLY

Kendall, H. and Stuart. A., STATISTICHESKIYE VYVODY I SVYAZI (Statistical
Conclusions and Correlations), Moscow. Nauka. 1973.

Konovalova, I. 2., "Spatial Discreteness of Observations of Currents in the
Coastal Zone of the Sea." OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), V01 Ix, No 6, 1969.

Konova1ovs, I. z. and Lagutin, B. 1.. "Sons Statistical Characteristics of
Coastal Currents According to Results of an Aerial Photographic Survey."
TRUDY GOINa (Transactions of the State Oceanographic Institute), No 95, 1968.
Konovalova, I. Ye., Lagutin, B. L. and Ovsyannikova, 0. A., ”Deternination of
Regime Characteristics of Currents in the Coastal Zone of Seas." TRUDY GOINa,
No 112, 1972.

Yampol'skiy, A. 0.. "Some Problems in the Method for Statistical Processing
of Current Observations," OKEANOLOGIYA, Vol IX, No 1, 1969.

27

FOI1DFNKJA1.USItoNLY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.US£(N§LY

UDC 551.482.2(67)
HEAT RUNOFF 0F RIVERS 1N EUROPEAN TERRITORY 0F USSR

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
19 Dec 80) PP 85-93

[Article by Yu. A. Yelshin, Murmansk Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring]

[Abstract] Until now proper attention has not been given to the heat runoff in
rivers. In the territory of the USSR the heat runoff characteristics have not

been determined and have not been published, nor are there any special studies

in this field. During 1979-1980 the author made computations of heat runoff in
all the studied rivers of the Kola Peninsula and many rivers in Karelia, Arkhan-
gel'skaya, Vologodskaya Oblasts and the Komi ASSR, rivers of the Baltic Sea basin
and a number of rivers in the lover Volga region, Moldavia and Western Ukraine.
For rivers in the "bite Sea basin, in addition to for individual rivers, the total
heat runoff was computed for consolidated regions (Kola Peninsula, Karelia, Sever-
nyy Kray) and for the basin as a whole. The total heat runoff for Lake Onega and
Lake Ladoga was also determined..ﬂeat runoff was computed for 268 hydrological
posts on rivers with a little-impaired regime having long (more than 10 years)
observation series. It was possible to ascertain the dependence of the mean long-
term heat runoff and the influence exerted on the heat runoff by a series of fac—
tors; a formula is derived for computing the heat runoff; methods are given for
computing the long-term variability and intraannual distribution of the heat run-
off of rivers. The dependence of the mean seasonal water temperature of rivers on
their volume is established. Figures 3, tables 4; references: 10 Russian.

28
IKIICNNNCIAI.USIIMNLY
POI! OHIO“. USE ONLY

UDC 556.16.01(571.1lo)

[Article by N. G. Inishev, Tonal: State University]

[Abstract] In this article, in the example of the 01qu River basin, the author
develops a method for computing the high-Hater hydrogrsph. The method is based on
an evaluation of lateral inflow on the basis of observations of water discharges

use with an electronic computer. Other formlss are proposed for the lateral inflow
probability density function along the length of the stream, taking into account
the peculiarities of structure of the channel network, on the basis of which ex-
pressions are obtained for the travel tine aoaents. The degree of detail consider-

breakdown. The solution of this problem for the Chulyn River, which has sountain-
ous, hilly and lowland reaches, is discussed. A model for computing the hydrograph
of spring high water is formulated on the basis of the total inflow of water into
the channel network with the use of the derived expressions. The validity of the

high-water hydrographs. The sane parameters of the model can be used in years with
different water discharge. Tables 2; references: 14 Russian.
FIIICIﬂﬂCJAI.UBE1ONlN

UDC 551.465.53(263)

SPATIAL-TEMPORAL VARIABILITY OF CURRENT DISCHARGES IN THE PCGE ATLANTIC
EQUATORIAL POLYGON

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
16 Feb 81) pp 101-108

[Article by V. A. Burkov, doctor of geographical sciences, A. B. Zubin and V. B.
Titov, candidates of geographical sciences, and A. I. Kharlamov, Institute of
Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] In 1979, during the P663, the Institute of Oceanology and its divisions
carried out extensive hydrophysical measurements in an Atlantic equatorial polygon.
The basic objective was a further investigation of the variability of currents
(Southern Trades Current, Lomonosov Current and westerly Equatorial Intermediate
Current) and associated oceanological characteristics. The observations in the
polygon included current measurements along the merdians 23°30'H and 18°30'w in
spring (10 March-2 May) and in summer (20 June—12 August) in the northern hemi-
sphere, hydrological sections along these meridians and a summer hydrological sur-
vey within the polygon and beyond its limits to the west and east. All the observa-
tions were made on the spring and summer voyages of the scientific research ships
"Akademik Kurchatov" and "Professor Shtokman." Both in spring and in summer the
total duration of current measurements at automatic buoy stations was about 50 days
-- this being one of the longest such series of equatorial currents in the Atlantic.
This article gives an analysis of the spatial-temporal variability of discharges
and some other current characteristics. The mean daily values of the zonal and mer-
idional components of currents were computed for each observation horizon. Then
these values were used in computing the mean discharges of zonal and meridional cur-
rents. The zonal discharges were determined along the meridians 23°30' and 18°30'H
for sections bounded by 1 1/2 degrees north and south latitude and the horizons

15 and 250 m. The meridional discharges were determined along the parallels 1°30'S,
0‘40'8, 0°00, O'éO'N and 1'30'N for sections bounded by 23'30’ and 18°30’U and the
horizons 15 and 250 m. It was found-that the discharges of zonal currents vary ir-
regularly with time and asynchronously along the flow with periods exceeding 30
days. The discharges of meridional currents with periods close to the periods of

meandering of the Lomonosov Current vary consistently along the meridians. The
computed vertical velocity values do not exceed 1000-10‘5 cm/sec. The role of mer-

idional flows in the weakening or strengthening of the Lomonosov Current is demon-
strated. Figures 4, tables 3; references 11: 10 Russian, 1 western.

30

FORilﬂﬂClALIENICNVLY
FOIloFFKJAl.USB¢MNLY

UDC $56.0ll+556.515

CONSIDERATIONS 0N DETERMINING MEAN WATERSHED SLOPBS

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
15 Sep 80) pp 109-111

[Article by A. P. Kopylov, candidate of geographical sciences. State Hydrological
Institute]

[Abstract] The inadequate mathematical validity of the formulas proposed in the
UNESCO publication REPRESENTATIVE AND EXPERIMENTAL BASIRS (1971) and in various

studies published by G. A. Alekseyev has been clearly pointed out by the author

of this critical cmnnunication in his article in HBTBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA. No
7, 1978. The principal reason for the negative evaluation of the formulas was

that they do not take into account the degree of dissection of the watershed sur-
face. The hypsographic curve for a watershed and the equivalent rectangular water-

shed used in connection with these formulas do not carry information on slopes and
therefore their use in computations is without justification. Nevertheless, this

matter has been raised anew in an article by D. M. Rudritskiy in HBTBORDLOGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA, No l, 1980. This author endeavored to defend these poorly substantiat-
ed formulas on the basis of assunptiona for which there is no backing and sought
to discredit the Kopylov formulas on the basis of false assertions. Accordingly,
this communication deals with the nest important of these errors in Kudritskiy's
article. The communication appears to successfully refute the Kudritskiy thesis.
References: 9 Russian.

31

FOIIHHNCUH.USE(NVLY
FOI‘0FFK!AI.U§E(MVLY

UDC 556.011+556.51!
FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS 0N MEAN HATERSHBD SLOPES

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (manuscript received
13 Feb 81) pp 111—114

[Article by N. A. Bagrov, professor, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research
Center]

[Abstract] This article supplements the article by A. P. Kopylov in this same num-
ber of HETEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (pp 109-111).-The author outlines several

schemes for which the scan slope of a watershed is easily computed. The examples
cited are for clarifying the geometrical concept of mean slope. The author fully
supports the thesis presented by A. P. Kopylov with respect to the validity of

his concepts. He completely rejects the arguments presented on this subject by

D. M. Kudritskiy in METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No l. 1980; he feels further
that debate on the subject should come to an end. In this short communication the
author notes that mean slope characterizes well only uniform basins. He stresses

that if the parts of the basin differ from one another with respect to orography,
forest cover. etc., the examination of slopes must be made separately for uniform

parts of the basin; these individual findings can then be brought together by use
of a special parameter characterizing the orographic nonuniformity of the basin.
The problems involved in obtaining such a parameter are discussed. Figures 3.

32

FOI‘DFFKJA1.USB(HVLY
FUI‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(lVLY

UDC 551.509.33
WORK OF AN UNOFFICIAL CONFERENCE 0P HMO EXPERTS 0N LONG-RANGE HEATHER FORECASTING

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (nanuscript received
6 Feb 81) pp 115-118

[Article by Sh. A. Husayelyan, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, USSR
Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: The author briefly examines nat-
erials from an unofficial conference of
HMO experts on long-range weather forecast-
ing (Geneva. 1-5 Septeaber 1980). This report
gives sone data on the status of research on
this problem in a number of countries. Infor-
aation is given on the neasures which will be
carried out in the future for further develop-

nent of investigations of the considered prob-
len.

An unofficial conference of "MO experts on long-range weather forecasting (LRHF)
for a month and a season in advance was held in Geneva during the period 1-5
September 1980. The conference, organized by the HMO, was attended by the followb
ing persons: the General Secretary of the HMO Hiin-Nielsen, Hiyakoda, Sonerville,
Epstein and Gillan from the United States, Bengtsson fron the European Center for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, Parker from the Heteorological Service of Great
Britain, Koflan from the Meteorological Bureau of Australia. Kikuchi from the
Japanese Meteorological Agency, the Director of the Department of Scientific
Research at the WHO A. S. Zaytsev. the Director of the GARP Joint Planning Group
Deyes, a consultant of the WHO Hbrld Climate Program Beauville, and also special-
ists of the HBO Secretariat Bozhkov and Suzuki. sh. A. hussyelyan of the Soviet
Union participated in the work of the conference.

The conference was opened by the General Secretary of the HMO Hiin-Nielsen, who in
his opening address stated, in particular, "Despite the fact that significant re-
sults have not been obtained in the field of LR"? up to the present time over the
course of a number of decades, nevertheless there is hope that long-range weather
forecasting is possible. Hhen we speak of a limit of predictability of 1-2 weeks,
reference is to existing models. If it is found that this is actually so, one

must proceed in another direction: develop a new, more realistic strategy and

for attaining the final objective travel a long and difficult path. The LR“?
problem is a problem which must be solved by all working together. The repre-
sentatives of the governments of many countries are very interested in the

33

FOIIOFFIJA1.USB(HNLY
F!”l(lﬂﬂ(]Al.llﬂE(ﬂHLN

development of new, more perfect LR"? methods. He have met in order to discuss
the present status of the problem, to evaluate existing methods and outline
further research and formulate a new strategy."

The principal objective of the conference was a discussion. on the basis of re-
view reports of “HO experts. of the status of the LR"? problem and the formula-
tion of preliminary measures which are necessary for the further development of re-
search on the considered problem. with respect to these measures, it was decid-

ed to plan a publication TECHNICAL NOTES 0? THE “MD on LR“? which should deal

with the following problems: empirical, statistical, dynamic and combined methods
of LRHF, interaction between the ocean and atmosphere and allowance for these in
the development of LR"? methods, and also the problem of atmospheric predictabil-
ity. In addition. it was decided to organize and carry out a research conference
on LRHF.

Then the floor was given to Deyes. He told of the Horld Climatic Research Program
in precise conformity to the report of the first session of the special committee
which met in Amsterdam during the period 26 March-3 April 1980. He noted that a
number of factors (cloud cover and radiation, ocean processes, sea ice, hydro-
logical processes, etc.), playing an haportant role in the genesis of climate,
are also exceptionally important in developing LRHF methods.

Then the review reports of the experts were presented.

Cilman told of the work of the Climatic Research Center of the United States
National Heather Service. The Center gives monthly and seasonal (four times a
year) weather forecasts. Numerical forecasts for five days, and also forecasts
for intermediate times are used in determining the onset of the period for the
preparation of monthly forecasts. These forecasts are disseminated to the United
States Department of Energy and other organizations. In the preparation of month-
ly forecasts use is made for the most part of mean five-day pressure pattern
charts (surface charts are used less frequently). Particularly great attention
is given to AT7 pressure pattern charts. Sometimes on these charts there are
macroscsle pecuggarities of meteorological fields which change little with time.
This makes it possible to employ the extrapolation procedure. The seasonal
peculiarities of meteorological elements and fields are also taken into account.
Temperature and precipitation anomalies are predicted. This year the predictions
for summer were very poor. Earlier almost always only the kinematics of pressure
formations was used. Investigations are now being made for taking other factors
into account. Particularly great significance is being given to checking of the
Namias hypothesis. Hork is continuing on a detailed study of the relationship
between anomalies of water temperature at the ocean surface and deviations of
the altitude of the 700-mb isobaric surface from the norm.

Kikuchi presented a review of investigations made by the Japanese Meteorological
Agency. In Japan experimental LR“? were first prepared in 1907 in order to supply
interested organizations with information on summer weather conditions in the
northern part of the country where rice fields are situated. Since 1962 LR“? have
been compiled for the entire territory of the country and are published almost
regularly (the only exception being 1949-1952).

The Japanese Meteorological Agency regularly, on a routine basis, is issuing the
following LRUP: monthly, three-monthly. for the cold and warm half-years.

3b

FORGIHHCIAI.USE(NNLY
FOI¢HﬂﬂCJAl.USE(MNLY

The monthly forecasts for each month are issued on the tenth day of the preced-
ing month and are made more precise on its last day.

Predictions are made for anomalies of mean temperature and the quantity of pre-
cipitation for each of the regions in Japan and the synoptic situation is pre-
dicted for each subsequent lO—day period.

Three-month forecasts are issued on the 20th of each month. These same elements
and mean weather conditions for each of the three subsequent months are predict-
ed, including summer and winter respectively. A forecast for the warm half-year
is issued on 20 March. and for the cold half-year on 10 October. These forecasts
give the general characteristics of the anticipated weather, such as late spring.
early autumn, etc.

The following methods are used at the present time in the preparation of LBHF:
Analogues Method
The forecast is prepared in two stages:

1) Selection of analogues for circulation conditions at the 5004mb isobaric sur-
face.

In choosing the analogues as a measure of similarity use is made of the percentage
of coincidence with respect to the sign of the ATSOO anomaly in the current field
and in the archival fields during this same calendar period of past years (a geo-
graphical grid for the northern hemisphere with a uniform interval in latitude
and longitude equal to 10° is used). Three groups of such evaluations are consider-
ed:

a) for hemispherical mean monthly fields this evaluation must be greater than the
critical value;

b) for fields averaged for 2. 6 and 6 five-day periods this evaluation must be
over 501 [(only those points of intersection at which the current values of the AI
AT 00 anomalies are greater than 1.280'are used (cris computed on the basis of ar-
chival data at the selected point of intersection during this same calendar period
of past years)];

c) this evaluation must be greater than the critical value for the mean monthly
fields when the computations include only points of intersection exerting an in-
fluence on the specific object of the forecast (the asynchronous correlation co-
efficient between the ATSOO anomaly at this point of intersection and the devia-
tion of the mean monthly temperature or the precipitation total from the norm at

a station in the considered region for the considered calendar period and a stip-
ulated time in advance: one. two or three months - more than 0.3).

The best variant of all the three enumerated analogues is used in the final stage
of the forecast.

2) Preparation of monthly forecasts of temperature and precipitation anomalies.

In predicting the mean monthly temperature or the monthly sums of precipitation
in a stipulated region use is made of data on the above-mentioned characteristics
with a time shift of one, two or three months, after the analogues of atmospheric
circulation have been selected for this case.

35
FORtlﬂﬂClALlﬂﬂ:0NlY
l1)l10IFICJAI.lﬂﬂE(NVLV

Correlation Hethod

Use is made of asynchronous relationships with a time shift of one, two and three
months between the mean monthly values of the altitude of the SOanb isobaric sur-
face at each point of intersection of a 5° geographical grid for the northern hemi-
sphere and the anomaly of mean monthly temperature for a particular meteorological
station. Regions with the highest correlation coefficient are selected and a
prognostic multiple regression equation is written for predicting the temperature
anomaly at a particular station where the A1500 anomalies are the predictors.

Extrapolation of Periodic Components Method

s) A harmonic analysis of the mean 10-day zonal circulation indices is made at the
SOO-mb level for the past 36 10—day periods. The two prevailing periods are dis-
criminated and on this basis there is a prediction of the mean 5-day index of
zonal circulation for one or even for three months. [In the USSR similar work has
been done over a period of years by V. D. Reshetov.]

b) A similar analysis is made for mean 10-day anomalies of altitudes of the 500~mb
isobaric surfaces with use of data on 66 elapsed 10-day periods applicable to each
point of intersection of the employed grid. This procedure is used for predicting
the mean 10-day anomalies of altitudes of the SOO-mb isobaric surface for regions
in the Far East.

c) The above-mentioned harmonic analysis procedure with subsequent extrapolation
of the periodic components is also used in computing the prognostic charts

of the mean monthly anomaly of altitudes of the SOO-mb surface for the northern
hemisphere. The mean monthly anomalies of the mentioned fields for the 29 success-
ive elapsed months are used. The computations are made for each point in the em-
ployed geographical grid in the northern hemisphere.

d) Employing the results in a)-c), his synoptic experience and common sense. the
forecaster makes a final decision.

Forecasts of temperature anomalies for the period from 1977 through 1979 have the
following guaranteed probability with respect to sign in percent:

Int 10 days 2d 10 days 3d 10 days

Monthly forecasts 66 62 52
let month 2d month 3d month

Three-month forecasts 58 58 58

During this same period the precipitation forecasts have the following guaranteed
probability:
lst month 2d month 3d month

Three-month forecasts 66 65 66

The following scientific research work is being done in order to improve the qual-
ity of LRHF:

36

ii)! OFiICIAJ.lEﬂB(MULY
FOIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY

-- A four-level spectral model intended for monthly forecasts is being developed.
- Existing methods are being improved by making use of three-dimensional data,

in particular. for study of the vertical propagation of the blocking process,

etc.

-- Investigations are being made on the use of water t-perature at the ocean sur-
face, snow cover and cloud cover distribution.

-- Forecasting methods are being developed for the southern hemisphere. This, in
the opinion of the speaker, should assist in improving the precipitation forecast.

A review of LR"? investigations in the Soviet Union was given by the author almost
completely on the basis of articles by N. A. Bagrov, Ye. N. Blinova, D. A. Ped',

K. A. Vasyukov and N. I. Zverev. included in the collection of articles PYAT'DESYAT
LET TSENTRU GIDROMBTEOROLOGICHESKIKB PWGNOZOV (Fifty Years at the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Forecasting Center), 1979, and in accordance with an article published by
Academician G. I. Marchuk entitled "Kydrodynamic Models in the Dynamics of the At-
mosphere and Ocean," included in the collection of articles PROBLM SOVREHENNOY
GIDROHETmROLocII (Problems in Modern Hydrometeorology) (Leningrad. Gidrometeoiz-
dat, 1977). In addition, the review included some results obtained at the Hydro-
meteorological Center using the cloud cover of the oceans in LRHF. The review

was supplied with an extensive bibliography of LBW? investigations of Soviet auth-
era.

In the review by Parker (Meteorological Service of Great Britain) it was pointed
out that in Great Britain 1.1M? have been issued since 1963 but soon such fore-
casts will be suspended because no funds will be available for such work. For the
time being the service will continue to issue forecasts for 5-15 and 16-25 days,
which are being used by petroleum workers. Seasonal forecasts are prepared each
three months and are issued by private organizations. These forecasts for the re-
gion,taking in the territory of Great Britain and part of the territory of Europe,

are prepared making use of the following methods:

1. Analogues method. The review gave an analysis of the actual observational data,
which. in the opinion of the speaker, demonstrates the basic possibility of pre-
paring forecasts using analogues. It is shown that this method has a statistical-
ly significant prognostic capability, although the results are not always satis-
factory. The quality of analysis of mean monthly aerological charts, especially
over the oceans, can eatert an influence on the process of selecting analogues.

2. Sea water temperature. At the present time work is being done in Great Britain
for improving the quality of analysis of the water temperature fields at the
ocean surface. This can assist in improving the method for selecting analogues
and investigations on the basis of numerical modeling.

3. Numerical modeling. LR"? forecasts are precomputed for a month in advance using
a f ive-level model with primitive equations. This model takes into account water
temperature at the ocean surface, moist convection and also the radiation effects
of clouds and the snow cover (using seasonal climatological data). The model was
developed for the northern hemisphere. However, these forecasts are used in prac-

tical work with great caution. Excessive polar anticyclogenesis creates great dif-
ficulties.

37'

MWUSEONLY
FIIR()FFIC1AI.lEﬂE(lNLY

The decision on the anticipated types of weather is made on the basis of prog-
nostic charts of surface pressure and the SOO-mb surface averaged for 10 days.

5. Autoprojection method. This method is similar to the Japanese method for the
extrapolation of periodic components with use of the main components of the con-
sidered meteorological fields. Before conclusions can be drawn concerning the
possibilities of the method it must be tested for a long time under routine con-
ditions.

5. Understanding of physical climatic system. Uork has begun on implementation

of the joint project of the Meteorological Service of Great Britain, one of the
universities and the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. The pur-
pose of this project is the creation of a specialized archives of global meteor-
ological data and diagnostic data on a number of energy characteristics and

study of the main climate-forming factors on the basis of a physical analysis of
these data. It is proposed that the understanding of the physical climatic system
be inproved in this way. The project has still not been completed.

6. Interpretation of pressure formations in weather terms. The analogues method,
nuserical models and the autoprojection method in the best case make it possible
to obtain the prognostic fields of surface pressure and/or geopotential of the
upper levels. The interpretation of these prognostic pressure fields in weather
terms (precipitation, temperature) is not sluays obvious. The circulation types
developed by Lamb in 1972 are used for solution of this problem.

Koflan gave a review of LEW? investigations carried out at the Australian Meteor-
ological Service. Empirical, statistical and numerical L8H? methods are being de-
veloped in Australia. In particular, a study is made of the correlation between
the field of velocities and the distribution of precipitation (the correlation
coefficient is about 0.6-0.7). However, the inadequacy of observational data is
sensed acutely. Two or three years are required in order to collect all the avail-
able useful data.

The Australian Bureau of Meteorological Experimental Forecasts operated during
l9Sb-l97l. This period is divided into two parts: first -- from 1956 through
1967; second -— from 1968 through 1971. During the first period LR"? work was
directed by Karelski, an adherent to the Soviet Hul'tsnovskiy school. Karelski
began his investigations of the considered problem for the Australian region in
1951. The concepts "cyclonality" and "anticyclonality" were introduced; partic-
ular attention was devoted to month-to-month anomalies of pressure formation sys-
tems. Investigations have indicated that some types of circulation have a defin-
itely conservative character in the course of natural periods up to a season or
more. Beginning in 1968 the LR"? work was headed by Hafotti.

The procedure of preparing a forecast involves the following stages:

1. Analysis of atmospheric circulation on the basis of ATSOO and a surface pres-
sure chart.

2. Analysis of "cyclonality" and "anticyclonality" anomalies of the current month.
3. Forecasting of atmospheric circulation in the coming month with an indication
of the types of anticipated circulation.

38

FOI¢0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOI1DFFKJAL.UBE(NNLY

4. A general description of the anticipated weather in the coming month for
large geographical regions of Australia.

For all years the mean evaluation of the forecasts for temperature is 561 and
for precipitation 51!. In 1971 this work was suspended.

During recent years, in connection with the awakening interest in the problem of
climatic change, there have been a number of studies (walker, Lamb, Nichols and
others) whose results make it possible to hope for the development of a new,
more perfect LRHF method.

During the discussion the position of the Soviet representative could be summaris-
ed as follows: at the present time one of the most promising directions in LR"?
research is a deeper study of the processes of interaction between the ocean and
the atmosphere on the basis of the theoretical studies of Academician G. 1. Mar-
chuk and Soviet proposals made within the framework of the "Rasrezy" (Profiles)
program. This position agrees with the corresponding resolution of the HMO execu-

tive committee. Hiin-Nielsen spoke out in support of the Soviet proposal. after
which it was adopted.

Then the conferees were informed by "MD officials that by way of preparation of
the program for the working conference on time series of oceanographic sections
(Tokio, 1981) there would be a conference of experts in the fourth quarter of 1980.

In the course of further discussion of the LR"? problem the Soviet representative
expressed his opinions concerning the importance of the problem of discriminating
and parameterising the most important nonadiabatic factors and on a new interpreta-
tion of the problem of atmospheric predictability. The conferees expressed their
agreement with these ideas. An address by Somerville was of particular interest.
He expressed most categorically that the principal efforts should be directed to
the development of a new strategy on the LRHP problem different from that which is
based on modern models of general circulation of the atmosphere. Using a model of
general circulation he carried out numerical experiments with inclusion and exclu-
sion of the principal physical processes taken into account in the model. It was
found that the results of these experiments differ little from one another. Ac-
cordingly. Somerville concluded that in modern models there is poor representa-
tion of the principal physical processes. Therefore. such models cannot be used

in LRHF.

In discussing the problems relating to preparation of the HMO TECHNICAL NOTES on
LR"? it was decided that the section entitled ”Empirical and Statistical L3H?
Methods" would be written by Soviet specialists.

The work of this conference revealed that although with respect to some problems
the opinions of the experts somewhat diverged (which is inevitable in discussing
such problems as LRHF), with respect to the main problem of international cooper-
ation in solution of the considered problem the opinion of all the conferees was
unanimous. It is felt that for success in carrying out investigations in this
field, directed to the development of new LR“? methods which are better, more per-
fect than those in existence, there is need for a good businesslike and mutually
advantageous international cooperation among all the interested countries.

39

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR¢DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

SIXTIETH BIRTHDAY 0F GIVI GEDRDHOVICH SVANIDZE
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 119-120

[Article by board members of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and En-
vironmental Monitoring and personnel of the Transcaucasian Regional Scientific Re-
search Institute]

[Abstract] Professor Givi Cedeonovich Svsnidze, doctor of technical sciences, cor-
responding member of the Georgian Academy of Sciences, marked his 60th birthday
on 20 September. G. G. Svanidze, director of the Transcaucasian Regional Sci-
entific Research Institute, is an outstanding scientist in the field of hydrology
of the land, hydroelectric power and multisided use of water resources. Beginning
in 1950 he worked at the Power Institute, where during 1958-1970 he headed the
Division of Multisided Use of Hater Resources, which he organized. Since 1971

he has headed the Hydrology Department at Tbilisi State University. In 1976 he
was designated director of the Transcaucasian Scientific Research Hydrometeorolog-
ical Institute (now the Tranacaucasian Scientific Research Institute). He was
elected a corresponding member of the Georgian Academy of Sciences in 1979. G. G.
Svanidze is the author of 150 scientific studies, including seven monographs. In
his monographs OSNOVY RASCHETA RRGULIROVANIYA RECRHOGO STORA METODOM MONTE-RARLO
(Principles for Computing Regulation of River Runoff by the Monte Carlo Method)
and MATEMATICHBSKOYE MODELIROVANIYE GIDROLOGICHBSKIKH RYADOV (Mathematical Model-
ing of Hydrological Series) he thoroughly investigated the possibilities of using
statistical tests in the field of water management computations and theories of
regulation of river runoff and developed new methods for computing reservoirs. For
the first time he generalized stochastic computation methods for the case of a
system of reservoirs. The methods which he proposed have been adopted into the
practice of planning of a number of hydroelectric power stations in the USSR. G. G.
Svanidze is one of the authors of the monographs VDDOKBOZYAYSTVBHHYY RADASTR SSSR.
METODIKA SOSTAVLEHIYA (Water Management Inventory of the USSR. Compilation Method),
GIDROEHERGETICHESKIYB RESURSY GRUZIHSKOY SSR (Hydroelectric Power Resources of the
Georgian SSR), OPASNYYB GIDROMETEOROLOGICHESKIYE YAVLBNIYA NA KAVKAZB (Dangerous
Hydrometeorological Phenomena in the Caucasus) and others. He directed prepara-
tion of the fundamental 10-volume work ROMPLEKSNOYE ISPOL'ZOVANIYB VODHYKH RESUR-
SOV GRUZINSKOY SSR (Multisided Use of Hater Resources in the Georgian SSR). The
studies of Svanidze in the field of modeling of hydrological processes have laid
the basis for a new scientific direction in the theory of regulation of river run-
off which is successfully being developed st the scientific and planning insti-
tutes of the USSR and also abroad. 6. G. Svanidze is one of the founders of modern
stochastic hydrology. His reports have been presented at 30 international symposis
and his works have been published in many languages.

40

FORiMHﬂCIAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIXTIBTH BIRTHDAY 0F ARKADIY YMMV!!!“ CWKOV

Moscow HHEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 120-121

[Article by board members of the USSR State Committee on Nydrometeorology and En—
vironmental Monitoring and personnel of the Northern Caucasus Territorial Admin—
istration of Nydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring)

[Abstract] Arkadiy Yefremovich Cherenkov, head of the Northern Caucasus Territor—
ial Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring, marked his
60th birthday on 30 September 1981. Since his graduation from the Rostov Hydro-
meteorological Technical School in 1940 he has been constantly affiliated with

the Northern Caucasus Administration. Under his direction and with his direct par-
ticipation there was restoration of the hydrological netuork of the Lower Don.
Later. in the 1950's. he carried out a hydrograpbic investigation of the Don River
and the rivers of the Sea of Azov area. In 1956 he was designated deputy head and
in 1965 head of the Northern Caucasus Administration of the Nydrometeorological
Service. Under his direction the administration is solving major problems in the
hydrometeorological support of the developing national economy of important re-
gions: Don, Kuban. Lover Volga and Northern Caucasus regions. He has always denot-
ed special attention to agricultural production. Arkadiy Yefremovich has done much
in supplying the required information to major construction projects: the Great
Stavropol' Canal, Krasnodarsk Reservoir and rice systems, Atommash, and others. He
has produced a number of important reference aids based on the results of study'of
the hydrometeorological regime. Major studies are being carried out for investiga-
tion of dangerous and especially dangerous hydroeeteorological phenomena, especial-
ly in the mountains of the Northern Caucasus. Recently the administration has solv-
ed a number of complex problems related to the technical reconstruction of the ser-
vice. automation of the collection, processing and dissemination of hydrometeorol-
ogical information and organizing observations and monitoring of environmental con-
tamination. Such successes of the administration are largely attributable to the

outstanding leadership of A. Ye. Cherenkov.
FOI:OIIWC1A1.USIZ(HVLY

AHARDS GIVEN T0 SOVIET HETEOROLOGISTS AND OCEANOGRAPHBRS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 121-126

[Unsigned article]

[Text] For implementation of the goals of the Tenth Five-Year Plan and for the
successes attained in hydrometeorological support of the national economy. or-
ders and medals of the USSR have been awarded to the following workers of inst-
itutes and organizations of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Monitoring:

Order of Lenin

Nikolay Nikolayevich Aksarin: Head of the Uzbek Republic Administration of the ﬂy-
drometeorological Service and Director of the Central Asian Scientific Research
Institute.

Galina Alekseyevna Hiehina: engineer at the Yakutak Aviation Meteorological Cen-
ter of the Yakutsk Territorial Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Order of the October Revolution

Petr Prokof'yevich Laptiyev: former Head of the Transbaykal Territorial Adminis-
tration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Sergey Konstantinovich Chcrkavskiy: Head of Administration at the State Committee
on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Order of the Red Banner of Labor

Liya Vasil'yevna Alekseyeva: Director of the Tallin Hydrometeorological Observa-
tory of the Estonian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Shatly Babayev: Head of the Chagyl Meteorological Station of the Turkmen Republic
Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Tofa Lyutfulla Bayramova: Section Head at the Azerbaydzhan Republic Administra-
tion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Dmitriy Petrovich Bespalov: Section Head at the Main Geophysical Observatory.
42

INJI‘OFIICIAI.IEIE(IVLY
FOI‘OIIHCJAI.IIIE(HULY

Konstantin Yegorovich Vlasov: Head of the Buguruslan Aviation Meteorological Sta-
tion of the Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Anatoliy Hakarovich Grishchenko: Head of the Omolon Aviation Meteorological Ste-
tion of the Kolyms Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorologicsl Service.

Tamara Fedorovna Zhevnyak: Head of the Aviation Meteorological Station of Kustan-
ayskaya Hydrometeorological Observatory of the Kazakh Republic Administration of
the Hydrometeorological Service.

Semen Pavlovich Koznov: Head of the Northwestern Territorial Administration of the
Bydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Nikolayevich Kolesnichenko: Head of the Northern Territorial Administra-
tion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Valentina Petrovna Krasnysnskaya: Senior Scientific Specialist of the Far Eastern
Scientific Research Institute.

Galina Petrovna Kupchinskaya: Section Head, Heather Bureau of the Black Sea and
Sea of Azov of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Zinanda Georgiyevna Kurakova: Head of the Yelizovo Aviation Meteorological Station
of the Kamchatkan Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vadim Viktorovich Larin: Deputy Head of Administration of the State Committee on
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Honitoring.

Trofim Vasil'yevich Li: Head of the Novosibirsk Aviation Meteorological Center of
the Heat Siberian Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Mikhail Hikhaylovich Hasalev: Head of the Kostroma Hydrometeorological Bureau of
the Upper Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yegor Vasil'yevich Hesyats: Head of the Service of the Automated System for Data
Transmission for the Far Eastern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorol-
ogical Service.

Vasiliy Grigor'yevich Pavlenko: Head of the Sakhalin Territorial Administration of
the Nydrometeorological Service.

Arvid Antonovich Pastors: Section Head in the Rise Heather Bureau of the Latvian
Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yakov Pavlovich Popov: Head of the Murmansk Territorial Administration of the ﬂy-
drometeorological Service.

Vennnmin Aleksandrovich Semenov: Head of the Data Center at the All-Union Scientif-
ic Research Institute of Hydrometeorologicsl Information.

63

FOI‘OPFEJAI.USIIMVLY
FOIMOF11C1A|.US£IJNLY

Viktor Petrovich Teslenko: Director of the Institute of Experimental Meteorology.

Grigoriy Petrovich Tsyganov: Head of the Rostov Aviation Meteorological Center
of the Northern Caucasus Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Lidiya Prokof’yevna Shevchik: senior engineer at the Bratsk Aviation Meteorolog-
ical Station of the Irkutsk Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Pavel Yakovlevich Yukhta: senior engineer at the Hydrometeorological Observatory
of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Order of Friendship of Peoples

Dmitriy Ivanovich Berezkin: Deputy Head of the Belorussian Republic Administra-
tion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Mikhail Mikaylovich Danilyuk: Head of the Transcarpathian Bydroneteorological Bur-
eau of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Mikhail Chokkayavich Zalikhanov: Director of the High-Mountain Geophysical Insti-
.tute.

Nikolay Yefimovich Zakharchenko: Head of the Latvian Republic Administration of
the Hydrometeorological Service.

Stanislav Iosifovich Zachek: laboratory head at the Main Geophysical Observatory.

Yevgeniy Mikhaylovich Ivsnov: captain of the scientific research ship "Akadenik
Shirshov" of the Far Eastern Scientific Research Institute.

Nikolay Petrovich Ivanov: senior electromechanic of the scientific research
weather ship "Ernst Krenkel'" of the Odessa Division. State Oceanographic Inst-
itute.

Mikhail Petrovich Koretskiy: Deputy Head of the Transbaykal Territorial Admin-
istration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yevgeniy Georgiyevich Lomonosov: Deputy Director of the USSR Hydrometeorological
Center.

Galina Mikhaylovna Petrova: laboratory head at the Institute of Applied Geophys-
ics.

Yevgeniya Abranovna Red'ko: Head of the Service of the Automated System for Data
Transmission of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Feliks Yakovlevich Rovinskiy: Section Head in the Laboratory for Monitoring the
Environment and Climate.

4d

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOI‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY

Civi Cedeonovich Svanidze: Director of the Tranacaucasian Regional Scientific
Research Institute.

Vladimir Pedorovich Suslov: Section Read at the Central Asian Scientific Research
Institute.

Boris Sergeyevich Tatarinov: Section Read at the Georgian Republic Administration
of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Ivanovich Teterin: Section Head at the Computation Complex of the State
Scientific Research Center for the Study of Natural Resources.

Tamar Ivanovich Turmanidze: Head of the Georgian Republic Administration of the
Hydrometeorological Service.

Aleksandr Petrovich Fedoseyev: Section Read at the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Agricultural Meteorology.

Sergey Stepanovich Khodkin: Head of Administration at the State Committee on By-
drometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Sof'ya Vaginakovna Shaginyan: Head of the Armenian Republic Administration of the
Hydrometeorological Service.

Grigoriy Innokent'yevich Shcherbakov: Head of the Khomutovo Agrooeteorological Sta-
tion of the Irkutsk Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Order "Emblem of Honor"

Agabek Sogomonovich Avetisyan: senior technician of the Hartuni Meteorological Sta-
tion of the Armenian Republic Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Anna Nikitichna Akop'yants: technician at the Sevastopol' Rydrometeorological 0b-
servatory of the Northern Caucasus Territorial Administration of the Bydromsteor-
ological Service.

Leonid Petrovich Anan'yev: Head of the Tiksi Territorial Administration of the
Hydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Hikheyevich Artyukhov: senior engineer of the Novokuznetak Aviation
Meteorological Station of the Nest Siberian Territorial Administration of the ﬂy-
drometeorological Service.

Petr Anatol'yevich Bibinov: Head of the Service of the Automated System for Data
Transmission of the Uzbek Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice.

Liliya Antonovna Borisova: senior engineer at the Cor'kiy Aviation Meteorological
Station of the Upper Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

45

INDI‘OIFICJAI.IEI§(H‘LY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY

Mariya Matveyevna Bondar': Head of the "Sovkhoz Kara-Sn" Hydrometeorological
Station of the Kirgiz Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Alekseyevich Bochin: Section Read at the State Committee on Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring.

Mikhayl Vssil'yevich Buykov: laboratory head at the Ukrainian Scientific Research
Institute.

Mariya Alekseyevna Verevkina: laboratory head at the Northern Caucasus Territor-
ial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Roman Solomonovich Golubov: laboratory head at the Kazakh Scientific Research
Institute.

Vladimir Dmitriyevich Grishchenko: junior scientific specialist at the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute.

Leonid Abramovich Dinevich: Head of the Antihail Service in the Moldavian Repub-
lic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Fishel' L'vovich Dlikman: laboratory head at the Institute of Applied Geophysics.

Ivan Sergeyevich Yeremin: Head of the Irkutsk Territorial Administration of the
Hydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Timofeyevich Zheltikov: head of the Volga Territorial Administration of the
Hydrometeorologicsl Service.

Oleg Georgiyevich Zhernovoy: senior engineer of the engineering team at the Kam-
chatka Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Saveliy Ivanovich Zhidkov: Head of the Leninabad Hydrometeorological Bureau of
the Tadzhik Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Amirgali Zhusupkaliyev: Head of the Opornaya Meteorological Station of the Kazakh
Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Aron L'vovich Zlatin: Section Head at the Scientific Research Institute of Instru-
ment Making.

Irina Konstantinovna Ivanova: senior engineer at the Saratov Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Volga Territorial Administration of the Mydrometeorological
Service.

Zoya Mikhaylovna Izmaylovn: Chairman of the Joint Trade Union Committee of the
Kirgiz Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vladimir Ivanovich Il'ysshenko: engineer at the Omsk Hydrometeorological Observa-
tory of the Omsk Territorial Administration of the Mydrometeorological Service.

46

FOI!0FFKJA1.USE(IVLY
F0!‘0FFHJA1.USE(HVLY

Agrippina Grigor'yevna Ribereva: technician at the Ul'zutuyevskaya Meteorolog-
ical Station of the Transbaykal Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorol-
ogical Service.

Vladimir Hikhaylovich Klimovich: Head of the Calculations and Reports Bureau of
the Amderna Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Leonid Dmitriyevich Kolesnikov: Section Head at the Arkhangel'sk Weather Bureau
of the Northern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Ivan Fomich Konoplin: Head of the Verkhne-Dubrovo Aerological Station of the Ural
Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vladimir Aleksandrovich Krupennikov: senior engineer at the Svcrdlovsk Heather
Bureau of the Ural Territorial Administration of the Rydrometeorological Service.

Yekaterina Grigor'yevna Kulik: engineer at the Cherkessk Hydrometeorological Bur-

eau of the Northern Caucasus Territorial Administration of the Rydrometeorolog-
icsl Service.

Petr Hikhaylovich Lur'ye: Head of the Turkmen Republic Administration of the ﬂy-
drometeorological Service.

Lyudmila Alekseyevna Hatveyeva: Section Head at the Khabarovsk Hydrometeorolog-
ical Observatory of the Far Eastern Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Bakitzhan Kudaybergenovich Haubaeov: Head of the Ayah-Run Meteorological Station
of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Vasil'yevich Hel'nichuk: Section Head at the Central Aerological Observa-
tory.

Nikolas Hikolovich Hikalayunas: Head of the Lithuanian Republic Administration of
the Hydrometeorological Service.

Tamara Ivanovna Hikhaylova: Head of the Leningrad Aviation Meteorological Station
of the Northwestern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Nikiforovich Holohoyedov: senior engineer of the communications center at
the Upper Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Romanovich Hyarikyanov: Section Head at the Yakutsk Territorial Adminis-
tration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Adella Andreyevna Nazarova: senior scientific specialist at the Hydrochemical In-
stitute.

Boris Aleksandrovich Nebogatikov: senior engineer at Sadgorod Aerological Station
of the Primor'ye Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

47

FOI10IFKJA1.USE(NVLY
INDR‘OFIUCJAI.LEIE(HUIJV

Tamilla Gasanovna Nedoshivina: Chief Editor of the State Scientific-Technical By-
drometeorological Publishing House. -

Nonna Alekseyevna Hikiforova: engineer at the Zhdanov Hydrometeorological Bureau
of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Aleksandra Vasil'yevna Nikolayeva: printer at the printing house of the State Com-
mittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. -

Fedor Vasil'yevich Oblakov: Director of the Tuapse Hydrometeorological Technical
School.

Robert Surenovich Ovsepyan: Head of the Antihail Service of the Armenian Republic
Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Cavrilovich Potulov: Head of the Aerological Station of the Ural Hydro-
meteorological Observatory of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydro-
meteorological Service.

Petr Yurevich Pushistov: Director of the Heat Siberian Regional Scientific Re-
search Institute.

Gennadiy Vital‘yevich Rumyantsev: Head of the Kolyma Territorial Administration
of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Aleksey Alekseyevich Rybnikov: Section Head at the State Oceanographic Institute.

Viktor Sergeyevich Ryazsnov: Head of the Upper Volga Territorial Administration of
the Hydrometeorological Service.

Valentina Aleksandrovna Safonova: technician at the Baku Heather Bureau of the
Azerbaydzhan Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vera Afanas'yevna Semenova: senior engineer of the Domodedovo Affiliate of the
Main Aviation Meteorological Center.

Anna Fedorovna Skokova: aenior engineer of the Yuzhno-Sskhalinsk Weather Bureau of
the Sakhalin Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Hikhaylovich Skurikhin: Section Chief Designer of the Central Design Bur-
eau of Hydrometeorological Instrument Making.

Raisa Prokof'yevna Sosnovskays: Section Head at the Ukrainian Heather Bureau of
the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Liya Ivanovna Stasevich: Head of the Pruzhany Meteorological Station of the Belo-
russian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Hinel' Aiekaandrovna Sumina: senior engineer at the Donetsk Aviation Meteorolog-
ical Station of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

#8

FINICHNNCJAI.USI2CMULY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.URE(NNLY

Rinmn Semenovna Sukhachcva: Section Read at the State Committee on Hydrometeorol-
ogy and Environmental Monitoring.

Margarita Il'inchinichna Sukhova: senior engineer of the Igarka Aviation Meteorol-
ogical Station of the Krasnoyarsk Territorial Administration of the Bydrometeor—
ological Service.

Nina Ivanovna Tayurskaya: head of the Leningrad Heather Bureau of the Northwest-
ern Territorial Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Petrovich Teplov: Director of the Pavlodar Bydrometeorological Observatory
of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Aleksandra Ivanovna Ushakova: senior engineer at the Crimean Bydrometeorological
Observatory of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Vladimir Yakovlevich Pedorov: Director of the Tyumen Hydrometeorological Observa-
tory of the Omsk Territorial Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Sarkisovich Tsaturov: Head of Administration at the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Ivan Vasil'yevich Tsvetkov: Deputy head of Administration at the State Committee on
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. .

Vladimir Afanas'yevich Cheban: head of the Communications Center at the Moldavian
Republic Administration of the Rydrometeorological Service.

Marina Aleksandrovna Cherkesova: Section Head of the Heather Bureau at the West
Siberian Territorial Administration of the Mydrometeorological Service.

Adam Valeriyevich Sheynov: Head of the Bakhta Radiometeorological Station at the
Krasnoyarak Territorial Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Ninel' Nikitichna Shekhanina: Head of the Delgograd Mydrometeorologicel Bureau of
the Territorial Administration of the Mydrometeorological Service of the Central
Chernozem Oblaats.

Igor' Alekaeyevich Shiklomanov: Deputy Director of the State Hydrological Insti-
tute.

Nntnl'ya Ivanovna shuleykin: Chief Engineer of the State Committee on ﬁydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring.

Tnt'yana Aiekaandrovna Brshtadt: engineer at the Murmansk Territorial Administra-
tion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Medal "For Illustrious Bork"

Khacik Vardsnovich Abramyan: technician at the Aparan Meteorological Station of
the Armenian Republic Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.‘

49

F0810FFKJAI.USB(NNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE<DNLY

Raise Aleksandrovna Antokhina: Section Read at the Krasnoyarsk Territorial Admin-
istration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Viola Isaakovna Aunin': senior engineer at the Riga Weather Bureau of the Latvian
Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Cenriyetta Vol'demarovna Balyakina: Division Read at the Moscow Hydrometeorological
Technical School.

Nadezhda Falaleyevna Boyeva: Chief Bookkeeper at the State Committee on Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Honitoring.

Nina Ivanovna Budnik: Deputy Section Read at the Kazakh Republic Administration
-of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Lyudmila Vladimirovna Butalova: senior engineer at the Computation Center of the
Main Geophysical Observatory.

Anatoliy Tarasovich Buyalo: mechanic on the steamer at the Kiev Lake Station of
the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Svetlana Aleksandrovna Vasil'yeva: Head of the Ishim Aviation Meteorological Sta-
tion at the Omsk Territorial Administration of Hydrometeorology.

Anatoliy Alekseyevich Velikodnyy: senior engineer at the Dikson Territorial Admin-
istration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nazim Gayazov: driver at the Western Kazakhstan Hydrometeorological observatory
of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Ismet Khemdiyevich Diasamidze: Director of the Batumi Hydrometeorological Observ-
atory of the Georgian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Valentina Vasil'yevna Dolgopolova: technician at the Kuban Mouth Station of the
Northern Caucasus Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vera Aleksandrovna Yelizarova: senior engineer at the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Lidiya Ivanovna Yemchenko: senior engineer of the Gor'kiy Weather Bureau of the
Upper Volga Territorial Administration of the Bydrometeorological Service.

Kuz'ma Petrovich Yermak: Head of the Onor Meteorological Station of the Sakhalin
Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Alla Nikolayevna Zavodtsova: senior engineer at the Svetlovodsk Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Gertrude Borisovna Zakharova: senior engineer of the Krasnoyarsk Hydrometeorolog-

ical Observatory of the Krasnoyarsk Territorial Administration of the Hydro-steer-
ological Service.

50

FIIICNWNCIAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lidiya Stepanovna Zvyagintseva: senior technician of the Bins Aviation Meteoro-
logical Station of the Azerbaydzhan Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorol-
ogical Service.

Zoya Hikhsylovna Ivanova: senior engineer at the Leningrad Hydrometeorological 0b-
servatory of the Northwestern Territorial Administration of the ilydroneteorolog-
icol Service.

‘rat'yana Prokof'yevna Ivanova: senior engineer of the Kuybyshev Weather Bureau of
the Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Valentina Ivanovna Ignat'yeva: senior engineer of the liary Aviation Meteorolog-
ical Station of the Turkmen Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological

Serv ice .

Ninel' Sergeyevna Kazantseva: Section Read at the Ukrainian Republic Administra-
tion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Galina Nikolsyevna Klyukvina: senior econolist of the State Couittee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Taisiys Yermolayevna Kovaleva: laboratory head at the Heat Siberian Scientific
Research Institute.

Galina Stepanovna Kopytova: senior technician of the Rybinsk Hydrometeorological

Observatory of the Upper Volga Territorial Adninistration of the Bydrometeorolog-
ical Service.

Lyudmila Ivanovna Krasnovskaya: laboratory head at the Central Aerological Observ-
story.

Khabil Tushevich Kudayev: specialist at the Northern Caucasus Antihail Service.

Lyudmila Pavlovna Kus'mina: Head of the authors Aviation Meteorological Station
of the Uzbek Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vsleriy Vladimirovich Lukin: senior engineer at the Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute. '

Aleksandr Nikolayevich Hartynov: radio station head at the Gur'yev Hydrometeoro-
logical Observatory of the Kazakh Republic Adsinistration of the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Service.

Valeriya Nikolayevna Hichurina: senior engineer in the Bureau of Calculations and
Reports at the Ural Territorial Administration of the Bydroneteorological Ser-
vice.

Anna Kikhaylovna Nozhenko: Section Head at the Kirgiz Republic Administration of
the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nina Ivanovna Nosacheva: Head of the Pyandzh Aviation Meteorological Station of the
Tadzhik Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIIICﬂNHCJAI.USE(NVLY

Irina Georgiyevna Orlova: senior scientific specialist at the Odessa Division of
the State Oceanographic Institute.

Natsl'ya Dmitriyevna Pal'tseva: technician at the Pervomayskoye Hydrometeorolog-
Vical Station of the West Siberian Territorial Administration of the hydrometeor-
ological Service.

Tamara Aleksandrovna Perlova: Chairman of the Joint Committee of Moscow Trade
Unions of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Galina Stepanovna Podshivalova: senior engineer of the Birobidzhan Hydrometeorolog-
icsl Bureau of the Far Eastern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Service.

Klavdiys Nikolayevna Polyakova: senior scientific specialist at the USSR Hydro-
meteorological Center.

Yuriy Ivanovich Portnyagin: laboratory head at the Institute of Experimental
Meteorology.

Yekaterins Dmitriyevna Redikortseva: senior engineer of the communications center
at the Ural Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vsrvara Alekseyevna Samokhvalova: Section Head at the Kura Weather Bureau of the
Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service of the Central
Chernozem Oblasts.

Aleksandra Lazarevna Sedinina: Head of the Teplyy Klyuch Aviation Meteorological
Station of the Yakutsk Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice.

Tat'yana Yevgen'yevna Sizova: engineer of the Antihail Service of the Moldavian
Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Boris Vladimirovich Solodkov: Head of the Kolva Hydrometeorological Station of
the Northern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Linda Yukhanovna Tartu: technician at the Pyarnu Meteorological Station of the
Estonian Republic Administration of the Hydro-eteorological Service.

Nikolay Ignat'yevich Tutubalin: senior engineer at the Pevek Mydrometeorological
observatory of the Pevek Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Lyudmila Ivanovna Usova: junior scientific specialist of the State Hydrological
Institute.

Zinands Ivanovna Khazova: senior technician of the Karelian Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Northwestern Territorial Administration of the Hydroseteorolog—
ical Service.

Tat'yana Petrovna Khozyaykina: shop foreman at the Novosibirsk Computer Station.

52

FENR(HﬂﬂC1Al.USE{MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mikhail Ivanovich Tsukanov: senior technician at the Camel Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Belorussian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorolog-
icnl Service.

Yelena Hikhaylovna Chesnokova: senior synoptic engineer at the Ulan-Ude Aviation
Heteorological Station of the Tranabaykal Territorial Administration of the ﬂy-
drometeorological Service.

Lyudmila Grigor'yevna Shinegina: senior technician at the Anadyr' Bydrometeorolog-
ical Observatory of the Kolyma Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Service.

Galina Ivanovna Shmotova: senior engineer at the Irkutsk Hydrometeorological Ob-

servatory of the Irkutsk Territorial Administration of the Rydrometeorological
Service.

Larisa Grigor'yevnn Shtan'ko: senior engineer of the Astrakhan Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Northern Caucasus Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeor-
ological Service.

Medal "For Distinction in Work"

Galina Sergeyevna Ahakumova: senior technician at the Voroahilovgrad Hydrometeoro-

logical Bureau of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Raisa Ivanovna Aksenova: senior technician at the Yemetak hydrometcorological sta-
tion of the Northern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice.

Valentina Petrovna Alekseyeva: photooperator at the Conunications Center of the
Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yelizaveta ll'inichna Anitskaya: Section Head at the Kuybyshev Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Amalya Zavcnovna Asatryan: senior technician at the Yerevan "Yuzhnaya" Aviation
Meteorological Stat ion of the Arnenian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeor-
ologicai Service.

Tamara Basagadayevn: junior technician at the Burgen' Meteorological Station of
the Transbaykal Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Tat'yann Ivanovna Bczrukova: junior technician at the Uch-Akty Meteorological Sta-
tion of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vladimir Leonidovich Belov: senior technician at the Vyborg Hydrological Station
of the Northwestern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vladislnv Ramazanovich Bolov: laboratory head at the High-hauntain Geophysical In-
stitute.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Lidiya Andreyevna Bulavinova: senior laboratory technician of the Kazakh Repub-
lic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Abram isayevich Buz: Section Head of the Vil'nyus Weather Bureau of the Lithuan-
ian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Lidiya Innokent'ycvna Vanteyeva: observer at the Shankhar Gaging Station of the Ir-
kutsk Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nikolay Alekseyevich Voyt: Head of the L'gov Meteorological Station of the Territor-
ial Administration of the Central Chernozem Oblasts.

Nadezhda Petrnvna Vorob'yeva: senior laboratory technician of the Krasnoyarsk Terri-
torial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Valentina Fedorovna Glinskaya: Section Head at the Vladivostok Hydrometeorological
Observatory of the Primor'ye Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Mariya Kuz'minichnn Gordeyeva: senior scientific specialist of the Far Eastern Sci-
entific Research Institute.

Nina Fedorovna Gorchak: senior engineer of the All-Union Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Hydrometeorological Information.

Murodmamad Davlyatmamadov: observer at the Khorogskoy Hydrological Post of the Hy-
drometeorological Observatory of the Tadzhik Republic Administration of the Hydro-
meteorological Service.

Vasiliy Semenovich Dmitriyev: metal worker at the Central Design Bureau of Hydro-
meteorological Instrument Making.

Lyudmila Ivanovna Dotsenko: technician at the Nikopol'skaya Meteorological Station
of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Kim Ivanovich Yepishin: Head of the Sverdlovsk—Uktus Aviation Meteorological Sta-
tion of the Ural Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Lidiya Fedorovna Yermakova: senior scientific specialist at the Sevastopol' Div-
ision of the State Oceanographic Institute.

Zinanda Hikhayiovna Zahara: senior technician at the Klepinino Agrometeorological
Station of the Ukrainian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice.

Nasihu Usmanovna Iskhakova: engineer at the Tashkent-Observatoriya Hydrometeoro-

logical Station of the Uzbek Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Amaliya Vaganovna Karmir-Harukyan: senior technician at the Georgian Republic
Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

54

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOIIOFIICJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY

Nikolay Sergeyevich Kim: senior scientific specialist of the Institute of Ex-
perimental Meteorology.

Vera Vasil'yevna Klabukova: senior laboratory engineer at the Northwestern Terri-
torial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Boris Kuz'mich Korolev: metalsmith-mechanic in the Experimental-Production workshop
of the Central Aerological Observatory.

Valentina Vasil'yevna Leshkova: senior engineer at the Weather Bureau of the Belo-
russian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Yuriy Konstantinovich Martynyuk: head of the Hydrometeorological Training Station
of the Vladivostok Hydrometeorological Technical School.

Inna Linovna Medvedeva: laboratory head at the Ural Territorial Administration of
the Hydrometeorological Service.

Nina Petrovna Mezentseva: Head of the Dvinakoy Bereznik Aviation Meteorological
Station of the Northern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice.

Muzaf far Mamed ugly Mirzoyev: junior technician of the Yardymly Bydroneteorolog—
ical Station of the Azerbaydzhan Republic Administration of the Bydrometeorolog-

ical Service.

Zhaniya Ivanovna Miroshnikova: senior engineer at the Ukrainian Scientific Re-
search Institute.

Galina Alekaandrovna Mishina: senior engineer at the Khabarovsk Heather Bureau of
the Far Eastern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Inna Alekscyevna Moiseyenko-Ivanova: senior section engineer at the Heat Siberian
Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.,

Nadezhda Borisovnn Moskalevn: engineer at the State Committee on Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring.

Nadezhda Borisovna Moskaleva: engineer of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring.

Vol'f Yeselevich Osherov: Chief Inspector of the Gor'kiy Regional Meteorological
Center.

Nikolny Makarovich Petrov: observer at the Yatyrakha Post of Yakutsk Hydrological
Station of the Yakutsk Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice.

Zinnnda Vasil'yevnn Podol'skaya: Secretary to the Deputy Chairman of the State Com-
mittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

SS

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(IVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Margarita Vasil'yevna Pozdeyeva: Deputy Chief Bookkeeper of the State Scientific
Research Center for Study of Natural Resources.

Nonia lvanovna Polkanova: senior technician at the Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy By-
drometeorological Station of the Kamchatka Territorial Administration of the ﬂy-
drometcorological Service.

Margarita Yegorovna Popova: radio operator at the szl-Orda Hydrometeorological
Bureau of the Kazakh Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Tat'yana Ivanovna Popova: photooperator at the Gor'kiy Regional Meteorological
Center.

Anna Petrovna Rozova: Section Head at the Central Volga Hydrometeorological'Ob-
servatory.

Nikolay Ivanovich Rumyantsev: Section Head at the Computation Center USSR Hydro-
meteorological Center.

Ella Mikhaylovna Sapozhnikova: senior engineer at the Weather Bureau of the Omsk
Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorologicai Service.

Lyudmila Iosifovna Selezneva: engineer at the Kirov Hydrometeorological Observa-

tory of the Upper Volga Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Galina Semenovna Sidorova: Head of the Alakurtti Hydrometeorological Station of
the Murmansk Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Mariya Savel'yevna Sirosh: senior technician of the Bukhta Provideniya Hydrometeor-
ological Bureau of the Pevek Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Anna Iosifovna Skvortsova: technician at the Slavgorod Hydrometeorological Station
of the west Siberian Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Valentina Petrovna Smirnova: team leader at the State Hydrological Institute.

Boris Leonidovich Sokolov: senior scientific specialist at the State Hydrological
Institute.

Sergoy Ivanovich Soldatov: electromechanic at the Communications Center of the Pri-
mor'ye Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Alla Aleksandrovna Spiridonova: senior engineer at the Vorkuta Hydrometeorological
Station of the Northern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service.

Biruta Petrovna Suyetene: junior technician at the Lazdiyay Meteorological Station
of the Lithuanian Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Ivan Vasil'yevich Tcrekhov: filer at the Moscow Repair-Construction Sector of the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

56

FOI.OI1W(JAl.l£ﬂB(HVLY
FOB1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Kaip Toktosunov: observer at the Chalna Hydrological Post of the Kirgiz Republic
Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Kirill Grigor'yevich Khendogiy: senior technician at the Kotel'nyy Polar Station
of the Tiksi Territorial Administration of the Hydro-eteorological Service.

Irakliy Vasil'yevich Chogovadze: Section Head at the Transcaucasian Scientific Re-
search Institute. -

Kapitalina Anisimovna Shalyapina: senior uarehouseman at the Base for Material-
Technical Supply of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring.

Galina Fedorovna Shapiro: engineer at the Volgograd Aviation Meteorological Sta-
tion of the Northern Caucasus Territorial Administration of the Hydroeeteorological
Service.

Tamara Anatol'yevna Shklyar: operator at the Regional Computation Center of the
Far Eastern Territorial Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Damladzhon Yusupov: Head of the Ktylkishlak Hydrometeorological Station of the U:-
bek Republic Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

57
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(H¥LY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE|MNLY

OBITUARY 0F PETR KARPOVICH YEVSEYEV (1911-1964)

ological Service. who died in 1964, would have been age 70 on 1 September. He made

the Great Fatherland Har he did much for organizing continuous meteorological sup-

port of operations of the Red Army. During 1962-1943 he was assigned to London for
discussions of exchange of meteorological data with the British. After discharging

increasingly responsible tasks. in 1965 he was named to the post of deputy direc-
tor of the Central Institute of Forecasts. Under his direction. in 1945-1967 the

Committee on Conduct of the International Geophysical Year, as well as a member of
the WHO Commission on Climatology. In April 1961 he was designated director of the
newly created Joint Meteorological Computation Center, USSR Academy of Sciences.
and the Main Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service, transformed in
early 1964 into the Horld Meteorological Center. Transforming the center into an
exceedingly well-regarded institute, he died on 20 June 1966 with brilliant plans
still unfulfilled but with an outstanding legacy.

COPYRIGHT: "Meteorologiya i gidrologiya". 1981

5303 - END ~
C80: 1866/3

58

FOR4OFFRIAI.USE(NVLY