FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10211
23 December 1981

Translation
ARTIFICIAL SENSE ORGANS
PROBLEMS OF MODELING SENSORY SYSTEMS

By

S.V. Fomin. Y'e. N. Spkolov and (3.6. Vaytkyavlchyus

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the.
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itals are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0F
HATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL JSB ONLY

JPRS L/10211
23 December 1981

ARTIFICIAL SENSE ORGANS
PROBLEMS OF MODELING SENSORY SYSTEMS

Moscow ISKUSSTVENNYYE ORGAN? CBUVSTV. PROBLEM! HODBLIROVANIYA
SENSORNYKH SISTEM in Russian 1979 (signed to press 15 Jun 79)

[Boat by Sergey Vasil'yevich Pomin, Yevgeniy Nikolayevich Sokolov and
Genrikh Genrikhovich Vaytkyavichyus, Izdatel'atvo 'Nauka”, UDC 519.95]

. Coureuts

“notation .OOOOOOOOOIQOC'.OOOOOOGOOOOCOOCOOO0....0..IOCOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOO 1
Foreword OOOCOOOOOOOOIOOOe.0.0000COOIOOIOIO00....t0.0000000COOOOOOOOOOUOOQCC 2
Chapter 1. Construction of Artificial Sense Organs ........................ 4
chapter 2. “Mel of channel umber “ding .0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0... 10
empter 3| Intensity Analyzer .0000...0...OOOODOOOOOOODDOOOIQOO'OOOOOOOOOOC 38
chapter a. color Analyzer 000..OOOOOOOOODOODODOODOIOO0.00000000000000000000 ‘7
chapter 50 Line Slant Analyzer .000....00CCOCUOOIOOOOO0.0QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOO 59
Chapter 6. Visual Analyzer of Direction and Speed of ﬁction ............... 75
chapter 7. stereo Analyzer OOOIOOOOOOOOOOO0.000000000000‘OOOOQOOO0.0.000... 85
chapter 8. Gravity Analyzer 000.00.00.00.0000.......OOODOIOOOOOOOOODOOOOO'O 99
Chapter 9. Construction of Analyzer. to Order 30.00.000.000...toe-00000tee. 102

Appendices:
1. General Theory oooooeoaooooean-oeooooeoooeo.ee-eoeeoooooeeeoeeuqoooooo 109
2. Intensity Analyzer cocoooootooeoeeocoooooooooaoooeoaoooeoeoeaooooooeco 123
30 Color Analyzer ooooooeoaoooooooooooono.oooeooeooounto-oe-eoo-oooooooo. 127
6. Line Slant Annlyzer soc-ooa~oooooeoocooeooooaooooeooyoooooaaoaeap-oooe 131
5. Analyzer of ”traction and Speed of_“°t1°n coo.oeaeaeeeooe'eeooaoeooeuo 141
6. Stereo Analyzer coe'eooeoo00.0.00...eeeec-anon-00.000.000.000.0.1.000. 143
7. Polarized Light Analyzer It...eoaeeoeooeeoeoooeeoooeoeo'ooooooooono... 1‘8

51b1108r0phy 0-500one.coco-ea...on.acetate00000000000000.0000.eoooeeooaeooeo 150

- a - [I - USSR - C P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010009-6

MWWONLY

PUBLICATION DATA

English title : Artificial Season
‘ of nodding Sens:

Russian title lskmstvennyye o‘

uodelirovsniys s

Authors : S. V. Fonin, Ye.
G. G. Vsytkysvic
Editor : Yu. P. monov, c

engineering scie

Publishing house : "hanks"
. Place of publication : Hoscou
Signed to ptess : 15 June 19'};
Copies : 1200
: Izdstel'stvo "N

OOPYRIGRT

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010009-6
FINI!)FFICIAI.lEﬂE(HULY

UDC' 519.95

ANNOTATION

This book deals with construction of artificial hulan and animal sense organs. The
analyzer systens, in which there is a nechanisn for enhsncins differential sensi-
tivity, codes the stinulus.uith the nulber of the nest stimulated channel. Ana-
lyzers of intensity. color, orientation. line of direction and speed of love-int
of an object, its position in space are described.

This book is intended for neurophysiologists, biophysicists and specialists in
sensitizing robots.

There are 74 figures; bibliography lists 111 items.

FOI1OFFKJAI.UBIIM‘LY
FIHIIJFFICIAI.IIEI:CNWLY

FOREWORD

This book is the result of 15 years of work using methods of psychophysics, neuro-
physiology and cybernetics. The research was conducted in a man-neuron-model system.
Investigation of a concrete sensory function on the psychophysical level, in experi-
Ients on man, developed in the direction of demonstrating its neuronal mechanisms in
animal experiments. The final stage of the study was a model, for which rather rigid
requirements were imposed; the entire model reproduced the psychophysicsl charac-
teristics of the function under study, while each neuron-like element of the eodel
reproduced the characteristics of the corresponding real neuron.

Construction of the models was based on the neurophysiologicslly validated principle
of coding a signal by the number of the detector channel. This principle provided
for combining data transmission and processing in a large number of parallel
channels.

The study of concrete analyzers of color, intensity, motion, orientation and depth
made it possible to formulate general principles of construction of artificial sense
organs out of neuron-like el cents. Expressly these general principles of construc-
tion of artificial sense organs. with the features of natural neuronal analyzers,
constitute the main content of this book.

Adhering to the principle of coding by channel number in artificial sensory systems,
it is necessary to settle the question of using information presented in this manner
in problens of control. Electrophysiological studies of command neurons, which
generate "chords” of motions by means of their systems of omnmunication with noto-
neurons. made it possible to conclude that control problems are solved by connecting
or disconnecting detectors from command neurons. The results of this analysis were
formulated in the description of the conceptual reflex arc.

'The aggregate of receptors, primary detectors and selective secondary detectors
forms the neuronal analyzer. This analyser is an expression of the biological
analyzer discovered by I. P. Pavlov. An exogenous signal, which elicits a set of
'excitations in independent primary detectors, generates an excitation vector. The
excitation vector, which acts upon the "fan" of communication [or connection] vectors
that connect primary and secondary detectors, creates single maximum excitation on
one of the elements of the population of secondary detectors, coding the signal

with the localization site of the excitation maximum.

According to the principle of coding a signal by channel number, a set of stimuli
is reflected in an n—dimensional sphere. which is formed by the detector neurons.
with a change in signal, the excitation maximum reflecting the signal change shifts
over the quasireceptive surface represented by a set [or many] secondary detectors.

2
InltolIICIAl.lEI!(HULY
FINItHﬂﬂCJAl.USEICMULN

Reflection of the signal on the sphere leads to a new approach in human psychophysics
and metrics of robot perceptive space. The subjective difference between stimuli

in men and a robot equipped with neuronal analysers is measured by the small arc of
the large circle of the n-dimensional sphere. This arc connects points at which

are localized the secondary detectors representing the corresponding stimuli.

inhibition of honologous primary detectors referable to different local analysers.

The esphasis of differences between signals is nsnifested by successive and concur-
rent contrasts. Introduction of adaptation and lateral inhibition into artificial

sense organs providing for enhancement of dlscrininsnt sensitivity generates illu-

sions in then that are analogous to Ian's perceptive illusions.

Thus, artificial sense organs consisting of neuron-like ale-ants reproduce very
completely the structure and function of hu-an sense organs. The general principles
of construction of artificial sense organs from neuron-like elements may find prac-
tical applications in two different fields: development of sensory prostheses
directly coordinated with the neuronal structures of the human brain and design of
sense organs for robots with elements of artificial intelligence.

Regrettably, Sergey Vasil'yevich Fonda, whose ideas served as the basis of this
book, passed away at the final stage of preparing the manuscript and could not
see it published.
mommtussoutv

CHAPTER 1. CONSTRUCTIOR OP ARTIFICIAL SENSE OchﬂS

Robot's artificial sense organs. Development or' nodern technology is largely
related to advances in creating integral robots with eluenta of artificial intelli-
gence. The ability to function in a couples envith is a distinctive feature
of such robots. For this. not only nust they have a sophisticated systea of
actuating elenents, but a well-developed systea of artificial sense organs capable
of processing a large volume of sensory data for analysis of scenes and couples '
acoustical signals.

There aust be provisions for aan's cmicationxith robots for effective control
thereof. We refer not only to development of an effective language for co-mica‘
tion, but obtaining a similarity of internal conceptions of sea and robot. In
other words, it is necessary for objects distinguished in the environ-eat by robot
and gran to‘coincide as fully as possible. Only then will the interaction of sea
and robot be effective. Finally, all deviations of internal conceptions of the
robot fro- the internal conceptions of nan should have a sinple and graphic inter-
pretation in terns of hunen perception. '

All these considerations conpel us to search for the asses of creating artificial
sense organs, the operating principles of which would-be similar to the operating
principles of huaan and aninal analysers. Since huan and aninal analysers are
capable of rapidly processing large arrays of input data, we can expect to find
new effective neans of information processing on this route.

Conputer's perception organs. The area of refinement of systeas of nan'a
comnication with a cosputer is an inortant area of application of artificial
sense organs. Although all of the procedures of recognizing speech sounds and
analysing visual scenes can be iapleuented by cosputers. this would require a

large neaory and significant tile for conversion of such conlex signals. A

better way would be to develop specialised parallel-action processors that would
persit rapid processing of couples acoustical signals and visual scenes. Thus,

the problea of creating artificial sense organs for a robot ties in with the prob-
lea of creating perception organs for a coaputer. It is also desirable to have

the internal representations of acoustical and visual signals in the conputer agree
with the internal conceptions of nan, so that the language of conaunicetion between
nan and coaputer would be based on the similarity of conceptions.

l'rostheses of huean sesne organs. In order to perform the task of creating
acoustic and visual prosthesis directly related to neuronal nechanisae of the
brain, it is necessary for the principles of signal coding in the prosthesis
to confora with the principles of signal coding in the brain. Work on artificial

I.
”MINOR”!
han--neuron--model. Development of general theory of artificial sense organs
providing for similarity of internal conceptions of man and robot is based on psycho-
physiolosy. which emerged on the borderline of psychology, physiology of higher
nervous activity, neurophysiology and cybernetics. Psychophyaiology is the discip-
line that deals with neuronal mechanisms of psychological processes; it is based on
the man-neuron-:odel principle. As they analyze functions on the level of human
behavior and verbal reactions, psychophysiologists turn to analysis of neuronal
mechanisms implementing this function. The work ends with construction of a model
of the function under study. The model is created with neuron-like elements.

Rigid requirements are imposed on the model: the model as a whole must recreate

the function under study on the behavioral level, while its neuron-like elements
must conform in characteristics to real neurons involved in the modeled function.
From the standpoint of development of artificial sensory systems vhere internal
conceptions of man and robot would coincide, such a model of a sensory function is
also a technical solution of the problem.

A comparison of concrete models of sensory systems makes it possible to construct

a single scheme-generalized model of sensory functions. It is possible to construct
artificial sensory systems that have no direct biological prototypes on the basis

of such a generalized model. ~

Information coding in the nervous system. The nervous system performs
functions of control, transmission and processing of incoming information. Inci-
dentally. it should be borne in mind that the above separation is quite arbitrary.
since control always includes some information processes, whereas the organs

perception of visual information depends appreciably on control of eye movements).
Moreover, there are many general principles, such as multilevel organization and
learning ability, are inherent in processes of control and information processing.

The same flow of signals transmitted over a communication line can deliver differ-
ent information, depending on expressly what the corresponding receiver reacts to.
For example, when we receive a letter we are usually interested only in its text.
However, it is conceivable that two individuals who are corresponding agreed to
attribute meaning to, for example, the color of the paper or lettering, rather
than the text of the letter. One can select such "informative signs" arbitrarily;
but the receiver must have the physical properties to perceive them (the color of

Those obvious considerations are quite applicable to transmission of information
in the nervous system also. Our perception of the world around us is multi-
faceted. He perceive bright colors, diverse sounds, odors and peculiar shapes in
it. In the nervous system, all relevant information is coded by a specific dis-
tribution of excitations in numerous neurons. The question of expressly how

5
FI”!(HWICJAI.(£NE(HVLY
ENJI‘OFIICJAI.lEIi(HVLY

this coding is done is one of the basic ones in neurophysiology and biophysics of
complex systems. Let us consider two problems, nanely, coding information by a
series of impulses within a single (unbranched) nerve fiber and coding in a complex
multichannel system.

Coding in'formation in a nerve fiber. It is a known fact that the inter-
spike intervals serve as information carriers when a series of impules extends over
a nerve fiber, since spikes themselves are rather standard. But what precisely is
significant: the length of different intervals, their mean length over a certain
segment, grouping of impulses in a bundle or something else? This is far from
clear, and one could hardly offer a single answer that would be suitable for all
cases.

At first glance, it appears best to code information by the lengths of different
lnterimpulse intervals, similar to the dots and dashes of the Morse code. This
method could provide for a high throughput of the communication channel and high
speed of system operation. Coding information with the average frequency of impul-
sation or some other statistical characteristics of a series of impulses cannot
provide such rapid action. However, there are several factors that limit the
possibility of coding information by the lengths of different interspike intervals.
These factors include, among others, the following.

Mathematical nodeling of processes of dissemination of excitation in a nerve fiber
[1] and direct physiological experiments have shown that the impulse sequence, which
has a complex structure, does not retain this structure as it travels over a long
nerve fiber if the impulse frequency inatrain is high enough. This effect is
attributable to the dependence of velocity of impulse propagation over the nerve
fiber on duration of the refractory phase, i.e., time that has elapsed after the
preceding impulse. By virtue of this dependence, there is gradual equalization of
interspike intervals in a train of spikes, and only information about the mean
impulse frequency is retained at the output. of course, this does not happen when
impulses follow one another at long enough intervals, since none falls into the
phase of relative refractoriness of the fiber. But then the information is trans-
mitted slowly, and the main advantage of coding by individual intervals, high
throughput, is lost.

These considerations apply aainly to long fibers. Similarly to exponential extinc-
tion of potential in a cable, there is exponential leveling down of information
about the duration of individual interspika intervals in a long fiber. In short
fibers, the shape of the inpulse train does not have time to level down, even

when frequency is high.

It should be borne in mind that dissemination of impulses over a fiber in a
relatively refractory state cannot be construed as a purely laboratory phenomenon
observed with unnaturally high stimulation frequencies. The phase of relative
refractorineas lasts about 100 ms and the interpulse interval constitutes only
6-10 as in the motor axons of the locust. In the internuncial neurons of the
spinal cord of mammals, in the neurons of certain ascending tracts and acoustic
nerve fibers frequencies of up to 100 imp s", and in fibers innervating the
electrical organs of fish the frequencies are even higher, up to 1500 imp s“.
Thus, the propagation of impulses over a fiber in a relatively refractory state
is certainly encountered under natural conditions.

F0l10FFKJAl.UBE(MYLY
FOI‘OIFICIAL.USEINULY

Smoothing of interpulae intervals is one of the reasons that limit coding by the
lengths of different intervals. Another reason is referable to the distinctions

of the decoding system. Secretion of mediator in synapses in response to an impulse
is stochastic in a number of instances. There is a probability of only 1/2 that

an impulse going to motoneurons over group I fibers will elicit secretion of mediator.
It is obvious that in such a case it becomes unrealistic to consider the possibility
of coding information by individual interimpulse intervals.

These circumstances limit the possibilities of coding information in a nerve fiber
with individual impulses. However, such coding is by no means ruled out. particu-
larly in short fibers. Thus, as far back as the early 1960's, in several well~
known studies conducted with neurons of the Aplysia mollusk, it was demonstrated
that one can obtain different responses from artificial stimulation of these neurons
with pulse trains of the same average frequency but different configuration. For
example, the neuronal reaction may change if this pulse train is delivered in re-
verse order. Evidently. in this and other similar cases, the neuron reacts to the
temporal pattern of the pulse train as a certain whole [2, 3].

Coding information by channel number. Recent experimental and theoretical
studies indicate that there is widespread so-celled coding of information by the
channel number. or locus [site] coding in a living organism, particularly its
sensory systems. According to this conception, the sensory system has a set of
detector neurons. one of which is stimulated more than its neighbors by a specific
stimulus. The number of the detector neuron that is maximally excited determines
the sensation that is elicited by the coded signal parameter (brightness, color,
direction of movement). If two stimuli elicit maximal excitation of the same
detector, they are not distinguished according to a given parameter.

It was demonstrated experimentally that the reaction of individual sensory neurons
presents distinct specificity for the value of.the parameter of the stimulus deli-
vered [6-6]. In particular. some of the neurons of the visual analyser do not
react at all to diffuse illumination of the retina [7]. One must deliver an appro-
priately organized image to a specific part of the retina to elicit a reaction in
such a neuron. The mechanism of lateral inhibition [8] provides for the high
sensitivity of detector systems. However, in the opinion of the critics of the
detector conception, detectors are temporary combinations of neurons that reflect
only the process of "running" a certain program for pattern recognition through
the neuronal network. After running this program, the "detector functions" of the
cell may disappear and it could take on other functions.

Current experiments on stability of detector properties of neurons revealed that in
individual neurons these properties are either genetically determined or formed
in early ontogenesis, and then persist for the entire lifetime of an animal.

Coding by channel number as a process of parallel information processing by no means
rules out successive analysis. If a stimulus is complex enough and the animal

does not have to deal with it often. perception may proceed step by step. by
isolating the important and simple features of the analyzed image. This is asso-
ciated with successive activation of different detector neurons, which reflects

the process of successive assembly of the "internal image" of an exogenous

stimulus from simple tags [9, 10]. Such is the function, for example, of eye
movements in perception of a complex image [ll]. It should also be stressed that
coding by channel number provides for concurrent transmission and processing of

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(IVLY
lUlibffulAl.UBE<DNlY

infatuation. Concurrent ["parallel”! information processing enables living organ-
isms to effectively solve identification problems.

A property of living systems, which we could call "functional stability," is also
related to coding by channel number. we use functional stability to refer to
viability, the capacity of a living system to perform its main functions, even if
in a somewhat reduced fora (for example, a dog could move satisfactorily on three
legs, whereas a car missing a wheel cannot), in the presence of some injury, even
rather significant. The concept of functional stability is related, to some
extent. to the concept of reliability in the seaning of von Neumann, but does not
coincide with it. In his well-known work. von Neumann [12] discussed the reliabi-
lity of a system which. like an electric switch, has two states-on and off. A
different situation is inherent in living systems, in that along with the two ex-
trese states-complete work capacity and complete breakdown-there are also various
intermediate states of partial work capacity. It is logical to introduce the con-
cept of functional stability in the presence of injury for such systems. Evidently,
the principles of constructing functionally stable systems must be other than
Neumann's principles of reliability.

The conbination of coding by channel number and appropriately organized lateral
inhibitory connections could serve as the basis for constructing neuronal systems
that are quite perfect in functional stability. although some elements of these
structures do not have such perfection [13].

In conclusion, it should be indicated that information processing in neural networks
is often described as follows: all processing occurs in neurons, while the nerve
fibers that connect than play merely a passive, transmitting role. However, there
is every reason to believe that this conception is not entirely correct. Let us
consider the process of propagation of excitation over a branching fiber in the
belief that this process is described by the well-known equations of Hodgkin-Huxley.
As shown by estimates, the branching node of such a fiber could play the part of
logic element, implementing certain basic logic functions of "or," ”and" and
“inhibition," depending on the conditions (proportion of disasters of fibers forming
the ramification, difference in tines of input signal in the unit via different
fibers). ‘

By combining the main logic functions one can obtain others. Here it is suggested
that there are natural analogies with so-called homogeneous environments-technical
equipment similar in properties to branching neural networks, which have recently
gained rather wide popularity as the basis for construction of various computer
systess.

Thus, even a single branching unit of a nerve fiber could perfora rather coeplex
physiological functions, for exasple, serve as a detector. The possibility of
complex logical information processing in branching structures suggests that. per-
haps, the role of dendrite orborisations in information processing is much greater
than usually believed. with reference to neuronal nets, we are apparently over-
simplifying the individual cell. Stating that "the brain is a computer," we
relegate the modest role of a single element to a single cell. Perhaps the
forauln that "the neuron is a computer" is closer to the truth.

According to the foregoing,_the function of detector could be performed by parts
of a neuron, rather than the neuron as a whole. The naterial submitted below is

8
ﬁOI'DFFKJAI.USE(HULY
FOR 091-10“. [BE ONLY

not in contradict [on with this conclusion, although the term "detector" implies a
single element of the corresponding neuronal net. The combination of numerous

independent detectors in a single element does not introduce any appreciable
difficulty in considering the function of the entire analyzer.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 2. MODEL OF CHANNEL NIHBER CODING

Spherical model. The function of signal discrimination in a model of coding
by channel number is provided by the fact that a specific value of parameter of
an exogenous signal generates a solitary maximum of excitation on one of the spe-
cialized detector neurons. Detector refers to a neuron that is selectively
adjusted for a specific value of the signal parameter. This selective adjustment
of the detector is obtained by s specific system of co-unications, by which the
detector is connected to neurons of the underlying level or receptors. Bach de-
tector forms one of the parallel channels for intonation processing. With a
change in the exogenous signal, the maximum excitation shifts from one detector to
another. If two signals elicit maxima- excitation of the same detector, they

are not distinguished. Scheaatically, a detector can be described as a formal
neuron with several inputs through which signals cone from underlying neurons-
primary detectors or receptors. Each of the inputs should provide independent
information to the detector (Figure l). The independence of the inputs means that
one cannot predict the activity of one input on the basis of knowledge about the
activity of any other input.

The diagram illustrates a secondary detector. The arrow shows the direction of the
signal at the detector output. The lines converging on the detector illustrate
arrival of signals that converge on the detector (ft—excitation coming over the 11th
channel). The small circles at the point of contact between the input and detector
represent the coefficients of synaptic transmission; oar-coefficient of synaptic
transmission of the 13th channel on the Jth detector. The dotted line refers to

part of the inputs not shown on the diagram. The detector adds the paired products
of each input signal multiplied by the corresponding coefficient of synaptic

transmission:
7:

d; - 0511': + + cjifi + + cjnfn - iglcjift'

where dj is magnitude of excitation of the jth detector. The set of delivered
stimuli forms excitation vector P - (fl, ..., f5. ..., 1“"). The set of canonica-
tion coefficients forms the coununication vector C' - [ad], ..., cji, ..., cjn}.
The reaction at the detector output equals the scalar product of excitation vector
multiplied by communication vector dj - (1’, CJ). when the input signal changes,

so does the 1. tonal reaction, and it reaches a maximal when the excitation vector
is collinear with the couhunication vector. The modulus of the connunication vector
is constant [Ca-I - const. . If [P] - 1.633.” - cos IF, Cj] ICjIIPI - ICJI, (j - l,

ass, m)-
FOR (WI-1(1AI. "SI-I ONLY

., ”V 7

Figure l. Tigure 2.
Structure of a secondary detector Spherical model of signal discrimination -

 

The detector is selectively adjusted for the signal whose excitation vector is col-
linear with the communication vector of this detector. In order to obtain a set of
such detectors with maximum sensitivity to a change in parameter, excitation f; as
a function of the signal nustbecosinecurves. This means that either the receptors
themselves must have such characteristics or that there must be elements to per-7
form the necessary conversions between the receptors and secondary detectors.

Let us consider the case where a selective output detector receives signals from
primary detectors. All of the primary detectors together, the number of which in
the general case equals n, have independent sensitivity functions in relation to the
coded signal parameter.

If a stimulus with preset value of coded parameter is delivered to the input of the
sensory system, each of the primary detectors will be excited to a certain level.
The magnitude of excitation of each primary detector can be viewed as vector
coordinate. Let us call such a vector the vector of excitation. The number of
independent coordinates of this vector determines its dimensionality. All informa-
tion about the stimulus is contained in the set of excitations of primary detectors;
in other words, it is determined by the excitation vector. In Euclidean space, the
vector is characterized by direction and modulus (length). However, the vector
modulus is not suitable for coding the values of stimulus parameter. Indeed. the
vector sodulue depends on intensity of the stimulus, whereas signal coding should not
depend on stimulus intensity. Consequently, the value of the coded signal parameter
must be coded by the direction of the excitation vector.

The direction of the excitation vector.can be characterized by the point of its
intersection of a solitary n-disensional sphere. In the proposed method. the signal
is coded by reflecting the physical (stimulus) space on the surface of the n-dimen-
sional sphere (subjective space). The dimensionality of the subjective spherical
space is smaller by one than the number of independent inputs and it equals

(n - l). .

Thus, a stimulus with specified value of parameter is represented by a point on
a solitary n-dimensional sphere. when the stimulus changes, the point that re-
presents it shifts over the sphere in accordance with the change in direction of
the excitation vector. The more the stimulus changes, the farther the point shifts

ll
lﬂlltﬂﬂﬂClAl.lEIl(l‘LY
FOIIOFFKIAI.IKﬂt(H!LY

and the greater the subjective change in the stimulus. The shortest arc of the
large circle between points on the n-dimensional sphere representing the corres-
ponding excitation vectors is a gauge of the subjective distance between two
stimuli (Figure 2).

The diagram illustrates the space in which is situated a sphere formed by s set of
detectors; the kth detector is on the sphere CjI - const at point dk, which is
obtained when this sphere intersects vector P ck; the thin lines refer to the co-
ordinate system. Two signals sk and SJ generate two excitation vectors Pk and P5.
Maximum excitation of output detector dk and dj corresponds to each excitation
vector. Thus, on the sphere each signal is represented by points dk and dj. The
subjective difference between stimuli is determined by the arc of the large circle
that separates detectorsead , dd. This arc equals the angle between excitation
ovectors generated by each 0 the stimuli, i.e.,~adk, dj - arc cos (Pk, Pj).

If two stimuli induce two excitation vectors equal in direction they are not sub-
jectively distinguished. Thus, a set of physical signals is projected on the
surface of the sphere constituting the perceptive space of the stimuli. The di-
mensionality of the perceptive space is determined by the number of independent
primary detectors. The threshold of discrimination between two stimuli equals the
arc that separates two adjacent detectors. The magnitude of the threshold measured
in angles is constant. However, the threshold measured in stimulus units may vary
for different stimuli, depending on how the direction of the excitation vector
changes with change in the stimulus. If we know the characteristics of primary
detectors, we can calculate the subjective difference between stimuli. Conversely,
if we know the subjective distances between stimuli and basis of space, we can
find the characteristics of primary detectors.

Thus, in order to assess the subjective distance between two stimuli we must find
the excitation vectors they generate and locate the points corresponding to the
compared stimuli on an n-dimensional sphere, then draw a large circle of the
sphere through these points and find the shortest distance on it. This gauge of
subjective closeness of two stimuli is equivalent to the value of the angle between
two excitation vectors generated by compared stimuli.

Characteristics of primary detectors. There is a point on the n—dimensional
sphere of the model corresponding to each stimulus. If an orthogonal basis is
specified, the position of the points on the sphere can be stipulated by its coordi-
nates which, in the case of a solitary sphere, correspond to the cosine of the angle
between corresponding basis vectors and the vectors determining the position on the
sphere of the maximally excited detector. when the stimulus parameter changes,

the coordinates of the points are described by the corresponding cosine curves.

The conclusion concerning the cosine curve characteristics of primary detectors

can be obtained sore strictly. The subjective difference between two stimuli is
determined by the angle formed by excitation vectors: the wider the angle, the
greater the subjective difference between stimuli. To provide high differential
sensitivity for all stimuli one should select functions of primary detector sensiti-
vity so that the angle between each pair of compared stimuli would be as wide as
possible. To satisfy this condition and create an optimum differential sensitivity
function for the entire system, the characteristics of primary detectors must be
described by cosine curves, the argument of which is a certain function of the
coded signal parameter (Appendix_l).

12
FOIINFHKJAI.USI(NULY
Fill(lﬂﬂClAl.llll(MHLY

Thus, the characteristics of primary detectors must be cosine curves for the system
of selective detectors to effectively distinguish exogenous signals.

Construction of secondary detectors. Schmtically, we can describe an output
detector as a formal neuron with several inputs. Each input is characterised by

a certain efficiency of synaptic transmission which can be described as coefficient
of communication. This coefficient determines the communication [relationship] be-
tween the primary detector or receptor and the secondary detector. A stimulus
traveling over a given input to the detector is determined, on the one hand, by the
force of delivered stimulation and, on the other hand, by the coefficient of
synaptic communication. Thus, a signal passing from one of the inputs is deter-
mined by the product of force of arriving excitation multiplied by the coefficient
of synaptic transmission. Analogous considerations are valid for other inputs.

The detector sums up the stimulus arriving via all inputs. The overall reaction of
the detector to the input signal equals the sum of products of excitation arriving
over the input multiplied by the corresponding communication coefficient. The same
can be expressed more concisely in the language of vector algebra. If all coeffi-
cients of communication [or relation] are viewed as components of the vector of
communications and all stimuli arriving over inputs as components of the excitation
vector, the detector's reaction equals the scalar product of excitation multiplied
by the communication vector. If the communication vector of a given secondary
detector is known by altering the signal and excitation vector induced by this
signal one can determine the characteristics of the secondary detector. For this,
the stimulation vector is scalarly multiplied by the communication vector fixed

for this detector. When the excitation vector becomescollinearwith the communicad
tion vector, the detector's reaction reaches a maximum. If we take this position
of the excitation vector'as the reference point, a decrease in reaction of output
detector is observed when the excitation vector deviates from this position,
measured in angles. Thus, the characteristics of the output detector are selective
in relation to a specific signal (Figure 3).

   

I
I
l
I
I
I

 

 

..- u-
t; Ir, r‘e-f.’

Figure 3. .. Figure 4.
Characteristics of secondary detector Projection of excitation vector on fan

of communication vectors of set of
secondary detectors

Angle d, which is formed by communication vector Gj of the detector and excitation
vector, is plotted on the x-axis; the scalar product dj/i - (Ci, F(¢i)) is plotted
on the y-axis. Excitation vector F(¢£) is a function of the input signal. Communi-
cation vector c. is fixed for the given detector. The neuronal reaction reaches

a maximum when he signal is at a level when the excitation vector is collinear with

13
FOI(lﬂﬂClMLlﬁi20NlN
IIII(HﬂﬁCJAl.U8E(MNLY

the communication vector of this detector. "hen the signal changes from this optimum
level, the reaction of the jth output diminishes.

Since each output detector is related to all primary detectors, each secondary de-
tector has its own communication vector. As a whole, the communication vectors of
all secondary detectors form a fan of vectors in a space whose dimensionality is
determined by the number of inputs. This can be graphically illustrated when each
secondary detector has only two inputs (Figure 4).

A set of vectors of communications {Cj}, (j - l, 3... n)|Cj|-const corresponds to
the set of secondary detectors. Each kth secondary detector has a corresponding
communication vector Ck. An exogenous stimulus generates excitation vector F1.
Excitation that equals the scalar product of excitation vector P; multiplied by
the communication vector corresponding to a given detector arises on each of the
secondary detectors under the influence of the stimulus. Thus, the magnitude of
excitation of the jth detector induced by the S¢z stimulus equals the value of the
projection of vector F(¢z) on the jth communication vector CJ. The figure eight
shape shows the distribution of reactions of dz detectors over their entire popula-
tion: Dz - CPz, where Dz is the columndvector {d,. ..., di. ..., dﬁ}, C -||Cjﬁ[

J - 1, ..., n; i- 1, ..., m.

The fan of communication vectors of a given set of detectors enables us to calcu-'
late the distribution of stimuli over the entire set of detectors with delivery of
a fixed stimulus. Excitation of a secondary detector is determined by the scalar
product of two vectors-excitation vector, which is constant in the case of a

fixed stimulus. and communication vector, which each secondary detector has. By
calculating the scalar product of a specified excitation vector multiplied by each
communication vector, we can find the values of excitations of all detectors in the
set. Together they form the excitation profile. Here, one of the detectors is
maximally excited coding unequivocally the parameter of the stimulus (Figure 5).

   

ﬂ-uu‘
elf. r96
Figure 5. Figure 6.
Profile of excitation on a set of Set of detectors as a multichannel
secondary detectors correlator

Angle d, formed by the excitation vector and communication vector of each secondary
detector is plotted on the x-axis, so that thesecondary detector number is also
plotted on the x-axis. 0n the y-axis is the scalar product dj/i - (Qj, Pi) of each
secondary detector communication vector multiplied by the excitation vector Pi - const
going to these detectors. A maximum reaction occurs in the secondary detector for
which the communication vector is collinear with the excitation vector. All other
detectors respond with weaker reactions. Thus, the graph illustrates the profile

14
ﬁOR‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(IVLY
INJR OF1WCIAL USIiCHULY

of excitation on a set of secondary detectors under the influence of a fixed stimulus.
The shape of the excitation profile for the entire set of detectors per fixed sti-
mulus coincides with the characteristics of one secondary detector when the excita-
tion vector changes.

The coincidence of characteristics of one detector with the profile of excitation
of the entire set of detectors per fixed stimulus occurs with change in stimulus
because the detector's reaction is determined by the scalar product of excitation
vector multiplied by the communication vector. Calculation of the characteristic
of one detector shows a change in excitation vector. With calculation of the
excitation profile there is a change in communication vector. But the excitation
vector is collinear with the communication vector of corresponding detectors, and
they could replace one another in the scalar product.

According to the principle of signal coding by channel number, all communication
vectors of a set of secondary detectors have the same moduli, so that in the case
where there are two primary detectors at the input the ends of the communication
vectors are on the circuaferenee. Since the moduli of communication vectors are
identical, each of the scalar products correct to within the constant factor
[multiplier] equals the cosine of the angle between the specified excitation vector
and corresponding communication vector. The detector whose communication vector
forms a zero angle with the excitation vector will present maximum excitation. In
other words, the communication vector of a secondary detector must be collinear with
the vector of stimulation that this stimulus induces in primary detectors in order
that the stimulus would elicit maximum excitation in the secondary detector. The
number of the maximally excited detector determines unequivocally the direction of
the excitation vector and, consequently, the stimulus that this excitation vector
generates.

Set of detectors as a aultichannel correlator. The reaction at the output
of each secondary detector equals the scalar product of excitation vector multiplied
by the communication vector or, correct to within the constant factor, the cosine

of the angle between them. Thus, with change in the signal, the detector's res-
ponse, which changes in the range of +1 to -l, calculates the coefficient of
reciprocal correlation between the set of delivered stimuli and the set of synaptic
connections. The entire set of detectors forms a aultichannel correlator. The
channel, in which the coefficientofreciprocal correlation between the excitation
vector and communication vector reaches a maximum, becomes the indicator of the
isolated signal parameter. The coefficient of correlation equals the cosine of the
angle between the excitation vector and coamunication vector of a given detector.
when the vector of excitation and vector of communications are collinear, the angle
between them equals zero, whereas the cosine of the angle between vectors and coeffi-
cient of correlation equal 1. This means that this channel records the presence of
the signal.

In Figure 6, angle ¢ between the initial excitation vector and communication
vector of a given secondary detector is plotted on the x-axis. The family of
curves characterizes the properties of secondary detectors adjusted for different
values of input signal.

He should call attention to another distinction of construction of seccndary detec-
tors. As previously shown, the characteristic of primary detectors in the spaée of
solitary vectors is described by a cosine curve, the value of which may be positive

15
lili‘OlﬂﬂC1A1.Uﬁli(lVLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at some levels of stimulus and negative at others. However, in biological systems,
one cannot transmit both positive and negative values over the same channel, since
the only form of signal transmission over rather large distances in the nervous
system is impulse frequency, whereas the coefficients of synaptic communication
between neurons retain their sign. Thus, a special channel is required to transmit
signals in the negative half-period of the cosine curve (Figure 7). In other words,
the positive and negative parts of the characteristic of primary detectors are

in different channels. For this reason, to execute the positive and legative parts
of the characteristic of one primary detector we must have two separate primary de-
tectors, each of which realizes only half the period of the cosine curve. As a
result of such separation of "positive" and "negative" channels, the number of
primary detectors is doubled.

   

lc’° I" (II' m’ m'
Figure 7. Figure 8.
Structure of detector with four inputs characteristic of primary detector

1) excitatory 2) inhibitory with four inputs

The four inputs of the secondary detector are intended for transmission of only
positive signals. With a change in the exogenous signal, instead of a change in
sign there is a change in number of primary detector as input of the secondary
detector. Alternation of signals is determined by the signs of the sine and cosine
for different angles of the excitation vector. Positive signals come to the first
and second inputs. while negative ones go to the third and fourth. This arrange-
ment of the secondary detector is related to the fact that only ispulses are trans-
mitted in the nervous system. and the sign of synaptic emulation of a given
synapse remains constant. In order to impart another sign to the signal we need

a separate channel. The dimensionality of the space of excitation vectors does
not change.

In Figure 8, angle 0 of the turn of the excitation vector representing a change in
signal to the input is plotted on the x~axis. and the value of components of the
excitation vector at each of theinputs is plotted on the y-axis. With a change in
sign of excitation another primary detector is turned on:

; _ My)! "'1': —90°<75:90°:
and “(ﬂ—{AM— in other cases

I.(?)- if 0'<o< 180°;

I.(7)— in other cases.

I; ('9) -=

16
FOI1DFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

0nly positive signals go from underlying elements to the secondary detector, which
codes the signal parameter by channel number, if there is a double number of primary

detectors. This is not associated with any change in excitation profile of secondary
detectors (Appendix 1).

Hodel of analyzer. The aggregate of receptors, primary and secondary detectors
forms the model of the analyzer of a specified signal parameter. At the first stage,
the exogenous stimulus is coded with the set of excitations of receptors (or primary
detectors that follow them) with characteristics in the form of a cosine curve. The
positive and negative phases of the signal are transmitted over different channels.

The set of excitations of primary detectors determines the direction of the excita-
tion vector.

At the second stage, the excitation vector of primary detectors will create maximum
excitation on one of the secondary detectors. The operation of scalar multiplica-
tion of the excitation vector by the communication vector is performed by means of
the secondary detector. This determines the coefficient of correlation, and the
signal is coded with the number of the most excited channel.

This analyzer model is close to the concept of biological analyzer advanced by I. P.
Pavlov.

In the analyzer model, the difference in physical parameters of a signal is recoded
into the difference in localization of excitation maximum on a set of detectors.

We are impressed by the resemblance between the set of secondary detectors, on
which the exogenous signal is reflected, and a receptive surface, for example,
skin surface. As the stimulus shifts over the skin surface, the excitation maximum
shifts from one receptor to another. In the detector model of an analyzer, with
change in the stimulus there is a change in correlation between stimuli in receptors
or primary sensory neurons, as a result of which the excitation maximum shifts free
one output detector to another. The aggregate of secondary detectors, which'forn
a sort of "brain screen" on which the change in a stimulus is reflected, could be
called a quasireceptive surface. Hith change in signal properties, the excitation
maximua shifts over such a quasireceptive surface, just like excitation shifts over
a surface formed by receptors. '-

One can test the model for coding a signal by channel number in both psychophysical
and neurophysiological experiments.

According to the detector model, different subjective sensations are represented by
points on a n-dimensional sphere. The shortest distance between points on the
sphere determines the subjective distance between corresponding stimuli: the
smaller the difference between stimuli, the shorter the distance between points

on the sphere that correspond to them. The dimensionality of the space found from
analysis of psychophysical data must correspond to the number of primary detectors.
Moreover, if an orthonormal basis is given in the perceptive space, the coordinates
of the point as a function of value of the coded parameter should determine the
characteristics of primary detectors in this space. If we know the function of
sensitivity of primary detectors we can also calculate the sensitivity function of
secondary detectors. This means that, on the basis of the principle of signal coding
by channel number, we can turn from psychophysical data to the characteristics of
individual detector neurOns. In turn, we can obtain the characteristics of detectors
independently, through electrophysiological experiments, using the same set of
stimuli as in the psychophysical experiment.

17
FOI‘OIIICIAI.IEHECHELY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the detector characteristics calculated on the basis of the model can be
checked twice: first by analyzing the psychophysical data and then by directly
examining the characteristics of neurons. The artificial analyser constructed on
the principle of signal coding by channel number, which consists of neuron-like
elements with characteristics analogous to those of human detector neurons, makes
it possible to create an internal representation of signals in a robot that would
be analogous to the internal representation of signals in man. Then, the

functions of signal discrimination by a robot will coincide with human functions

of discrimination of these signals. In addition, by using the principle of signal
coding by channel number, it is possible to create artificial sense organs for a
robot that do not exist in man. This can be achieved by using sensors that are
wanting in the set of human receptors, as well as combinations of receptors that are
not inherent in man. With some combination of receptors, the dimensionality of the
perceptive space of a robot may differ from the dimensionality of the human per-
ceptive space. Although this would disrupt the coincidence of internal conception
[representation] of signals in man and robot, the similarity of principles of con-
structing sensory systems facilitates the recoding problem when organising communi-
cation between man and robot.

Problems of enhancing analyzer sensitivity. Under the influence of a
stimulus on an analyzer, an excitation vector arises in its receptors or primary
detectors beyond the receptors, which affects immediately the entire population of
secondary detectors through the fan of communication vectors. Bach communication
vector is specific to a given secondary detector. As a result, an excitation
profile is generated on the population of output detectors in the form of distri-
bution of excitations on secondary detectors with a solitary maximum on one of
them. With change in the stimulus, the excitation vector formed by primary detec-
tors changes, and the excitation maximum shifts from one secondary detector to
another.

The degree of difference between one stimulus and another is determined by the
angle between the excitation vectors that they induce, or length of the are that
separates the secondary detectors that represent these stimuli on the sphere.

The discrimination threshold is determined by the distance between adjacent secondary
detectors. Thus, the precision of analyzer function is determined by the density of
output detectors represented by points on an nfdimensional sphere and forming a quasi-
recepitve surface. With a set density of detectors on the quasireceptive surface,
the precision of analyser function depends on the level of the excitation maximum

in the detector population (on selectivity of the excitation profile),on the one
hand, and on the angle of rotation of the excitation vector with change in stimulus,
on the other. The capacity to distinguish between stimuli depends both on the

speed of rotation of the excitation vector with change in stimulus and on the
precision, with which the analyzer can measure different directions of the excita-
tion vector. Thus. the problem of enhancing differential sensitivity of the

analyzer can be reduced to two different problems: increasing precision of measure-
ment of direction of excitation vectors (or increasing selectivity of the multi-
channel correlator) and increasing the speed of rotation of the excitation vector
with change in stimulus.

The problem of increasing accuracy of measuring the direction of the excitation vec-
tor with a given number of secondary detectors amounts to increasing selectivity
of the excitation profile on the population of secondary detectors (i.e., the problem

18
FCHI(NFFIC1AI.£EHE(NHLY
ilNR()FO1(1AI lQHPCH‘lY

of increasing levvl of excitation maximum). Lateral inhibition between secondary
detectors, which is analogous to lateral inhibition between eccentric cells of the
Xiphosura eye, is the mechanism that increases acuity of the excitation profile.
This lateral inhibition implies that there are inhibitory connections between all
output detectors. The value of the coefficient of these inhibitory relations
decreases with increase in distance between detectors.

Considering the reciprocal inhibition of secondary detectors, the reaction of a
given detector equals the influence from primary detectors minus overall inhibition
from the outputs of all secondary detectors, with the exception of that one. The
inhibitory communications of this detector with all other detectors, with the
exception of its communication with itself. form the components of the communication
vector of lateral.inhibition. All excitations of secondary detectors, with the
exception of the given one, constitute components of the supplemental excitation vec-
tor. The reaction of the_secondary detector with consideration of lateral inhibi-
tion can be expressed in vector form. The reaction of this secondary detector.

with consideration of lateral inhibition, equals its initial excitation minus the
scalar product of the vector of lateral connections multiplied by the supplemental
excitation vector. when the output detector has two inputs (two-dimensional case)
and the n-dimensional sphere degenerates into a circumference, it is convenient to
describe the excitation profile in polar coordinates. For this purpose. one should
plot the value of excitation of the secondary detector on each communication vector
characterizing this detector. Let us call such a description of the excitation
profile the diagram of orientation of the detector system. As a result of lateral
inhibition the number of the detector with maximum excitation does not change. How-
ever, the acuity of the excitation profile increases and so does the excitation
maximum on a set of detectors. Figure 9 illustrates the change in the digram of
orientation [direction] of the detector system with and without consideration of
lateral inhibition.

The circumference is formed by the fan

of secondary detector communication
vectors Ile - const. The solid line
shows responses of secondary detectors
that form the excitation profile in a

set of detectors when there is no lateral
inhibition: d'li - (c-, n). with intro-
duction of la eral in ibition, the level
thereof kid shows which share of the
signal from the output of the Jth secondary
detector enters the input of the ith
detector. The responses of secondary
detectors diminish by a value that equals

 

Plgurc 9. the sum of products of coefficients of
change in orientation diagram under the lateral communications multiplied by the
influence of lateral inhibition corresponding excitation of adjacent

detectors:

* n *
da'li - da'n' 'jzlkﬂdz

where i/kjl - r are cos (c1, Cj) (r - coast), the coefficient of lateral relation
is inversely proportional to the distance between secondary detectors or angle be-
twcen communication vectors that represent them (dash line).

19
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
HOR<MHNCIAL.USEINVLY

The directional diagram undergoes no change in orientation as a result of lateral

inhibition, but it hecones narrower and receives additional inhibition: its inhi-
bitory path increases.

The same can be described in a rectan-
gular system of coordinates; for this,
the angle characterizing the direction
of the commication vector is plotted
on the x-axis and the level of excita-
tion of the corresponding detector on
the y-axis. Under the influence of
lateral inhibition (Figure 10), the
excitation profile becomes more select-
ive, and an additional flanking zone

 

Figure 10. of inhibition appears on it. There is
Sharpening of excitation profile of a no change in position of excitation
set of secondary detectors under the maximum on the x-axis. Angle ¢ char-
influence of lateral inhibition acterizes the inclination of the com-
1) magnitude of reaction qj/i of jth munication vector of each secondary
secondary detector under the detector. Lateral inhibition legs
influence of ith stimulus in relation to excitation. For this
2) reaction of the sane detector, but reason, there is gradual development
with consideration of lateral inhi- of increase in selectivity of the
bition, i.e., value of dgli (see excitation prof.le on the set of the
Figure 9) detectors under the influence of a

stimulus. Since lateral inhibition
has a threshold, acuity of the excitation profile does not increase with low signal
intensities. As a result, lateral inhibition turns of and analyzer sensitivity
diminishes when signal intensity is lowered. -

Adaptation of prinary detectors as a means of enhancing differential
sensitivity in the vicinity of an adaptive stinulus. when observing a
stimulus for a long tine it becomes necessary to detect the slightest deviations
of its parameters. In a spherical model, the threshold of differential sensitivity

closest to it. The higher the detector density on s quasirecsptive surface, the
lower the threshold. However, increasing detector density alone will not yield
the desired increase in analyzer sensitivity. Indeed, if the number of output
detectors is large enough, there will be an insignificant difference between the
activity of two adjacent neurons. If, however, we take into consideration noise,
under its influence the excitation maximum with a constant stimulus will wander
around a certain detector over the quasireceptive surface, and for this reason the
accuracy of detersining the stimulus pareneter will not improve. One cannot im-
prove accuracy of stimulus perception by only increasing the number of secondary
detectors, without lowering the noise level.

However, one can solve the problem of inproving sensitivity in another way [15, 15].
with a given density of secondary detectors, the sensitivity of the systen to
change in stimulus parameter is determined by the angle of rotation of the excita-
tion vector. In order to improve sensitivity of the system to a change in para-
meter of a long-lasting stimulus (which we shall call the adaptive stimulus here-
after), we must find a means of increasing the rotation of the excitation vector

20
FORiofﬁKJAl.USE(NVLY
F18“‘e 11‘
may

of cxc1“

non "c
tors before

ads?“

 

to: 0f
:10“ detect-0“ '
8 excitac

f excite!

9:133”

 

V3 to: 0: pt

e the out! °
t occupies

cm°“e“u

ion VG
detecto

inntv

f 0689“.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with only one component other than zero, do not change their direction during adap-
tation. The last excitation vectors, whose second component equals zero, coincide
with the direction of one of the basis vectors (Appendix 1).

The degree of subjective change in a stimulus under the influence of adaptation of
primary detectors is measured by the angle of rotation of the excitation vector in
relation to its initial position. The profile of excitation generated on the
population of secondary detectors turns by the same angle as the excitation vector
(Figure 13). The magnitude of reac-
tion of a given secondary detector is
plotted along the vector radius. The
excitation maximum shifted to another
secondary detector under the influence
of adaptation; which corresponds to a
change in perception of this signal.
The direction of the excitation vector
whose components are equal will not
change under the influence of adapta-
tion. The position of the excitation
profile on the population of secondary

 

Figure 13. detectors will not change either. For
Shift of excitation profile of secondary this reason, the stimulus that gene-
detectors under the influence of adapta- rates an excitation vector with equal
tion of primary detectors components will emerge as the limit
1) profile of excitation before adaptation toward which all other stimuli will
2) after adaptation strive. The only exceptions are

stimuli corresponding to basis vec-
tors. It can be stated that such a stimulus emerges as a certain norm. when a
stimulus comes close to such a norm as a result of development of adaptation it
is generally called normalization.

The process of adaptation of primary
detectors develops gradually, with
some inertia. for this reason. all of
the adaptation effects depend on dura-
tion of the stimulus and time that
elapses after it is discontinued.

It should be noted that all changes
in sensitivity of primary detectors
elicited by the adaptive stimulus will
persist for some time after it is dis-

 

Figure la. ' continued. For this reason, a stimulus
Increased discriminating sensitivity in delivered after an adaptive one will
the vicinity of an adaptive stimulus elicit excitation of primary detectors

to a different level than a stimulus
delivered when there is no adaptation. In other words, a stimulus delivered prior
to preliminary adaptation and after development of adaptation generates, in the
general case, excitation vectors that differ in direction. Thus, the same stimulus
elicits maximum excitation of different secondary detectors before adaptation and
after adaptation, and for this reason is perceived as two different stimuli. This
effect is called the sftereffect. An adaptive stimulus alters the most markedly
the excitation vector in relation to itself and similar stimuli. Two similar

22
FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[or close] stimuli in the vicinity of the adaptive stimulus would differ more after
adaptation than before. This is attributable to the fact that the greater the
initial excitation of components of the excitation vector. the more they diminish as
a result of adaptation (Figure 16). Two excitation vectors Pk and Fl are shown in
polar coordinates, which are generated by two different stimuli, Sk and $7,. The
angle between these excitation vectors before adaptation equals are 1! between the
ends of these vectors. Under the influence of adaptation, the characteristics of
primary detectors changed in such a way that the angle between the new excitation
vectors Pk and F1 increased and became W. This means that the subjective distance
between stimuli 51“ and 5' increased as a result of adaptation: #70. This increase
in subjective distance occurs only in the vicinity of the adaptive stimlus. There
may be poorer discrinination of stimuli other than the adaptive one after adaptation.

Thus. differential sensitivity of the sensory analyzer increases locally under the
influence of adaptation (Figure 15). In this figure, the value of angle M, which
characterizes the direction of the excitation vector is plotted on the r—axis and
the change in subjective distance between stimuli, Aw - (F (¢+r/oa), F (ti/0a)) -
(F (¢+T)s F (0)). .a - 2A0.

Illusions of perceptiommlisation
and aftereffect—are the cost of en-
hanced sensitivity. Introduction of
adaptation into primary detectors of
artificial sense organs of the robot
elicits a gain due to an improvement
of their capacity for signal discrimi-
nation. This brings even closer the
sensory system of man and robot:

[a (a 5’ a 1,. human and robot perception illusions
also become the same.

 

Figure 15.
Effect of adaptation on discriminating In conclusion, it must be noted that,
sensitivity of two-dimensional model in addition to adaptation of primary
1) ¢a _ 0 3) 9a _ 37.30, detectors, one must consider adapta-

tion of secondary detectors. which is
nanifested by a decrease in sensitivity
proportionately to the degree of their
excitation. As a result of such a decrease in sensitivity of secondary detectors
there is an increase in absolute threshold of perception for stimuli that are close
to the adaptive one. This influence has an aftereffect: in order to detect the
adaptive signal its intensity must be increased . even after some time has elapsed.

2) ¢a . 2mm 6) ¢a - 45°

Adaptation at input of primary detectors as a means of augmenting the
dynamic range of analyzer operation. Differential sensitivity in relation
to successively delivered stimuli is increased by increasing the angle between
excitation vectors. In this case. the vector modulus is not taken into considera-
tion. it is assumed that the intensity of the signal does not affect evaluation
of its other parameters. The limitations of this assumption are obvious, at least
for low intensities. If the stimulus is so weak that it cannot elicit excitation
in a receptor, it is impossible to perceive it.

Moreover, one must consider the fact that a stimulus usually appears against a cer-
tain background. if this background is not suppressed, the components of the excita-
tion vector will not differ from another, and it will be impossible to distinguish
signals.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The receptors must be sensitive to both low stimulus intensities and the slightest
changes in signal intensity in relation to the background for the analyzer to
function effectively. Consequently, there must be a combination in the analyzer

of a wide dynamic range and significant characteristic slope. A special mechanism
must be added, that would maintain receptor sensitivity to changes in the useful
signal, to broaden the dynamic range of the analyzer without lowering differential
sensitivity. For this, the working point of the receptor characteristic mustremain
in the steepest segment. The purpose of this mechanism is to limit the intensity
of the stimulus affecting the receptor. The amplitude characteristic of the .
receptor shifts along the axis of signal intensity by a distance that is deter-
mined by intensity of the background. The working point of the receptor always
remains at the steepest part of its characteristic (Figure 16). The input signal
of primary detectors is cut off by adjusting the threshold of the receptor-primary
detector connection. The threshold is adjusted by n elements, the degree of excita-
tion of which depends on receptor excitation.

    

4'4] u!

Figure 16. Adaptation at primary detector input

a) adjustment of sensitivity of primary detectors under the influence of the
background (I--lnyer of receptors. II-1ayer of primary detectors)

b) shift of amplitude response of primary detector as a function of intensity
of stimulus to receptors

The intensity of the stimulus is plotted on the x-axis and amplitude of detector
response with different background intensities is plotted on the y-axis. 11, I;
are current value of background intensity, while AI is increment of signal inten-
sity in relation to the background. If there is no regulatory mechanism, the
response of the primary detector is fixed (curve 1). In this case, the detector's
reactions nabackground I; and stimulus Iz+AI will almost coincide. If the mechan-
ism 0[ threshold regulation is turned on, the detector's response will shift along
the x-axis (curve 2) and the reaction of the same detector to background I; and
stimulus with intensity 12+AI will be different. Regulation of the threshold
provides for automatic shift of the response [characteristic] in such a way that
a deviation from the background will elicit a strong change in the reaction of the
primary detector.

Such a mechanism can be introduced either on the receptor level or at the point
of communication between receptors and primary detectors.

Interaction between elements of analyzer field as a means of enhancing
sensitivity. Another task that often has to be done under real conditions is

24
FOR 0FﬁﬂJAl.USE(H‘LY
to compare two simultaneously delivered stimuli according to some parameter and
determine whether they are equal or not. Heretofore, we have discussed only one
local analyzer consisting of a set of receptors linked to output detectors either
directly or through primary detectors. The characteristics of primary detectors
are described by a cosine curve. When a stimulus is delivered to a population of
output detectors an excitation vector is activated, which creates maximum excita-
tion on one of them. If the stimulus changes, the excitation maximum shifts over
the set of output detectors represented by points on an n—dimensional sphere. The
signal is analyzed in relation to the local segment of space. Numerous local
analyzers of the same type form a field that is affected by several stimuli. Each
stimulus is analyzed by its own local analyzer; however, there could be considerable
overlapping of areas of action of local analyzers.

The problen of equality of two stimuli delivered to different local analyzers can
be solved by determining whether these stimuli elicit in each of the local analyzers
maximum excitation of detectors bearing the same number. If both stimuli excite

to a maximum degree secondary detectors with the same numbers, it is decided that
the stimuliareequal, otherwise the stimuli are perceived as being different. The
degree of differencebetweenstimuli is determined by the angle between excitation
vectors in each of the local analyzers.

If the local analyzers function independently of one another, the problem of
improving accuracy of assessing stimuli amounts to increasing the number of secondary
detectors in each of them. However, the problem cannot be solved by unlimited
increase in number of secondary detectors.

The question arises as to how to improve the effectiveness of signal discrimination
by a set of local analyzers. Let us consider two local analyzers corresponding to
two different sections of the field in which the signals operate. Let a stimulus
be delivered to one section that generates an excitation vector in one analyzer.
The other stimulus generates an excitation vector in the adjacent section. if we
now introduce lateral inhibition between analogous primary detectors of different
local analyzers, the angle between excitation vectors generated in different
sections of the field will increase.

The arrows in Figure 17 show the
action of two stimuli 5k and s; on
receptive fields of two adjacent ana-
lyzers. The receptive fields of local
analyzers are shown by the striped '
regions. Bach stimulus generates its
own excitation vector P and G in the
local analyzer. The exitation vectors

 

Figure 17. are modified and diverge (vectors P*
Diagram of interaction between two local and 6*) under the influence of lateral
analyzers inhibition of analogous detectors.

Figure 18 illustrates divergence of excitation vectors. Two stimuli elicit differ-
cnt excitation vectors F and c in two local analyzers. The components of the
excitation vector change (F* and 6*) under the influence of lateral inhibition
between analogous detectors in such a way that the angle between points representing
the signals increase: &*>0. This means that the subjective distance between stimuli

25

IIIICHHHCJAJ.IEIECNULY
Nil! (WI-TOM. IN: ONLY

 

Figure 18.
Divergence of excitation vectors under
the influence of lateral inhibition
between analogous primary detectors

increased. The excitation vectors of
two identical stimuli retain their
position with such interaction. Sub-
jectively. these stimuli are perCeived
without changes. At the bottom of the
figure we see that vector P* - P - a6
and 6* - G - of. This means that the
form of lateral inhibition discussed
enhances differential sensitivity of
the entire system. Different signals
shown in spatially different regions
can be distinguished more effectively.
At the same time, if two stimuli gene-
rate identical excitation vectors in

two different sections of the field, with introduction of lateral inhibition the
signals are perceived as identical, just the same as without lateral interaction.

 

Figure 19.
Magnitude of simultaneous contrast as a.
function of force of lateral inhibition
between analogous primary detectors

Hith increase in objective difference
between stimuli. there is an increase
in the angle between excitation vec-
tors and the degree of subjective
difference between them increases. If
two stimuli generate excitation vectors
in opposite directions, interaction be-
tween analyzers does not alter subje-
tive evaluation of the stimuli. lf
subjective distance between stimuli

is at a maximum, lateral inhibition
does not alter orientation of vectors
of excitation and does not increase

the subjective difference between them
(Figure 19). The angle between excita-
tion vectors corresponding to inter-
acting stimuli Ad - ¢/2 is plotted on
the x-axis, and changes in subjective
distance between stimuli AW - 2*(01),
6*(oz) - Hm), 6(02) are plotted on
the y-axis (see Tigers 18); a is the
value of the coefficient of lateral

inhibition. Negative values were omitted in the right part of the graph.

if interai inhibition between analogous primary detectors of different local ana-
lyzers is increased, maximum increase in subjective differentiation between two
stimuli is obtained with smaller objective differences.between them.

The excitation vectors diverge under the influence of lateral inhibition between
analogous primary detectors of different loci by an angle that is wider than the
angle characterizing subjective differences between stimuli in the case where

lateral inhibition is absent. Consequently.
primary detectors emphasizes the differences

lateral inhibition between analogous
between stimuli. This is obtained

without increasing the number of output detectors. Concurrent contrast and con-

comitant perception illusions are the cost of this gain in differential sensitivity.

26
INJR<0FINC1AL UGI:(HVLY
FOI<0FFKJA1.USEINVLY

it is important to stress that simultaneous contrast is a universal effect, and it
could be manifested in all types of sensory systems where there is a set of iden-
tical analyzers that function concurrently, which have primary detectors linked by
reciprocal inhibition. The magnitude of simultaneous contrast depends on the ob-
jective difference between stimuli. Identical stimuli or those that are at a maxi-
mum distance in subjective space do not elicit simultaneous contrast. Moreover, the
closer the stimuli are to one another in the receptor field, the greater the simul-
taneous contrast. The inertia of lateral inhibition explains simultaneous contrast
as a function of time. Since lateral inhibition induced by a stimulus can persist
for some time after discontinuing stimulation, it is capable of depressing milder
excitation in adjacent regions. This leads to masking of one stimulus by another
that is spatially close to it. The masking effect is at a maximum for stimuli

that generate identical excitation vectors in adjacent regions. The masking effect
also depends on intensity. A stronger stimulus raises the excitation threshold for
analogous stimuli in adjacent regions, masking adjacent stimuli.

Invariant detector. The most inportant distinction of human and animal per-
ception is its constancy. Thus, even though the image shifts from some retinal
elements to others with eye movement, the object is perceived in a stable way,
in accordance with its constancy in the environment. The robot's internal concep-
tions must also have constancy, analogous to that of human perception. To provide
constancy of visual perception, information is needed about the position of the
eyes, either in the form of feedback from proprioceptor muscles of the eyes, or
in the form of copies of commands given to control eye movement. The neuronal
mechanism of constancy of perception is universal for all analyzers, and it is
related to the concept of invariant detector. while it was previously believed that
secondary detectors of a local analyzer have a constant set of relations with pri-
mary detectors, the links between an invariant detector and detectors on a lower
level change in accordance with signals coming from other analyzers. These signals
perform a controlling function, modifying the communication vector by which the
invariant detector is linked to the set of underlying detectors (Figure 20). The
invariant detector is characterized by a communication vector (91, 91, ..., g3, ...)
that is collinear with the vector of excitation of the additional set of detectors.
when the excitation profile of the additional set of detectors changes, so does the
communication vector. The arrows show that the coefficients of communication be-
tween aconstant and invariant detectors acquires values of mi, ..., m, .... under
the influence of stimulation of detectors of the additional set. If there is simul-
taneous change in excitation vector P and control vector of excitation H - ﬁn1, ...,
m5....}, the level of excitation of invarumtdetectors remains constant, and
the location of excitation maximum on the set of invariant detectors does not change
either. If only the control vector changes with a constant signal at the input,
there is the illusion of change in the stimulus. This happens because the communi-
cation vector changes, and this causes a shift of excitation maximum from one in-
variant detector to another.

Thus, we can distinguish two sensory signals: the main one going to the invariant
detector and an additional one, which modifies the communication system of the
invariant detector with the underlying level. The modifying signal depends on
which stimulus is delivered to the input of the additional system of detectors.
This stimulus determines the channel in which signals from underlying detectors
will create maximum excitation. Hith a change in signal at the input of the addi-
tional detectors, there is also a change in the number of the invariant detector
with maximum excitation. -

27
FINICIHWCJAl.lEﬂEIHVLY
ma (ll-W1AI. "SF. ONI."

4 I' The functional role of the additional
analyzer is to determine the aagnitude
of change in distribution of stimuli
on a set of invariant detectors. as
compared to their distribution on a
set of aconstant detectors (Figure 21).

In Figure 21, a stimulus represented
by an excitation vector or angle that

    

/- I gives it is plotted on the x-axis and
" the scalar product i - (P, M) of the
"" l. excitation vector multiplied by the
comunicetion vector of this invariant
Figure 20. detector with two different values for
Diagram of invariant detector control vector Mk and M1 is plotted on

the y-axis. This figure illustrates
a two-dimensional case. With one
controlling vector the invariant de-
tector is adjusted for one signal:
with a change in controlling vector,
when the col-unication vector changes,
the ease invariant detector becomes
selectively adjusted for the other
signal. The invariant detector res-
ponds with a minus reaction to the

 

Figure 21. signal whose excitation vector is
change in characteristic of invariant collinear to the formed communication
detector under the influence of a con- vector. '
trolling vector that nodifies the
con-unication vectors Thus, the vector controlling the addi-

tional set of detectors changes the
conunicetions of invariant detectors in such a way that with a shift of the
maximum for the set of additional detectors the excitation maxi-um created in' the
aain set of detectors shifts over the set of invariant detectors. The effect of
constant perception arises when the shift of excitatiou maximum over the set of
additional detectors is associated with a shift of excitation maximum over the
main set seven. The control vector, which alters the coununications between
aconstant and invariant detectors, creates an excitation maxinun on the same in-
variant detector. Thus, when the eyes are turned. the image shifts over the
retina; however, the controlling vector generated by the analyzer of viewing di-
rection changes the co-unications between aconstant and invariant detectors in
such a way that the inage is retained on the same invariant detectors all of the
time. This is what provides constancy of visual perception of direction during
eye movement.

Constancy of perception in the model under discussion amounts to the following.
There are at least two sets of detectors. Some detectors perfora the function of
main ones that perform analysis of stimulus parameters, the second is the set of
additional, ancillary detectors. The signals they contain alter the connunications
between the main and invariant detectors forming the set of output detectors. When
there is coordinated shifting of excitation maximums over the main and additional
sets of detectors. distribution of stimuli on the set of invariant detectors does
not change. The set [or numerous] of invariant detectors forms the internal screen

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t of main

the signs]. on the se
etectors,

additional 6

he set of
:tectors will shift constantly,
s s result, there is the illusion of chsnge in stinulus.
f an image that is stabilized in relation to the retins during eye movement is an
sion.
a by channel

such an illu
oding signsl parameter
n by primary de-

ing on receptors elicits s resctio
of an n-dinenBionel

e [significance] of components
ly to the ease

the valu
and stimulus is delivered siwltsneous
ruined by the sun
d

mle of

excitation vect
receptors, the level of exc
of the effects of these two stimuli. Formally, the j
ternined by the sum of the two excitation vectors genersted by then
cooponents of the resultant excitation vector equal the sun of corresponding cospo-
nents of the initial vectors. In the general use, the direction of the resultan
excitation vector differs from the direction of each of the initial vectors, i.e.,
the position of the excitation minus on the set of output detectors under the
sisultsneous effect of two etimli differs iron the position of excitation sexism
when only one of then is delivers (Figure 2 . In other words, concurrent delivery
f two stimuli to the input of s local
analyzer elicits a different subjective
sensation than each of the sun-ate
stimuli s parstely. Let a stimulus
generate an excitation vector that is
collinear with the vector g rated
by two simltaneously delivered stimuli;
then such s stimlus cannot be distin-
guished from the sun of the stimuli.
Thus, coding by channel nunber leads to
foundation of s genersliud law of
ture of stimuli, s specisl instance
of which is the well- 1 of mix--
ture of odors gustatory sensations
colors. The av of ure con-
the anal ser 0

 

tsneously acting

l excitation fusion’I] applies in
line slant. anslyz

analyzer of notion.

two simul
and 6—— luitin

tor PH: is the

Hixture of
stimuli (F
vectors; vec
P and c)

ponents o
itstion vecto

they will yield a zero
nutunl depression of s
odors are mixed.

detectors

ivity char
ixing can be p

indirectly est
find unknown character

1f the cos

of the axe
vec

If the sensit

of stimulus n
it possible to

in a number of
POI OFFICIALUSE ONLY

Considering the inertia of excitatory
' and inhibitory processes in real

’ " neuronal networks, one could expect
6 - mixing effects with successive delivery
'of two stinuli to the input of a local
analyzer. Indeed, excitation of primary
detectors induced by a stimulus ~
diminishes gradually after it is dis-
continued. This nsans that, after a
stimulus is discontinued, the excitation
vector it generated also disappears
gradually, with some lag. If a second
stinulus is delivered after discontinuing the first one, perception is determined by
the sun of excitation vectors of the preceding and next stimuli, with consideration
of the dynamics of their reaction (Figure 23).

Figure 23a
Mixing of two successive signals

Residual excitation persists for sone tine after the stiaulus on the level of primary
detectors, and this detenines vector I". If a second stimulus is now delivered,

its excitation vector 6 is added to the vector of residual excitation I". The new
excitation vector 8+1" deternines perception that differs froa perception of the
first and second signals delivered separately, as well as free the sun thereof,

when they are used sisultaneously. The contribution of the fading trace of the ex-
citation vector to the overall excitation vector diminishes with increase in inter-
val between stimuli.

Comaand neuron. In developing artificial sense organs for a robot, which are
based on the principle of signal coding by-chennel number, the question arises as
to how to coordinate such a multichannel, parallel-operating analyzer system that
has an hierarchic structure with the actuating performance of the robot. This
question requires special consideration. In this work. coordination of the prin-
ciple of signal coding by channel nunber with actuating functions is obtained by
following the biological prototype. The pricniple of coding by channel number
extends to realization of reactions. This is related to the concept of col-sand
neuron. The comnd neuron is a structure that is analogous to a detector, but
with an inverted co-unication tree. If the detector responds with nature excita-
tion to a specific combination of signals delivered to it over several channels
with different coefficients of amplification, the co-and neuron that is excited
forms a controlling vector due to the different coefficients of eonnunication with
underlying neurons. There is a solitary cowbination of effectors, which emerges
as a specific reaction of the organise in analysis of behavior, that corresponds
to this controlling vector. In the simplest case, the components of the control
vector are excitations from the co-and neuron which pass through motoneurons to
the input of effector eleaents. Figure 26 illustrates the structure of a con-and
neuron. Signals (d1. d2. ..., d... ...) fron different detectors'cone to the
input of the co-aand neuron through synaptic connections characterized by coeffi-
cients of co‘nunication (ql, Q2, ((3, ...). Excitation going free the wand neuron
through connections {19], v2, 0:. ...l. triggers a reaction through a set of noto-
neurons that create control excitation vector Rj, which creates a certain pattern
of effector responses. and this detersinea the output reaction. With reference to
the correlation between components of the control vector generated by a given
col-and neuron, one aust also take into consideration the tine of propagation of
impulses over consunications with "actuating [effector]. mechanisms." The tins
"pattern" of synaptic effects on the effector inputs nay also be of substantial
significance.

30
POROFFICIALUSIONLY
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY

 

- Figure 25. Structure of cot-sand neuron

The diversity of counsnd neurons generating different control vectors can create a
wide diversity of fixed reactions with a linited set of effector elmnts.

Thus. if an exogenous signal generates in a sensory system an excitation vector
that creates naxinma excitation on one of the secondary detectors, the excitation
of one co-aand neuron generates a control vector whose components are the product
of asgnitude of excitation of the cox-land neuron aultiplied by the conponents of
the vector of comunication with underlying elements.

Excitation of one comand neuron leads to a reaction or frag-ant of a reaction.
Thus, in the simplest case. the list of cot-sand neurons corrresponds to the list
of elementary reactions. -

The diversity of elementary reactions is deter-irked by the diversity of comnd
neurons. By analogy with the hierarchic structure of detectors. we can conceive

of the hierarchic systea of col-and neurons which, due to complication of cat-mica-
tions. generates an increasing diversity of reactions.

The choice of acne reaction or other signifies excitation of acne co-and neuron or
other. In the simplest case, the choice of reaction consists of stimulating detec-
tors through the exogenous environment which converge on the col-sand neuron. A
conbination of detectors converging on a co-Iand neuron ferns the specific stinulus
for a given reaction. In ethology, such relations are described under‘the none
of “lock and key." ‘

If there is no change in rise in the coauunication of the set of detectors with a
given cot-sand neuron and it does not depend on number of signals delivered. nor is
it a function of combining one signal with another, such a cot-land neuron does
not have flexibility. Flexible comand neurons are those whose coefficients of
communication with detectors change as a function of amber of stinuli delivered
or as a function of conbination of signals at the input.

Field of connand neurons. Bach connand neuron is characterised by a specific
control vector that generates a specific reaction. The reactions of different
comand neurons nay differ from one another in such a way that, together. they

form a field of command neurons with a wide assortnent of reactions. The system
of comand neurons involved in saccadic control of eye novuent could be an exanple
of such a field. Bach co-and neuron inplenents novenent of the eyes in a specific
direction and over a specific distance. A set of such comand neurons pernits

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

displacement of the eyes in relation to their initial position. This makes it
possible to transfer the image of any object on the retina to the required position,
for example, to its most sensitive part. -

One can develop a technical system of organization of motion on this principle. For
this, one should organize a set of analogues of co-and neurons that together form a
field. The control vectors of these co-and neurons must overlap the given space.
Reaching a specific point in space amounts, in this case, to the choice and excita-
tion of a specific consand neuron. The given trajectory of‘ a complex movement is
obtained by shifting the focus of excitation over the field of con-and neurons.

with the use of signals of invariant detectors as signals at the input of contend
neurons, one can organize a field of ecu-sand neurons that implement reactions with
consideration of constancy of signal perception.

Lateral inhibition between command neurons and change in priority of
reactions. The cos-and neurons of each level are connected to one another by lat-
eral inhibition. Excitation of one comand neuron inhibits all other cos-and
neurons. The uniqueness of choice is thus provided.

The choice of a reaction depends not only on which stimulus is involved, but which
reaction is preferable in a given situation. For ample, when an animal experiences
great thirst it does not pay attention to food which, in another situation, w0uld

be far from indifferent.

The mechanism of change in priority of co-and neurons controlling reactions is
involved in the choice of preferred reaction. This is achieved by means of special
modulating neurons. The set of values that alter the excitation of each cal-and
neuron constitutes a modulating vector, which redistributes the priorities of

couand neurons and, consequently, reaction priorities. In combination with lateral
inhibition between comnd neurons, the mechanism of redistribution of reaction pri- .
orities provides for a solitary choice of reaction in accordance with the require-
nents of the prewniling situation.

In each situation, in addition to situational signals, a modulating excitation
vector is delivered to the set of co-and neurons, and it alters the priorities of
cot-sand neurons. Hodulating vectors are realized by modulating neurons, which
receive signals from receptors of internal states: hunger, thirst, respiration, tem-
perature. The actions that conform with a given situation are performed as a result
of redistribution of priorities of conand neurons.

Instruction as disconnection of detectors from a command neuron. In
constructing a robot with consideration of interaction between detectors and com-and
neurons, it is necessary'to construct a system of conunications from command neurons
to motoneurons and effector elements after selecting a specific set of reactions.
These conunications are realized by the corresponding control vector which imple-
ments occurrence of the reaction. It is then necessary to select a vector of com-
munication between the set of detectors and each of the cat-and neurons that will
determine the selectivity of calling for the reactions.

The robot can be instructed either by means of expanding the repertoire of reactions
or changing their composition. This is achieved by including in the list of
possible actions some additional reactions and excluding unnecessary reactions.

This is done by changing the effectiveness of conunication between co-and neurons

32
POROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR Ol-‘l-KJAI. US! ONLY

and effector hctuating] elements. And it is necessary for these co-unications to
be flexible.

If the alphabet of robot actions is constant. instruction mounts to transformation
of couunication between the detectors and amend neurons. This could consist of
disconnecting previously connected detectors, connecting previously disconnected
detectors and combination of these processes. In this case, the oo-snications
between detectors and the command neuron must be flexible.

Pigure 25.
Disconnection of detectors from col-sand neuron
l) coefficients of con-unication the value of which
is inversely proportional to the value of the
detector excitation
2) profile of detector excitation
3) initial level of coefficients of mication
between detectors and count! neuron
.7') detector No
dj) level of its excitation
q“) value of coefficient of co-unication of jth
detector with lth col-tend neuron

 

Let us consider instruction as disconnection of detectors from the command neuron.
Let a set of detectors be connected to the cons“ neuron. Upon delivery of a
stimulus. a certain excitation profile passing to the input of conend neurons is
formed in this set of detectors. If we assume that the commutation coefficients
diminish proportionately to the degree of their excitation. with repeated delivery
of the same stimulus the excitation going to the input of the conand neuron '
becomes lower and lower from stimulus delivery to delivery, so that ultimately this
comand neuron ceases to react. The higher this process of adaptation in the
system of primary and secondary detectors, the longer the extinction of the co-and
neuron reaction lasts. Formally, extinction of the conand neuron's reaction in
the case of delivery of a stimulus many times can be interpreted as the result of
formation of a new conunication vector. the direction of which does not coincide
with the direction of the initial conunication vector between detectors and
cot-sand neurons. Thereby, under the influence of a stable stimlus situation,

the coemand neuron becomes selectively adjusted expressly to it. Adjustment is
manifested by selective blocking of signals elicited by this stimulus. In turn,
this leads to a situation where the stimulus no longer elicits the reaction that
the consand neuron in question controls (Figure 25).

With a change in stimulus, the excitation profile shifts over the set of sensory
detectors, as a result of which there is no longer compensation by the transformed
communication vector of excitation delivered to the input of the command neuron.
Thus, the command neuron is a cut-off filter: it does not react if the signal coin-
cides with a prior stimulus and it reacts when the preceding and subsequent stimuli
do not coincide [17]. This situation is illustrated in Figure 26. The value of
stimulus S is plotted on the x-axis and the reaction of the command neuron kj, which
equals the product of the vector of transformed communications multiplied by.7 the
excitation vector D generated by a signal in secondary detectors, is plotted on

the y-axis. The vertical dotted line shows the position of the stimulus that

was used during instruction 3.. After instruction, this stimulus elicits minimal

33
FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY
MWLLBEONLY

excitation. when the signal deviates from the standard, the reaction of the co-and
neuron is greater. The col-and neuron selectively depresses the signal that was _
used in instruction. The dotted line (horizontal) indicates the level of excitation

of a co-and neuron prior to instruction. . -

p.
/

    

visur. 26s
Oo-and neuron as a readjusting
_filter blocking a constant signal

Instruction as connection of detectors to a con-and neuron. when de-
tectors'are disconnected, the coefficients of their co-unicat'ion with the comand
neuron diminish as these communications are used. As a result. the conand neuron,
which selectively blocks the instructing signal, becomes a cut-off filter precluding
appearance of a reaction to this stimlus. Connection of detectors to e couand
neuron consists of increasing the coefficients of cormunication between detectors
subnitted to the stimulus and the con-and neuron. The excitation vector, which
appears under the influence of the stimulus on thepopulation of detectors, per-
forns the function of controlling the col-unication coefficients between detectors
and cmand neurons. As a result of delivery of the stimulus many times, the
comnication vector that connects the detectors to the co-and neurons is trans-
formed and becomes collinear with the excitation vector (Figure 27). Now the
stimulus generates sn-excitation vector on the set of detectors that is collinear
with the commicstion vector, and it elicits -a urinal reaction by the co-and
neuron. All other stimuli, which generate excitation vectors 'that are.not collinear
with the vector of comnication with the «mod neuron, elicit milder reactions
(Figure 28). thus, in the course of change in micatione, the cot-land neuron

becomes a selective filter that reacts only to a specific stimulus.

 

 

Figure 27. Connecting detectors to connand neuron

j) detector No - .vertical'dotted line—position of
qu‘) connunicetion coefficient instructive st'inulus
d-) level of‘ detector excitation horizontal dotted line—initial level
i) detector excitation curve created . of coefficients of conunication
by stimulus - between detectors and the cot-end
2) profile of transforned comunication neuron
coefficients
36

POIOFHCIALUSEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL!“ ONLY

Co-snd neuron as a reedjusting filter
which .aplifies the signals

In Figure 28, changing stimulus S,

which generates a variable excitation
vector 1) on secondary detectors,

is
plotted on the x—exis and the reaction
of cousnd neuron kg to ahewarisble
stimulus. the maximum reaction occurs

to the 8. signal that was used for
instruction and created a modification

of co-unication vector Q* (vertical
dotted line).

Instruction as change in connunication between detectors and the

command neuron as a result of effect of reinforcement input.

Theabove

cases of disconnecting detectors from the wand neuron or connecting them were
determined exclusively by the signals that passed through these conunications.

Disconnectionnconnection, which depends
is another forn of instruction.
of inputs: stable and flexible,

A change in efficiency of the flexible input is deternined by

inputs functions simultaneously with the
sign of change in the flexible input

the magnitude of change is determined by the nuber of combinations of
elici
detectors and

stable inputs. The excitation vector
coefficients of comunication between

with the next delivery of the stimulus through

"I

/ 5%.“;

Negative

Figure 29.
Change in co-unications between detectors
and comand neuron under the influence of
positive reinforcement of some stimuli
and negative reinforcement of others (ver-
tical dotted line—position of reinforced
stimulus sj)

on other inputs on the sans
let us consider the cos-and neuron with two types

ted by a specific

co-and neuron

stimulus alters the

the consent! neuron in accordance
the stable input of the cot-sand neuron.

Let us consider the case where two
vectors of detector excitation are

given on s cow-sand neuron with two stable
inputs. These inputs perforn the func-
tion of reinforcement. when the stimulus
is combined with positive reinforcement,
the co‘unication coefficients increase
and when it is conbined with negative
reinforccaent, they decrease. with a
combination of two stimuli with differ-
ent forms of reinforcement s communica-
tion vector develops whose components
are determined by the combination nunber
of each flexible input with each of the
stable inputs perforning the reinforce-
nent function. This complex canonica-
tion vector now starts to determine the
subsequent effects of the stimulus. The

excitation vector corresponding to the positively reinforced stimulus and the excita-

tion vector corresponding to the negatively reinforced stimulus,

when scelarly mul-

tiplied by the forned co-Iunication vector, elicits reactions that differ in negni-

tude (Figure 29).
depression of others,

tively reinforced signal. In other words.

comes selectively
the effect of the stinulus is
mined by the cos-and neuron input with which it

As a result of selective amplification of sons conunications and
the conand neuron be

adjusted to the posi-
now deter-

was previously colbined. Thus, one

can describe formation of a conditioned reflex in the language of change in con-uni-
cations between detectors and cot-and neurons.

35

MWLWONLY
ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Command neurons in the analyzer feedback circuit. It is necessary to
discuss col-and neurons and principles of their co-nnication with detectors when
examining artificial sense organs, since the sense. organs must themselves be active
systems that implement active searches. ‘

The simplest example of active control of sense organs is movement of eyes from one
point in space to another in viewing a scene. There are different means of such
movement. However, use of a field of com-and neurons with fixed motor fields makes
it possible .to provide simple co-unication between the detectors of target position
and mud neurons that move the eyes to view the 'target. The flexibility of com-
mand neurons makes it possible to shift the glance on this basis in response to
previously ineffective signals, for example, human verbal conands. Introduction
of contend neurons of a higher hierarchic level makes it possible to move over

complex trajectors, assembling them from elements represented by different col-sand
neurons of a lower level.

Conceptual reflex arc. The combination of receptors, detectors of co-and
neurons and effector units forms the conceptual reflex arc. The mechanism of coding
a signal by channel number by means of detectors forming a-multilayer analyzer is
used as the main principle of its organization. The most important characteristic

of higher level detectors is their invariance, which is achieved as a result of
controlling the coemmnications of one set of detectors by the excitation vector
generated by another, additional set of detectors. The system of invariant detectors
makes it possible to represent exogenous signals on the endogenous screen of the
robot, regardless of its own movements in relation to the external enviroment. The
actuating functions of the robot are implemented by col-sand neurons on which con-
verge specific sets of detectors. The priorities of co-and neurons are changed

by means of modulating neurons that are specific to a given situation, which create
control vectors for redistribution of comman neuron priorities.

The instruction process is considered as disconnection—connection of detectors
to the comand neuron. A distinction is made between two types of instruction:
dependent only on the stimulus and dependent on the combination of stimulus and
reinforcement.

Stimulus-dependent instruction is determined by the number of repetitions of the
signal that alters the coefficients of communication of detectors with the comand
neuron. Reinforcement-dependent instruction is determined by detectors converging
on the command neur'on that function simultaneously with the stable input of this
command neuron.

Passage of signals in conceptual reflex arc: the external signal creates, through
receptors, an excitation vector in primary detectors, and it determines the excita-
tion profile of output detectors. This set of excitations is rerouted to invarianted
detectors. The response [operation] of the command neuron depends on the priority

of the reaction, distinctions of the signal and instruction procedure (Figure 30).
This can be described as follows. Signal 8, which acts on receptors, induces an
excitation vector in them. An excitation vector appears in primary detectors. This
leads to selective excitation of the set of secondary detectors. The reactions of
command neurons are determined by the contribution of excited detectors, modulating
neurons and change in communications between command neurons and detectors during
instruction. Lateral inhibition, which is shown by the arrows between detectors,
sharpens their selectivity. It also provides for uniqueness [solitary] of excitation

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

of com-and neurons. The reaction at the output of the entire system is determined
by the excitation vector in the set of mononeurons. In the generalized form, the
operation of translation of signals in the conceptual reflex arc can be described

as matrix multiplication. Let P be the matrix of receptor excitation, A the matrix
of coununication of receptors with primary detectors, 1" the matrix of excitation of
primary detectors, c the matrix of comication of prinary detectors with secondary
detectors, 1) the matrix of excitation of secondary detectors, Q the matrix of
cousunication of secondary detectors with couand neurons. K the matrix of excita-
tion of command neurons and ijax -' Rj the transition from the maximally excited
command neuron to the reaction that is linked with it. Here, PA - 1’, Fc - D, 00 - K.

    
  

   

. Noto-
Prinary Secondary Con-and neurons Effectors
Receptors detect. detectors surons . )
IIII illl EIIII ‘ €]’9

 

-
h" Reactions

  

(:1 [I] w {x1

 

(I) ll} (/1

neuron
Figure 30. Conceptual reflex arc

[Pl—matrix of receptor reactions elicited by stimulus

[Al-«matrix of comaunication between receptors and primary detectors

[FJ-onatrix of excitation of primary detectors

[Cl-«matrix of communication of primary detectors with secondary ones

[DI—matrix of excitation of secondary detectors

[Q]-matrix of comunications of secondary detectors with command neuron
[Klwmatrix of excitation of cal-sand neurons

The discussed principles make it possible to create systems of neuron-like elements.
the internal conceptions [representations] of which coincide in many respects with
the internal conceptions of man, while the reactions reproduce conditioned reflex

reac t ions .

Hereafter, attention is given mainly to artificial sense organs. Cos-sand neurons
and changes in communication of detectors with comand neurons are mentioned only
to the extent that they are necessary for the control of sense organs.

37
FOR OFFICIAL [SB ONLY
'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3. INTENSITY ANALYZER

Model of analyzer of intensity. According to the general principle of
coding by channel number, coding of light intensity is done by a multilayer system
(Figure 31). There are receptors in the first layer of such an analyzer. There
are two types of receptors: rods and cones. Three types of cones have different
curves of spectral sensitivity to different wavelengths of monochromatic radiation.
The reactions of all receptors as a function of light intensity are described by

a hyperbolic tangent (in the mean range of sensitivity, this function can be re-
placed with a logarithmic one (Lipetz [18]).

The signal from the receptors travels to the input of primary detectors of two
types. The threshold and coefficient of celnunication between receptors and primary
detectors are regulated by horizontal cells [19, 20-21].

The characteristics of primary detectors are described according to the general
principle by a cosine or sine, the argument of which is a certain function of
stimulus intensity (Appendix 2). The characteristics of sensitivity of primary
detectors are defined in the range of arguent values of 0 to 180‘. It is

assumed that a primary detector, which is an analogue of a B neuron, has sinusoidal
characteristics and the analogue of a D neuron has cosinusoidal characteristics
[23, 26].

After the layer of primary detectors with gradual characteristics there is a .
layer of secondary detectors selectively adjusted to a specific stimulus intensity.

In Figure 32, light intensity I (logarithmic scale log I) is plotted on the x-
axis and level of excitation of individual secondary detectors d; with different
levels of input signal intensity is plotted on the y-axis. Different detectors
are excited to a maximum with different levels of stimulus intensity. With a
change in signal, the excitation maximu- shifts from one detector to another.

The controllable threshold of cousunication between receptors and primary detec-
tors aakes it possible to broaden the dynamic range of the entire system, retaining
high sensitivity to- change in illumination. Hith increase in intensity of light,
the characteristics of primary detectors shift in the direction of higher intensity
and with decrease. they shift toward lover ones. One can select a response shift
in such a way that the change in light intensity vould elicit maxim change in
activity of primary detectors.

Operation of the model can be described as follows. Hith illumination, the signal
from receptors excites primary detectors to a certain level. The level of excita-
tion of primary detectors is determined by components of a two-dimensional excita-
tion vector (Figure 31).
38
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
itﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(M‘LY

 

Figure 32.
Selective responses of secondary
detectors of intensity

 

In turn. the signal from B and D neurons goes to the input of secondary detectors
and excites then. We find that one of these detectors is more excited than any
other input detector. The nuaber of the primary detector with nsxinum excitation
unequivocally determines subjective perception of sci-ulna brightness. The number
of the secondary detector with laxinun excitation is unequivocally related to the
direction of the two-dimensional excitation vector. with change in etinulus in-
tensity. the direction of the excitation vector changes in the range of the first
quadrant, i.e., from 0 to 90'. If we assune that one of the prinary detectors

is subject to naxinun excitation in the dark (D neuron) and another has a zero
signal at the output (3 neuron), a vector with zero direction corresponds to this
case. A vector with zero direction corresponds to the weakest stinulus. With in-
crease in light intensity. the direction of the excitation vector changes, caning
close to 90'. A value of stimulus intensity, with which the subjective sensation
does not change in the course of adaptation. corresponds to a 45° angle position
of the excitation vector. In Figure 33, all of the diversity of secondary detec-
tors of the local intensity analyzer is situated on the circumference within the
angle of the first quadrant, which corresponds to different combinations of excita-
tion of two prinary detectors. Excitation of a type D primary detector is plotted
on the x—axis and excitation of a type 3 primary detector is plotted on the y-axis.
The position of the excitation vector changes as a function of force of stimulus.
which corresponds to shifting of excitation maximum fron one secondary detector

to another, reflecting strong (1), average (2)-and weak (3) signals.

however, we know that in the absence of
light nan does not perceive the color
black. Under these conditions, his per-
ception is characterised as ”eonething
gray.” The typical distinction of the
hunnn and animal light intensity analyzer
is that the brightness of the signal is
measured in relation to a certain average
level, which corresponds to absence of
Figure 33. signal at the input. Changes in brightness
Space of perception of intensity occur in both directions. increase and
decrease in relation to the level of the

"retina's own light."
39
FNTR 0F?1C1Al.ll§il(ﬂ‘LN
FIIICHﬂNCJAl.USE1ONlN

Simultaneous contrast. 1n the case of overall illumination of the retina,
perception of black as less bright than the "retina's own light" is impossible.
Perception of "black" occurs when there are sections of the retina with considerably
lower than average illumination. Thus, perception of "black" occurs only when two
adjacent sections of the retina are illuainatedto different degrees. This neans
that the blackening effect is the result of interaction of at least two local
analyzers of intensity.

According to the general principles of organization of sensory systems, there is
interaction between local analyzers that enhances differential sensitivity of the
system as a whole. This interaction occurs with the participation of inhibitory
communications between analogous primary detectors of different local analyzers.
Formally. this interaction is described by transformation of the corresponding exci-
tation vectors. The resultant vector in a given analyzer equals the initial excita-
tion vector in the ease analyzer sinus the excitation vector generated in an adja-
cent local snalyzer multiplied by the coefficient of interaction. The direction of
the resultant vector does not necessarily coincide with the direction of the initial
excitation vector. If the direction of the excitation vector changes, there is

also a change in the number of the detector with laximum excitation.

Let us assume that there is no signal at the input of one analyzer and that the
input of another is illuminated. Absence of signal corresponds to an excitation
vector with zero direction. However, as a result of interaction, the excitation
vector goes beyond the first quadrant, since the reaction of the 3 primary detector
becomes negative. This is associated with decline in level of excitation of the

D neuron.

Tigure 34.
Concurrent contrast during interaction of two
intensity analyzers
R) receptors
3, D) primary detectors
di, i-l. ..., n) secondary detectors of one
local intensity analyzer
d.¢, di) secondary detectors of black
and white stimuli, respectively
d.) gray color detector

 

The characteristics of primary detectors change under the influence of concurrent
contrast: a negative part appears in B detectors with illumination of adjacent

- regions, whereas the excitation level drops in the D detector. Interaction of
stimuli in two local intensity analyzers is illustrated in Figure 34. Two stimuli,
s. and 5;, act on two local intensity analyzers. Analogous priaary detectors are
linked by lateral inhibition (D neuron with D neuron, B neuron with B neuron).
Appearance of black shades is related to the fact that the excitation vector shifts
to the fourth quadrant, where primary type B detector is inhibited (striped circles
represent inhibitor relations and white show positive relations).

‘0
FEIICHHNCJAL.USEGNﬂLY
FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USI(M§LY

hus, different secti
.eurons. In this case.

.n fornation of primary d

sepent of the response
local analyzer and its negative seg-

froa both its on primary

this nodel is characterized by th
detectors and from prinary detectors of adjacent analyzers go to the secondary de-
ity analyzer. The set of secondary detectors can be
e escitation

te when there
consists of detectors that

ensation of black.
when illumination of the retinal segnent is lower than
are neaaured (Figure 35). As

1y a signal from its receptive field
t of prisary detectors of

and there is no inducing

the local analyser
only sole of

signal fron adjacent analysers,
ectors function, vhich corres-

g.
‘94“ the intensity det
”a pond to increase in intensity in relation to
. the retina's light. If there is an inductive
“- sh: signal tron an adjacent section, detectors that
/Q neasure gradations from gray to black function.
A.
g. To construct secondary detectors, determination
a 4' is first nade of the van of acitation vectors
for which output detectors nuat be constructed.
Then a cmication vector is assigned to each
llinear to the corresponding

detector that is co

Appearance of shades of black as excitation vector.
modulus of all could-cation vectors

a turn of the vector into the
to of the

fourth quadrant un
ence of an inductive field Properties of different elenen
1N) excitation vector of test nodel of intensity analyzer. In the
field absence of illumination of the retina, the
F) inductive field vector excitation vector has a zero direction. The
secondary detector, which codes neutral gray
ination, the B

n. with increase in illun

maximum excitatio
tion of the

gly excited. whereas excite D detector dini-

(intrinaic gray) has
ncrease in an:

detector
nishes. An increase in illuninstion corresponds to i
to 90‘, which is associated with a shift of excitation
" in the direction of detectors of

of ”intrinsic gray
d to shift the excitation sexism

l of intensity require
one deternines the absolute

nore brightness. The leve
" to an adjacent

from the detector of "intrinsic gray
threshold of intensity perception.

Hith change in i
detectors. The reaction of different output det

of illumination can be calculated on

detectors are cosine curves, the srgunent of which is the

Al
F03 OFHCIAL USE ONLY
ill|(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.Uﬁl10NlN

delivered to their inputs. The data obtained are similar to the characteristics
of intensity detectors found for the rabbit's visual cortex [25].

Neurons involved incoding intensity can be classified as so-called brightness
cells [25]. Spectral sensitivity of brightness cells is characterized by the
visibility [luminous efficiency?] curve. The visibility curve is determined experi-

mentally, establishing the intensity of monochromatic light at a given wavelength
so that its brightness would be constant.

The spectral characteristics of different neurons are determined by finding the
intensity of monochromatic light at a given wavelength, at which neuronal activity
reaches a certain fixed level. Evidently. the spectral characteristics of primary
detectors are determined by the spectral characteristics of receptors at the model's
input. Either rods (with low illumination) or cones (with high illumination) can
serve as receptors in the model. Thus, with low intensities, the spectral charac-
teristics of primary detectors are determined by the spectral properties of rhodop-
sin and coincide with the scotopic curve. with high illumination. they are
determined by the overall spectral characteristics of all three cones and correspond
to the photopic visibility curve.

apparently, the reaction of any detector neurons of the model will not change if
there is no change in magnitude of the overall receptor signal delivered to the

input of primary detectors. The reaction of secondary detectors does not change
either. '

Thus, the spectral properties of all neurons of the model of light intensity analyzer
have the same appearance; it is described by a photopic visibility curve with high
intensities, i.e., all of the neurons in the intensity analyzer model are, in the
classification of deValois [26], brightness cells.

Subjective differences with changes in light intensity. Acuuding

to the spherical model of signal discrimination, the subjective space of perception
of stimulus intensity is described by the circumference of a single radius. The
subjective distance between stimuli is determined by the angle formed by the cor-
responding excitation vectors or length of the are on which this angle is based.

It would be logical to select the zero direction vector, which corresponds to
”intrinsic gray" as the reference point. In this case, subjective brightness of

the stimulus equals the angle formed by the zero vector and given excitation vector.

The model satisfies the function that is known in psychophysics as the law of
Heber-Pechner [27].

In the aodel, the threshold increment of intensity is determined as a value, at
which the excitation maximum shifts from one secondary detector to the next one.
If the density of detectors on the circumference is constant, the threshold incre-
ment of intensity is determined by a value at which the excitation vector turns

by a certain fixed angle; the turn angle is unrelated to the current value of
stimulus intensity.

In other words, if we operate with distances in the subjective space of the model,
the differential threshold measured in angular units is a constant. If we know
this value, we can determine the threshold increment of intensity that elicits

a change in sensation for the first time.

- 42
FOR OFIHC1A1.UBEGDNLY
F0.‘0FFHJAI.USE(HVLY

After determining the threshold increment of intensity, we can calculate the Heber
fraction for the model (Figure 36).

    

10” Figure 36.
1447 Curve of Hiber's fraction for man and model
"‘ a 1g 1) logarithm of stimlua intensity
’1 (5 AI/I) relative differential threshold,
’ ’1 , where AI is threshold change in
' , stimulus intensity
‘1 ' a, b) curve of Weber's fraction for man and

-l-l 02 ‘u/
b

model, respectively

I ‘8 1) curve of Heber's fraction in the case
where receptor sensitivity is des-
cribed by a hyperbolic tangent

A: at 1’ 1‘ g] 2) by a logarithmic function

    
 

If the sensitivity of receptors to stimulus intensity is described by a logarithmic
function, the Heberfracdnn is constant. If the characteristics of the receptor
are represented by a hyperbolic tangent, the Heber fraction is constant only for middle
intensities: with lower or higher intensities it increases for the model. The
Weber fraction as determined in psychophysical experiments behaves similarly. how-
ever, in the model, the range of intensities for which the Heber fraction is con-
stant is narrower than the one for man. This is attributable to the fact that

the calculations did not take into consideration the effect of a shift of detector
responses along the intensity axis. The increase in Heber's fraction with strong
intensities is related to the fact that saturation of primary detectors occurs. In
order to alter the reaction of primary detectors by a magnitude at which the exci-
tation vector would turn by the threshold angle there must be a large incrumant of
intensity (Appendix 2).

Steven‘s law. The subjective distance between stimuli is determined by the
angle between the corresponding excitation vectors. If one of the vectors is

fixed and corresponds to "intrinsic gray,” while the other is arbitrary and cor-
responds to a stimulus of arbitrary intensity, the angle between vectors as a func-
tion of intensity of the arbitrary stimulus is an analogue of Steven’s psycho-
physical law (Figure 37) [28]. The angle of excitation vector rotation as a func-
tion of the logarithm of stimulus intensity was calculated and found to be close

to the experimental data of Stevens. For weak and middle intensities this func-
tion is a straight line. with strong intensities it is curved: in order to elicit
the same increase in brightness as with weak intensities, one must increase stimulus
intensity more and more.

However, there is also some difference between experimental and estimated charac-

teristics: the experimental response deflects down with mild intensities of light,
whereas the estimated function does not deviate from the straight line. The non-

linearity of this function increases for man if the assessment of stimulus bright-
ness is made after preliminary adaptation to a certain stimulus. The greater the

intensity of the adaptive stimulus, the greater this deviation [28, 29].

43
FIII(NﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NNLY
F!II(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.lEIi(lVLY

 

Figure 37. Stevens' function for man and the model

lg I) logarithm of stimulus intensity
6) logarithm of rank evaluation of intensity or logaritha of subjective
distance calculated in the model (curves 2-6 calculated with consideration
of shift in characteristics of primary detectors in relation to the
intensity scale with the adaptive effect of bighnintensity stimuli)
a) function found experimentally for man
h) function calculated for the model

This effect can also be reproduced in the model if we consider the mechanism of
raising the threshold when the signal is transmitted via the receptor-primary
detector channel. Hith increase in illumination intensity there is intensifica-
tion of the signal at the receptor output, which leads to intensification of the
signal at the output of horizontal cells. In turn, amplification of the signal at
the output of horizontal cells leads to elevation of the threshold of the receptor-
primary detector channel. As a result of these processes, only signals that exceed
this threshold reach the input of primary detectors. This provides for a shift of
primary detector responses in the direction of high intensities, which prevents
saturation thereof. As a result, the model does not perceive intensities that

are elicited in receptors by a signal that is smaller than the threshold of the
receptor-primary detector channel. Deflection from a straight line with reproduc-
tion-of Steven's law in the model is a consequence of this. The higher the illumi-
nation of the adaptive stimulus, the higher the threshold and the greater the
initial range of intensities to which the model remains insensitive.

Adaptation of primary detectors of intensity. Under the influence of
light on the main receptive field of a local analyzer, the sensitivity of primary
detectors dininishas porportionally to the force of excitation. Thus, with high
brightness, the sensitivity of a type a primary detector decreases more than

that of a type D detector.

This is associated with a turn of the excitation vector in the direction of the
vector with a 45' direction, i.e., the perceived brightness of the stimulus dimi-
nishes. If, however, the intensity of the adaptive stimulus is such that the
output signal of the B neuron is lower than the signal at the output of the D
neuron, as a result of adaptation the excitation vector turns from the zero vector
toward the vector with a 65' direction. Upon adaptation to dark, the subjective
brightness of the stimulus increases. These processes are an expression of the
normalization effect in the intensity analyser.

- 4h
IN)! OFIICIAI.IIHBCNILY
INDI¢0FFICJAI.IENE(NQLY

Since the change in responsesot primary detectors persists for some time, even
after discontinuing the adaptive stimulus, an aftereffect occurs. The stimulus
delivered after prior adaptation generates an excitation vector whose direction
differs from that of the vector generated by the same stimulus in the absence of
adaptation. Subjective evaluation of brightness changes in such a way that
analyzer discrimination increases in the vicinity of the adaptive stimulus. This
is manifested by the fact that the subjective distances increase between stimuli in
the vicinity of the stimulus intensity at which adaptation occurred. ‘

All of the above considerations can be extrapolated to perception of black, when
the main field is surrounded by a lighter inductive field. In this case, it must

be borne in mind that the responses of primary detectors are formed by means of
both the main and inductive fields.

The aftereffect enables us to explain in part successive images. Indeed, let a
bright stimulus be delivered to the main analyzer field. As a result of adaptation
to this stimulus, there sill be greater decrease in sensitivity of B detectors than
that of D detectors. After this stimulus is discontinued, the background stimulus
excites B neurons to a lesser extent than in the absence of the adaptive stimulus.
As a result, this background is perceived as being darker than without prior adap-
tation. This explains the next negative image.

After adaptation to the inductive field in the absence of a stimulus to the main
field, the sensitivity of the B neuron becomes greater than that of the D neuron.
This leads to appearance of a positive next image in the segment of the main field.

The following factors must be taken into consideration to explain completely the
dynamics of successive images: occurrence of oscillations in the set of detectors
as a consequence of inertia of inhibitory and excitatory connections between them;
change in threshold under the influence of the adaptive stimulus in the receptor-
primary detector channel.

Adaptation is combined with concurrent contrast, which is the consequence of in-
hibitory relations between analogous primary detectors referable to different local
analyzers. Thus, D neurons of one segment of the retina have an inhibitory effect
on D neurons of another segment. There is analogous mutual inhibition between B
detectors.

Let us consider two cases. In the first case, let the stimulus affect only the
main field of the local analyzer. The delivered stimulus increases activity of the
B neuron and decreases activity of the D neuron. Conversely, in adjacent segments,
n rzurcns are not excited while D neurons show maximum excitation. As a result of
lateral inhibition between primary detectors of different local analyzers, D neurons
of the main field are strongly inhibited by D neurons of the inductive field, while
B neurons of the inductive field are strongly inhibited by B neurons of the main
field. Then the components of the excitation vector on the main field will change
so as to correspond to stronger stiaulation. In turn, changes in components of the
excitation vector in adjacent local analysers whose receptive fields are not illu-
minated correspond to a "weaker" stimulus. This is perceived as the color black.

In the second case, let the main and inductive fields be equally illuminated. The
degree of excitation of primary detectors of both local analyzers is the same. As

#5
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB¢MVLY
WWWMY

a result of interaction of analogous primary detectors of two local analyzers, the
degree of excitation will diminish in all prinsry detectors. but the proportion
will remain unchanged and . consequently, there will not be a change in direction
of the excitation vector either. This means that there is also no change in the
masher of the secondary detector with maxi-us excitation. Thus, if the nain and
indictive fields are equally illuminated, subjective brightness of the stinulus
does not change. -

This effect differs tron lateral inhibition usually discussed in the literature
[30-32] in that it occurs between hononymous detectors.

If the main and inductive fields are equally illuinated. as a result of ordinary
lateral inhibition the signal at the receptor output will diminish everywhere by
the ease nagnitude. There will also be a change in the signal going from receptors
to prinary detectors. As a result, there will be a decrease in excitation of B
detectors and increase in .that of D detectors. This corresponds to a decrease in
atinulus brightness. Thus, uniforn illumination of the entire retina in the pre-
sence of lateral inhibition on the receptor level leads to a decrease in perceived
brightness of the stiaulus. However. in the case of inhibition between hononynous
primary detectors. there is no change in perceived stimlus brightness.

1.6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rasmussen“

CHAPTER 4. COLOR ANALYZER

Construction of nodel of color analyzer. In accordance with the general
pricniples of constructing sensory analysers, the nodel of a color analyzer is
comprised of a layer of receptors, layer of primary detectors and layer of output,
secondary detectors (Figure 38).

There are three types of cones in the receptor layer—R, G and l—each of which
has selective sensitivity to nonochroaatic radiation with different wavelengths:

R is the cone that contains erythrolabe as pignent, which is the most sensitive

to long-wave radiation. and mint. sensitivity is obtained at a wavelength of

A - 570 .nn; 6 is the cone containing the pignent chlorolabe, which is the nost sen-
sitive to the niddle-wave segnent of the visible spectrum, with maximum sensitivity
at A - 535 nu; 3 is the cone containing cyanolabe, which is the nest sensitive to
short-wave radiation, with minu- sensitivity at X - “5 ms [33]. As shown by
Dartnall [36], the characteristics of cone sensitivity as a function of frequency
of nonochronatic radiation have the sane appearance with accuracy of up to a con-
stant factor [nultiplier]. It is seemed that thereafter the characteristics

of cones are described by the function of Dartnall. 0n the whole, these three
cones cover the range of visible light waves from 380 to 750 n.

Signals fron cones with different weights and different signs go to the input of
primary detectors forming three opponent pairs of cells: 1) pair of neurons mired
by red and inhibited by green (red-"+"; green—"-”) or, on the contrary, inhibited
by red and excited by green ("-"-red, "+"-green); 2) pair of neurons with "+"--
blue, "-“-yellow. or "-" blue and "+" yellow); 3) pair of neurons with "+"-black
and "-" white, or "+“ white and "-" black. Bach pair of opponent cells corresponds
to one primary detector. The presence of a pair of cells (rather than one) is
necessary to separate the excitation and inhibition channels converging on the
input of secondary detectors. Thus, the set of three primary detectors (three pairs
of cells) describes the components of a three-dinensional excitation vector, and
each pair of opponent cells for-s only one of its conponents (Appendix 3).

He should explain why the three types of cones cannot directly determine the coupon-
ents of the three-dimensional color vector of excitation. when the cones are ex-
posed to light of any spectral composition, their reaction presents the sane sign,
which is determined by the hyperpolarizing effect of light on then. Consequently,
if the response of the cones would directly deter-inc the conponents of the excita-
tion vector. the latter could not go beyond the range of one octant, and then the
subjective distance between colors would be small. To increase the distance between
colors one must use the entire three-dimensional space. The components of the
excitation vector should change in sign with change in spectral composition of the

lo?
POIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOIGHHHKJAL.USBIHULY

stimulus. This is achieved by the fact that the cone signals travel to.prinary
detectors with different signs and weights.'

 

Figure 38. Structure of color an.lyrer

The first element of signal transformation after the receptors are horizontal
cells connected to the cones. The three types of horizontal cells correspond to
B/Y, RIC and Hh/Bl elements of the model on the level of bipolar cells. Hutually
opposite pairs are formed. Neurons have been found on the level of the visual.
cortex that are selective for a specific color tone.

In accordance with the spherical model, the characteristics of opponent cells must
satisfy the sphere equation. Indeed, a study of the responses of horizontal cells
of fish revealed that the sum of the squares of excitation of three types of hori-
zontal cells by equally bright stimuli equals a constant, thus satisfying the
sphere equation. . .

In Figure 39s. the coordinates of color space are given by the excitation of three
types of opponent neurons, B/Y. RIG and Hh/Bl representing primary detectors. The
sum of the squares of excitation of these detectors for equally bright stimuli is

a constant. The modulus [A(A)| . const. is the radius of the sphere where secondary
detectors are localized. The vertical angle of the excitation vector determines
saturation and the horizontal angle. the color tone. Detectors selectively adjusted
to specific wavelengths of monochromatic radiation form a curve on the sphere that
is connected to detectors adjusted to a mixture of red and violet. which corresponds
to purples. (B/Y) is the reaction of the opponent primary "blue-yellow” detector,
(RIG) is "red-—green" and ("h/Bl) is "white-black.” The solid line on the sphere
shows the line of monochromatic colors. -

In Figure 38b, the color circle is obtained as a projection of the color sphere

on plane RIG - :gand B/Y - :2. In the center of the circle is projected the point
of the color white, while the projections of monochromatic colors are shown by
dots, triangles and squares for different subjects [13]. The wavelength of the
indicated color in nanometers is shown near some of the points.

In Figure 39c, the functions of color opponents were obtained by the method of
multidiaensional scaling on the basis of data on the names of colors [13]. The

58
.FOIIOF11C1AI.IINE(HVLY
FOIIDFFKNAL.USElN‘LV

wavelength is plotted on the x-axie and values of RIG. 3/! and thBl components on
the y-axis.

_ ,..—— — _

 

 

Figure 39. Space of perception of color stimuli

Thus, the entire set of color-selective secondary detectors lies in three-dimensional
space on the surface of a sphere [35]. The Euclidean coordinates of this sphere are

the levels of excitation of the three types of opponent cells. '

The subjective characteristics of color are determined by secondary detectors that
"lie" on the surface of the sphere. Here. the horizontal angle corresponds to
color tone and the vertical angle to degree of saturation. Hhite is localized
at the pole. The line of monochromatic colors lies on the sphere at different
distances free the pole. The line of nonochroeatic colors is connected_to the

section of purples.

£9
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USI‘0NLY
INJI!0FFICIAI.1EHE(H‘LY

One can construct the system of artificial color vision by the usual scheme. A
communication vector is with constant modulus collinear with one of the excitation
vectors in three-dimensional color space, formed by the primary detector signal,
is ascribed to each of the output detectors.

The function of the color analyzer can be described as follows. when a stimulus

of a given spectral composition is delivered to the model's input, hyperpolariza-
tion corresponding to the stimulus occurs in the three types of cones. A signal
from the cones is delivered to the input of primary detectors (opponent cells [36])
determining the degree of their excitation. A vector of excitation whose direction
determines the subjective quality of light that we call color corresponds to a

given set of excitations of primary detectors. The signal from primary detectors
determines the degree of excitation of each of the secondary detectors, one of which
will be excited more than all the others. The number of the secondary detector with
maximal excitation determines "perception“ of color by the model. The estimated
characteristics of secondary detectors as a function of wavelength of monochromatic
radiation can be obtained if we know the characteristics of the primary detectors
(Figure 60). DeValois I36, 37] discovered color detectors in the lateral geniculate
body of a monkey.

.a €§ b
’x
I - ’_
I
I
III II! III A, I“. III III III I’ll, nm
Figure 40. Characteristics of secondary detectors of colors for a monkey
and the model

A) wavelength of monochromatic radiation
dj ) magnitude of reaction of color-selective primate neuron and model element

(with change in wavelength,excitation maximum shifts from one detector to
another)

a) for monkey neurons

b) for the model

Simultaneous contrast in color analyzer. Like the intensity analyzer,
the color analyzer consits of a set of parallel local analyzers. Each of the
local analyzers "sees" the outside world by means of a small segment of the retina,
from which it receives a signal. we previously named this retinal segment the
main field of the local analyzer.

According to the general principle of concurrent contrast, there is inhibitory
interaction between homonymous primary detectors of different local analyzers
(Figure 61). Two stimuli. the main one, s. and inductive one 81. act on two
local color analyzers I and II, generating two excitation vectors represented by

50
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
H)! (WI-10M! "8&2 ONLY

excitations of corresponding primary detectors of color. Analogous primary detectors
are connected by lateral inhibition. If the intensity levels are the sane, lateral
inhibition alters the color tone and saturation in each cement without appearance
of black shades; if the illumination of the inductive field is greater than that of
the main field, the excitation-vector turns and moves into the other half of the
sphere. This is associated with excitation of secondary detectors of color (d1, d2,
..., d”), which are characterized by blackish shades. For this reason the color

of the main field acquires a blackish shading. Consequently, primary detectors re-
ceive signals not only from receptors of the main field, but those of adjacent
fields. Let us call the segments of the retina that are not the main ones for a
given local analyzer but influence its function by means of siaultaneous contrast
relations the inductive fields.

 

Figure 1:1. Simultaneous contrast in the color analyzer

In the case of uniform illumination of the entire retina by light of the same
spectral coaposition, a change in spectral composition of light leads to a change
in direction of the excitation vector, but it does not exceed the boundaries of
the convex cone circumscribed by the line of monochromatic colors.

This statement ensues from the convexity of such a cone. Indeed, light of any
spectral composition can be described as the result of the overall effect of its
monochronatic radiation components. Since the Iodel is linear, the resultant
excitation vector is the sum of vectors generated by the different nonochromatic
radiations. Since the cone of Ionochromatic colors is convex, the resultant vec-
tor 1a always within this cone.

Thus, in the case of uniform illumination of the retina, color perception is
limited to the monochromatic cone. However. in theory, the range of color per-
ception can be increased. For this, we must know how to obtain excitation vectors

51
FOR OFl-‘IGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beyond the monochromatic cone. Presence of detectors on the sections of the sphere
lying beyond the line of monochromatic colors is a condition for effectiveness of
such a procedure.

In the case where the main and inductive fields
of the color analyzer are illuminated by nono-
chromatic radiations differing in wavelength,
the excitation vector deter-aiming color per-
ception by the model equals the excitation
vector generated by the stimulus in the main
field minus the vector corresponding to the
stimulus in the inductive field, multiplied

by the coefficient of interaction. In the
general case, such a resultant vector could

go beyond the boundaries of the monochromatic

 

Figure 62. cone, leading to color sensations that would
Appearance of new color shades as a be impossible with uniform illumination of
result of influence of inductive the entire retina (Figure 62). An analogous
field (solid line shows the trajec- situation exists in human perception of color.
tory of monochromatic colors) when the main and inductive fields of the

_ analyzer are illuninated by light differing
in spectral composition, perception of such colors as brown, grayish brown. brick
occurs. which is impossible with uniform illumination of the entire retina.

Thus, as is the case for the intensity analyzer, the set of secondary detectors can
be divided into two subsets. One of them includes all the neurons that code colors
corresponding to excitation vectors of the monochronatic cone and the other, all

the rest of the detectors. These output detectors are subject to maximum excitation
only if the stimuli of the main and inductive fields have different spectral cowo-
sition.

Although the properties of such neurons had not been subnittsd to experimental study,
according to deVelois [26], there is inhibitory interaction of the "simultaneous
contrast" type in the color analyzer.

The functional significance of inhibitory relations between homonymous primary de-
tectors of different local analyzers is to increase disrcimination sensitivity to
two stimuli delivered simltaneously to different cements of the retina. Such
interaction leads to increased subjective differentiation of stimuli.

The increase in differential sensitivity to stimli similar in color to the stimulus
on the inductive field inevitable leads to diminished differential sensitivity to
other colors. This is due to the fact that, on the whole, the sensitivity of the
color analyzer is close to optimal, and it cannot be increased for all colors at the
same time: an increase in sensitivity to some colors inevitably leads to a decrease
therein to others.

The human color analyser has analogous properties. It has been shown that illumina-
tion of the inductive field with, for example, green color leads to an increase in
differentisl'sensitivity on the main field to stimuli that are close to green. How-
ever, this is associated with a decrease in sensitivity to other colors, for example,
blue [38].

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOInOF1NCJAI.l£§EINNLY

Interaction of the "simultaneous contrast" type provides for some invariance of

color perception in relation to the color of background illumination. Indeed, if
the main and inductive fields are illuminated by additional background light, the
effect of the overall background illumination is compensated by mutual inhibitory

However, in addition to positive effects, interaction of the "simultaneous contrast”
type generates a number of negative phenomena. He refer to illusions of simultaneous
contrast. bet, for example, the entire screen be illuminated by red light, with

the exception of a small light spot. As a result of concurrent contrast, the

white spot is perceived by man as being green. We could cite many examples of such
illusions.

Moreover, the inhibitory mechanism of "simultaneous contrast" creates the effect

of one color being masked by another when delivered successively. The closer the
delivered szimuli are in color. the greater the masking effect. The effect of
masking of one stimulus by another is attributable to residual lateral inhibition
by the preceding stimulus of excitation elicited by the next stimulus. This
inhibition is effected via lateral connections between primary detectors, and the
closer the stimuli are in color, the greater the inhibition. This is also ob-
served in psychOphysical experiments: the closer two successively delivered stimuli
are in color, the more they mask one another [39].

Adaptation in the color analyzer. There is an adaptation mechanism in the
color analyzer which enhances its ability to discriminate the colors of two suc-
cessively delivered stimuli. Such enhancement of discrimination sensitivity of
the color analyzer is obtained by lowering the sensitivity of primary color detec-
tors proportionally to the level of their excitation by the adaptive stimulus.

In the course of prolonged observation of the same adaptive stimulus, there is
continuous change in sensitivity of primary detectors and, consequently, there is
also continuous change in signal at the detector output which, in the general
case, corresponds to continuous change in direction of the excitation vector. In
turn, a change in direction of the excitation vector leads to a change in the
number of the output detector with maximum excitation and change in perception of
stimulus color. Thus, during prolonged observation of a stimulus there is con-
stant change in perception of its color. This phenomenon is called the normaliza-
tion effect in the color analyzer. According to previously obtained findings,
stimuli that excite either only one of the primary detectors or excite all primary
detectors equally are not subject to the normalization effect.

Of all the stimuli that are net subject to normalization, only those that excite
all primary detectors equally are stable. This means that, in the course of
adaptation, all vectors tend toward the vector with equal components. During
adaptation, the excitation vectors move toward the vector that has equal components
over different trajectories. If an excitation vector has at least two equal com—
ponents, its trajectory is flat during adaptation and the excitation vector remains
in the same plane all of the time. These planes are two-dimensional invariant sub-
spaces of the adaptation operator (Appendix 7).

All the rest of the vectors have a rather complex trajectory: saturated colors
shift during adaptation in both the direction of white and the direction of one of
the planes that is a two-dimensional invariant subspace of the adaptation operator.

53
FOI‘0FFK3A1.USB(IVLY
Let there be a plane containing the excitation vector for white. As it intersects
the three-dimensional solitary sphere. it forms a certain meridian. By rotating
this plane about the vector for white we obtain a family of meridians of the

unit sphere of colors. Each color excitation vector can now he described by two
parameters: one indicates the meridian on which lies its point of intersection

and the point corresponding to white. The former characterizes the chromaticity of
the stimulus and the latter its saturation [40, bl].

long time there is a change, in the general case, in both its chromaticity and satura
tion. Stimuli corresponding to vectors referable to invariant subspaces of the

adaptation vector do not change color in the course of prolonged observation, only
their saturation changes.

Monochromatic colors with wavelengthsof 13470. 492 and 560 nm do not change their
thromaticity [lb]. In addition to monochromatic colors, there is also no change
with adaptation in chromaticity of the color with the following three-stimulus
coefficients: a I 0.695. y - 0.155. 3 . 0.35.

of A “670-487, .507, 565-576 nm does not change
during adaptation. In addition to the above-

J mentioned colors. there is also purple, which
,// also does not change its chromaticity during
adaptation [42]. Other colors change with

' adaptation (Figure 43). The original color
7 before adaptation is characterised by differ-
ent components of excitation vector P. Hith

,7; adaptation. the vector components diminish
proportionately to the degree of their exci-
Figure 43. tation. For this reason, excitation vector
Shift of end of excitation vector 7* deflects to a position where the compon-
with adaptation to color ents are equal. Saturation of a highly

saturated color diminishes, while the color
tone shifts to one of the stable colors.

In real neuron nets, changes in sensitivity induced by an adaptive stimulus are
restored after discontinuing the stimulus gradually, with some lag. If the stimulus
reaches the analyzer input before total restoration of sensitivity of primary de-
tectors, it stimulates primary detectors differently. This means that the same
stimulus delivered before and after preadaptation generates excitation vectors dif-
fering in direction and elicits perception of different colors.

In analyzing the adaptation effects, it must be borne in mind that they could be
elicited by adaptation of detectors in both the main and inductive fields. In the
latter case, the effect of adaptation is transmitted via inhibitory connections
between homonymous primary detectors of different local analyzers.

These illusions are the price for the gain in discrimination sensitivity that the
system acquires because of adaptation. Thus (see Figure 66), after prior adaptation

FOIIOFFHJAI.USE(NNLY
IIII(HNWCU\LIJBE(HVLY

to three monochromatic colors (solid
line A . 500, dash line 555 and dot-
desh line 625 am) there is increase
in differential sensitivity of the
system, particularly to stimuli whose
color is close to the color of the
adaptive stimulus. The results ob-
tained with the model coincide with
psychophysical data (Figure 44).

It was demonstrated experimentally that,
as a result of adaptation to red, man
becomes more sensitive to a change in
saturation of this color. The same
applies to adaptation to blue. Con-

 

Figure 46. currently with heightened sensitivity
Increase in differential color sensitivity to a change in saturation of the color
under the influence of adaptation in the that is close to the adaptive one,
receptor element there is a decrease in sensitivity to
ill) wave number differences in saturation of colors
AW) change in sensitivity (in assessing that are farther away from the adaptive
the influence of receptor adapta- one [63]. Prolonged viewing of a mono-

tion, it must be borne in mind that chromatic stimulus increases man9a
there is still adaptation of primary differential sensitivity to colors
detectors) that are close to the adaptive one [40].

In the studies of deValois [6], it was demonstrated that there is a decrease in
influence of a color on activity of opponent neurons as a result of prolonged adap-
tation to this color, for example, green. This applies to other colors also.

According to the foregoing, in the course of adaptation the sensitivity of primary
detectors to the adaptive stimulus does indeed diminish, and this confirms the
initial assumption that the adaptive stimulus influences sensitivity of primary
detectors.

Thus, adaptation phenomena in the model correspond to the adaptation effects ob-
served in the human and animal color analyser. on both the neuronal and psychophy-
sical levels.

In addition to adaptation on the level of primary detectors of color. one must con-
aider adaptation related to a shift in amplitude characteristics of the receptor.
Thus, under the influence of white. receptor adaptation equalires the components of
the excitation vector (on the level of primary detector inputs), which prevents
development of_a chromatic shift. But receptor adaptation disappears faster than
adaptation in primary detectors. For this reason, all colors are perceived as
being more saturated after adaptation to white. This is attributable to the fact
that sensitivity to the "white component" remains low for a long time.

Successive contrast in the color analyzer. After delivery of a color
sitmulus, when residual excitation disappears. the sensitivity of primary detectors
remains low for some time. The more a given primary detector was excited, the
greater this decline of sensitivity. If another color stimulus is now delivered,
the excitation vector it elicits will differ from the initial one.

55 \
F0l:0iIICIAl.USE1DNlN
FOItOI1ﬂC1Al.UEIlO$ﬂJ¥

Let us examine three cases of successive color contrast in the model.

1. The adaptive stimulus is a saturated color with a small coatrihution of a black-
white cosponent. In this case. contrast depends primarily on the correlation between
blue-yellow and red-green components. If they are equal. the sensitivity of these
prirary detectors changes equally, and the excitation vector induced by the next
stimulus does not change its direction-color is perceived regardless of prior adap-
tation and there is no successive contrast.

If the hlue-yelloworred-green coaponent dominates. its sensitivity diminishes more
in the course of adaptation. As a result, the excitation vector turns in the direc-
tion of the closest stable position. The projection of the excitation vector on the
equatorial plane shows that the vector is turning in the horizontal plane. The

angle of rotation of the projection of the vector on the equatorial plane corresponds
to a change in color tone under the influence of prior adaptation (Figure 45).

   

Figure 65. Figure 66.
Successive color contrast with adaptation Successive color contrast in the form
to saturated color with unequal components of increased saturation after prior
of excitation vector adaptation to white _

2. Adaptive color--white. In this case there is a decrease in sensitivity of the
white-black primary detector, while the sensitivity of the blue-yellow and red-
green ones remains high. If we now deliver any color other than white, its satura-
tion increases and will he greater than the saturation of the same stinulus before
adaptation. This will happen because. as a result of decrease in white-black com-
ponent, the excitation vector will turn in the direction of the equatorial plane.
This is not associated with change in color tone.

with projection on the equatorial plans, we see that projection of the excitation
vector, which retains the direction, increases in magnitude reflecting approxina-
tion of the excitation vector to the equatorial plane (Figure 66).

3. Adaptive color-poorly saturated. In this case successive contrast is a com-
bination of two phenomena: increased saturation due to diminished sensitivity of the
white component and change in color tone due to greater decrease in sensitivty of
the yellow-blue or red-green system (Figure 67).

Thus, all cases of successive color contrast are directly obtained from a model
that includes adaptation of primary detectors.

56
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USlIMNlY
Figure 47. Figure 48.
Successive color contrast in the form of Summation of two saturated colors of
increase in saturation and change in color equal brightness
tone after adaptation to poorly saturated

color
F) position of vector induced by Color mixture. within the frame-
stimulus 8 before adaptation work of the color analyzer model in
F*) position of vector induced by the question, there is also a simple and
same stimulus after adaptation graphic explanation of the laws of

mixing equally bright colors. If each
of two stimuli elicits a specific excitation vector in the color analyzer, the
color of mixture thereof is determined by the resultant excitation vector. Indeed.
the components of the mixture excitation vector equal the sum of components of the
signals making up the mixture.

Let us consider two cases of summation of color stimuli.

l. Mixture of two saturated colors with different color tone. Saturation of color
diminishes in relation to a more saturated color because their white components are
summated (Figure 48).

when the components of vectors determining color tone are equal but of opposite
signs, the color of the mixture becomes white. This is related to the fact that
the blue-yellow and red-green components of the excitation vector for such a
mixture equal zero. when the components differ in sign and magnitude. the color
of the mixture differs from each initial color.

2. White is summated with a saturated color. In this case, the color tone does
not change, but saturation of the mixture diminishes. This occurs because of pre-
dominant increase in the white component.

Thus, in all cases the saturation of the mixture is lower than at least one of the
initial colors. As for color tone, it is either close to the nearest stable posi-
tion, when the components of the blue-yellow and red-green systems are the same in
sign, or deviate from stable positions in the direction of unstable ones, if the
components have different signs.

The distinction of this system of color mixture is that it makes it possible to
consider the individual effects of color mixing if the individual characteristics
of primary detectors are known.

57
INDI OFIICIAI.lliL(H‘LY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USI(H‘LY

In addition, this system of color mixing, which is based on responses of primary
detectors, makes it possible to take into consideration the effect of color adapta-
tion on the result of color mixture.

With regard to color mixture in the model, we have discussed only cases of mixing
colors of equal brightness. when colors of different brightness are mixed, the
excitation vectors are multiplied by scalars proportional to the logarithm of
brightness of mixed color. The resultant color will be detersined by the contri-
bution of colors with different brightness to the resultant excitation vector.

One can make a note precise mixture of colors of different brightness by adding
the signals in receptors and then finding the values of the conponents of the
resultant excitation vector [66].

This principle of color mixing applies to colors that appear as a result of simul-
taneous color contrast and that are localized in the opposite hemisphere.

58
FOR OFFICIAL lﬂﬂifﬂ'LY
FOI‘OPFIJAI.U§IIINLY

CHAPTER 5. LINE SLANT ANALYZER

Analysis of visual scenes. In describing a scene. one must not only distin-
guish color and brightness of different elements, but be able to single out differ-
ent objects. The problem of distinguishing objects often amounts to the problem

of distinguishing their outlinesw-the lines along which an illumination gradient

is observed. In order to solve the problem of distinguishing the outlines of
objects, it is convenient to consider the visual scene in the form of s scalar field.
A value is ascribed to each point of this field that characterizes its illumination.
It is not difficult to move from the scalar field to a field of gradients. The
gradient of a scalar field is a vector that is determined at each point of the

field by the normal to the level of equal illumination. The length of this vector
equals the rate of change in illumination in the indicated direction. Knowing the
gradient of the scalar illumination field, one can determine the equally illuminated
levels that are orthogonal to it at each point of the field.

As a rule, it is very difficult to distinguish the outline of an object, since the
image of the scene contains numerous lines. fine details that mask the object. To
eliminate this flaw, the following procedure is used: the initial scalar field is
submitted to Fourier transformation in order to eliminate fine details from the
image. This is associated with suppression of high spatial frequencies. Then,
using the inverse Fourier transform, the initial picture is restored, with the ex-
ception of fine details. By determining the gradient of the new scalar field the
overall outlines of the scene are distinguished.

If it is then necessary to distinguish the fine details of the scene, a Fourier
transform is so selected as to suppress the low spatial frequencies without effect-
ing the high ones. Use of the inverse Fourier transform permits restoration of the
original picture, but without large details.

Thus. in order to distinguish the overall outline and outlines of fine d tails
separately. the scalar field is transformed twice: in the former case the high
spatial frequencies are suppressed and in the latter. the low spatial frequencies.
The scalar field. in which high frequencies are suppressed. permits distinguishing
elements of the overall outline as we move to the gradient field. The scalar
field, in which low frequencies are suppressed, permits distinguishing elements of
local outlines as we move to the field of gradients and from it to equally illumi-
nated levels.

In other words, in order to distinguish elements of the overall outline and elements
of local outlines. we must determine the gradient of the scalar field twice: with

59
roe omcun. us: only
ROI40UIICIAI.IIIB¢IVLV

suppression of high spatial frequencies and low spatial frequencies. All of the
described procedures are performed with a computer.

After the elements of the outline have been singled out follows the procedure of
combining elements into segments. For two elements of an outline to be included

in a segment they must be next to one another and the difference in orientation

of these segments should not exceed a given threshold level. Segments with common
points are combined into structures. Finally, by introducing more complex criteria,
the structures are combined into objects. The aggregate of distinguished objects
forms the scene. The robot's actions are organised in relation to the distinguished
objects.

when using computer techniques. the transition from a scalar field, which represents
the initial visual information, to distinguishing segments, structures and objects
by transforming the scalar field into a field of gradients and field of equally
illuminated levels takes up much time. For this reason, it is of particular inter-
est to discuss the detector approach, which solves the problem of distinguishing
.outline elements by means of parallel processing of signals on a population of
orientation detectors. The final result of such processing is analogous to computer
analysis; in both cases the result of converting base data is isolation and defini-
tion of orientation of elements of the outline. Subsequent joining thereof into
segments, structures and objects of the scene can be done on the basis of usual
computer hardware. However, in principle, the introduction of higher level detec-
tors makes it possible to reduce these problems also to coding of segments, struc-
tures and objects by channel number.

Neuronal mechanisms of isolating outlines. Visual information is processed
in two neuronal systems: neurons that process relatively stationary signals (type 1)
and neurons that process moving stimuli (types Y and R). Apparently, distinguish-
ing the outline of an object and determining orientation of segments thereof is
related to x type neurons, and they are the ones we shall be discussing. These
neurons summate the signal from some part of the retina that is called the recep-
tive field. There are two types of receptive fields: with excitstory center and
inhibitory periphery (neuron for coding light) and those with inhibitory center and
excitatory peripheral (neuron for coding darkness).

In the first case, illumination of the central part of the receptive field leads
to excitation, while illumination of the periphery leads to inhibition of the X
neuron in question. In the second case. the reverse is observed.

The distinctive feature of X neurons is that they may have different sized receptive
fields. In other words, in addition to neurons that aummste a signal from a small
part of the retina, there are also neurons with large receptive fields. In the
former case. the X neurons are sensitive to high spatial frequencies (they die-
tinguish fine details of the image) and in the latter, on the contrary, they are
sensitive to low spatial frequencies. As a result of antagonistic relations be-
tween the center and periphery of each neuron, the spatial constant component of

the signal is suppressed.

0n the next level of the external geniculste body, the concentric fields remain,
but they become more local as a result of greater inhibition. On the level of the
visual cortex, the system of x neurons is localised in the 17th field in the form
of columns that unite neurons responsible for an elementary segment of a line with
a specific slant in a specific part of the retina. These neurons react selectively

60
FOIWOFFNJAI.U§E(NVLY
IND! OFIICIAI.IIHE(HVLN

only to lines with a specific orientation, performing an operation that is equivalent
to change to the gradient of the scalar field of distribution of illumination and
finding orientation of elements of the outline. Processing is done concurrently

for each retinal segment. Selective adjustment of detectors of line orientation

is the result of integration in one neuron of the visual cortex of signals coming
from several neurons of the external geniculate body. he must stress another dis-
tinction of the neuronal mechanism of detemrining the orientation of outline seg-
meats. Neurons that are selective for orientation of elements of image outline con-
sist of neurons with concentric fields of a specific site. For this reason, such

a neuron is sensitive not only to a specific orientation of an outline element, but
a specific segment of the spectrum of spatial frequencies. A comparison of computer
processing of visual information to such processing in real neuronal nets reveals
the following. In real neuronal nets, the gradient of the scalar field of illmina-
tion is "calculated" for each of the spatial frequencies separately, and in parallel
for different spatial frequencies. This yields concurrently both the overall out-
line and different elements of the image, from large to increasingly smaller ones.
Each segment of the retina is represented in the cortex by a neuronal matrix, in
which columns correspond to different line orientation and lines correspond to

the size of the grain of the image. The sizes of receptive fields of which orienta-
tion detectors are constructed increase from the surface into the depth of the
visual cortex. In a columnwiththe sane orientation of lines, the different orienta-
tion detectors represent different spatial frequencies, ranging from high ones on
the surface to low ones deep in the cortex. Thus, the retinal segment is represented
in the visual cortex by a set of detectors that are sensitive to different orienta-
tion and different spatial frequency. If we were to place detectors vertically

that are selective to outlines with the same orientation but different spatial
frequency, and horizontally the detectors that are selective for different orienta-
tions of outline, the local segment of the visual field will be reflected on the
field of detectors that are sensitive to orientation and spatial frequency. In
other words, what coaputer techniquesdo by successive transformation of signals

of the primary visual image is done in the neuronal network in parallel, with the
use of conception of outline orientation and spatial frequency according to the
principle of coding by channel number.

Model of line slant analyzer. Description of the model: According to the
main principle of constructing analyzer systems, the model in question must have a
layer of receptors, layer of primary detectors and layer of output detectors of
line orientation. The receptors, primary detectors and set of output detectors
form the local analyzer of line orientation. Such local analyzers represent the
entire visual field on the retinal surface, separately for each spatial frequency.

Two systems of detectors must be organized: for white lines on a black background
and for black lines on white, using the systess of 3 and D neurons. However, it

is sufficient to construct one of them, and the second is constructed analogously.
Let us discuss the construction of such a system. Orientation of the outline is des-
cribed by one independent parameter, the angle of inclination of the outline in
relation to a given coordinate axis. The angle can have any value in the range of

0 to 180°. He must have two independent primary detectors forming components of

a two-dimensional excitation vector in order to have the direction of the excitation
vector define unequivocally the value of angle 00 The characteristics of these
primary detectors are a cosine curve and sine curve with a dual angle characterising
inclination of the outline segment in relation to the selected system of coordinates.

61
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFNKJAI.USI(H'LY

One can build primary detectors with optimum characteristics in the following
manner. A receptive field is created so that the line centered in relation to

it would elicit a reaction, when projected on this receptive field, equaling the
sine or cosine of the'dual angle, respectively. If all receptors are considered
to be identical. the density of their arrangement uniform and the connections

with primary detectors the same. the shape of the receptive field is given in polar
coordinates as the length of the vector radius that is proportional to the cosine
of the dual angle for one detector and the sine of the duel angle for the other
detector. The connections of primary detectors with secondary output detectors
must be collinear to the excitation vectors of the signals for which these excita-
tion maximums are assumed (Appendix 4). '

In this case, the receptive field of the primary detector is in the shape of a
figure eight. The question arises as to how to orient the receptive fields of
primary detectors in relation to the coordinate axes. In principle, receptive
fields could have any orientation. However. one must consider the effect of adap-
tation of primary detectors. The orientation of receptive fields of primary de-
tectors must be chosen in such a way as to have the adaptation effects in the
analyzer of line orientation coincide in the robot and man. Psychophysical experi-
ments have shown that line tilts for which there are no normalisation effects and
aftereffect correspond to angles of 0, b5, 90, 135 and 180' (Appendix 4). This
means that straight lines with such a slant must elicit equal excitation in both
primary detectors. In view of the fact that the responses of primary detectors
are represented by dual angle cosine curves. lines with a titlt of 0, b5, 90, 135
and 180’ will excite equally both primary detectors only when the maximal axis of
the receptive field is turned by 22°30' in relation to the r-axis.

Thus, the model has two primary detectors at the input whose reaction equals the
cosine and sine of the double angle of inclination of the line measured in rela-
tion to the x-axis. The optimum axes of the receptive field of primary detectors
areat an angle of 22'30' in relation to the vertical direction coinciding with
the direction of the gravity vector.

Since the excitation and inhibition channels must be separated in real neuronal
nets, the number of primary detectors must be increased to four. Some detectors
effect the positive part of the response and others, the negative.

Output detectors are constructed in accordance with the standard scheme: a communi-
cation vector collinesr to one of the excitation vectors is assigned to each
secondary detectors. This permits calculation of the characteristics of output
detectors. One possible variant of such a model is illustrated in Figure 69. In
this figure is shown the retinal segment corresponding to the receptive field of
the local snalyzer of line slant. The four figure sights, two cross-hatched and
two not. represent the receptive fields of primary detectors (layer I). Primary
detectors have characteristics in the form of the sine and cosine of dual angle o
(layer II). The secondary detectors are selectively adjusted to specific line tilts
in the range of 0-180'. with a change in line tilt within a local analyzer, exci-
tation maximum shifts from one secondary detector to another. The "+" sign shows
the parts of the receptive fields that have an excitstory effect on activity of the
given primary detector, while the ”-" sign shows the inhibitory region of the
detector's receptive field. The quantity of primary detectors was doubled for
transmission of negative signals over separate channels. Detectors effecting the

62
IN)! 0'1!C1A1.lﬂiﬁ(ﬂ¢tl’
lNDl‘OITH‘JAI.lIIE(NULY

negative part of the response receive an exciting signal from areas designated
with "-“ and inhibitory signals from areas designated ”+."

Operation of the model can be described as
follows. "has a given segment of the object
outline is delivered to the receptive field
primary detectors of the analyzer are ex-
cited. The signal from the output of the
primary detectors excites secondary detectom
one of which being more excited than all
others. The number of the maximally excited
output detector unequivocally determines the
orientation of the tested part of the out-
line. Thus, the signal, which generates an
excitation vector in primary detectors,
creates an excitation profile on the set
of output elements. The location of the
maximum of this excitation maximum on the
set of secondary detectors unequivocally
determines the orientation of the analyzed
segment of the outline. Two stimuli are
indistinguishable if they excite to a

Figure 49. maximum the same output detector.
Structure of local line slant analyzer

-—— _“.-., _«———-_~ The space of perception of line tilts is

illustrated in Figure 50. Excitation of

 

 
   

 

. Disci - the first primary detector is plotted on
IIJW' " gghold the x-sxis and excitation of the second
ay- Subjective primary detector on the y-axis. The exci-

distance tstion vector P(¢) - {sin 2¢. cos Zdﬂinter-
sects the circumference IF(¢)I - const st
zxrvv' the point where the secondary detector.
which codes the signal by the tilt of this
excitation vector, is located. The length
ova' of the are between adjacent secondary de-
tectors determines the subjective threshold
Figure 50. of discrimination of the line slant.
Space of line tilt perception
It nust be stressed that there is mutually
identical conformity between number of the detector with maximal excitation and
direction of the excitation vector. The proposed model transforms signals of
physical space represented by slants of a line in the perceptive space of excita-
tion vector directions. The physical space of signals is one-dimensional: it is a
certain segment on which the slant of the line could assume any angle, from O to
180’. The perceptive space of directions of excitation vectors is also one-
dimensional. This is a segment on which the parameter determining the direction
of the vector can have any value from 0 to 360'. Thus, the model of the line
tilt analyzer causes reflection of one signal as another, doubling its length
at the sane time. Hith such reflection. the perceptive distance between two
stimuli doubles in relation to the distance in physical space. If the angle be-
tween lines equals 30‘, the angle between excitation vectors in the perceptive
space equals 60‘.

63
IN3I<OIIICIAI.IEHE(HVLY
IN3I10IIICIA1.IIBI1(IILY

Comparison of model to real structure of line slant analyzer: The model of the
line slant analyzer consists of two types of detectors that are selective for
slant. Both types of detectors have the same characteristics. Consequently.

they cannot be classified as primary and secondary according to output responses.
However, these types of detectors can be separated according to input: secondary
detectors receive a signal only from the four primary detectors, whereas the

signal from a set [or numerous] of receptors or ganglionic cells with concentric
receptive fields converge on primary detectors. Creutzfeldt et al. [65], concluded
on the basis of intracellular recording in a study'of detectors of the cat's visual "
cortex that their selective reaction to slanting of a line is implemented with the
participation of only 2-4 cells of the external geniculata body. It is difficult
to conceive that such selectivity can be provided by only four nonselective cells
with concentric receptive fields. But this can be explained on the assumption that
such neurons of the ls.e'a1 geniculate body are primary detectors. At the present
time, the presence of cells that are selective to inclination of a line in the
lateral geniculate body has been demonstrated experimentally [66].

The discriminatory property of secondary detectors also ensues from the distinctions
of signal coding by the number of the input detector. The perceived value of the
coded parameter does not change if the reaction of all output detectors is decreased
or increased by the same value. Indeed. this is not associated with a change in

the element with maximal excitation.

If, however, part of the response of primary detectors is cut off by inhibition,
there will be a change in properties of the model as a whole. This is due to the
fact that such an operation alters the direction of the excitation vector. Thus,
the responses of primary detectors must be more stable than those of the secondary
detectors.

Mixing effect in the analyzer of orientation of slant: If two lines are delivered
at different angles in relation to the selected coordinate axis to the same recep-
tive field of a local line slant analyzer, they will have a cumulative effect on
primary detectors that is different from the one elicited by each line separately.
As a result, one line with an intermediate slant (Appendix k) is perceived under
the joint effect of two lines in the receptive field of one local analyzer. This
effect is analogous to the color mixing effect. Burns at al. [56], who studied

the mechanisms of Zollner illusions, demonstrated such a mixing effect. The corti-
cal detector reacts by a change in activity to appearance of the second line in its
receptive field. It was found that if the distance between two lines is small the
cortical neuron reacts to the two lines just as it would to one line with inter-
mediate slant. Thus, there is experimental confirmation of the effect of line
mixture in neurons of the cat's visual cortex. An analogous phenomenon occurs in
an individual secondary detector of the model. Appearance of two orthogonal

lines simultaneously in the receptive field of the local line slant analyzer leads
to mutual suppression of primary detector reactions (Appendix 4). This enables us
to explain the "torn wire" illusion known in psychophysice [47], which consists of
appearance of e seeming break when viewing intersecting telegraph wires at the

site of intersection.

Adaptation in the model of line slant analyzer. Normalization phenomenon:
If a stimulus that excites primary detectors to a certain level is active at the
analyzer input for a long time. according to the general principles the sensitivity
of primary detectors starts to diminish, and the higher the level of excitation. the

6b
FIHI(HHHCIAI.U§EIINLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more it diminishes. As a result, the levels of excitation of both detectors strive
toward the state where they equal one another. This corresponds to rotation of the
excitation vector in the direction of the vector with equal components. In turn,
rotation of the excitation vector leads to a shift of excitation maximum from one
secondary detector to another and to a change in perception of orientation of the
line.

This means that an illusion of change in slant occurs when viewing the line for a
long time. This effect is known in psychophysics as the normalization phenomenon.
It was first described by Gibson [108, (09] in the late 1930's. If a line is dis-
played to a man, which deviates slightly from the horizontal or vertical, the illu-
sion that it comes close to the horizontal or vertical arises when it is viewed

for a long time. If, however, the adaptive line is strictly horizontal or vertical
such an illusion does not occur. In Gibson's opinion. there are two types of lines:
stable lines that are not subject to adaptation and lines whose orientation changes
and come close to stable when viewed for a long time. Han perceives stable lines
as the norm. In the opinion of Gibson, two such norms are represented in the nervous
system. A horizontal line activates only its horizontal norm and a vertical
line, its own vertical norm. An intermediately tilted line activates both norms.
The proportion of stimulation of norms determines the perceived tilt of the line.
In the course of adaptation, man strives to alter the norn so that the presented
line would become the new norm. Hence the name of "normalization effect."

The question arises as to what happens with a line tilted at 65'. In the course of
adaptation it also does not alter its tilt and, consequently, has every right to
claim to be another norm. This is not explained in Gibson's theory. In the pro-
posed model of local analyzer of line tilt, there is a simple explanation for the
normalization effect. All stimuli that excite either only one primary detector

or both to the same degree do not change their orientation during adaptation and,
consequently, are not subject to normalisation.

Lines with a tilt of 0 - 0, 195, 90 and 135', as well as those with o - 22°30',
67°30', 112°30' and 157°30', do not change their slant during prolonged viewing.
However, these two groups of lines differ from one another in stability. While

the former group is referable to stable lines, the second is unstable. The sensi-
tivity of primary detectors changes under the influence of prior adaptation to a
line that corresponds to one of the vectors 1?, H or G.(Pigure 51). The primary
detector that was the most excited loses more of its sensitivity. After adaptation
to one of the lines, the same line generates excitation vector P* (or I", or 6*)
instead of P (or H, or G). A turn of vector I'* (or 8*, or 6*) in relation to F

(or H, or G) corresponds to a shift of excitation maximum to another secondary
detector and. accordingly, a change in perception of line tilt. The vector compon-
ents level off as a result of adaptation. The excitation vector shifts to its
closest stable position. To restore the fixed position of the line, the stimulus
must turn to the same extent as the excitation vector did as a result of adaptation.
In this figure, shifting of the excitation vector under the influence of adaptation
is illustrated. The direction of the shift depends on the position of the stimulus
in relation to a stable position. Stable lines elicit equal excitation of both
primary detectors. while unstable ones generate more excitation in one of them.

For this reason, the slightest deviation from unstable tilts leads to drift in
the direction of one of the closest stable lines (lines with a tilt of 0 - O, 145,
90 and 135°)(Figure 52). At the same time, when the signal deviates from stable

65
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son omcm. use on“

position, the adaptation process acts in the direction that returns the excitation
vector to a stable state. Such an arrangement of stable and unstable orientations
of the line corresponds to a model with primary detector sensitivity characteristics
in the fora of functions cos 2 (¢ + 22‘30') and sin 2 (O + 22‘30').

     

r ' - sua'l/f 4174’) - m'l/y-IIW')

,, zz'JI' r ’ ‘
_ , . {"gbe

A

was
\‘e

     

Figure 51. Figure 52.
change in perception of line tilt after Line tilts not subject,to adaptation
preliminary adaptation to a stimulus. the (solid line shows stable orientations
components of whose excitation vector are _ and dash line shows unstable ones;
not equal the arrows show the direction of
r2 - sin: 2(¢+22°3o') + cos: 2(¢+22°3o') adaptationdrift)

Aftereffect: When the adaptive stimulus is discontinued, there is gradual restora-
tion of sensitivity of primary detectors. For this reason, if a new stimulus is
delivered to the input of the local analyzer model before sensitivity of primary
detectors is restored, this stimulus will correspond to a different direction of
excitation vector from the one when there is no adaptation. the aftereffect is
manifested by different perception of the test line delivered after the prolonged
use of an adaptive line than without preadaptation.

An analogous effect, also first discovered by Gibson and known as the "aftereffect,"
is observed when men perceives the tile of a line. If a man is asked to look at

a line at a certain slant for a long time and then asked to place the line in a
vertical or horizontal direction. the subject will make a mistake. If the angle
between the adaptive line and objective vertical ie less than 65', the vertical
established by the subject will be rotated clockwise from the true vertical. If
this angle is greater than 65°, the vertical set by the subject will be turned
counterclockwise in relation to the true vertical. In the former case. the error

is considered positive and in the latter, negative [50]. No error is made if the
angle between the adaptive line and vertical is zero. According to Gibson, the
aftereffect can be explained as follows: there is overestimation of the norm of
line tilt during prolonged viewing of an adaptive line. If the adaptive line is
close to vertical. the vertical norm shifts clockwise in the direction of the
adaptive line (Figure 53a). Concurrently. the horizontal norm shifts in the same
direction. 'If a vertical line is presented to the subject after adaptation, it
does not coincide with the vertical norm and is perceived as other than vertical.
To restore the subjective perception of vertical, the subject turns the test line
clockwise until it coincides with the vertical norm. A positive sftereffect occurs.

66
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
F0!‘0PFK3AI.UBEIMVLY

___ _” Figure 53.
'. Normalization effect according to Gibso

a, and 32) vertical and horizontal
norms

AO) angle of rotation of vertical
and horizontal norm after
adaptation to line La

La) excitation vector corresponding
to diagonal test line

119 dash-line excitation vector
corresponding to diagonal line
after adaptation to line L.

 

I£.however, the adaptive line is closer to the horizontal norm, during prolonged
viewing the horizontal norm shifts in the direction of the adaptive line. Con-
currently, the vertical norm turns in the same direction. If an objective vertical
is presented after this, it will again fail to coincide with the vertical norm

and the test line should be turned counterclockwise to restore the sensation of a
vertical. A negative aftereffect appears. when the adaptive line is equidistant
from the vertical and horizontal norms, there will be no change in the norms and
no aftereffect.

If we now take as the test line a line with a 45' tilt, instead of a vertical,
and it is equidistant from both norms, the interpretation of Gibson would lead
to wrong conclusions. Indeed, if the adaptive line is diagnoal to 65‘<¢<90',
both norms turn clockwise as a result of adaptation. For this reason, the true
diagonal must be turned clockwise to restore perception of the diagonal, so that
it will be perceived as equidistant from both norms. In this case, we should
observe the positive aftereffect (Figure 53b).

Kohler et al. [51] made an experimental check of this conclusion of Gibson's. and
they found that the experimental data do not confirm the theoreticallconclusions
of Gibson. Recently, Mitchell et a1. [52], who studied the effect of preliminary
adaptation on perception of a diagonal line, concluded that, in spite of the
theoretical predictions, the aftereffect in perception of a tilted line did not
differ in any way from the aftereffecta of perception of vertical and horizontal.

The model of a local line tilt analyzer offers a simple explanation for this
phenomenon. Let the adaptive line be oriented at an angle ¢ . 22’30'. Hith such
a tilt. the sinusoid primary detector is excited more than the coainusoidal one.
For this reason, in the course of adaptation the sinusoidal detector‘s sensitivity
diminishes more than that of the coainusoidal one (Figure 56). If the subject

is now shown an objective vertical, it will no longer excite both primary detec-
tors to the same extent. There will be less excitation of the sinusoidal primary
detector than the coainusoidal one. Such excitation of primary detectors corres-
ponds to a line turned counterclockwise in relation to the vertical. To restore
the sensation of a vertical, the test line must be turned clockwise by an angle A0
and then it will again excite both primary detectors equally. Analogous reason-
ing applies when a diagonal serves as the test line. After adaptation to line
L2,, line hpr should be turned counterclockwise by an angle A0 for it to excite

t e primary detectors in the same way as before adaptation.

67
lﬂll.€ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.ll§Ei(l‘LY
I! ”I ' Figure 55 e
Aftereffect
Figure 55. 9) size of dual angle between adaptive
Normalization effect in the model and vertical line (used in experi-
¢) line tilt mant as test line)
f1(¢) and f3(¢)-reactions of primary Aw) systematic error in placing line
detectors f; and f; to given line in vertical position
with tilt ¢ 1) calculated response of model
1) sensitivity of primary detectors 2,3) experimental functions determined
before adaptation by Gibson [48] and Campbell et a1.
2) after adaptation to line with tilt o. [50], respectively

Thus, in the case of an adaptive line with a tilt of O - 22’30', the aftereffect
is maximal. If the adaptive line excites both primary detectors equally. the
aftereffect equals zero. Thus, with a tilt of ¢ - 65° of the adaptive line no
aftereffect is observed. Further increase in tilt of adaptive line leads to a
change in sign of aftereffect: the subjective vertical determined by the subject
is found to be turned counterclockwise in relation to the objective vertical. The
next maximum of negative aftereffect is obtained when the adaptive line is
oriented at an angle of o - 67’30'. Hith an angle of 0 - 90'. the sftereffect is
again absent (Figure Sé). '

The estimated sftereffect as a function of angle between adaptive and objective
vertical lines in the model is qualitatively similar to the analogous experi-
mentally demonstrated response (Figure 55). However, the experimental curve
differs from the estimated one. While the aftereffect in the model is syuetrical
in relation to point ¢/2 - as’, in man the analogous curve is asymmetrical. More-
over, a maximum effect is obtained with ¢/2 - 22'30' for the model and 0/2210-15'
in experiments on man. This difference can be significantly reduced if we consider
the contribution of lateral inhibition to the aftereffect. In this case, the
residual influence of inhibition on the part of the adaptive stimulus appears to
push the test stimulus in an opposite direction from the adaptive one. As a
result. there is enhancement of the positive effect while the negative one, on the
contrary, diminishes.

If a diagonal line is taken as the test line. the aftereffect as a function of
angle between adaptive line and this test line has the sane appearance as when
a vertical is used as the test line. Thus, the aftereffect has the same appear-
ance in the model as the aftereffect when men perceives vertical, horizontal and
diagonal lines.

Adaptation on the level of the primary detectors affects differential sensitivity
of the entire local analyzer of line orientation as an element of the outline

68
F0R40FFMJAI.UBIIMVLY
FOIIOFFINMI.USI(NNLY

[or circu t]. Differential sensitivity increases to line tilts that are close to
the tilt of the adaptive line.

Simultaneous contrast in line tilt analyser. Inhibitory connections are
added between homonymous primary detectors of different local tilt analyzers in
order to improve discrimination of line tilt analyzer to two lines presented simul—
taneously in different points of space. The question of enhancing discrimination
of man for two simultaneously exhibited lines had not been submitted to direct
experimental investigation. However, there are indirect data indicative of in-
crease in sensitivity. Illusions of widening of acute angles and narrowing of
obtuse angles can serve as examples. Let two lines that intersect at a certain
angle be shown to a human subject. One line is stationary, L6, while the experi-
menter can alter the tilt of the other line. L“, which forms the second side of
the angle. A third test line, L.r [L. in figures] is exhibited at some distance
from this angle. The subject's task is to place the test line parallel to the
stationary side of angle L5. It was found that the su ject performs this with a

systematic error (Figure 56).

If the angle is smaller than 90‘. the subject turns the test line counterclockwise
in relation to the stationary side of the angle. With angles smaller than 90°, the
lines forming the angle seem to draw away from one another, which leads to sub-
jective increase in angle; with angles larger than 90‘, the lines appear to be
pulled to one another, which leads to subjective decrease in angle they form [53];
if the angle equals 90°, no systematic errror occurs in placing the test line.

 

1.

 

Figure 56. Effect of simultaneous contrast in perception of angles

A0) angle between lines L5 and Lu
L5) line whose tilt was not changed during the experiment

Ln) test line
L“) inductive line whose tilt was arbitrarily set by experimenter

l) experimentally determined function for man [53]
2,3,6) functions estimated for model with following interaction coefficients:
a . 0.2; a - 0.02 exp(-4 sin Ad); a . 0.2 exp(-4 sin A¢/2)
(A¢>o corresponds to counterclockwise turn of test line he in relation
to line L5)

69
FOR OFFICIAL USIICM'LY
FOI'DFFKJAL.USC(NiLY

It can be concluded from the above-described experiment that, as a result of inter-
action of two lines forming an acute angle, the subjective distance between stimuli
increases. If the lines form an obtuse angle, it subjectively decreases. This
effect is the consequence of lateral inhibition between analogous primary detectors
of different local analyzers of line orientation. Lines that form the angle gener-
ate different excitation vectors in different local analyzers of line tilt. The
resultant vectors change under the influence of lateral inhibition between analo-
gous primary detectors of spatially different local analyzers. The angle between
resultant vectors can be calculated, and one can learn which subjective angle
between lines corresponds to it. The angle between resultant excitation vectors
will be larger than the angle between initial excitation vectors if the angle
between the lines forming it is smaller than 90'. If the angle between lines
forming it equals 90‘, the angle between vectors will not change.

The closer to one the coefficient of lateral inhibition, the greater the degree of
subjective increase or decrease of angle in the model.

With increase in inhibitory interaction, maximum subjective widening of the angle

in the model is obtained with increasingly small angles between the lines. The
estimated function of subjective change in angle is symmetrical with point 0 - 90'.
The analogous characteristic obtained experimentally for man is asymmetrical-its
positive part is much larger than the negative. One can reduce the discrepancy
between experimental and estimated curves by assuming that the inhibitory communica-
tions between primary detectors of different local analyzers diminish with distance
between their receptive fields. If we accept that such a decrease in interaction
with distance occurs, there is a high coincidence of estimated curve with experi-
mental data.

Great difficulties are encountered when efforts are made to interpret the effect
of widening of acute angles on the basis of ordinary lateral inhibition [66].
Thus, ordinary lateral inhibition cannot explain widening of acute angles and
narrowing of obtuse ones [53].

Inhibition between analogous primary detectors of local line tilt analyzers is
confirmed on the neuronal level. In a study of neuronal mechanisms of simul-
taneous contrast, Blakemore et al. [56, 55] first investigated with a micro-
electrode reactions of a neuron selective for line tilt in the cat's visual
cortex. when a grid of black and white stripes of optimal orientation (Figure
57a) was projected on the receptive field of such a detector, the neuronal reac-
tion was maxi-a1. Thereafter, the orientation of the grid remained constant
throughout the experiment. Then the grid projected on the main receptive field
was surrounded by a grid forming the inductive field. The experimenter changed
the orientation of the grid on the inductive field at will. The purpose of the
experiment was to examine the neuronal reaction as a function of correlation be-
tween grid tilt in the main and inductive fields. It was found that if the tilt
of both grids coincided the neuronal reaction to the grid in the main field was
almost entirely suppressed. with increase in difference between grid tilts, there
was a decrease in inhibitory effect of the inductive field and it disappeared
entirely with a difference of 65'. Further increase of the angle between grids
led to appearance of excitatory effect of the inductive field, which first in-
creased and than, as the angle between grids approached 90', tended toward zero
(Figure S7).

70
FOR OIIHCJAI.IEHB(HWLY
-u -u w a :1 a ll 1,

Figure 57. Effect of simultaneous contrast on the detector level

a) image of stimulus delivered to cat retina
b) detector reaction as a function of angle A0
Ab) difference in orientation of grid angles in main and inductive fields
4i) reaction of tested orientation detector
1) experimentally plotted curve for cat's cortical detector [54]
2,3) functions calculated on model with following interaction coefficients:

a - 0.2 exp(-3 sin AOIZ). o - 0.4 exp(-6 sin A0)

An analogous experiment can be reproduced with a secondary detector of the model
of a line tilt analyzer. The response of the secondary detector to an optimally
oriented line as a function of the line delivered to the input of the adjacent
local analyzer was calculated on the assumption that inhibitory communications
between analogous primary detectors depend on the distance between their receptive
fields. The response calculated on the model coincides closely with the experi-
mental data obtained from the study of a real neuron.

A number of authors (Blakemore et al., [56], Sekular et a1. [57]) have tried to
explain adaptation effects by means of usual lateral inhibition. Inhibition
elicited by a preceding stimulus does not disappear right away, it does so gra-
dually. As a result of inertia of the inhibitory process, it affects perception
of the next stimulus, forming an aftereffect. To confirm this statement, Sekular
[S7] submits the results of an experiment, in which the subject was shown a
stimulus in the form of a line with specific tilt for a short time (1 to 1000 ms)
followed by delivery of the test line. The subject had to evaluate the tilt of
the test line. It was found that perception of the test line changed with less
than 30 ms intervals between stimuli. Subjectively. the test line seemed to be
turned in the opposite direction from the inductive line, which corresponded to
widening of the angle between lines. Since the time of delivery of the inductive
stimulus was not sufficient to cause adaptation and the observed effect resembled
the sftereffect observed with prolonged exposure of a stimulus, this aftereffect
was interpreted as the consequence of inertia of lateral communications.

Simultaneous contrast and perceptive illusions in line tilt analyzer.
The phenomenon of simultaneous contrast is based on inhibitory interaction between
homonymous primary detectors. It can lead to a number of illusions of perception

(Figure 58).

71
IIHR(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ!(ﬂVLY
l I

Figure 58. Examples of optical illusions based on interaction of different
local sections of image outline

a) Zollner illusion (two parallel lines, AB and CD. on a background of non-
parallel lines are perceived as not being parallel)

b) square on a background of circles is distorted

c) circle on a background of divergent lines is perceived as being flattened
on the side of the acute angle

d) square on a background of nonparallel lines is significantly distorted

e, f) white circles on a black background and black circles on a white background

are perceived as hexagons [67]

Zollner illusions: Two parallel lines on a background of two grids that are not
parallel to one another are perceived by man as not being parallel.

The cause of this illusion is inhibitory interaction between homonymous primary
detectors of different local orientation analysers. As a result of interaction
between parallel lines and background, they are subjectively turned in opposite
directions: one line counterclockwise and the other clockwise. As a result. the
objectively parallel lines are perceived as being divergent.

Other illusions can be explained in a similar way. Circles displayed to the subject
are perceived as hexagons. This illusion can also be attributed to interaction be-
tween sections of outlines referable to different circles. As a result of inhi-
bitory interaction between primary detectors, different segments of the circles

are :bjectively transformed to different degrees. The cause of dissimilar dis-
tortion of elements of the circle's outline is that the distances are different
between interacting points of the outline. Each local segment of the outline
therefore experiences a different inhibitory influence from adjacent segments,
leading to dissimilar distortion of the outline of the circle. As a result, man
perceives circles as hexagons.

Poggendorff illusion: This illusion (Figure 59) consists of perceiving segments
of one line intersecting two others as segments of two different lines shifted in
the vertical plane. At the same time. segments belonging to different lines are
perceived as belonging to one line.

72
IIIICIWICIAl.lEﬂB(ﬂNLY
ITNR(HWWCIALIJ§B(MVLY

 

I I
I
l

'1

a
I
I x I

Figure 59. Figure 60.

Poggendorff illusion Explanation of Poggendorff illusion

Thus, segments a-a and s-e are segments of the same line, although subjectively
they are perceived as being shifted from one another.

The explanation of the Poggendorff illusion is based on a mechanism of inhibition
of the "simultaneous contrast" type. As a result of interaction with the lines,
the segments are subjectively turned counterclockwise and perceived as belonging
to different lines (Figure 60).

Segments a-a and b-b belong to the same line. As a result of interaction with
lines 1-1 and 2-2, segments a-a and b-b are perceived to be rotated counter-
clockwise by an angle A¢, consequently, as segments a-a' end b-b'. For this
reason, segments a-s end b-b are no longer perceived as the continuation of the
same line: they appear to be shifted from another by Ad - Aha-CA2. However, seg-
ments a-a and c-c are subjectively perceived as belonging to the sane line.

The subjective shift as a function of angle between line segments was calculated
on the model (Figure 61). In the calculation, the function of widening of an
acute angle was used (Appendix 6).

Masking phenomenon: Excitation and inhibition do not disappear instantly after
discontinuing a stimulus; this occurs gradually, with acne lag. For this reason,
with successive delivery of two stimuli, the excitatory and inhibitiory processes
elicited by then are superimposed, so that each of the two stimuli affects per-
ception of the other. This is known as the "masking effect" of one stimulus on
another [58].

Both summation of excitatory processes in one local analyzer and inhibition via
inhibitory connections between hosonyaous detectors of different local analyzers
are involved in masking of one stimulus by another.

Interaction of excitations leads to the effect of mixture of line tilts, causing
two stimuli to merge into one. It is difficult to correctly assess the test
stimulus since, by virtue of inertia of processes in neuronal nets, excitation

73
IKHRCHHﬂCIAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
INDI‘OIWHCIAI.IIIE(I!LY

elicited by a stimulus is summated with excitation from the preceding (direct masking)
or next stimulus (backward masking), generating the subjective perception of a line
with an intermediate tilt. '

 

 

   

~11 (I II - lily
Figure 61. Pigure 62.
Vertical shift Ab as a Masking phenomenon
function of angle 6 6) angle between test and masking lines
(designations are the tcr) minimum required duration of test stimulus for
same as in Figure 62) perception
a) interaction 1) experimentally established function for man [60]
coefficient 2.3.4) functions calculated on model with different

interaction coefficients

Inertia of inhibitory processes also affects the process of development of excita-
tion elicited by stimuli. Maximum inhibitory interaction between stimuli is ob-
tained when the tilt of the test and seeking lines is the same (Appendix 6). The
method of calculating the effects of inhibition is based on the assumption that,
for proper perception of the tilt of a test stimulus the output detector coding
this line tilt must be exicted for a certain fixed time. Inhibition by the masking
stimulus affects the time. during which the detector is excited above the threshold
level. The masking line inhibits activity of the test line detector if the angle
between them is less than 45'. If the angle is greater than 65', the masking line
has an excitatory effect on detector activity (Appendix 4).

Meyer et al. [59] demonstrated that the duration of a test stimulus in the form of
a black and white grid is perceived as being shorter if the orientation of the
masking stimulus coincides with the orientation of this grid. If. however, the
stimuli are orthogonal, the apparent duration of the test stimulus is increased.

Minimum duration of test stimulus required for perception as a function of angle
between test and masking lines, which was calculated on the model, coincides with
the response obtained by Sekular et al. [60] in direct experiments on man (Pigure62).

Matin [6i] and Abadi [62] also report a close correlation between the masking effect
and inhibitory mechanism of simultaneous contrast. The outline of an object is
represented by detectors of segments with a specific tilt as a result of the acti-
vity of the set of local analyzers of line orientation. The distinguished outline
segments can then be conbined into outline segments of different length and

orientation.

74
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(H{LY
summon“

CHAPTER 6. VISUAL ARALYZFR 0P DIRECTIOI AND SPEED 0? 101101]

Principles of coding direction and speed of notion. A special systea
of neurons referable to the Y or H type is used to code noving optical stimuli.
The distinction of these neurons is that they respond with a rapidly fading dis-
charge to stiaulation with a stationary stimlus. The neurons that code notion
can be subdivided into three sajor groups: those coding direction of notion,
coding speed of motion and those that are selective to both speed and direction
of stinulus motion.

Neurons that are sensitive only to notion of a stimulus for the mechanism of per-
ception of notion regardless of other features of a moving object [63]. Thus,
there is an independent notion analyser in the visual systee of nan and animals.

Does the notion analyzer have features of the previously discussed "standard
analyzer"? .

In a survey article dealing with neuronal nechanisas of coding notion. Grusser [6b]
distinguishes five types of neurons reacting to movement of a visual stimulus.
Among the distinguished neurons. direction-selective neurons occupy a special
place, and they are responsible for coding direction of movement.

Neurons have also been found that react selectively to the speed of love-ant of
an object [65, 66].

Thus, there are at least two independent analysers in the nervous system of- man
and aniaals: analyzer of direction and analyser of speed of motion.

Direction-selective neurons and analyzer of direction of motion: These neurons
are encountered on different levels of the visual system, ranging from the retina
to the visual cortex [66]. The neurons found on the lower levels of the visual
analyzer may be primary detectors.

Best studied are the direction-selective neurons of the rabbit retina [66, 67].
Their reactions depend on the direction of novelent of a point stimulus. The
direction of stimulus notion with which a given neuron is maximally excited is
generally called optimal. The direction with which the reaction of a given neuron
is ninieal is called zero direction. The neurons separate into four groups, the
optinun directions of which fern an angle of 90’ with one another [68. 66]. Ana-
logous distribution of neurons according to optimum direction has been found in
the superior colliculus of the cat.

75
MWWONLY
FOI¢HHNCUU.USI(NNL¥

The characteristics of neuronal responses to change in direction of stimulus motion
are described by cosine curves. the argument of which is the angle of direction of
motion of a point stimulus. A deviation frol a cosine curve is observed only with
directions that are quite far from optimal [67, 69] (Figure 63).

 

J.
:5

(I

  

ll I‘lllﬁlllﬂ‘ll/Illﬂwf

Figure 63. Characteristics of sensitivity of direction-selective neurons
in the rabbit
d) direction of movement of point stimulus
d') level of neuronal excitation
1) curve of neuronal reaction of rabbit retina (a) [67] and lateral geniculate
body [691 (b)
2) theoretical functions of sensitivity of primary detectors of motion direction

This enables us to assume that direction-selective neurons perforn the functions of
primary detectors of notion direction. There are four primary detectors, because
each of then effects only the positive part of the response.

Secondary detectors of direction of motion: In the rabbit and cat visual cortex.
direction-selective neurons often have different optimal directions of motion (70-
73]. It can he stated that there is ”reproduction" of detectors on higher levels
of the visual systen, uhich are selective to direction of motion of a visual stimu-
lus. According to Creuttfeldt [65], the selective responses of cortical detectors
of direction of motion in the cat are effected only by two or four neurons of the
lateral geniculate body. This can be explained on the assumption that the neurons
of the lateral geniculate body are primary detectors of direction of notion, while
the selective neurons of the visual cortex are secondary detectors.

0n the basis of these data. it can be concluded that the structure of the analyzer
of direction of motion conforms to the general principles of construction of ana-
lyser systems. The analyzer of motion direction contains neurons with the proper-
ties of primary detectors. 0n higher levels of the visual system. there is "re-
production” of detectors. which cover all directions of movement. Their proper-
ties are those of secondary detectors in the standard analyser model.

Model of visual analyzer of direction of motion. The model of the
analyzer of notion direction consists of the following layers: receptors. primary
detectors and secondary detectors. A stimulus moving over the receptive field
excites primary detectors which, in turn. excite secondary detectors. As a result
of the special organisation of connnications between prinary and secondary detec-
tors, one of the latter is found to be more excited than the others. The number
of the secondary detector with maximal excitation determines the direction of

76
FOI‘OFFKJAI.U§E(HVLY
INJRIOFTHCJAl.lliBIHVLV

movement "perceived" by the model (the struc-
ture of the model is illustrated in Pigureéé).

The local receptive field of the retina aere
vices several primary detectors: four ortho-
gonal primary detectors of direction and
detectors of speed of motion. An object
loving at a certain speed over a certain
trajectory in the local receptive field of
the retina generates a three-component exci-
tation vector. The four detectors of direc-
tion work in pairs. A pair of primary speed
detectors is added to them. The solid line
illustrates the response of the detectors

in the form of sin e or cos 4; and the dash
line in the form of sin (¢ + 180') and

cos (0‘? 180'). The excitation vector acts
through the fan of communication vectors on
the secondary detectors. creating maximal
excitation on one of them. Thus, the speed

and direction of movement are recoded into the number of the channel with maximum
excitation.

 

Figure 66.
Structure of spherical model
of visual analyzer of direction

Pria~.y detectors of model of analyzer of motion direction: According to the fore-
going, successive illumination by point stimuli of receptors situated along a spe-
cific trajectory is sufficient to excite a primary detector. There must be some
lag in illumination of different receptors, which corresponds to the time required
to shift the stimulus from one receptor to another with ordinary movement.

This property of the detector of direction of motion was demonstrated in the chipmunk
retina [7h]. Apparently, the same mechanism is reponsihle for the illusion of move-
ment, or phi phenomenon, in man. If short flashes are used to illuminate two points
on a screen successively, with a properly selected lag, the subject seas smooth
movement from one point to the other [75. 76]. Selective stimulation of the analyzer
of direction of motion is the cause of the phi phenomenon. '

Construction of secondary detectors of motion direction: The secondary detectors
are constructed in the standard way: a communication vector is selected for each
secondary detector that is collinear to the excitation vector induced by the stimu-
lus for which this detector must be adjusted. The modulus of the communication
vector is a constant, and it is unrelated to the detector number. There is a

one to one correspondence between the number of the output detector with maximum
excitation and direction of excitation vector.

Differential sensitivity of the model is determined by the magnitude of change in
direction of object movement that must be made so that maximal excitation would
shift from a given secondary detector to the one closest to it. Two is the least
number of primary detectors. Their responses are given by the sine and cosine
curves of the angle of direction of movement of the stimulus in relation to the
selected system of coordinates. The moving stimulus excites primary detectors.
determining the value of components of the excitation vector. There is one to one
correspondence between the direction of the excitation stimulus and direction of
stimulus movement. The direction of movement of the stimulus and excitation

77
FOI!0FFKJA1.USIINNLY
mmmmv

vector can have any value from 0 to 360’. The proposed coding method is equivalent
to the reflection of the physical space of motion direction in perceptive space

in the case where subjective differences between stimuli equal their objective
differences.

The receptive fields of primary detectors of the analyzer of direction of motion
can be constructed in different ways. One of them consists of tin following: each
light-sensitive elenent of the receptive field sends a signal to a primary detector
via two channels-minhibitory and excitatory. The speed of signal transnission is
different in the two channels. and it depends on the location of the receptors. If
the stimulus moves in the optimum direction, the signals from photoreceptors are
animated. and the signal at the input of the primary detector is maximal. If the
signal moves in the opposite direction, the inhibitory signal suppresses the exci-
tatory signal entirely. In this case, the signal at the input of the primary de-
tectors becomes minimal. when the stimulus moves in intermediate directions there
is only partial suppression of the excitatory signal. One can so choose interac~
tion between excitatory and inhibitory processes that the resultant signal of the
primary detector will equal the sine and cosine of the angle of direction of
stimulus movement. Differential sensitivity of the analyzer of motion direction
depends on the direction of movement. The~nunber of cortical detectors that code
vertical or horizontal movement of an object is greater than the nunber of detec-
tors that code diagonal directions of motion. This corresponds to a difference

in detector density: differential sensitivity is greater for vertical and horizon-
tal movements than diagonal [72].

Adaptation effects in the visual analyser of direction of motion.
This analyzer is analogous in many respects to the analyzer of line tilt. The
only difference is that the sensitivity characteristics of prinary detectors‘of
the analyzer of direction of motion are represented by the cosine and sine of the
directional angle of motion, while those of primary detectors of the orientation
analyzer are represented by the sine and cosine of the double angle of line tilt.
In the case of the analyzer of direction of motion, the distance between stimuli
in physical and perceptive space coincide. whereas in the orientation analyzer
the distance is twice as long in subjective space as it is in physical space.

The effects of adaptation have the sue appearance in the model of the analyzer of
movement direction as in the model of line orientation analyzer. however. all
angles between directions that are not subject to adaptation are twice the site
of ,the corresponding angles in the model of the line orientation analyzer.

If the optimum trajectories of receptive fields of primary detectors are super-
imposed over the coordinate axes, novements at angles of (05. l35, 225 and 315' will
be stable directions. while those at 0. 90, 180 and 270‘ will be unstable.

however, psychophysical experiments have shown that 0. 90, 180 and 270' are stable
directions (78].

For vertical or horizontal directions of motion in the nodal not to undergo adap-
tation. the receptive fields of prinary detectors on the retina must be an oriented
as to have their optimum directions turned by an angle of 65‘ in relation to the
vertical of the gravity field. Then prolonged viewing of an object moving in

any of the directions of 0. 90, 180 and 270‘ does not affect subsequent perception
of notion.

78
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Normalization effect when man views for a long time a point stimulus moving in a
specified direction: Experiments conducted to study the normalization effect in
the human analyzer of direction of motion provide an answer to the question of

whether there is a change in perception of direction of motion during prolonged
viewing of a moving stimulus.

 

”II/IllﬂII/In

Figure 65. Normalization effect in human analyzer of direction of motion

n) sequential number of setting required direction in successive setting
by subject of specified direction of motion of a point stimulus

4») direction of movement of illuminated point set by subject

a) specified direction of movement

a)¢-o' c)¢-2s° e)¢-45°

b) ¢ - 90' d) ¢' 51'

A spot of Sight was shown to the subject in total darkness: it moved from the
center to the periphery of a television screen. The speed of movement of the
point over the screen was constant throughout the experiment. The subject had
to set the movement of the point in a previously specified direction 50-70 times
in a row, by controlling the voltage. It was assumed that with each successive

79
FOR OFFIOAI. [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

setting of specified direction the result of each prior setting would effect the
next one, since the subject tried to set a direction of movement that would not
differ from the preceding one subjectively, and there. could be accumulation of
systematic error from setting to setting. ' '

If the subject was required to set vertical or horizontal direction of movement,
there was virtually no change in error of Qecified direction from test to test
(Figure 65, a, b).

If, however, the subject was asked to set one of the tilted directions at an angle
of 26 or 50‘, the magnitude of error increased from trial to trial. with an angle
of 26°, the subject set a direction of movement that deviated more and more from
vertical (Figure 65c) and with an angle of 50', it deviated more and more from
horizontal (Figure 65d). In both cases, there was a tendency to choose directions
that were closer to diagonal. This was manifested by constant drift of perceived
direction toward the diagonal. The cause of the drift was that, when viewing a
moving point, the prieary detectors of direction of movement were perceived, under
the influence of adaptation, as being more and more vertical (with an angle of 26')
or more and more horizontal (with an angle of 50') (Appendix 10). -

In order to reproduce the standard, the subject altered the trajectory of movement,
shifting it from vertical or horizontal. As a result, the trajectory of movement
approximated the diagonal fron setting to setting. The closer the set direction
of movement of the spot was to a diagonal, the less drift there was. If, however,
the subject crossed the boundary formed by diagonal direction, drift changed to
the opposite direction. This can be seen from the results of an experiment, where
the subject was asked to set close tr diagonal directions of spot movenent

(Figure 65c).

~If the receptive fields of primary detectors are so oriented in the retina that
their optimum axes are rotated by 45' in relation to the gravity vertical, the
diagonal direction of movement is unstable: a deviation from it generates drift
of settings toward the closest stable direction [77].

when the subject was asked to set an unstable direction, there was usually conti-
nuous increase in setting error. When setting a strictly diagonal direction of
movement. the error fluctuated about the specified direction. In this case, the
constant reversal of the sign of adaptation drift prevented accumulation of error.

Aftereffect in perception of direction of motion: In the proposed model of an
analyzer of movement direction, the aftereffect has the same appearance as in the
model of the line orientation analyzer. The only difference is that the after-
effect response for direction of movement is doubled along the x-axie, in relation
to angle.

Studies have been made of the effect of prior adaptation to a. stimulus moving in
a specified direction on subsequent perception of vertical movement. [78, 77].
when the trajectory of the test stimulus was turned clockwise the error was con-
sidered positive, otherwise negative.

It was found that when the angle between the specified direction of movement of

the adaptive stimulus and gravity vertical was less than 90' there was a positive
aftereffect. when, however, this angle was larger than 90', a negative aftereffect
was observed (Figure 66).

t

FOR OFFICIA... «SE ONLY
[a II lllly_

Figure 66. Aftereffect in analyzer of diraction of motion

0) angle between direction of movement of adaptive stimulus and vertical direction
of movement from bottom to top
AW) systematic error in setting vertical direction of movement
a,b) aftereffact in different subjects (each point on the curve is the mean of
10 settings; the vertical segment defines the 99% confidence interval)

The results of this experiment show that the observed effects are the consequence
of adaptation in expressly the motion direction analyser, rather than a side-effect
of adaptation in the line orientation analyser. This is proven by the effect that
normalization effects and aftereffecte are characterised by other angles in the
analyzer of direction of movement than would be expected for the analyzer of line
tilt.

Thus, prior adaptation to movement of the point in directions at angles of 0. 90 and
180° does not affect subsequent perception in the analyser of motion direction of
the vertical direction of movement of the test stimulus. In the line tilt analyzer,
prior adaptation to lines tilted at angles of 0, 1.5 and 90' from the vertical does
not affect perception of the vertical. While lines tilted at angles of 0‘, 22'30'.
45', 67°30' and 90° are perceived in the line tilt analyzer as constant when viewed
for a long time, in the analyzer of direction of motion stable directions are those
oriented at angles of 0, 45, 90, 135 and 180'.

The adaptation effects are identical in the real analyser of direction of motion and
its model. In both cases, the functional significance of adaptation is that the
discriminating capacity of the system increases. This is achieved by a change in
responses of primary detectors in accordance with the excitation level they reach.
Such attenuation of neuronal reactions in the cat's visual analyzer under the
effect of a prolonged moving stimulus apparently reflects the process of adaptation
of primary detectors [79].

Simultaneous contrast in visual analyser of direction of motion.
Simultaneous contrast is provided in the motion analyser by inhibitory connections
between homonymous primary detectors representing different sections of the visual
field. If the angle between trajectories of movement is less than 180’, there is
an increase in difference in perception of direction of movement of two stimuli
moving in different sections of the visual field. If the angle between the two
directions is greater than 180‘, there is a decrease in subjective difference
between the directions of movement of these stimuli.

81
F0! OFFICIALUSEONLY
HOICMNNCJAI.USE(MVLY

Michael [80], who mtde a study of the properties of visual system neurons of the
ground squirrel that detect the direction of motion, observed that the reaction

of such a neuron depends not only on movement of the stimulus in the neuron’s
receptive field, but on the direction of movement of a stimulus delivered beyond
its receptive field. If the direction of movement of both stimuli is the same. there
is virtually complete suppression of neuronal activity. If, however, the stimuli
move in opposite directions, there is no change in reaction of the tested detector.
Thus, it can be concluded that two stimuli inhibit one another the most when they
move in the same direction. If the stimuli shift in opposite directions, there is
no inhibitory interaction. The inhibitory connections between homonymous primary
detectors placed in the model reproduce this phenomenon.

With simultaneous movement of two stimuli in the receptive field of one local ana-
lyzer of movement direction, their combined effect cannot be distinguished from

the effect of one stimulus moving in an intermediate direction. In both cases,

the number of the output detector with maximum excitation is the same. However, the
amplitude of detector excitation will depend on the angle between directions of
movement of these stimuli. The larger the angle, the lower the level of excitation
of the detector. when the two stimuli move in opposite directions, the amplitude
of detector excitation equals zero: the stimuli suppress one another entirely.

It was experimentally demonstrated that-there is mutual suppression of two stimuli
moving in opposite directions in the receptive field of the ground squirrel's
detector.

Analyzer of speed of motion. The model of this analyzer can be constructed
of neuron-like elements by the standard method. The sensitivity characteristics of
primary detectors of speed of movement must be represented by sine and cosine func-
tions. Then, when the speed of movement is increased the response of one primary
detector diminishes and that of the other increases. Different methods can be

used to organize the receptive field of primary detectors of speed of motion.

However, if we accept the principle of organisation of the receptive field of

the analyzer of direction of motion, by using a different lag between excitatory

and inhibitory inputs one can render the primary detector sensitive to speed of
movement of an object. Neurons that are selectively sensitive to speed of motion,
but not selective for direction of motion, can perform the role of primary detectors.

However, direction-selective neurons are also sensitive to speed of motion: some
react to low speeds of stimulus movement and others to high speeds. The sensitivity
characteristics of direction-selective neurons to speed of motion of a stimulus
correspond well to the characteristics of cone sensitivity described by the
Dartnell nomogram. One can construct speed-selective secondary detectors

that are also selective for direction of motion on the basis of primary detectors
with sensitivity in the form of Dartnell nomograms.

If the primary detectors are constructed on the basis of direction-selective
neurons (Appendix 5), concurrent contrast will depend not only on the difference
in speeds of delivered stimuli, but difference in direction of their movement.

Adaptation of primary detectors of the speed analyser leads to the normalization
effect, which consists of the fact that, when viewing a stimulus for a long time,
its speed changes slowly, but continuously, coming close to the speed that corres-
ponds to equal excitation of both primary detectors. This speed will be the

82
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB(MVLY
POI 0‘11CIAI.USIGNNLY

invariant speed of stimulus movement. In the course of adaptation any stimulus
speed that is slower than the invariant level will subjectively increase and

one that is faster will monotonously decrease, striving toward the stable invariant
value.

Prior adaptation to one speed of motion elicits changes in perception of speed of

the next stimulus. If one selects as the adaptive speed one that is less than the
invariant speed and as the test stimulus one that has the invariant speed of
movement, subjectively there will be an increase in speed of the test stimulus. Con-
versely, the speed of the test stimulus will diminish if it is preceded by an
adaptive stimulus that is faster than the invariant speed.

Such aftereffects exist in the human analyser of speed of movement [81].

Simultaneous contrast in the speed analyzer is provided by addition of inhibitory
connections between homonymous primary detectors of different local analysers of
movement speed. As a result, the subjective difference between stimuli increases.
This is associated with seeming slowing of low speeds and seeming acceleration

of faster movement of the stimulus. Thus, simultaneous contrast acts in the
direction that emphasizes differences.

Simultaneous contrast has been demonstrated in the human analyzer of velocity [82].
Along with increasing differential sensitivity, simultaneous contrast renders
perception of velocity of a stimulus relatively independent of speed of motion

of the background against which the object is moving.

Indeed, background signals acting on primary detectors of the set of local speed
analyzers are mutually suppressed.

Spherical model of visual analyser of motion. Are the direction and
velocity analyzers independent analysers, or are we dealing with two aspects of
function of the same visual analyzer? It was learned that there is a specific com-
bination of direction and speed of an optimum stimulus for different neurons, with
which a particular neuron exhibits a maximum response. With optimum velocity

there is the greatest directional selectivity. At the same time, with optimum
direction of stimulus movement, there is maximum selectivity with respect to speed.

It can be assumed that signals from three types of primary detectors converge on
such secondary detectors that are selective for a specific combination of velocity
and direction of movement. Two types of primary detectors determine selectivity
for direction, while the third type of primary detectors gradually reacts to

speed of movement of an object.

Excitation of the three types of primary detectors constitutes three coordinates
in Euclidean space. Thus, there is one to one correspondence of an optical
stimulus moving in a specific direction and at a specific speed with a three-
component excitation vector of primary detectors.

The secondary detector with a collinear vector of communication with primary
detectors will be selectively excited when a stimulus is delivered to its recep-
tive field that has motion parameters generating such a three-component excita-
tion vector.

The perceptivefieldof the visual analyzer of motion is illustrated in Figure 67.

83
FOR OFIICIA1.lﬂiE(H‘LY
soa«orrunar.use¢mnrv

Excitation of primary detectors of
direction of motion f1(¢), f3(¢).
which provide for perception of sig-
nals in the four quadrants of the
equatorial plane, as vell as excita-
60’)» tion of primary velocity detectors
f(v), are plotted on the three axes
of the perceptive space of motion
perception. The x and Y axes are
shifted by 45' in relation to the
' gravity vector. An object moving
Figure 67. in the visual field has a certain
Spherical model of visual motion analyzer direction and velocity. This leads
to excitation of the three primary
detectors in a certain combination. The secondary detectors are selective to spe-
cific combinations of excitation of primary detectors due to selection of connec-
tions that are collinear to the excitation vector of primary detectors. The sec-
ondary detector is selectively excited with a specific combination of velocity
and direction because of this arrangement. Thus, different points on the sphere
correspond to secondary detectors with maximum excitation. when the direction is
fixed, a change in velocity leads to shifting of excitation maximum on the meri-
dian. Direction detectors that are selectively adjusted for optimum speed are
"situated on the equator. Detectors that code slowly and rapidly moving objects
are located at the poles.

 

Since each secondary detector satisfies the sphere equation, the entire set of
secondary detectors is located on the surface of the sphere that forms a quasirecep-
tive surface. Subjective differences betveen stimuli are determined by the dis-
tsnces on the small arc of the large circle. as in the spherical model of the color
analyzer.

For the final construction of the spherical model, one must properly determine the
position of the axes in relation to fixed parameters of motion. The primary
detectors of direction of movement must be turned by 65' in relation to the gravity
vector. In turn, zero velocity and maximum velocity, when direction of motion loses
meaning, should be placed on the poles (Figure 67).

Neurons that are adjusted for optimum speed. at which the responses of gradual
detectors of high and low speeds equal zero. will lie on the equator. The con-
tribution of priaary detectors of direction of movement also equals zero at the
poles. The main effect is reproduced in the model: selective reactivity of motion
detectors for a specific combination of velocity and direction of movement.

86
itﬂltﬂﬂﬂClkLll§E(NVLY
FOI!OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

CHAPTER 7. STEREO ANALYZER

Neuronal mechanisms of stereopsis. With the joint function of both eyes,
the orientation of the line of vision is usually so selected as to have the

viewed object projected in the foveal part of the retina. The point in space where
the lines of vision of both eyes intersect is called the point of fixation. Thus,
an object located at the point of fixation is projected on the central part of the
retina. All other spatial objects are visible at a certain angle in relation to
the point of fixation. The distance on the retina between projections of the

point of fixation and an arbitrary point in three-dimensional space can be des-
cribed as the angle of vision. The difference between angles of vision of as arbi-
trary object of the left and right eye is usually called disparity. It is assumed
that disparity is used to determine the position of an object in three-disensional
space in relation to the point of fixation [83, 84].

Studies of the cat and monkey visual cortex revealed a population of neurons that
undergo maximum excitation only when a stimulus is localized in a specific point

in space [85-87]. Separate stimulation of each eye does not elicit neuronal
reactions. Excessive disparity of stimuli to both retinas. as well as insufficient
disparity. lead to inhibition of the neuronal response. The response of a binocular
stereoneuron is selectively enhanced only when there is a specific magnitude of
disparity of the image on the retina. One can find a specific disparity of stimulus
for each binocular stereoneuron. A shift of signals in relation to the center of
the retina corresponds to a specific direction in space, while each specific dis-
paﬂty corresponds to a specific distance of the stimulus. In other words, each
binocular stereoneuron is specific for a certain direction to the object and its
specific distance. It is assumed, that the eyes fix on the same point. This means
that the direction and distance of objects are coded by scans of stereoneurons in
relation to a specified point of fixation. All of the foregoing applies to points
in the horizontal plane.

Thus, there is a set of detector neurons for perception of an aggregate of points

in external space in the horizontal plane, each of which responds only to a specific
combination of direction and distance. This set of stereodetectors forms a quasi-
receptive surface, the so-called internal cyclopian screenonwhich the position of
the points is reflected. when the points come closer, farther or change in direc-
tion, the excitation maximum shifts over the cyclopian set of stereodetectors. Con-
sequently, a certain combination of excitations of the two retinas is transformed
into a tingle excitation of a specific stereodetector.

If we were to apply analogous reasoning to points that are not in the horizontal
plane of external space. but in the plane that forms a certain angle with the

85
FOI:OFFRJA1.U§EINNLY
INDIiOFFICJAl.llﬂE(l§LN

horizontal plane, aquasireceptive surface formed by its own stereodetectors can

be formed for each such plane. As a result. there is a set of quasireceptive sur-
faces representing the entire diversity of points in external space. This stereo-
detector space forms internal cyclopianapace: signals from both retinas are trans-
formed in it into a single excitation corresponding to the given direction, dis-
tance and height of a point. It can be said that, for each element of one retina
there is an element or group of similar elements in the other retina, joint stimula-
tion of which leads to selective excitation of a specific stareodetector, with
which there is fusion of images into a single stereoscopic image.

The region of external space in which two images can merge into a single stereo-
scopic image is named after the researcher of the effect of stereoscopic fusion-
Panum's area. Beyond Panum's area there are double images. In the language of
detector description, this means that there are some restrictions imposed on
disparity. when disparity exceeds the magnitude expressed by the set of dispari-
ties of receptive fields fusion is impossible. Thus. Panun's area is represented
by a set of detectors that differ in selectivity for magnitude of disparity of
retinal receptive fields. Each direction in external space is represented by its
own set of stereodetsctors with different disparity of receptive fields. The
term, "disparity of receptive fields," refers to the necessary magnitude of diver-
gence of receptive fields on each retina to obtain a maximum response by the
stereodetector. The possible disparity of receptive fields increases from the
center to the periphery of the retina. For this reason, Panum's area is wider for
directions that are far froa the center. Thus, there is a gauge of stereodetectors
with different disparities of receptive fields for each of the directions consid-
ered, which code by channel number the relative distance in a given direction. On
the other hand, there 1; a set ofstereodetectors for a specific distance in differ-
ent directions. to which different directions at the given distance correspond.
There is a mechanism of separation of space into planes to represent points in
three-dimensional space: detectors with the same disparity of receptive fields

for different directions and different deviations from the horizontal plane dis-
tinguish in the external space the plane [layout] whose points are perceived as
being at the same distance fro: the observer.

The cyclopiuispace formed by the set of stereodetsctors is made up of neurons of the
17th field of the visual cortex and it is aconstant in the sense that when the

line of vision shifts the focus of excitation shifts in accordance with the shift

of the image of the point on each retina. However, human stereoscopic perception

is constant: points in external space are perceived with retention of their posi-
tion, in spite of the shift of their images on the retinas with eye movement. One
must take into consideration the principles of coding eye position in order to
identify the neuronal mechanisn of constancy.

Neuronal mechanisms of coding position of line of vision. There must
be a mechanism that considers eye position to assurace constancy of spatial percep-
tion. The position of the line of vision in the nervous system is also based on
the principle of signal coding by channel number.

In total darkness, when the effect of photic stimuli is ruled out entirely, one
can detect the neuronal mechanism of coding viewing position. The detectors of
position of line of vision are afferent neurons which are excited when the eyes
occupy a specific position in relation to the orbits.

86
FOI‘OFFRJA1.USIIINLY
FIIRCHWNCIAI.USE(N‘LY

If the line of vision shifts, excitation maximum shifts from one detector to another.
The detector is excited for the entire time that the line of vision occupies the
specific position for this detector. Such coding has been established for shifts
of line of vision in the horizontal plane. The question of coding of height of line
vision in relation to the horizontal plane remains open. However, if we consider
the general principle of coding by channel number, the principle of selective de-
tectors should also be used to code the position of line of vision in relation to
the horizontal plane. A shift of line of vision in depth requires conjugated con-
vergence or divergence of the eyes. There are data indicating that there is an
independent set of selective detectors to code vergence of vision. Considering the
coding of vision when the eyes are turned. shifted in relation to the horizontal
plane and in vergence, it can be stated that all of the external space represented
by points on which vision can be fixed is coded by a combination of detectors of
position of line of vision. If the line of vision shifts. excitation maximum
shifts over the sets of detectors. Construction of detectors of position of line
of vision is the same as construction of detectors of intensity: signals from the
proprioceptor muscles of the eyes travel to primary detectors of which are built
detectors that are selective for specific combinations of proprioceptive signals.
However, there is also another way of Obtaining information about the position of
the eyes, which makes use of a copy of the command that serves to shift the eyes to
a specific point. These signals may be impulses from command neurons that control
direction of vision.

Constancy of spatial perception. Thus far, all efforts to find stereo-
detectors in the visual cortex that would be invariant in relation to eye position
have failed. But the neurons in the parietal region, which is characterized by
interaction of analyzers of different modality in construction of the human body
schema, retain tht localization of their receptive field in space with different
position of line of vision. This corresponds to the conception of properties of
constant reflection of the external environment on a population of invariant de-
tectors. This constant space of stereodetectors differs basically from cyclopian
aconstant space in that the receptive fields are not determined by the position of
the stimulus on the retinas, but by the objective position of the stimulus in ex-
ternal space. Since we have no data as yet concerning the principles of neuronal
realization of constant coding. we have to construct a model and then test its
conformity to psychophysical data obtained from studies of stereoscopic vision in
man. General theory of invariant detectors. as detectors with adjustable communi-
cation vector, is the starting point for building such a model. The communication
vector changes under the influence of signals from detectors of another modality.

Model of depth analyzer. Main premises used in building the model. The above-
mentioned model, which is based on certain experimental facts, has flaws along with
a nuaber of positive properties, such as simplicity of explaining mechanisms of
stereoscopic fusion; these flaws ensue from the desire to combine in One model both
the sechanism of image fusion and the mechanism of depth coding. A number of diffi-
culties arise when one tries to use it to explain some experimental data.

1. Object vision may be absent with the sensation of depth. Thus, if images on
the left and right retinas consist of randomly scattered points differing in bright-
ness and chromaticity, when they are appropriately chosen the sensation arises that
part of the image is farther or closer than the point of fixation [88-90]. Images
on the left and right retinas consist of randomly scattered points or spots, in

87
FOR OFFICIAL.USBIONLY
INNICINWKIAJ.UI31INLV

which there is no consistent structure in the form of specifically oriented lines
when viewed separately. If we consider that the disparity detectors found in the
cat's visual cortex are organized. according to Bishop [87], on the basis of super-
position of two monocular detectors of a line with one orientation, appearance

of depth perception when there is an image on each retina in the form of randomly
scattered points is incomprehensible.

2. Depth perception in diplopia [91] is also not explained satisfactorily in this
model. If the mechanism of depth perception is the same with diplopia and fusion
of monocular images. the above-described model is a model of stereoscopic fusion
of isages, and not a model of the mechanism of depth perception.

3. when two stimuli are delivered to a subject, in the presence of summation depth
perception occurs as the mean of the sum of depths of each stimulus. By changing
the intensity of a stimulus one can alter the contribution of this stimulus to
evaluation of the resultant depth [16]. This phenomenon is known as-the depth
mixing phenomena. In the model under discussion, the phenomenon of depth mixture
is not explained.

All this warrants thebelief that there is an independent depth analyzer in the
nervous system to measure depth. The process of fusion of images is an independnet
process.

If there is no need for objective organization of images delivered separately to
each retina for occurrence of depth perception, the depth feature is distinguished
in the visual antlyzer independently of objective [object] vision. This statement
is consistent with the fact that the time required for occurrence of depth percep-
tion is shorter, or at least not longer. than the time required for object
perceptu~» fﬂbl.

It must be stressed that any model of a stereo analyzer must provide for monocular
perception of object direction even without perception of this object in depth.

Let there be two light-sensitive retina-matrices spread in space horizontally by
the magnitude formed by interocular distance. Each of the photometrices can turn
independently of one another about a certain point called the central point of

the retina. ‘Horeover, the matrices can also sake coordinated turns about this
point. Signals about the magnitude of rotation of the retinas in the vertical and
horizontal planes are coded by neuron number by means of three systems of primary
detectors: those formed by receptors of the muscles of one eye that turn it in

the horizontal plane; those formed by proprioceptors of the same muscles of differ-
ent eyes. turning the eyes in the horizontal plane. The detectors of signals from
muscles that turn the eyes up and down in relation to the horizontal plane code the
position of the line of vision in the vertical plane.

The photometrices have an optical system for automatic focusing of an image in

the matrix (retina) plane. In addition, the optical axes are orthogonal to the
retinal p‘ane and traverse the centers of the retinas (see Figure 68). In Figure 68.
point of fixation 1 is on the Pit-Muller circumference. It is projected in the
center of the receptive fields of the right and left eye. These points are marked
on the retina of each eye with an "X?. Their receptive fields are characterized by
zero disparity; the position of the centers of the receptive fields euqals zero in
relAtion to the central direction. Point 3 in the other direction lies on the

88
INHICHHHCIAI.USECH‘LY
FOI»OFiIC1Al.USEJONL¥

horopter and is projected on receptive fields whose centers 2' have disparity that
equals the difference between their projections on the retina. The angle between
the center of the receptive field and projections of point 3 on the retina is
characterized by relative disparity within
the receptive field-difference between
angles a and B. The position of the pro-
jection of an arbitrary point on the retina
can be given unambiguously by means of two
pairs of angles, a and y, B and 6. Angle 0
determines the angle of ision by the left
eye of point A in the horizontal plane, in
relation to the main optical axis. while 1
determines the vertical angle. Angles B and
6 set the position of the projection of
point A on the other retina. Thus, the two
pairs of vertical and horizontal angles are
independent physical variables that charac-
terize the position of point A in space, in
relation to the given orientation of the

 

Figure 68. eyes.
Diagram of projection on the retina
of both eyes of points situated at If the optical axes intersect in space, we
different depths in relation to the shall call this point fixation point e.
fixation point Then angles a. y and B, 6 are .efined in

relation .0 the given fixati' ooint.

According to the foregoing, all measurements
taken in the stereo analyzer are relative-
the fixation point is the reference center.
Perception of absolute distance is possible
only if there is an additional system that
codes the position of line of vision or po-
sition of fixation point in space.

Description of model: According to the
"standard model” of a sensory analyzer, any
physical feature of a stimulus is coded by
the direction of the excitation vector. The
dimensionality of the vector is determined
by the number of independent primary detec-
tors. The responses of these detectors to
the coded feature must satisfy the general
requirements of maximum integral sensitivity
of the system as a whole. In turn. the
direction of the excitation vector is coded

 

Figure 69. with the number of the output element, called
Structure of local depth analyzer secondary detector. which has maximum exci-
tation.

"hen perceiving an object. there are two pairs of angles for each eye, at which

it is seen monocularly. If the angles of vision are coded in a separate analyzer,
the number of independent primary detectors for each eye is four. Detector neurons
for angular size may be used as such detectors [92. 93] (or ordinary neurons

89
Itﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂK1Al.UBE(MNLY
MWWONLY

with concentric un-off fields). The sensitivity characteristics of these detec-
tors are described by the cosine or sine of the corresponding angle of vision
(Appendix 6). The level of detector excitation determines the values of components

of excitation vectors. Bach excitation vector codes the angle at which an object
is seen monocularly.

1n the general case. knowledge of all angles of vision is sufficient to determine
the position of an object in space; for this, one should take one eight-dinensional
excitation vector rather than four tv o-dimensional vectors. The direction of this
vector determines unambiguously the location of the object in space. As shown by
studies, the depth sensitivity of such a model would he lowest along the cyclopian
axis. At the same time, in man sensitivity to change in distance of an object is
maximal on this axis.

It is easy to eliminate this flaw. For this, let us plot a separate depth analyzer.
It is assumed that it consists of a set of local analyzers. Each such analyzer
examines only part of the visual space. Let us call the retinal regions on which
the sector of space examined by a given local analyzer is projected the monocular
receptive fields of the local depth analyzer. Bach analyzer determines the "depth"
of an object in relation to a point that is at the same distance as the fixation
point (Figure 69). Let us call the geometric place of points in the horizontal
plane and at the sane distance as the fixation point the horopter. Thus, each
local analyzer of depth measures the distance of an object in relation to the
corresponding horop'ter point. This leans that angles of vision are measured in
each local analyzer in relation to the corresponding horopter point.

Disparity (Figure 69), in the for: of difference in levels of excitation of mono-
cular prinary detectors with sinusoid sensitivity characteristics (A is the signal
of horizontal disparity). is the input signal for prinary detectors of the local
depth analyzer. The level of excitation of gradual primary detectors of disparity
in a given segment of space determines the comments of the disparity vector, the
direction of which is what gives the subjective sensation of position of an object
in depth, its distance.

Output detectors can be formed by the usual method (Appendix 1). The structure of
the depth analyzer is illustrated in Figure 69. -

There is a set of pairs of local analyzers of direction of object. Each such ana-
lyzer has its own reference point. and two such points. 8 and 1, are shown in the
figure. Point 2 is on the cyclopian axis and with fixation thereof there is pro-
jection in points 2' and 2 ' on both retinas. Arbitrary point 4 is seen by both
local analyzers simultaneously at angles of (ti + a, 8,; + B and a. B.

The presence of point 4 in the visual field of both analyzers elicits excitation
of monocular primary detectors of direction of different eyes. The characteristics
of these pairs of detectors are outlined with dashes. Then the signals from the
local direction analyzers which distinguish in each eye the same direction inter-
act and forn a signal that is proportional to the disparity of the object in the
visual field of the local depth analyzer in the specified direction:

4.: sin; — elapse—p.

A, = slide. 4- C) - “MB. '1‘ ”~04 — pa) + (‘ - B).

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USI(RVLY

If at - Bi - 0, disparity of the object is the same in all analyzers. The bottom
row shows two pairs of primary depth detectors with responses in the form of cos
and sin AA. Each pair of these detectors is used to code the depth of an object
in corresponding directions. Each excitation vector formed by primary depth detec-
tors implements, through the fan of communication vectors, selective excitation of
a secondary detector (this is not shown in the figure). we shall now discuss only
one of the local depth analyzers. The monocular analyzers of "direction of object"
are discussed only to the extent that they are necessary to describe the function
of the depth analyzer, which codes depth over a considerably broader range of
disparities than the range in which image fusion (Penum's area) is possible. Within
Panum's area, along with the depth analyser, there is function of the mechanism of
image fusion; beyond the fusion area there is only one functioning depth analyzer,
and this explains depth perception with diplopia.

however, the area of space examined by a local depth analyzer is limited. This
area is determined by the receptive fields of the depth analyzer.

The conclusions derived by Beverley and Regan [9b, 95], based on experimental facts,
to the effect thetthereare at least four primary detectors of the analyzer of
motion in depth serve as indirect confirmation of the fact that the depth analyzer
is not an exception from the general rule of constructing analyzers.

Properties of model of depth analyzer. Boropter: The horopter is defined
as the geometric site of points in three-dimensional space that have the same sub-
jective direction with a given fixation point for the left and right eye separately.

Unfortunately, there is no agreement as to how a horopter is to be demonstrated
experimentally. there are several methods of determining it (83, 86]. In one
instance, the horopter is defined as the aggregate of points the angle of vision
of which does not change when viewed alternately with either the left or right
eye, with a specified fixation point. Thus, the horopter demonstrated in the
horizontal plane coincides well with the so-called Fit-Muller circumference, i.e.,
the circle traced through fixation point 0 and the optical centers of both eyes.
Angles o and B, at which any horopter point is visible to the left and right
eye, respectively, are equal to one another. This is attributable to the fact
that the apex of these angles rests on the same circle, while their sides rest
on the same arc of this circle.

In the model of the depth analyzer, the monocular "direct of object" is determined
by the direction of corresponding excitation vectors. For these directions to

be equal for the left and right eye, the vectors must he collinear or, which is

the same thing, angles a and 8 determining the values of vector components with low
vertical disparity must be the same. Thus. the horopter is also a Pit-holler
circle.

Another method of experimental determination of a horopter is based on finding the
geometric site of points in the horizontal plane, which are subjectively perceived
as lying in the same frontal plane, with a specified fixation point. It is believed
that the fixation point is also in this frontal plane. Thus, the frontal plane is
a plane, each point of which has zero depth in relation to the fixation point.

With this experimental definition of a horopter. utterly different results are ob-
tained than by the method of same directions [83]. At small distances of the
fixation point, the horopter coincides rather well with the Pit-Muller circle. As

91
FIH!‘IHHC1AI.USI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY

the distance free the fixation point of the subject increases, the slope of the
horopter diminishes, coning close to a straight line. At a certain distance fron
the subject, the slope changes in sign, as a result of which the horopter becones
convex [83, 84]. In order to use this nethod for deternination of the horopter of
the nodel we nust clarify what the tern, "has the sane depth as the fixation point,"
neans. there can be two cases: I) the distance in depth to arbitrary point A of
the horopter is neasured directly fron the fixation point. and it is indicated
that this distance equals zero; 2) the distance fron this point is nessured fron
a certain arbitrary point, the subjective reference point (in this case, the tern,
"has the ease depth as the fixation point," neans that arbitrary point A is just
as far in depth fron the reference point as the fixation point).

Unfortunately, there are no works dealing with the question of how the subject solves
the problen put to his.

If we adhere to the first method of neasuring distance for deternination of the
horopter in the nodel, the horopter line again coincides with the circle of Fit-
Muller. The shape of the horopter will be different in the second case. Let us
discuss this case in greater detail.

Let there be a certain point B on the cyclopian axis, which is selected as the
subjective reference point. Let us define the distance in depth fron point 0 to
point B. It is deternined by the direction of vector 11(0/3). The expression 0/8
means that the disparity analyzer measures the distance of point 0 in relation to
point B.

with the second nethod of deternination, the horopter is a surface in space, each
point of which is at a sane distance in depth fron point 3 as point 0. In other

words, each point A of such a surface corresponds to a disparity vector D (Alb),

which is collinear with vector IMO/B).

The results of calculation depend on deterninstion of point B, the subjective refer-
ence point. Two cases are considered. In the first case, the position of the
reference point on the cyclopisn axis is fixed (l'igure 70a) and in the second,

the point of the subjective center follows the fixation point at the sane subjective
distance (1‘ or 30') (Figure 70, b, c) (Appendix 6).

with the second nethod of deterninstion, the shape of the horopter differs free

the horopter calculated by the nethod of equal directions. the slope of the horoptgr
dininishes constantly as the fixation point noves farther away along the cyclopian
axis. with sufficient distance of the fixation point, the slope of the horopter
changes in sign, and it becones convex. If , however. fixation point o coincides

with reference point B, the horopter, as was to be expected, coincides with the
circle of Fit-Muller. In both cases, the nodal is capable of explaining the shape
of the horopter.

Mixture effects in the binocular analyzer: I‘l'he proposed nodel has a linited nunber
of prinary detectors at its input. Bach specific set of stinuli of these detectors
deternines the nuber of output elenent with naxinun excitation. however, prinary
detectors can be excited to the sane level by different leans, by different conbina-
tions of stinuli. Excitation generated by one stinulus nay be indistinguishable

from excitation generated by several stinuli delivered simultaneously. As a result,
the model will be incapable of differentiation between one stinulus and the overall
effect of two stinuli. This phenonenon is known as the depth nixture phenonenon [16].

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

 

Figure 70. Horopter as the geometric site of points that are equidistant in
depth in relation to fixation point B. X-axis, distance from
cyclopian axis; y-axis. distance in depth along cyclopian axis

a) reference point is fixed and located on the cyclopian axis at point B

(on - 50 cm)
h,c) reference point follows fixation point and is situated on the cyclopian

axis at an angle of vision of 30', 1'

Let us consider in greater detail one of the described experiments which, in the
authore' opinion. is indicative of existence of the depth mixture phenomenon in

the binocular analyzer [161. Figure 71 illustrates the stimuli used in the experi-
ments of Foley. An illuminated fixation point 0 was presented on a screen to the
subject, and below it were two lines, LA and L3. The position of the lines was such
that the image of line LA on the left retina and of line Lg on the right one had

93
F(Il(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USI(M§LY
FOIOFFICIALIBIONLY

zero disparity. i.e., the angle of vision of
line LA with the left eye equaled the angle
of vision of line [.3 with the right eye,
while the angle of vision of 1.5 with the left
eye equaled the angle of vision of line LA
with the right eye.

As a result of such matching of stimuli
there was fusion of two images objectively
referable to different lines.

During the experiment, the intensity of
luminescence of LA (or 1.3) was constant.
whereas the experimenter could alter it
for L30“) at will.

 

Figure 71. .
Depth mixture according to Foley [16]
(Lines LA and 1.3 are at points A and
B, and the perceived depth equals the
sum of their depths)

By means of special devices, the subject was
able to indicate the perceived depth of
lines LA and L3 in relation to the fixation
point. If the intensity of luminescence

of lines LA and 1.3 was the same, the subject
perceived them as being at the same depth as the fixation point. with decrease in
intensity of either line, LA (or I. , there was a change in perceived depth of
the resultant image, approximating tge more illuminated line, L3 (or LA).

Thus, there is ”mixture" of depths of the lines when viewing two lines that are
objectively at different distances from the fixation point. As a result of such
mixture. the subject perceives one line at a certain intermediate depth. The
brighter the relative brightness of each line. the greater its "contribution to
perception of resultant depth.

There is a simple explanation for the mixture effect in the model. Each of the
lines excites separately the same primary detector whose output signal is the sum
of effects of both lines. The degree of detector excitation depends not only on
disparity of the image on the retina, but intensity of each of them. By altering
the intensity of luminescence of the stimulus we alter the contribution of this
stimulus to excitation of primary detectors.

As a result. there is depth mixture of two stimuli, and the brighter the stimulus,
the greater its contribution (Appendix 6).

Simultaneous contrast and adaptive effects in object position analyser: To in-
crease discrimination of two successively delivered stimuli. let us add into
the depth analyzer an adaptation mechanism for attenuating sensitivity of primary
detectors as a function of excitation level they have reached. The illusion of
adaptation is the "price" for this gain: aftereffect and normalization effect.
The aftereffect consists of the fact that prolonged viewing of distant points
leads to seeming approximation of the initial fixation point, whereas viewir-e
close points leads to increase in distance of the fixation point. Adaptation in
the depth analyzer will also generate the normalization effect—seeming change
in depth of object in the form of its approximation to the fixation point.

96
MOFFIGALUSEONLY
IN]! OIWNCIAI.IIBI2(MVLY

There have been previous reports [96, 97] of the effect of prior adaptation on
subsequent estimation of depth of a test object. A more recent study of the
aftereffect phenomenon in human depth perception was conducted by Hitchell et al.
(98]. The main conclusion of this study was that the distance to a test object
was overestimated after adaptation to a nearer stimulus. After adaptation to
stimulus that was farther away than the fixation point, the subject presented a
tendency toward underestimating the distance to the test object. Thus, the after~
effect observed in the experiments had the same features as in the model.

ent depths.

Anomalies of depth perception: The primary detectors of the depth analyzer differ
from the primary detectors of the monocular analyzer of ”direction of object," whose
properties are similar to those of detector neurons of angular dimensions [93]. The
difference is that signals are delivered to disparity detectors from monocular de-
tectors referable to different retinas. The detectors of one retina have an exci-
tatory effect on depth detectors, while the detectors of the other retina have an
inhibitory effect. Let us consider a detector for which the left eye is a source
of excitation and the right a source of inhibition. If we consider that a real
neuron cannot transmit a negative signal, there must be neurons whose responses

are expressed separately as the positive and negative parts of the responses of

a "theoretical" primary detector (Appendix 6). The wider the angle of vision

of an object with a given eye. the stronger the signal from monocular detectors
with sinusoidal responses. Consequently, the primary detector, for which the

left eye is excitatory, will react only to objects for which the angle of vision
with the left eye is larger than the angle of vision with the right eye, i.e.,

this primary detector is excited only if the object is farther away than the fixa-
tion point (Appendix 6). Analogously, the neuron with excitatory input from the
right eye will react only to objects situated closer than the fixation point (how-
ever, together they realize the response of the theoretical detector).

If one of these detectors is missing fro: the depth analyzer, the entire system
will be incapable of perceiving either greater distances, or distances that are
closer than the fixation point. Such disturbances of depth perception have been
described in the literature [97, 100].

Absence from the visual system of one of the above-described primary detectors of
disparity does not mean that the subject will be unable to determine whether a
given point is closer or farther than the specified fixation point. Let there be
no detector of close objects in the visual system, as a result of which the subject
cannot determine that point A is closer than fixation point Q. The subject will
settle the question of depth of objects in the following manner. The subject will
replace fixation point 0 with point A and determine that farmer fixation point

is farther away than point A, i.e., point A is closer than point 0. In other words,
the subject solves the problem of depth using the analyzer for objects that are
farther than the fixation point, since he does not have a directly available
analyzer for objects that are closer than the fixation point.

95
FORIOFFIJAI.UBI(HVLY
FOI!OFFK3Al.USE(NNLY

It has been experimentally demonstrated that the behavior of a subject with anomalous
binocular vision when solving "closer-farthsr” problems is very similar to the
above-described behavior of the model in solving analogous problems [100].

Thus, it can be maintained that the experimental facts are consistent with the
assumption that the human and animal depth analyzer has the structure of a standard
analyzer, which codes signal parameters by channel number.

Construction of eye position analyzer. when discussing the question of
constructing an analyzer of line of vision, one must take into consideration that
the line of vision of each eye is determined by two independent variables: position
of the line of vision in the horizontal plane and position of the line of vision

in the vertical plane. This situation is analogous to coding an object in space

in relation to the fixation point. The difference is that, in t“: case of coding
eye position, there is localization of fixation points, whereas r.e depth analyzer
codes the position of an arbitrary point in relation to the fixati : point. Thus,
the task of construc;ing an analyzer of direction of line of vision can be solved
by analogy with the stereo analyzer. The degree of tension of corresponding eye
muscles serves as the input signal of primary detectors. The gauge for angle of
rotation of the photomatrix (eye) in the horizontal (or vertical) plane generates

a signal that equals the cosine and sine of this angle of rotation. These signals
are formed at the output of two primary detectors. They are followed by a second
layer of selective detectors connected to primary detectors by connections that
differ in weight coefficients. Pith change in the angle characterizing the orienta-
tion of photomatrices in relation to external space, an-excitstion maximum is
created on one of the detectors that codes this position of the photometrices.

Each fixed position of the line of vision of the photometrix corresponds to maximum
excitation of a specific detector. "hen the eyes turn. the degree of excitation
in primary detectors changes and the excitation maximum shifts along the set of
detectors of position of line of vision. The distinction of this structure is
that. at each point in time, there is only one excitation maximum on the chain of
detectors that determines the only position of the line of vision at each point in
time. There is a quasireceptive space of detectors of position of line of vision
for the entire space, in which the line of vision may have a different position.
With any change in direction of vision in depth or angle. in relation to the hori-
zontal plane, there is a shift of excitation maximum in it, reflecting the shift

of the line of vision.

The line of vision in depth, in relation to the horizontal plane, does not alter
the viewed position of a target. although its position on each retina and on the
stereo detectors changes. We have to assume that, at a higher level. signals of
eye position are considered in some way, providing for constant perception of the
objectively stable world. To solve this problem. let us use the mechanism of
invariant detectors that we have already discussed. It consists of the fact that
the detectors of direction of vision alter the communication vector of the cyclo-
pian screen with invariant detectors uniquely. so that with concurrent change in
position of signals on the cyclopian screen and detectors of position of line of
vision of the stereoscopic picture of the outside world on the set of invariant
detectors does not change. Stereo signals are read in relation to the initial
fixation point. It should be noted that with change in fixation point the disparity
of image on the left and right retina may exceed the permissible range, i.e., the
object will move beyond Panum's area. As a result, there could he destruction of
perception of a fused image, diplopia may arise. However, this will not happen if

96
Ft!i€ﬂﬂﬂ(1el.ll§li(ﬂ'Ll
IINRCIWHCIAI.USI1NNLN

we take into consideration the hysteresis effect in the stereo analyser. it cou-

aets of detectors on which the fused iaage appears. As a result, moderate wander-
ing of the line of vision will not disrupt the fused image, while the presence of
invariant detectors will provide for invariant perception of the outside world.

The mechaniea of construction of invariant detectors is consistent with the general
scheme described before.

Each detector of the sconstant stereoscopic screen is connected to all invariant
detectors. However, the connections between sconstant and invariant detectors can
be selectively altered, depending on localization of excitation maxi-u. on the popuv
lation of detectors of position of line of vision. For example, let the orientation
of matrices be such that there is aaxinun excitation of the kth detector of position
of line of vision. This is associated with activation of connections between the
first sconstant and kth invariant detectors, second and (k+l)th detectors. As a
result, distribution of excitation on the set of invariant detectors is shifted by k
units in relation to the distribution on the set of sconstant detectors. If orienta-
tion of the photometrices changes, there is concurrent change in position of the
image on them. A shift of the inage on the Istrix leads to shift of excitation
naxinun on the set of detectors of position of linerof vision. it is assumed that
the shift in naximum on detectors of position of line of vision would lead to a
change in connections between sconstant and invariant detectors, with which the
distribution of excitation on invariant detectors will be shifted by the ease number
of units to the left of the distribution of excitation on the set of sconstant
detectors. Thus. the excitation laximum on the invariant set of detectors will
again be found on the sane kth detector. Thus, a shift of images caused by nove-

ment of matrices (eyes) on the set of invariant detectors will be automatically
compensated by a shift of line of vision.

Since the detectors of position of line of vision change only the destination of

visual signals ontheinvariant screen, rather than excitation in the visual channel,
the visual image itself does not change.

A robot with an invariant screen of reflection of the external environment will

have the sane illusions as are inherent in hulan vision. Thus, if the distribution
of lighten photometrices remain constant, while the matrices turn in such a manner
that signals will arise in the turn sensors corresponding to a shift of the robot's
line of vision, there will be a shift of signals on the invariant screen. This will
be perceived as a shift of the stiaulus in space. An analogous situation arises in
man's perception of an afterinage. For example, prolonged viewing of a white square
on a black background leads to appearance in the dark of an after image after the
former is turned off: black square on a white background. Movement of the eyes leads

to the sensation of movement of the afterinage, although there is actually no shift
of the illusory image.

The entire diversity of sconstant detectors reflects the external space with all
possible combinations of image shifting in relation to the photoeatrices. The
space of the invariant detectors involves all of the objective space that can be
represented on invariant detectors by altering the position of the line of vision.

97
HOI‘OFIICIAI.IEHE(NULY
IIHICINHCIAL.UBI¢N‘LY

Hith addition of short-term memory into the mechanism of operation of invariant
detectors we have the possibility of conatructing a panoramic image of the external
world on the invariant screen, even if the size of the aconatant screen in limited.

98
lilitlﬁﬂC1A1.USEIHWLY
CHAPTER 8. GRAVITY ANALYZER

Neuronal aechanisas of perception of gravity. The gravity analyser is
represented by otolith organs in vertebrates-the eacculus and utriculus. The most
important elements of these organs are receptors invested with cilia-kinocilia and

of gravity. If an exogenous force leads to deflection of kinocilia away fro. the
stereocilis, depolarization occurs in the receptor. If gravity acts in the opposite
direction. toward the stereocilis, hyperpolsrisstion occurs in the receptor. The
otolith receptors form a group of several hundred unite, in each of which the kine-
cilia are oriented in the ease direction. However, the orientation of kinocilia in
different groups is not the same. This causes each group of receptors to be a
selective receiver of specific directions of gravity. 0n the surface of the maculs
formed by hair cells the lines of polarisation of kinocilia diverge from the aedial
region to the periphery, where the direction of polarization is reversed. with a
change in gravity, there is selective excitation of the group of hair cells where
the direction of the gravity vector coincides with the orientation of kinocilis.
Thus, the receptors of the sacculua and utricaluo are receptors of direction of
gravity. The utriculus differentiates finely a deviation from the strict vertical
position. while the sacculus differentiates all other positions. Detection of the
direction of gravity is made with the participation of otolitha, which are fine
grains of calcite. Tangential displacement of cilia, which could reach 15 pa with
extreme inclination of the body, is the stimulating factor. The receptors are
synaptically connected with neurons of Scarpe's ganglion. The ganglion neurons
present selectivity for the direction of the gravity vector. Ultimately, the
otolith signals can be used to control body love-en: in order to maintain equilib-
riua: different parts of the macula or, note precisely, different groups of its
receptors with specific polarisation are connected to different auscle groups.

Differentiation of the gravity analyser into two regions with groups of selectively
oriented receptors in different areas makes it difficult to give a formal descrip-
tion of the gravity analyzer. It is considerably simpler to introduce fornalisn
to describe the vertebrate organ of equilibriua.

Statocysts of nollusks. The aollusk atatocysts are sacs, 70-100 um in dis-
aeter, which are symmetrically situated between pedal and cerebral ganglia. The
statocyst is transparent, and it consists of 12-13 hair cells 60-50 um in diameter.
The cilia of hair cells, totaling loo-150, are oriented into the statoeyst. There
is an accumulation of particles, 3-10 no in diameter, which are called atatoconia.
in the fluid inside the statocyst. An inclination of a statocyst causes shifting
of the sccunulstion of particles in it in the direction of inclination. Some cilia
bend. with delivery of a mechanical pulse free a piesocrystal to a atatocyst,

99
FOI‘OFIHCIAI.IEI!(NVLY
FOI1DFFEJAI.UBE(NVLY

the hair cells forming its walls move. while the cilia bend under the influence
of particles with inertia. The generator potential of hair cells increases linearly
as a function of the logarithn of statocyst displacenent. The hair cells fora

axons, along which impulses generated by then travel to the centers of the cerebra-
pleural ganglion.

If an isolated statocyst is rotated. the centrifugal force which occurs during
rotation causes statoconia to coapress cells lc.ated farther from the center of
rotation. their cilia bend over, the cells are depolarized and impulsation frequency
increases. Centrifugal force attenuates the effect of statoconia on the cilia that
are.closer to the center of rotation. Their cilia stand erect. the cells are hyper-
polarized and ispulsation frequency in then diminishes. Threshold stimulation of
hair cells constitutes 0.5-0.25 6. There is inhibitory interaction between hair
cells. which increases the difference between reactions of hair cells situated in
different parts of the statocyst. Thus, the entire population of hair cells forms

a receptive surface in the form of a closed sphere. The receptors perform a detec-
tion function. Gravity elicits an excitation profile on the receptors. The excita-
tion maximum is localized in a specific part of this receptive surface, depending

on the body's position in space. '

With change in body position. the gravity vector changes in relation to the set of
receptors and eicitation maximum shifts over the sphere formed by the cilia.. Here,
the direction of gravity is coded by channel nunber already on the level of the
receptors that transmit signals directly to nerve centers. Thus, although there is
no multilayer detector systen in the analyzer of direction of gravity, the receptors
perform the function of coding by channel nulber. The spherical structure repre-
sented in the above-described cases in the for- of a quasireceptive surface formed
by detectors is realized here by the receptive surface itself. Since there are no
prinary detectors here,.illusions related to adaptation on the level of primary
detectors are also not observed. Lateral inhibition, which occurs between hair
cells, increases selectivity in coding of the gravity vector by channel number.

Gravity analyzer with neuron-like elenents. One can construct a statocyst
technically in the form of a closed sphere, within which there is a weight attached
to guys. These guys are situated at a fixed distance froa one another on the sphere,
and they are equipped with pressure sensors.

Let us bisect the center of the statocyst in the plane of gravity. Then the weight
would be suspended on the guys and lean on supports situated on the circumference.
If we assign numbers to the guy-supports, the gravity vector will create pressure
that differs in aagnitude and sign in guys having different numbers. The signals
taken free the corresponding pressure sensors for. the pressure profile. With a
change in direction of the gravity vector. the pressures are redistributed on

the guys, creating a new pressure profile. The pressure in each of the guys deter-
mines the nagnitude of components of the excitation vector. Then the differences
between directions of gravity vectors will be deternined by the angle between the
excitation vectors they create. If we were to describe the cosponents of the exci-
tation vector as polar coordinates. there is a specific orientation pattern in
three-dimensional space corresponding to a specific direction of gravity. Hith
change in direction of gravity, the orientation pattern shifts over the sphere
formed by receptors.

100
FOI¢OFFHJAI.USIINVLY
FOR4DFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

Addition of reciprocal inhibitory connections between receptors makes it possible
to code the direction of gravity more selectively by channel number.

Screen that is invariant in relation to gravity vector. When the posi-
tion of the robot's housing changes in space, there is a shift in signal image on
the photometrix. This image shift can be eliminated by introducing an invariant
screen. with projection on which of an exogenous stimulus there is consideration

of the position of the robot's housing in relation to the gravity vector. In con-
etructing the invariant screen, the main element is an invariant detector whose
communication vector with corresponding detectors of the aconstant screen are re-
adjusted under the influence of signals from the auxiliary set of detectors. A po-
pulation of gravity detectors can serve as such an additional set of detectors.

The excitation vector of the gravity detectors performs the same function as the
excitation vector formed by the detectors of eye position. The excitation vector
for-ed in the guy-support sensors alters the coefficients of communication of
detectors of the aconstant screen with detectors of the invariant screen in such

a way that the image remains on the same elements with all changes in position of
photonatrices in relation to external space when the robot bends over.

101
FOR‘OFFRJAI.USE¢HMLY
FOI4OFFK341.USB(INLY

CHAPTER 9. CONSTRUCTION OF ANALYZBRS TO ORDER

Requirement of analyzer constructed of neuron-like elements. Heluve
discussed above general theory of artificial sense organs based on the principle

of coding signals by channel number. Then this theory was tested on models of
specific sensory systems. The properties of_the sensory system constructed with
neuron-like elements were compared to the psychophysical and neurophysiological
features of the corresponding real analyzers. The constructed models, which repro-
duced the functions of real sense organs on the psychophysical level, had a remarks
able property: the responses of their neuron-like elements coincided with the res-
ponses of real neurons.

Thus, the principle of coding by channel number turned out to be effective in model-
ing specific sense organs. The fact that the psychophysical and neurophysiological
features of the models and real biological analysers coincide opens up the possibi-
lity of designing new artificial sensory systems that man does not have on the basis
of the principle of coding by channel number.

Let us discuss the process of constructing an artificial sensory system, an
analyser of polarized light. By selecting this analyser as an example of sensory
system that nan does not have, we can check the effectiveness of modeling on bio-
logical objects, since insects havo such analysers.

He now come to the problem of constructing.a robot analyzer that distinguishes a
light source according to plane and degree of polarisation.

Detection of polarization plane must be independent of the angle of inclination of
the robot. For this reason, at the final stage one nust provide for constant per-
ception of polarisation plane by taking into consideration infornntion taken from
detectors of the robot's position in space.

Detectors that are selective to plane and degree of polarisation. Let
us consider detectors that code the position of the polarisation plane in relation
to the horizontal plane. The polarisation plane is characterised by an angle that
can have any value in the range of 0-180’.

we must have at least two independent primary detectors to code the angle of polari-
ration. The level of excitation of each primary detectors determines the value of
components of the excitation vector. In view of the fact that negative signals
require a special channel, there must be four primary detectors. The direction of
the excitation vector codes the angle of polarisation. Signals from the four
prinary detectors, whose responses are so chosen as to have a constant modulus

102
roe omcm use my
FINI‘HHNCIAI.USEGNNLY

of the excitation vector, are fed to the inputs of secondary detectors. In this
case, the ends of the excitation vectors remain on the sphere, in this case on the
circumference. The increase in number of primary detectors to four provides for
transmission of the signal even when it has a negative value.

when the designed model must provide coding not only of polarization angle, but
degree, the minimum number of primary detectors required increases to three or five,
respectively.

The responses of primary detectors of polarized light can he represented by a sine
or cosine of a dual angle of polarization, analogously to what occurs in the primary
detectors of line tilt.

Ordinary photoresistors covered with film, with polarization axes of 0 and 65‘, can
serve as receptors of polarized light. In an analyzer that consider: not only the
angle but degree of polarization, one can use a receptor without selectivity for
polarized light to construct the auxiliary primary detector.

The characteristics of receptors [101] that are selective for polarization plane do
not provide directly for optimum responses of primary detectors, since they contain
a constant component. In order to obtain responses of primary detectors in the
form of sine and cosine curves, one must subtract the constant component from the
signal of the receptor that is sensitive to polarization plane.

The primary detector with a cosine curve type of response receives excitation from
the receptor that is sensitive to polarization plane and inhibition from the receptor
that is not selective for angle of polarization of light. As a result of such
interaction, there is a signal in the form of a cosine curve at the output of the
sumating elenent. The enlisting elements constructed in this way can be used as
primary detectors.

Two sore additional primary detectors, on which an unpolarized receptor has an
excitatory effect and receptors sensitive to angle of polarization of light have

an inhibitory effect, must be constructed to transmit the positive and negative
parts of the responses of primary detectors. These elements will have the res-
ponses that are necessary in transmission of information about the angles of polari-
zation, with which the value of the corresponding cosines is negative (Figure 72).
Two receptors have selectivity for the polarization plane. One receptor is not
sensitive to the polarization plane. The optimum angles of orientation of receivers
of polarized light are 0 and 45°. The primary detectors are formed by paired
summation of a selective and nonselective receptor with different signs. The sig-
nals of primary detectors form a three-component excitation vector. Secondary
detectors lie on the sphere.

The analyzer that codes the degree and angle of polarization of light is analogous
to the color analyzer. Like color, polarized light is characterized by two para-
meters-degree of polarization and angle of polarization (the degree of polarization
is analogous to saturation in the color analyzer, while the polarization plane is
analogous to color tone). when reflecting an exogenous signal on the sphere, the
vertical angle on the sphere characterizes the degree of polarization of light,
while the horizontal one characterizes the inclination of the polarization plane
(Figure 73). If the degree of polarization changes and the angle of polarization
remains constant, the point on the sphere moves along the meridian. If, however,
only the polarization angle changes, the point on the sphere representing the

103
FOI:OIIICI:1.[EHE(MUL¥
te detector in the color
Figure 72 analyzer. With change in polarization plane
‘ ' there is change in poeition ot the excitation
3:32;": gleaﬁizﬁgnocffpigﬁtmd “xi-um which in characterized by the hori-
l) polarization plane zontnlan

2) degree of polarization the color analyzer.

analyzer of polarized light in inaecte. One
, of then in not selectively eenaitive to po-
w, larized light. The other No have ﬂexing

polarization angle is determined by orienta-
l, 2) selective detector adjusted

for 0 end 65', respectively
primary detector

of polarization of light both priury detectors are equally exicted [101].
means that, in this case, all of the components of the excite
Such a vector does not ch

eieilar to e real hiologi

l‘o dietinguieh light according to degree of polari
bf unpolerized light whose rhabd
ins in such a way th

evele ot‘ the biological anelyzer have

The higher
econdery detectors a

In the model, the

reeponda to dieplacuent of
aphere. The poeition o

FORDML'JSBONLY
FORiﬂﬂNClALlﬁﬂIONIN

is characterized by two angles: vertical angle that determines degree of polariza-
tion and horizontal angle that determines the angle of polarization of light. we
could continue the analogy to the color analyzer. To the four opponent neurons of
the color analyzer correspond four primary detectors in the polarized light ana~
lyzer. The analogue of the black and white system is the primary detector of degree
of polarization. Secondary detectors of degree and angle of polarization correspond
to the selective color detectors.

The polarized light analyzer also has a normalization effect. Polarization angles
of 0, 65, 90 and 135‘ are stable, while 22'30', 67°30'. 112'30' and 157'30' are
unstable. In addition to normalization. there is also an aftereffect. During
prolonged viewing of polarized light, the sensitivity of each primary detector
changes as a function of degree of its excitation. For this reason, the next
stimulus could excite prinary detectors in a different proportion, as compared to
what would happen without adaptive stimulus. The adaptation effect leads to the
illusion of change in polarization plane.

Constant perception of polarization plane by using gravity analyzer
signals. In the nodel discussed. a specific angle and degree of polarization
correspond to a selective secondary detector. in which the only excitation maximum
occurs. If the angle or degree of polarization is changed, excitation maximum
shifts from one detector to another. Thus. in this system signal coding is done
by channel number. However. such a set of detectors is not constant, in the
sense that with a constant angle and degree of polarization inclination of the
equipment containing the polarized light analyzer also leads to a shift of excita-
tion from one detector to another. It can be said that many [or a set] of detectors
of polarized light form a quasireceptive surface of the aconstant type. In order
to render perception of polarization angle constant-independent of inclination of
spparatua-we must create a quasireceptive surface of invariant detectors. Each
invariant detector is connected to all aconatant detector; however. the link be-
tween aconstant and constant detectors changes in accordance with the excitation
vector on the set of detectors of the analyzer of direction of gravity.

When the apparatus is inclined, the plane of polarization of light changes in rela-
tion to the photoreceptors; concurrently, there is change in direction of the
excitation vector in the gravity analyzer which, in turn, leads to change in
comnicstion vector between the sets of invariant and aconstant detectors. As a
result, when there is concurrent change in polarization plane and angle of inclina-
tionof theapparatus.excitation maximum remains on the same invariant detector. At
the same time, if only the polarization plane changes, excitation maximum shifts
from detector to detector. reflecting the change in the external world on the
quasireceptive surface of invariant detectors. The cost of constancy of perception
is the illusion of seeming change in polarization plane when the signal of the
gravity analyzer is not accompanied by a change in polarization plane.

Control of apparatus[robot?]movement by means of command elements. The
significance of a constant screen formed by invariant detectors of polarization
plane is graphically demonstrable when it is necessary to control an apparatus moving
toward a target that is determined by a given plane of polarized light. Indeed.
with any inclination ofthespparstusthe excitation maximum remains on the sass in-
variant detector in accordance with the objective constancy of the plane of light
polarization. Let us consider the case when tl'e apparatus-net move toward a light

105
ll”!(lﬂﬂt1khlﬂil(lil¥
apparatus has two nodes: search for target and movement toward target. If the
signal on the set of detectors coincides with the set one, the apparatus operates
in the mode of movenent toward the target. If the angle of polarization of light
failing on receptors differs from the specified one. the apparatus operates in
the node of searching for the target by means of circular scanning [survey]. One
can set the node of operation by using connund ale-ants. One com-and element

the target. If a light source with specified polarization plane appears in the
field of vision. the progran for noving toumrd the target is turned on and the
scanning one is turned off. If radiation falls on receptors that has a different
angle of polarization plane, the progran for noving toward the target is turned off
and the search program is turned on. If. in the course of scanning. the apparatus
sssunes a position, in which the polarization angle coincides with the required
position, the excitation nsxinun occurs on the invariant detector connected to

The appropriate invariant detector is connected to the corresponding com-and element
in order to control the choice of targets. Thus, the question of resetting [re-
adjusting) the apparatus amounts-to changing the connections of the coanand neuron
to a specific detector. In order to change the target. one has to disconnect the
previously connected detector fro. the command element of sovement touard the-
target and connect another detector to it. This changes the target touard which
the apparatus loves. Moreover, the disconnected detector nust be connected to the
coanand element for scanning. Such conplex alteration of connections can be made

current disconnection of detectors fron one connsnd neuron and connection thereof
to another con-and neuron. After this, novemsnt toward the target is triggered
by another detector. The detector which previously turned on the progran for

scanning program.

Thus, by comparing the coding of external signals in the central nervous system
to the patte.n of neuronal discharges, ensenhle of neurons and channel number, it
can be concluded that coding is done by channel nunher by means of neuron-
detectors that are selectively adjusted for specific values of the analyzed signal
parameter. The distinction of coding by channel nunber is that the process of

for highly reliable coding. Elimination of part of the detectors does not disrupt
appreciably the reflection of signals on the quasireceptive surface formed by the
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

set of detectors. Presentation of the signal of excitation maximum on the quasi-
receptive surface of the detectors is the logicalcontinuation of signal reflection
on a receptive surface. However. the stimulus does not shift over the receptors

in the case of a set of detectors. The stimulus merely alters the correlation be-
tween excitations of receptors. But maximu- excitation does really shift over the
set of central detectors. This shift of excitation maximum is achieved because each
- detector has its own set of comnicationa with receptors.

The mechanism of constant perception is a more coaplex form of signal dc. action. In
this case , the connections between detectors and receptors or primary detectors are
not fixed. They change when the signal changes on the auxiliary set of detectors.
When the organism itself moves. the signal changes both on the main and auxiliary
sets of detectors. As a result, the excitation maximum remains on the same invariant
detector. Invariant detectors make it possible to receive signals constantly, inde-
pendently of the organism's movements. Construction of invariant detectors makes

it possible to create the analogue of constant perception for a robot.

Representation of a signal in the form of maximum excitation on the quaaireceptive
surface of detectors makes it possible to use detectors and, first of all. invariant
ones to control movements. This also applies to robots with artificial sense
organs based on neuron-like elements. Signal coding with the channel number does
not require recoding in the usual sense of the word in order to implement control
functions. Signals from detectors can be used directly as control signals. Thus,
coding by channel number provides for efficient transition from the alphabet of
stimuli to the alphabet of reactions.

Coding by channel number is a univeer method of coding in various sense organs
based on com-on principles. The most cones [general] principle is the principle
of maximum sensitivity of a set of detectors. According to this principle, the
detector characteristics should be so selected as to have maxim sensitivity of
the entire set. 0n the basis of this principle, one can calculate theoretically
the detector characteristics; these characteristics are found to be cosine curves.
An external signal generating maximum excitation on one of the detectors can be '
represented by a point on an n-dimensional sphere.

One can accentuate detector responses by means of lateral inhibition, the magnitude
of which is inversely proportional to the distance between detectors on then-dimen-
sional sphere. Here again. we see the analogy to simpler systems. for example,
lateral inhibition in the Xiphosura eye.

The characteristics of receptors are coordinated with selective detectors by means
of a layer of primary detectors that perform the function of a cosine.

Adaptation on the leVel of primary detectors renders the entire set of secondary
detectors particularly sensitive to changes in a long-acting signal. In the case
where there are several independent local analysers, each of which has separate

sets of primary and secondary detectors, lateral inhibition is added between homo-
nymous primary detectors of local analyzers to enhance their differential sensitivity.

Lateral connections between homonymous primary detectors enhance discrimination
sensitivity with regard to spatially scattered signals.

107
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
POROFFICIALIBEONLY

0n the basis of the general scheme of organisation of analyzers, one can create ar-
tifical sense organs for a robot that are based on neuron-like elements and reproduce
the functions of real detectors. The artificial sense organs constructed on these
principles are analogous in many respects to human and animal sense organs. Such
an artificial analyzer as a whole reproduces the psychophysical characteristics
that are known in man. At the same time. each neuron-like element corresponds to

a real neuron involved in performing a given sensory function. As a result one

can obtain an “internal" reflection of the environment in a robot that coincides
with internal reflection of the environment in nan. The similarity of perceptive
characteristics of nan and robot can extend to occurrence of analogous illusions.
In both cases. illusions are the price for greater discriminating sensitivity. The
resemblance of internal reflections in man and robot opens up new opportunities for
efficient control of robots and creation of a reliable language to communicate with
then.

Studies and formalization of general principles of neuronal organization of ana-
lyzers enable us not only to construct robot sense organs by analogy to the known
human sense organs, but to develop on these principles sense organs in a robot
that do not exist in man. In the most general form, construction of a set of de-
tectors consists of having a specific input signal correspond to the number of a
specific output detector. .

The principle of coding by channel number in biological systems extends to organiza-
tion of motion by means of comand neurons. Channels fomd by many [or a set of]
detectors can be used directly to control robot movement. This is achieved by

using co-and neuron signals in the structure of the robot.

Excitation of one analogue of a comand neuron is transformed into a vector of
excitations on a set of effector elements, which are motoneuron analogues. Thus,
the channel formed by the cot-sand element at the output creates a specialized re-
action. Bere, the program of motion is fixed in the set of connections leading
free the cos-and neuron to the effector element. In order to use detectors for
alternate control of reactions via cot-sand elaents, the detector inputs on the
cos-land neuron must be flexible and depend on the number of deliveries of each
signal, as well as which command neuron input is activated. Moreover, the
communications between detectors and cos-rand neurons may change from an hierarchi-
cally higher level by means of signals that alter the sets of connections between
detectors and command neurons. The reactions of the robot are functions of memory
and instruction as a result of connecting detectors to cot-send neurons and die-
connecting detectors from cos-and neurons. thus changing the correlation between
stimuli and reactions.

Development of artificial sense organs based on the principle of signal coding by
channel number also solves the problem of developing prostheses of lost sense
organs by means of direct linkage of electronicdevices to the neuronal structures
of the hman brain.

108
MWI’SEONLY
FOIOFHCIALISEONLY

APPENDIX 1. GENERAL THEORY

Signal coding by channel number. Signal coding by channel nuaher will be
construed as coding where a specific value of a signal corresponds to one laxinally
excited element of a whole set. He shall call the different selectively excited
elements detectors. A change in stimulus is transforled into a shift of excita-
tion naxinua fron one eleaent to another.

The set of detectors, together with elements that generate excitation under the
influence of a stimulus, ashes up the neuronal analyser.

A detector that codes a certain parameter ¢€L of stiaulua 8¢ is viewed as an adder
that sun-ates paired products: occurring excitation by the coefficient of efficiency
of synaptic contact cjiz

..___—-__.... -n- _. _—

 

a,=l§c,,y.=(c,, r), [=1,....m, 9:000“.

where f; are excitations over the ith input; the set of excitations {ﬁg}, (11 - l,
..., n) is considered as components of excitation vector P“); c 4; is the coeffi-
cient of the ith connection of an underlying element with the it detector; set
{cf}, (1'. - l, ..., n) is considered as conponents of conunication vector of the
Jr detector; dj is the level of excitation of the jth detector. ".rhe'input channels,
which supply information to the detector, are linearly independent inputs. Thus,
the number of inputs is finite, while functions f1“), (11 - l. ..., n), which des-
crihe sensitivity of the 12th input as a function of 0- are linearly independent.
Each stinulus 84, generates excitation {f£(¢)} at the detector inputs. Primary
detectors nay sometimes coincide with receptors. In other cases, primry detectors
are the result of preprocessing of receptor signals:

3,3 m9) 3 P (9)..

where 1"(0) is the excitation vector; 8; and3; are stages of conversion. :81 imple-
ments the transition from stiaulation to the receptor excitation set, while 32
does so from the set of receptor excitations to the set of excitations of primary
detectors.

The level of excitation of the jth detector under the influence of fixed stimulus Sp
is determined with the following equation:

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFII‘ICIALWONLY

 

 

a,=(r,, c,)L-=|r,|c,'|eo.[r,. 0,;

The problem of constructing the analyzer for signal coding by channel nulber aaounts
to finding for each secondary detector the connication vectors CJ that would
cause this detector to be saxinally excited fros a given stimulus, in relation to
all other detectors in the set.

We see from the equation for dj that if contacts 05 are matched and fixed the
position of the maxim. on the set. of detectors is unrelated to the value of
vector aodulus [Pp]. This neana that coding with channel amber is equivalent to
coding the signal parameter with the direction of the excitation vector.

The simplest solution to the previously fornulated problem is obtained in the case
where Ile - const. It is obvious from the equation dj - ICjIMcosICj, p] that
achievenent of maxim excitation of the jth detector with a stimulus 8? is
equivalent to condition Fp| |Cj. It ensues free the condition of collinearity of

vectors that their components are proportional:

Ia=h¢ya and. dyf-‘Z’ﬂn

where h is the coefficient of proportionality. Since coding by channel number is
equivalent to coding by direction of the excitation vector, instead of vector P
that is arbitrary with regard to modulus, we shall consider normalised vector 5?-
P/ | F I. In this case, djnax - coast for all secondary detectors, i.e.,

__

 

_ ._..__.H. ...-

 

 

~—..

20}.= #:r'alc’f
c-s ‘ '
r

 

._.—.
_.ﬁ_

0
e

. §(‘l€"r=ib .

where cojilr) - cos “i3 “i is the angle between co-Iunication vector and {th
coordinate axis; cos a; is the direction cosine.

Thus, the components of the communication vector are-cosine curves. In view of the
fact that there is a collinear excitation vector corresponding to each co-aunication
vector, we can observe that signals passing to inputs aust also he cosine curves.

Subjective gauge of closeness of two stimuli and spherical model. Let
there be two stimuli, S and S , the subjective value of whose paranetere is deter-
ained by the direction of the corresponding excitation vectors, Pp and P . It is
logical to assule that stimuli s and s are subjectively perceived as b
increasingly different as angle gp, Pq cresses.- It is seemed that the neaaure

[or gauge] of closeness W(Sp, Sq) of two stisuli is the angle between the excitation
vettors that correspond to these stimulig

us', S.]=stsoos"-n-f—c:' '5.

 

___‘——

110
I70! OFFICIAL “ONLY
5‘0! OFFICIAL US ONLY

If we consider, instead of vectors F the unit vectors F/IFI . ¢ - const, the length
of the arc (length of geodesic line) connecting two points on a unit sphere, in
which are represented the corresponding secondary detectors, could serve as a
measure of closeness of two stimuli. For stimli :p and Sq, these points are the
intersection of the unit sphere with vectors, - IIPPI end 96- Fq/qul. Here,
“Sp, sq) -usp, sq. Subjective space meets t e of metric space:

 

1) ”3,. JJ=0 when and only when J,=J.:
2) "a?” J']=,l;'e I”:
3) “J". Jel<,l;r Jql+’lJ-r;r"

The first two requirements are obvious, while the third axiom is satisfied by virtue
of the fact that My , 9}] is the length of the geodesic line that connects two
points on the sphere.

Criterion of sensitivity of the analyzer to change in coded parameter.
Let there be a set of n linearly independent functions in Euclidean space:

 

U:(’». -(‘=‘s'°'ln)o I (1.1)

which describe the sensitivity of primary detectors, where d is a number that
assumes an arbitrary value in the range of “-1. - [¢., 9 1. It is assumed that
functions (1.1) in a certain orthogonal basis describe éhe components of an n-dimen-
sional excitation vector No). Let there also be given another vector PM”),
where 1’ is a low constant value. with fixed (DEL, let us determine the quantity

_——_
_——.

I'MN +¢)
8: I 0 I 7 =8“, e). (1.2)
Imemeol

Quantity 6(¢, 1) is the cosine of the angle between vectors F( ) and P(¢+ 1'). whose
coordinates are the numerical values of functions {f‘(¢)} and (mnwith “L.
It is assumed that T is a small enough quantity for which 6(¢, 1330 is satisfied

with any oEL.

Equation (1.2) depends on the angle between vectors H0) and NM): the larger
angle PM), Hm), the smaller the value of 5(0. 1'). In turn, sensitivity of the
system to a change in parameter 0, from 0 to MT ‘will be all the greater, the
greater the difference in directions of vectors No) and NM). i.e., the larger
angle F(¢), ”0+0- Consequently, the smaller the value of equation (1.2).

the greater the sensitivity of the system at point ¢€Ifo, f1]. If we know the
sensitivity of the system at point 0» we can also determine its mean sensitivity
over the entire range of I“. oz]. For this, it is sufficient to find the mean
value'of Mo, 1') in interval Mo. 01], i.e.,

':

s I (103)
'l m(?))=mi3(h 9d,

111
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOI‘OI"CI‘I.UBIGN‘LY

In executing the model, it is desirable to select primary detectors that would give
the model maximum average sensitivity. For this purpose, one must find a class of
functions {ft(¢)} describing sensitivity of primary detectors so that the value
of the functional (1.2) of this class of functions would be minimal.

Evidently, the value of functional (1.2) will not change if, instead of vectors

F 0) and NM!) that are arbitrary in modulus, we consider unit vectors ’(Q) and
(OH) collinear with vectors 17(0) and F(¢+'r), respectivel}. The numbers {fi(¢)}

and {fiWVU L Moo. ¢Zl serve as coordinates of vectors (o) and gut-t), and it

is assumed that

 

it:(v)=imv+o=t_ (1.4)

 

Since the modulus of vectors 9(0) and fun) equals 1 (with given value of .61.),
sensitivity of the system will be determined by the value of the functional

 

v, . '
1(I.(9))=1ﬁr$ E!.(9)I.(v+')dv. ‘ (1.5)
O.

Xt.(v)l.(9+t)

is the scalar product of the unit vectors 5(4)) and sun) with a fixed value of 0-
In this case, we have the problem for an arbitrary extrenum: we have to find functions
{fi(¢)) in such a form that in the class of these functions functional (1.5) would
be ninimal and satisfy condition (1.4) also. In order to solve this problem, we

must find such a class of functions, for which functional

 

 

where

 

'1 g m '
n0.(7))=[{2I.(v)t.(7+a)—Mufﬁn—1]-

” . ~ (1.5a)
-M[ZI:(9+*)-1]}Jv
((M. A2) -- Lagrange factors) would be minimal.
A nandatory condition for extremisation by functions
1m». «$1.3». (1.5)

of functional (1.5a) is that they must satisfy the systen of Euler's equations.
In the case of a variational problem with shifted argument. the system of Euler
equations hes the following appearance [103]:

¢/.-;;°/c+‘n--:;§n=0. ‘ (1.7)

where 0 is the expression of functional (1.5a) unger the integral sign; 3 is what
is obtained from 0 with substitution of variable 9 - 0 + 1'; Off and f; are partial

'112
me 0mm use ONLY
ﬁll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

derivatives of 0 and 3 for an independent variable ﬁt“) or f1'(;), respectively...

0413' and 3% are analogous partial derivatives taken according to It“) and ﬂ“).

Since functional (1.5a) is unrelated to f;(¢), equation (1.7) has the following
appearance:

o,‘+o,‘=‘6, (1=1..... n). (1.7a)

In addition, function (1.6) must satisfy the following conditions at the ends of
interval [0” oz]: '

 

 

Io(9)-=‘4(Y)II with 'EIYe' ’e+‘)v -
,((')=bd(,) with 96"» 71+“: (L75)

where a1;(¢) and 1912(0) are certain known functions. Conditions (1.7b) are analogous
to boundary conditions in the usual variational problee with fixed ends [103].

For (1.5a), the systen of Euler equations has the following appearance:

mw-m.(v)+t.(9-‘)—w.(é)=o. """ - u s)
I.(9+*)+I.(9-*)=Wa(v). . °
where ”-2 (Ari-1,)

Fran (1.8) we get:

 

e

’o(?)=lla(7+‘)+la(?-‘)yr (1.9)

n
Fron condition Zfz.(¢) - 1, it is not difficult to obtain the value of M and,
after inserting the obtained expression in (1.9) we finally get: _ ._

_ .. ._..— —-

,‘(’)= ’0‘ +')+' -‘) '
Ila ”+044: (Y-rn' h (1.10)

Since the denoninator in the right part of (1.10) does not depend on 11. equation
(1.10) can be written in a sonewhst different for-n:

/.(v)=-,(+.,u.«+o+l.<o-m
«(7. *)=l2ll.(9+*)+la(v—*)l‘l"'o

or in vector form

J(v)=a,',—,ylf(v+*)+i(v-*)l- -- (1.11)

where

According to (1.11‘), any three excitation vectors found in three points, ¢, 0+1.

p-‘r, (WHO. 01]), are linearly dependent. Consequently, extremal {f£(¢)}¢€-[¢o, 01]
is a flat curve, 1.2., it is in a certain two-dineneional plane.

113
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roaommtussmv'

Thus. the proposed method for coding parameter 0, which assumes an arbitrary
value in the interval [09, 0;], involves reflection of interval [¢s. dz] on the
circumference. Each point on the circumference is characterized by two coordi-

natea, i.e., in this case the minimum number of functions (1.10) is two. By
substituting the value in (1.10):

 

momma» and I.(r)_=sln'19.' i=7... p ' (1.12)
we get an identity.

It should be noted that (1.10) also satisfies the functions

-—.. .._.. _

I.(9)=ml(9)and now-hi?»
[(9) is a monotonic function, and I (7+?) 3 I (VH‘VI' (9)-

The larger A is, the greater the sensitivity of the system to a change in para-
meter 9 (see expression (1.12)). From the requirement of unambiguous-reflection
of interval (0., 0;] on the circle (two-dimensional plane), the value of A is
restricted. Hith change in parameter ¢ from do to oz, the direction of the excita-
tion vector can change from 0 to 2!: with great changes in direction of the vector,

different points of interval (0.. 01] will correspond to the sale point on the
circle [circumference]. Thus,

 

«commune. i(90l=i;66°0°°ﬂ(1.-1n)=2%

i.e., the maximum value of A is:
1 = 2*“?0 " Q’s)‘

The question arises as to whether one can increase sensitivity of the system without
disruptingtheumamhiguity [single value?! of the above-mentioned reflection. He
find that this can he done; however, the dimensionality of space in which parameter
ocIog, dz] is reflected must be increased. Let the entire possible range log, oz]
of values of parameter o be separated into R mutually nonoverlapping segments

[00. ¢llo [01. 02], .... [¢£_,. °il"‘” [oh-l oz]. Points on the ends of segments
belong to two adjacent intervals simultaneously. [¢i.¢, ¢£-,Iand[¢£,., ¢¢]. We
shall then consider these segments as intervals of values k of independent
variables ¢!€l¢i-no vi]. (i - 1. .... k). each of which is reflected on its own
separate p e. Ultimately, we have k separate planes, the mutual position of
which in space is not defined. For such a reflection to satisfy the condition of
unambiuuity, each point over the entire range [¢., ¢ ] must correspond to one and
only one point in space. Since two adjacent intervafs [d{-¢. ¢i-l] and I¢£.1, ¢£l
have a common point ’i-l' this point in space corresponds to the same unit vector
91¢). Consequently. the regions of planes, in which parameters d;.; and 0% are
reflected, must have one and only one common point on the line of intersection of
these planes.

As a graphic illustration, let us consider a concrete case of such reflection. Let
the interval [¢., oz) of values of o be separated into three equal segments

[0's ¢lls (019 02] and [’29 01].

114
IIIIC”HHCIA1.IEIEC”VLV
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He then construct the next functions, considering that A - 31/(0140) and ¢* - 0-”:

Icon”. 1: -9Elr..(n+n)l3wl(n+m n):
I.(v)= ~Ish1r'l. 1‘ Vanna:
0- in the other cases.

lay-WI. 15 95mm:
I.(9)= -I°°0l9'l. 1: r€[(n+n)ﬂ.(n+n)m: M (1.13)

0—- in the other cases

lmlv'l. 1f own-HM. (n+9.)I2l:

I.(9)=[-lslnlr‘l. 1f 96!» n):
0—in the other cases.'

Functions (1.13), which correspond to the sensitivity characteristics of primary
detectors. apparently satisfy the optimality conditions (1.10).

In this case, parameter mm, on] is reflected on three mutually orthogonal planes.
If an orthonormal basis e1. eg. a, is given and functions (1.13) are considered
as conponents of a certain three-dimensional vector 5“) in this space, with a
change in parameter p fron N to (o.+¢,)/2, vector 9’“) traces a circle. turning
from vector e‘ to e;(e;-'ez). Further increase in 9 from (¢.+¢1)/2 to M leads

to continuous rotation of vector 5(a): are" and with change of ¢ in the interval:

 

In. (9.+9.)/Zl——e.»—e.. ram-+9012 9.1— err—0..
'07.. (n +7:)/21—-—e.-.—e. .-

s6l(9.+n)lz 9.I—-¢.->en-‘

As a result of the above-described reflection. the total turn of the excitation
vector with change in ¢ from “‘91. will constitute 560’, which is 1.5 tines more
than in the case where A - 2. By continuing to increase the nunber k of subinter-
vals that are reflected on their own planes. we shall increasingly narrow functions
(1.13). Concurrently, there will he an increase in A. Within the linit, functions
(1.13) becone}deltoid and excitation vector Pp assumes the appearance of {.... 0,
+1, 0. 0, see 0

Characteristics of secondary detectors. According to the foregoing, in
building the model, to each secondary detector is assigned a certain conunication
vector cj, which is collinear with a specific excitation vector 3,“) ¢' pg,

and Ile - const. He can then determine the distribution of excitation on t

set of secondary detectors:

Mk +,>=c..:.(,,)+c.4.(,,). ' ' (1.1a)

Substituting their values for cki- (i - l, 2; z - l. ... , m), and ﬂ“), we get:

115
FOR WHOM. [BE ONLY
IKIICIHHCJAI.USEGINLY

Mk 9,)=hml(9.)m!(9,)+kslnM901!"[(9)

or (1.15)

40* 9,)= hMIMh) 1(9)). ' (1.16)
”-“w”* 75'-['h-!kl ' ”
The value of pk is different for each secondary detector.

Analogously, we can find the reaction of an individual detector as a function of
value of paraneter ¢€[0.. Oz]:

 

 

40 9)= —I.(9)=.c,.h(9)+w.(9). I=M .' (1.17)

OK

4(I 9,)=cmll(9) 1(9))!

In conclusion, it should be noted that the proposed nethod of building secondary
detectors is not the only one, since condition Ile- const (j - l, .... m) is not
sandstory. Let us consider a variant of separate channels for excitation and
inhibition. Let there he a set of four prinary detectors with the following
sensitivity characteristics:

In {motm 1r :IZ<IR*R3
n= 1: «I2<I(p)<§*:
I _‘ o. 1f.-«/2<I(9)<*13:
. .(9)- —oosl(?)- 1r unwed“:

(1.1a)
I() {“"Nﬂ- 1‘ °<I(9)<s:
"= if «max:
”FLO 1‘ °<I(9)<w;
‘ —slnl(9). 1“ *(I(9)<2x.

where functions f1(¢) and f3(o) together realise Icoa fKQ)|. f3(¢) realizing the
positive cosine curve period and f3(¢) the negative one. The sane applies to
functions f;(0) and f3(¢), which together realise the sine curve.

If there are four prinary detectors, there are two ways of constructing secondary
detectors. In the first case, each secondary detector supplied with a colnunica-
tion vector is collinear to the excitation vector:

.—

cﬁ=hml(9,) and c,.= —Iaslnl(9,).
VICIYU’9J '

If, with a given value of parameter 0- Oj the value of the cosine (sine) curve is
negative, the secondary detector receives: excitation tron the second (or fourth)
prinary detector and inhibition from the odd-numbered prinary detector. The

116
INHICIHHCIAJ.USB(NNLY
tilluifﬂJA1.U§E(lNL\

absolute value of connections between the {frat and second (third. fourth) primary
detectors with the secondary detectors is equal.

If, however, with ¢ - Qj' the cosine (sine) curves are positive. the secondary
detector receives excitation from the first (third) and inhibition from the second
(fourth) primary detectors, the magnitude of connections from the first. second
(third, fourth) primary detectors being equal in absolute value.

With such construction of secondary detectors. all of their characteristics remain
the same as in the case where there were combined channels for transmission of
excitation and inhibition.

If, in the case we have just discussed for construction of secondary detectors, we
were to discard all inhibitory connections between primary and secondary detectors
and retain the excitatory ones, we obtain the second method of executing a model
that codes the parameter by the number of the output element with maximum excita-
tion. In this case. there is a change in characteristics of secondary detectors
(the inhibitory "drift" disappears); however, this does not affect the principle
"of coding with channel number, since the position of the excitation maximum on the
population of detectors does not change.

Adaptation in the system of primary detectors. Differential sensitivity
of analyzer: Let us consider the conditions. under which adaptation to stimulus

S (lowering of excitation level during prolonged viewing of stimulus S.) enhances
differential sensitivity of the system to a change in this stimulus.

Adaptation leads to some transformation of excitation vector £7(¢). Instead of
€7(¢). the excitation vector becomes:

P(m.)=d(é.7)}(v). ' . (1.19)

 

where«l(¢a, t) is a certain operator that depends on both the value of parameter
¢a of adapting stimulus5¢ and on time t, during which this stimulus is presented.
Vector F(o/¢a) is the excitation vector generated by stimulus 5., with considera-
tion of prior adaptation to stimulus SOa' Stimulus so is presented to the system
immediately after adaptive stimulus S¢a.

Let operator 4 (on, t) have the following appearance:
0" (7.. 0 =l(1 " T (‘)l’c(?s)l)3ulv ' ' (1.20)

where y(t) is a certain function that does not diminish in timezipnd lzy(t)>0 - 7(0);
{f;(¢a)}. (i - l. ..., n) are components of excitation vector (ea); 6‘3 is
Kronecker's delta symbol (5ij - 1, if i I j, and dﬂj - 0 with iii).

The physical meaning of operator (1.20) is that, under the influence of adapting

stimulus , the longer and greater the absolute excitation of this detector.
the sore mar ed the decline in sensitivity of primary detectors.

In (1.20), the decline of sensitivity of primary detectors depends on the absolute
level of its excitation. This is based on the assumption that the same primary
detector is excitatory for some secondary detectors and inhibitory for others.

117
FOR OllﬂCltllliliﬂﬁLY
FOR1OFFRJAI.USE¢NULY

Let us see how differential sensitivity of the systsn changes under the influence
of adaptation. In order to determine differential sensitivity, we nuat find out
how the subjective distance between two stimuli s W’ where t is a rather
saall constant, ¢E[¢.. 0;], changes under the infzuencew of adaptation. As we have
indicated. the subjective distance between stimuli equals the angle between the
excitation vectors corresponding to these stimuli, i.e..

o'=tl'«v+‘¥)'h.). Polio]. (1.21)
n 9.=m. 9619.. n]-

 

Hithout adaptation. the subjective distance between the same stimuli, S. and S¢+1.
is deternined by the angle:

 

i=vﬂ9-H. 7 (v)- (1.21)

Here. w is the distance between stinuli before adaptation and $‘ after adaptation.

Thus. the difference
Ag . ¢e - n (1.22)

determines how the subjective distance between two stimuli chan.es under the in-
fluence of adaptation. If (1.22) is positive. adaptation for the given values of
parameter W increases differential sensitivity of the analyzer, and if it is
negative. it decreases this sensitivity [60, 102].

This incresssindifferential sensitivity under the influence of adaptation can be
found analytically.

Figure 15 shows that, as a result of adaptation, differential sensitivity of the
analyzer to stimuli that are sinilar to the adaptive stimulus increases (Ad>0).
A naxinun increase in sensitivity is obtained when the adaptive stinulus corres-
ponds to the following values for the srgunent of the cosine curve that describe
the sensitivity of prinary detectors:

f(9)=0. so. no. 210'_ . (1.23)
and differential sensitivity does not change under the influence of adaptation if:
1(9):“.135. 225. 315' 1 (1.23.)

Such an increase in analyzer sensitivity is useful fro. the functional point of
view: during prolonged viewing of the sane stimulus there is an increase in the
system's capacity to detect ninor deviations fron the adapting stimulus.

It should be noted that if the sensitivity of prinary detectors increases during
adaptation, the differential sensitivity of the analyzer to stimuli close to
the adaptive one. on the contrary, diminishes A$<0.

Adaptation effects: Let there be a certain stimulus s which generates excitation
vector 57(0). Let also operator Jf(¢. t) (1.19) describe the change in sensitivity

ll8
IIIICIHHCIAI.USI(HVLY
MOWIBEONLY

of prinary detectors under the influence of this stimulus. Thus, under the pro-
longed effect of stimulus So the excitation vector can be found fro. the following
expression, I'M/ea) ”“0. t) [(0). In the general case, after adaptation the
excitation vector does not coincide in direction with the excitation vector that
corresponds to the stimulus before adaptation. The question arises, in which cases
does the excitation vector remain collinear after adaptation to the vector of excita-

tion before adaptation. For this, one has to find the_valuea of paraneter that
correspond to the eigen vectors of operator :1 (o. t).

Let us find the conditions under which the following equaucy is satisfied:

 

r(v/v)=xJ(v)é§7;.:);i(v). ' (1.21.)
where l are the eigen numbers of operatorl“, t).

Considering the form of operator 6' (a, t) (1.19), it is not difficult to obtain

 

x,= 1 -1(t)ll.(9)l; ' (1.25)

In order to determine the eigen vectors of operators/ (¢, t). we insert the obtained
values of eigen numbers in (1.24), where we obtain after sinple conversions:

I.(9)(lh(v)l-I!.(v)l)=0- _ ' (1.26)

This condition means that for vector {(0) to be the eigen vector of operatorJ (¢, (9
there must be the condition of identity of its nonzero conponents with regard
to absolute value at any point in tine.

If stimulus 5° does not correspond to the eigen vector of operatord (o, t). it
changes continuously in the course of adaptation. The speed of adaptation depends
on function y(t) (see (1.20)): the faster function y(t) increases in time, the
faster the subjective drift of stimtlus S . The drift is always in the direction
of one of the invariant (independent of egaptat'ion) values of parameter ¢ of
stimulus 8.9.

Thus, the normalization effect is the consequence of adaptation of the (1.20) type
on the level of primary detectors. In psychophysics, constant drift of perception
of an adaptive stimulus is known as the nornalization effect.

Let stimulus S¢ generate vector {(9) before adaptation to stimlus 8% and
vector Pop/ea) (1.19) after adaptation. If the two vectors are collinear to one
another, S¢ is perceived identically both before and after adaptation. If the
vectors are not collinear, the sale stimulus S is perceived as two different
stimuli before and after adaptation. The subjective distance between these stimuli
is determined by the angle between vectors ((1,) and Puma). i.e.,

J (9). PEA.» (1.27)

In the literature, the above effect is known as the aftereffect.

Interaction between two local analysers: In a real situation, there is often the
problem of determining equality of two simltaneoualy delivered stimuli. Let us

119
FOR omen. IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consider the conditions, under which one can increase the systea's capacity to
distinguish between two stimli.

Type of interaction that enhances discrimination: Let us consider two separate
local analyzers. The receptive fields of these analyzers cover the space of
different sensory areas. Stimulus 80k is delivered to one analyzer and 80,, to
the other. These stimli correspond to “citation vectors ((ok) and {(01.1)-
Let us insert between these analyzers the interaction described by operator A.
Hirh consideration of interaction A, instead of excitation vectors {(Qk) and
9M"). we shall have the following vectors:

 

F(v.)=o'(v.)—-AJ (7.). (1.28)
|’(v.)=<7 (rd—AI (7.) (1.29)

 

 

The question arises as to what operator A must be so that the analyzer of parameter
¢ would have the following properties.

1. If stimuli 50k and 80K. which have the seas pereneter 0, i.e., 9k - 0,2, are
delivered separately to t e input of interacting analyzers, as a result 0 inter-
action A the subjectively perceived value of parameters pk and ﬁn should not
change. remaining the sane as without interaction. This neans that if two identi-
cal stinuli are delivered sinultaneously, assresult of interaction these stinuli
should be perceived not only as being identical, but the as in the absence

of interaction. Thus, if excitation vectors {(910 and (0m) .u'e collinear,
vectors 2(0).) and N00!) nusé not only ’be collinear [to one another], but have the
sane direction as vectors (0") and (0,"):

 

J(9.)li(9.JlFi(r.)-IP(9.‘)~—.A "—_' (1.30)

2. If the difference between values of parameters of the two stimli 50k and SM
is snall, i.e.. An - ”16%| is snall. as a result of interaction the subjective
difference between stimuli should increase. This means that the angle between

vectors ”MO and Fm") nust be larger than the angle between vectors 910k) and

9105,.) = _ .. >
1’ (9.). P (VJ—J (9.). o" (,_)>o. (1.3-1)

In the case where condition (1.30) is satisfied, i.e.. I“ ) -5-(¢,,) - ”(01.) -
811%,"), one can rewrite expression (1.29) in the following on:

J(9.)Iﬂ=€'(v.)—AI(9.) -_ ‘ (1.32)
or
(1 --1mw(v.)=u(v.)=4.r(v.). ' - _ (1-33)

where vector 9(014) is the eigen vector of operator A.

Since 5(01‘) is an arbitrary vector, condition (1.33) is satisfied if operator A
is diagonal, and the following coefficients are on the nain diagonal:

..,=.=1—1;p. (1.34)

120
MWUSBONLY
ma OMCIAL USE ONLY

Prom condition (1.31), it is not difficult to find the sin and value of coefficient
a. For interaction between analyzers to increase differential sensitivity it is
necessary to have 13020.

Differential sensitivity and value of coefficient a: As a graphic illustration. let
us consider a two-diaensional case. Let there be two vectors 9(dk) and {(dm) with
components

(co-m.» mm.» Fee-um. mm.»- (1.35)

As a result of the previously discussed interaction, vectors (1.35) assune the
following appearance:

 

 

(mien—mike.» am!(v.)é:-_Inl(v.)). '. (1.36).
(we I (no—a mun). sin !(9.)—¢ sin I (9.))-

Let us use (1.36) to deternine the angle between vectors N”) and “M' For
this, let us find the cosine of this angle:

wafﬂe). F(9Jl=H§%—$. _ (1.37)

where do - |f(¢m) - f(¢k)|, and then the angle: -

~

“9.). P(y_)=arooos W} (1.33)

If , as a result of interaction, there was subjective increase in distance between
stimuli, angle "'bk)’ PM") will be larger than angle {(ok). (0),"):

 

 

 

 

Ana's.» I'M-mo. ' ' (1.39)

At what values of difference A¢ does function Ah reach a nexim value? Let us
differentiate function (1.39) in relation to cos Ad:

053 2.}-.. I‘—
soosep EFIFFF-Eeosﬁi'

Condition Min/3 cos M - 0 is satisfied at values of M when the following equality
applies:

 

a . cos A0 or A0 - arc cos a (1.40)

Thus, the closer u is to one. the lower the values of M with which function (1.39)
assumes a maxi-mm value.

Reaction of secondary detectors as a function of negnitude of interaction of
coefficient a. and difference Ada: The output signal of the jth secondary detector
is d(.j. 1)) - (6.7-, 5(0)). Hith consideration of interaction (1.30):

domes, ne—«Imf ' . _ (1.41)

where m. ¢€[¢., (91]., is the parameter of the stimlus delivered to the analyzer
in question, while 9m is the parameter of the next one. Let us write (1.101) in

121
F0! OFFIOAL lﬂ ONLY
FOR1OFIICJAI.USEGNVLY

a different form: d(j, o) - (Cj, 9(0)) - (3(ng 32%|). 01':

 

40- 9) = mom! ,) —I (61:5 It (9,)'— 19.)]. _- (1.42)
If VET-'QIRCOE‘. ,.E I“. "I .d A'=l (,ﬁ—I (,J. ‘
then (I (I. ”E‘ —¢ too A,-[ (5,). . (1. 3)

Thus, the jth detector adjusted for st'inulus Sr experiences maxim inhibition
by the next [adjacent] analyzer if‘there are stimli with the sane parameters 'in
the receptive fields of both analyzers. ' '

Interaction of the simultaneous contrast type as a means of providing
for invariance. Let two stisuli k and 84." be delivered to the inputs of
two analyzers, respectively. Let snot er stimulus, 8“, act simltaneously on both
analyzer inputs. In other words, each of the analysers sees its stimulus 8” or Sm
on the background of stinulus Sr. Thus, as a result of effects of two stiluli,

or

$156“, we have excitation vec 5(0):) + 9103) in the first analyzer and (Wm) +
(pa) in the second one. with consideration of interaction (1.30), we have the
following tvo excitation vectors:

F_(v.)=f(e;)-¢J(9J+(l¢) —J(§.). .' a ‘3)
F(v.)=i(v.)-IJ(9.)+(1-¢)J'(9.)» ' ‘
If u is close to one, the influence of the background as a result of interaction is

negligible. Interaction of the "simultaneous contrast" type provides for some
invariance of perception of the stimulus in relation to the background.

 

If we consider that, in a real analyzer, many local analyzers interact, the influence
of the background could be reduced to nil even with low values of coefficient . In-
deed, the background ia usually uniformly distributed over all the receptive fields
of local analyzers, whereas the discrininated signal is delivered locally. Thus,

the inhibitory signal going to a given analyzer from a set of adjacent local
analyzers can totally compensate for the influence of the background. In this

case, expression (1.534!) is replaced with:

‘P(v.)=J(9.)—§-I(e.)-(t —§-)7(é.). . (1...)

where R, is the set of local analyzers affected by stim-lus 5% and R3 is the set
of analyzers affected by background stimulus 8”.

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFHCIALUSEONLY

APPENDIX 2. INTENSITY ANALYZER

Sensitivity characteristics of primary detectors. The local model of
an intensity analyzer consists of a layer of photoreceptors, which transforn the
photic signal into an electrical one, a pair of primary detectors and output secon-
dary detectors. The sensitivity of the receptors [16] is described by:

m1) . that (2.1)

In the range of average intensities, we can replace expression (2.1) with:

15(1) - 1058! (2.2)
Let the primary detectors have the following sensitivity functions:

mt) - sin a £118! (2.3)
and
fa“) - cos a thBI (2.1.)

where a and B . const.

Let us call the detector with characteristics of the (2.3) type the B detector (or
neuron) and one of the (2.6) type the D detector (or neuron).

With consideration of characteristics 1‘; (I) and 13(1) altered by adaptation, we
can calculate the angle between the excitation vector of an -arbitrary stimulus and
the vector of "gray color proper”:

7m=iru=n ram

Functions “1) in the model are an analogue of subjective difference for the
function of Stevens.

Let us consider the case where a vector, one component of which equals zero

(a thBI - 0), is selected as the zero vector. Then sensitivity to stimuli that
are brighter than "eigen gray" increases, whereas the naximu possible subjective
distance between stimuli increases to 11/2. However, there is no room in such a
model to perceive "black," i.e., stinuli of lesser intensity than the "retina's
own light." This flaw can be elininated by introducing inhibitory connections
between hononymous primary detectors of the main and inductive field.

Let us consider the case where the min field is not illuminated and the stimulus
is delivered only to the inductive field. Then the signal at the output of the
8 detector of the main field is:

123

”WWONLY
MWWONLY

—_._—_— ‘ _.__—_—— .-.—

 

 

Ink—«mun ' "(2.5)
and the one at the output of the D detector is:
fulﬁl—«MM!» (2.5a)
After nornslisation. we have: .__ _. ‘ .. _
;,(I)=__L’('l_l,_ ‘ _
|t+s'—1eensl(l) '- ' (2-6)

and

= 1—1”, I) 2.7
’1“) WW. - . (_ )

The last two expressions can be viewed as functions of prinary detector sensitivity
when only the inductive field is illunineted end no stimulus is delivered to the
nain field. In this case. we can speak for-ally of delivery of a stimulus with
negative intensity to the nain field. Then expressions (2.6) end (2.7) describe the

responses of prinary detectors to delivery of a stimulus with negative intensity,
which corresponds to blackening.

Thus. when constructing the set of secondary detectors one must also take into con-
sideration negative intensities that correspond to blacks. For-ally. there are no
difficulties involved in building such detectors: a communication vector with
constant nodulus, collinear with one of the excitation vectors, including those
generated by stimuli with negative intensity, is assigned to each detector.

Heber'e ratio in the intensity analyzer. ' Let there he stimuli 81 and
81+“, to which correspond excitation vectors 5(1) and {(1 + AI), where I is
the current intensity of the stinulus and AI is the threshold intensity increment.

According to the foregoing, engle

.._~

u=mn. ra+ﬁn=w§ _ '- " (2.3)

is the angle that detersines the distance between two adjacent secondary detectors.
Knowing angle w (2.8). it is not difficult to deter-ins the following values: '

 

———.._. ___._._.. .

A'=I(,, I), ' . (209)
and Usher's ratio will appear as
swam. I)". (2.10)

If the density of the detectors is not constant. u will he a certain function of I.
If this function is known one can deternine Weber's ratio. with consideration of
the changing threshold.

Adaptation in the intensity analyser. Adaptation at the input of prinary
detectors: Let adaptive stimulus s be delivered to the input of the systen.
A signal is delivered to the input 0 horizontal cells which equals:

12‘
FOR OFFICIAL use MY
FOROFI'ICIALUSIONLY

where P pan) is the receptor' a reaction to the adaptive stimlus, R; is the set of
receptors of the nain field. If the adaptive stimlus is followed by delivery of

stinulus 81 whose intensity is 1 units. the signal at the input of the prinry de-
tectore can be calculated as follows:

_. __ .__... —- .—

W=rlmm 1f -(I)=§P,(I)—3§P,U.)>o. (2.11)
0. if «(1)0. _

000.3(1), 1f u(n>0. H ‘-
/.(l)=‘ 1f u(I)<o.

Adaptation of. priaery detectors: Let adaptive stimulus 814. which excites prieary
detectors to level (2.11) be delivered to the input of the systen. Quantities
(2.11) are conponents of «citation vector {(1a) generated by stiuulus 81a. Under
the influence of prolonged excitation. the sensitivity of prinary detectors dinini-
shes proportionally to the level of their excitation by the adaptive stinulue. As
a result, stinulus s; delivered right after the adaptive one generates the follow-
ing excitation vector:

—Tr‘(m.)=7(7.. 637i). _ ‘ (2.12)

where Jud , t) is the adaption operator (Appendix I) and t is the tine of delivery
of the adaptive stimulus.

Knowing the corresponding excitation vectors (2.12) and zero vector of‘ ‘grey proper,"
one can calculate the angle between them

'+(I)='IJ(I'=0)T_I'(III.)) 5 (2.13)

Overall level of activity of intensity analyzer. He shall call the sun
of activity of all secondary detectors the overall level of analyser activity.

The excitation profile on the set of secondary detectors (see Appendix 1) is des-
cribed by the function cos [f(1) - f(lj)], where 1;; is the intensity of the optinun
stimulus for the jth detector. In this case, overall activity of all detectors
will be:

ﬂ

sa)=$ mum—Munam.
i.e. .

sm-mNH-Inlm- ' ' - (2.14)

Expression (2.14) assumes a sexism value when cos f(1) - sin f(l). i.e., when the
components of the excitation vector equal one another. Thus. total illumination of

125
FOR omcw. “MY
soa<ornxna1.uss¢nncv

the entire retina from zero to a certain intensity I tirst leads to an increase in
overall analyzer activity. which reaches a naximum with intensities that generate
an excitation vector with o - ‘5', after which further increase in intensity leads
to decrease in overall analyzer activity.

Overall activity of primary detectors behaves analogously: sp(1) - cos f(l) + sin f(I).
with increase in stimulus intensity sp(1) increases. reaching a maximum at the point
where cos f(I) - sin f(l), and further increase in intensity leads to decrease in

S (I).

P

An analogous function of intensity was described in a study of the magnitude of
evoked potential or mean level of activity derived from the optic nerve [18].

In the foregoing, photosensitive elements with characteristics of the (2.3) and
(2.h) types were used as photoreceptors. However, the dynamic range of such charac-
teristics does not exceed two logarithmic units. Us obtain even closer coincidence
of the model's characteristics with the analogous ones 0! san if we use as photo-
receptors elements with characteristics of the following appearance:

 

 

'U)='R-.1$;. (2.15)

where Run; is the maxiaun response of the receptor, a is intensity of light at which
the response of phororeceptors equals half its maximum value and n is a constant that
determines the steepness of responses. For example, with n - 0.5. the range over
which Heber's ratio is constant. AIII - const, equals about four logarithmic units,
while the indicator of the law of Stevenson is about 0.b. Expression (2.15) des-
cribes receptor responses better than a hyperbolic tangent.

126
FIIIGJIIICIAI.IEIBCIHLY
FOI10FFKJA1.USE(MNLY

APPENDIX 3. COLOR ANALYZER

Sensitivity characteristics of cones and priaary color detectors.
Color perception is possible only when there is sufficient illumination, when the
outside world is perceived by the cones. In twilight conditions, when only the
rods are functional, nan cannot perceive colors. and the world around hie is
perceived as being black and white.

There are three types of cones, R, G and B. If the sensitivity characteristics

of cones were to be described as functions of frequency of nonochronetic radiation,
these characteristics would have the sane appearance for all three types of cones,
although their characteristics are shifted in relation to one another. The
general characteristic thus obtained coincides, with accuracy to a constant factor,
with the so-called Dartnall noeosran [3b].

Hereafter, it is sssuned that the cone characteristics are Dartnall functions.

The question arises: Are Dartnall functions optimal from the standpoint of integral
sensitivity of the entire analyzer? For this, let us rewrite functional

 

_ 'I
w.)= 3 cost? 0.0». Pu.(v+:»1av . (3.1)
9.

(to deter-ine the cosin, see Appendix 1, expression 1.2), using slallness 1, i.e..
fi(¢+r) - f2(¢) + 1f;(¢), in a soaewhst different fore:

 

 

 

wm»= S m (P (1.0)). [P (I. W441"; (Io-(9))” it. ' (3.2)

where F' is a vector with components of the {df;(¢)/d¢} type.

Functional (3. 2) does not overtly contain variable d. Consequently, for Dsrtnall
functions {f (0)}, i - l, 2, 3. to describe the extreaal, the corresponding
Hamiltonian SlOA] along these extra-a1 lust be constant:

n=_o+zo,./.=m. ' _- (3.3)

where O is a subintegral function of expression (3.2) and sf; is its partial deri-
vative dolaj'i.

127
IOI(IWRJALIEI(ﬁﬂN
ONIRIINWC!Al-UBIiONIN

In deternining functional (3.2). it lust be borne in nind that Dartnall functions
are not orthogonal. Condition (3.3) with synnstrical position of nertnall func-
tions on the frequency axis was directly checked in (103. 106]. It was found that
condition (3.3) is satisfied over the entire range of the visible spectrua.

Thus. there are grounds to unintain that Dertnall functions are close to optimal.

However, it is not desirable to nake direct use of cones with Dartnall functions of
sensitivity as prisary detectors detersining the conponents of the color excitation
vector. The fact- of the natter is that, in this case, the subjective distance be-
tween colors would he snall and the excitation vector would not exceed the range

of one octant.

For this reason, detectors whose responses were obtained as a linear conbination of
responses of individual cones are used as prinery detectors. Also. the direction

of the excitation vector should change as nuch as possible with change in spectral
conposition of illunination. In the ideal case, the sensitivity characteristics of
primary detectors should be described by the corresponding directing cosine curves.

Let us now consider the construction of secondary detectors, without detersining
the characteristics of primary detectors. As us know, the reaction of the Jth seq
condary detector can be found from the expression

 

do. r)=—(C,. Pb». _ ' «3.0

Let us now stipulate that, with frequency of light radiation 0- Oj , the Jth detec-
tor is excited nore than any other detector. This condition is set if, at a given
value of 6' pi , the reaction of the jth detector reaches a maxi-us, and the naxinun
reaction of any detector equals a certain constant value 3. In other words.

 

 

ML." =(° 79%.” =0 ' ' - (3.»

provided that
‘0! ')=3. (3e6)

where j I l. ..., m.

In this case, let us first consider condition (3.5), and use (3.6) to find unknown
constants that deternine the nodules of connunication vector. Fran (3.5) we get

wmiﬁlww‘ﬁ who.

lee es.

m—ALLV '

Connunication vector QJ must be orthogonal to vector dP(¢)Id¢I¢- dj, tangential to
spatial curve {fk(¢)}, k - l, 2. 3, and 96L is the interval of frequencies of
visible nonochrosatic radiation. The sought vector Qj is in a plane that is ortho-
gonal to vector di(¢)|d¢|¢ - 9‘. There say he nan: such vectors. Let us choose
one of then so that the angle tween it and excitation vector P‘QJ) would be as

128
F!"l(ﬂﬂﬂ€lAl.llIl(ﬂVLY
MOWUSEONLY

small as possible. To find such a vector, let us project on the plane of comics-
tion vectors {CJ'} excitation vector N”) and we shall get vector Pc(¢j). $90811:
vector ca. coincides in direction with vector P¢(¢j). i.e.,

9:156). ' _ _—- (3:8)"

where Y is a certain constant.

In view of the fact that vector P (o) is orthogonal to vector Pc(¢J)-.-projection
of vector F(¢-) on the plane of co-aunication vectors {Cj}. we can submit vector
P(¢j) as the ‘following sun:

P(o,)'=:i'a(v;).l'§mo)t.., ‘W

or

Pc(9,)=F(v,)—9|",(9)lm,. ' (3.9)
where 8 is a certain constant.

Since vector Pc(¢') is orthogonal to vector P'(¢) . with consideration of
(3.9) we get: '7 ¢ [NJ

 

inn): 1" (9))kq,=(i'-(v,). rump”,—

—P| ,(?)|3-u=°
or
9— (PM. mm L"
— do“). Isl,” J. . (3.10)

ﬂoreover, considering condition (3.6). we can obtain the value of the other
unknown constant: '

-_ _—_ ‘_

__ s "'_ -.‘ . . '
"(W—Wm. (m- my. » Ly' - (3.11)

Knowing curve {fk(¢)}, ($1.. k - l, 2. 3). we can calculate co-sunication vector
c ' (3.8), where coefficients 7 and B can be found froa conditions (3.10) and

( .11). The coasunication vector enables us to calculate the characteristics of
output detectors (3.10). Figure 1.0 illustrates the response of different output
detectors calculated by the nethod described in [105]. If we were to choose any
three independent orthogonal functions out of the existing set of responses,
these functions could be used as the characteristics of prinery detectors.

Two-diaensionsl invariant spaces of color adaptation operator. Let
a certain adaptive stimulus S . be given. to which corresponds excitation vector
F09.) with conponents {f£(¢.)’. Let the vector be transfer-ed under the influence
of prolonged viewing of stimulus S“ as follows:

' r(..;.)=.«T...'m.). . (3.12)

where .4 (to: t) is the adaptation operator. 4(4),, t) is a diagonal operator.
with the following coefficients on the sain diagonal:

_ “u =' ’ T (0”: (-’)l- (3. 13)

129
memmeonu
FOI<OFIHC1A1.USEJONIN

In the general case, vector F(¢o/¢e) is not collinear to vector ?(¢.). The question
arises: In what cases in the trajectory of the vector flat in the courae of adep-

tstion and, in addition. does it contain the vector of white color? In other words,
in what caaea doee adaptation have no effect on the perceived color of the attnulua?

Let there be the three following vectors: purely nonochronatic vector in the absence
of adaptation P(¢). white vector ?(6) with conponenta f3(6) and vector d?(¢./¢.) 0t;
tangential to the trajectory of adaptation. The components of the laat vector equal
y'(t), {fa(¢o)}. J - l. 2. 3. It all these vectors are in the some plane at any

point in {inc t, the trajectory of vector F(¢o/¢.) will be flat. In this case, all

three vectors ahould be linked with a linear function. Then the deterninant plotted
on these vectors should equal 0:

 

’1 1 1
Am. 1.. I.)=—1'(¢)m 1.0.) Me.) Me.) =41 (3'1“
Me.) M.) 1m.)

Since we are dealing with an alternant [Vandernond determinant], condition (3.15)
can be replaced with condition:

u.—_I.)u.-I.)u'.—ta-o. ' ‘ (3.15)

Thus, for the stimulus not to change its chronaticity during adaptation, this
stimulus aunt excite to an equal extent at least two of the three primary detectors.

130
FOR‘OIFIJAI.USBGNNLY
FOR4OFFKJA1.USI(NVLY

APPENDIX 6. LINE SLAﬂT ANALYZER

Primary detectors of line slant. Distinction of areas with illumination
gradient: Distinction of the range of illumination by means of on or off receptive
fields has a substantial flaw: in order to distinguish a black line on a white
background and white line on a black background, different systems of receptive
fields mat be used: off-on in the first case and on-off inthe second. Such a sys-
tem is cunberaone and unreliable.

Let us consider another method that is suitable for distinguishing both a white out-
line on a black background and a black outline on white. Figure 76 illustrates a
systea that will function only if its receptor layer sakes snail random jumps all

of the tine. Let the image of a black-white border be projected on the receptive
field. Two groups of receptors can be distinguished. On some receptors, the

level of illumination changes constantly since the range of change in illumina-
tions shifts fron one receptor to another in the presence of randon tremor. The
illumination level remains constant on the rest of the receptors. As a result.

a variable signal arises at the output of the first group of receptors and a con-
stant one at the output of the second group of receptors. The signal passes from
the receptor to the input of the underlying neuron via the excitation and inhibition
channel. Tranenission of the signal via the inhibitory channel legs in relation

to the excitstory channel.

Hhen there is an unchanging image on the retina, signals from the constantly illu-
minated group of receptors passing via the inhibitory and sxcitatory channels com-
pensate one another. As a result. the output signal of these neurons is found to
equal zero soon after turning the stimulus on. If the signal at the output of

the receptors changes in tine, excitation and inhibition passing to the input of
the second neuron are unable to compensate one another. As a result, this signal
passes only fron the receptors. on which the limit of illumination is projected

in the presence of tremor. This method sakes it possible to single out a white
outline on a black background and a black outline on a white background.

This nethod can also be well-used in the visual analyser, since the eye has the
required randon tremor. Thus, frequency of tremor in nan constitutes 150 a: and
ssplitude is about 18 s of the visual angle. uhich corresponds to shifting of
an image in the central part of the retina within the range of 1-3 cones [ll].
Interaction between bipolar. anacrine and ganglion cells nay be responsible for
distinction of the variable conponent, generating phasic reactions in ganglion
cells [22].

131
INDI‘OIIICIAJ.IEIIIMULY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

It},

8

!

 

1/
I
, W é’
a .—
4..—_._——— u
_I__l____..',”

;_._LJ_LI._I___,.
/_I_L.I_I__I_l——-,//

Figure 76.
Distinguishing outline of an inage by
nenas of trenor

In the following, it is assumed that

to construct primary detectors of
orientation use is made of signals taken
from neurons, on which there is preli-
minary distinction of image outline.

Organisation of receptive field of
prinary detectors: Let a segment of
image outline be projected in the re-
ceptiwe field of a local analyser.
Under the influence of light at the out-
put of receptors or neurons distinguish-
ing the outline, there is appearance of
signal rial), 1: - l, ..., s, where 1'. is
receptor nuaber, .s is the number of
photoelements in the receptive field
and I is intensity of receptor int-ins-
tion. The set of signals {r,;(I)}(£ - lo
..., a) is a discrete approximation

of the image delivered to the receptive
field of the local image enalyrer. He
shall consider set {135(1)} (1: - l, ....,
s) as conponents of s-diaensionsl
vector .2. The orientation of a local
line segment is given by the number ‘9
(angle of tilt in a given system of
coordinates), which takes on any value

in the interval [0, I]. It is assumed
that the value of the parameter is coded unanbiguously by the direction of excita-
tion vector “0) or number new. 21!].

' Vector F(¢) must be at least two-dimensional, and hereafter we assune that dimen-
sionality equals two. Consequently, we must have two independent priaary detectors
whose responses are described by the functions:

' t.(9)=ain21 '- ’t.(o)=ooézo. (M)

Thus, the image on the retina generates s-dimensional vector 3. Then, by nesns
of a certain degenerate operator 3;, vector& is transformed into the second

excitation vector ’10). The appearance of operator 31(4359» is determined
by the contacts between receptors and prisary detectors. Apparently, there are
my [or a set] such transformations, with which the following equation applies: _

He shall discuss below two nethods of determining operator 3;, bet the receptive
field of primary detectors be divided into two intersecting connected zones. We
shall call the zone. illumination of which elicits inhibition of a primary detector,
the inhibitory zone, and the one illumination of which excites the primary
detector, the excitatory zone. Let the influence of each point of the illuminated
receptive field on detector activity be constant and independent of the position

of the point in the receptive field. The projection of the line on the receptive
field elicits a reaction by the prinary detector, formed by the sun of signals fron

132
FOR OFFICIAL ms ONLY
MOMMIBEONLY

the inhibitory 8.1- and excitstory R3 areas. These sigr...ls equal the cosine and sine
of the dual angle of inclination of line 00 In order to determine the form of re-
ceptive field of the corresponding prinary detector, let us transform (4.1) into
the following expressions:

 

' I.(9)='-In2p=;-7(p+75§— slaw-Han. (4.2)
I.(v)=mav=m'v—a|n'v- (6.3)

Thus, according to (b. 2) and (b. 3). the overall signal from excitator; regions should
equal cosz Oand cos1(¢+as°) and the inhibitory one should equal sin a and sin’
(¢+45‘), respectively. Consequently, the length of the presented line lying in the
excited part of the receptive field is 93 - cos‘sor cos (01415“), and for the line
segment in the inhibitory zone, sinzo or sinz (¢+05’). The: overall length of the
vector-radius for the entire receptive field is sin 9 + cos: 0- 1. Thus, the
vector-radius of the receptive field is constant-the receptive field is in the

form of a circle.

The flaw of such organization of the receptive field is that, in this case, the re-
action of primary detectors depends on the presence of noise contained in the image.
Indeed, let the receptive field of the analyzer be illuminated by random spots. The
spots are small. but their density is rather high. If the density of noise is high
enough. the overall output signal of the primary detector fro. both zones of the
receptive field separately is proportional to the area of these regions. The area
of the excitatory region in the previously proposed case is:

=1}; M=H mow:
s=%pt +T'm2’r+ﬁ'hhr=%‘ (10.4)

The area of the inhibitory region is found as the difference between areas of the
circle and excitatory region, i.e..

 

Sy=s—%-s=-i-n. ((0.5)

Fron these results we see that with noisy illuination of the receptive field the
signal at the output of primary detectors does not equal zero:

 

I.(v)=§.-s.=_.n. /;(.)=3,_s,=;,., T (4.6)

which is equivalent to excitation vector 3(9 - 112‘30') with-equal negative col-
ponento. Thus. in the presence at the input of only noisy illusination, there
is the illusion of perception of a line tilted at 112'30'.

In order to eliminate this flaw, let us consider a different structure of organiza-
tion of the primary detector receptive field.

Each point on the receptive field has the same effect on activity of a primary
detector. when an outline is projected in the detector'a receptive field, the
absolute value of its reaction equals the length of the line in the receptive field.

133
FOR OFFICIAL [Bl MY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The overall reaction of the primary detector should equal f1“) - sin 2p and

f;(¢) - cos 20. respectively. Consequently, the receptive field in polar coordinates
has the following appearance:

_—- ——

Mﬂ=|8|n 3?! II p,(9)=|ooa29|. ((0-7)

Figure 69 illustrates the for: of receptive field thus obtained. In constructing
a primary detector, it oust be borne in mind that a""p1us refers to regions that
have an excitatory effect on the activity of the prilary detector and "Iinus" to
those that have an inhibitory effect.

Hith such organization of the receptive field, the reaction of primary detectors
does not depend on presence of random uniforl noise in illumination. Indeed, in
this case the areas of the inhibitory and excitatory zones are equal, so that the
signals from both zones balance one another.

Finally, there can also be a third for: of receptive field. Let there be a center
given in the receptive field, through which a line is drawn. The tilt of this line
equals zero. The orientation of the arbitrary line is determined by angle 0, which
it forms with the line that has zero tilt. ‘l'he Iagnitude of contact between the
receptor and primary detector is proportional to cos 2d (or sin 20).

Mixture effects in orientation analyzer: Let there be two centered lines, 1.91 and
LN, projected on the receptive field, which correspond to excitation vectors:

J<v.)=(o€i§'2e.. an 2.7.. are.) =5}... 9...... «.3)

As a result of joint excitation of priaary detectors, their excitation level is:

Mn. VJ—alnzn-i-nnzy, “23".1(—9:+h)-§o;(n-9.)
’I(?I-N= 2000(7.+9,)oos(9,— —,,). - (5-9)

The vector with components (4. 9) corresponds in direction with the excitation
vector generated by line tilt (mwﬁ/Z. Thus, with simultaneous delivery to

the receptive field of two lines, there is generation of a vector that corresponds
to a line, which is the bissectrix of the stall angle between these lines.

 

Adaptation effects in orientation analyser. Normalization effect: During
prolonged viewing of a line, its slant does not change when this line corresponds
to one of the eigen vectors of the adaptation operator, i.e., the vector in which
either all non-zero components equal one another, or else only one coaponent does
not equal zero (Appendix 1). The formr case corresponds to lines with tilt: '

.—

,,=qua. (i=1. 3:5,1). _ (4.10)
and the latter, with tilt:
p,=ke/B, (i=0. 2. 4. a). . (4.11)

Let us consider the adap ution properties under the influence of lines with tilts
of the (4.10) and (4.11) type. For this, let us determine how the angle between
the arbitrary line and closest line with tilt (4.11) changes with adaptation,
1.6.,

13!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOMWONLY

_ r . =arI-lll lW’”.
cool «I» J (9.)! WWW

 

Putting a.=i—1(¢)ll,(e)l. we have—
_ _ a r !( (4.12)
3(0— «WIN?!» «7(901— 3,-an m .

Let 9.30 or ’.- “/2. A
ll(?s)=°m?_4.=i' I I.(9.)=8ln 29.=0. - (M13)

Considering (4.13), expression (A. 12) assumes the following appear-

ance: _ _a_ “M” _
3(0— ,, "ﬂu”, ——-1,-1.w—

«In M 1:- - ‘ (4.15)
=———1£ﬁiﬂm Inks)-

Since the denominator of. (6.14) is positive. the sign of the entire upression is
determined by the sign of the numerator. After reducing in the numerator 61(t)
we have

 

 

h(‘)=Ml¢i¢s-¢a4l I. (9) I; (9.). ‘ - (4,15,

Since a;>0, azfi>0 also, and the sign of (“15) is determined by the sign of
the expression:

 

games—WAG”. (9.)- ' I (6.16)

After substituting in (4.16) the values a; - l - 7(t) lfi(¢)l and a} - -Y'(t)lf1;(¢)l
we get

 

 

tab/«mm(um-u.(9mm' (4 1,,
Since 1' (0) 0. the sign is detersined by the sign_ of
34“)=I|(?"I(h)("s(?)l‘UK’N’ (4.18)

Let us first consider the case 0k - 0,_ 1.9., fl(¢k) - l in the interval of 0<¢<45°.
f, (”>0 and f1(¢)>fz(¢). Thus. with «[0. 65°], expression (4.18) is negative.

In other words, during adaptation the angle of mm), {(ek). (W: - 0; 0<¢<loS‘)
increases (cosine decreases). In the interval of «(-653 0) with Mt" 0. ex-
pression (6.18) is also ne etive, i.e., this angle also increases during adaptation.
Indeed, if 0>¢>-45°, then Tf1(¢)|>[fz(§)f, f;(¢)>0, f1(¢k) ‘ 1, consequently

6~(t)<00
1n the case where 0k - 1/2, f1(¢k) - -l. tT€(67'30', 112’30') and W'. Then
f1(¢)<0 and fi(¢)fx(¢k)>0. Horeover, [13(0)] > f (”I and, consequently, 6.(t)<0.

Let 9k - 21/8 or 0k - 61I/8, i.e.. f1(¢k) - cos “k - 0 and f2(¢k ) - sin zok - 11.
In this case. pursuing the analogous reasoning as in the first case. the sign of
derivative d cos [No/0). 9(0k)])/dt is determined by the sign of the expression:

”(0: T.(91I.(9.)lll.(9)l-l!.(9—)ll-- ' " (’0 19)

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFHCIALUSEONLV

Let us consider the case where pk - 211/8 and szk) - 1. In addition, 96(22°30'.

67‘30') and WIS. In this case, f2(¢)>0, Ifz(¢)l>|f3(o)| and, consequently.
expression (lo.l9) is negative.

Let then an. - 135° (fuck) - -1). ¢6(1i2°3o'. arson and n - 135°, i.e., mom.
f,(¢k)<o and f3(¢)f;(¢k)>0. Since in this interval If;(¢)|>|f1(¢)|, again sumo.

During prolonged viewing of aline with arbitrary tilt, the angle between the vector
corresponding to this line and the closest eigen vector 5(ok), where W: - kw/8,‘

(k - 0, 2, lo, 6) increases continuously. Lines with arbitrary tilt that is other
than the tilts that generate eigen vectors (4.10) and (4.11) alter their slant in
the course of adaptation, toning close to one of the nearest lines with tilts
(4.10). The slightest deviation of the lines from slants (10.11) leads to perception
thereof as oriented in the direction of one of the nearest lines (10.10). Hereafter,
we shall call lines (6.11) unstable eigen lines, and those with tilts (6.10) stable.

In nan, stable eigen lines are the vertical or horizontel in the gravity field.
These lines should excite both primary detectors equally. To satisfy this condition,
the optimum axes of the detector receptive field should be turned by 22'30' in rela-
tion to the coordinate systen of the gravity field.

Aftereffect: Let there be two stimli, vertical line L: , which corresponds to

vector 5(00), and arbitrary line L with excitation vec 3r 3(0). Line is the
adaptive line, after which vertical line 14. is inediately presented. ith con-
sideration of adaptation, line I.“ generates a transformed excitation vector:

 

Penman. Olin). (4.20)

where .4 (¢, 1:) is the adaptation operator and t is the tine of delivery of the
adaptive stimulus (Appendix 1).

 

Vector P(¢./¢) is not collinear with vector 5'0.) in the general case. Let us
find the angle of Non/o). 9“.) as a function of tilt of the adaptive line. the
cosine of the angle between the initial and transformed excitation vectors (6.20)

equals:
wait” (10- P(9J9)I=
_ one‘ (i- (I) one +ale' I- all )
_lm'3h('-1ﬂ)lmhl)‘+di'3MI—1(0|dn¢u)'l ' “'2”

If the tilt of the vertical in the coordinate system of— primary detectors equals
22‘30', expression (6.21) acquires the following appearance: .

ammo. Hunk?- x

X 3- (000003! + “In!" . (4.22)
I“—1(‘)I°°03II)'+("10).“0390'” ‘

Expression (6.22) equals 1 with O - rat/8, r - l, 3, 5, 7. In other words, with
the given values of the adaptive stimulus. the angle between vectors F(¢o/¢) and
{(00) does not change; consequently, adaptation, which develops to the sane ex-
tent in both primary detectors, does not affect perception of tilt of the vertical
line.

136
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
mommouiv

The value of cosine (€0.22) enables us to deter-ins the angle by which the vertical
should be turned so that it is subjectively perceived again as a vertical after
adaptation-wthe angle equals half the angle of arc cos [9100). Moo/w].

Simultaneous contrast. Description of “simultaneous contrast” interaction:
When there is inhibitory interaction between hoaonynous detectors of spatially

different analysers. one can calculate the subjective change in angle between two
lines using the following forlula:

Af=-; arom[%¥h}j _ - (6.23)

where a is the coefficient of interaction Oaxl; M is the angle between excitation
vectors corresponding to interacting lines (Appendix 1).

In the general case, coefficient 0: depends on the distance between interacting
primary detectors of different local analyzers. Figure 56b illustrates the function
of quantity 1/2““) - f(A¢)—chara$72eristic of ”aimltaneous contrast." It was
considered that MM) ' ase’B , where a. and 8 are constants. The calcula-
tions were made for different values of constants u. and 8.

Figure 57b shows the effect of an inductive line on the reaction elicited by the
optimum line in the sain test field of primary detectors of orientation. In the
calculations, it was also assuned that the coefficgeni of nteraction is a function
of angle 60. It was considered that a(A¢) '090 ’ '

Poggendorff illusions: Figure 59 illustrates the objective location of lines (solid
lines) and their subjective (dotted line) position with Poggendorff's illusion. The
distance between lines 1-1 and 2-2 equals d. Lines a-a and b-b for. angle 0 with
lines 1-1 and 2-2. Then the segment M1 I-dctg O. and CA; -dctg (was), where As
is the subjective increase in angle 9 during interaction of the lines (see (4. 23)).
In turn, the sought subjective shift Ab equals Ab . M3 - CA2, i.e.'.

 

-,——.- .. .—

Ab= ,"ﬂ, 4- (4.24)

Hashing effect: In this section there is discussion of the effect of inertia of
inhibitory contacts that implement "simultaneous contrast" interaction on the dura-
tion of excitation of the orientation detector by the test line in excess of a
certain threshold level 6.

It was assumed that the inertia of connections involved in "sinultaneous contrast"
could be reduced to inertia of primary detectors. Let the transient process, which
arises in primary detectors upon use of the stimulus. be described by the expression:

m. :)=1. (9) (1 -wm':w—t.n. (MS)
and with stimulus off: , '
no. t)=l:(v. owww—t.» (4.26)

where B; and B: are time constants of build-up and extinction, respectively, of
excitation of primary detectors, and usually 8982 [108, 109]; ft“: t) is the output
signal of the ith primary detector at tile t; h(t-to) is a Heaviside function:

137
ms OFFIGAI. US! ONLY
nominees“

' 0. if' to. -
la(¢-—t,\)=l1. I“ ‘>‘.. .' . (6.27)
Thus, expressions (6.25) and (6.26) describe the level of detector excitation
after discontinuing the stimulus at tine t..

Let us consider the case of backward leaking described by Sskular [102]. In this
case, vertical line 1'0. served as the teat etinulus, while L. with arbitrery tilt 6
served as the leaking one. There was s constant interval, 1: - 60 as, between

the tine of discontinuing the test line and delivering the neeking one. The leek-
ing stinulus delivery tine was constant. with 1’: - 100 Is, while the duration of
test stinulus To could be changed during the experiusnt.

How long should test stinulus lest so that its detector would be excited for

a tine t“ in excess of thresho level 02 He can find the conponents of the ex-
citation vector atter discontinuing the test stimlus. with consideration of inertia,
using the expression: .

l’ (n 0'=—(o~ 3n- “F‘ 29-} (1 9- mlk(¢‘-s)r“““o . (6.28)

For the masking stimulus. the excitation vector acquires the following appearance:

 

[(9, t): I . - _
_. (”‘27. “IMO—wm’). if A>t>r.+g"
_ (m2...|nz,)(1_.-a.~).-w.u. 1g ¢>d, (6.29) (6.29)

where A - to + n + u. and ties t is clocked iron the nonent of delivery of the
test stinulue.’

The conponents of vectors Neg, 1:) end P(¢, 1%) describe the state of prinery detec-
tors of different local analyzers of orientation. With consideration of inhibition,
which produces "simltsneous contrast," instead of vectors P09, t) and Ne, t),

Ive nust consider the following vectors:

F'm Odin-m9. o «a We. o=m can.» I). (4.30)

Knowing the resultant vector PM... t), we can deter-ins the level, of excitation of
the output detector for the nth tilt of the line:

 

..—‘ ..._——

40. ,e)=(c’. '1‘, l))=(C’, P‘,” ‘)—-¢P(’. 0), (‘0310

Considering (6.28) and (6.29), free (6.31) we obtain the following efter pertorning
the most elenentery operations:
40- 9>=m(i-«*~)r“‘~°—cn'm24vlla). - («.32)
where W‘HIme-i. .
—rﬂt--.), 1f 4>g>§‘+9,

1
ll(‘)='(i—¢-M).-m-A). 1g ‘>4=ﬁ+“+% : (6.32s)

and A0 is the angle between the test and seeking line.

138
MWWONLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

Knowing d(j, o, t) («.32). let us find a duration of the test stimulus that would
satisfy condition d(.7', 0.. a“) '6. Considering (6.37) and that R - l, we get
the following expression:

 

 

(' -“"‘)r'°"';"~f)—c oo- M (Q='. (6.33)
where H(tcr) is determined with expression (6.32s), with t - ter-

Hith 9 3 0, the condition will be satisfied if d(j, 0- t)>0 at the time of dis-
continuing the masking stimulus. Thus, condition (4.33) can be replaced by
another condition: at the time of discontinuation of the masking stimulus, the
following inequality must be satisfied:

(1 _.-s~)wc.«a 43'; a.“ —-w-)‘ >0

 

or ‘
1—seos269(i —.-¢.~)a«w>r«. -' («34)
Taking the logarithm of‘(4.34), we have I i '
|'tli—umzay(a_.-e~)wsoo]>_p,., (4.35)
If ﬂu.<f. i.e..,
Inn-'“wWD-4‘ ' -' '(lo.35a)

expression (6.35), with consideration of a cos 2 Ad 331(11+Tz)<1, can be simplified
significantly. by expanding logag1thm (6.35s) into a Taylor series and discarding

all higher terms of these series, we finally get:

‘=]'_._. 008 Mtﬂ‘ﬂ. (5.36)
Figure 62 illustrates a function of the (4.36) type.

Differential sensitivity of the model of a line orientation analyser.
Differential sensitivity is determined by As“, which is the reciprocal of the
change in tilt angle 0 of line L. at which the subjective distance between com-
pared stimuli equals a threshold value. The subjective threshold distance between
stimuli is determined by the angle by which the excitation vector must be turned so
that the excitation maximum would shift from a given output detector to the next
one. The angle of rotation of the excitation vector depends on the number of
secondary detectors that code line tilt: the larger their number, the smaller the
needed angle of vector rotation and the shorter the subjective threshold distance
between stimuli. For example, with change in line tilt from 0 to 60°, let the
excitation vector change its direction from 0 to 120’. To code the direction of

an excitation vector that assumes any value from 0 to 120°, there are three second-
ary detectors. then, in order to detect changes in direction of the excitation
vector it should be turned by at least an angle of 40‘, i.e., the slant of the line
should be changed by 20'. If, however, there are six secondary detectors, instead
of three, intended for coding these inclinations of the excitation vector, the
minimal detectable changes constitute 20' (instead of 40‘ as in the preceding case),
which corresponds to a 10’ change in line tilt (instead of the 20' in the preced-
ing case). If there are three secondary detectors intended for coding tilts of
excitation vectors fron 0 to 20' and nine secondary detector; for those from 20 to

139
FOI'OFFKJA1.U§E(HVLY
FOR 0'1!C1Al.l§li(ﬂﬂl¥

to 40°, the subjective threshold distances between lines generating excitation vec-
tors will differ, depending on the tilt of the analysed lines. Thus. the subjective
threshold distance for lines with a tilt of 0 to 10‘ is 3 tines greater than the
analogous distance for lines with a tilt of 10 to 20‘. If the subjective threahold
is a constant unrelated to value of the stimulus. differential sensitivity will

also he a constant equaling half the angle daternining the subjective threshold.

It was experimentally demonstrated. however, that nan has greater sensitivity to
changes in inclination of vertical or horizontal lines than diagonal ones [109, 111].
This inconsistency between the nodal and psychophysical data can he elininated if
nore secondary detectors are assigned for coding lines that are close to vertical

or horizontal than for«diagonal lines. _There are data to the effect that this is
expressly how dissinilar,sensitivity of nan [110] and animals [73] to changes in
tilts of lines with different orientation is provided.

160
IN)I‘OIFICIAI.IEI£(HULV
FOR OFFICIAL USIONLY

”PENDIX 5. ANALYZER 0F DIRECTION AND SPB. 01’ WHO)!

Primary detectors of speed of notion. let us consider the construction
of prisary detectors based on ordinary nc cells: slow on ‘and fast on-qﬁf
neurons that have responses of the following type:

 

 

II(7v ”)=cl(u)m'v t". D)=C‘(U m i D

My. u)=c.(u)m(.+'zm ) H 20..) ‘5‘”
for the on type of cells and '

I. (9. v)=c.(v)coo(v+0.). 0.=o. so, 180. 210° (5-2)

for the art-off type of cells (Figure Q). where 05(9), (1’. - l, 2) is a function of
velocity of the stilulus.

If He consider that the entire cosinecurve response can be realized only if there
is spontaneous neuronal activity, (5.1) and (5.2) should be replaced with the
following expressions:

I$(v.v)=¢x(v)l1+°ﬂ(v+.c)lu . . ‘
o.=a—t)-m°. (t=i.2.3) ‘

“(9. V)=¢s(')"+°°‘(9+.o”y > - (5,4)
0‘=((_]).W' (l=l, 3,3,». '

(5.3)
and

Let there also he elements that smote the signal free on and art-off cells se-
parately, i.e.,

 

8 '.
l.(v)=c.(v)§lz(9. v)-—-e.(u). _ (5.5)
!:(v)=¢.(v)2‘.l.(v. v)=c.(v). (5.6)

As a result. the responses of the elements do not depend on the direction of
novenent of the stimulus. Oyster [97] indicates that the function 011(0). (1'. - l, 2)
within the range of (on or art-off) cells is rather constant. particularly for the

on type of prinary detectors of direction of lotion.
I

Functions (5.5) and (5.6) can be viewed as the responses of prinary detectors of
velocity of a stisulus. -

however, functions of the (5.1) and (5.2) type can also be used directly as primary
detectors. ._

1101
FOI omen US! ONLY
F0!‘0FFKJA1.U§E¢NULY

Adaptation effects in the analyzer of direction of notion. The prinary
detectors of the direction analyzer are described by the functions:

I‘M) ' cos e and f2“) ' sin 4» (5.7)

Functions (5.7) differ fro. the functions describing sensitivity of priaary detec-
tors of line slant only in that they are extended twice as such on axis 0. This
aesns that all functions that are valid for the line orientation analyzer also
retain their validity for the analyzer of direction of love-ant, but for angles
that are twice the size of those for line tilt. Consequently, the eigen directions
of soveaent are 0, 65, 90, 135. 180, 225. 270 and 315‘. and the stable ones are
45, 135, 225 and 315'. If the optinua axes of priaary detectors of direction were
to be turned b5“, i.e., function (5.7) sodified in the following Ianner: f;(¢) 5
cos (0+45') and fz(o) 5 sin (¢+65°), the stable directions would be 0, 90, 180 and
270°. The function analogous to the successive effect of tilt in the tilt analyzer
acquires the following appearance:

«7 (9.)- l"(rJv)='

= V! 2- I one + slnl
'"mITut—wnmvww—w)lumm'5} (5")

where y(t) are previously defined functions. The function of aiaultaneous contrast
can be calculated using the formula:

 

5,45;qu _._ (5.9)

where A0 is the difference in direction of notion of two point stiauli moving
simultaneously and a is the coefficient of lateral inhibition between hononyaous
prinary detectors of different local analysers.

142
INJI‘OIIWCJAI.IISI2CH‘LY
son omcm. use omx

APPENDIX 6. STEREO ANALYZER

Primary detectors of stereo analyzer. The model of a stereo analyzer in
question has the following structure. It consists of four independent monocular
primary detectors of direction toward object with responses of the following type:

 

In (“)‘ﬂﬂ M“. I. (”"009 ‘1“. ‘ (6.1)
Is 00"“ ‘a'lo Is (7):“ ‘s? '

and

I. (”win 1.9. I. (”-coe up,
I. (than u. 1. (3)-... m. (6.2)

where Al, A2, A, and A. are constants. Hereafter, it is assumed that A, - A2-

A. - A. - A - const, (a, y) is a pair of horizontal and vertical angles that deter-
mine the "direction toward object" for the left eye. These angles are determined
in relation to a certain fixed point 0. The analogous angles for the right eye are

(8. 6).
Primary depth detectors are formed fron primary monocular detectors of direction
of different eyes. The depth analyzers consist of primary depth detectors and a
set of secondary detectors. The input signal for primary depth detectors is the
difference between signals:
A - sin An - sin is (6.3)
when angles a and 8 are rather small:
A ~ Mo - B) (6.4)
i.c.. A is a horizontal disparity.
The primary detectors of the depth analyser have the following characteristics:
Aft - sin AhAu f3 - cos AhA (6.4a)

where Ah are constants. Functions (6.4a) are components of the disparity vector

1) '. {M1, M2} (6.5)

The distance of point A (lo) in relation to fixation point 0 is coded in the local
depth analyzer by the direction of vector D. This analyser ”services" a small

143
me OFFICIAL USIONLY
FORMALUSEONLV

sector of visual space. Other parts of this space are examined by other local
depth analyzers. There can be significant overlapping of sectors of visual space
of different local analyzers. Thus. the sane point A can be seen simltaneously

by several depth analyzers (Figures 68, 69). The question arises: In what cases
does the "depth” of point A perceived by different local analyzers have the sane
value? Let point 0,; (2) (i - 0, l. ..., m) serve as the reference point for the
11th local analyzer. Further, let the following angles be defined for this analyzer:

(“is 31:) ‘nd (eis “19s (1:. 0s 19 000’ III) I (606)

where a; and 313 are horizontal angles at which point A is seen with the left and
right eye, respectively; - and 6,; are angles at which the zero depth analyzer
sees reference point 05(1). If the difference 0,; - n; - const. the disparity A;
of point A for all local depth analyzers has a constant value A -- oi - Bi - coast
(1: - 0. 1. see. ")0

Indeed, angles 61', and Si can be expressed in the following nenner (Figure 69):
ai'a.-e£ and Bt-B.-ni (6.7)
Then A - oi - Bi ' a. - 89 + "i - wt. If
m; - 9i - conat - o (6.8)
A 3 o. - 8° 4- c . const (6.9)

In the special case, if c - 0, i.e.. n; - 61;, the reference points 0,; are on the
Fit-Muller circle.

Thus, if 6,; - n1; - const. point A is perceived in all local depth analyzers as
being at the sane distance fron line 61', - n; - const.

When angles a and B are rather large. disparity A should be determined fron ex-
pression (6.3). In this case, point A is perceived by all local analyzers as
being at the same depth if all reference points are on a line along which the
following condition is satisfied:

A; - sin Ami - sin A81; - sin Moo - 6i) - sin MB. - hi) - coast (6.10)

If reference points 0i of local depth analyzers are situated along curve (6.10), the
disparity of arbitrary point A seen simultaneously by several analyzers is a con-
stant. To avoid discrepancy in depth analyzer readings in aeasuring the distance

of point A. the eyes aust be scorientei as to have all reference points correspond-
ing to the centers of receptive fields situated on the horopter (6.10).

Properties of stereo analyzer nodel. ‘l'hs horopter as the geometric site
of points having the sane direction for the right and left eye separately: It is
assumed that the monocular direction of the object is given by two independent
vectors with conponents (6.1) and (6.2). The direction of the object is the sane
for the left and right eye separately if the corresponding excitation vectors are
collinear to one another and the corresponding cosponsnts of these vectors equal
One another. If we consider that, in the horizontal plane, the difference between

1“
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vertical angles of vision of the object with the left and right eye is insignifi-
cant, the equality of nonocular directions of the object is detenined by the
condition:
sinks - sinks and cooks - cosXB
Then .
a - 8 (6.11)

Condition (6.11) is satisfied for all points on the circle traced through the fixa-
tion point and optical centers of both eyes (Pit-Hullsr circle).

The horopter as the geoeetric site of equidistant points in depth. and as the
fixation point: Let us consider first the cases when the tern "equidistant in depth"
means that the object has zero depth in relation to the fixation point and disparity
of the object equals zero. Vertical disparity in the horizontal plane is small, and
it has no appreciable influence:

A - sin Ac - sin AB - 0 (6.12)
Then a - 8, which corresponds to a horopter in the fern of a Pit-Muller circle.

In the case where the tern, "equidistant in depth" neans that point A is just as
far in depth as fixation point 0 in relation to a certain reference point B, which
is chosen on the cyclopisn axis. we should alter sooewhat condition (6.12). Let
disparity of fixation point 0 in relation to reference point B be:

A(O/B) - sin Au - sin X8 - c (6.13)
i.e., disparity vector 3(0/3) has components of the following appearance:
sin “A (0/3), cos AhMO/B) (6.16)

The points on the horizontal plane. for which disparity vector 3(A/B) is collinear
with vector 3(0/3), are just as far in depth fron point B as the fixation point.
These vectors are collinear if disparity (6.10) is constant for all of the indicated
Points, ices,

sin An - sin 18 - e - const (6.15)

Thus, the horopter as the geometric site of points that are at a constant depth
away fros point B in the horizontal plane is described by curve (6.15). Figure 70
illustrates horopters for different values of constants c (6.15) and with differ-
ent positions of reference point B on the cyclopisn axis.

Mixture effects in the depth analyzer: Let there be a given fixation point 0 and
two points A and B on the cyclopisn axis. The angle of vision of these points A and
B in relation to fixation point 0 is the sane for both eyes. The monocular vectors
determining the direction of points A and B have the following appearance:*

Ju(11)=(sln Xe, cosh. sln 11', cosh}, (6.16)
J" (A) = (sin «.1, nos-ls“ sin 18, one 18), (6.17)
J). (R): (slll lﬂ, cos hp. sin )1. cos 11), (6-18)
Juan-=13». 19,. one up sln n. nos 15). (6- 19>

———_i—— '
*Translator a note: 10 it’ll-W108 equations subscripts n and I! refer to
right and left. respectively.

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINItIﬂﬂCJAL'USIithLY

Further, lei both points A and B be situated in the sane receptive field and together
excite the primary detectors. As a result, instead of vectors (6.16)-(6.19) we
have vectors

‘ .—

Jas=€n(A)+GJs(B)= .
=(sln la+esln 19. coale+seoslp, 2],, 2].), (6.20)

where 0<a<l is the coefficient which takes into consideration the intensity of points
. and B. If a - l, the intensity of both points is the sane, but if a - 0, the
intensity of point 8 equals zero.

Analogously, for the right eye, the overall excitation vector is

Jns=;u(ﬁ)+aJ(H)_—. .
= ("'0“) +¢“|'| 13.. 008 kg +0 we 11)., 2],, 2].). (6.21)

 

In view of the fact that, according to condition a - «a, B - -B; and B . ~o.
instead of vectors (6.20) and (6.21), we get

J..=«o~1)slm. Mariam

and

' I'm-4‘“! -e)sln l9. (1 +¢)ooslp). ’ (6.22)

Further, we calculate disparity of the resultant stinulus on-the basis of vectors
(6.21):

A; - 2(a - 1) sin 18 (6.23)
As a result, the disparity vector has the following appearance
0; - {sin A;. cos Ax} (6.26)

Let now a - l. i.e., the intensity of both stinuli is the sane. Then, vector

Dz - (0. l) is collinear with 0(0) - {0. 1}. In other words, the resultant stinulus
is perceived at the sane depth as the fixation point. Since disparity of the re-
sultant stinulus equals zero. there will be fusion of both points. Ultimately, the
model perceives the two points A and B at the sane depth as the fixation point.
With decrease in a the depth of the resultant stimulus changes: the resultant sti-
mulus draws closer in depth to the brighter point. and with a - 0 the depth of the
remaining point coincides with the depth of the overall stinulus. ﬂhen there is
significant change in brightness of one of the stinuli, the disparity of the over-
all effect increases to the extent of developnent of diplopia, when there is
double perception of the image when the intensity of one of the points is low
enough.

Analogous effects were described by Foley [16] in experinents on humans.

Anomalies of depth perception: The input signal for prinary detectors of the depth
analyzer is:

A - sin Ad - .133 AB (6.25)

166
F08109FIJA1.U8E(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

which may be either negative or positive, depending on the position of point A in
relation to fixation point 0.

In view of the fact that transnission of positive and negative signals over the
same channel is iapossible in biological systems, there must be separate channels
for conplete fulfillment of function (6.25): one to transuit a positive signal and
the other to transit a negative one. More precisely, we must have two separate
prinary detectors of disparity. which fulfill together the sane function sin A. One

of the primary detectors is excited only if A>0, whereas the other is excited if
A<0, i.e..

A, __‘unx.a. 1r a>o. A o. 12—.A>o,
II-_ 0, 1f A<03 lu=‘ﬂﬂl.6, 1f 6(0. _- (6.26)

A>0 if sin Aho> sin “8 or 098. Analogously, A<0 if a<B. In other words, a detector
with a response of the Af“ type is excited only if the angle of vision of the object
with the left eye is larger than the angle of vision of the object by the right eye.
For this primary detector, the left eye has an excitatory effect and the right, an

inhibitory effect. By analogy, detector of“ (6.26) is excited by the right and
inhibited by the left eye.

If, however, one of the detectors. Ah; or Afu, is lacking, the oyster will be in-
capable of perceiving the depth of stimli that have either positive or negative
disparity. In the nodal, this means that it will be incapable of estimating the
depth of stimuli that are either farther away than the fixation point or stimuli
that are closer than the fixation point.

The secondary depth detectors have selective responses that are sieilsr to the
stereo detectors of the vertebrate visual cortex.

167
me oman. l5! ONLY
FOROMCMLUSEONLY

APPENDIX 7. POLARIZED LIGHT ANALYZER

It is assured that there are three priaary detectors at the input of the polarized
light analyzer, two of which are sensitivity to inclination of the plane of light
polarization, while the third detector does not have selectivity for polarized
light. According to Bernard and Hehner, in the inset retina there are direct
receptors which have selectivity to the inclination of polarized light plane by
virtue of their internal structure. The responses of each receptors have the
following appearance: __.

=1 A 2 —
“d UM 1+ 00‘ (9 h)! (7.1)

r.(9)=l1+4m2(v-9.)l. (7.2)

 

where A is a constant that depends on degree (depth) of polarization; ¢ is the angle
' between the polarization plane and horizontal plane; 01 and 03 are the values of
angle o that laxinize the response of the first or second receptor, respectively.
According to Hehner: l¢l _ 92' g ‘5.

One can obtain primary detectors of the polarized light analyser by subtracting
from m“) or raw) a constant, a I 1. As a result, the responses of primary de-
tectora have the following appearance:

l.(9)=4m3(9—n). t;io)=Aa-2(v-:¢J. (7.3)
nm=m

If we consider that a detector cannot tranenit a negative quantity, the nunber of
selective detectors will double. Their characteristics can he realized as follows:

lu=lr,(,)-1=m2(9—n). if —«I2<2(9-9.)<*l2:
0— otherwise;
"Fl ‘ 0. 1f —§<2(9-—n)<§: *
-r. (9) +1 = -eoe 2(9 — 9.) -—otherwiee;
I”={r.(»-i=m2(v—w. 1r --§<2(9-9a)<-§:_
0— otherwise; I
I.=l"""'=°°‘2"”"‘ 1r —;<2(r-v.)<s;:'
O—otherwise. '

148
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, polarized light is characterized by the direction of the excitation vector:

 

arm= mm. 1.15). M»). where -

I... is -§<2(7—_9.)<;-:

I". — otherwise;

In. 1‘ -;'<3(?j—h)<;';
[n— in other cases.

’1‘?)=|

1: (Y) =|

149
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI". ONLV

BIBLIOGQAPHY

l.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

110.

Fonin, S. V., and Berkinblit, M. 3., "Msthensticsl Problems in Biology,”
Moscow, Neuka, 1973.

Perkel, D. ll.. Schulnan, J. IL, Bullock, ‘1'. 8., et s1., "Pacemaker Neuron:
Effects of Regularly Spaced Synaptic Input," SCIENCE, 145, 1964, pp 61-63.

Perkel, D. H., and Bullock, 1‘. H., "Neural Coding," NBUROSCI. RES. PROGRAM
mill... 6, 1968, PP 221-3‘80

Son'yen, 0:11., "Sensory Intonation Coding," Moscow, Mir, 1975.

Nubel, D. 11., and Uiesel, T. N., "Receptive Fields of Single Neurones in the
Cat's Striste Cortex," J. PMYSIOLH 1A8, 1959, pp 575-591.

Hubel, D. 11., and Hiesel, ‘1‘. N., ”Receptive Fields snd Functional Architecture
in Two Striste Visual Areas (18 and 19) of the Cst," J. NEMPHYSIOL., 28,
1965, p 229.

Jung, 3., "Visual Perception end-Neurophysiology,” "Hsndb. Sens. Physiol.,"
Berlin -Heidelberg -New York, Springer Verl., 7, P3A, 1973, pp l-J 52.

Pozin, N. V., "Modeling Neuronal Structures," Moscow, Nsuks, 1970.

Miller, 6., Galsnter, 3.. and Pribrsn, K., "Plsns end Structure of Behavior,"
Moscow, 1965.

Sokolov, Ye. N., "Modeling Properties of the Nervous System," in "Kibernetike
nyshleniys 1 2111211” [Cybernetics of Thinking and Life], Moscow, Mysl', 1966.

Yerbus, A. 1... "Role of Eye Movenents in Vision Process," Moscow, Nsuks, 1965.

Neuunn, J., "Probabilistic Logic and Synthesis of Reliable Organism Pros
Unreliable Components," in "Avtonety" [Automate], Moscow, IL [Foreign
Literature publishing house], 1956.

Fonin, S. V., "Some Aspects of Inforution Processing in the Nervous System,"
"Tezisy dokl. IV Mezhdunsr. sinp. biofis. kongresss" [Smaries of Papers
Delivered st International Sylposiun of Biophysics- Congress], Moscow, 1974.

Fonin, s. V., Vsytkyevichyus. G. 6., and Sokolov, Ye. N., "Adeptstion in
Detector System and Differential Sensitivity," BIOPIZIKA, 21, No 3, 1976, p 562.

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

FIHKCHWHCIALIJSB(MNLY

Vaitkevicius, H. H., "Adaptation as a Regulator of the Differential Sensitivity
of a Set of Detectors," in "IPAC Symposium on Control Mechanisms in 810- and
Ecosystems," Leipzig, 2, 1977, pp 38-66.

Foley, J. M., "Binocular Depth Mixture," VIS. RBS., 16, 1976, pp 1263-1267.

Sokolov, Ye. N., "The Detector, Command Neuron and Plastic Convergence," ZHURN.
VND 1H. PAVLOVA, 27, No 6, 1977, pp 691-697.

Lipetz, L. 8., "The Relation of Physiological and Psychological Aspects of
Sensory Intensity," "Handb. Sens. Physiol.," Berlin-Meidelberg-New York,
Springer Ver1., 1971, pp 191-225.

Byzov, A. L., and Kusnezova, L. P., ”On the Mehcanisas of Visual Adaptation,"
vis res., Suppl 3, 1969, pp 51-63.

Herblin, F. 8., and Dawling, J. K., "Organization of the Retina of the Mudpuppy,
Necturus maccolosus: II. Intracellular Recording," NEUROPMYSIOLOGY, 32, 1969,
pp 339-355.

Herblin, P. 8., "Adaptation in a Vertebrate Retina: Intracellular Recording in
Necturus," J. NEUROPHYSIOL., 36, 1971, pp 228-261.

Idem, “Control of Retinal Sensitivity. II. Lateral Interactions at the'
Outer Plexiform Layer," J. GEN. PEYSIOL., 63, No l, 1973, pp 62-87.

Yung, R., "Integration in Visual Cortical Neurons and Its Significance to
Visual Information," in "Teoriya svyazi v sensornykh sistenakh" [Theory of
Communication in Sensory Systems], Moscow, Mir, 1966.

Levick, H. R., "Maintained Discharge in the Visual System and Its Role for
Information Processing," "Handb. Sens. Physiol.," Berlin-ﬁeidelberg-Nev York,
Springer Ver1., 7, 1973, p 575.

Polyansky, V. 3., Sokolov, E. N., Polkoshnikov, D. V., and Zimachev, M. M.,
"Single Unit Reactions in the Visual Cortex of the Unanesthetired Rabbit to
the Light Flashes of the Different Intensities," VIS. RES., 13, 1973, p 809.

DeValoIs, R. K., "Analysis and Coding of Color Vision in the Primate Visual
Systea," COLD SPRING HARBOR SYMP. QUANT. BIOL., 30, 1965, p 567.

Pieron, A., "Psychophysics," in "Rksperimental'nsya paikhologiya" [Experimental
Psychology], Moscow, Progress, Nos 1 and 2, 1966.

Stevens, 8. S. "Sensory Power Functions and Neural Events," "Handb. Sens.
Physiol.," Berlin-Heidelberg-Neu York, Springer Ver1., 1, 1971, pp 226-242.

Mansfield, R. J. U., "Visual Adaptation: Retinal Transduction Brightness and
Sensitivity,“ VIS. RBS., 16, 1976, pp 679-690.

Hartline, H. K., "The Modification of Sensory Information by Neural Interaction
in the Eye and Its Relation to Vision," IRE TRANS. MED. ELECTR., 6, 1959, p 84.

151
FOItOFFKJAl.USE(MNLY
31.
32.

33.

34.

3S.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

a2.

43.

44.

45.

46.

“7.

48.

FI”l(lﬂﬂ(lAl.USEIDNLN

Von Bekasy, 6., "The Ear," SCI. AMER., 197, 1957, pp 66-78.
Ides, "Sensory Inhibition," Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton Univ. Press, 1967.

Marks, N. 8., Dobelle, N. N., and McNichol, B. P., ”Visual Pigments of Single
Priaate Cones," SCIENCE, 143. 1964, p_1181.

Dartnall, J. a. A., "The Interpretation of Spectral Sensitivity Curves,"
BRIT. m. wLLs, 1953’ PP 24-30. '

Sokolov, Ye. N., Iznaylov, Ch. A., Ismaylovs, T. V., and Zinachev, M.,
"Spherical Model of Color Vision," VESTN. MCU. PSIKHOLOGIYA, l, 1977, pp 45-52.

Svoetichin, 6., Negishi, K., and Fatehchand, R., "Cellular Mechanisms of a Young
Herring Visual System." in "Ciba POundation Sylposium Color Vision Physiology
and Experimental Psychology," Boston, Little, Brown and Co., 1965, pp 178-205.

De Valois, a. K., Abranov, 1., and Jacobs, 6., "Analysis of Response Patterns
of LGN Cells," J. 0PT. SOC. AMBR., S6, 1966, p 966.

Jameson, D., and Hurvich, L. M., "Color Adaptation: Sensitivity, Contrast,
Afterimagea}'"ﬂandb. Sens. Physiol.-Vis. Psychophys.," 7, 94, 1973, pp 568-581.

Bevan, H., Jonides, J., and Collyer, s. C., "Chromatic Relationships in
Metacontrsst Suppression" PSYCNONOM. SCI., 19, 1970, pp 367-362 [sic].

Izmaylov, I. A., and Sokolov, Ye. N., ”Metric Characteristics of Spherical
Model of Color Discrimination," VBSTN. MGU. PSIKBOLOCIYA, 2, 1978, pp 47-61.

Kriulina, A. A., and Sokolov, Ye. N., "Color Perception Under Joint Effect of
Test and Induction Pields," Ibid, 2, 1977, pp 19-28.

Hartridge, 6., "Current Advances in Physiology of Sight," Moscow, IL, 1952.

Yager, 0., "Effects of Chromatic Adaptation on-Saturation Discrimination in
Goldfish," Vls. RES., 14, 1974. pp 1089-1094.

Sokolov, Ye. N., Benin, 3. V., and Vsytkyavichyus, G. 6., "Principles of
Information Processing in Neural Nets," in "Modeli neyronnykh atruktur”
[Models of Neuronal Structures], Moscow, Nauka, 1970.

Creutafeldt, 0. 0., and Ito. M., ”Functional Synaptic Organization of Primary
Visual Cortex Neurons in the Cat," EXP. BRAIN 333., 6, 1968, pp 324-352.

Burns, 3. 0., and Pritchard, 8., ”Geometrical Illusions and the Response of
Neurons in the Cat's Visual Cortex to the Angle Patterns," J. PHYSIOL., 213,
1971, pp 599-616.

Artamonov, I. 0., ”Optical Illusions," Moscow, Nauka, 1964.
Gibson, J. J., and Radner, M., "Adaptation Aftereffect and Contrast in the

Perception of Tilted Lines. I. Quantitative Studies," J. EXP. PSYCHOL., 20,
1937, pp 453-467.

152
liliCHﬂﬂCLAlllillﬂﬁLY
49.

30.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

FOI:0F11CIAI.USE(MVLY

Gibson, J. J.. "Adaptation, Aftereffact and Contrast in the Perception of
Curved Lines," Ibid, 16, 1933, pp 1-31.

Caapbell, P. h., and haffei, 1., "The Tilt Aftereffect, a Fresh Look," V18. BBS.,
11, 1977, pp 833-840.

Kohler, 9., and Usllsch, B., "Figural Aferteffects: an Investigation of Visual
Processes," PROC. AMER. PBILOSOPH. $00., 88, 1944, pp 269-375.

Mitchell, 0. B., and Huir, D. H., "Does the Tilt Aftereffect Occur in the
Oblique Meridian? MS. 335.. 16, 1976, pp 609-614.

Blakenore, c., Carpenter, B., and Georgeson, M. H., "Lateral Inhibition Between
Orientation Detections in the human Vision.” NATURE, 228, 1970, pp 37-39.

Blakenore, c., and Tobin, B. A., "Lateral Inhibition Between Orientation
Detectors in the Cat's Visual Cortex," EXP. BRAIN RES., 15, 1972, pp 439-440.

Carpenter, B., and Blakenore, c., "Interaction Between Orientations in Human
Vision," Ibid, 18, 1973, pp 287-303.

Blake-ore, c., Carpenter, R. u. S., and Georgeson, H. A., "Lateral Thinking
About Lateral Inhibition," NATURE, 234, 1971, pp 418-419.

Sekular, B., and Littlejohn, J.. "Tilt Aftsraffect Following Very Brief
Exposures," VIS. 825., 14, 1974, pp 151-152.

Kahneuan, D., "Method, Finding and Theory in Studies of Visual Masking," in
”Information Processing Approaches to VisualPerception," ed. R. Haber Holt,
Reneharta, Hinston, New York-Toronto-London, 1969, pp 90-112.

Meyer, 6. B., Lawson, R., and Csbon, H., "The Effects of Orientation-Specific
Adaptation on the Duration of Short-Tern Visual Storage," VIS. 838., 15,
1975, pp 569-572.

Sekular, B., "Spatial and Tenporal Determinants of Visual Backward Masking,“
J. EXP. PSYCHOL., 70, 1965, pp 401-406.

Hatin, B., "Light Adaptation and the Dyna-ice of Induced Tilt," VIS. 325., 14,
1974, pp 255-265.

Abadi, R. V.. "Induction Hasking--a Study of Sole Inhibitory Interactions
During Dichoptic Viewing," Ibid. 16, 1976, pp 269-275.

Hertheiner, H., "Experimental Studies of Vision of Movement," 2. PSYCHOL.,
61, 1912, pp 161-265.

Grusser, O. J.. and Grusser-Cornehls, 0., ”Neuronal Mechanisms of Visual
Movement Perception on Some Psychophysical and Behavior Correlations,"
"handb. Sens. Physiol.." Berlin-Heide1berg--New York, Springer Ver1., 7, P3A.
1973, pp 333-431.

Zenkin, c. H.. and Pigarev, I. N., "Detector Properties of the Pike's
Retinal Ganglion Cells," BIOPIZIKA, 14, 1969, pp 722-730.

153
I!”l(lﬂﬂ€1Al.U8810NLY
FOI1DFFKJAI.UBE(M‘LY

66. Oyster, C. U., and Barlou, B. N., ”Direction-Selective Units in Rabbit Retina:
Distribution of Preferred Directions," SCIENCE, 155, 1967, p 861.

67. Oyster, C. H., "Direction-Selective Retinal Ganglion Cells and Control of
Optokinetic Nystagnns in the Rabbit," V18. R38., 12, 1972, p 138.

68. Bishop, L. 6., Keehn, D. 6., and McCann, C. D., ”Motion Detection by Inter-
neurons of Optic Lobes and Brain of the Blies Calliphera Phoenics and Musca
Domestics," J. MBUROPHYSIOL., 31, 1976, p 503.

69. Levick, W. R., Oyster, C. 9., and Takaheshi, 3., "Rabbit LCM: Sharpener of
Directional lnfornation," SCIENCE, 165, 1969, pp 712-716.

70. Chou. K. 1., Massland, R. 8., and Steward, D. L., "Receptive Field Character-

istics of Striate Cortical Neurons in the Rabbit," EXP. BR. 338., 33, 1971,
pp 337-352.

71. Lee, B. B., Cleland, B. 6., and Creutzfeldt, O. D., "The Retinal Input to Cells
in Area 17 of the Cat's Cortex," EXP. BRAIN 338., 30, No 6, 1977, pp 527-538.

72. Mods, H., Freeman. R. B., Giea, B., and Creutsfeldt, O. D., "Neuronal Responses
in the Visual Cortex of Awake Cats to Stationary and Moving Targets," Ibid, 12,
No 6, 1971, pp 389-405.

73. Pettigreu, J. D., hikers, 1., and Bishop, P. 0., "Response to Moving Slits by
Single Units in Cat Striate Cortex," Ibid, 6, 1968, pp 373-390.

74. Michael, Ch. R.. ”Receptive Fields of Single Optic Rerve Fibers in a Manual
With an All-Cone Retina: II Directional Selective Units,” J. REUROPRYSIOL.,
31, 1968, pp 257-267.

75. Vallakh, 6., "Perception of Motion,” in ”Vospriyetiye: nekhanisly i nodeli"
(Perception: Mechanisns and Models], Moscow, Mir, 1976, pp 301-308.

76. Kolers, P.. "Illusions of Motion," Ibid, pp 309-322.

77. Vaytkyavichyus, G. 0., Korzh, N. 8., and Soknlov, Ye. M., "Adaptation in the
Motion Analyzer," BIOPIZIRA, 22, No 6, 1977, pp 1095-1099.

78. Levinson, 8.. and Sekular, 3., "Adaptation Alters Perceived Direction of
Motion," V15. RBS., 16, 1976, pp 779-781.

79. Barlow, ﬂ. 3., and Kill, R. M., NAIURE, 200, 1963, p 1366.

80. Michael, Ch. R., ”Visual Receptive Fields of Single Neurons in Superior
Colliculus of the Ground Squirrel,” J. NEUROPBYSIOL., 35, 1972, p 815-832.

81. Pantle, A., "Motion Aftereffect Magnitude as a Measure of the Spatio-Telporal
Response Properties of Direction-Sensitive Analyzers," V18. R38., 16, 1974,
pp 1229-1236.

82. Walker, P., and Povell, D. J. "Lateral Interaction Between Neural Channels
Sensitive to Velocity in the Human Visual System,” MAIURB, 252, 1976, pp 732-
733. '

154 .
lN)!‘0l1ﬂ(JAl.llSli(MiLY
83.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.
90.

91.

92.

93.

9“.

95.

96.

97.

98.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ogle, K. N., "Researches in Binocular Vision," Philadelphia, U. B. Saunders,

Idem, ”Spatial Localization Through Binocular Vision,” in "The Eye," ed.
H. Dawson, New York, Acsd. Press, 5, 1962, pp 271-320.

Barlow N. B., Blakenore, C., and Pettigrev, J. D., "The Neural Nechanism of
Binocular Depth Discrimination," J. PBYSIOL., 193, 1967, pp 327-362.

Nikara, 1.. Bishop, P. 0., and Pettigrew, J. D., "Analysis of Retinal Corres-
pondence by Studying Receptive Fields of Binocular Single Units in Cat
Striate Cortex," EXP. BRAIN RES., 6, 1968, pp 353-372.

Bishop, P. 0., ”Neurophysiology of Binocular Single Vision and Stereopsis."
"Handb. Sens. Physiol.,“ Berlin-Neide1berg-New York, Springer Ver1., 7. 93A,
1973, pp 255-306.

Julesz, 3., "Binocular Depth Penception Without Familiarity Cues,” SCIENCE,
145, 1976, pp 356-362.

Iden, "Foundations of Cyclopian Perception," Univ. Chicago Press, 1971.

Idea, "Cooperative Phenomena in Binocular Depth Perception," AMER. SCIENTIST,
62, 1974, pp 32-A3.

Richards, H., "Anomalous Stereoscopic Depth Perception,” J. 0PT. SOC. ANER.,
61, 1971, pp 410-614. °

Supin, A. Ya., "Analysis of Visual Stimuli by Neurons of Rabbit's Visual
Cortex," "Tezisy VII Vsesoyuz. konf. po elektrofiziologii TsNS" [Summaries of
Papers Delivered at 7th All-Union Conference on Blectrophyaiology of the
Central Nervous System], Kaunas, 1976.

Click, R. D., and Pomeranz, D., "Frog Retinal Ganglion Cells Show Species
Differences in Their Optimal Stinulus Sizes," NAIUBB, 265, 1977, pp 51-53.

Beverley, K. J., and Regan, D., ”Evidence for the Existence of Neural
Mechanisms Selectively Sensitive to the Direction of Movement in Space,"
J. PHYSIOL., 235, 1973, pp 17-29.

Idea, "The vaation Between Discrimination and Sensitivity in the Perception
of Motion in Depth," Ibid, 249, 1975, pp 387-398.

Ames, 0., "Aneiseikonia-a Factor in the Functioning of Vision," AMER. J.
0PHTHAL., 28, 1935, pp 268-262.

Kohler, H., and Emory,D.Aw,"Figura1 Aftereffects in the Third Dimension of
Visual Space," AHER. J. PNYSIOL., 60, 1967, pp 159-201.

hitchell, D. 8., and Baker, Q. B., "Stereoscopic Aftereffects: Evidence for
Disparity-Specific Neurons in the Human Visual System," VIS. 828., 13, 1973,
pp 2273-2288.

155
IKIICIWWC1A1.USB(IVLY
99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

FtﬂltlﬂﬂK1A1.USE10NlN

Werner. ﬂ., “Binocular Depth Contrast and the Conditions of the Binocular
Field,” AMER. J. PSYCHOL., 51, 1974, pp 489-497.

Jones, R., "Anonalies of Disparity Detection in the Hunan Visual System,"
J. 91mm... 264, 1977, pp 621-640.

Huhner. R.. “Polarized-Light Navigation by Insects." SCI. AMER., 235, 1976,
pp 106-115.

Kunenskiy, G. A., "Variational and Marginal Proble-s Hith Deviating Argument,”
DIFFERENTSIAL'NYYB URAVNBNIYA, 6, No 8, 1970, p 1349.

Vaytkyavichyus. 6. 6., Pouin. S. V., Sokolov, Ye. N., and Plornyalis, M. Yu.,
"Principle of Maxi-us Sensitivity in Detector Systens." BIOFIZIKA, 19, No 3,
1974, pp 514-518.

Gcl'fand, I. M.. and Fonin, s. V., "Calculus of Variations," Moscow,
Piznatgiz, 1961.

Vaytkyavichyus. G. 0., “Sena Problems of Infornation Processing," author
abstract of candidatorial dissertation, Pushchino-na-Oke, Institute of
Biophysics, USSR Academy of Sciences, 1970.

Fonin, S. V., Vaitkevicius, H. H., Sokolov, B. N.. and Bloznelis, M. J..
"On the Maximal Sensitivenesa in the Set of Detectors," in "Biokybernetik,"
VEB Gustav Fischer Ver1., 5, 1975, pp 163-169.

Dubin. M. U., and Cleland, .. 6., ”Organization of Visual Inputs to
Interneurons of LON of the Cat," J. NEUROPHYSIOL., 40, 1977, pp 410-427.

Ponin. s. V., Vaytkyavichyus, G. 6., and Sokolov, Ye. N., "Neuronal
Mechanisms of Color Perception and Modeling Thereof on a Digital Computer.”
BIOPIZIKA, 14, 1969, 1080-1086.

Appeals, 8.. "Perception and Discrilination as a Function of Stimulus
Orientation: the 'Oblique Effect' in Man and Animals," PSYCHOL. BULL., 78.
Mo 4, 1972. pp 266-278.

Zenkin, G. M.. Petrov. A. P., and Pigarev, I. M.. "Constant Conception
of Visual Field in Munan Occipital Cortex Hith Mead Tilted Toward the
Shoulder." BIOPIZIKA, 19, 1974, pp 950-951.

Donna, M.. and Andrieeen, J. J., "Perceived Orientation of Isolated Line
Segments,” VIS. 358.. 8. 1968, pp 493-507.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979

10,657

C80: 8144/1859 - 3ND -

156
F0I10FFKJAI.USI(H!LY