FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10369
4 March 1982

USSR Report

EARTH SCIENCES

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non:

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained .

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within i'tans are as

given by source .

1he contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

COPYRIG‘IT LAWS AND REGULATIORS GOVERNING MERSHIP OP
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
EARTH SCIENCES

(P000 1/82)
Coureurs

HEW!
Cloud Physics and Artificial Modification of Clouds .............
Collection of Articles on Heliogeoplwsioal Factors in Weather

and 01m“ 0.....OOOOOOOCD.O.IOUOCIOOOO'COOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOC

OCEANNRAPHY

Oceanographic Investigations in Northwestern Indian Ocean
Dn‘ing spring'mr 1980 eoeeeoeeoaoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeeeoeeeee

Use of music-Stochastic Model in Processing HydrOphysioal
Heamnts m hdan mom 0....0....OOOOOCOOOOOOICOOOOOOOOO

Noncontact Methods for Measuring Oceanographic Perelman..."

Spectral Analysis of Random Oceanological Fields ,,,,,,,,.",,,,

Monograph on Interface for Programmable Instruments in Systems
for Aumung madman“ 0.00.00.00.0000000000000000000IOOOO

Monograph on Bottom Geology and Geoplvsics in Eastern Part of

Indim mew O...0.0.0...COOOIIOOOC'UOOOOOOOOOOOQOOIOOOOOOOOC.

Sound Absorption in Turbulent Medium .....................;.....

Statistical Characteristics of natural Electronagnetio Field
in Se” and mews OOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOIQOOOOOOIOI

Sea Measurements of Constant Electric Field Using mfference

Apparatus .0...O0.0.0....IOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.IOOOOOOOODOOOODOOOOOO

Investigation of Contact-Type Primary Devices for Measuring
Electric ﬁeld in Sea oeeeeoaeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

- a - [III - USSR - 21x S"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WRIAL GEOPHYSICS
Articles on Theory and Methods of Interpretation of Gravimegnetic

Fields O....0Cl...OOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO...OOOOIOIOOOOIOIIOOOCOOO

Articles on Regionslizstionof Geophysical Fields and Deep
structu‘e in F” hat 0.......0.0.0000000000000000.00.0.0000...

ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
mmt Arctic Polar Basin Research COOOOOOOOICOOOC0.0...‘....I...
25 Years of Work of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition .............

FOIOFFICIALIMONLY
POI OMCIAL USE ONLY

143mm!

000 551.509.616/617+519.2
CLOUD PHYSICS AND ARTIFICIAL morncanou 01’ CLOUDS

hbscov TRUDY 0RDBNA TRUNVOGO KRASNOGO ZNAHENI INSTITU'I'A PRIKLADNOY GEOFIZIKI:
FIZIKA OBLAKOV I AKTIVNYKB VOZDEYSTVIY in Russian No 66. 1981 (signed to press
26 Aug 81) PP 2. 121

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles “Cloud Physics and
Artificial Modification of Clouds", edited by N. I. Vul‘fson, doctor of physical
and mathematical sciences, and 0. I. Shipilov. candidate of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences, Hoskovskoye otdeleniye Gidrometeoizdata, 390 copies, 121 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles is devoted to a number of problems
related to preparations for and implementation of an experiment for artificial
augmentation of precipitation in the basin of Lake Sevan. The articles 'in the col-
lection deal with the problems involved in technical support of the experiment,
meteorological conditions for carrying out experiments, the seeking of new methods
for the nodification of clouds, etc. For the first time in the USSR the collection
of articles contains a number of studies on the methods for statistical evalua-
tion of the effect of modification. The collection is intended for specialists in
the field of cloud physics and artificial modificatioa and for specialists in the
field of utheaatical statistics and also for all those who are interested in the
problem of artificial modification of weather.

Contents
Foreword by Editors 3

Vul'fson, N. I. "Formulation of an Experiment for Increasing Precipitation
in the Lake Seven Basin" 1.

Voronov, G. 8.. Galiulan, B. A.. Gorodinchev, V. 31., Kopchenov, V. H. and
Petrov, A. V. [deceased] "Remote Control Systems for Surface Aerosol Gen-
erators" -- 25

Spiridonova, Yu. V. "Characteristics of Aerosynoptic Conditions of the Lake

Sevan Basin" 37
Vul'fson, N. I. and Levin, L. H. "Investigation of Propagation of a Heteotron
Jet in a Cloud Medium Applicable to Artificial Modification" 50
1

FOIOI-‘F'IGALUSIONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bulinskiy, A. V. and Kolmsorov, A. N. "Evaluation of Effectiveness of Cloud
Modification" 69

Bulinskiy, A. V. and Kolnogorov,'A. N. "Sample Evaluations of Suns of Random
Values" ‘73

Vorob'yev, I... S. and Ehurbenko, I. G. "Evaluation of Effectiveness of the Asymp-
totic Optinun C(ob) Test for Experiments for Augmenting Precipitation" 78

Belyayev, Yu. K. "Ascertaining a Strategy for Using Modification With a Maxi-
nun Increase in the Total Quantity of Precipitation" 91

Ostronogil'skaya, I. Ye., Pedorov, V. V. and Shipilov, 0. I. "Paired Random-
ization in Experiments for Augmenting Precipitation" 96

Zhilinskaya. Ye. I. and Kuznetsova. I. A. "Writing and Analysis of Linear Re-

gression mdels Hith Use of Diurnal Quantities of Precipitation as Predic-
tors" 108

Bernshteyn, A. V. "Use of One Three-Parameter Distribution Family for Process-
ing the Results of Randomized Experiments" 115

COPYRIGHT: Institut prikladnoy geofiziki, 1981

5303
(:80: 1865/87

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOIAOFINCIAI.USE¢MVLY

UDC 551.590

COLLECTION 0? ARTICLES 0N NELIOGEOPHYSICAL FACTORS IN HEATHER AND CLIMATE

Leningrad TRUDY ORDENA TRUDOVOGO KRASNOGO ZNAHENI CLAVNOY GEOFIZICEESKOY OBSERVAP
TORII IN. A. I. VOYEYKOVA: GELIOGEOPIZICEESKIYB PAKTORY POGODY I KLIHATA in Russian
No 663, 1981 (signed to press 11 Hay 81) pp 129-135

[Abstracts of articles from "Transactions of the Order of the Red Banner of Labor
Main Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. beeykov: Baliogeophysical Pactors of
Heather and Climate). edited by L. R. Rakipova, doctor of physical and mathenatical
sciences, and N. I. Yakovleva, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences.
Gidroneteoizdat, 680 copies, 135 pages]

[Text] Abstracts

UDC 551.590

REFINED PNYSICOSTATISTICAL SCHEME FOR SUPERLONC-RANCE FORECASTING OP NEAN MONTHLY
AIR TEMPERATURE ANOHALIES FOR THE NORTHERN NEHISPEBRE

[Abstract of article by Borisenkov, Ye. P. and Borisova, L. Ye.]

[Text] A study was made of the possibility of superlong-range forecasting of the tem-
perature background for the northern hemisphere by the physicoststistical method.

The paper gives the results of an evaluation of forecasts of the temperature anon-
aly for regions of the northern hemisphere prepared using a refined scheme. As a re-
sult of the improvement in the method it was possible to increase the probable suc-
cess of the forecasts. Figures 1, tables 1. references 15.

UDC 551.590.2
RELATIONSHIP OF HELIOPHYSICAL AND CIRCULAIION FACTORS IN DROUGHT-FORMATION
[Abstract of article by Pokrovskaya, T. V. and Yefrenova, N. 1.]

[Text] Data are given on the probability of droughts in the European USSR, in north-
ern Kazakhstan and in southeastern Western Siberia in dependence on the phase of the
11-year cycle of the index of geomagnetic disturbance as an indicator of solar
corpuscular radiation and in dependence on the sign of he deviation of the 6. Ya.
Vangengeym indices of atmospheric circulation from the norm, as well as the corres-
ponding L. A. Vitel's indices. The conclusion is drawn that the probability of
droughts is not less closely associated with solar activity than with atnospheric

FOR‘OFFKJAI.U§E¢NNLY
FOR‘0FFIJA1.USE(INLY

circulation. A catalogue of the yields of spring wheat in northern Kazakhstan for
1880-1977 is given. Tables 3. references 17.

use 551.59o:630.551

INFLUENCE OF THE SPRING GEOHAGNETIC INDEX KP 0N YIELD VARIATIONS OF AGRICULTURAL
CROPS

[Abstract of article by Rakipova, L. 8., Yakovleva, N. I. and Andreyeva, L. K.]

[Text] Correlations between the geomagnetic index KP in spring and yield variations
of spring wheat were obtained for the territory of the USSR. These correlations
confirm the similar correlations derived earlier for the territory of Europe and
Canada. Figures 1. tables 1, references 5.

UDC 551.515
CATALOGUES 0P DROUGHTS FOR THE EUROPEAN USSR AND CEOHAGNETIC DISTURBANCE
[Abstract of article by Girskaya. E. 1.. Sasonov. B. I. and Ul'yanova, T. “.1

[Text] Seven catalogues of droughts for the European USSR are compared. These cata-
logues are used in checking the hypothesis of T. V. Pokrovskays concerning the pre-
dominance of droughts on the ascending branch of geomagnetic activity K9. Tables 2,
references 15.

UDC 551.509+551.524

CORRELATION 0P SEVERE HINTERS AND SOLAR ACTIVITY
[Abstract of article by Yefanova, A. V.]

[Text] A study was made of severe winters on the continents of the northern hemi-
sphere in the 11-year solar activity cycle. It is shown that they are most probable

near the Wolf number maximum. The annual variation of geomagnetic disturbance prior
to severe winters as a rule is greater than the mean long-term level of the RP in-
dex. Figures 1, tables 5. references 9.

UDC 551.536

ENEROETIC ATHOSPHERIC HANIFESTATIONS DURING Il-YEAR GEOHAGNETIC DISTURBANCE CYCLE
[Abstract of article by Vorob'yev, Ye. V. and Priyemov. V. N.]

[Text] Data for 1891-1972 were used in a spatial and temporal analysis of a comput-
ational characteristic of the atmosphere -- temperature at the mean energy level

Tmean as a function of the phase of geomagnetic disturbance KP. This temperature
characterizes the mean temperature of a column of the atmosphere and is one of the

principal parameters determining the potential and kinetic energy of the atmosphere.

FOIIOIINCIAI.USEtﬂNlN
FORtoffﬂﬂAl.USE(NVLY

The changes in Tmean from phase to phase of “P attain and even exceed 1°C. The

authors discuss the spatial and seasonal characteristics of the Tmean distribu-
tion. The most significant changes occur in the northern latitudes with a localiz-

ation of centers in the northern part of North America, the Pacific Ocean and the
Atlantic Ocean. The revealed patterns have practical use in a diagnosis of the
thermal state of the atmosphere. Figures 2, tables 4, references 8.

UDC 551.590

POSSIBILITY OF USE OF L. A. VITEL'S CHARACTERISTICS FOR STOCEASTIC FORECASTS 0F
DROUGHTS IN WESTERN SIBERIA

[Abstract of article by Dmitriyeva, S. v.]

[Text] A study was made of the possibility of using the L. A. Vitel's barocircula-
tion characteristics for a stochastic forecast of droughts. A preliminary scheme
for the forecasting of droughts is developed. Figures 2, tables 2, references 7.

HBO 551.515.7

MACROSYNOPTIC CHARACTERISTICS OF DEVELOPMENT AND MOVEMENT OF ANTICYCLONES DURING
DROUGHT PERIODS OF 1963, 1972 AND 1975

[Abstract of article by Serdyuk, V. N. and Kotlyar, I. V.]

[Text] The general characteristics of macrosynoptic processes, development and move-
ment of anticyclones characteristic for all the considered months with drought are
revealed. It is shown that during drought periods there was a predominance of mov-
ing anticyclones forming in the high-altitude frontal zone over northern Europe.

The regions of droughts were situated primarily under the influence of the peri-

pheral parts of anticyclones. There is a conjugate character of the processes de-
veloping in the space of the Atlantic-American and European sectors of the hemi-

sphere. Figures 2, references 14.

UDC 551.590
PREDICTION OF EXTREMAL WEATHER PHENOMENA

[Abstract of article by Sazonov, B. 1.]

[Text] In the example of droughts in the European USSR a study was made of methods
for investigating extremal weather phenomena. The author notes the peculiarities

of manifestation of extremal weather phenomena. The rhythm and periodicity of their
manifestation are noted. Recommendations are given on methods for a superlong-range

forecasting of weather phenomena, together with some considerations on possible
physical factors favoring their appearance. Figures 1, tables 5, references 7.

FOI¢OFWM;RI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFIClAl.lEiE(NULY

UDC 551.Sl+551.509

POSSIBILITY OF USING THE C. YA. VANGENGEYH CLASSIFICATION IN LONG-RANGE FORECASTING
0! SUMMER PRECIPITATION IN CHINESE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC

[Abstract of article by Kim Hun Yuk]

[Text] The predictors of summer arid seasons for different forms of circulation of
types U, E and C are determined with the use of discriminant analysis with an ad-
vance time fron several months to 10 years. Figures 2, tables 5, references 4.

UDC 551.590

NETNOD FOR PREDICTING MEAN MONTHLY QUANTITY OF PRECIPITATION OVER EUROPEAN USSR
DURING HARE SEASON

[Abstract by Getmanova, G. F.]

[Text] A method is presented for predicting the mean monthly quantity of precipita-
tion over the European USSR during the warm season of the year for a period of three
months in advance. As predictors use was made of: l) forecasts of the anomaly of
mean monthly air pressure and temperature in the northern hemisphere obtained us-
ing the coefficients of expansion of meteorological fields into double Fourier ser-
ies; 2) water temperature gradients in the North Atlantic, computed using data

from weather ships; 3) precipitation (mm). read at the points of intersection of a

standard grid of points over the territory of the 0858. The evaluation of forecasts
on the basis of both dependent and independent material was positive. This approach

to solution of the problem of forecasting of the quantity of precipitation can be
useful for solving other practical and scientific research problems. Tables 3, ref-

erences S.

UDC 551.521:S$1.526

ROLE OF NITROGEN OXIDES IN FORMATION OF OZONOSPNERE
[Abstract of article by Rakipova, L. R. and Trubnikov, B. N.]

[Abstract] This is a review of modern concepts concerning the catalytic influence
of nitrogen oxides on the processes of ozone formation under the influence of solar
ultraviolet and corpuscular radiation. The article gives the principal chemical re-
actions and systems of equations of hydrothermodynamics taking this factor into ac-
count. References 10.

FOI:OIIWC1A1.USE1ONIN
FOIIOFTWCJAI.IEIZ(NULY

UDC 551.513

INVESTIGATINC TROPOSPHERE-STRATOSPHERE INTERACTION WITH ALLOHANCE FOR OZONE
HEATING FUNCTION

[Abstract of article by Rakipova, L. R., Trubnikov. B. u. and Shcherba. I. A.]

[Text] The authors investigated the influence of variations of ozone heat influxes
caused by a change in ozone content with different solar activity levels on the
vertical propagation of macroscale disturbances. Expressions are derived for the
indices of refraction and absorption of macroscale waves. taking into account the
ozone heating function. An evaluation of the influence of solar activity on the

logarithmic decrement of attenuetion of macroscale waves in the atmosphere is
presented. Figures 2, tables 1. references 9.

UDC 551.521:551.526

EVALUATION OF DYNAHIC AND THERMAL EFFECTS OF 'OZONE-TENPEBATURE' FEEDBACK

[Abstract of article by Rakipova, L. R.]

[Text] The article gives quantitative evaluations of the influence of the negative
feedback between temperature and the ozone content in the upper stratosphere on
temperature and the wind velocity components. The importance of this correlation
for the hydrothermodynamic regime of the ozonosphere is demonstrated. Such evalua-
tions were obtained for the first time. Tables 1, references 6.

HBO 551.513

INFLUENCE 0? WINTER STRATOHBSOSPHERIC WARNINGS ON TROPOSPHERIC PROCESSES IN THE
MIDDLE LATITUDES

[Abstract of article by Karinov. K. A., Rakipova. L. R. and Geynutdinova, R. D.]

[Text] In the specific cases of mesospheric warnings in 1978 and 1979 the authors
give an analysis of the propagation of disturbances from the stratosphere to the
troposphere. It is shown that stratomesospheric warnings exert an influence on the
temperature regime of the troposphere and favor the development of high-altitude
tropospheric ridges. Figures 7, references 3.

UDC 630:551.5

DEPENDENCES 0F GRAIN CROP YIELD VARIATIONS 0N TIMES 0? SPRING RESTRUCTURINCS
0P STRATOSPHERIC CIRCULATION

[Abstract of article by Yakovleva, N. I. and Vorob'yeva, N. 1.]

[Text] The spatial distribution of the correlation coefficients between the dates
of spring restructurings of stratospheric circulation and variations in the yield

7
FINIGJFIICLAI.USI:(NNLY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE¢NVLY

of spring wheat in deviations from the theoretical curve for the territory of the
USSR is analyzed. A positive correlation over the territory of the European USSR

was found, whereas a negative correlation was observed over northern Kazakhstan.

Figures 1. references 16.

UDC 551.590.2

CORRELATION ANALYSIS OF RELATIONSHIPS 0F MEAN JANUARY METEOROLOGICAL FIELDS IN
TROPOSPHERE AND STRATOSPEERE IN HIGH LATITUDES WITHIN ll-YEAR SOLAR CYCLE

[Abstract of article by Rakipova, L. R., Kidiyarova, V. G. and Shcherba, I. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the year-to-year changes in the correlation coefficients
between the mean January distributions of geopotential and temperature at the 500
and 30 mbar surfaces in the high latitudes during the period 1965-1977. It is

shown that the correlation coefficients characterizing the interrelationship of

the troposphere and stratosphere vary from year to year. Their variability is in
phase with the mean January geopotential values at the 30 shot surface and in anti-
phase with the variability of the mean zonal wind coaponents in the middle strato-
sphere. In years of the solar activity maxi-um the stratospheric-tropospheric rela-
tionships weaken, the mean zonal geopotential increases and the standard deviations
of geopotential decrease. Figures 2, tables 1. references 8.

unc 551.596.1z551.590.21
INFLUENCE OF SOLAR FLARES 0N ELECTRIC FIELD STRENGTH IN FREE ATMOSPHERE
[Abstract of article by Tsvetkov, A. V.)
[Text] The author examines the influence of solar flares on strength of the electric

field in the free atmosphere. Taking into account that solar flares change atmospher-
ic conductivity with time, on the basis of solution of the differential equation

div(dE + cog—f) . o

it is possible to determine the dependence of the vertical electric field B(z,t) on
the nature of conductivity (z,t). References 5.

COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya geofizicheskaye observatoriya in. A. I. Voyeykova (660), 1981

5303
C50: 1865/58A

INDI OIIHCIAI.IEIB(HVLY'
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OCEANOGRAPHI

OCEANOGRAPHIC INVESTIGATIONS IN NORTHVBSTEKN INDIAN OCEAN DURING SPRING-SMR 1980

Sevastopol' KOHPLEKSNYYB OKBANOLOGICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA INDIYSKOGO OKEANA
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Apr 81) pp 7-18

[Article by Yu. T. Shchetinin, V. K. Kosnyrev, Ye. A. Agafonov and V. A. Urdenko,
from monograph "Multisided Oceanological Investigations of the Indian Ocean",

3. A. Nelepo, academician Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, responsible editor, Mor—
skoy gidrofisicheskiy institut AN USSR (HGT AN USSR), 300 copies, 155 pages]

[Text] Abstract: The principal scientific results
obtained on the 22d voyage of the scientific

research ship “Akadenik Vernadskiy" under the

CIPRIO program are discussed. The features of
distribution of the fields of hydrological, hy-

hydrochemical, hydrooptical and hydrobiological
characteristics are analyzed. The nature of the
relationship between biological productivity of
the upper layer of the ocean and synoptic eddy
structures is discussed.

During March—June 1980 the Marine Hydrophysicsl Institute of the Ukrainian Academy
of Sciences carried out oceanographic investigations in the northwestern part of
the Indian Ocean. The principal purpose of these investigations was a determina-
tion of the relationships between the characteristics of biological productivity
in the ocean and hydrophysical fields at the scales of synoptic processes. The re-
search method involved the implementation of a series of multisided macroscale

surveys of the polygon and micropolygons (Fig. 1).

Figure 2a shows a map of the macroscale survey of the polygon carried out on the
22d voyage of the scientific research ship "Akademik Vernadskiy." At all drift
stations there was a complex of hydrological. optical and biological studies, reg-
istry of sound-scattering layers, microwave and electrical measure-eats. At sus-
pended hydrological stations (denoted by a symbol) these studies were supplement-
ed by the taking of samples for hydrochemical analyses and observations of the
resistance of materials to corrosion. At a number of stations work was carried out

for studying the characteristics of oceanic turbulence: measurements were made of
current velocities; nuclear hydrophysics, hydrobionics and zoology were studied.

The first macroscale survey was made from 15 March through A April 1980. During this
tine specialists on the scientific research ship "Akadenik Vernadskiy“ occupied 117

drift stations, including 41 hydrological stations with suspended instruments. The

FOI10I1NC1ALlﬂiﬁtﬂ'LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.[EHE(NULY

specialists of the Marine Hydrophysical Institute of the Ukrainian Academy of
Sciences during this same period carried out investigations of the vertical dis-
tribution of the hydrological characteristics using the ISTOK complex on other
ships of the joint expedition. Measurement data from these ships were transmitted
by radio to the scientific research ship "Akademik Vernadskiy" and subjected to
primary processing in the shipboard c0mputation center.

After departure from the port of Victoria three automatic buoy stations were set
out for studying the dynamics and structure of an eddy formation in the region

of discovery of a synoptic eddy (Fig. 2b) and a survey was made of two micropoly-
gons during the period from 14 April through 8 May 1980. The distance between the
stations along the meridian was 30 miles and along the parallel - 20 miles. Dur-
ing this period 95 stations were occupied, of which 71 were with suspended instru-

ments. . _ ....__.. .__ __

”f0. ‘7. 0V
q.ﬂ .Ziﬁr' . lBQMGQA
. . Elbombay

“.

CW»
%g ,3

/;

5

Djiboutifl'f,é$

_ w», ‘ '
"E

—“'.l

Brlropns
Victoria

 

Fig. 1. Map of track of 22d voyage of scientific research ship "Akademik Vernad-
skiy" and location of regions of macroscale surveys: I, II -- “Akademik Vernad-

kiy," III -- "Chatyr-Dsg"; 1, 2 -- micropolygons and a, b) meridional profiles.

After departure from the port of Singapore there was a second macroscale survey

(Fig. 2c) during the period 20 May through 5 June 1980. The distance between sta-
tions along the meridian was 40 miles and along the parallel was 30 miles. A total
of 50 stations were occupied, of which 14 were hydrological stations with suspend-

ed instruments.

Upon completion of a layover in the port of Bombay the ship proceeded to the point
of setting-out of automatic buoy station a (Fig. 2c). This stage in the work. af-
ter removal of the automatic buoy station, was continued by the implementation of

10
INIIIOI1ﬂC1AI.IISII(HWLY
27” ’0

 

Pig. 2. Diagram of surveys nude by the scientific research
ship "Akadenik Vernadskiy."

11
POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FCIICIHWCJAI.USE(IVLY

two meridional profiles which were situated in the region of the first mscroscale
survey. The profiles were run during the period from 15 June through 22 June 1980
along 67°20' and 65'20’3 between 10 and 17°“. Along the central part of the Red
sea during the period from 25 June through 29 June 1980 hydrological and hydroop-
tical studies were carried out which were completed with the setting-out of auto-
antic buoy station 5 (Fig. 1)

These investigations made it possible to determine the background characteristics
of hydrological, hydrochemical, hydroopticsl and hydrobiological fields in the
ocean, evaluate the level of the eddy energy and biological productivity. inten-
sity and kinematics of eddy formations and obtain some statistical characteristics
of the eddy field in the polygon. Before proceeding to an exposition of the sci-

entific results we will give a brief summary of the principal features of the in-
vestigated region of the ocean.

The Indian Ocean differs from the other oceans in the monsoonal character of the
winds blowing over it. From May through September the southwest monsoon prevails.
whereas from November thrOugh March it is the northeast monsoon. The reversal of
the monsoon usually occurs in April and October during the course of a relatively
short period of time. The monsoonal character of atmospheric circulation is closely
related to the regime of water circulation, whose restructuring also occurs rela-
tively rapidly. It is precisely the six-month cycle of the wind regime which is
one of the reasons for the variability of water masses in this region of the
ocean. Another distinguishing characteristic is a well-expressed stratification
of the waters vertically and also the presence of considerable horizontal gradi-
ents of the fields of temperature, salinity and density in each of the individual
layers. The enumerated features are manifested in the structure and dynamics of
the water masses in the investigated region of the ocean.

He will describe the specific hydrometeorological situation prevailing during the
period of investigations in the polygon. The onset of the work (mid-March) fell
during the period of ending of the winter monsoon and was characterized by weak
winds of 4-8 m/sec of northerly and northeasterly directions. The main part of the
investigations (late March-April) fell in the transitional period, primarily dur-
ing calm weather. The final phase (late Hay-June) coincided with the onset of the
summer monsoon; the wind velocity averaged 10-18 m/sec; the direction varied from
SH to US“.

An analysis of the distribution of temperature and salinity carried out on the ba-
sis of data from a macroscale survey and surveys of micropolygons demonstrated
that the synoptic variability in the region of the investigations is characteriz—
ed by cyclonic and anticyclonic eddy formations with a characteristic scale of
60-200 miles. In the area of the polygon there were found to be seven cyclonic and
five anticyclonic formations (Pig. 3). The intensity of these formations was rela-
tively small: the maximum rise of the 16° isotherm, selected for mapping the eddy
field, was 70 m.

Two successive surveys. carried out in one of the cyclonic eddies, made it pos-
sible to determine its kinematic characteristics - the direction and velocity of
movement. During the period from 6 April through 1 May 1980 the center of the eddy

12 _
FIHI<HHNC1AI.USE(NULY
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

formation was displaced by 270 miles, which gives an average velocity of movement
of about 9 miles/day. The direction of movement was "SW. A distinguishing charac—
teristic of all the detected formations is their close relationship to the strat-
ification of the waters. To all intents and purposes not one of these formations
,was manifested in the temperature field of the ocean surface by a spot of cold or
warm water. This indicates a weak resultant vertical transfer wirhin the limits of
the eddy, which is traced most frequently in the layer 100-400 m; deeper the pic-
ture becomes "blurred" and it is difficult to identify any formations on the basis
of their manifestations in the density and temperature field. In contrast to the
temperature field, individual eddy formations were rather clearly traced on the
basis of salinity anomalies at the ocean surface. A comparison of the position of
these anomalies with maps of dynamic topography indicates that in the process of
eddy formation there was a capture of mass. after which the advective flows led to
the transport of this anomaly into a region with other characteristics of water
masses.

A characteristic form of synoptic variability of the ocean in the region of invest-
igation is also the presence of a hydrological front intersecting the polygon from
the southwest to the northeast. On the basis of the nature of its position this
front probably corresponds to the southern and southeastern peripheries of a macro-
scale cyclonic circulation occupying the northern part of the Arabian Sea. The

meandering of this front could be one of the reasons for weak eddy formation with-
in the limits of the polygon.

Now we will discuss another form of manifestation of synoptic variability of the
ocean -- zones of upwelling of deep waters. These zones can be seen in the north-
western, northeastern and southeastern corners of the macroscale polygon. It is as-
sumed that here the upwelling of deep waters corresponds to the zones of tradi-
tional intensive upwelling along the shores of the Arabian Peninsula and the west-
ern coast of the Indian subcontinent. As a result of change in the wind or dynamic
regime in these zones the generation of eddy formations can occur which thereafter
are advectively transported to other regions. A preliminary T.S analysis. made on
the basis of survey data, indicated that a cold cyclonic eddy, traced in the micro-

polygon, had T,S characteristics corresponding to the zone of the Arabian upwell-
ing.

we note the exceedingly rapid variability of the form of eddy formations observec
on the basis of survey results. This indicates either a wave nature of the eddy

formations (superpositioning of rapid baroclinic Rossby waves) or that they are
unstable.

A hydrological survey carried out during the period of development of the summer
monsoon was considerably inferior in scale to the winter survey. Nevertheless.

in the area of the polygon it was possible to detect a cold cyclonic formation with
a characteristic horizontal scale of about 150 miles. The maximum rise of the 16°

isotherm in this formation was 25-30 m. The same as before. the eddy was not Iani-
fasted in the temperature field of the ocean surface but was easily detected from
the anoma10us values of salinity, which at the center of the eddy was 36.550/00; in
the surrounding waters it was 36.2°/oo.

13
FINICNHH<IA1.USII(HNLY
Fig. 3. Map of depth of 16°C isotherm according to data in first macroscale survey.

Dynamics of waters. The most complete information on the circulation of waters in
the Arabian Sea was obtained during the period of ending of the winter monsoon and
in the transition period. A hydrological survey of the macroscale polygon and s
survey of two micropolygons made it possible to compute and plot maps of dynamic
topography relative to the reading surface 1500 db. On these maps it is possible
to discriminate six eddy formations (3 cyclonic and 3 anticyclonic) on the basis
of their manifestations in the upper ZOO-m layer of the ocean (Fig. 4). In these
formations the velocities of rotational motion are relatively small, usually 9-11
cm/sec. but not more than 20 cm/sec. The clustering of dynamic contour lines ob-
served in the southern and eastern parts of the macroscale polygon is evidently

the axis of a macroscale cyclonic circulation forming during the winter in the
northern part of the Arabian Sea. The current velocities on the axis are 3-21 cn/

sec. The pattern of circulation of waters, similar to that shown, is traced to a
depth of 200 m; deeper the pattern of circulation is "blurred," although the posi-

tion of the center of the circulation and the character of the circulation are
maintained to a depth :5 800 m.

11;
INJI.(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂB(NULY
5:°£’i 3

.—_—- —"'.f' ._-—.. 1"“

if!)

 

Fig. 4. Dynamic topography at 0' horizon.

The maps of dynamic topography, computed for the micropolygons, show that the geo-
strophic currents in the eddy cyclonic formation. completely outlined in the sec-
ond micropolygon, retain their sign to great depths. The current velocity in this
eddy varies in the range 10-30 cm/sec. By comparing the successive positions of
the center of the cyclonic formation on the three maps, it is possible to estimate
the velocity of movement at about 8-9 miles/day.

The data from experimental measurements carried out with the three automatic buoy
stations agree entirely with data on currents obtained by the dynamic method. An

analysis of graphs of the mean daily progressive vectors indicates that the change
in direction and velocity modulus of the current is closely related to the passage

of a cyclonic eddy through the system of automatic buoy stations on the first 3-4
days and the passage of an anticyclonic eddy in the middle and at the end_of the
observation period. At all three buoys the current velocity regularly decreased
with depth. The velocity maximum was usually situated at the horizons 50, 100 m
and the minimum was at the horizons 800. 1500 m. The minimum current velocity

is noted at a depth of 800 m as well when using data computed by the dynamic meth-
od. Despite the fact that the horizontal gradients of the temperature and salin-
ity fields at these depths are extremely significant, the current velocities are
nevertheless small. This fact can be attributed to the influence of intermediate

Arabian Sea waters which form an almost horizontal pycnocline.

The characteristics of the hydrological structure and circulation of waters are
closely related to the distribution of the hydrochemicsl and hydrooptical character-
istics. The Arabian Sea is characterized by a three-layer structure of the distrib-
ution of chemical characteristics with depth: a) the surface homogeneous layer

(to depths of 50-80 m); b) the layer of maximum vertical gradients (to depths of

15
mommmv
M 051-10“. USE ONLY

125 m); c) the subsurface or intermediate layer, extending to the lower limit of
observations (500 n).

An analysis of the influence of eddy disturbances on the variability of the fields
of biogenous elements indicated that the results in many respects are identical to
the conclusions drawn when carrying out work under the "Polimode" program. A cy-
clonic eddy was discovered during the microsurveys; it moved toward the southwest-
with a velocity of about 9 miles/day. It was traced most clearly from the upwell-
ing of waters in the layer 100-200 m. At the center of the zone of upwelling of
waters there was an increase in phosphorus concentrations (by approximately 20;;3/
liter) and silicon (by a factor of 2-3) in comparison with the concentration in
the surrounding waters. At the horizon 500 m the influence of upwelling was almost
absent.

Now we will examine the hydrooptical characteristics in the zones of eddy forma-
tions. The investigations carried out in the micropolygons revealed that the

anomalies caused by eddy formations in the transparency field occupied a relative-
ly thin layer 50-200 m and the greatest vertical displacements of the transpar-

ency isolines corresponding to the backgroand conditions did not exceed 50-60 m.
In the immediate neighborhood of the center of the circulation, determined from
the hydrological data, there were two anomalous regions, one of which corresponds
to an uplift of the jump layer; the other corresponds to its subsidence. Both re-
gions were situated on the line of movement (trajectory) of the eddy. By compar-
ing the spectral changes in the attenuation index in the zones of rising and sink-
ing of the jump layer it can be noted that the waters corresponding to the region
of rising are related in spectral composition to deep waters, whereas the region
of subsidence is filled with surface waters. One gets the impression that the eddy
causes not only an upwelling of waters, but also their subsidence on the periphery.
However, insignificant vertical velocities of such movements and their localiza-
tion in the thin layer near the surface did not favor an intensification of the
processes of exchange of deep and surface waters under the conditions of the open
ocean.

Now we will examine the principal characteristics of the biological productivity
of waters in the investigated region of the ocean at different trophic levels and
we will give an evaluation of this productivity as a whole.

The quantities of primary production during the period of the winter monsoon were
characterized by relatively low values. The average production of the surface

layer was 2.5 mg C-m'3-day‘1; for the entire photosynthesis layer — about 50 mg C-
m' 'day'1 with considerable variations (0.1-1o.s mg c--.’3 and 10.3-41.7.2 .3 C-m'z).
The main mass of photosynthetically active phytoplankton was concentrated in the
upper ZS-m layer with urine, as a rule. at the surface or at a depth of 10 m;

at greater depths the synthesis of phytoplankton was very weak.

Investigations during the period of the su-ner monsoon indicated a very insignif-
icant decrease in the level of primary production of organic matter by phyto-
plankton. The maximum quantities of primary production in individual zones did
not exceed 5 mg em"3 and 155 mg C-ul‘2 respectively. In the course of both per-
iods there was a "spottiness" in the distribution of more or less productive
zones.

16
FOIOFFICIALIBBONLY
FIHI()FII(JAI.IEIE(NVLY

Within the limits of the investigated ocean area there were no sharp differences
in the concentration of chlorophyll "a" during different seasons. For example,
during the period of the winter monsoon the order of magnitude varied in the

range 0.01—0.10 mgo '3; for the entire layer 0-100 m the concentration was 8.14
mg'm‘z. The maximum chlorophyll contents were observed in the layer 60-80 m, where
its concentration in individual cases attained 0.2-0.3 mg° '3. At the same time,
the assimilation number, characterizing the rate of photosynthesis per unit of
chlorophyll, was minimum at these depths.

In the micropolygons, where the cold cyclonic eddy was outlined, there was some
increase in chlorophyll "a" both for the surface and for the layer 0-100 m (up
to 0.04 mg-m‘3 and 9.h9 Ing'm'2 respectively). In the second micropolygon, where
the cold eddy was completely outlined, the chlorophyll content in the photosyn-
thesis layer on the average attained maximum values 13.0 mg-m'z. The main mass

of chlorophyll here was concentrated at a depth of about 50 m and in individual
regions attained 0.46 mg-m‘3.

In the distribution of the quantities of primary production and chlorophyll "a"

there was a general increase in their quantities in a direction from northeast
to southwest.

Thus, with respect to the level of production of primary organic matter by phyto—
plankton and content of chlorophyll "a" the investigated ocean area can be class-
ified as oligotrophic and is transitional to mesotrophic waters. Regions of in-
creased productivity were observed in part in local zones associated with the
divergence of water masses in disturbances of the cyclonic type.

0n the basis of the richness of bacterioplankton this ocean area can be classif-
ied as mesotrophic waters. The bacterial population of the surface layer in the
macropolygon and two micropolygons on the average varied in the range 500-700
thousand cells-ml'l. It was possible to define the ocean areas richest in bac-
terial life and those which were relatively im verished. The highest quantities
of bacterioplankton (about 1 million cells-ml' ) were discovered in the north-
western part of the macropolygon. In general, the northern part of the polygon
stood Out due to an increased development of bacterial life. This productive zone
extended in a southwesterly direction.

Zooplankton is the next link in the trophic chain of the biocoenosis. An analysis
of the data obtained both with total exploitation of the layer 0-100 m with a

net and with specific exploitation of the sound-scattering layer indicated the
following.

Net seston in all stages of the investigations in different parts of the investig-
ated region was represented primarily by two groups - copepoda and chaetognatha.
According to visual evaluations there was a predominance of the first group, be-
ing 50-902 or more of the biomass of zooplankton. A distinguishing characteristic
of seston during the period of ending of the winter monsoon (March-April) was

the greater content of detritus and slime -- residues of different jellylike

forms (medusa, Portuguese man-of-war). In some cases the quantity of detritus was
502 or more of the seston biomass. With the onset of the period of the southwest
unnsoon the fraction of detritus (primarily macrodetritus) decreased sharply; rem-
nants of jellylike forms completely disappeared. In the zooplankton there was an

17
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1ON1V

increase in the volume of copepoda in the early stages of development; other mass
components of zooplankton were the young of chaetognatha and the larvae of gastro-
poda. During this period at virtually no station was there any abundant develop-
ment of jellylike forms. All this is evidence that the onset of the summer season
is characterized by a rather significant change in the phases of succession of
zooplankton and an intensification of development of the most massive forms of
first- and second-order consumers (an indication of "rejuvenation“ of the commun-

ity).

The intensity of development of zooplenkton in the layer 0-100 m was also differ-
ent at different moments in time. For example, during March—April the greatest
concentrations of net seston (150—250 mg-ZSO mg-In’3 or more) were observed in
the northwestern and northern parts of the polygon, which is evidently associat-
ed with cyclonic circulation in the Arabian Sea. Over the greater part of the
polygon the concentration of seston was at the level 50-150 mg° '3. 0n the aver-
age for the entire region the seston concentration was 120 mg-m’3. Repeated in-
vestigations, carried out in the southwestern part of the region in late May-
early June, indicated that despite changes in the composition of net seston, its
concentration nevertheless remained at the former level (the average biomass was
110 mg-m'3). At the end of the second-beginning of the third 10-day period in
June there was an appreciable increase in the biomass of seston, on the average
to 148 mgom'3.

Specific catches in the sound-scattering layer indicated that the characteristic
representatives of these layers (regardless of their type) were myctophida and

their young, euphuesia, chaetognatha, copepoda, etc. At stations situated in the
northwestern part of the polygon.there was a great quantity of roe, hypothetical-

ly of squid. There were no significant differences in the composition of the
sound—scattering layer in different seasons of the investigations. The concentra—

tion of animals in the sound-scattering layer is 4-5 times less than that in the
upper 100-m layer of the ocean.

In general, with respect to the level of development of zooplankton the open
waters of the Arabian Sea (according to the Bogorov-Raas classification) can
be classified as moderately productive. but the relatively uniform distribution
of plankton and the absence of its aggregations in individual sectors impede an
accumulation of organisms of higher trophic levels. including those of interest
for the fishing industry (squid, fish).

In this connection the question arises of the reasons for the relatively low (bio-
logical in general and conmercial in particular) productivity of the investigated

region. The prevailing opinion that the principal factor limiting bioproductivity
in the tropical zone of the oceans is a low content of biogenous elements in the

euphotic layer is scarcely correct for this region. Hydrochemical investigations

indicate that the content of biogenous elements in the euphotic layer is rather
great and exceeds by many times the requirements of the number of algae present.

The latter is confirmed by data on the low concentrations of biogens, the low
content of chlorophyll "a" in the water and the low levels of primary production.
It seems most probable that the consumption of the biogenous elements by the al—
gae present in the eutrophic layer in great quantities and the development of
organisms of subsequent trophic levels on this basis is limited primarily by

i1ﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂﬂi(MVLY
FOR‘OF‘ICJAI.IEHE(MVLY

the dynamic factor -- by the absence of conditions leading to the accumulation of
developing plankton. Under conditions of an inadequacy of food for the plankters-
filtrators there should be a considerable increase in the role of detritus as a
buffer component in the food chain of the pelagic ecosystem, especially since its
content in the water in individual periods is extremely significant. According to
the computations which have been made, the food requirements of herbivorous zoo-
plankton in the investigated period are satisfied by approximately 60-501 by the
production of phytoplankton.

A detailed analysis of the collected data will make it possible to obtain more re-

liable information concerning the characteristics of development of the biological
comunity in this region of the ocean and establish a close relationship between
its degree of development, hydrological and dynamic factors.

COPYRIGHT: Horskoy gidrofizicheskiy insticut AN USSR (MCI AN USSR), 1981

5303
680: 1865/82

19
I!IICHHHIJA1.USE(NULY
ltllCIﬂﬂElAl.USE(NNLY

USE OF DYNAMIC-STOCHASTIC MODEL IN PROCESSING HYDROPHYSICAL MEASUREMENTS IN
INDIAN OCEAN

Sevastopol' KOHPLBKSNYYE OKEANDLOGICEZSIIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA INDIYSKOGO OIEANA
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Apr 81) pp 99-107

[Article by I. G. Protsenko, I. Ye. Timchenko and V. D. Yarin, from monograph
"Hultisided Oceanological Investigations of the Indian Ocean", 8. A. Nelepo,
academician Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, responsible editor. Horskoy gidrofis-

icheskiy institut AN USSR (H81 AN USSR), 300 copies, 155 pages]

[Text] Abstract: A dynamic-stochastic model is used
-in constructing synchronous maps of hydrophys-
ical fields on the basis of density surveys

-carried out during the 22d voyage of the sci-
entific research ship "Akademik Vernadskiy"
in the Indian Ocean. The authors analyse the
results of computations. The conclusion is
drawn that a dynamic-stochastic approach to
an analysis of observations is highly promis-
ing for the processing of data under exped-
itionary conditions at a real time scale.

Dynamic-stochastic model. The broadening of expeditionary oceanographic research
is bringing to the forefront the problems involved in the routine quantitative
interpretation of the collected information. The use of dynamic-stochastic models
for the processing of hydrophysical observations is highly promising for these
purposes [1-3].

The dynamic-stochastic model presented in this study includes a three-dimensional
thermohydrodynamic model for predicting the density and current fields in an open

oceanic basin, a model for computing the parameterised covariation matrix of err-
ors and a procedure for the statistical assimilation of individual measurements.

As in [1-3], the use of a dynamic-stochastic model is used in processing data for
the density field. However. in contrast to the mentioned studies, the hydrodynamic

part of the model is far simpler. which made it possible to apply it numerically
using a shipboard electronic computer under expeditionary conditions.

In a study of macroscale geostrophic movements we use a system of differential

equations of a hydrodynamic model describing the superpositioning of low-frequency
baroclinic Rossby waves and inertial oscillations

IIIICHHWCIAI.IIIECNELY
FOIOFHCIALIBBONLY

y n.
5% '""f%, page duﬁtﬁ‘f- (1)

I!
d o‘ 4 da
7f?”“"§;§7§42*ﬁ “xv-2' (2,
I
2
__L_ or _ dr ,
"‘5'?“ 9,! a? y,“ (3)
6' d 'd d d 0'
7'§*“7§*V7§*"752'az—%7{+4‘9‘ a.)

The system of differential equations (l)-(4) describes the evolution of the vector

of state of the ocean. whose components are the projections of the velocity vector
of currents u. v, w onto the Cartesian coordinate axes x, y, z, and also the den-

sity )9 . here y: is the coefficient of vertical turbulent exchange; .13. X:
are the coefficients of vertical and horizontal diffusion; L is the Coriolis para-

meter; ﬂ - 31/3 y; g is the acceleration of free falling; 1:” ‘6, are the con-
ponents of wind shearing stress. The covariation function of the deviation of the
theoretical evaluation of density from the measure-ants will be represented in the

for. -- ---———---———._.-

A(x,y,'z,x,..¥. Z,,t)- .
= q] (x-x, , y ~35) q: (z -z,) JCx,y,z,t)d(x,,e;,z,,t), (5)

where d’(x, y, z, t) is the standard deviation of the field of errors; the func-
tions 9g, 9’; are the standard normalized correlation functions of uniforl fields

with a unique dispersion.

In accordance with [3], we will write the equation for the function of dispersion

of errors if .1 . . do” do’ d-J'
— — — — t-
(It “‘ax "on “Q; *2”

11-34 5—5” mw’ - u. (5—? )’-2«r.[(%’7'(§;¢)’l%"

6-5;», aw

 

(6)

where
" It 4 4:
2:2,

 

 

I
J .1,

In equation (6) O’ 2 represents the dispersion of excitation and is a probabilistic
model of small-scale phenomena not taken into account by the hydrodynamic model

(1)-(lo).

At the tins of receipt of the asssurement 750:» yA, 2“, t) at the point A the
density and dispersion of error in the correlation radius is node more precise
using Izhe formulas

J’G vii)

5(""Z")"'5’("" 1'5),qu(z-z,) I, <7)

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHOALUSEONLY
.q, (Hm—y.) [§<x..xr.z..r>-p mam].

A
a I Qty. 2 . t) -a’: (1.x. Lt) [l—qr2 (z -z‘) (I, (x-x",_%)]. (8)
He will we the following boundary conditions

da' (7.?

Po 0: ﬁ“tx ‘ Pool 71"?" 9:9, v 556,, when r - 0; (9)
dd J" _
5.!- =27 -0’ 9- 9' ’ 0:34;: when 2 - 111, (10)

where 111 is the depth of the horizon below which the density is considered homo-
geneous.

In the liquid vertical boundaries of the considered region
9 a J’ -J" .
Pr : r (11)

At the initial moment in time when t - 0
unu’. may". pvp'. 6": 6")? (12)

The numerical solution of equation (1)-(8) with the boundary (9)-(ll) and initial
(12) conditions was found in a computation grid which in the horizontal direction

contains the uniformly spaced grid line intersections (x1, yj)x1 - in‘, y -
13 y; i - 1.....L; j - l,...,H and in the vertical direction the nonunifo y
spaced horizons 2k, 1: - 1,...,N. Equations (1), (2), (lo), (6) were written with use
of a natural filter scheme. With respect to the derivatives in the horizontal direc-
tion the scheme was explicit with a second order of approximation. In equation (6)
the last tern on the right-hand side was taken in the computation layer. Along the
vertical coordinate the equations were approximated by the balance method. after
which the resulting system of algebraic equations was solved by matrix fitting
along a. On the boundary for equation (6) there was stipulation of the condition
of an exponential increase from zero to unity for the normalized dispersion of the
field of errors: — .- --— —-- - -- —— -
(60w =Mé££ ,
He'd: (13)

where ((72)n+1 is the value of the function in the computation layer; 5 t is the
tine interval in the numerical scheme.

Such a choice of behavior of the dispersion of error on the boundary is attribut-
able to the fact that the values of the density field at the boundary points re-
mained constant in the absence of information and changed only after assimilation
of the measurement at the boundary points and at points adjacent to the boundary,
whereas the real field changed at each moment in time. Accordingly, the disper-
sion of error in determining the field at the boundary increased with time and
attained a maximum value after an interval equal to the time correlation radius
of the density field.

22
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£10NLY

0n the basis of this model we processed data for hydrophysical polygons investi-
gated under the program for complex investigations of the fishery resources of
the Indian Ocean [6].

Results of Computations

The first polygon, in which numerical computations were made, was situated in the
region 60°-68°60'E, lO—l7°N (Fig. 1). Nine horizons were selected in the vertical
direction: 0, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 1500, 2000, 3500 m. The components of the
wind shearing stress were determined using data on observations of the velocity
of the near-water wind made on the ship. The values of the initial density field
were taken from the ATLAS OF THE INDIAN OCEAN. The stationary diagnostic solution
of equations (l)-(3) was used for the values of the initial velocities. The dis-
persion at the initial moment was assumed equal to the dispersion of the density
field. The values of the model parameters were: 5): - 107 cm, 5, I 0.84-107 cm,

V; - 10 cmzlsec, 3’2 - 10 cmzfsect J(,_:_;g7 cmglsec.

90' so" 60' 70' ' "or

    

0' .
Pig. 1. Location of hydrophysicsl polygons in Arabian Sea.

In accordance with equations (l)-(8) computations were made of the hydrodynamic
characteristics for 20 days (the time from the beginning to the end of the macro-
scale survey) with a time interval 3t I 3 hours. At the times corresponding to the
time of occupation of the hydrological stations (Fig. 2 in [7]) the procedure of
statistical assimilation of observational data was carried out.

An analysis of the level surface (Fig. 2,a), representing an integral character-
istic of the density field and graphically reflecting the dynamic processes trans-
piring in the water layer,indicated that during the time of implementation of the
macroscale survey in the polygon there were four well-expressed eddy formations
-- two cyclonic (in the northern and southwestern parts) and two anticyclonic (in
the eastern and southern parts), and also a number of less intensive eddies. The
level drop between the minimum in the cyclone and the maximum in the anticyclone
was 32 cm per 200 miles. There is a general tendency to a rise in the ocean level
from northwest to southeast with the sharpest gradients in the frontal zone pass-
ing thrOugh the polygon in the direction from the southwestern to the northeast-
ern corner.

Figure 2,b shows a map of the level surface constructed by the objective analysis

method on the basis of data arbitrarily related to one time. A comparison of maps
of the level Surfaces in Pig. 2,a.b shows that in general they are similar, but

23
FOR OFFKJAI.USB(M‘LY
IN)! 0FIICJAI.|J§II(MVLY

as a result of use of the equations of dynamics and successive analysis of the
data the cyclone in the northern part of the polygon moved to the north (evi-
dently under the influence of a current directed from the southwest to the north-
east). In the west the cyclone changed its form and the region of the zero sur-
face was propagated to the southwest.

 

gin/c cm/sec
d c a d

Fig. 2. Level surface: a) obtained from dynamic-stochastic model; b) constructed
by objective analysis method; c) map of horizontal currents at ZOO-m horizon; d)
vertical velocity at ZOO-m horizon.

Figure 2,c is a map of the current vectors at the 200bm horizon. In general, the
fields of horizontal velocities are sinilar for all the computation horizons.

The velocity modulus decreases with depth. For example, the maximum velocity
modulus at a depth of 50 m, registered in the southwestern part of the polygon, is
45 cm/sec; at the lOOO—m horizon its value decreased to 15 cnlsec. Along the line
of the maximum gradients of the level surface there is a relatively intensive

flow directed from southwest to northeast. To the left of it there are two eddy

formations with s cyclonic direction of velocity; to the right of it there are
two major eddies of the anticyclonic type. Except for the southwestern cyclone.
all the eddies lie partially outside the polygon. The velocity modulus in

2!.
roe omcm. use on“
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

the southwesterly flow on the average is obviously greater than the orbital velo-
cities in the eddy formations. Thus, the dynamics of the eddies occurs against

the background of the energy exchange of the mean flow and eddy formations of a
synoptic scale.

5" 50‘ .3234 50'

If“...""“T""¢1 1‘7”“

   

£91k cull-cc
a 6

 

Pig. 3. Map of horizontal current vectors: a) obtained on 16 April 1980 and b)
20 April 1980.

An examination of the vertical component of current velocity (Pig. 2,d) makes it
possible to conclude that the zones of upwelling of deep waters lie on the west-
ern periphery of anticyclonic eddy formations and on the eastern periphery of cy-
clonic eddies. For zones of subsidence-the opposite picture is observed. The velo-
cities of upwelling and subsidence of waters increase with depth. Within the limits
of the polygon the values of the vertical component of current velocity fall within
the interval 10'2-10'3 cm/sec. The density field to a depth of 600-700 m is charac-
terized by a domelike rising or dropping of the isopycnic lines relative to the
mean level in zones of anticyclonic or cyclonic eddies respectively. At the low-
er-lying horizons the indicated feature is expressed less clearly.

Second polygon. In this region the scientific research ship "Akademik Vernadskiy"
investigated two nicropolygons (Figure 1, 2). This was situated in the region
54°-62°60'E, 5-12°N. The investigation of the micropolygons was preceded by a
macroscale survey with participation of the scientific ship "Professor Vodyanitsk-
iy." Due to the unsatisfactory quality of the measurements in this polygon the
sounding data were subjected to additional processing. The "surges" on the ver-
tical profiles were smoothed and at the computation horizons the mean values of
the density field and its dispersion were reduced in accordance with the data for
the first polygon by means of subtracting the nonclosure between the mean values,
multiplied by a coefficient equal to the ratio of the standard deviations, comput-
ed for each group of data. The density field obtained in this way was used as the
initial field. Hydrodynamic computations were made for the period 9-16 April 1980
(beginning of work for surveying of the first nicropolygon and the setting-out of
three multiday buoy stations).

25
Iron omcm. use my
Fig. 4. Level surface: a) second polygon; b) third polygon; map of horizontal cur-
rent vectors: c) second polygon; d) third polygon.

Figure 3.a is a map of the horizontal velocities at a depth of 500 m; the figure
shows the velocity vectors (the location of the buoy stations is denoted by
circles). measured at the automatic buoy stations. Despite the relatively long

time of the forecast. there is agreement with observations. Figure 3,b shows the
horizontal velocities for the SOO—m horizon, obtained at the end of the survey of
the first micropolygon. They were computed using the dynamic-stochastic model. tak-
ing into account the new data on the density field and to a great degree approach
the measurements. The measured current vectors are greater in absolute value than
the velocities obtained as a result of computation of the dynamic-stochastic model.

Figure b.a is a map of the level surface relating to the end of the survey of the
fifth nicropolygon (28 April 1980). Since in the numerical model the interval of
the computation grid is twice as great as the distance between the stations in the
nicropolygone, some data were not taken into account. Nevertheless, in the western
part of the micropolygon there is a region of the upwelling of waters caused by the
presence of an anticyclonic eddy whose eastern periphery passed through the micro-

polygon.

26
F‘MI(IHNCJAI.USE(H§LY
FOR‘OFFICIAI.UEI£(MVLY

The third polygon, for which the data of the first and second micropolygons were
completely processed. had a spatial interval half as great and was situated in

the region Sb'-58°20'E, 7°-10°30'N. 0n the map of the level surface obtained on 28
April 1980 there were certain peculiarities. The anticyclonic eddy formation was
expressed by two centers of subsidence of the isopycnic lines (Fig. b,b). The

level gradients in this variant were greater than in computations in a coarser
grid. A comparison of the maps of the horizontal current vectors at the ZOO-m hori-

izon (Pig. 4,c.d) reveals that the principal features of the anticyclonic circula-
tion coincide in both variants.

Summary

The region of investigations was characterised by a complex hydrological structure
of the fields, which made it difficult to trace their evolution on the basis of
asynchronous data of polygon measurements. Nevertheless. the use of a dynamic-
stochastic model made it possible to carry out a generalization of the collected
data and construct maps of fields consistent with the results of hydrological
soundings. At the same time, the possibilities of employing the dynamic-stochastic
approach with a low-capacity electronic computer under shipboard conditions have
been demonstrated. The proposed model can be used as a basis for an automated sys-
ten for the processing of hydrophysical information operating at a real time scale.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Nelepo, B. A., Knysh, V. V. and Timchenko, I. Ye., "Evolution of Synoptic
Eddies According to Density Surveys Made by the Marine Hydrophysical Institxze
of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in the 'Polimode' Polygon," Preprint No
3. Sevastopol', Izd. MGI AN Ukrainskoy SSR, 1978, 82 pages.

2. Knyah, V. V., Nelepo, B. A., Sarkisyan, A. S. and Timchenko, I. Ye., "Dynamic-
Statistical Approach to Analysis of Observations of the Density Field in My-
drophysical Polygons," IZV. AN SSSR: FAQ (News of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean). Vol 16, No 10, pp 1079-1093.
1978.

3. Timchenko, I. Ye., Knysh, V. V., Protsenko. I. G. and Yarin, V. 0., "Dynamic-
Stochastic Model for the Processing of Density Surveys in the Ocean." MDRSKIYE
GIDROPIZICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophysical Investigations), No A,
Sevastopol', pp 81-96. 1979.

4. Knysh. V. V., Moiseyenko, V. A.. Serkisyan, A. S. and Timchenko. I. Ye., "Com-
plex Use of Measurements in Hydrophysical Polygons in the Ocean in Pour-Dimen-
sional Analysis," DAN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences). No 4,
pp 832-835. 1980.

5. Knysh, V. V. and Protsenko, I. 6., "nonlinear Effects in the Quasihomogeneous
Layer of the Main Pycnocline in the Sea During the Mistral," MORSKIYE GIDRD—
PIZICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, No 3, Sevastopol', pp 65-57, 1979.

6. Protsenko, I. 6., Timchenko, I. Ye. and Yarin, V. D.. "Method for Predicting
the Statistical Characteristics of the Field of a Conservative Admixture,"
HORSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, No 4, pp 97-108. 1979.

2?
IIIIC”WNCJAI.USIIMNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(H‘LY

7. Shchetinin, Yu. T.. Kosnyrev, V. K., Asefonov. Ye. A. and Urdenko, V. A.,
"Oceanographic Investigations in the Northwestern Part of the Indian Ocean

During the Spring-Sumner Period of 1980," in this collection of articles,
pp 7-18.

COPYRIGHT: Horekoy gidrofizicheekoy institut AN USSR ("GI AN USSR), 1981

5303
CSO: 1865/82

28
FOR‘0FFIJAI.USE(HQLY
MWWONLY

UDC 551.46
NONOONTACT METHODS FOR MEASURING OCEANOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS

Moscow MONTAKTNYYB MBTODY IZMERENIYA OKEANOGRAPICEBSKIKH PARAMETROV in Russian
1981 (signed to press 19 May 81) pp 2, 120-123

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Noncontact Methods
for Measuring Oceanographic Parameters", edited by S. V. Viktorov, candidate of
physical and mathematical sciences. Moskovskoye otdeleniye Gidromstooizdata, 560
copies, 124 pages]

[Text] Annotation. These articles examine the results of theoretical and experi-
mental investigations directed to creation of noncontact methods and means for

measuring oceanographic parameters. The greatest emphasis is on measurement of the
characteristics of sea waves, ice. temperature of the sea surface and contamination
of the sea surface by petroleum products using instruments carried aboard flight-
craft. The collection of articles contains the following sections:

1. Active SM? methods.

2. Passive SH? methods.

3. Measurements in IR range.

lo. Laser methods. .

5. Space and aerial surveys in optical range.

6. Ultrasound methods.

7. Methodological problems of noncontact measurements.

The collection of articles is intended for a wide range of scientific workers and
engineers working in the field of study of natural resources of the earth and
world ocean and students in the advanced courses of the corresponding fields of
specialization.

Contents
Foreword by Editor 3
Active SH? Methods

Volyak, K. 1., Glushkov, V. M.. Yemel'yanov, Yu. N.. Komarov, V. 8., Kontorov,
S. Ye., Mudrova, Z. M., Popov, A. Ye. and Starostin, V. A. "Investigation

of Petroleum Contaminations of Sea Surface Using Side-booking Radar" 6
Basharinov. A. Ye. [deceased], Baskakov, A. I. and Kalinhevich, A. A., "Use of
a Radioaltimeter in Investigating Wave-Covered Sea Surface" 9
29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY

Basharinov, A. Ye. [deceased]. Kalinkevich, A. A. and Baskakov, A. I. "Investiga-
tion of the Possibility of Determining the height of Sea waves by the Multi-
frequency Correlation Method Hhen Using Satellite Radioaltimetera" (Annota-
tion) 13

Zagorodnikov, A. A., Chalysh'ev, K. B. and Chegrinets, V. M. "Changes in the
Two-Dimensional Spectrum of a Radar Image of the Sea Surface Due to Movement
of Measuring Instrument" 16

Zhilko, Ye. 0., Zagorodnikov, A. A. and Chalyshev, R. R. "Angular Spectra of Sea
Haves According to Renote Measurement Data" 18

Gagarin, Yu. 3., Dyatiov. G. 1., Zhilko, Ye. o. and Meshcheryakov, Ye. M.,
"Results of Measurements of Parameters of Sea Haven and Amospheric Turbulence
Using Surface Incoherent Radars" (Annotation) 21

Baypur, Yu. 2., Gagarin, Yu. 3., Zhilko, Ye. O. and Miroehnichenko, S. I.
"Measurement of the Parameters of Sea Waves by the Doppler Measurement Method
with Different Aircraft Flight Regimes" 22

Bazhenin, V. 6.. Kalnykov. A. A. and Kharlova, M. M. "Energy Characteristics of
Envelope of Radar Signals and Their Relationship to Have Parameters" 26

Passive SH? Methods

Shutko, A. M., "Evaluation of State and Physicochemical Properties of Ocean Sur-
ace According to Data From Spectral Measurements of SUP Radiation" 31

Chukhray, c. I. and Shutko, A. 24., "Results of sur Radiometric Sounding of Ocean
Areas Hith Different Temperature and Salinity Values" 35

Rayzer, V. Yu. and Sharkov, Ye. A. "Spectral and Polarization Characteristics of
SB? Radiation of Foam Formations" 39

Andreyev, B. M., Vinogradov, V. V. and Pomytkin. B. A. "Measurement of Micro-
scale Elements of Waves and Foam in Microwave Investigations of the Sea Sur-
face" 63

Lyushvin, P. V. "Determination of Wind Velocity at Hater Surface Using Measure-
ments of Microwave Radiation of the Earth-Atmosphere System" 47

Bogorodskiy, V. V.. Darovskikh, A. 11., Martynov. Ye. A. and Spitsyn, V. A.,
"Results of Experiment With Joint Use of IR and Microwave Radiometers for
Remote Determination of the Characteristics of Sea Ice" 51
Nikitin, P. A. "Microwave Radiation of Sea Ice" 57

Measurements in Infrared Range

Paramonov, A. I. "Investigation of Temporal Variability of Heat Exchange of Seas
in the Eastern Arctic With the Atmosphere by the IR Radiometry Method" 61

30
MOMMUSIONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

Visnevskiy, A. A. "Use of IR Radiometry in Investigations of Par Eastern Seas"
(Annotation)

Laser Methods

Rokotyan, V. Ye. "Asynptotic Investigation of Laser Pulses Reflected Prom Sea
Surface" (Annotation)

Korchagina, S. P., Kravtsov, A. l... Lezhen, A. S. and Khalturin, V. I. "Possi-
bility of Determining the Concentration of Sea Uydrosol by Remote Laser
Methods" (Annotation)

Torgovichev, V. A., Krivolanov, V. P., Klimva, ‘l'. 8., Haslov, V. Yu. and
Nefedov, 6. Ya. "Remote Detection and Identification of Sea Contamination
by Petrolem Prom Fluorescence Spectra"

Lezhen, A. S. and Urikova. N. V. "Use of Statistical Tests Method for Computing
Reflectivity of Ocean Irradiated by Laser Radiation" (Annotation)

Space and Aerial Surveys in Optical Range

Drabkin, V. V. and Honosov, H. L. "Movements and Drift of Ice at Head of Gulf
of Finland Applicable to Hydraulic Construction Problems (Using Materials
From an Aerial Photographic Survey)

Vanyushin, G. P. "Experience in Interpreting Zones of Increased Biological Pro-
ductivity Using Hultizonal Space Images of the Rater Hedium

Yegorikhin, Ye. D. and Filatova, T. N. "Some Results of Measurements of Currents
in Lakes and Reservoirs From an Aircraft" (Annotation)

Hikhaylov, V. A. and Usachev, V. P. "Use of Analog-Digital Apparatus for the In-
terpretation of Aerospace Information"

Ultrasonic Methods

Seregin, N. I. and Kalmykov, A. A. "Influence of Spatial Averaging on the Ac-
curacy in Measuring the Have Profile by a Sonar Have Recorder"

Nekhonov, N. A., Kalmykov, A. A., Kirpa, Yu. I. and Varhenin, V. G. "Coupsra-
tive Analysis of Use of Electromagnetic and Acoustic Oscillations for Ship-

board Sonar Uave Recorders" (Annotation)

Aleksandrov, A. P., Vayndruk. z. 8. and Narodnitskiy, C. Yu. "Some Results of
Measurements of the Spatial-Temporal Characteristics of the Sea Surface by
the Aeroacoustic Method"

Narodnitskiy, 6. Yu. "Information Content of Amplitude Characteristics of Scat--
tering by Sea Surface with Local Irradiation"

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

67

69

69

76

75

78

83

91

92

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Methodological Probl- of Noncontact Heaeurenanta

Dotaenko, S. V., Nelepo, B. A. and Saliron, L. 6. "Optimum Calibration in Remote
Sounding of Ocean" 101

Dotaenko, S. V. and Nedoveaov, A. N. "Recomtrmtion of the Averaged Field Pron
Satellite Measurements" 105

Tinofeyev, Yu. H. and Trifonov, H. 1. "Influence of Some Factors on Accuracy of
Satellite Method for Determining Tenperaturc of the Underlying Surface" 109

Kate, A. V. and Spevak, I. S. "Reconstruction of Sea Have Spectra Fran Measure-
ments With a Moving Sensor" 113

Volynakaya, N. N. and Kon'kov, I. 1“. "Problem in Condensing Oceanographic In-
formation in Remote Measurements" 117

COPYRIGHT: Goeudaratvennyy okeanograficheekiy institut (Leningradskoye otdel-
eniye), 1981

5303
680: 1865/ 85

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICINHCJAI.1E“E(MNLY

UDC 551.46

SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF RANDOM OCEANOLOGICAL FIELDS

Leningrad SPEKTRAL'NYY ANALIZ SLUCHAYNYKH OKEANOLOGICHBSKIKB FOLEY in Russian
1981 (signed to press 30 Jan 81) pp 2-6

[Annotation and table of contents from monograph "Spectral Analysis of Random

Oceanological Fields", by Konstantin Vasil'yevich Konyayev, responsible editor
K. D. Sabinin, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Cidrometeoizdat,

1360 copies, 206+ pages]

[Text] Annotation. This book contains a systematic exposition of multidimensional
spectral analysis and its oceanological applications. Traditional and some special
procedures for the collection and processing of data are presented, including re-
cently developed autoregression methods ensuring a high resolution. The errors in
spectral evaluations and some fundamental limitations of the analysis are discuss-
ed. The book contains various examples of analysis of oceanological fields, such
as synoptic eddies, internal and wind fields and fields of acoustic noise. The
book is intended for oceanologists, meteorologists and other researchers and also

-for students at universities and other hydrometeorological institutes.

Contents

Pteface'ssoeseaseeaseesesasaeeso.eoeosesseeosoosoeeeeeoeeoeooeemoeseeeeoeoeeeeso 5

Principal Annotations and Tem......unannounouu.o....n............... 8
Introduction. Random Field and Its Correlation Function and Energy 8pectrum.....10

Chapter 1. Linear Evaluations of Spectrum of Random Process.................... 17
1.1. Linear algorithms for data processing................................... 17
1.2. Weighting and .mthins 1n 8M1y018(0f Vindw).....o.-o....nun...... 20
1.3. Tim-discrete am1y818...I...0.000000000COOOODOO.DOOOOOOOOOOOOCIOCOOCOIs 26
1.6. Systematic and random errors in analysis and uncertainty relation....... 31
1.5. Model processes and spectra............................................. 37

1060 Correlation matr1Xssesossessssosssssossosssess0.000000sssssssssssosssses 39

Appendix. Some Properties of the Fourier Transform............................. 42

Chapter 2. Measurement of Field Spectrum....................................... 48
2.1. Features of nultidmn'iml analysis.ono.........................o..oo ’08
2.2. Computation and representation of space-time spectrum................... 52

33
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(N§LY
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.

Chapter
3.1.
3.2.
3. 3.
3.4.

Chapter
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.

Chapter
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.4.

Chapter

6.1.
6.2.

Chapter
7.1.
7.2.
7.3.
7.4.
7.5.

Chapter
8.1.
8.2.
8. 3.

Chapter
9.1.
9.2.
9. 3.
9.4.

Chapter
10.1.
10.2.

F0I10FIIC1A1.USI1DNLN

Areal distribution of sensor’IOOIOOODOIIODOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOODDOO’OO
mvuent of semrsooooa00.IOIIOO...OOOCOOICCIOOOOCCOOOOIOOOOOOOIIOOOO
Reconstruction of true spectrum from measured spectrum................

3. mlysis of Inco'plete D8“.0.0IOOCOOOIOOUOOOOOO'OOQOC.000......IO.
Field sections and spectral projections...............................
Analysis of radar image of Have-covered sea surface...................
Analysis of vertical profiles of current velocity field...............
Aperture 'ynthe'is.OOCCOOIIOOOIICI.OOOOOOOOQIOOOOOOOIIOOOOCOIOOOOOIIOO

4. Interference Systems of Sensors....................................
Field Projections and SPGCCtal ’ectj-ORSOso.easaesooosoeoaaeaeosaaoveao
Measurement of angular spectrum of short wind usves...................
System with unambiguity with respect to direction of wave movement....

5. Measurement of Spectrum Prom Two Field Sections....................
Algorithm for processing sections.....................................
Properties of evaluation of spectrum..................................
MeasurENHI of wind “V88 by m ”Vina 8m0r3.....”unannoun-
T-shaped distribution of sensors in horizontal plane..................

6. Spectral Evaluations Using Few Parameters..........................
simle Mela of .Pectm...’0......IOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0IOUOOOOOIOIICOOO
Gradient measurements of angular spectrum.............................

7. Autoregression Evaluations of Spectrum of Random Series............
Autoregression series and maximum entropy'condition...................
mun Processim usoritmOOIOm...50.000.00.000...ODOOIODOOOIOOOOOOOOU
mice of length of "Whitening" filters-soassssodaoosaoosssssaaooeoose
Properties of autoregression evaluations..............................
Uncertainty relation and complementarity principle in analysis........

8- A'Jtoresression Evaluations of Field spectm. o a a o o o s s a o a o s o s s e s o o a a
Data processing algorithms............................................
Examples of field autoregression analysis.............................
Choice of reference sensor............................................

9. Features of Analysis of Vector Pields..............................
vector field.OOOODOIOOOIOOOC000......OU0.0.00....OOOOOOOOOIOIIOOCVUICO
Expansion of velocity vector into Cartesian components................
Expansion of velocity vector into rotational components...............
Spectral description of synoptic eddies...............................

10. Coherence of Temporal Variations and Spatial Spectrum.............
Coherence and coherence scale.........................................
Coherence measurement.................................................

Summary. Principal Ideas and Methods of Spectral Analysis.....................

Bibliogr‘physsaaooooaassesoassoosoooooooosooaooooosoooooboaaosasssooooasaoooss

IndestOOanoaaoosssossosssoososoaooCauses-abssooaoooo-sooooososssosaooases-as

COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1981

5303

680: 1865/86

FOI‘OFFKJAJ.USI(NNLY

59
67
73

78
78
79
81
84

89
89
94
98

101
101
107
110
114

118
118
121

127
127
130
134
137
144

148
148
152
167

171
171
172
175
180

181
181
193

197

201
206
UDC 681.325

MNOGRAPH 0N INTERFACE FOR PROGRMIIABLB INSTRme IN SYSTEMS FOR AMTING
EXPERIMENTS

Moscow INTERFEYS DLYA PROGRAHHIRUYEHYKH PRIBOROV V SISTEHAKH ANTOHATIZATSlI EKSPBR-
INENTA in Russian (signed to press 19 Mar 81) pp 2-5, 261-262

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from monograph "Interface for Pro-
grammable Instruments in Systems for Automating Experiments", by Nikolay Ivanovich
Gorelikov. Aleksandr Nikolayevich Domaratskiy, Sergcy Nikolayevich Domaratskiy,
Vitaliy Alekseyevich Liskin, Nikolay Vasil'yevich Pcpenko and Leonid Semenovich
Sitnikov, responsible editor L. 8. Sitnikov; doctor of technical sciences, Izdat-
el'stvo "Ranks", 4250 copies, 263 pages]

[Textl-Annotation. This monograph is devoted to the interfaces used in ensuring an
orderly exchange of information between self-contained measurement instruments,
peripheral equipment and an electronic computer. The authors give a description of
theIEC nus interface, the basis for which was the HP-lB interface of the Hewlett-
Packard Company for programmable measurement instruments. The interface functions
and the controlling sequences are described in a high-level language. A description
of the algorithms for the exchange of information between instruments along 13c BUS
lines is given. Also examined are examples of the practical realisation of inter-
face elements for different instruments, an electronic computer and peripheral
equipment, as well as problems relating to the construction of data measurement
systems based on the described interface.

Introduction. The intensification and increased cost of scientific research is giv-
ing rise to an insistent need for creating systems for automating experiments. The
principal purposes of such systems are the automated collection, registry. process-
ing and display of information, and in case of necessity, also monitoring of the
experiment, which assumes the integration of measurement, recording and monitoring
instruments into a unified complex. It is most effective to create systems for the
automation of an experiment on the basis of a combining of instruments of a uni-
fied standard information'line, which assumes a modular construction of the system
and application of the programmed control principle. Recently considerable efforts
have been made in this direction and a number of standards have been proposed, the
best known of which is the KAHAK standard. The KAHAK standard has come into the
broadest use both in the automation of scientific research and in industry in

those cases when the need arises for creating automation systems, including an
electronic computer, and having a variable makeup of measurement converters and
sensors, input and output devices for experimental data, measurement instruments
and peripheral equipment. However, the experience with use of the KAHAK standard

35
roe omen. use our
of working elements, in many cases unjustifiable in those applications where there
is no need for the maximum speed. The most suitable standard for constructing auto-

application. It goes without saying that not one interface is ideal or identically
well suited for satisying the many frequently mutually exclusive requirements.
Nevertheless, the standard of the Hewlett-Packard Company, serving as the basic
standard for the International Electrotechnical Commission for the interface for
programmable instruments, makes possible the successful solution of most of the
problems involved in creating measurement and control systems having rather broad
functional possibilities. The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in-
terface ensures the combining of instruments into systems with their connection to
a single standard information line. A great advantage of this standard is the ab-
sence of restrictions on instrument designs and assurance of the possibility of
connection of these instruments, with or without small modifications, to virtually
any instruments produced by industry. The merits of the IEC interface are revealed

In such cases the IEC standard connecting element makes possible the easy joining

together of measurement, registry and control instruments, electronic computer and
peripheral equipment in any combination in the desired system.

The IEC interface has now come into extensive use throughout the world. Such well-
known firms as "Solsrtron,” "DEC," "DCC" and "Honelway" include the standard 130
bus in their hardware. It can be said with assurance that the IBC interface will
find extensive use in our country as well. However, its adoption is made difficult
due to the absence of publications containing not only a detailed description of
the standard, but also examples of the practical embodiment of its equipment and
programming devices. This book intends, insofar as possible, to fill this gap and
facilitate the speediest possible introduction of the IEC interface into practical
Soviet instrument making. The book is intended for a broad range of specialists,
especially instrument makers and the developers of systems for the automation of
an experiment and industrial test systems. The book can also be useful to special-
ists in the field of automatic control systems, engineers and scientific workers
directly engaged in experimentation in the most different fields of science (phys-
ics, chemistry, geophysics and oceanology, biology and medicine, etc.) and stu-
dents in the corresponding fields of specialization at colleges and universities.

Work on writing of the book was divided among the authors in the following way:

Chapter 1 was written by N. . Gorelikov, A. N. Domaritskiy and L. S. sitnikov,
Chapter 2 by A. N. Domaritskiy, S. N. Domaritskiy and N. V. Popenko, Chapter 3

by V. A. Liskin and N. V. Popenko, Chapter 4 by A. N. Domaritskiy, S. N. Domar-
itskiy and L. s. Sitnikov, Chapter 5 by S. N. Domaritskiy, Chapter 6 by N. I. Cor-
elikov, V. A. Liskin and N. V. Popenko. Chapters 1 and 4 were edited by N. V.
Popenko .

lNﬂR<lﬂﬂ€1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY

The authors would like to express appreciation to A. G. Blagodarev, H. H. Borkov-
skiy, K. V. Grinberg. V. A. Herzlyak and P. V. Shcherbakov for participation in
the development of a number of devices described in the monograph, and to L. I.

Lyubomudrov and G. I. Hesyatsev for a series of valuable cements on the presenta-
tion of the material and finalizing of the work.

  

     
     

16)
1) umo hr? 10) ﬂodpaauee
2) A‘NWIUN'HW
3) 1’0:de W
etu-
4) Athﬂgnamuw
1} LI;I.2;JI:JI:
5) mm. 0 many!
had um 2:0 I." f.
6, Wm og- '1".
Pol. 11:12:2IIJJ:
7) Wm!”- “:5,
In We! a I
8) menu
Fig. 1. Key to book.
KEY:
1) Who are you? 13) and reading
2) Administrator 14) Section
3) Instrument developer 15) Chapter

4) Developer of systems for op-

5) User

6) Programer

7) Student at technical school

8) Person interested in technology

16) In greater detail

17) On interface of measurement instru-
ments

18) On interface of peripheral devices

19) On microprocessor devices

20) On systems for automating experiment

timizing experiment

9) Beginning 21) On ro rami

10) Read introduction 22) On chgintergce
11) Yes 23) Read conclusion
12) No 24) End

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI10F'ICIAI.IEHE(H9LY

Contents

Introductions-seesoes-oososslosossooosooooosssooosoosssossoeoonoaoaossooosssoooo

Chapter 1. Principles of Interface for Programmable Instruments................
1.1. Standard interface in systems for automating experiment.................
1.2. Interface of International Electrotechnical Commission for programmable

instmntSOl0.000.000.0000....0.000000IOCCOCOO0.0ICUOIIOIOOOCOOOOOOO.
1.3. Logical organization of interface for programmable instruments..........
1.4. Electrotechnical and mechanical characteristics.........................

Chapter 2. Algorithms for Interaction of Interface Functions...................
2.1. IDELA language for describing logical organization of interface.........
2.2. Algorithms for instrument-receiver operation............................
2.3. Algorithms for instrument-source operation..............................
2.4. Broadening of possibilities of L0 and T0 functions in instrument

cmlexe. and controllerBOOOO..OOOOOOOOOOOOOO'.0.90.00.000000000000000
5. Algorithms for instrument-controller operation..........................
.6. Algorithms for exchange of information along line.......................

Chapter 3. Programmable Instruments for Systems for Automating Experiments....
3.1. Peculiarities of design of instruments with allowance for requirements
for systems “sac-ooooeooeoooo-so...evesassessesoesoosoooeooeooooooeo

2. Choice of interface functions for standard-produced instruments.......
3. Universal set of interface functions for instrument complexes.........
4. Scheme for realization of interface functions.........................
5. Interface schemes for voltmeters and multimeters......................
6. Interface schemes for calibrators and programmable power sources......
7. Interface schemes for storage units on intermediate carriers..........
8. Interface schemes for photoreadout units..............................

mapter l.- mtrollers.‘ICOOOOOOOOIOOOIC.0.0.0.0.0000...IOOOOOOOOIOIIOIOOOIOI
4.1. General characteristics and types of controllers......................
4.2. Set of interface functions of controllers.............................
4.3. Universal manual instrument-controller................................
4.4. Controllers based on memory units with intermediate carrier...........
4.5. Controllers as part of small computers................................
[.06. controllers ” Part of “inicowuteraooseeoooosooooooooooooeoooooooooeo

Chapter 5. Features of Programmed Support....................................
5.1. Nomenclature and makeup of programmed support.........................
5.2. Control of line using programmable calculator.........................
5.3. Programmed support of controllers as part of minicomputers............
5.4. Programmed support of microprocessor inatruments......................

Chapter 6. Systems for Automation of Experiment Based on Prograumuble
Instrumnts.I.00....00000.00....OOOOODOOOIOCOOOQDOIOOIOOIOQOIII.
6.1. Autonomous systems for automating experiment..........................
6.2. Hydrophysical scunding complex with programmable calculator...........
6.3. Multipurpose system for collecting data with programmable calculator..
6.4. System for determining nonlinearity of frequency deviation of
generators with oscillating frequency...............................

38
mmussomv

20
24
39

50
50

58
68

81
81
93

101

101
112
117
126
131
137
141
145

148'
148
153
157
160
164
170

184
184

186

198
218

229
229
233
235

238
FOR1DFFKJAI.USE1IVLY

6.5. Industrial test systems based on use of calculators.................. 261
6.6. Shipboard systems for automating experiment.......................... 247

mnclusion.................-uu....................s....uooocooso.....oo-.ooo 257
Bibliography..........o....u..-..-o....a.......oc...u..na..n......csooucoo-c. 258

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

5303
CSO: 1865/68

39
FOI(HﬂﬂC1Al.USE(NVLY
momdatustmv

uoc 551+sso.3('267-26.03)
mama on nor-mu (:30ch mo cmvmsxcs m mm mm or mom 0cm

Moscow GEOLOGIYA I GBOFIZIKA DNA VOSTOCENOY CHASTI INDIYSKOGO OKEANA in Russian
1981 (signed to press 26 Jun 81) pp 2, 256-255

[Annotation and table of contents from monograph "Bottom Geology and Geophysics of
the Eastern Part of the Indian Ocean," responsible editors P. L. Bezrukov (deceased),
corresponding member, USSR Academy of Sciences, and Yu. P. Neprochnow, doctor.

of physical and mathematical sciences, Inatitut okeanologii imeni P. P. shirshov,
Indetel'stvo "ﬂanks“, 650 copies, 256 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This monograph, based on materials of the 54th and 58th voyages
of the scientific research ship "Vityaz'," gives the results of multisided geolog-
ical and geophysical investigations carried out in 1973 in the eastern part of the
Indian Ocean. 0n the basis of an analysis of the collected materials the monograph
gives a description of bottom relief, the magnetic and gravitational fields, struc-
ture of the sedimentary layer and deep structure of the earth's crust in the East
Indian Ridge, Central, Heat Australian and Cocos Basins and in the Sunda Trench.
Materials on petrography, petrochemistry and geochemistry of the magmatic rocks in
the region are systematized. The new geological and geophysical data are compared
with data from deep-water drilling. The tectonics and history of geological devel-
opment of the eastern part of the Indian Ocean are considered. The monograph is

of interest for specialists in the field of marine geology and geophysics and also
for college students. Figures 99, tables lb, references 233.

Contents

Introduction (P. L. Betrukov and Y“. P. Neptochnov..uuo.o..o.....o.............. 3

Chapter 1. Geological and Seismic Investigations on the 56th Voyage of the

Scientific Research Ship "Vityaz'" (P. L. Bezrukov)................... 7
1. objectives of expaitionOOCOOOOCOO00.0.0.0...I....0.00....000......OOCOCOOOOI 7
2. mk‘up of meditmnOOOOOODOIOOC0.0.00.0.0....0.D...OOOCOUOIQOOOOOOOOO...D... 7
3. merhent‘l lethodODOOOICOOIIOO0.00000000000DOOOODOOOOICOOOOOODOIDOC0.0.0... 8
4. Route of em.d1t1¢°n0.0......0l.I.IDUOOIOOCODIOOODODOOOOOOCOOOOIODDOOOOIOIIDUO 8
5. Volume of work carried out in Indian 0cean.................................. ll
6. Sm scient1f1c resuts.l.O..0.0'IOOOOOOOOOOIOUOOOIOOUO.IIOOOOOODDOOOIDOIOOO 11

no
FOItOIIICIAl.UBE(H§LY
FOIHOFIIC!A1.1EIE(HVLY

Chapter 2. Hultisided Geological-Geophysical Investigations on 58th Voyage of
Scientific Research Ship "Vityaz'" (Yu. P. Neprochnov).............

10 Objective. of expeditiontlbblIOOOOOO0.00...OIOOOCDIIIIOIOOCC...IOOOCOICOOO
2. “Ikeup of expedition.II.lﬂ..0..0...I0.00...OOCCCOOOIOCCOOOCOOCOOUI0.0.0...
3O Emerimul mtdeOOOIIOI.OOOOOOOOOOI...0.....I..'...C'.C..0.0.0.0000...
(.0 Route of expeditionot0......IIICIOOOOO'OOOOCIOIOCOOOOCICCCCOCOOCOCUUO"...
Se vol“ of dark donedcOOOIOIOOIIOIOOOO0.0...IOOOCCOOOOOOIOIO0.000QOCOQOQ...
6. Principal ’cientific results...0..OOIOOIICOOOO.COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCO0.0...

chapter 3. Bottom Geomorphology (L. K. Zatonskiy and N. N. Turks).............
1. Undewater ”rain of contmmtaol0......OOOOOOOOOIOIIIOVIOOIIICOOOOOOOUOC
2. sun“ islmd ‘rcOOOOOOOIOOOOOUOOI.III...OOOOOOOOIOOUOIOOOOODODOIOOVODUOODO

3. man flooroesosooosoos-ssosseossssseeeesooososososssseassesses-svsooooooo

‘o smryoeooso.osssosseseoeooeesesoeoeeeooeseooeeeoossosseeassesses-soot...

14
14
‘15
15
17
26
26

30
30
32
36
52

Chapter 4. Geomagnetic Field (A. A. Shreyder and V. I. Trukhin)............... Sb

1.
2.
3.
4.

Introductionsooesoeseesoeessssosasoso.Ososecessssoooesossseoooeeeassess... 5a

Featuras of anomalous magnetic field.oooeseeseseessooooesoeeeeeeeeo-esoooo 56
Interpretation of data from component magnetic survey..................... 68

smryoooeeeooeoeoeseooesosso esseseoosoeoeeesososeDose-essesoeoeoooeoeoo 71

Chapter 5. Gravity Field (A. G. Caynanov)..................................... 73

1.
2.
3.

History and method of research..o....o.......o.ou.......--.............-c. 73
mlysis of ammlou field..U.............'.............................. 75
Interpretation of anomalies............................................... 81

Chlpter 6. Structure of Sedimentary Layer and BaleIent...................coo.o 82

l.
2.

3.
6.
5.
6C

7.
8.

Brief review of preceding studies (Yu. P. Neprochnov)..................... 82

Method and apparatus for continuous seismic profiling (L. R. Merklin and

Yu- P. Neptochnov).OIOOOIOOOOOOOOI00......OO....OOOCOCOOOIOOIOOOOOOOIOIII. 83
East Indian Ridge (V. Ye. Hilanovskiy, L. R. Hertlin and Yu. P. Neprochnov) 85
Central Basin (L. R. Herklin)....o......o................................. 108
COCOS Basin (0. V. uvchenko)..ol.OIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI000......0.0.0.0'10 116
"est Australian and North Australian Basins (Yu. P. Neprochnov and

v. Ye. m1an°vsk1y>cooOOOIOOOOII.00......0.00.00.00.0000000IOOOIOUOOOI'... 125
Sunda Trench (0. A. Levchenko, L. R. Herklin and Yu. P. Neprochnov)....... 128
Map of Thicknesses of Sedimentary Cover (Yu. P. Neprochnov and V. Ye.
m18nov‘k1y).c00....0.0.0.0...3I...0....OOIIIIOIOQIOOIOOOOOOOCOC0.0.0.0... 138

Chapter 7. Structure of Earth's Crust and Seismicity.......................... 140

1.

2.
3'

4.
5.

6.
7.

Extent of study of eastern part of Indian Ocean by deep seismic sounding

(Yu. p. Neptochmv)...‘.....0.00......000......IIIIOOUOOOOCI.QOOUICIOCOOCO 1‘0
Apparatus and method (Yu. P. Neprochnov and V. V. Ssdov).................. 142
Results of deep seismic sounding on 54th voyage of scientific research

ship "VityQZ'" (Yu. P. Neprochnov).........o.oo...oo.....o........co...... 1“
Results of deep seismic sounding in polygon V-Ss-l (I. N. Yel'nikov, Yu. P.
Neprochnov and N. A. Shiahkins)........................................... 166
Results of deep seismic sounding in polygon V-SB—II (A. P. Neprochnova and

V. v. sedov)ooooesooeesossosassess-esoosoeseoseseosooosooosoeossossoeoeoos 151

Comparison of results of deep seismic sounding (N. A. Shishkina).......... 158
Seismological investigations (V. V. Sedov and L. N. Rykunov).............. 163

1.1
son omcul. use ONLY
Chapter 8.

Chapter 9.

Chapter 10.

FOR system. USE ONLY

Hagmatic end Metamorphic Rocks (6. L. Kashintsev, G. B. Rudnik
and 8. PI sobolev).l0000OOOOOOOOOOOIIOIO00.0.00...IIOOOQOOIIOOIOOOO 166
1a Hepatic rocks...”nun..."unnuuu..."”nun"................. 168
2. Associations of magmatic rocks and their relationship to tectonic struc-

turesOOIOOOOOCOO..0IDO....IOCOOOOOIOOOOOUCII...00.000.00.00.00000000000000 185
3. Metamorphic rocks......................................................... 189
4. Stages in formation of magnetic and metamorphic rocks..................... 193

Preglacial Sediments end Sedimentary Rocks (N. s. Skornyakova.

V.
s.
1.
2.

N. Sval'nov, P. L. Bezrukov, V. B. Kurnosov, V. V. Mukhina,

B. Kruglikova, O. B. Dmitriyenko and H. s. Barash...............
Sediments and sedimentary rocks of Best Indian Ridge............
Sediments and sedimentary rocks of basins in eastern part of

Indian ocean...oesoosooosI00.00.00.000Iso.osseooooosaesooe-osooo

Tectonics and History of Geological Development...................

1.
2.

3.

(.0

Review of existing hypotheses (A. A. Shreyder).................
Complex geological-geophysical characteristics of principal
structures (Yu. P. Neprochnov end A. A. Shreyder)..............
Tectonic map (V. Ye. Milanovskiy, L. R. Herklin and Yu. P.

Neptochmv)...see-00000000000000sooooooooossocools-000000000000

Some problems in geological history (G. L. Kashintsev).........

Summary (P. L. Bezrukov and Yu. P. Neprochnov).................................

Key to PhototableSsooooooeooosoosoosuse...ososOosooooososossosoosoooeoseosOesoo

BibliograPhYOQOOoeoeoeoooeosssoassesses-000000..ooooeosssssoooooosooeooossoosoo

COPYRIGHT:

5303

Izdatel'stvo "Hanks". 1981

C50: 1865/70

ha
you omcm. use can

195
195

219

225
225

230

235
238

260
242

246
SOUND ABSORPTION IN TURBULENT MEDIUM

Moscow IMSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA in Russian Vol 17,
No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received 22 Dec 80) pp 1217-1219

[Article by V. P. Kuznetsov and A. V. Berezutskiy, Institute of Oceanology, USSR
Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Turbulence exerts a great influence on many processes in the ocean [I], and
in particular, turbulent fluctuations .of the speed of sound and current velocities

lead to fluctuations of the amplitude and phase of waves passing through the medium.

The propagation of acoustic waves in a turbulent medium is accompanied by the pheno-
menon of scattering of waves on random inhomogeneities of the medium arising as a
result of nonlinear interactions of the principal types of movements of the fluid
or normal hydrodynamic modes: potential, eddy and entropic. The most general anal-
ysis of such interactions was presented in [2].

A great number of studies have been devoted to the development of a theory of sound
scattering in a turbulent medium, but this problem was solved most precisely in
[3-5]. As was noted in [5], turbulence exerts an influence on the propagation of
acoustic waves in two ways. first, the presence of turbulent temperature fluctua-
tions leads to fluctuations of the speed of sound. Second, acoustic waves are an-
trained by movements of the medium and therefore turbulent movement introduces ad-
ditional random distortions in the field of the acoustic wave. In a general case
the acoustic wave itself perturbs this turbulence. However, in existing theories
.the reverse effect of sound on the eddy velocity field is usually neglected, that
is, an approximation of the stipulated turbulence is considered, and therefore the
energy exchange between the potential and eddy modes is not taken into account. It

is obvious that in the approximation of the stipulated turbulence the processes of
inelastic scattering of the acoustic wave or the processes of sound absorption by
turbulence are ignored.

In [6] an expression was derived for the decrement of sound absorption in a homo-
geneous and isotropic turbulent medium:

i.;IV-"L". ‘ I (1)
where V is the eddy component of the velocity of fluctuating novement, 1. is the ex-

ternal turbulence scale, H - Vco'1 is ‘the Mach number. This absorption was caused by
the transfer of the energy of perturbed eddy movement in the wave number spectrum;

1:3
roe ornau. use can
INDItDFFICIAI.tl§EI(HVLV

it predominates in the case of large Rayleigh numbers of turbulent movement. In the
case of small Reynolds numbers, characteristic for microscale oceanic turbulence,
developing in interlayers with a fine structure of hydrophysical fields, viscoas
eddy scattering is most important. The expression for the decrement of sound ab-

sorption in homogeneous and isotropic turbulence, caused by viscous attenuation
of the eddy, will have the form

[3 - viscous] I‘.-vM‘L".I- (2)

where'V is kinematic viscosity. The processes of sound absorption by turbulence be-
gin to play an appreciable role under the condition of smallness of the turbulence
scale in comparison with the wavelength of sound. that is, with kL<:l. It is im-
portant that both expressions of the absorption decrement (1) and (2) are not de-
pendent on the sound frequency.

In [6. 7] the sound-eddy interaction was examined within the framework of a single
formal scheme .. the Wild diagram technique - for the canonical equations of mo-
tion of an ideal fluid. It is clear that in adhering to this scheme it is impos-
sible to obtain effects related to dissipation and therefore below we have written
a related system of equations describing the dynamics of the potential and eddy
modes in a dissipative medium. The authors of [6, 7) derived a nonlinear canonical
transform for variables in which the eddy and potential movements of the fluid are
separated to the greatest degree. Since the concepts of potential and eddy move-
ments of a fluid are a purely kinematic characteristic of the flow, within the
framework of hydrodynamic equations it is possible, with mathematical rigor and
soundness, to separate completely the eddy and potential modes, representing the
full field of velocities in the form of the sum of the eddy and potential compon-
ents:

‘ u(t. r)-V(-t. r)§-V¢E'r)... d-l-kat: 17-.0." (3)

In these variables the system of equations_describing only the interactions of the
types eddy-eddy and eddy-sound (that is, linear sound and an eddy of finite ampli-
tude) can be represented in the following form:

 

 

m a _ __0* V -2v. 0o 1 (.
V-CO‘M--;[5AQ+A ‘ 111.31. ( V. I 31‘) ( )

0

(—0— —VA) V;-X.+A.. [€a2-— (Vevp) ].

a: 0:. 08-
(5)

where i 4 ' I i

b- “l 3 n+.+x( ¢._ c,_):|

is the coefficient of sound attenuation, V’- VII/90,

av. on. A 6 A“ _
C..- .“ - ,3. I II 1. ’3‘ at. I
43'1 is an integral operator, the reverse of the Laplacian, x1 are the components
of the external forces, to is the speed of sound.

 

IIIICIHHCIAI.USE1DNIN
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVEY

The right-hand side of the wave equation (4) contains terms describing the pheno-
menon of the dissipation of an acoustic wave, radiation and scattering of waves

by the eddy field of velocity. This equation (6) is similar (with an accuracy to
replacement of the variables) to the wave equation in studies [3, 5, 8]. Equation
(5) differs from the known equation of turbulence theory [9] only by the presence
of the term ed59f/a Xp , describing the effect of sound on the eddy component.

Assume that ' ' '
w. n-V'u. r)+6V(l. r). IV'PIGVI-
. (6)

where V'(t, r) is the unperturbed eddy field of velocity satisfying equation (5) in
the absence of sound, that is, with 9’ - O; 6V(t, r) is the perturbation of the
eddy field of velocity caused by the presence of sound.

Substituting expression (6) into the system of equations (6) and (5), linearizing
and omitting the effects of generation and scattering of sound in an unperturbed
eddy field V' (t, r), in the case of small Reynolds numbers of turbulent movement
we obtain the following system of equations for ¢(t,r) and JV(t,r):

 

. . (7)
33.- x -i M +244 0' (V.6V)
an e M a: v 03.“. ’ ]'
a - a
(—-v«)w.-......_~.
a: 0:.

Here and in the text which follows the prime on V(t, r) is omitted.

Expressing the perturbation of the eddy field 6 V(t,r) from equation (8) and sub-
stituting into (7), we obtain the wagequation

_""'aT{' a
— — c '69 - El Mc+2A"

( V.ZA..eu?¥)]. (9)

3:

 

01‘ as. 0:.

He will represent the wave field in the form of the sum of the meen((p) (coherent
part) and scattered «f' fields:

9(1. r)-(9)+9’. (on-o. (10)

Averaging equation (10) for the set of inhomogeneities and assuming that “9"?" we

f ind
. 0(a))
( Walden") ' )1 .

a"

”(9) 'M ) ’ 6M ) 26 ' 0'
—. — c - — + '
on o o a: [ 9

 

 

.(11)

8:. 0:.

Thus, a closed wave equation is derived for the coherent part of the field with a

determined coefficient, expressed through the correlation matrix of the unperturb-
ed eddy field (V1VJ) .

Then, carrying out a Fourier transform of" equation (11)
‘ Q- _ ' ' --.

I
‘V(w.k)- (—2“);- i‘m mun-m am.

and assuming the eddy field V(r) to be a stationary homogeneous random field
(Veil) v;(k.))-p.,(k)a(k-k.).

1:5
roa OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJA1.US£¢MVLY

where P1 (k) is the spectral tensor of turbulent fluctuations of the eddy compon-
ent of t e velocity field, we obtain the following dispersion equation:

 

lob m‘ 21"(q'l)(Il-l)'
p .__ __.-_ ur -l (12)
( c.’) co' 0_.(-l¢+vq‘)¢' "u“ ”’1'
In the case of isotropic turbulence
"' tk
rum- rm ( to - —;,’—

the dispersion equation (l?2_assumes the form

 

L-=( lob) 0' 20M (q-It)I-'(lq-k|) [ ‘ _ (q-k)‘ ] p“.

-—-——
9’“

cc :8 o _. ~0w+vq‘ (13)

The method for approximate analysis of the dispersion equations in the theory of
wave propagation in randomly inhomogeneous media was developed in [10]. Without
dwelling on the details, we obtain a dispersion equation for the case of a Gaussian
spectrum: 'ku,)

(WM) up (— —

F(|')- 2

 

(2-1) '5

Under the condition kL<l and 4v2/L4d2<1 we obtain

 

w'-co'k’ [1+M’-lo —b—+ “”3 )1 (1")
co' 0’!) '

hence the effective absorption decrement is

«'b 9‘” I-I . '

Peff ‘57-02 L3 .

Thus, the process of sound absorption in a homogeneous and isotropic medium is not

dependent on frequency in the region of low-frequency acoustic oscillations (below
the frequency V/szL).

 

(15)

Qualitatively the same character of attenuation of low-frequency acoustic waves is
observed in the ocean.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Monin, A. 5.. "Turbulence and Hicrostructure in the Ocean." uspmx FIZ. mum
(Advances in the Physical Sciences), Vol 100. No 2, pp 333-354, 1973.

2. Boa Teh Chu and Kovasznay, L. 8., "Nonlinear Interactions in s Viscous Heat-
Conducting Compressible Gas," J. FLUID HECH, Vol 3, No 5, pp 494-514, 1958.

3. Lighthill, H. J., "On the Energy Scattered From the Interaction of Turbulence

with Scund or Shock Haves," PROC. CAMBRIDGE PHILOS. 800., Vol 69, No 3, pp
531-551, 1953.

4. Kraichnan, R. 8., "The Scattering of Sound in a Turbulent Medium," J. ACOUST.
soc. mam, Vol 25, No 6, pp 1096—1106, 1953.

FOI‘OFFKIAL.USI(HVLY
FOR‘OITNCJA1.lEHE(ﬂVLY

S. Honin, A. 8., "Some Features of Sound Scattering in a Turbulent Atnoophere."
AKUS‘I‘. ZH. (Acoustics Journal), Vol 1, “0'6, pp 657-461, 1961.

6. L'vov, V. S. and Hikhayluv, A. V., "Sound and Hydrodynamic Turbulence in a Con-
bustible Fluid." ZhE‘rF (Journal of Experimental and Technical Physics), Vol 71.,
No 4, pp 1445-1457, 1978.

7. L'vov, V. s. and Kikhaylov, A. V., "Scattering and Interaction of Sound with
Sound in a Turbulent Median," ZhB‘i'F, Vol 75, No 5, pp 1669-1682, 1978.

8. Tatarskiy, V. I., RASPROSTRANENIYE VOLN V TURBULENTNOY AMSPBRB (Have Propaga-
tion in a Turbulent Atmosphere), Hoacov, Nauka, 1967, 548 pages.

9. Honin, A. S. and Yaglon, A. 11., STATISTICHESKAYA GIDRGIEKHANIKA (Statistical
Ilydronechanics), Part 2, Moscow, Nauka, 1967. 270 pages.

10. “one, H. 5., "0n Have Scattering by Random Inhomgeneities With Application to
the Theory of Weak Bores," J. FLUID. NECK” Vol 65, No 6, pp 785-804, 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Fizika atnoafery i okesna",
1981

5303
C30: 1865/63

ls?
roe omcm. use ONLY
ITII(IWHC1A1.UBE¢HVLY

UDC 550.38:550.37
STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF NATURAL ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD IR SEAS AND OCEANS

Moscow PROBLEHY HORSKIRB ELEKTROHACNITNYKB ISSLEDOVANIY in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 25 Jul 80) pp 38-65

[Article from monograph "Problems of Electromagnetic Research at Sea", by N. N.
Karnaushenko, A. s. Kukushkin and A. I. Zhilina, Institut temnogp aagnetizm,
ionosfery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln. 300 copies]

[Text] The authors of [1] described methods and apparatus for investigating the
natural electromagnetic field in the ocean in the frequency range above a few Hz.
The natural electromagnetic field in the ocean constitutes the total effect of
the fluctuating and pulsed components. whose sources are both in the water itself
and outside it [2, 3].

In this article we give the statistical characteristics of the horizontal electric
and magnetic components of the natural electromagnetic field in the frequency
range 10-200 Hz at depths up to 100 m in deep-water regions of the tropical zone
of the Atlantic Ocean, at depths to 250 n in the region of the continental slope
of the Atlantic Ocean, in regions with the coordinates:

9’ - 9-12‘u n - 17-19%:
V - 1o-12°s n - 25-30%:
7 - 31°“ 2 - 14°"

and also in the central deep-water parts of the Tyrrhenian and Black Seas in re-

gions with the coordinates: 9- 60'“, 1- 12's,
(f- I.2°30'-43°3o'u, 7x- 31-36'3

Horizontal electric component. In the frequency range 10-9b H: the mean field
strengths decrease with an increase in frequency at a constant depth by one or

two orders of magnitude or in conformity to a linear law (at a logarithmic scale),
Pig. 1. In the range of frequencies 110-190 H: the decrease was less than an or—
der of magnitude. In particular, it is possible to discriminate the region of the
continental slope of the Atlantic Ocean. In comparison with the deep-water part the
mean values of field strength are one or two orders of magnitude greater (layer 0-
100 m). For the continental slope the mean field strength values at the horizons
150-200-250 m are identical in the limits of one order of magnitude, decreasing
linearly in the frequency range 10-96 B: (at a logarithmic scale). In the region
of the continental slope it was not possible to detect any pattern of change in
field strength with depth at identical frequencies. The mean field strength values
for different depths in the layer 0-100 m at identical frequencies frequently are

ha
lﬂlltlﬂﬂtlAl.USE¢lNLY
I uh" Tlﬂz'l
INDI!0FFICJAI.lEﬂE(NHLY

in the limits of the same order of magnitude. One of the reasons for the absence

of a clear dependence of the change in field strength on depth can be the contin-
ental slope effect and the presence of a pulsed component. A comparison of the

mean values of strength of the electric component for different regions of the
Atlantic Ocean and Tyrrhenian Sea revealed that the mean values for the continental
slope of the Atlantic Ocean are an order of magnitude greater than for the abyssal
part of the Atlantic Ocean and the Tyrrhenian Sea. We assume that this is attrib-
utable to the presence of local field sources over Africa, which substantially
changes the external electromagnetic background [6].

Schumann resonances are inconspicuous [5], since the total electromagnetic field
was measured without separation into fluctuating and pulsed components. This pheno-
nenon was mentioned in [6], which gives the results of processing of measurements
of the horizontal electric component of the field in the Tyrrhenian Sea in series
registered in the absence and presence of the pulsed field component. The Schumann
resonances are traced clearly for the first records and poorly for the second. A
comparison of the strength levels for the horizontal electric component with the
data in [7] show the coincidence of the results within the same order of magnitude
of intensity for identical depths and frequencies. Series were processed in [7]
after discriminating the pulsed component.

The horizontal magnetic component is represented in the form of two orthogonal com-
ponents MI and H11, Fig. 2.

For the abyssal part of the Atlantic Ocean the mean field strength values decrease
by two orders of magnitude at the same horizon in the frequency range 10-96 Hz

and decrease with an increase in depth (90-115 m) at the same frequency by an or-
der of magnitude. In the continental slope region of the Atlantic Ocean there is

a tendency to a decrease with frequency (10-94 Hz) by an order of magnitude at the
same horizon, but a definite dependence on depth for the same frequency cannot be
traced due to the presence of a pulsed component. For the regions of the Black and
Tyrrhenian Seas available data at one of the horizons (65 and 90, 115 m) confirm
a decrease by 1-2 orders of magnitude with an increase in frequency from 10 to 90
Hz.

The dependences on frequency and depth for the mean square values of the deviations
in strength are similar to those shown in Figures 1 and 2; in order of magnitude

they are comparable to the mean values.

The checking of the investigated series for stationarity on the basis of s nonpara-
metric test of the series [8] with a significance level 0.05 indicated that for

70% of them the stationarity hypothesis is applicable. Below we give an analysis of
the statistical processing of series satisfying the stationarity condition. Figure
3 shows sample spectral densities of strength of the electric and magnetic fields
in the seas and oceans. The form of the spectra varies. In addition to the spectra
for which most of the power is concentrated at the low frequencies for a particular
spectral window, as is characteristic for smoothly changing series, there are spec-
tra for which the power is distributed in a wider band of frequencies of the spec-
tral window. The nature of the spectra confirms the presence of a pulsed component
in the initial records. Especially conspicuous is the appearance of a pulsed com-
ponent in the analysis of histograms carried out on "Rayleigh" paper (Fig. 4a). It

F0!‘0FFK£§$.USE¢MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is known that for processes with a normal distribution of the instantaneOus values
the envelope has a Rayleigh distribution. An analysis (Fig. 4a) shows that in the
region of large field values the approximating straight lines have a bend, which
confirms the presence of a pulsed component.

The sample normalized autocorrelstion functions are represented in Fig. lac.

The correlation radii do not reveal a distinct dependence on depth and frequency
for all field series; their range of change is from 0.3 sec to 1. sec.

But for the continental slope and the surface layers of Atlantic Ocean water:
there is a tendency to a decrease in the correlation radius with an increase in
frequency. At individual horizons there are the following values of the correla-
tion radii: for the strength of the electric component of

 

h I
. 7' Hid/2
or
to”
no.“ «an ”1—9" 12.1:
0 9m
0’
nun-Ian .-...,..N05.
‘ ~' no, .1
«a
”10;.
v' '3.“ '3‘. 53
o - _
6 mm m. "‘ """ rm
0 .m-u» I!“
.m-mM-u-m In
«I ' '”"""" noise "49

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR!OFFICIAI.lISIICMHLY

the abyssal part of the Atlantic Ocean at the horizon 100 m a value of the cor-
relation radius 1-1.5 sec predominates; for the strength of the magnetic component
in the abysaal part of the Atlantic Ocean and Black Sea values 1-1.5 sec predomin-
ate; for the Tyrrhenian Sea —- 0.3 sec; in the region of the continental slope of
the Atlantic Ocean for depths of 60 m. 165 m and 265 a there is a predominance

of values 0.5 sec, 1 sec and 2 sec respectively.

Conclusions

1. It was possible to obtain integral levels of strength of the electric and magnet-
ic components of the natural electromagnetic field in the range 10—200 Hz at depths
up to 100 m for abyssal regions of the tropical zone of the Atlantic Ocean, Tyr-

rehian and Black Seas; at depths as great as 250 m in the shelf zone of the Atlantic
Ocean.

2. A linear law of decrease of the investigated fields (at a logarithmic scale) with
an increase in frequency was established.

3. A preliminary statistical processing of expeditionary data was carried out, from
which it follows that there is a need for separate investigation of the fluctuation
and pulsed components of the natural electromagnetic field.

4. The natural electromagnetic field in seas and oceans at depths as great as 100-
200 m in the frequency range above a few “2 is caused for the most part by the to-
tal atmospheric electromagnetic background.

M “‘1'. “2.1/2

    

'axwuausaﬁmuz

Fig. 2. Dependence of mean values of strength of magnetic component of natural el-
ectromagnetic field in seas and oceans on frequency and depth. a) abyssal part of

tropical zone of Atlantic Ocean; b) region of continental slope of Atlantic Ocean;
c) abyssal parts of Tyrrhenian and Black Seas.

F0!‘0FIIC£§&.IEHE¢NNLY
FOI1OFFHJAI.USEGHNLY

 

.nuaooo was «won cu vaouu

ouuoumaaouuooao nonsuna mo macadamioo oauouwna

vac uuuuooao uo auwcouuo no ouowuonau cauuoaou
unoccusu tonuauluoz .a .ocqouo can undo cw anouu .acaooo one anon any ad vuuuu uauucwua
ouuocunaouuooao Hanson: mo aucocoaaoo ouuonuua lauuooao Hanson: no aunocoaaoo uuuocuua can can»
and ouuuooao no suwcouuo no nlnuw0uoun .a .c .uah soon» we £uwcouuo no uuuuaaaov Hauuoonm .n .wum

3m sun: I z 3 New :uaaouwmmw Iva—w...-
cuooo ouunoau< I o < I
anon» Hauaucuucoo I mu : vuouu uuuocwmaouuuoao kaw

   

038335

ﬁmﬁw
~55! to (1..

vﬁ' ("I
a: 3.55..

 

“h

FOI(NﬂﬂC§2Llﬂ§50NlN
INIICIHNCJAI.USBIMVLV

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Karnaushenko, u. N. and Kukushkin, A. 8., FUNDAMENTAL'NYYE PROBLEMY MORSKIKH
ELEKTROMAGNITNYKH ISSLEDOVANIY (Fundamental Problems of Marine Blectronagnetic
Investigations), Moscow, IZMIRAN, pp 241-249. 1980.

Zaytsevs, L. A., et a1., ISSLEDOVANIYE KDLBBANIY YESTBSTVENNOGO BLEKTROMAGNIT-
N000 POLYA V DIAPAZONE SVERKMNIZKIKM CHASTOT (OBZOR) (Investigation of Varia-
tions of the Natural Electroeagnetic Field in the Range of Superlow Frequenc-
ies (Review)), Moscow, 60, 1973.

Akindinov, V. V.. Naryshkin, V. I. and Ryazantsev, A. N., RADIOTBKMNIKA I BL!!-
TRONIKA (Radioengineering and Electronics), XXI, No 5, pp 913—944, 1976.

Aleksandrov, M. 8., et 81., PLUKTUATSII ELEKTROMAGNITNOGO POLYA ZEMLI V DIA-
PAZONE SNCh (Fluctuations of the Earth's Electromagnetic Field in the SM?
Range), Moscow, "Nauka," 192, 1972.

Schunsn, W. 0., Z. NAIURIORSCM., 72, No 2, pp 149-154, 1952.

Taconi, 6., PABL. COMP., Dordrecht, pp 239-243, 1974.

Soderberg, E. F., J. 0? GBOPHYS. RES., 74. No 9, pp 2376-2387, 1969.

Bendat, Dzh. and Piraol, A., IZMERENIYE I ANALIZ SLUCHAYNYKH PROTSBSSOV (Meas-
urement and Analysis of Random Processes), Moscow, "Mir,“ 464, 1974.

COPYRIGHT: Institut zennogo nagnetizna, ionoefery i rasprostraneniye radiovoln

(12mm), 1980

S303
CSO: 1865/66

FOR1OFFH13&.USE¢NVLY
[Article from monograph "Problems of Electromagnetic Research at Sea", by 0. V. Naz-
arenko. A. V. Kryukov, B. P. Degtyar'. Ya. K. Zanders and S. V. Zakharov, Institut
zemnogo magnetizu, ionosfery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln, 300 copies]

saurces, are noise. Since the amplitudes of the temporal variations can be cemen-
surable with the intensities of the anomalies subject to study, the methodological

A block diagram of a model of analog apparatus developed for testing the difference
measurements method is shown in Fig. la. The apparatus contains two identical chan-

changes into its circuitry: there was a replacement of operational amplifiers, a
change in the size and type of individual elements, an increase in output. In the

labratory tests of the fabricated amplifiers (with the introduced changes) we ob-

-- measurement range - 10.5, 1.0, 2.0 mV;
-- nominal output voltage (with R")100 ohms) - *5 V;
-- principal error - not greater than 12;

-- level of characteristic noise reduced to input. in band 1 Hz not greater than
).1P.V;
FOI10FFIJA1.USI(MVLY

-- input resistance - 30-50 kilohma;
-- frequency band at 3-db level - 0-18 Hz.

. _- .. ...._—~.

@m- E
El. [SJ-El
smear. ~ +21

 

Fig. 1. Block diagram of apparatus (a) and difference outfit (b) for measuring elec-
tric field. 1) compensator of emf of electrode polarization, 2) calibration unit, 3)

amplifier. k) unit for discriminating difference signal, S) recorder

The unit for discriminating the difference signal is a summing stage based on an
operational amplifier with a high-power output; the transfer constant of the stage
is changed by commutation of the resistors in the feedback circuit.

A diagram of the apparatus for difference measurements of the electric field is
shown in Fig. 1b. It consists of two identical receiving dipoles “1N1 - “252’ spac-
ed at the distance er and towed by a ship. Such an apparatus differs in that dur-
ing movement of the ship the variations of the electric field caused by remote var-
iable sources will be registered on the channel records simultaneously, whereas the
electric field anomalies will be registered with a time shift determined by the dis-
tance and rate of movement of the ship. In the case of identical channels the signal
at the output of the unit for discriminating the difference signal will be free of
temporal variations and characterizes the electric field anomaly.

The choice of the length of the dipoles HR and the distances between them [5r re-
quires special attention because the shape of the resultant curves will be dependent
on their relationship to the extent of the electric field anomaly.

0n the other hand, the length of the dipoles MN is determined also by purely tech-
nical factors, such as the response of the apparatus and the quality of the elec-
trodes. Hhen employing copper nonpolarizing electrodes and the described amplifier
we used dipoles with a length from 20 to 100 m.

The distance between the dipoles is determined by methodological considerations;
its maximum value is limited by the length of the cable used in towing and its min-
imum value is fixed by the mutual influence of the channels during calibration and

compensation of emf of electrode polarization. When carrying out the work this dis-
tance was selected as equal to 100 and 200 m, which ensured a convenient displace-

ment of the electric field anomalies on the channel records.

INJI1OIIIC£§;.lEiE(HVLY
FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(NULY

a

In order to reduce towing noise (the influence of the ship's electric field, vibra-
tion and change in the vertical position of the electrodes) the length of the cable

to the nearest dipole is not less than 3-5 sea depths, taking into account the size
of the ship and the rate of towing. Figures 2-4 show fragments of records obtained
during continuous profiling with the difference apparatus with a length of the di-
poles 50 m. obtained in the regions of the Baltic and Barents Seas. Figure 2 (Gulf
of Riga) shows intensive industrial noise appearing on the channel records and ab-
sent on the signal record, where anomalies of the natural field are virtually ab-
sent. The degree of suppression of the noise of remote sources, which can be char-
acterized by the coefficient

5 . 401 +402

ZAUdif ’.

on the basis of the results of processing of segments of the tapes where electric
field anomalies are absent, is extremely high and 30-80“. It should be noted that
the degree of suppression of the "high-frequency" noise is essentially dependent
on the identity of both the amplitude-frequency and phase-frequency characteristics

of the channels. . .
.W means-re

:.u.. channel 2
l
anusRmV
9 ""' channel 1 ‘

—."—.

 

Fig. 2. Example of suppression of industrial noise of remote sources by difference
apparatus (continuous profiling, Gulf of Riga). ‘

. fpd-’/:;ttr IV
‘5' “m c 3351““

\x c nel 2 l
V min channel 1'\

Mn

Fig. 3. Example of discrimination of electric field anomaly by difference apparatus
under conditions of intensive noise.

Figure 3 shows an example of discrimination and detection of an electric field anom-
aly from the record of a difference signal in the presence of noise exceeding the
useful signal.

5
ma omcu7t use ONLY
FOI:0IIIC1A1.USEIMVLY

An example of the reproducibility of an electric field anomaly is shown in Fig. 6.
The control record was obtained by repeated running of the segment of the profile
each three days. Some discrepancy in fine details can be attributed to the position
error, which is estimated at :20 m.

“V A J
. "HM «WI/\‘M
{rifai'wm L

Fig. lo. Example of reproduction of electric field anomaly (repeated measurement -
after 3 days).

Profile 35

 

Pig. 5. Example of tracing electric field anomaly along several profiles at sea.

Figure 5 shows an example of the tracing of an anomaly along several profiles (only
the channel records are shown; the records were matched for one of the channels).
The different displacement of the record for the other channel is attributable to
the different directions of ship movement along the profile.

Experience has shown that the use of the difference apparatus and the described
model of the apparatus made it possible to discriminate anomalies of the constant
natural field, whose amplitude was 3-5 times less than the amplitude of the noise
of remote sources, that is, for practical purpose carry out measurements under
the conditions under which the use of ordinary electric field apparatus and the

usual instrumentation could not give any positive results.

The experimental studies, carried out in a considerable volume, confirmed the ef-
fectiveness and high yield of geological data from measurements of the electric
field with the difference apparatus. In our opinion, the next tasks in this field
are the testing of multichannel difference apparatuses and the formulation of
practical recomndations on interpretation of the results.

COPYRIGHT: Institut zemnogo magnetizma, ionosfery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln
(11mm), 1980

5303
650: 1865/66

8
FOR OFFICISAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OF'!CIAI.USE1MHLY

UDC 550.38:550.37

INVESTIGASION 0P CONTACT-TYPE PRIMARY DEVICES FOR MEASURING ELECTRIC FIELD IN SEA

Moscow paoaum nonsxnm ammmmmm Issnanovmn in Russian 1980 (signed to
press 25 Jul 80) pp 155-161

[Article from monograph "Problems of Electromagnetic Research at Sea", by M. M.
Bogorodskiy, Institut zemnogo magnetizm, ionoefery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln,
300 copies

[Text] In the field of development of methods and instrumentation for measurements
of the electric field in the sea, carried out in the interest of solution of many
timely problems in geophysics and for practical purposes [1-7], a considerable
number of studies have already been made [2, 8-17]. A reduction in the noise of
amplifiers [18-20] made it possible to broaden the range of interest in electric
phenomena in the sea. The changeover to measurements on short bases [8, 11, 12, 17]
and to more complex methods, such as divergent methods [21, 22), forced researchers
to turn to a search for ways in which to reduce electrode noise [9, ll, 15, 23, 26]
and other imperfections of electrodes and "hydroconductors" [the term was proposed
by V. N. Mitrofanov]. Below we give the results of experimental and theoretical
investigation of the effect exerted on the measurement electrodes and hydroconduc—
tors by temperature, pressure and flow velocity, obtained at the Institute of Ter-
restrial Magnetism, Ionoephere and Radio Have Propagation,and discuss the possibil-
ities of suppressing or taking into account all these noise-forming factors.

1. The effect of temperature on Ag-AgCI electrodes of.the IELAN—IZHIRAN system [25]
was investigated using the circuitry of a nonisothermic diffusion cell of the first

type [26]

_ MC]. paste “(:1 paste
A8 Agct sea water to sea water sea water AsC1-Ag (1)
comparigon electrode ﬁfty-At; ':1 “3'15 ‘1

investigated electrode

The temperatures t1 and t2 were detected by vitrified microthermistors. The invest-
igated electrode initially was exposed at a temperature to and then was rapidly
shifted to another part of the cell; in this case the temperature of the medium
surrounding the electrode changed in a jump. The potential change of the investig-
ated electrode A? was a linear function of both measured temperatures

A? (p) - 294461) + 54463 (2)

59
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE|MVLY

This meant that the boundary between the AgCl packing and sea water has an apprec-
iable temperature response, like many other interphaae boundaries [26]. Due to
the inconstancy of the temperature coefficient, the presence of temperature hys-
teresis in many types of electrodes [27-29] and the presence of an external ac-
tive surface of the electrode (2) the conclusion was drawn in [30] that only the
use of hydroconductors, separating the entire active mass of the electrode from
the influence of the surrounding medium. can substantially lessen their tempera-
ture response in periods less than the thermal inertial time of the electrode.

An investigation of the thermoelectric potentials in salt bridges filled with sea
water [31] was carried out using the circuitry of a nonisothermic diffusion cell
of the second type [26].

 

thermostat sea water sea water sea water thernostat
Ag—AgCl salinity 81 salinity $2 salinity $1 AgCl-Ag (3)
to'20° t1 t2 to-ZO"

with $1 - 36°loo and 82 values from 36°loo to fresh water. With filling of the en-
tire cell (3) with 36°loo water and temperature changes :1, t2 in the range from
a to 35‘ the potential readings were in the range of measurement error, in this
case :3yLv. Other combinations of salinities indicated that if the electrodes
penetrate a more saline hydroconductor, the electrode connected with the warmer
contact of water masses becomes positive. The thermoelectromotive force increases
by approximately 212 with a shift of the interval (t , t2) by 10° in the direc-
tion of high temperatures. In the stipulated interv (t1. t2) the thermoelectro-
motive force increases with an increase in the difference in salinities ($2 - 81).
A generalization [32] of the results in [31] gave an estimate of the thermoelec-
tromotive force for an arbitrary closed thermohaline path in the form

V. (M) --4.71 eo.019[:-2sm] t (é)

where t (in degrees) and S (°/oo) are characteristics of the momentary point of
the path and the asterisk shows that the formula was derived by an approximation
of the data. The nomogram for this evaluation, having an accuracy of 6: and which
is very graphic, made it possible to assert that the hydroconductors, retaining
their concentration along the path [33],to a high degree were subject to noise
from temperature oscillations near their electrometric apertures, moreso than
others allowing diffusion of the components of the surrounding medium into the
hydroconductor cavity. This conclusion was used for practical purposes in creat-
ing a divergent neasurement apparatus [22] operating in Lake Ladoga.

2. The pressure of the medium creates interference during vertical soundings [S],
in measurements at shallow depths [6] and under tidal conditions. An investiga-
tion of the baroresponse of Ag-AgCl electrodes fabricated at IZHIRAN [21] was
carried out using a pressure chamber [36] consisting of two interconnecting
chambers, one of which, containing the electrode to be investigated, was hermetic,
whereas the other, containing the comparison electrode, was nonhermetic. The two
chambers were interconnected by a flexible hose filled with a 3.5! NaCl solution.

The static baroresponse )3 was determined as the ratio of the increment of elec-
trode potential M to the increnent of hydrostatic pressure Ap; the standard
pressure drop was 10 m H20, that is, 1 bar; the temperature changes in the

60
INDI‘OIFICIAJ.IISEI(HVLY
FOIIOFFKJAI-USE¢N‘LY

hermetic chamber were adiabatic. For each electrode we computed the individual
baroresponse‘bt" whose values usually fell in the range from -70 to +lbopcV-bar'1

and the dispersion O’( ﬁn), attaining 180pLV°bsr‘1. For individual electrodes
there were anomalies in the form of a gigantic, up to 2 mV-bar'l, baroresponae and
in the form of unidirectional relaxation [26, p 269] of the electrode potential,
being restored with the same sign after the removal of pressure. The determination
of baroresponse can be used in sorting the electrodes because electrodes with
anomalous baroresponae were always defective.

For the purpose of increasing response and reproducibility of measurements it was
proposed in [35] that electrodes immersed in an electrolyte be subjected to vibra-
tion and a vacuum with subsequent exposure in the same electrolyte at atmospheric
pressure. It was demonstrated in [21, 35] that as_a result of such processing the
mean baroresponse of a consignment of electrodes‘B is about ~6.S;lV-bar'1 with s
dispersion of this value of about 0.6'LV'blf'1, which reduces by more than an or-
der of magnitude the estimate of the error introduced by static baroresponae. This
is particularly important in the operation of complex, such as divergent, elec-
trode systems [22].

We discovered the dynamic baroresponae )’, introduced as the ratio of the incre-
ment of electrode potential to the increment of the rate of pressure change, in
an experimental evaluation of the errors caused in the shallow water zone by the
influence exerted on the measurement electrodes by pressure changes [36]. Tests
were made of four pairs of Ag-AgCl electrodes of the IELAN-IZHIRAN system taken
from one consignment and in pairs isolated from other environmental effects. One
pair was first processed in order to reduce the baroresponae [35]; the bottom
pressure values were estimated from the shape of the wave. The effect of dynamic
baroresponae exceeded by an order of magnitude the anticipated unwanted extraneous
interference from static baroresponae for unprocessed pairs being 150-300, and
for a processed pair about 60’LV-bar' vsec.

In the case of collapsing crests the effect was 4-5 times greater.

An estimate of the contribution of dynamic baroresponae for the unprocessed elec-
trodes used in the surface layers of a deep sea with waves of class V—VI is, taking
the cited data into account, a value of about lOO’LV, that is, is of the same or-

der of magnitude as the contribution of static baroresponae. In the case of
processed electrodes [35] the estimate of the contribution of dynamic baroresponae

under deep sea conditions and the same class of waves was 3-4 times greater than
the contributions of static baroresponae. This raises the question of the need for
taking into account and seeking ways to compensate the baroresponae of electrodes.

3. The active surface of the electrodes is protected against the novement of the
electrolyte in order to avoid the interference associated with this [37] by the use
of housings of one kind or another [11] or hydroconductors are employed [8, 11, la,
17. 22]. Electrokinetic phenomena arise with flow around such housings or during
filtering of the electrolyte in the medium through their porous elements [36, 38].

Source [39] gives estimates of the tribopolsrization potentials i’rib for an elec-
trode with a porous housing [5, 38] in the form of an elongated ellipsoid of revo-

lution (/02 cm, L - 12 cm).

61
POI 0FFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR¢OI'IC1AI.IIIE(MVLY

ytrib ' Kr! JEN-33 K15 7-5‘10'5n'58ec20hm'1 (5)

where z is the electrokinetic potential of the housing material relative to a
median electrolyte with the conductivity 3', Use is the velocity of longitudinal
flow around the housing. The tribopolarization potential is formed due to electro-
kinetic filtration currents arising as a result of the hydrodynamic difference in
pressures on the elements of the porous housing.

The estimate of yzrib for electrodes with a continuous housing of the same config-
uration having electrometric apertures in the intake part has the form [39]:

spun, . K21 4-1.0}.3/7; x252.10-6n-20/73ec13/7om-1 (6)

In this case the tribopolarisation potential is formed by the spreading—Out currents
of a convective surface current caused by flow of the surrounding medium around the
electrode housing.

For the practical use of the estimates (5), (6) we measured the electrokinetic
potentials of a number of construction materials in solutions of the sea water

type. Some results of these measurements, supplementing the data in [39], are given
below. The estimate (5) which we made coincides satisfactorily with observations in
[38]. A comparison of the estimates (5) and (6) shows that the rejection of a porous
housing in favor of a continuous (solid) housing or in favor of a channelized hydro-
conductor reduces the level of electrokinetic interference by 1 1/2-2 orders of
magnitude. The tribopolarization can be reduced further by means of optimum
positioning of the electrometric aperture on the electrode housing or the hydro-
conductor line and also by means of fabricating the housings from an optimum mat-
erial (ebonite and polypropylene being used for this purpose).

Name of material 4 (mV) with salinity of
0.58°/oo 1. 34°Ioo b.08°/oo 12.20/00 36.2°/oo

poly-é-methyl-pentane-l -66.2 -38.4 -28.3 -21.6 -1b.2
polycarbonate -l9.2 ~13.6 -9.8 -8.3 -6.6
industrial polypropylene -5.3 -3.0 -2.3 -3.1 -2.3
ebonite (shavings) from -12.5 -19.9 -16.9 -12.4 -8.0

to +2.1 +3.5 +2.9 +2.1 +0.6
mean temperature 19.7° 18.6° 17.2' 15.3° 16.8°

6. In conclusion we give a table of estimates

Factors Evaluation of noise immunity
* Electrodes Rydroconductors
temperature 20 - 200p- V/degree * V d .0
salinity z 500*‘1'**,.v/°/oo 0’07 5“ I ”r“ ’°°
pressure:
a tatic 6440*“?4, V- bar‘l
dynamic 60-300"* uV-bar‘leec
tribopolsrizstion po housing
with flow velocity 6*$22:26***“V (0.02-0.11)****+»v
u... - 5 m-sec-l solid housing * (0.06-0.45)*** pv
(0. 02-0. 11) p. v: *1"
(0.06-0.b5);LV

****) $236°loog ***) S=12°/oo; **) 5:12-360/00; *) Pb-PbCl from [9].

62
FOI‘OFFHJMI.USI(MNLY
1.

2.

3.

[On

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 IBLIOGRAPBY

Van'yan, L. I... Svetov, B. S. and Sochel'nikov, V. V., MORSKOYB MAGNITOTBLLUR—
ICHBSKOYE ZONDIROVANIYE (Magnetotalluric Sounding at Sea), Moscow, pp 3-18,
1978.

Akindinov, V. V., et 81., RADIOTEKHN. I ELBKTRONIKA (Radio Engineering and Elec-
tronics), 21, No 5, pp 913-9104, 1976.

Para-snow, A. N., et a1., SWE HETODY I SREDSTVA IMBMIYA GIDRDPIZ-
ICHBSKIKH PARAMETROV OKEANA (Modern Methods and Apparatus for Measuring Hydro-
physical Parameters in the Ocean), Kiev, 1979.

Zhukov, R. P., et 81., 8181'“, PRIBORY I USTROYSTVA PODVOMOGO POISKA (Systems,
Instrunents and Devices for Underwater Search), Voyenizdat, 1972.

Demenitskaya. R. M. and Gorodnitskiy, A. M., TRUDY NIIGA (Transactions of the
Scientific Research Institute of Civil Aviation), 181, 1979.

Abranova, L. M., et a1., GMMIZM I AERONOMIYA (Geomagnetisn and Aeronony),
11., No 6, 1121, 1971..

Trofinov, I. L., Shneyer, V. S. and Korotayev, S. M., GWIZM I ABRONOMIYA,
18, No 2, pp 319-323, 1978.

Pilloux, J. H., PHIS. EARTH PLAN. INTER., 7, pp 323-338, 1973.

Petio, Zh. and Mora, P., VTsP [Expansion Unknown], Translation 8-31828, Moscow,
1979.

Mitrofanov, V. N. and Sevast'yanov, E. 8., VOLNOVYYE PROTSESSY V mmvmi
OBLASTYAKH OKEANA (Wave Processes in Marginal Regions of the Ocean), Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, pp 122-131, 1979.

Klekovkin, V. A., TRUDY VNIIM (Transactions of the All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of MetrolOSY). No 186(246), pp 26-29, 1978.

bopatnikov, V. 1., HORSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSLBDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophys-
ical Investigations), No 1(80), pp 117-120, 1978.

Tarbeyev, Yu. V., et a1., SOVRBMBNHYYE PROBLEMY METROIDGII (Modern Problems
in Metrology), Moscow, pp 14-15, 1976.

Tarbeyev, Yu. V., et a1., SOVREMENNYYB PROBLM MBTROLOGII, Moscow, pp 75-76,
1976.

Tarbeyev, Yu. V., et a1., TRUDY VNIIM, No 214(274), pp 53-56, 1977.

Tarbeyev, Yu. V., et 81., TRUDY VNIIM, No 214(274), pp 61-66, 1977.

MOWMONLY
17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

35.

5'03 OFFICIAL 158 ONLY

Novysh, V. V., GEOFIZICHBSKAYA APPARATURA (Geophysical Apparatus), No 67,
pp 17-23, 1979.

Antonov, S. Ya. and Botin, Yu. 17., WW! PROBLEMY METROLOGII, Moscow,
pp 10-11, 1976.

Ponomarev, A. N., 50mm PROBLEMY DETROICGII, No 6, pp 9-10, 1977.

Selyatitskiy, V. G. and Yeremahin, V. F., TRUDY VNIDI, No 186(246), pp 52-58,
1978.

Bogorodekiy, M. M., FUNDAMENTAL'NYYE PROBLBMY MORSRIKB ELEICI'ROMAGNITNYKH IS-
SLEDOVANIY (Fundamental Problems in Marine Electromagnetic Research), Moscow,
pp 78-91, 1979.

Semenov, V. Yu. and Fedoryuk, Yu. V., GmMAGNETIZM I AERONOMIYA, 20, No 3, pp
566-569, 1980.

Antonov, 8. Ya., et al., SOVRDENNYYB noan METROLOGII, Moscow, 11, 1976.
'l‘yagay, V. A., BLEKTROKHIMIYA (Electrochemiatry). 10, No‘ 1, pp 3-24, 1974.

Novysh, V. V. and Bogorodskiy, M. M., mnsxm WITH“! POLYA (Sea
Electromagnetic Fields), Moscow, pp 26-36, 1976.

Ty‘l‘tel, “0 Jo v0 and “0111.. G. La, TEARS. PKWY 8°C.. (.5, NO 316, Pp 411"
423, 1949; 48, No 357, pp 893-904, 1952; 50, No 382, pp 1056-1066, 1954.

Turlygin, S. Ya. and Korneva, L. A., TRUDY MCI AN SSSR (Transactions of the
Marine Hydrophyaical Institute USSR Academy of Sciences), 7, pp 3-14, 1956.

Solov'yev, L. 6., DAN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), 138,
No 2, pp 445-447, 1961.

Beyts, R. G., METODY IZMERENIYA V BLBKTNKBIMII (Measurement Methods in Elec-
trochemistry), Vol 1, Moscow, p 45, 1977.

Bogorodekiy, M. M., MORSKIYE ELEICIRGMNITNYYE POLYA, Moscow, pp 37-50, 1976.

Bogorodskiy, M. M. and Novysh, V. V., MORSKIYE BLEKTROMAGNITNYYB POLYA, Moscow,
pp 56-70, 1976.

Bogorodskiy, M. m, uonsxm: ammcmmm 90mm, Moscow, pp 71-81, 1976.
Koppel, H. L. and Gealt, E. A., ADI. INSTRUM., 27, p 3, 1972, 719 (1-3).

Novyeh, V. V., Bogorodekiy, M. M. and Coryachev, Yu. A., AUTHOR'S CERTIFICATE,
USSR, No 693213, K1. COIN, 1979.

Bogorodskiy, M. M., AUTHOR'S CERTIFICATE, USSR, No 693215, K1. GOIN, 1979.

61:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
36.

37.

38.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bogorodskly, M. IL, FUNDAMENTAL'NYYE PROBLEHY HORSKIKH ELBKTROHAGNITNYKH IS-

SLEDOVANIY (Fundamental Problems of Sea Electromagnetic Research), Moscow, pp
70-77, 1980.

Kistyakovskiy, V. A., ELEKTROKHIHICHBSKIYE REAKTSII I ELEKTRODNYYB POTENTSIALY

NEKOTORYIGI HE'I‘ALLOV (Electrochemical Reactions and Electrode Potentials of
Some Metals), St. Peterburg, p 36, 1910.

Aleksandrov, V. V. and Zaytsev, L. V., IZHENCHIVOST' GIDROFIZICHESKIKH FOLEY V
OZERAKH (Variability of Hydrophyaical Fields in Lakes), Leningrad, pp 215-218,
1978.

Bogorodskiy, H. H., DINAMIKA KOSHICRESKOY PLAN (Dynamics of Space Plasma),
Moscow, IZHIRAN, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Institut zennogo magnetizna. ionosfery i rasprostraneniya radiovoln

5303
C50:

(IZHIRAN) , 1980

1865/66

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OF1HC1A1.IEIE(NNLN

TERRESTRIAL GEOPHYSICS

UDC 550.831

ARTICLES 0N THEORX AND METHODS OF INTERPRETATION OF GRAVIMAGNETIC FIELDS

Kiev TEORIYA I METODIKA INTERPRETATSII GRAVIMAGNITNYKR FOLEY in Russian 1981
(signed to press 23 Jun 81) DP 2, 397-412

[Annotation and abstracts from collection of articles "Theory and Methods for the
Interpretation of Gravimagnetic Fields", edited by V. I. Starostenko and V. N.
Strakhov (responsible editors), S. s. Krasovskiy (deputy responsible editor), V. G.
Kozlenko, L. I. Koyfman and V. N. Nikolenko, Izdatel'stvo ”Naukova dumka", 700
copies, 412 pages]

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles consists of reports presented at the
All-Union Seminar on the Interpretation of Gravitational Anomalies (Kiev, 1980).
These materials characterize the level attained by Soviet gravimetry both in the
field of theory and methods for interpreting such fields and in the solution of
practical problems in the range from constructing density models of the planets to
the interpretation of gravity observations in underground mines. The reports also
deal with ways to bring about further development of theoretical and applied re-
search in the field of gravimetry, including the principles of combining gravi-
metry v'th data obtained by other methods. The collection is intended for a broad
range of geophysicists and geologists engaged in the study of the earth's deep
structure, as well as college students specializing in the field of geology.

Abstracts

UDC 550.83
SOME TIMELY PROBLEMS IN THEORY OF INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITY ANOMALIES

[Abstract of article by Strakhov, V. N.]

[Text] Some timely problems in the theory of interpretation of gravity anomalies
are considered.

000 550.83

NONLINEAR METHOD FOR ANALYTICAL CONTINUATION 0F TWO-DIMENSIONAL FIELDS AND ITS USE
IN THE INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITY AND MAGNETIC ANOMALIES

[Abstract of article by Angelova, Ye. 1.]

[Text] The article examines the theoretical principles of a nonlinear method for
the analytical continuation of two-dimensional potential fields and also problems

66
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
relating to its practical realization. In model and practical examples the author
demonstrates the possibility of using the method in the interpretation of anomal-
ous fields. Figures 6, references 7.

"DC 550.831.016

SEPARATION OF COMPLEX GRAVITY ANOMALIES

[Abstract of article by Antonov, Yu. V.]

[Text] A study was made of the problems involved in the separation of complex ,
anomalies on a straight line running between anomalous bodies. In particular, the

author examines the methods and technology for the separation of a couple): anomaly

from two bodies situated on different sides of a vertical axis and also from bodies
situated one above the other. The proposed numerical schemes were tested in model

and practical examples. Satisfactory results were obtained. ﬁgures 6, tables ’0,
references 12.

UDC 550.838
DIRECT AND INVERSB PROBLEMS IN ARTIFICIAL MAGNETIZATION METHOD

[Abstract of article by Voskoboynikov, C. H., Gurevich, Yu. 11., Zbykovskaya. T. A.,
Hartyshko, P. 8., Prutkin, I. L. and Tsyrul'skiy, A. v.]

[Text] Mathematical methods. for solving direct and inverse problems in the ar-
tificial magnetization method are presented. Figures 5, references 17.

UDC 550. 344+550.834

CONDITIONS OF UNIQUENESS 0F INVERSIW 0P SEISMIC TRAVEL TIME CURVES
[Abstract of article by Geyko, V. 3.]

[Text] It is demonstrated that if the travel-time curve of a refracted wave

from a surface source is known and if at least one of the following conditions is
satisfied: a) the travel time Curve of a wave reflected from a horizontal discon-
tinuity lying below the deepest waveguide is known; b) the travel-time curve from
a deep source situated below the deepest waveguide is known; c) the measure H(u) -
mes (an; 0, v'}_(z)_;u} is analytical in some segment [c,d], where 0<c<¢<co, c
03“, Me: n) - an, an is the depth of the lower end of the deepest waveguide, and

there is, in the interval [c, 00 ] such an analytical function A(u) that with
us [c,oc] Mu): H(u), in all these cases there is unambiguous determination of:

1) velocity v(z) outside the waveguides: 2) thg measure Ilk(u) - mes{z:zel.k, v'1
(2)2 u} for each Lk of the waveguide Lk - k - l, n. References 7.

61
FOR OFFIOA USE ONLY
IIIICMﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NVLY

UDC 550.83
AUTOMATED SYSTEM FOR INTERPRETING GRAVIMETRIC DATA

[Abstract of article by Col'dshmidt; V. I.,.Kuz'min, Yu. I. and Shabaldin, V. “.1

[Text] The article describes the first stage of an automated system devised for
interpretation of gravimetric data realized using an electronic computer of the
Yes type (principal programming language - FORTRAN-IV) which it is intended will
be a subsystem of a more general system for use in ore geophysics (ASOM RC).
Figures 5. references 8.

UDC 550.3

INFORMATION CONTENT OF GEOPHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS
[Abstract of article by Gol'tsman, F. M.]

[Text] Formulas are proposed for determining the informational content of geophys-

ical experiments. There is a discussion of the dependence of the information con-
tent on the decision rules and different transformations of probability tables.

Tables 2, references 3.

UDC 550.83

CONSTRUCTION OF SECTIONS OF MAGNETICALLY ACTIVE SOURCES USING A COMPLEX OF
OBSERVATIONS

[Abstract of article by Kalinina, T. 3.]

[Text] A statistical method is proposed for determining the parameters of mag-
netically active (density) sources from a complex of observed potential fields and
their derivatives. Also examined is a method for investigating the resolution and
effective depth of the method. Examples are given illustrating the desirability of
a complex interpretation in the construction of sections of magnetized and density
sources. Figures 1, tables 1, references 2.

UDC 550.83

STATISTICAL METHODS FOR CONSTRUCTING DENSITY SECTIONS OF KNOWN GEOMBTRY FROM
GRAVITY ANOMALIES UNDER NOISE CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Karatayev, G. 1.]

[Text] A study was made of the problems involved in determining the densities of
disturbing bodies of an arbitrary but known configuration on the basis of the
anomalous gravity field complicated by different kinds of noise. The proposed
methods can be used in obtaining effective evaluations of densities of disturbing
masses in a deep geological section. References 10.

FIN!(MWWC1AI.USE(NULY
FOI:OFIIC1AI.IEHECNNLY

UDC 550.831
EQUIVALENT REDISTRIBUTIONS IN CLASS 0? DENSITY DISCONTINUITIES
[Abstract of article by Korbunov, A. 1.]

[Text] The article gives integral representations of optimality classes of den-
sity discontinuities whose parameterization is accomplished by the density drop

at the contact, a zero approximation (asymptote) and evaluation of the reliability
of construction of the zero approximation. A computation scheme is developed for

constructing the elements corresponding to the observed field from the indicated
classes. Examples of the computations are given. Figures 10, references 6.

UDC 550.831.01

ANALYTICAL REPRESENTATION OF INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL FIELDS 0F ATTRACTION OF BODIES
WITH VARIABLE DENSITY BOUNDED BY FIRST-ORDER SURFACES

[Abstract of article by Kravtsov, c. 6.]

[Text] The author discusses the results of a rigorous solution of the internal
and external direct problem of Newtonian potential for an arbitrary polyhedron with

a density of masses varying linearly in an arbitrary direction. An analytical cor-
relation is established between the Laplacian of potential and the Gauss integral

for the solid angle of visibility of the polyhedron surface. Similar expressions
giving the relationship of the third partial derivatives of gravitational potential
are derived and cited. Figures 2; references 3.

UDC 550.831
INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITY ANONALIES STIPULATED IN LIMITED REGION

[Abstract of article by Kudrya, A. V.]

[Text] A numerical Scheme is proposed for the interpretation of gravity anom-
alies from three-dimensional bodies stipulated in a limited observation area. Con-

ditions are derived whose satisfaction ensures a stable determination of the mass-
geometry parameters of the body. References 13.

UDC $50.38

ONE EVALUATION OF ACCURACY IN SOLVING SYSTEMS OF LINEAR ALCEBRAIC EQUATIONS

[Abstract of article by Levenkor, Ya. 8.]

[Text] The relative character of the concept of a poorly stipulated system is
demonstrated in the example of solution of systems of linear algebraic equations
with Gilbert matrices. A lower estimate of the number of precise figures in the

69
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOB1OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

components of the solution is obtained theoretically regardless of the employed
method and with the most general assumptions concerning the nature of rounding-
off errors. The determined evaluation was tested in solving systems with square
matrices and its effectiveness is thereby confirmed. Table 1, references a.

UDC 550.83.016:552.33/57l.56/

METHODS AND ALGORITHMS FOR EVALUATING PARAMETERS OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL GEOLOGICAL
BODIES FROM MAGNETIC ANOMALIES

[Abstract of article by Loyter, P. P. and Yushmanov, V. V.]

[Text] A study was made of the problem of choosing a model for complex geolog-

ical bodies in the initial stages of interpretation. 0n the basis of magnetometric
data work was done for determining the deep structure of the Bilibinskiy magma com-
plex of a central type (Aldan shield). Figures 2. references A.

UDC 550.83

HARMONIC DENSITIES AND INVERSE POTENTIAL PROBLEM

[Abstract of article by Hargulis. A. 8.]

[Text] The role of harmonic densities in the inverse potential problem is in-
vestigated. The necessary and adequate condition for solubility of a problem in

the class L; was obtained, as well as a theorem of smoothness of normal solutions.
An exhaustive characterization of densities not giving rise to an external poten-

tial is given. An integral representation of the operator of orthogonal projection
of the space L; onto the subspace of harmonic densities is presented, as well as a
method for solving the V. N. Strakhov "sweeping out" problem. References: 13.

UDC 550.831.01

REGULARIZING ALGORITHMS FOR TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL INVERSE PROBLEMS IN
GRAVIMETRY WITH USE OF A 8?? SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by Helikhov, V. R.. Rambkhatla, c. S. S. and Bulychev, A. A.]

[Text] This is a discussion of the results of a methodological testing of a new

high-speed apparatus used in the method for solution of linear inverse problems
in gravimetric prospecting. References 6.

UDC 550.831:553.981.06.012:519.2

USE OF REGULARIZATION IN INTERPRETATION OF GRAVIMETRIC PROSPECTING DATA FOR
PURPOSE 0? DIRECT SEARCH FOR PETROLEUM AND GAS DEPOSITS

[Abstract of article by Hudretsova, Ye. A., Komarova, G. H. and Pilatov, V. 6.]

[Text] The article gives algorithms and programs for the interpretation of grav-
imetric prospecting data on the basis of use of the regularization method for the

70
FINICNWNCIAI.USE(NVLV
FOI1OFFMJA1.USE(NNLY

purpose of direct search for petroleum and gas deposits under the VGF, Vybor and
HI? programs. The algorithm for the HIP program is presented in detail and it was
tested in model and practical examples. Figures 3, references 17.

UDC 550.88

EVALUATION OF RATE OF CONVERGENCE OF ONE CLASS OF ITERATION METHODS USED IN
SOLVINC LINEAR INCORRECT PROBLEMS IN GEOPHYSICS

[Abstract of article by Oganesyan, S. M.]

[Text] The results of an investigation of the convergence and rate of converg-

ence of one class of iteration.methods are given. By means of construction of the
nonlinear operator c it is shown that for the iteration method xn+1 - an there is
a linear or superlinear rate of convergence. The form of the construction of the
linear operator C generalizes the method of modified monotonic images. References
23.

UDC 550.83
PSBUDOSOLUTIONS AND THEIR USE IN INCORRECT GRAVIMETRIC PROBLEMS
[Abstract of article by Oganesyan, S. M. and Stnrostenko, V. 1.]

[Text] The author gives some new properties of an element introduced by.V. A.

Horozov for minimizing the generalized A. N. Tikhonov parametric functional and
L - the pseudosolution. References 5.

upc 550.83l

REALIZATION OF THE TRIAL-AND-ERROR METHOD WITH USE OF AN INTERACTIVE TERMINAL WITH
A GRAPHIC DISPLAY IN THE INTERPRETATION OF MAGNETIC AND GRAVITATIONAL OBSERVATIONS

[Abstract of article by Pashko, V. F., Snpozhnikov, V. c. and Heshkova, 0. P.]

[Text] Realizations of the trial-and—error method with use of interactive ter-

minals with a graphic display are described and the effectiveness of use of such
realizations is examined in the example of the program of the C66 Company in vari-

ants modified by the authors in the solution of test and practical problems. Var-
ious aspects of further improvement of such systems are discussed. Figures 5, ref-
erences 28.

UDC 550.83

ECONOMICAL SOLUTIONS OF SOME CLASSICAL DIRECT PROBLEMS IN GRAVIMETRY AND
MAGNETOMETRY

[Abstract of article by Strakhov, V. N. and Lapina, M. 1.]

[Text] Possible methods for economical computations for the solution of direct
problems in gravimetry are considered. Tables 9, referentes 16.

71
FOR10FFMJAI.USE(NNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

UDC 550.831

METHOD AND RESULTS OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL MODELING OF THE GALESHCHINSKOYE IRON ORE
DEPOSIT (KREHENCHUG) ACCORDING TO GRAVIHETRIC DATA

[Abstract of article by Andreyev, V. 1., Koyfman. L. I. and Korenevich, K. A.]

[Text] An optimization of three-dimensional iteration density modeling of the
Galeshchinskoye iron ore deposit was carried out in the first approximation using
an electronic computer. The results clearly define the geometry of the structure

and the possibility of a predictive basis for the deposit. The employed method
it recommended in the solution of such problems for complex geological structures.
Figures 2, tables 1, references 8.

UDC 550.31:551.l

GRAVITATIONAL MODEL 0? DEEP GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE ALONG PROFILE NARRAEA-POYLY
(LESSER CAUCASUS)

[Abstract of article by Babadzhanyan, A. C. and Oganesyan, L. 3.]

[Text] A new variant of a gravitational model of the upper part of the earth's
crust along the profile Harkara-Poyly has been constructed. Positions were deter-
mined more precisely and there is a quantitative characterization of fault zones
detected by "Zemlya" stations and the results of geological mapping. A decrease
in the number of blocks with depth was established. Pigures 2, references 17.

UDC 550.834.32:83l.072

DATA PROM MODELING OF THE HAVE AND GRAVITATIONAL FIELDS ALONG DEEP SEISMIC
SOUNDING PROFILES IN DNEPR GRABEN

[Abstract of article by Baranova, Ye. P. and Kozlenko, V. 6.]

[Text] The article examines the results of choice of velocity models satisfying the
wave fields observed along deep seismic sounding profiles in the nortnweatern part
of the Dnepr-Donetsk depression and also computations of gravity field anomalies
along it. For the first time under the conditions of the Dnepr-Donetsk depression
it was possible to discriminate local high-velocity bodies situated in the axial
part of the aulacogen, which confirms its rift nature. The structure of the region-
al velocity model of the earth‘s crust is determined rather unstably. In order to
increase the effectiveness of seismic modeling it is necessary to automate the
trial-and-error testing method and also to develop principles for optimizing the
solution under conditions of incomplete information on the wave field. Figures 1,
references 9.

72
ltﬂl(nﬂﬂC1A1.U§E(ﬂVLY
INJR‘OITICJAI.IENE(NQLY

UDC 550.83:550.36:551.24

DENSITY MODELS OF TECTONOSPHERE 0F CONTINENTAL REGIONS UITN DIFFERENT ENDOGENOUS
REGINES

[Abstract of article by Bur'yanov, V. 8., Gordiyenko, V. V., Pavlenkova, N. I.
and Yurov, Yu. 6.]

[Text] The gravitational field along the two profiles Vorkuta-Black Sea

and St. Tropes-Brest, intersecting all the presently known varieties of regions
with individual endogenous regimes of the continental type.was studied. A "norm"
was introduced; this is equal to the difference in the effect of the crust (whose
density was assumed to be negative relative to the mantle) and the intensity of

the Bouguer anomaly observed in the region. It was established that within the lim-
its of the East European platform there are no mantle anomalies which are reliably
discriminated with the attained accuracy in computations (15-20 mgal). In active

regions there are extremely diversified mantle disturbances with an intensity of
50-200 mgal. Figures 2, references 8.

UDC 550.831:551.261I26/

CHOICE OF REDUCTION FUNCTION IN INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITY ANOHALIES IN OCEAN
BY TRIAL-AND-ERROR METHOD

[Abstract of article by Bur'yanov, V. 3., Karabovich, s. V., Rusakov, 0. H. and
Solov'yev, V. D.]

[Text] In the interpretation of gravity anomalies of structures on the ocean

floor by the trial-and-error method the authors propose that use be made of a re-
duction functiontofa normalized section of the mature oceanic crust of an abyssal

basin, based on genetic considerations. Allowance for its gravitational effect not
only increases the reliability of the determined density discontinuities in the
earth's crust, but also makes it possible to detect the gravitational effect caus-
ed by density inhomogeneities of the upper mantle. Figures 2, references 10.

UDC 550.931

DETECTION OF PATTERNS OF DENSITY MODELS OF DEEP STRUCTURES ALONG BEREGOVO-CHERNIGOV
PROFILE

[Abstract of article by Geyko, V. 8., Koyfnan, L. 1., Korenevich, K. A., Kupri-
ycnko, P. Ys., Krasovskiy. S. 3., Livanova, L. P. and Tsvetkova, T. A.)

lText} 0n the basis of data collected on the distribution of velocities it was
possible to make a precise determination of the seismic section within the limits
of the considered profile. All present-day geological, geophysical and petrolog-
ical data fit in well in the quantitatively consistent seismic and density models.
Figures 2, references 23.

73
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI1DFFMJAI.USE(MULY

UDC 550.831:550.836

MODELS OF MEDIUM IN MULTISIDED INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITAIIONAL FIELD AND SEISMIC
OBSERVATIONS

[Abstract of article by Golizdra, 6. Ya.]

[Text] Three types of medium models S, U and M are introduced by the author for a
multisiden interpretation of the gravity field and seismic observations. The re-

sults of an independent interpretation of two methods are summed and made consis-
tent in model S. All the parameters of the density and velocity models coincide in
the U model. Model H, of an intermediate type, can be used. The construction of
models of the medium is accomplished by the trial-and-error method. The formulation
of problems in multisided interpretation is dependent on the type of model of the
medium. References 17.

UDC 550.831

COMPUTER COMPUTATION OF FIELD IN INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITY OBSERVATIONS IN
UNDERGROUND MINES

[Abstract of article by Golizdra, 6. Ya., Plishko, I. V.. Soldatenko, V. P. and
Tatarinova, 1. A.]

[Text] The gravity field is found within three— and two-dimensional masses by
numerical integration of expressions reduced to a single integral. The peculiar-
ities of the integrands are liquidated by discriminating the A-neighborhood of the
computation point. Algorithms were developed and FORTRAN was used in preparing
programs for computers of the Yes type: "Poligon," "Piramida." "Liniya" and other
programs. References 2.

UDC 550.36:550.83

DEEP HEAT AND GRAVITY ANOMALIES

[Abstract of article by Cordiyenko, V. V.]

[Text] The author examines three variants of change in the density of crustal
rocks and the earth's mantle during heating: before attaining critical stresses,
after attaining them, with exceeding the temperature of partial melting. Examples
of gravity anomalies in tectonically active regions associated with temperature
change of density are cited and it is shown that they coincide well with the dis—
crepancy in observed fields and the gravitational effects of the crust. References
15.

FOR‘0'FMJA1.USE(NNLY
ETHICNWWCJAI.USE(NNLY

UDC 550.312.836

POSSIBLE HETEROGENEITY 0P PLANETARY GEOPOTENTIAL ANOHALIES

[Abstract of article by Deynenko, Yu. P. and Koalenko. V. 6.]

[Text 0n the basis of data on density and velocity inhomogeneities situated in the
earth 3 deep layers it is postulated that planetary anomalies of the gravity field

have an interference character, that is, are caused by a combining of the effects
of anomalous masses situated at different depths. Figures 1. references 2.

UDC 550.83l:553/b70.324/

ROLE AND PLACE OF GRAVIHETRY IN STUDY OF DEEP STRUCTURE OF VORDNEZHSKIY CRYSTALLINE
COMPLEX AND SEARCH FOR DIFFERENT MINERALS

[Abstract of article by Zhavoronkin, I. A., Vasserman, I. s. and Nadezhda, L. I.]

[Text] A study was made of the problems involved in use of results of interpretation

of gravity anomalies for investigating the regional deep structure of the Voronezh-
skiy crystalline complex and the search for different minerals in it. There was
found to be a high effectiveness in use of gravitational prospecting in combination
with other geophysical methods in the deep geological mapping of a region covered

by sediments, study of the structure of iron ore deposits, search for bauxites and
mapping of potentially nickel-bearing intrusions of basic and ultrabasic composi-
tions. Figures 4, references 9.

UDC 550.838:518.5

INTERPRETATION OF GRAVITATIONAL AND MAGNETIC ANOHALIBS OF THE ZVIZDAL'-ZALESSKAYA
ZONE

[Abstract of article by Zeygel'man, H. 5.]

[Text] The method and the principal procedures used in the interpretation of gravi-

tational and magnetic anomalies over a complex of basic rocks, which in the geolog-
ical literature is known as the Zvizdal'-Zalesskiy dike, are examined. The prin-
cipal results of the interpretation are given. These substantially change the pre-
vailing concepts concerning the deep structure of the complex. Figures 2, refer-
ences 7.

UDC 550.83:551.16/15

FORMALIZED MODELS OF DISTRIBUTION OF MASS AND HEAT AND GLOBAL SMARIES OF PHYSICAL
FIELDS 1N GEODYNANICS AND HETALLOGENY

[Abstract of article by Klushin, I. 6.]

[Textl Some problems in the interpretation of geophysical data are considered.
taking into account changes of model parameters with time. An approach is given

75
roe 0mm]. use on“
FOI(NHNCJAI.USE(NNLY

for the separation of inhomogeneities in the upper mantle into components of a
different nature. A study was made of the theoretical and practical aspects of

the redistribution and accumulation of asthenospheric fluids, and also problems
involved in the processing of geophysical data in a study of deep structures.
References 27.

UDC 550.831

VALUES AND INTERRELATIONSHIP OP COEFFICIENTS OF LINEAR DEPENDENCE BETWEEN DENSITY
AND VELOCITY 0P LONGITUDINAL HAVES FOR SEIIMENTARY AND CRYSTALLINE ROCKS

[Abstract of article by Krasovskiy, S. S. and Geysherik, G. M.)

[Text] For sedimentary and crystalline rocks there is a distinct correlation of

the coefficients a and b in the dependence P - a + by , which can be employed in
the introduction of corrections for the composition cg rocks and the peculiarit—
ies of regions. Figures 2, references 6.

UDC 550.83.012

OBJECT BASIS FOR MULTISIDED INTERPRETATION OF GEOLOGICAL-GEOPHYSICAL DATA

[Abstract of article by Malyshev. Yu. P. and Kulyndyshev, V. A.]

[Text] Conclusions are drawn concernin the decisive role of geophysical ob ects
in solution of problems in the multisi ed interpretation of geological-gasp ysical

data. The principles are formulated and a theoretical basis for multisided inter-
pretation is outlined. Figures 6, references 18.

UDC 550.312

REPRESENTATION OP DENSITY OP EARTH'S LAYERS BY SERIES OF BIORTHOGONAL SYSTEMS OF
POLYNOMIALS

[Abstract of article by Meshcheryakov, G. A. and Eye, M. M.)

[Text] A study was made of construction of the approximate distributions
of the density of the earth's layers by means of series in biorthogonal systems

of polynomials. Use is made of information on the gravitational field and also
the results of seismic study of the planet. References 10.

UDC 523

SOME PROBLEMS IN INTERPRETATION OF THE EARTH'S CRANITY FIELD IN ITS COMPARATIVE
PIANETOLOCY ASPECT

[Abstract of article by Meshcheryakov, G. A., Tserklevich. A. L., Deyneka, Yu. P.
and Zazulynk, P. M.]

[Text] A study was made of the problems involved in interpretation of planetary
anomalies of the Earth, Hats and the Moon with regard to isostatic state of the

76
FOI‘OFFKJM1.USE(NNLY
PORiOFFIClAL USIZ¢NVLY

crust and the distribution of density inhomogeneities in the mantle of the planet.
Differences in elastic stresses caused by anomalous planetary layers are found and
they are interpreted. The contribution of topographic and compensatory masses in
undulations of the geoid, areoid and selenoid is evaluated. Computations were made
of the depths of the centers of mass of density inhomogeneities and estimates of
the lateral differences in density near the top and bottom of the planet's upper
mantle are given. Tables 2, references 16.

000 550.831.01

DISPERSION OF EFFECTIVE AND MEAN DENSITIES 0P INHOHDGENEOUS LAYERED MEDIA
[Abstract of article by Novoselitskiy, V. H. and Vol'fson, 0. Kh.]

[Text] A study was made of a class of layered-zonal density models in which

the initial information on the density inhomogeneity of the layers is complicated
by noise. For the particular class it was possible to obtain expressions for the
dispersion of effective density with stipulated autocorrelation properties of

noise in stratum densities. For this particular case it is shown that the disper-

sion of effective densities is considerably less than the dispersions of the mean
weighted densities. Tables 2, references 9.

UDC 550.831

SOME EQUIVALENT REPRESENTATIONS 0F GRADIENT-LAYERED MEDIA IN GRAVIHETRIC
PROSPECTING

[Abstract of article by Novoselitskiy, V. H. and Gubaydullin, H. 6.]

[Text] The effective density was determined for a horizontal stratum equivalent

with respect to its external field to a complexly structured gradient medium. It
is shown that the use of effective densities in practical interpretation makes
possible a correct determination of excess density at the discontinuity of in-
homogeneous gravinctive strata characterized by a different gradient and also

a more reliable evaluation of the lateral variability of rocks with respect to
gravity anomalies in zones of development of tectonic dislocations. Figures 1,
references 7.

UDC 550.83
CRITERIA FOR OPTIMUM DISCRIMINATION 0F WEAK MAGNETIC ANOHALIES WITH AVERAGING

[Abstract of article by Pnlumurchuk, V. K.]

[Text] Criteria are examined for the optimum discrimination of anomalies
based on an evaluation of the similarity of residual local anomalies to theoret-

ical models. It is demonstrated here that by using the proposed criteria it
is possible to evaluate the variable radius of averaging. Figures 2, references

7
FOI‘OFFK511.0881NULY
FINICNWHCIAI.USEIDN13

UDC 551.24

INFLUENCE OF THERHODYNAHIC STATE OF DIFFERENT LAYERS 0F EARTN'S CRUST 0N LOCAL AND
REGIONAL GRAVITY ANONALIES IN KURILE DEPRESSION

[Abstract of article by Pil'chin. A. N.)

[Text] The change in the density of granite and gebbro in a broad range of
pressures and temperatures is estimated. It is shown that the indicated changes
in density under the thermodynamic conditions of the earth's crust along the pro-
file 3-DSS (deep seismic sounding profile) (Hiddle Kura Depression) cause gravity
anomalies - 0.67, 1.35 mgal from the "granite" and 11.8, 15.7 mgal from the "ba-
salt" layers. Tables 4, references 6.

UDC 550.83:551.24

PRINCIPLES FOR MODELING DEEP STRUCTURE OF THE EARTH'S CRUST USING GRAVIHETRIC DATA

[Abstract of article by thanitsyn, V. A., Timoshenko. V. I. and Shlyakhovskly. V.A.]

[Text] It is shown that the effect from deep discontinuities in the earth's

crust constitutes a considerable value which can characterize an extremely dis~
sected relief of the H discontinuity under the condition of block movements along
tilted faults. Figures 2, references 15.

UDC 550.83l:2b1/26/

DETECTION OF DEEP DENSITY INHOHOCENEITIES IN NORTHERN INDIAN OCEAN

[Abstract of article by Starostenko, V. I. and Shen, E. L.]

[Text] The article contains the results of selection of a three-dimensional model
of the crust in the northern part of the Indian Ocean. The density variations meth-
od is used in constructing one-dimensional density sections of the lithosphere and
the principal geological structures in this region, which when put together give
some idea concerning the essentially heterogeneous nature of the deep layers. Fig-
ures 1, references 7.

UDC 550.831

DENSITY VARIATIONS METHOD IN CONSTRUCTING SYSTEM OF GRAVITATIONAL MODELS

[Abstract of article by Starostenko, V. I. and Shen, B. L.]

[Text] A study was made of the possibility of using the density variation meth-
od in constructing a hierarchical series of gravitational models. This method makes

it possible to use the limitations imposed by the requirement of conservation of
mass and the moment of the earth's inertia in both formal and substantive forms.
Table 1. references 8.

78
FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR‘0FFNJA1.USE(NNLY

UDC 653.80

INDIRECT DETERMINATIONS OF SPECIFIC DIRECTIONS IN SOME FIGURES 0F ANALYTICAL
NETWORK

[Abstract of article by Akhverdov, G. 8.]

[Text] Under restricted conditions, and also for the purpose of reducing the

volumes of work, which increases productivity and reduces expenditures, it is de-
sirable to construct not the standard engineering triangulation networks, but more
simplified geodetic constructions. More modern methods have been developed for the
creation of geodetic constructions. Such constructions, taking into account the
high accuracy of modern angle-measuring instruments, make it possible to obtain

high-quality (accomplished with the required accuracy) results with a decrease in
expenditures by 10-152. Figures 5, references 2.

UDC 622.83

EXPERIENCE IN DEVELOPING ANTENNA-FEEDER SYSTEMS FOR RADAR APPARATUS FOR
DETERMINING GEOLOGICAL INHOHOGENEITIES IN ROCK HASSES OP NORTHERN URAL BAUXITE MINE

[Abstract of article by Nizkoshapka, V. P.)

[Text] The article contains information on the development of antenna-feeder sys-
tems for a radar apparatus with a working frequency of 150 MHz. The author exam-

ines methods for matching the antenna—feeder system and the rock. Figures 3, ref-
erences 3.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", 1981

5303
C30: 1865/69

79
FIN!(NWWC1AI.USE|NNLY
903(HDWCIAI.UBEGNVLY

UDC 550.83.015+551.24(S7l.6)

ARTICLES 0" REGIONALIZATION 0P GEOPHYSICAL FIELDS AND DEEP STRUCTURE IN FAR EAST

Vladivostok RAYONIROVANIYA GEOPIZICHBSKIKH FOLEY I GLUBINNOYE STROYBHIYE DAL'NECO
VOSTOKA in Russian 1977 (signed to press 19 Jul 77) pp 133-136

[Abstracts of articles from collection “Regionalization of Geophysical Fields and
Deep Structure of the Far East", responsible editor Yu. A. Kosygin, academician.

Institut tektoniki i geofiziki, Dal'nevoatochnyy nauchnyy taentr, Akademiya nauk

SSSR, 600 copies. 136 pages]

[T 1 Abstracts
9““ unc 550.8.015

PRINCIPLES OF AREAL AND VOLUMETRIC GEOPHYSICAL REGIONALIZATION

[Abscract of article by Malyshev, Yu. F., Bryanskiy, L. 1., Kulyndyshev. V. A.
and Loyter, P. P.]

[text] The general concept of ”regionalization procedure" is formulated. The prob-
lems of areal and volumetric regionalization are defined. Areal and volumetric re-
gionalization block diagrams are constructed. The authors describe how to convert

from the areal regionalization of geophysical fields to volumetric regionalization
of field sources. Figures 2, references 55.

"DC 550.831.016(571.6)

PAR EASTERN GRAVITATIONAL ANOHALIES

[Abstract of article by Halyshev, Yu. F., Parfenov, L. H., Reynlib, E. L. and Roman-
ovskiy, N. P.]

[Text] The article sets forth the methods used and the results of regionalization
of the anomalous gravity field in the Far East. It was possible to discriminate two
anomalous regions: transitional and continental, corresponding to the two principal
geoblocks in Asia. The transitional region corresponds to a perioceanic eugeosyn-
clinal zone. The continental region corresponds to the marginal part of the Late
Mesozoic of the Asian continent. Fundamentally new data were obtained on the 9031.

tion and structure of the boundary zone separating these geoblocks. Within the
limits of the anomalous regions it is possible to discriminate higher-order

FOItﬂlﬂﬂCJAl.llSl2(MVLY
NOI¢NHHCJAI.USI‘ONLV

anomalies and their geological nature is examined. Figures 1, references 16.

UDC 550.831.016(571.61/62)

LEVEL CORRELATION AND SCHEME FOR REGIONALIZATION OF GRAVITY ANOHALIES IN AHUR AREA
[Abstract of article by Sheredkn. V. A.]

[Text] A deep formal regionalization of gravity anomalies in the Amur region was
carried out. An examination of maps of different levels of correlation reveals

a selectivity in the directions of the zones of increased field gradients, ident-
ifiable with faults. First- and second-order blocks of the anomalous field are
discriminated and characterized. Figures 2, tables 1. references 2-

UDC 550.831.016(57l.64)
REGIONALIZATION 0P ANOHALOUS GRAVITY FIELD IN SOUTHERN SEA OF OKBOTSK
[Abstract of article by Kosygin, V. Yu., Pavlov, Yu. A. and Popov. Ye. 1.]
[Text] With respect to structure and mean level of the anomalous gravity field in

the Bouguer reduction it was possible to discriminate four anomalous regions: Sakh-
alin, Academy of Sciences Rise, Kotlovinnyy and Kurile. The description of the

anomalous field of the regions is accompanied by a geological interpretation of the
nature of the anomalies. Figures 2. references 17.

UDC 552.08:53(571.6l/.62)

DENSITY INHOHOGENEITIES OP EARTH'S CRUST IN SOUTHERN FAR EAST

[Abstract of article by Nalyshev, Yu. F., Parfenov, L. H., Reynlib, B. L. and
Romanovskiy. N. P.]

[Text] The article describes a method for compiling a formalized map of rock dens-
ity in the southern part of the Far East. Primarily inversion relationships were
established between the density distrinution at the surface and the gravity anomal-

ies of major tectonic elements. which is attributable to the characteristics of
deep structure of the region. Figures 3. tables 1. references 12.

UDc 550.382.3:552.321:553.45(57l.61/.62)
PETROHAGNETIC CRITERIA 0F TIN CONTENT OF AMUR REGION GRANITOIDS
[Abstract of article by Onikhimovskiy, V. V. and Romanovskiy, N. P.]
[Text] The authors demonstrate the possibility of using a petromagnetic character-

ization of tin-bearing intrusions of granitoids for determining the formational
affiliation and potential productivity of tin shows. An increase in the mean values

81
FOI:0FFIC1AI.IINE(N§LY
F!MI(IFIICIAI.1ENB(HVLY

of magnetic susceptibility of tin-bearing granitoid intrusions is regarded as an
index of productivity of tin ore. Tables 1. references 15.

UDC 550.83.016:551.21(571.62)

EXPERIENCE IN VOLUHETRIC GEOPHYSICAL REGIONALIZATIOH IN EXAMPLE OF KHINGANO-
OLONOYSKAYA AND KAHENUSHINSKAYA VOLCANIC DEPRESSIONS

[Abstract of article by Bryanskiy, L. 1., Halyshev, Yu. P. and Pavlov, G. A.]

[Text] One of the methods for volumetric geophysical regionalization on the basis

of a combination of methods is described. Its use made it possible to obtain a
map of basement structure and the volcanic formations of the Khingano-Olonoyskaya

and Kamenushinskaya depressions. An attempt has been made to relate structural for-
mations and the netallogeny of the region. Figures 4. references 5.

UDC 550.312(57l.64)
ISOSTATIC STATE OF EARTH'S CRUST IN SOUTHERN PART OF SEA OF OKHOTSK
[Abstract of article by Kosygin, V. Yu.]

[Text] An evaluation of isostasy of the earth's crust was made by two methods: on
the basis of isostatic anomalies and on the basis of computations of pressures at
the surface of compensation. Despite a general comparability of the results, the
second method gives additional information on changes of isostasy in the earth's
crust, associated with the peculiarities of its structure and development. Figures
2, references 7.

UDC 550.83+551.26(571.62)

PROBLEMS IN DEEP STRUCTURE OF SOUTHEASTERN ALDANSKIY SHIELD
[Abstract of article by Karsakov, L. P., Malyshev, Yu. P. and Romanovskiy, N. P.]

[Text] On the basis of a study of geological and geophysical data an investigation
was made of the nature of the Tyrkanskiy regional gravity minimum. The authors dis—
cuss the reasons for the inversion relationship between the surface density distrib-
ution and gravity anomalies. The role of Mesozoic and Precambrian granitoids, the
bottom of the paleocruat and heating of the top of the mantle in the Cenozoic in

the anomalous effect is examined. Figures 2, references 21.

UDC 550.83+551.24+551.21(57l.66)
FEATURES OF DEEP STRUCTURE OF SOUTHERN KANCHATKA ACCORDING TO GEOPHYSICAL DATA

[Abstract of article by Akhmadulin, V. A., Zubin. H. 1., Smirnov, V. S. and Tarakan—
ovskiy, A. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the deep structure of the region of the Tolmachevskaya
volcanic-tectonic depression. 0n the basis of data from gravimetry and magnetometry

82
POI OFFICJAJ.USE1NVLY
FOI‘OFIICIAI.USE13NLY

it was possible to construct a map of the Cretaceous basement and detect the pres-
ence of magma hearths in the earth's crust which are reflected in the results of
magnetotelluric sounding. Figures 2, references 8.

UDC 550.837.211(571.62)
EXPERIENCE IN HAGNETOTELLURIC INVESTIGATIONS IN BUREINSKIY COMPLEX
[Absrract of article by Akhmadulin, V. A.]

[Text] It is shown in this article that measurements of the vertical component of
the electric field in a borehole are subject to the influence of horizontal inhomo-
geneities of the section. The author evaluates the geoelectric profile in the
southern part of the Bureinskiy complex. There was found to be conductivity anom-

alies in the earth's crust and upper mantle at depths of 20-h0 and 60-70 km. Pig-
ures 6, references 13.

UDC 550.831.017:551.24(571.62)

METHOD FOR STUDYING DEEP STRUCTURE OF MESOZOIC-CENOZOIC DEPRESSIONS (IN EXAMPLE OF
BUREINSKAYA DEPRESSION)

[Abstract of article by Bryanskiy, L. 1.]

[Text] The type of correlation between the gravity field and the depth of the de—
pression is theoretically validated for a case when stratum density varies linear-
1y with depth. A new algorithm of the correlation method of interpretation has
been developed allowing its automation. New data on structure of the Bureinskiy
downwarp were obtained. Figures 2. tables 1. references 7.

UDC 550.836.3:551.24(282.257.5)

EXPERIENCE IN STUDYING BOTTOM DEPOSITS OP AMUR BY CONTINUOUS SEISHOACOUSTIC
PROFILING METHOD

[Abstract of article by Kalinin, V. V., Markov, V. A. and Pivovarov, B. L.]

[Text] A study was made of the characteristics of the continuous seismoacoustic
profiling method under specific fluvial conditions. As a result of use of contin-
uous seismic profiling it was possible to detect new structural elements and re-
fine the extent and position of those known earlier. The collected data show that
in the northeastern part of the Khabarovskaya depression the depth of the Mesozoic
folded basement does not exceed 200 m. Figures 2, tables 1, references 6.

FOIiDFﬁKJAI.USE(lNLY
FOIMOFIﬂClAl.lEﬂE(HWLY

UDC 551.268.2+550.358(571.61)

FEATURES OF HORIZONTAL BLOCK MOVEMENTS IN NEIGHBORHOOD OP ZEYSKAYA HYDROBLBCTRIC
POHER STATION

[Abstract of article by Korchagin, F. 6.]

[Text] The article sets forth the results of experimental investigations of the dy-
nanics of the tectonic block near the dam. It was found that there are three types
of elastic oscillations of the block. A study was made of the nature of horizontal
movements of the block. The influence of the reservoir on elastic oscillations

of the block is evaluated and the possibility of increasing the seisnicity of the
region in dependence on the regime of filling of the reservoir is examined. Fig-

ures 2, references 2.

COPYRIGHT: DVNTs AN SSSR, 1977

5303
C80: 1865/59

81;
FIIICHHHCIAI.U§IICMVLY
MWLUSEONLY

ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

RECENT ARCTIC POLAR BASIN RESEARCH

Leningrad PROBLEHY ARKTIKI I ANIARKTIKI: SBORNIK STATBY in Russian No 57, 1981
(signed to press 27 Jul 81) PP 123-127

[Abstracts from collection of articles "Problems of the Arctic and Antarctica:
Collection of Articles)", A. F. Treshnikov, responsible editor, Gidrometeoisdat,
600 copies, 127 pages]

UDC 910.6(98,99)
PRINCIPAL STAGES AND PROSPECTS FOR STUDY OF EARTH'S POLAR REBIONS

[Abstract of article by Treshnikov, A. P.]

[Text] The principal stages and prospects for study of the earth's polar regions
are examined. The article gives a brief history of the organization and implement-
ation of research in the Arctic, beginning in 1920, when the Northern Cooperative
Expedition was organized, from which the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research
Institute (AANII) owes its origin. Soviet investigations began in Antarctica in
1956 and since 1958 the AANII has been responsible for the organization and coor-
dination of investigations made by the Soviet Union on the sixth continent and in
the Antarctic Ocean. The author gives the principal scientific results in the
field of study of the ice cover of arctic seas and the Antarctic Ocean. polar
oceanology, meteorology, interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere, heat
balance, water and ice regimes of the lower reaches and mouths of rivers in the
arctic zone, hydrochemical regime, geophysical phenomena, radio wave propagation,
glaciology of polar countries, ice qualities of icebreakers. polar medicine, and
economic effectiveness of hydrometeorological forecasts. Also examined is the fur-
ther development of in situ investigations in the Arctic and Antarctica and the
northern regions of the Atlantic Ocean, the beefs for which is scientific invest-
igations under the "POLEX," "Profiles" and "POLK-Climate" progress.

UDC 551.46(268(269)
PROBLHiS IN OCEANOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN POLAR REGIONS

[Abstract of article by Hustafin, N. V., Nikiforov, Ye. 6., Sarukhanyan, B. 1.,
Smirnov, N. P. and Timokhov, L. A.)

[Text] The article discusses the status and outlines the prospects for solution
of problems in three directions: regularities in formation of the hydrological

8
FOR omait USE ONLY
MWLIBEONLY

regime of the Arctic and Antarctic Oceans, nethods for ocemlogical computations
and forecasts, scientific-practical aids and oceanological support of branches of
the national economy associated with transportation and econOmic use of the Arctic
and Antarctica. Figures 1, tables 1, references 78.

UDC 551.664.628:556.465.lo2
STATUS AND PROSPECTS FOR HYDROCHEHICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN ARCTIC OCEAN
[Abstract of article by Rusanov. V. P.)

(Text) The problems involved in study of the hydrochemical regime of the Arctic
Ocean associated with solution of more complex problems in polar oceanography and _

preservation of its waters are considered. A brief review is given of the principal
scientific results obtained on the basis of a generalization of hydrochenical ob-
servations made during recent decades. Also discussed is the possibility of using
some chemical characteristics of sea water as indicators of oceanological process-
es in the Arctic Ocean. References 18.

UDC 551.326.03

PROBLDIS IN INVESTIGATING SEA ICE

[Abstract of article by Gudkovich, Z. 11., Zakharov, V. F., Kirillov, A. A. and
Krutskikh. B. A.]

[Text] A study was made of the importance of sea ice as an indicator of climatic
changes and the dilate-forming factor, as well as their influence on man's econ-
omic activity. The authors examine the features of the physicostatistical and

thermohydrodynamic methods for ice computations and forecasts, together with their
probable success; the principal problems in an investigation of the thermal and

dynamic processes in the ice cover, its geographical distribution and properties
are enmnerated. Figures lo, tables 1.

UDC 551.465. 7:519.24

PROBLEMS IN MACROSCALE INTERACTION BETWEEN OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE
[Abstract of article by Nikolayev, Yu. V. and Smirnov, N. P.]
[Text] Brief results are given of in situ and experimental investigations of macro-

scale interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere in the Arctic Basin and in
the North Atlantic carried out during the last five years.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! OEWHCJA|.lIiEICHNLY

UDC 551.667

MODERN METHODS AND RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS OF PHYSICS 0? ICE AND OCEAN

[Abstract of article by Bogorodskiy, V. V.]

[Text] A study was made of the problems involved in the use of active and passive
radar and techniques in measuring ice thickness, studies of the rates of movement
and internal structure of glaciers, and investigation of the surface temperature
of Arctic seas. Also discussed are the results of use of a complex of new technical
equipment in study of the dynamics of drifting ice covers. The article gives an
evaluation of the results of investigations of the optical characteristics of the
waters and snow-ice cover of the Arctic basin. and also new information on the
micro- and mesoscale spatial-temporal variability of its hydrophysical fields. Also
discussed are the results of introduction of the pressiometric method for deter-in-
ing the rheological characteristics of ice covers. Figures 8, references 6.

hDC 551.482+556.54

RESULTS OF AIR EXPEDITIONS IN LOWER REACHES AND MOUTH REGIONS OF ARCTIC ZONE RIVERS
[Abstract of article by Ivanov, V. V. and Nalimov, Yu. V.]

[Text] This is a review of the results of the work of air expeditions in the lower
reaches and mouth regions of rivers carried out fro: the early 1920's through 1980.
It is shown that the use of aircraft on air expeditions in the lower reaches and
mouth regions of arctic zone rivers is related to observation of the ice-hydrolog-
ical regime in order to ensure navigation along the Northern Sea Route and also
other needs of the national economy. It is shown that the purposes and tasks of air
expeditions have changed in accordance with the need to support the national economy
and the development of science. At the same time the range of the observations and
their volume have broadened. Hultisided observations beginning in 1969 have been
directed to the collection of hydrological information for scientific validation

of major national economic tasks, such as year-round navigation and shifting of the
runoff of rivers in the north and Siberia, as well as scientific-operational support

of the national economy. Figures 1, tables 2, references 37.

UDC 551.509.334

STUDY OF ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND LONG-RANGE METEOROLOGICAL FORECASTS FOR POLAR
REGIONS

[Abstract of article by Girs. A. A.]

[Text] The principal stages in development of the macrocirculation method for long-
range meteorological forecasting for the Arctic and Antarctica are considered. The

author formulates the tasks for further investigations for the development of this
nethod and ways to develop a multisided method. References 2.

FOR OFFI;§I.USEiﬂ‘LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.l!ﬂi(NVLV

UDC SSl.50(98/99)
TIHELY PROBLEMS IN POLAR HETEOROLOGY
[Abstract of article by Voskresenskiy, A. 1.]

[Text] An evaluation of the results attained in the field of polar meteorology is
given against the background of existing global problems. Particular attention is

given to the problems of study of natural variations of climate, anthropogenic ef-
fects and the organization of climatic monitoring. References 11.

UDC 550.385.388.2.621.371
RESULTS AND PROSPECTS OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH

[Abstract of article by Shirochkov, A. V.]

[Text] The article gives the results and prospects of investigations of the iono-
sphere, geomagnetic field and radio wave propagation in the Arctic and Antarctica.

It is noted that data from geophysical observations are being used successfully in
the practice of prognostic centers of the ionospheric-magnetic service formed in

1973 in the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring sys-
ten.

UDC 629.124.791.551.467

ENSURING ICE QUALITIES 0P ICEBREAKERS AND TRANSPORT SHIPS FOR NAVIGATION IN ICE
[Abstract of article by Haksutov, D. 0.]

[Text] This is a review of the scientific activity of the laboratory of ice qualit—
ies of ships and the world's only experimental ice basin at the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute and the results of their operation are given. The at-

ticle reveals the great contribution of the laboratory to the creation of modern
icebreakers and ships for navigation in the ice intended for solution of important

problems in the national economy.
unc 001(98/99)

PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION OF RESULTS OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

[Abstract of article by Shanont'yev, V. A.]

[Text] Problems related to the practical introduction of the results of scientific
research and experimental-design work of a hydrometeorological character are con-
sidered. A classification of scientific studies is given. These are divided into
five types: fundamental, prognostic, scientific-practical, scientific-methodolog-
ical and experimental-design. Three types of introduction are indicated:

88
FOR'OFIWCIAI.IHNE(NVLY
IN)! 0F!1Clhl.l£ﬂ£(ﬂﬂl¥

1) national economic, in which the results of the work are used in several branch-
es of the national economy, 2) branch, in which the results of the work are used at
scientific institutes and other organizations of the State Committee on Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring and 3) intro-institute, in which the results are
used only at the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute. Tables 2.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut
(AANII), 1981

5303
C50: 1865/88

8
INDR¢0I11(121.IENE(NNLY
FOI:OFTIC1Al.lIIB(MULY

UDC 910.2

25 YEARS OF HORK OF THE SOVIET ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION

Moscow VESTNIR ARADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 3-12
[Unsigned article]

[Text] Twenty-five years of work have been completed by the Soviet Antarctic Exped-
ition. In this connection a solemn session of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the
Board of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitor-
ing (Coskomgidromet) was held in the Moscow House of Scientists. Representatives

of scientific institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, State Committee on Hydro—
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring, a number of ministries and departments,
Party and public agencies in Moscow met here on 8 January.

The President of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, open-
ed the solemn session. He congratulated all the participants in work in Antarctica
who had made a major contribution to the study and exploitation of this severe re-
gion of the earth. Then A. P. Aleksandrov yielded the floor to A. F. Treshnikov,
corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences, who told of the results of Soviet
Antarctic investigations over a 25-year period.

Soviet investigations in Antarctica, said the speaker, were initiated in connection
with the program of the International Geophysical Year (IGY), which was observed
during the period 1 July 1957 through 31 December 1958. But preparations for it de-
veloped long prior to the IGY. The International Committee of the ICY, in formulat-
ing a unified program for investigations over the entire earth, also called for a
study of Antarctica. Soviet scientists warmly responded to this call.

In the Division of Sea Expeditionary Work of the USSR Azsdemy of Sciences Presidium
a planning group under the direction of I. D. Papanin, with participation of repre-
sentatives of the Arctic Institute, and also a number of Moscow institutes, devel-
oped proposals concerning the organization of a Soviet Antarctic Expedition. In
1955 a decision was made to send a major expedition to Antarctica. The scientific
direction of the expedition was delegated to the USSR Academy of Sciences and the
preparation and technical outfitting was assigned to the Main Administration of

the Northern Sea Route. (In 1958, when the expedition became annual. its organiza-
tion and implementation were assigned to the Arctic Institute, which from that time
was called the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute. But as before,
scientists of the USSR Academy of Sciences participate in the expeditions, as well
as different institutes and departments, but the general coordination work is del-
egated to the Interdepartmental Commission on Study of Antarctica in the Earth
Sciences Section, Presidium, USSR Academy of Sciences.)

90
FOIIOIIIClAl.llﬂE(MULY
FOI!0'1WCJAI.IEIE(HVLY

The scientific program for the expedition, approved by the Presidium, USSR Academy
of Sciences, provided for a full range of investigations of the nature of the
south polar region: influence of atmospheric processes in Antarctica on general
circulation of the earth's atmosphere; peculiarities of geophysical phenomena and
processes in Antarctica; glacial cover of Antarctica and its dynamics: geological
structure and geological history of Antarctica; physiogrsphic and biogeographical
features of individual regions of Antarctica; oceanic waters, sea ice and bottom
structure of the Antarctic Ocean; biology of waters and zonal distribution of
fauna in the waters of the Antarctic Ocean, and also compilation of the naviga-
tional-geographical characteristics of the Antarctic coastal zone, collection of
materials for the compilation of navigation and topographic charts.

The head of the First Soviet Antarctic Expedition was Hero of the Soviet Union
M. H. Somov. The key leaders of the expedition were selected from among the sci-

entists of the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the Arctic Institute
and Moscow University.

Thousands of people and hundreds of enterprises and institutes participated in the
outfitting of the first expedition. The diesel-electric "Ob'" departed from Kalin-
ingrad on 30 Hovember 1955 and on 5 January 1956 approached the shores of Eastern
Antarctica in the neighborhood of Depot Bay in the Davis Sea. On this same day a
group of Soviet scientists under the direction of A. H. Gusev (the group included
G. A. Avsyuk, V. G. Kort, P. A. Shunskiy, K. K. Markov, 0. S. Vyalov, motion pic-
ture camera operator A. V. Kochetkov and correspondent P. R. Barashev) made their
way over the shore ice to the shore and investigated dark rocks of glacial mor-
aine. This day also marked the beginning of Soviet investigations on the Antarctic
continent. But the site for a shore station was not selected here, but in the area
of the Haswell Islands, at 90'E, where there are bedrock outcrops. The first sci-
entific station and shore base was opened there on 13 February 1956; it was named
in honor of one of the ships of the first Russian Antarctic expedition, led by
Bellinsgauzen and Lazarev, who discovered Antarctica in 1820.

In addition to the "0b'," two other ships sailed to Antarctica: the diesel-electric
"Lens" and the refrigerator ship "Semerka." They delivered to its shores the mem-
bers of the expedition, supplies, construction materials, food, aircraft, heli-
copters, etc. The crews of the ships, after unloading, participated in the con-
struction of Hirnyy. Simultaneously with creation of the base there were recon-
naissance flights into the heart of the continent and into neighboring regions
where geologists and glaciologists collected the first data concerning the nature
of extensive territories.

A sledge-tractor train was dispatched to the south from Hirnyy late in the Antarctic
autumn. It advanced along the steep slope of the glacier dome against a constant
strong katabatic wind and low blizzard. In one month the train covered a distance
of 375 km from Hirnyy, rising along the glacier slope. There it was decided to

stop. A station was created from hutments built on runners. It was officially open-
ed on 27 May 1956 and was named "Pionerskaya." This was Antarctica's first intracon-
tinental scientific station. Its opening marked the beginning of an important stage
in the history of investigation of the sixth continent. It was the first time that
man had decided to spend the winter so far from the shore in the depths of the con-
tinent at an elevation of 2,700 a above sea level.

91
IN)! OFFICIAL lEﬂB(HVLV
FOI‘OFFKJALIJQECM‘LY

The experience of the trek and infatuation on the severe climatic conditions at
Pionerskaya station enabled the Second Antarctic Expedition, which was headed by
the author of this report, to prepare itself for an attack on the deeper regions
of Antarctica on a sounder basis. Despite this, the expedition encountered enor-
mous difficulties in its advance toward the South Geomagnetic Pole. The first 600
km the route ran through high, hard zastrugi and then, already at elevations of

more than 3,000 m above sea level, a friable crystalline snow began, which would
not compact as a result of the conditions of its formation at constant low temper-
atures; the tractor treads stuck in it and the runners of the sledges did not
slide.

The temporary intermediate station Vostok-l was established early in 1957 at a dis-
tance of 630 km to the south of Hirnyy. In the second half of the year, in the Ant-
arctic spring, still another intermediate station was established at a distance

of 860 km from Hirnyy - Komsomol'skaya, and Vostok-l station was rebased to the
point of the geomagnetic pole at a distance of 1,610 km to the south of Hirnyy. It
was opened on 16 December 1957 and was given the name "Vostok" in honor of another
ship of the first Russian Antarctic expedition led by Bellinsgauzen and Lazarev.
Geomagnetic observations have already been made at Vostok station at the point
where the magnetic meridians converge for 22 years. Here the lowest temperatures
on earth (absolute minimum -88.3°C) are observed at an elevation of 3,500 m.

The third expedition, under the direction of Hero of the Soviet Union Ye. I. Tolst-
ikov, early in 1958 advanced even a greater distance into the depths of the ice
continent. For the first time Sovetskaya station was established at an elevation

of 3,662 m above sea level between Sovetskaya station and the Pole of Innccessibil-
ity, and late in 1958 the South Pole of Inaccessibility, situated at a distance of

2,200 km from Hirnyy at an elevation of 3,800 m above sea level, was reached. Here
a small base was established. Although scientific observations at this base were

made for only 12 days, later it served as an intermediate base for treks into the
unmapped regions of Queen Maud Land and for transcontinental treks. 0n subsequent
expeditions other stations were opened. some of which were closed after the 10!.

The IGY ended, but scientific investigations were continued in the south polar
region.

There are now seven Soviet scientific stations in operation in Antarctica: Holodezh-
naya, Mirnyy, Novolazarevskaya, Leningradskaya, Bellinsgsuzen, Russkaya and Vostok
at the Scuth Geomagnetic Pole. Here specialists are making systematic hydrometeoro-
logical, geomagnetic and ionospheric observations; studies are being made of sur-
orss, cosmic rays and conditions for radio wave propagation. Rocket sounding of the
high layers of the atmosphere is being carried out at Holodezhnaya. The station re-
ceives satellite information and regular hydrometeorological information from sta-
tions in other countries. Hydrometeorological information is transmitted to inter-
national data centers and is used at the Molodezhnaya weather bureau in the south
polar region.

Extensive geographical. geophysical and glaciological observations have been made

in Antarctica over the course of 25 years. On the basis of Soviet investigations,
and also materials from expeditions of other countries, the scientists of the USSR

92
INJR OFIWCIAI.IHNE(MNLY
FOI,0FI1CJAI.USE(NVLY

created a fundamental scientific study - the two-volume ATLAS ANTARKTIKI (Atlas
of Antarctica), the key authors of which were awarded the USSR State Prize.

Then A. P. Treshnikov characterized the most important scientific results obtained
by Soviet scientists in Antarctica.

Precise maps of the continent and Antarctic Ocean were compiled, as well as maps
of underwater and underice relief. Hundreds of new geographic names appeared on
the maps; these honored participants in the Soviet Antarctic expeditions who had
perished. scientists who had made a major contribution to the study of the Arctic
and Antarctica. Some names honored the leading Russian and Soviet scientists. cap-
tains who navigated ships to the shores of Antarctica and Soviet cosmonauts.

Soviet investigators determined the principal features of the bedrock relief. Ranges.
mountain systems, plains and valleys were discovered beneath the ice. The Trans-
antarctic Range divides Antarctica into two parts - eastern and western. It can

be considered established that all of Antarctica, together with the shelf, is a
unified continent, although the geological structure of the western and eastern
parts is different, since their geological history during the last several mil-

lion years was different.

The principal features of structure of the glacial cover of Antarctica were deter-
mined. In some places the thickness of the ice attains 4,000 m. A borehole whose
depth attained 1,360 m was drilled at Vostok station. The age of the ice at a depth
of 950 m was 46,000 years. An analysis of isotopes of oxygen present in samples

of ice indicated that lS,000—10,000 years ago there was a warming of the air by
approximately 5° in Antarctica. The same data were obtained by Americans in a bore-
hole at Bard station in Western Antarctica and at the center of Greenland. At this
same time the glacier sheets of Europe and America melted. Thus, changes in cli-
mate on the earth occurred simultaneously in the northern and southern hemispheres.

A study was made of the ice regime in the Antarctic Ocean, the circulation of its
water and ice was described and the water masses of the Antarctic Ocean were in-
vestigated. The presence of cyclonic circulations of waters in the coastal zone
and in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current causes an upwelling of the waters with
the transport of nutrient salts. In theSe places a rich organic life develops -
phytoplankton and zooplankton - and the krill and fish associated with them.

A rich underwater world was discovered in the coastal zone of Antarctica. The life
of the animals in the coastal zone and in the Antarctic Ocean was studied.

An investigation of the geomagnetic field and the ionosphere made it possible to
establish that the structure of the magnetosphere and ionosphere is identical
both in the Arctic and in Antarctica; the effect exerted on them by the solar
wind and cosmic radiation is manifested simultaneously on the conjugate magnetic
lines. The oval of the maximum of auroras was defined and the conditions for the
propagation of radio waves in the auroral zone were determined.

In conclusion A. P. Treshnikov discussed the prospects for Antarctic investiga-
tions. Stationary hydrometeorological and geophysical observations will be contin-
ued at stations, on treks, from air and space. A study will be made of the life
of the Antarctic glacier and geological investigations will be made. There is a

93
FOR 0F11ClAl.USE‘0NLY
FINICNNWCJAI.lEﬂE(M§LV

need for further clarification of the potential resources of the Antarctic Ocean
—- fish and especially krill.

Scientists will study interaction between the Antarctic Ocean, atmosphere and the
ice continent for creation of a model of climate and prediction of weather. Studies
will be made of magnetic and ionospheric disturbances in connection with solar ac-
tivity. Background observations will be made of the utate of the environment in
Antarctica.

Now the 26th expedition has begun its work in Antarctica. Its program is extensive:
observations at all seven stations, treks and flights into the deep regions of Ant-
arctica, implementation of the "POLEX-South-Bl" program in the waters of the Antarc-
tic Ocean on four scientific research ships, geological and geophysical investiga-
tions in Western Antarctica, and prediction of weather and ice conditions in the
Antarctic Ocean for ships and aircraft.

During recent years about 300 Soviet polar researchers have spent the winter in
Antarctica, whereas during the summer season more than 700 persons work there.
During the 25 years more than 15,000 persons have visited there.

Ye. I. Tolstikov, deputy chairman of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring. presented a report on international scientific cooperation
in Antarctica.

International cooperation in study of Antarctica, stated the speaker, will serve
as an example of how, by the combining of the efforts of scientists of many coun-
tries, it is possible to solve in relatively short times complex scientific problems
on whose solution a single country would have to spend tens of years. We polar sci-
entists can be proud that due to our fraternal work on the sixth continent an Ant-
arctic Treaty has been signed. It was signed and ratified by all countries partic-
ipating in Antarctic investigations. The treaty entered into force on 23 June 1961.
It was in keeping with the traditions developing during the IGY period: exchange
of information on the plans for scientific work, exchange of information on the
details of such research, exchange of scientific personnel among expeditions and
stations, exchange of observational data and the results of scientific investiga-
tions. In accordance with the treaty Antarctica was declared a continent of peace.
All kinds of military measures and operations and the storage of atomic production
are forbidden here. Antarctica was opened for the implementation of investigations
by the scientists of all countries on an equal basis.

In accordance with the treaty there are regular consultative conferences of the
representatives of the countries participating in Antarctic research. At these con-
ferences recommendations are adopted which are then approved by the representatives
of these countries. For example, recommendations were adopted with respect to
problems relating to the exchange of information, telecommunication in Antarctica,
tourism, etc. In particular, we should note the recommendation "Coordinated Meas-
ures on Preservation of Flora and Fauna on the Sixth Continent." These recommend-
ations proclaim Antarctica as a sort of sanctuary whose nature is being preserved
by the polar workers working there.

The Soviet scientists carrying out investigations in Antarctica are in close con-
tact with the scientists of other countries. There are bilateral and multilateral

agreements for the Antarctic Ocean. Under the "POLBx-South" program Soviet and

9h
roe omcut use on“
FOI‘OFFNJAI.U§£{DNLY

American specialists are Studying interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere.
The international program "Geophysical Polygon," in which the USSR, Australia and
France are participating, has the purpose of studying geomagnetic variations and
their relationship to the interplanetary magnetic field. According to the Inter-
national Glaciological Project. the scientists of the USSR, United States, Aus-
tralia, France and Great Britain are investigating the past regime of glaciation

in Antarctica and also predicting the future of its glacial cover and the ice
mass balance.

Over the last 25 years about 110 foreign scientists from 14 countries have worked
on our wintering expeditions: from Australia, Great Britain, Argentina, Bulgaria,
Hungary, GDR, India, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, United States, France, Czechoslo-
vakia, Japan. Mutual assistance and mutual advantage are the foundation of exped-
itionary life in Antarctica.

Under the severe conditions of the sixth continent the scientists of different
countries are working in harmony, are assisting one another in work and in mis-
fortune. This work is favoring a strengthening of peaceful international scien-
tific cooperation in the south polar region, provided for in the Antarctic treaty.

Then the floor was given to V. A. Yarmolyuk, deputy minister of geology, for a re-
port entitled "Geological—Geophysical Investigations and Mineral Resources of Ant-
arctica." The nature and scales of Soviet geological investigations in Antarctica,
stated the speaker, have changed very greatly over the course of the 25 years. Dur-
ing the first years they had primarily a reconnaissance nature, along profiles.
Nevertheless, even then Soviet scientists were able to obtain exceptionally inter-
esting geological material, making it possible to form the first (later reinforced)

ideas concerning the geological structure of the southern continent and its miner-
als.

Now geological investigations have a planned character and are directed to a system-
atic study of the Antarctic subsurface for the purpose of creating a reliable geolog-
ical basis for evaluating the prospects of finding different minerals in Antarctica.
In organizational respects the investigations are usually carried out autonomously,
far from permanent stations, with work being done from special temporary field

bases. Each year from 150 to 200 specialists participate in such work, making use

of helicopters, airplanes, ships, various kinds of land transportation and modern
radio communication and navigation equipment.

A noteworthy feature of this work is that it is multisidad. Geological investiga-

tions of ice-free mountainous sectors are carried out parallely with geophysical
studies of ice-covered territories. At the same time, radio echo methods are em-

ployed in measuring thickness of the ice cover and areawide aerial geological-
geophysical surveys are combined with geophysical measurements made by the landing
on the ice of people supplied with the necessary equipment.

Up to 1975 Soviet geologists worked for the most part in the eastern part of Ant-
arctica. Since 1976 investigations have also been made in its western part, in-
cluding the shelf of the Weddell Sea and the mountains surrounding it.

95
roe ornaat use our
INJI‘OFFICIAI.UGII(HMLY

Then V. A. Yarmolyuk told about the results obtained during 25 years in the prin-
cipal directions of geological investigations.

The attainments of Soviet geologists have been manifested, in particular, in the
field of geological mapping. The materials which they have collected have made it
possible to compile and publish a series of original maps (prior to this not pre-
pared by the geologists of other countries) and these have been included in the
Atlas of Antarctica and have also been released as individual publications. Prod-
ucts of particularly great scientific importance were: geological map at a scale
of l:S,000,000 (1976), map of metamorphic facies at this same scale (1979) and
tectonic map at a scale of 1:10.000,000 (1980).

Soviet investigators also enjoy unquestionable priority in the field of study of
the internal structure of the earth's crust within the limits of Antarctica. Deep
seismic sounding was carried out, making it possible tv detect earlier unknown
very extensive rift zones, for the most part hidden beneath a thick ice layer. A
multisided interpretation of data from deep seismic sounding and other types of
geophysical investigations made it possible to extrapolate the collected informa-
tion to adjacent areas with a total extent of more than 1.5 million square kilo-
meters.

A substantial contribution was made by geologists and geophysicists to comprehen-
sion of the general patterns of development of the earth's crust. Interesting data
were obtained on the role of the oceanization processes in the geological develop-
ment of the Antarctic sector of the earth. Many geologists have come to the con-
clusion that in the past Antarctica belonged to the supercontinent Gondwana and
they have developed ideas concerning the reasons for and mechanism of development
and breakdown of this once enormous continent.

In the field of study of mineral resources Soviet geologists have proceeded as
pioneers in the largest iron ore basin in the Prince Charles Mountains (Eastern
Antarctica), which with respect to its scale can be compared with the universally
known Kursk Magnetic Anomaly. A number of shows of polymetals, rock crystal, mics
and aluminous raw material in Queen Maud Land, Enderby Land and in some other re-
gions of development of the ancient crystalline basement are known. Areas of inter-
est may be the eastern and southeastern shores of the Heddell Sea, whose geological
structure is very similar to the structure of the ancient platform of South Africa.
The discovered eruptive breccias of deep alkaline-ultrabasic rocks show that in
Eastern Antarctica there are shows of kimberlite magmatism and therefore concentra-
tions of diamonds may be found. In some sectors of development of the platform
mantle there have been discoveries of coal.

The folded system of the Transantarctic Mountains in metallogenetic respects can
be regarded as promising for lead-zinc, tin, molybdenum and radioactive ores. The
folded complexes of Hestern Antarctica are regarded as a continuation of the Andes
metallogenetic province of South America, well known for its copper-molybdenum,
pyrite-polymetallic and tin deposits.

Soviet geophysical investigations carried out within the limits of the major intra-
continental zones of Antarctica, and also in the Weddell Sea region, indicated a
considerable plunging of the basement in these regions and the presence of a rather

96
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
thick sedimentary mantle. This is a favorable factor for the formation of petrol-
eum and gas deposits here. The enormous area of the Antarctic shelf is also a pos-
itive factor in evaluating the general prospects for finding petroleum and gas in
Antarctica. However, in evaluating these prospects it is necessary to weigh care-
fully the feasibility of carrying out drilling and especially operational work for
petroleum and gas and be sure that this work will not result in annihilation of
the unique nature of Antarctica.

In conclusion, the speaker, in the name of the Board of the USSR Geology Ministry,
thanked the investigators of Antarctica, including geologists and geophysicists,

for their self-sacrificing and heroic work.

A report'entitled "Biological Resources of Antarctica," was presented by N. P.
Kudryavtsev, USSR deputy minister of the fishing industry. It is no exaggeration

to state, he noted, that the Antarctic Ocean as a fishing region was discovered

and mastered by the Soviet fishing industry. Systematic fishing investigations were
initiated here in 1961 when the "Muksun," reconnaissance ship of the Atlantic Sci-
entific Research Institute of Fishing and Oceanography, was sent into the Atlantic
sector of the Antarctic Ocean. Between 1964 and the present time investigations
have been made in this sector by the "Akademik Rnipovich“ of the All-Union Sci-
entific Research Institute of Fishing and Oceanography, and in other regions of
Antarctica work has been done by scientific research ships of the Pacific Ocean
and Sea of Azov-Black Sea Institutes of Fishing and Oceanography and the recon-
naissance ships of the USSR Ministry of the Fishing Industry. A total of 127 voy-
ages were made during the period 1961 through 1980. we should also mention the im-
portance of the work carried out by the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research
Institute, Institute of Oceanology imeni N. N. Shirshov of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences and expeditions of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring. The fundamental investigations made have constituted a major contribu-
tion to study of Antarctic bioresources. They became the basis for understanding
their distribution, laws of migration of schools of fish, magnitude and changes of
biological productivity of waters in the Antarctic Ocean.

It has been established that the nature of the bioproductive processes in the waters
of the Antarctic Ocean is determined by the totality of atmnspheric, oceanological
and geomorphological features of this ocean area and also the specific features

of fauna -- the organisms living here. A study of these factors made it possible to
predict with accuracy the distribution of commercial fish and krill and to organize
the work of the fishing fleet which will be effective from the point of view of
conservation of bioresources.

The investigations revealed that even now, when by no means all the regions of
krill distribution have been fully studied, without lessening its reserves. ‘it is
possible to harvest not less than 30 million tons of krill annually. When all the
waters of the Antarctic Ocean have been explored, this quantity evidently can be
increased to 50 million tor .. that is, the krill in Antarctic waters can be pro-
duced in a quantity as great as the present-day yield of fish from the entire
world ocean.

As demonstrated by Soviet investigations, the reserves of some species of fish are
also extremely significant. Fish concentrations have been observed in the area
of South Georgia, Rerguelen, Heard Islands, etc.

97
FOR OFFICIAl.lEﬂI(NVLY
FOIiMWﬂCJAI.USE(NVLY

The formation of concentrations of pelagic fish is directly associated with the
development and concentration of highly productive zones of pelagic crustaceans.
In these zones there are concentrations of luminescent anchovies, epigonus, mauro-
likus and other fish. These are entirely new-objects of exploitation and their re-
serves are extremely significant. Work is now proceeding on their study and ex-
ploitation. Concentrations of bottom fish live in coastal regions of Antarctica,

on the shelf and on some banks: these include different speCies of Nototenia, band-
ed pickerel and Argentinidae.

Plans call for a further considerable broadening of investigations of the biological
resources of the Antarctic Ocean during the 11th Five-Year Plan. The purpose Of 311
these plans is two complex programs - "Kril'" ("Krill") and "Pelagial'" ("Pelagic
Areas"). The work under the "Kril'" program. which will continue the study of biol-
ogy and krill reserves, will involve a broadening and deepening of technological
investigations. Heat is even now being produced from krill: it is a high-quality
protein product with a high content of noninterchangeable acids and other elements
valuable for nutrition. Preserves are made from this meat which with respect to
taste does not differ from canned crab. Positive results have been obtained in the
preparation of fodder products from krill. It has been used in making flour for

the feeding of poultry and additives to cattle fodder. Krill is also used in pro-
ducing valuable chemical substances: chitin, chitosan, etc. This complex problem
requires further chemical and technological investigations.

Under the "Pelagial'" program plans call for the study and exploitation of commer-
cial concentrations of pelagic fish which are not found near the coast and which
live beyond the limits of the ZOO-mile economic zones.

He, stated the speaker, are being guided by the principle of rational use of biore—
sources without disruption of their conditions for reproduction in that ecosystem
which developed in the waters of the Antarctic Ocean. He congratulated the invest-
igators of Antarctica and wished them further successes.

Then A. P. Aleksandrov proposed that congratulations be sent to the participants of
the 25th and 26th expeditions and the crews of ships now in Antarctica on the occa-
sion of the 25th anniversary of work of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition.

The motion picture film "Continent Hithout Boundaries" was shown at conclusion of
the session.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1981

5303
CSO: 8144/0408

- END -

IN)! 0i1ﬂ€1Al.lﬁSl2(ﬂﬁLY