FUR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

JPRS L/10093

4 November 1981

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 6, June 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL l'SF "NI \

NOT ICE

‘Ihe contents of this report will change with the next issue. Instead of
cover-to-cover translation, it will contain either translations or abstracts of
all articles from the Soviet journal METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY. 'lhe Table of
Contents will list each article in that issue of the journal and will note these

articles which have been abstracted.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USSR REPORT

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 6, June 1981

Translation of the Russian-language monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I
GIDROLCGIYA published in Moscow by Gidromateoizdat.

CONTENTS
Principal Results and Prospects for Development of Rydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring................................................ ..... .. 1
Heather Forecasting: Status and hunediate Tasks.... ....... ........... .......... 19
Study of Climate and Its Practical Aspects ........ .............................. 37

Present Status of Climatic Research............................................. 59
The Heliogeophyaical Service, Its Tasks and Prospects for Development........... 7b
Modern Problems in Oceanographic Research ......... .............................. 92
Principal Results and Prospects for the Development of Investigations in the

Field of Hydrology in Relation to the Problems of Shifting of Part of the

Runoff nf Northern Rivers to the South .......... . ..... ........ ............... 106

Principal Results of Agrometeorologicnl Investigations in the Tenth Five-Year
Plan and Prospects for Their Further Development............................. 119

Effect of Solar Activity on the Temperature Regime in the Polar Atmosphere..... 126
Preliminary Results of Implementation of the P668 Program...................... 135

Review of Monograph by I. P. Karasev: 'River Hydrometry and Inventorying of
water Resourccs' (Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1980).......................... 149

Sixtieth Birthday of Natal'ya Leont'yevna Byzova .............. . ..... . .......... 151

Events at the USSR State Comnittee on Rydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring ........... . ......... .. ...... . ................... .................. 153
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070008-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conferences. Meetings and Seminars ............. . ....... . . . . . . . .

Notes From Abroad..... ................... ..

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400070008-2
FOR!OF1W(1AI.USE|MNLY

UDC 551.5.338.98b.3(047)

PRINCIPAL RESULTS AND PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF NYDROHETEOROLOCY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING

Moscow HETEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
16 Apr 81) pp 5-18

[Article by Yu. A. Izrael, corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences, chairman
of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Honitoring]

[Text] Abstract: The results of the work of the
USSR State Comittee on Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring during the
Tenth Five-Year Plan and the basic tasks
facing the Committee and the prospects of
its development are examined.

During the past Tenth Five-Year Plan the broad use of hydrometeorologicol'data
and information on the state of the environment assumed ever-greater importance.

The principal directions in the activity of the State Committee on Bydrometeorology.
including a number of new directions, follow from the most important state docu-
ments. documents of the 26th CPSU Congress.

It must be emphasized that at the 26th CPSU Congress, among the most important tasks
in the field of the natural and technical sciences, a variety of problems were de-
fined such as further study and exploitation of space in the interests of develop-
ment of science. technology and the national economy; problems in study of the

world ocean, including the shelf. for the purpose of rational use of its resources;
problems in improving methods for prediction of weather and other natural pheno-
mena, an increase in the effectiveness of measures in the field of preservation of
nature; development of work in the field of ecology.

The congress defined major tasks in the field of preservation of nature.
The problem is defined of implementing a series of measures for the purpose of re-
ducing the discharge of harmful substances into the environment, improvement in

state control and intensifying of monitoring in the field of use of nature and
preservation of the environment.

The tasks defined at the congress in the report of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev are tasks
which are directly related to the personnel of the State Committee on Hydrometeor-
ology which must be solved during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan. The results of the

l

ltﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE|MNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

work of the Committee during the Tenth Five-Year Plan should be evaluated in the
light of these problems.

During the past Five-Year Plan the Main Administration of the Hydrometeorological
Service was transformed into the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and En-
vironmental Monitoring; the local administrations of the Hydrometeorological Ser-
vice were transformed into republic and territorial administrations of hydrometeor-
ology and environmental monitoring; centers were established for study and monitor-
ing of contamination of the environment, the strengthening of network and scien-
tific institutes. The state observation system is developing at a new technical
level.

Hydrometeorological Support of the USSR National Economy

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan the hydrometeorological conditions were unfavorable
for many branches of the national economy. For example, for agricultural work the
weather conditions were unfavorable in three of the five years. This resulted in

an increased demand for the supplying of Party and soviet agencies and national
economic organizations with information on current and anticipated hydrometeorolog-
ical conditions.

The principal task in the field of meteorological support, which was faced in the
Tenth Five-Year Plan and a problem which must still be solved is an increase in
the effectiveness of servicing of all branches of the national economy.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan the guaranteed probability of short-range predic-
tions and warnings of the occurrence of dangerous phenomena, even according to a
new, more rigorous evaluation, increased by 1-31. The mean guaranteed probability
of diurnal (24-hour) predictions for a region for 1980 was 892. The broad use of
these predictions in the national economy will give an appreciable economic effect.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan much work was done on improving the system for dis-
seminating warnings of the occurrence of especially dangerous weather phenomena
to the leaders of Party and soviet agencies and interested organizations.

For the purpose of a further increase in the quality of hydrometeorological support
of the developing branches of the national economy over the course of the Tenth
Five-Year Plan the operational-prognostic agencies were strengthened at 21 admin-
istrative centers of the autonomous republics and oblasts and seven new specializ-
ed hydrometeorological observatories and three hydrometeorological bureaus were
organized.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan the institutes of the State Comittee on Hydrometeor-
ology under complex hydrometeorological conditions for the most part in a timely
manner and properly supplied key agencies and interested organizations with inform-
ation on heat and moisture supply of sown crops, their state, anticipated condi-
tions for yield formation and warnings on the occurrence of weather phenomena dan-
gerous for agriculture.

Each year surface and aerial investigations of sown crops and pasture vegetation
are carried out in a large volume.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan it is necessary to ensure a more routine and
complete receipt of information on the condition and moisture supply of agricul-
tural crops and pasture vegetation, increasing the areas of investigations of ag-
ricultural crops to 55 million hectares and gmmma suveys of soil moisture content
to 15 million hectares.

There was a considerable expansion in the collection of information on the condi-
tions for yield formation on drainable soils. Three new agrometeorological sta-
tions were opened, as well as 80 agrometeorological posts on improvable lands and
390 agrometnornlopica] posts at collective and state farms.

The annual predictions of crop yield and gross harvest of grain, prepared by the
USSR Hydrometeorological Center and the administrations of hydrometeorology and
environmental monitoring, were extremely successful.

The tasks of developing the agroindustrial complex in our country, decreed by the
26th CPSU Congress. require a substantial improvement in the hydrometeorologicsl
support of agriculture.

During the current Five-Year Plan the institutes of the State Committee on Hydro—
meteorology are faced with the task of developing new or improving existing methods
for agrometeorological predictions, making it possible to predict the gross harvest
of graincrops with an error not exceeding 5-102. The solution of this problem is
provided for within the framework of a special purposeful program.

The institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and the administrations
of hydrometeorology and environmental monitoring, jointly with the All-Union Acad-
emy of Agricultural Sciences and the scientific research institutes of the USSR
Agriculture Ministryzmust generalize the experience in use of hydrometeorological
information in the distribution of agricultural crops and the planning of agroen-
gineering measures.

During the Tenth Five.Year Plan there was further development of the modification
of hail processes for the purpose of protecting valuable agricultural crops against
hailfalls. The area of the protected crops was increased during the period of the
five-year plan by 2 million hectares and in 1980 reached 6.4 million hectares.
Eleven new antihail detachments were formed, the technical outfitting of the anti-
bail service was improved and new modification apparatus is being introduced. This
will give an economic effect of about 100 million rubles each year.

Long-range predictions of water inflow into the reservoirs of the Volga-Kama Hy-
droelectric Power Station, Angara-Yenisey stages and other major hydroelectric
stations had a high guaranteed probability during the Tenth Five-Year Plan. At the
present time such predictions are prepared for 110 reservoirs.

Predictions of the water volume in the rivers of Central Asia and Kazakhstan had
great importance for the planning of sown areas and the distribution of water
among the republics at the time of low water in 1976 and 1977. The water volume of
rivers in irrigable regions of Central Asia during the growing season and in 1980
was also ably predicted.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology carried out a consider-
able volume of work for studying mudflow and avalanche danger.

Despite the frequent recurrence of unfavorable weather conditions on the seas dur-

ing the five-year period, there were no mishaps or disasters there due to incorrect
forecasts and storm warnings. The guaranteed probability of the warnings of danger-
ous phenomena was from 96 to 1001.

There was further development of servicing of ships of the Ministry of the Maritime
Fleet and the Ministry of the Fish Industry with recommendations on the most advan-
tageous and safe navigation routes in the oceans. Each year from 2,500 to 3,000
ships received such recommendations.

During recent years support has been given to the work of the fishing and krill
expeditions of the USSR Ministry of the Fish Industry in new, poorly studied re-
gions of the Antarctic Ocean.

Work has successfully developed on study and exploitation of Antarctica. The 25th
Soviet Antarctic Expedition opened the new Soviet station ”Russkaya" in one of the
inaccessible regions of western Antarctica.

A snow-ice airdrome was constructed in 1980 at Molodezhnaya station and the first
test flight of an 11-180 aircraft was made along the Moscowantarctica route.

In the central polar basin of the Arctic five high—latitude aerial expeditions
were carried out in the last five years and the "Severnyy Polyus" drifting sta-

tions continued to operate. The new "Severnyy Polyus-ZS" station began to operate
this year.

The total economic effect from the use of hydrometeorologicsl information and pre-
dictions in the national economy during the five-year period in those branches
where this effect can be taken into account was more than 4 billion rubles.

The task in the field of hydrometeorological servicing of the national economy is
to increase the economic effect from the use of hydro-eteorological information
in the national economy by 10-151 in comparison with the Tenth Five-Year Plan.

Despite the definite successes attained in the Tenth Five-Year Plan, there are un-
solved problems which lower the quality and effectiveness of hydrometeorological
support of the national economy. For example, the guaranteed probability of the
monthly predictions does not meet the needs of the national economy; the flexi-
bility of the system for the registry and collection of information is inadequate,
especially outside the standard observation times under anomalous conditions and

at the time of weather phenomena; the interaction between the directors of a num-
ber of republic and territorial administrations of hydrometeorology and environ-
mental monitoring and Party and soviet agencies and national economic organiza-
tions is inadequate.

Special attention must be given to the need for clarity and routineness in the
collection and dissemination of information.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0*?1C1AI.U$EGNNLY

In the Eleventh Five-Year Plan it is proposed that one of the first steps be the
development of an automated system for the dissemination of information from the
Computation Center of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center to the computation cen-
ters of the Ministry of Power and Electrification, Ministry of the Gas Industry and
Ministry of Land Reclamation and Water Resources (USSR) and the Ministry of Agri-
culture (RSFSR).

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan particular attention was devoted to the meteoro-
logical support of civil aviation. Aviation is developing at an exceptionally vigor-
ous rate and is very sensitive to weather; the requirements on meteorological sup-
port here are exceptionally high.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan 6 new aviation meteorological centers, 51 aviation
meteorological stations. 47 operations groups and 80 meteorological aviation posts
were organized. The plan for development of the operational network was completely
implemented.

Individual methods for aviation predictions (thunderstorms, hail. icing) were devel-
opcd and improved; methodological recommendations on determination of the wind shear
and turbulence in the lower layer of the atmosphere, etc. were published.

An improvement was achieved in the meteorological support of civil aviation as a
result of implementation of the abovedmentioned measures. As an average for the
five-year period there was only one interrupted flight due to incorrect predic-
tions per 7,070 aircraft departures.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan in order to improve the meteorological support
of civil aviation plans call for:

- development of the operational network of aviation meteorological centers and
aviation meteorological stations at civil aviation airports for the most part in
the Siberia and Far East regions, including the organization of 1&2 new aviation
meteorological stations, groups and posts;

- introduction of 120 automatic stations into operation at airports, as well as
6,000 different meteorological instruments, introduction of an automated measure-
ment-information system and other measures at airdromes.

work on Study and Monitoring Environmental Contamination

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan work in the field of study and monitoring of the
environment was greatly advanced. The plan for organizing new network subdivisions
was completely implemented.

Fifty—one laboratories for monitoring the contamination of atmospheric air. 19
laboratories for monitoring the contamination of surface waters and 17 hydrobiolog-
ical laboratories were organized. At virtually all the republic (territorial) ad-
ministrations of hydrometeorology and environmental monitoring centers were estab-
lished for studying and monitoring environmental contamination.

As of 1 January 1981 the monitoring of the contamination of atmospheric air by the
agencies of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology was being carried out at 273
cities and industrial centers of the country; monitoring of the quality of surface
waters was being carried out at 3,150 points and monitoring of the quality of sea

water at 1.500 stations.

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁ(1Al.USEloNlN
FOR‘0F?1CLALI£SE|DNLY

Hork was further developed on the prediction of the levels of contamination of
atmospheric air. Predictions are now being prepared for 122 cities.

The monitoring of transboundary transport of contaminants over great distances was
organized.

At the present time the State Committee on Hydrometeorology has been assigned the
responsibility for carrying out the functions of an interbranch administration for
monitoring environmental contamination. The Committee has actively participated

in drawing up the "Law on Preservation of Atmospheric Air.” adopted by the USSR
Supreme Soviet in June 1980.

Since 1976 the State Committee on Bydrometeorology has formulated and at fixed
times has sent to the USSR State Planning Committee the drafts of national plans
for the economic and social development of the USSR with relevance to the "Preserv-
ation of Nature and the Rational Use of Natural Resources."

The State Cormdxtee on Hydrometeorology has organized an inventorying of the
sources of discharge of harmful substances into the atmosphere.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan specialists developed a number of new technical
means for monitoring contamination of the environment. a high percentage of which
have been put into standard production.

work has developed on the setting of norms for the discharge of harmful substances
from stationary sources of contamination. In the cities the key organizations for
the setting of norms have been determined. Drafts of "Regulations on the Sequence
for Approval and Introduction of Maximum Admissible Concentrations" and "Systemat-
ic Instructions on the Setting of Norms for Discharges Into the Atmosphere" have
been drawn up. Appropriate sections and groups have been established in 55 cities
in the country.

The institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology have initiated work on
the expert evaluation of projects with respect to prevention of the contamination
of atmospheric air: this will make it possible, already in the planning stage, to
make provision for the necessary environmental protection measures.

During the last two years the agencies of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology
have carried out expert evaluations of about 2.000 major planning decisions.

The specialists of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology have checked the status
of work on preservation of the air basin and have crawn up proposals for its san-
itization in many cities.

In 1980 the State Committee on Hydrometeorology raised a number of questions con-
cerning the improvement of environmental protection work at the enterprises of

several ministries and departments.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan plans call for the implementation of the follow-
ing measures in the field of regulation of the use and preservation of the air

basin:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-- creation of a State Inspectorate for Protecting Atmospheric Air Against Con-
taminants and by the end of the five-year period the organization of all links
in the State Inspectorate for the most part will be completed;

-- development of -orms for the maximum admissible discharge of harmful sub-

stances into the atmosphere and interim approved discharges of harmful substances
for enterprises situated in 250 cities;

-- organization of regular taking and analysis of samples of discharges into the
atmosphere at 1.700 major enterprises (in 110 cities).

It is desirable that majcr regional subdivisions for expert evaluations be estab-
lished. '

During the Eleventh Five.Year Plan subdivisions will be established for the setting
of norms for discharges of harmful substances and plans will be developed for pres-
ervation of the air basin in another 104 cities, which will make it possible to

monitor enterprises located in 159 cities, that is, in virtually all oblast centers
of the country.

Since 1975 the Committee has had the responsibility for an ionospheric-magnetic
service and a service for monitoring radiation conditions in circumterrestrial
space. For all practical purposes these services were organized and fully develop—
ed in the course of the Tenth Five-Year Plan.

A system for the collection and processing of heliogeophysical information and ser-
vices for predicting the state of the ionosphere, the earth’s magnetic field and
radiation conditions were created, as well as regional centers for these ser-
vices.

During recent years there has been an increase in the number of organizations ser-
viced with information and predictions by the geophysical services. Since 1979 the
Committee has successfully ensured the servicing of distant flights of crews of
the "Soyuz"-"Sa1yut" space complexes with predictions of radiation conditions in
circumterrestrial space.

Development of the State System for Observing and Monitoring the State of the
Environment and Climate

At the present time one of the principal sources of information on the state of the
environment is the surface subsystem. It is made up of 3,100 hydrometeorological
stations, 8.000 hydrometeorological posts, 136 hydrometeorological observatories,
several thousand stations for the monitoring of contaminants, more than 300 labor-
stories for monitoring contaminations and more than 70 major expeditionary and sci-
entific research ships.

Observations and primary processing are t1rried out in these network agencies.

The surface network is enormous in its structure, but it has not yet reached its
optimum size.

During the Tenth Five—Year Plan the surface network continued to develop. The tasks
of opening and rationalizing stations and posts were carried out. A total of 116
hydrometeorological stations were opened and 1,160 posts were organized.

FOR OFTWCLAL USEECR§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the years of the five-year plan there was an increase in the quality of ob-
servations and work at the majority of the administrations. More than 951 of the
stations and posts provided excellent and good work quality.

During the five years in the network new service, residential and work structures
were constructed at more than 300 stations at a cost of more than 10 million
rubles.

A broad range of technical instrumentation and equipment for the collection of hy-
drometeorological information was furnished to the organizations of the State
Comittee on Hydrometeorology during the Tenth Five-Year Plan either for the first
time or to replace worn-out or outmoded equipment. The plans for accomplishing such
work during the five-year period and in 1980 were met.

Work was completed on the development of a number of new types of technical equip-
ment (Scientific Research Institute of Instrument Making, Central Design Bureau,
etc.). Much work was carried out for creating and putting into operation the
"Pogoda" automated weather system.

Thirty-one computation centers are operating in the data processing system of the
State Comittee on Hydrometeorology. Among the electronic computers put into opera-
tion most are computers of the YeS series.

The space subsystem for hydrometeorological observations and the study of natural
resources occupies a special place in the state observation systan.

During the Tenth Five—Year Plan there was a considerable expansion in the use of
space vehicles and facilities for the collection of hydroseteorological informa-
tion and for the purpose of monitoring the environment.

Work was completed on tests of the meteorological space systu with the second-gen-
eration satellites "Meteor-2," considerably surpassing first-generation satellites
in their technical specifications.

At the administrations of hydrometeorology and environmental monitoring the network
of autonoaous surface points for the reception of satellite information was consid-
erably expanded and by the end of the five-year period had attained 60 points.

0n the basis of the "Meteor" experimental satellites it was possible to put the
experimental 'Heteor-Priroda" space system into operation. Satellites of this sys-
tem ensure the collection of information needed by many ministries and departments
for the study of natural resources in the solution of branch problems.

During recent years the surface complex for the reception and processing of satel-
lite data has been considerably upgraded with new and superior equipment.

Work is being done on the creation of a geostationary meteorological satellite.
The purposeful program for the development of the State Syst- for Observations and

Monitoring of the Environment during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan and in the per-
iod ending in 1990 provided for measures directed to its further development

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

(second stage). The Central Design Bureau of the State Con-ittee on Hydrometeor-
ology has prepared the sound basis for such development.

In the development of the subsystem for the collection of information plans call
for the development of several modifications of automatic and saniautomatic sta-
tions (semiautomatic station for the large-scale network, making it possible to
exclude the need for nighttime personnel) and other technical apparatus on the
basis of integrated meteorological equipment systems (ASHT - agregatirovannyye
sredstv meteorologicheskoy tekhniki).

During "-0 Eleven?!- Five-Year Plan it is proposed that 300 new points for meteoro-
logical observations be established, as well as 250 points for hydrological observ-
ations, 60 points for agrometeorological observations, approximately up to 60
points for radar observations of clouds and precipitation, 70-75 points for oper-
ational meteorological support of civil aviation airports, more than 500 points
for monitoring air contamination and 1.000 for monitoring water contamination.

Since existing network observation facilities will long retain their importance in
the surface subsystem for a long time, plans call for a substantial increase in
the volume of construction and repair of work and residential buildings and struc-
tures of hydrometeorological organizations, especially inaccessible stations, and
also carrying out other measures for improving the working conditions and work en-

vironment of workers .

In this five-year plan it is proposed that the network for radiosonde observations
of the atmosphere be reoutfitted with a new complex: the small HARZ radiosonde -
the "Titan" radar - a mini-computer. However, the "Meteor" and "Malakhit" aerolog-
ical stations will still be in use for a number of years.

During the course of the five-year plan the first clusters of observation facilit-
ies outfitted with a new generation of unserviced stations will be crated.

Shipboard hydrometeorological stations will be outfitted with remote measurement
instruments and shipboard automatic stations.

Beginning in 1982 the URL—2 will be outfitted with special instrumentation for
the automatic processing of meteorological data, the ”Tsiklon" outfit. Plans call
for the annual installation of up to 10 outfits over the course of the five-year
period.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan it is proposed that the MRI. system be introduc-
ed not only in zones of airline routes. but also for radar determination of pre-
cipitation in regions with a danger of floods.

Provision is made for a considerable inuease in the degree of automation in the
making of observations and the processing of primary data.

In the Far East provision is made for the creation of an automated system of ob-
servations of the development and propagation of tsunamia and the issuance of
tsunami warnings from the main center for the collection and processing of data
at Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the Eleventh Five-Year Plan the complex program provides for a further im-
provement of the Committee's communication system. The following should be ac-
complished:

-- development of the new "Priroda" automated communication system, ensuring an
increase in the rate of transmission through communication channels up to 9600
bits per second;

-— development and testing of an apparatus complex for the high—rate facsimile
transmission of data, making it possible to reduce the time required for trans-
mission and reception of a standard synoptic chart to 1-2 minutes. By 1985 plans
call for the outfitting of all regional centers with this outfit;

-- development of a system for the collection of data from automatic observation
facilities using geostationary artificial earth satellites.

By 1985 there will be considerable development of the "Priroda" automated data
transmission system.

Plans call for the reoutfitting of presently operating and organization of new
communication points at the largest prognostic facilities.

In the data processing system the complex program provides for the following ob-
jectives:

-- the possibility of operational processing of global meteorological information;
-- the possibility of mutual backing-up of the data processing centers and their
integration into a unified computation center network;

-- creation of an environmental data bank.

At the higher data processing level plans call for the creation and operation of
the Main Computation (Prognostic) Center and a considerable development of the
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological Information.

In order to improve existing and create new data banks plans provide for the fur-
ther outfitting of the All—Union Scientific Research Institute of Meteorological
Information, being a world data center (NBC), with modern high-output electronic
computers. hearing in mind that it will serve as a general informational data base
and will ensure the creation of an upper-level environmental data bank.

The plan for 1981-1985 provided for the creation of the following specialized
banks and their preparation for experimental use: "Surface Meteorology and Cli-
mate,” "Synoptic Forecasting," "Aerology." "Oceanography" and a bank for a new
type of data given the name "Profiles" ("Razrezy"); at the State Hydrological In-

stitute —— "State Hater Inventory Bank"; at the Main Geophysical Observatory -
"Actinometry" and "Atmospleric Contamination"; at the Institute of Applied Geo-
physics —- "Heliogeophysics"; at the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of

Agricultural Meteorology -- "Agrometeorology."
At the regional data processing level plans call for the development of the comput-

ation capabilities of four regional centers: at Moscow, Novosibirsk, Tashkent and
Khabarovsk.

With respect to the system for data reduction the complex program provides for the
following during the period 1981-1985:

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-- development of proposals, testing and experimental operation of an automated
system for the reduction of data on the environment ensuring compatability with
republic automated control systems (based at the Belorussian Administration of ﬂy-
drometeorology and Environmental Monitoring);

-— expansion of the information base and improvement in the technical outfitting
of the "Sigma" system for the purpose of routine support of directive and plann-
ing agencies with information;

-- development of a system for the continuous radio transmission of current and
urgent information on the environment to users.

Scientific Research

The scientific investigations of the Committee during the Tenth Five—Year Plan
were carried out at 21 scientific research institutes where about 19,000 special-
ists work.

A new independent Laboratory for Monitoring the Environment and Climate (LAM -—
Laboratoriya monitoringa prirodnoy sredy i klimata) of the State Committee on
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring and the USSR Academy of Sciences
was organized.

The five-year plan for scientific research and experimental design work of the
Committee for 1976-1980 for the most part has been successfully implemented. Impor-
tant scientific and practical results have been obtained in many directions and
these are used extensively in the country's national economy.

In the field of weather forecasting the institutes of the Committee (USSR Hydro-
meteorological Center, West Siberian Scientific Research Institute and others)
have worked on creaticn of computation methods for the prediction of meteorolog-
ical elements on the basis of numerical solutions of the full equations of atmo-
spheric hydro thermodynamics . -

As a result of work in the field of mesometeorology, carried out during recent
years at the institutes of the Committee (Central Aerological Observatory, Main
Geophysical Observatory, Rest Siberian Scientific Research Institute) for the

first time it became possible to approach the creation of a model for local numer-
ical prediction of meteorological elements, that is, prediction for a territory
comparable to the extent of Moskovskaya Oblast, for a time period of about 24 hours
but with a greater resolution (about 10 km horizontally).

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan it was possible to achieve new results in the im-
provement of methods for short- and intermediate—range weather prediction. In par—
ticular, a method was introduced into operational practice for prediction with a
regional prognostic model on the basis of solution of a system of full equations
in hydrodynamics. The guaranteed success of short-range predictions for Moscow in
1980 was 86.5%, for Moskovskaya Oblast -- 892, and in the period of the summer
Olympic Games the guaranteed success of short-range 24-hour predictions was 93.81.

All this indicates the availability of quite good methods for making short-range
weather predictions.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An automated intermediate-range weather prediction system was put into operation.
A system for the objective interpretation of hydrodynamic predictions was created
for obtaining a prediction of weather elements. A result of this, in particular,
is the prediction of minimum and maximum air temperature for a five-day period.
Detailed methods for predicting air temperature for 5-10 days for individual re-
gions of the country have been developed and are being successfully used in prac-
tical work.

A model of general circulation of the atmosphere has been developed for the pur-
pose of development of prognostic schemes for study of planetary atmospheric
processes by the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. Using this model the USSR Hydro-
meteorological Center has carried out investigations in the field of planetary
dynamics and on their basis has developed a method for predicting meteorological
elements for 10 days.

In the field of development of methods for long-range weather prediction definite
work has been carried out by the USSR Hydrometeorological Center, West Siberian
Scientific Research Institute, Main Geophysical Observatory and other institutes.
In particular, the USSR Hydrometeorological Center has formulated the theoretical
principles for including nonadiabatic factors in a highly simple thermodynamic
model of the atmosphere and ocean.

The West Siberian Scientific Research Institute, in collaboration with the Comput-
ation Center of the Siberian Division of the USSR Academy of Sciences, on the ba-
sis of the concept of G. I. Harchuk on the decisive role of the ocean in the for-
mation of long—term weather anomalies, carried out numerical experiments within
the framework of a general model of circulation of the atmosphere and ocean. The
results indicate the possibility of practical application of the proposed ap-
proaches.

In order to solve the problem of long-range weather prediction it is necessary

to obtain detailed information on atmospheric processes, especially concerning
atmospheric circulation, at a global scale. Hork carried out under the Program
for Investigation of Global Atmospheric Processes (CARP) was directed precisely
to these ends. The scientific institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeor-
ology took an active part in this work. As a result of this work we now have

sets of data on the state of the atmosphere and ocean for the observational phase

of CARP which are unique with respect to quality and completeness. work has been
initiated on the processing and use of the accumulated data.

As before, one of the central problems in the improvement of weather predictions
is the task of supporting the mentioned studies with higheoutput electronic com-
puters. Such equipment is planned for the Main Computation (Prognostic) Center
which is to be established in this five-year period in Moscow.

Long-range prediction imposes special requirements on information on the state
of the atmosphere, ocean and surface of the land. Precisely from this point of
view it is necessary to emphasize the importance of the observations organized
in the last five-year period on a permanent basis in the Atlantic Ocean within
the framework of the "Razrezy" program. The very same can be said with respect
to the creation of a cloud cover service organized on the basis of use of in-
formation obtained from meteorological artificial earth satellites.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAl. USE ONLY

Much work was done during the Tenth Five-Year Plan by the scientific research in-
stitutes of the Committee in the field of development of methods for making agro-
meteorological predictions (USSR Hydrometeorological Center, All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Agricultural Meteorology).

The scientific research institutes of the Gmmmittee have formulated special recom-
mendations on the agrometeorological validation of individual agroengineering pro-
cedures for the cultivation of agricultural crops and meliorative measures in the

nonchernozem zone of the RSFSR and other regions of the country.

During the pest five-year period the USSR Hydrometeorological Center and other in-
stituces (Central Asian Scientific Research Institute, Ukrainian Scientific Re-
search Institute) developed methods for long-range predictions of water inflow
into the reservoirs of major hydroelectric power stations and methods for the
rational use of water resources (State Hydrological Institute). Investigations and
predictions of possible hydrological, climatic and ecological changes over the
territory of the USSR were used in preparing the technical-economic basis for the
shifting of part of the runoff of northern and Siberian rivers into the southern
regions of the country (State Hydrological Institute, Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute, and others).

Studies in the field of creation of a theory of climate and the development of
methods for predicting climate, carried out at the Main Geophysical Observatory,
State Hydrological Institute and other instituted, made it possible to draw con-

clusions concerning the influence of economic activity on possible climatic
changes.

work was carried out for improving methods for warning of and contending with
avalanches and mudflows (Central Asian Scientific Research Institute, Transcaucas-
ian Scientific Research Institute, High-Mountain Geophysical Institute, Kazakh
Scientific Research Institute).

The institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology, headed by the Institute
of Applied Geophysics (jointly with the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences and other departments) have developed complex predictions of the state of
the environment and have given evaluations of man's influence on nature. It is im-
portant to note that during the Tenth Five-Year Plan a number of institutes of the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology began extensive ecological investigations. The
scientific principles for a many-sided analysis of the state of the environment
were formulated (LAN).

The Institute of Applied Geophysics formulated scientific approaches to evalua-
tion and analysis of the propagation of contaminating substances over great dis-
tances. These served as the basis for Saliet proposals for the drawing-up of an
international convention on the transboutdary propagation of contaminations over
_ great distances.

The Institute of Applied Geophysics, Hydrochemical Institute, Main Geophysical
Observatory, Laboratory for Monitoring the Environment and Climate and other in-
stitutes of the Committee have done much work on the scientific validation of an
optimum system for observations and monitoring of the level of environmental con-
tamination, including at the background level.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Main Geophysical Observatory has prepared systematic instructions on the in-
ventorying of the discharges of harmful substances into the atmosphere of cities
and industrial centers and a method for setting norms for discharges of harmful
substances into the atmosphere for industrial enterprises.

Investigations in the field of preservation of the marine environment were further
developed during the Tenth Five-Year Plan (State Oceanographic Institute, Far East-

ern Scientific Research Institute, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Insti-
tute).

In the field of development of methods for computing hydrometeorological charac-
teristics the institutes of the Committee have obtained a number of significant

results. In particular, climatic indices were generalized for setting norms for
glaze and glaze-wind loads.

A manual on the study of microclimate for the purposes of agricultural production,
a map of agroclimatic resources of the nonchernozem zone of the RSPSR, a climatic
map of the Baykal-Amur Railroad zone and a map of the heat supplies for the grow-
ing season in the zone of the Baykal-Amur Railroad were prepared and published

for meeting the needs of agriculture.

The State Oceanographic Institute. in collaboration with the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute, Main Geophysical Observatory, Far Eastern Sci-
entific Research Institute and other institutes and territorial administrations

of the State Committee on ﬂydrometeorology, developed the scientific principles
for the supplying of the hydroengineering construction industry with regime hydro-
meteorological data, including studies for the finding and production of petroleum
and gas in the shelf zone of USSR seas.

Scientific investigations directed to the development of new and improvement of
existing methods for the artificial modification of meteorological processes have
been extensively developed. Methods have been developed for the artificial regul-
ation of precipitation, methods and apparatus for the modification of hail, thun-
derstorms, fog and low clouds (Institute of Experimental Meteorology, Central
Aerologicsl Observatory, High-Mountain Geophysical Institute, Transcaucasian Sci-
entific Research Institute).

Major investigations of the world ocean were carried out during 1976-1980. As a
result of these studies new and important information was obtained concerning
thermodynamic processes in the ocean and on the interaction between the ocean and
the atmosphere at different scales. Investigations were made of sea waves, cur-
rents, tides, the ice cover of the oceans and seas.

Long-range predictions of hydrological and hydrochemical conditions in the White
Sea, Sea of Azov, Black Sea, Caspian Sea and Aral Sea were formulated.

Extensive investigations carried out during 1976-1980 in the Arctic and in Antarc-
tica made possible considerable progress in the practical exploitation of these
regions (Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute).

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the field of satellite meteorology a method for remote determination of water
surface temperature and the altitude of the upper cloud boundary was introduced

into operational practice on the basis of data from satellite spectral measure-

ments of outgoing thermal radiation. The basic principles for active and passive
SH? equipment for determining the characteristics of the underlying surface were
formulated and validated.

Despite the achieved results, in the activity of a number of scientific research
institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology there are serious shortcom-
ings lessening the effectiveness and quality of their work. Not in all cases was
there assuranr' rh-t the work would be carried out on the basis of through plann-
ing of r‘- scientif;: theme from theoretical investigations to practical applica-
tion of the results. At some institutes inadequate attention is being devoted to
the problems involved in the introduction of the final results of scientific re-
search and experimental design work. It is necessary to strengthen monitoring of
the implementation of scientific investigations on the part of the administra-
tions and divisions of the central headquarters of the State Committee on Hydro—

meteorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Tasks of Scientific Research Institutes and Purposeful Programs of the State
Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Honitoring During the Eleventh
Five-Year Plan

For the purpose of a many-sided and complete implementation of the tasks follow-
ing from the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress, the decrees of the directive
agencies in the field of hydrometeorology and environmental monitoring, as well
as assurance of a tic-in of specialized plans with material-technical and finan-
cial support, multisided purposeful programs have been developed along the prin-
cipal directions of Committee activity (a total of eight programs) in which there
is a reflection of both the scientific and productive aspects of our activity,
the problems involved in the application of the results in the national economy.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan the scientific investigations carried out by
the institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology were directed to the
implementation of studies included in the program for the solution of the most
important scientific and technical problems approved by the joint decrees of the
State Committee on Science and Technology, the USSR State Planning Commission and
the USSR Academy of Sciences. These are programs relating to the development of
new and improvement of existing methods for long- and short-range hydrometeorolog-
ical predictions and predictions of heliogeophysical processes and the development
of methods and equipment for artificial modification of meteorological processes
and their introduction into the national economy, as well as methods for evaluat-
ing possible changes in climate and the influence of these changes on the national
economy, for the creation and introduction of effective methods and equipment for
monitoring environmental contamination, the development and introduction of a sys-
tem for monitoring the background state of the environment and climate, and also
the carrying out of multisided investigations of hydrophysical processes in the
world ocean. the development of scientific and technical principles and measures
for improving the use and preservation of water resources, and the development of
scientific and technical principles for the territorial redistribution of water

(CSIJUI’C 28 .

15

FOR 051NC]AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Work on these programs, carried out in collaboration with other ministries and de-
partments, will make it possible to concentrate the scientific potential of dif-
ferent institutes on the solution of major problems which are of great scientific
and national economic importance.

As already noted, the purposeful programs of the State Couittee on Hydrometeorol-
ogy, directed to the solution of national economic problems, are organically relat-
ed to the scientific plans and programs. In particular, work has developed exten-
sively on the purposeful multisided program “Heather Prediction," since precisely
weather prediction lies at the basis of all hydrometeorological predictions.

Thus, on the basis of the use of models of general circulation of the atmosphere,
with allowance for the properties of the underlying surface, the task is set of
improving the hydrodynamic-synoptic method for prediction of the principal meteor-
ological elements by regions of the country for 5-7 days in advance with a guaran-
teed probability of 80-90%.

The task is set of developing methods for predicting mean monthly air temperatures
and the sum of precipitation for the purpose of increasing their accuracy by 10-
152 and bringing the guaranteed probability of these predictions to 70-75:.

Through the joint efforts of specialists of the State Committee on Hydrometeorol-
ogy and the USSR Academy of Sciences plans call for improvement in methods for
long-range weather prediction with use of the theory of conjugate equations in
hydrodynamics and on the basis of a broadening of the volume of information on the
state of the ocean and atmosphere so as to bring the guaranteed probability of
these predictions to 60-652.

A special purposeful program provides for improvement in the system for the hydro-
meteorological support of the principal branches of the national economy of the
country for the purpose of a more complete and operational support of these branch-
es with hydrometeorological information.

The purposeful multisided program "Artificial Modification" is directed to an in-
crease in the reliability of protection of agricultural plantings against hailfalls
and bringing the protected areas up to 11 million hectares with a total saving of
not less than 100-150 million rubles annually, as well as ensuring work on the
artificial increase in precipitation by 1985 over an area of 1.3 million hectares
and by 1990 over a still greater area; in addition, it is directed to an implement-
ation of a search for ways to modify warm fogs, thunderstorms and frosts.

A special purposeful multisided program is directed to a solution of scientific,
operational, organizational and other problems in the field of development of a
national service of observations and monitoring of environmental contamination.
As a result of implementation of this program scientific research will be carried
out, new scientific laboratories will be established and existing ones will be
strengthened, centers working on this problem will be created and enlarged, net-
work organizations will be developed and norm-setting and juridical documentation
will be worked out. All this will make it possible to ensure better-defined func-
tioning of the national service of observations and monitoring of environmental
contamination.

16

FOR 0F1WC1A1.USElNNLY
FOR 0F$1C1AL.USEIDNLN

Investigations in the Arctic and Antarctic are making it possible to obtain new
and check existing concepts concerning the patterns of meteorological and hydro-
logical processes, including the properties of the ice cover, for the purpose

of ensuring a changeover to year-round navigation in the Arctic, the mastery of
the continental shelf and preservation of the environment in the Arctic region.
This program is concentrating the efforts of Soviet Antarctic investigations on
a determination of the possibility of exploiting the natural resources of Antarc-
tica and the Antarctic Ocean.

At the present time contamination of the environment has attained such an intens-
ity that it has hc-one appreciable everywhere even at the background level. In
this connection, in this five-year plan the formulation and introduction of a
national system for background monitoring and the implementation of prediction

of the state of the environment at the background level as well is becoming ex-
tremely timely. Such a prediction is acutely necessary in the planning of the
development of the national economy over the long term. This work will be carried
out within the framework of a new scientific and technical program of the State
Committee on Science and Technology. The State Committee on Hydrometeorology is

the key department for this program. These tasks should be carried out in the
course of the five-year period.

Work in the field of space meteorology and development of a general system of ob-
servations and monitoring of the state of the environment will also be developed
in accordance with a special multiaided program of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring.

Finally, it is necessary to discuss the development of international scientific
and technical cooperation of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology.

International cooperation is an indispensable part of the activity of the State
Committee on Hydrometeorology and is directed first of all to obtaining hydro-
meteorological information from the entire earth, to solving complex scientific
problems.

The active participation of the Soviet Union in a number of major international
projects, such as the world Heather Hatch. Program for Investigation of Global
Atmospheric Processes, Joint Global System of Oceanic Stations, etc., made pos-
sible a considerable increase in the volume of data arriving at the world (Hos-
cow) and regional (Tashkent, Novosibirsk, Khabarovsk) meteorological centers.

Scientific and technical cooperation in the field of hydrometeorology, space
meteorology, preservation of the environment and rational use of the earth's nat-
ural resources deveIOped and improved during the Tenth Five-Year Plan. Coopera-
tion with the socialist countries within the framework of multilateral and bi-
lateral agreements developed particularly broadly and productively. Internation—
al scientific and technical cooperation of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology
also also took place with many developing countries (Afghanistan, India, Angola,
Mozambique, and others) and with the capitalist countries (United States, France,
England, Sweden, Finland, Denmark and others).

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The General High-Level European Conference on the Environment, held in 1979 on
the initiative of the USSR, was of exceptional importance. This led to the sign-
ing by 32 countries of Europe, the United States and Canada of an international
convention on transboundary contamination of the atmosphere over great distances
and a declaration on technology with little or no waste products, which was a
significant contribution to realization of the official final act of the general
European conference at Helsinki on safety and cooperation in Europe. The Com—
mittee made a major contribution to preparations for this conference and actively
participates in the realization of this convention.

The participation of the Soviet Union in the international meteorological experi—
ments FCGE, MONEx, POLEX and a number of others had a major effect. As a result
of these experiments new data were obtained on global circulation of atmospheric
processes, on interaction between the atmosphere and ocean. so necessary for the
solution of the problem of long-range weather predictions; the analysis of the
results of the Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE) has been virtually completed.

As already noted. work is successfully developing under the "Razrezy" ("Profiles")
program on a national and international basis. This program is specially directed
to a quantitative determination of the role of interaction between the atmosphere
and ocean, the role of special energy-active zones in the ocean in the formation
of weather on the continents.

The effective development of the mentioned work in the field of international co-
operation will help in the successful solving of highly complex problems in the
field of long-range weather prediction. evaluation of possible changes in the
earth's climate, ozone layer, anthropogenic changes in the state of the biosphere
and other particularly acute geophysical and ecological problems.

In conclusion it must be noted that the development of work in the field of hydro-
meteorology and environmental monitoring in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan and in

the more distant future should make a substantial contribution to the development
of the national economy of our country and should also favor the preservation and
improvement of a high quality of the environment, being a highly important element
in the well-being of the Soviet people.

18
IKNICHﬂﬂC1Al.USE(MVLY

uoc 551.509
HEATHER muscasrmc: STATUS AND Demure 'rasxs“

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDBDLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
10 Mar 81) pp 19-31

[Article by H. A. Petrosyants, professor. Hydrometeorological Scientific Research
Center]

[Text] Abstract: The article summarizes the
results of work of the USSR Bydrometeor-
ological Center on the method for fore-
casting weather for different times in
advance during the Tenth Five-Year Plan
and problems for the future are outlined.

As a result of the ever-increasing needs of man's economic activity for precise
weather forecasts for different times in advance the number of studies devoted

to this problem, both in the Soviet Union, and especially abroad, is increasing
like an avalanche. A review of investigations in this field is a timely but an
independent task. In addition, routine practical work in the preparation of fore-
casts at the present time is extremely dependent on the technical means for col-
lecting and processing information. The standardization of these means for the
time being is a matter of the future. Accordingly, in this article we will exam-
ine exclusively the studies of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center directed to
the improvement of weather forecasts for different tines in advance.

Short-Range Heather Forecasts (Forecasts for One-Three Days in Advance)

The working method for preparing short-range weather forecasts is the synoptic
method, that is. the frontological analysis method. which now relies not on the
extrapolation method, but on the numerical hydrodynamic prediction of the synop-
tic situation (fields of the principal isobaric surfaces).

A highly important element of the analysis is determination of the position and
character of the fronts and is now accomplished with additional use of satellite
cloud cover photographs. The quality of short-range weather forecasts is

* Main content of a report at an expanded session of the Presidium of the Sci-
entific and Technical Council, State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Monitoring, 13 October 1980.

INJR‘OFIWCJAI.l£ﬂE(HVLY
I-‘Dll ()l-‘Hi‘lAl. USE ONLY

dependent on the volume of meteorological infatuation used and the quality of
the hydrodynamic forecasting methods. The theoretical principles of these fore-
casting methods have been well developed [20, 24, 65]. However, their practical
application is dependent on many factors, the most important of which are the
productivity and memory of available electronic computers and data support.

At the present time the USSR Hydrometeorological Center has the following numer-
ical short-range forecasting schemes in practical use:

A quasigeostrophic scheme for predicting the surface pressure field and the geo-
potential of the isobaric surfaces 850. 700, 500. 400, 300 and 200 gPa for the
territory of the Moscow Regional Center for times up to 72 hours. With the use of
this scheme there is simultaneous diagnosis and prediction of vertical air velo-
cities at the surfaces 850, 700 and 500 gPa, prediction of the trajectories for
stipulated points for times up to ‘2 hours [5] and prediction of some other para-
meters. The scheme has been combined with a synoptic-hydrodynamic scheme for pre-
dicting surface pressure for 26 hours and prediction of precipitation for a per-
iod up to 36 hours [29, A3]. A total of 40 maps per day is computed using these
schemes.

The "Sintez" hemispherical six-level adiabatic scheme with the use of a system
of full equations in hydrodynamics. A difference analogue was constructed for the
isobaric surfaces 1000, 850, 700, 500, 300 and 100 gPa and 1,625 "checkerboard"
points. formed by two square grids measuring 29 x 29 and 28 x 28 points and

with an interval of 600 km and with an integration time interval of 12 minutes.
meshed in one another. The grid region is a square inscribed in the circle of the
equator on a map of the northern hemisphere. Computations of a 24-hour forecast
require 14 minutes. A forecast is given for a time up to 84 hours. Each day this
scheme is used in computing 20 24-hour maps [4].

The "Region" regional six-level scheme with the use of a system of full equations
in hydrodynamics is telescoped in the "Sintez" hemispherical scheme for the

same isobaric surfaces as in the "Sintez" scheme. The region of telescoping is
.Ircctangie nnihe map of the Moscow region. which contains 1,193 points. formed by
two mutually embedded grids measuring 27 x 23 and 26 x 22 points, each with an in-
terval of 300 km, with the integration time interval being 6 minutes. Forecasting
for 2h hours requires 25 minutes with a DESK-6 computer and the forecast is com-
puted for times up to 48 hours [5, 22].

At the edges the regional scheme uses values of the variables computed in the hemi-
spherical model at the time of the preceding computation session. It is also combin-
ed with a synoptic-hydrodynamic scheme. The latter uses the forecast of the geo-
potential fields obtained in a"Region" scheme and an objective analysis of the
pressure tendency at the earth for the 0300 hours observation time and a forecast

of surface pressure is given for 24 hours and a forecast of precipitation is given
for 36 hours. At the present time the "Region" scheme is used in computing five

maps each day. However, the ”Region" scheme can give the entire volume of produc—
tion provided by a quasigeostrophic scheme.

For rhv needs of aviation a wind forecast is computed at the isobaric surfaces
600 and 300 gPa for )2 and 26 hours on the basis of data for 0300 hours by means
of solution of a system of full equations in hydrodynamics [9]. Data for 0300

20

FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEIONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and 1500 hours are used for these same surfaces in issuing 24-hour forecasts of
zones of strong clear-air turbulence twice a day [11]. A total of six maps is
issued each day.

Table 1 gives the relative errors of operational forecasts for 1979 for two re-
gions: the region best covered with observational data (A -- European USSR and
Western Europe) and the entire Moscow region (B). The data in the table reveal a
definite advantage of a hemispherical scheme.

Table 2 gives the relative errors of regional AT 00 forecasts using the 'Region"
and quasigeosmuuphtv schemes. The figures in Tabfe 2 indicate the advantage of
the “Region" scheme. especially in 26-hour forecasts.

An analysis of the history of development of short-range weather forecasts shows
that a substantial increase in guaranteed probability of success in forecasts in
every case was associated with major technical innovations in the weather service:
with the creation of the aerological sounding network, with the introduction of
electronic computers and numerical methods for forecasting pressure fields, with
the use of satellite information for an analysis of atmospheric processes [10].

It is natural to expect that a further improvement in the quality of short-range
weather forecasts can be achieved only with a substantial technical reoutfitting
of the weather service. This reoutfitting should lead, first of all, to a broad-
ening of the volume of meteorological information used in forecasting and an in-
crease in the productivity of electronic computers.

First of all there should be a broadening of the data base on the state of the
atmosphere. ocean and land surface. At the present time synoptic (SYNOP, SYNOP
SHIP) and aerological (TEMP and TEMP SHIP) data are used in analysis and forecastr
ing, as well as a number of fictitious (prepared by the weatherman) data in the
form of TEMP telegrams from regions where few actual observations are made. In the
synoptic analysis use is also made of radar and satellite observations.

Over the course of the last few years a mathematical support has been created
which makes it possible to interpret virtually all types of communications on
synchronous and asynchronous observations now being transmitted through commun-
ication channels (PILOT. SATEH. SATOB. AIRBP. DRIBU, COLBA. BATHY, TBSAC and GRID
[37, 44]» The next task is the use of this mathematical support in preparing diag-
nostic charts and in objective analysis.

The objective analysis used in the technological process of short-range forecast-
ing is based on the optimum interpolation method. Its use gives surface pressure
and geopotential of nine surfaces (850. 700. 500, 400, 300, 250, 200, 150, 100
gPa). the surface three—hour pressure tenJency, temperature and humidity, and
also the field of water temperature of the ocean surface in the North Atlantic.
interpolated in a regular grid of points [2]. The development of the objective
analysis subsystem in the innediate futu:e can be seen from the diagram in Fig. l.
A series of problems must be solved:

-- development of effective methods for checking operational data on the wind re-
ceivcd from the aerological network, aircraft and satellites. and also satellite
data on temperature profiles;

21

FOR¢0FFRJAL.USE(NVLY
Fig. 1.

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

     
   
     

  

0h unuluui
an": Meno-
quuvuaut
”mum!

1.)

u

"must”:

tarpon

Human“
"um
mnnlmwm-

4)

Inna-emu: ll

nut hm a

”nuns
lad-nun
nulu

     

  
 

utmm um 10) Fauna!
up" I nut n rum":
nun: mum- ”

we ”hung
("HIM-3M)

   
   
     

 
 
     
   

 
 

u w "mum-«u
nuywnmﬁ unlu-
cpowmﬁ nnum

Hull“ aauinuntlue:

  

8)

Diagram of development of objective analysis subsystem. a) 1980; b) long-

range development .

KEY:
1)
2)
3)
b)
5)
b)
7)
8)
9)
10)

Objective analysis of meteorological elements

Geopotential N

System for objective analysis of meteorological data

Geopotential N

Hind velocity components u, v

Temperature 1‘

Humidity (dew point Td' cloud cover, soil moisture content)
Hydrodynamic hemispherical short-range forecast (first approximation)

System for supplementing data on poorly covered regions (nan-computer)
Pressure trend PP

-- development of a method for objective analysis of the wind field and matching of
the wind and geopotential fields;

-- coverage of all poorly reported regions for which the weatherman prepares fic-
titious aerological data;

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FfﬂlfﬂﬂﬁC1Al.lEH§(M‘LY

«-

—- development of objective analysis methods for the tropical zone and the south~
ern hemisphere and some others.

The general approach for the development of short-range weather forecasts, in addi-
tion to expansion-of the data base. is improvement of numerical schemes for the hy-
drodynamic forecasting of meteorological fields. In particular. this involves real-
ization, in an operational regime, of the hemispherical and regional nonadisbatic
models already developed at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. In a hemispherical
nonadiabatic model with full equations there is an allowance for the heat from con-
densation, radiation, turbulent thermal conductivity and influence of the boundary
layer {6]. In a "3.51.01 nonadiabatic model with full equations an allowance is
made for s-.£ace friction, orography, radiation heat influxes and heat fluxes from
the underlying surfaces, macroscale and convective precipitation-forming processes
[22). The introduction of these models into operational practice will make it pos—
sible to reduce the relative error by 5-151 in forecasts of the synoptic situation
up to 72 hours. In the future, as the USSR hydrometeorologicai Center acquires more
modern computers, a decrease in the relative error of numerical forecasts will occur
as a result of a decrease in the spatial grid interval and a more precise description

of physical processes on a subgrid scale.

Table 1
Relative Errors of Operational Forecasts (1979)
Forecast Hemispherical scheme Quasigeostropic plus synoptic—
time. hours hydrodynamic schemes
A B C
surface 500 gPa surface 500 gPs surface 850 gPa 500 gPa 300 gPa
24 0.73 0.68 0.83 0.79 0.75 0.81 0.73 0.69
A8 0.83 0.77 0.92 0.86 0.79
72 0.93 0.85 1.02 0.9a 0.92
Table 2

Relative Errors of Regional Forecasts of

ATSOO Using "Region" Scheme and a Quasi-
geostrOphic Scheme (1979-1980)

_____________________________.__________

Scheme Forecasting time, hours
26 36

"Region" 0.64 0.71

Quasigeostrophic 0.73 0.74

.________________________________________

ion of the grids used in numerical schemes for hydrody-

The minimum spatial resolut
he present time is 150 km.

namic forecasting at the Hydrometeorolog'cal Center at t
Taking into account the prospec

with new electronic computers,

decreased. Accordingly, a numer
large-scale forecast of the future synop

the grid interval probably cannot be significantly

ical hydrodynamic forecast, as before, will give a
tie situation for one, two and three days.

23

FtHRCNﬂﬂC1A1.USEiDNLN
FOR*0FFNJAL.USEZONLY

Thus. the interpretation of the synoptic process and the formulation of a forecast
in weather terms for a specific point or region remains the task of a weatherman.
In making a 26-hour forecast the weatherman has at his disposal different methods
for forecasting the weather elements and the results of computations of tempera-
ture and precipitation using synoptic-hydrodynamic schemes. However, the situation
with the prediction of weather for the second and third day is considerably more
complex. In order to objectivize weather forecasting for these times as well, it is
necessary to develop synoptic-statistical relationships between the elements pre-
dictable in numerical schemes (predictors) and the weather phenomena of interest

to us (so-called "M03 concept"). Such studies have already been initiated [41] and
they must be developed further in the future. We feel that it is especially promis-
ing to make use of the MOS concept in application to the forecasting of local weath-
er phenomena. such as local winds. orographic precipitation, fogs, etc. A necessary
condition for the development of this direction is the creation of an archives of
the results of prognostic computations using hydrodynamic models.

It is also necesaary to intensify investigation of fronts and their mesostructure on
the basis of satellite and radar information and also investigation of mesoscale
phenomena leading to dangerous weather phenomena.

Determination of the course of weather by hours within the limits of a 24-hour per-
iod is becoming possible with the creation of methods of local hydrodynamic fore-
casting (with departure from the quasigeostrophicity hypothesis), which would make
it possible to model mesnscale atmospheric processes.

The hydrodynamic modeling of individual mesoscale atmospheric processes (orographic
disturbances, breeze and mountain-valley circulation, convective movements, etc.)
has a rather long history. However, for the time being sufficiently complete meso—
scaie nonhydrostatic models have not been created which could be :outinely used in
forecasting. At the USSR Hydrometeorological Center studies for the creation of a
prognostic scheme of a local forecast were initiated in 1979. A model has now been
created which is based on the equations of intense convection, ensuring a descrip-
tion of mesoscale processes. The temporal change of macroscale currents is taken
into account by the formulation of bOundary conditions at the lateral boundaries of
the computation region. It is assumed that by the use of this model it will be pos-
sible to give a forecast of temperature, pressure, the three components of wind
velocity. humidity, cloud cover and precipitation for Moscow and Moscow Oblast for
a time up to 36 lnurs. The immediate tasks are perfecting this model and computing
experimental forecasts [14, 21, 47].

intermediate-Range Heather Forecasts (Forecasts for 4-10 Days)

Since 1973 the USSR Hydrometeorological Center has routinely three times a week
prepared forecasts of the mean five-day temperature and quantity of precipitation,
neon five-day temperature anomaly and once in five days -- forecasts of the mean
ten-day temperature [18, 19]. The probable success of these forecasts is quite
high and they have a substantial advantage over inertial and climatic forecasts
[12]. However. practical needs and successes in the creation of short-range hydro-
dynamic forecasts have made the task of developing a method for the hydrodynamic
forecasting of weather day—by—day for a period of up to two weeks a matter of
priority. Precisely this task is one of the main goals of the Program for the

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigation of Global Atmospheric Processes and its First Global Experiment. The
difficulties standing on the path of solution of this problem are of a fundamental
character: in particular, a hydrodynamic model for the prediction of meteorological
elements must be nonadiabatic, with sufficiently complete allowance for the physical
processes exerting an influence on the formation of atmospheric circulation; the re-
gion of solution of the equations for the prognostic model must take in the entire
earth, and accordingly, hydrometeorological information on the state of the atmo-
sphere, ocean and land must be global; resolution in the model both horizontally
(with respect to spatial intervals or spectral numbers) and vertically (number of
levels) shOuld make it possible to describe sufficiently small disturbances, such
as newlv developed cyclones, frequently being transformed during their development
in the course of the forecasting time into enormous vortices which determine the

For the purposes of developing intermediate—range weather forecasting the USSR Hy—
drometeorological Center has created an automated programming-technologital "line"
for the processing of meteorological information ("Liniya") [23]. It consists of

the following subsystems:

-- reception, primary processing and checking of data arriving in communication
channels;

-- supplementation of the data with additional meteorological information by es-
tablishing a "man-computer" relationship;

-- spectral objective analysis;

-- hydrodynamic forecasting of geopotential for the northern hemisphere for a period
up to 10 days;

- objective interpretation of hydrodynamic forecasts for the purpose of obtaining
an intermediate-range forecast of weather‘elements;

-— interaction among the above-mentioned special-task subsystems through data banks.

tial for the northern hemisphere for times up to 10 days. At the present time tests
are being made of a finite—difference model of general circulation in the full equa-
tions of hydrodynamics with real initial data [42]. The model includes the para—
meterization of physical processes: radiation, boundary layer, macroturbulence,
hydrological cycle (macroscale condensation, falling and melting of snow, moisture
accumulation in the soil. evaporation). The model was constructed on the modular
principle with the separation out of a programming core, which includes modules

for the control, processing and exchange of information between the operational and
external memories and is common for different variants.

A "Saber-172" computer was used with a taut-level hemispherical scheme with a lati-
tude-longitude grid in two variants: with 576 points (18 in Jatitude x 32 in longi—
tude) and with 1152 points (18 in latitude x 64 in longitude). The latter variant
requires 90 minutes computer time with the "Saber-172" for forecasting for 26 hours.
A telescoping model was also employed [15]. The following information is necessary
as initial data: surface pressure, temperature (or geopotential). wind. humidity,
temperature of the ocean surface and soil moisture content.

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Ann .585: 6 mu

SN

Cu

AWN 33-2. ..

                    

 

3i 3‘: i
- S‘si 5:5
{Kai‘s =33=‘
Sousa-5‘? In).

3“:
¢Nl-~ 3 22:3
32:5:533“

using! sun-‘3

333‘:

int: u ~53
39.5.5!!! .331

‘23.. 3333.331:

.3;

.e!» “uau
E

A“: ‘3
g h

        

  

  

 

9.5".— 93

            

 

it ‘3‘.

:hh‘ ﬁ~s§
13‘“ .‘i‘ﬁ‘ it.
2: 3.333!

       

: an \
‘hk higiIﬁg ‘h

.5556 5
w a

  

3...:

#3 \ 53>... = 261»
«:3: ~ 322‘.‘ -=
aiisiuanﬁsiﬁ=

« I: Q . . an
353: 2-55: 35!: £335
A h H ans-3.5.3.: ~53...»

! ‘43s -

   
 

$5.3. .3

G:

g

tsi - in

m.—

3H

2%.. 33.:

AN

AS
@s.

2 cs 2.6%.
§~5\‘(=~\= u
5 u .3:
252:}...3
9.3‘
2:33-23;

. :22
3.
.2s‘. 02‘

  

33‘ .sk

- I‘ o"
§§~K§A N .—

        
         

  

~a~3§~= 3
.-I§ h 23a 3.33.32: §=~§ 35$.

    

3.53:: 2‘33}: 3.....qu 2.3:
u G53. \ azuu‘n‘ssst ~33;
R3Q§~.¥‘§ alt~ﬂiﬁ§hh~§w§ shﬁ.‘ Q

      

“5:3. 23:39.}: I25 As

~§~Iit ~3-§2-§s3~ no
intiilwtih ~§~§-~§¥I§~ 3.

"sum mucus-ally

       
 

«33. 3a.... 37!: is}! no.
'22:: s3-~s§€~§¢t~ 2.3.5::

         
           

:3}! ~
guisitt: :ssts! gag-tai:

  

untvi~§§t won}:-
333: u 3:32: -2--§§

§§5€~§ .3: .Su \Eﬁatutss‘ak

4 Stat“; :25:

2; =3 3.32:1: 332‘: 3:: 3-3:.
i=3 33:32:.{33- u-u-s§§§at§

 
 

~31 a?
:!=~ 2525.335.ng
5:23:93 gigs-cat. ~3~at-3§§

AN

2
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

KEY TO FIG. 2

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

Prospective functional configuration of hydrodynamic forecasting scheme

. Four—level hydrodynamic nonlinear scheme for predicting pressure field

(on the basis of full equations). USSR Hydrometeorological Center, 1980.
GT“ model (O‘rsA - general circulation of the atmosphere)

Determination of requirements on quality of initial information
Optimization of methods for integration in model
Increase in spatial resolution of model (AX~100 km; ~ 20 levels)

. Improvement in parameterization of nonadiabatic factors

Allouame For subgrid phenomena

. Intr~duction of telescoping of atmospheric processes modeled in scheme for

purpose of obtaining model cyclogenesis
Allowance for influence of tropical zone and southern hemisphere

. Prospective development
. ASOOI-6 bank

. Prediction H500, Po, T500, H300, H700, H350, 011888, vertical currents, wind

components, etc. with advance time up to 10 days

. List of prognostic characteristics

. Drafting

. Initial data

. Communication channels

. Interpretation system (computation of prediction of weather elements for 10-10

days)
ASP-30

. Prospective development
. Automated input of data from communication channels (in particular, in GRID

code)

Creation of an automatically replenishing bank of the synoptic type (381')
Development of a generalized analogue method for preparing two arbitrary
fields of tropospheric circulation (for example, 3500)

Automatic preparation of dynamic samples for current process

. Creation of a method for detailed prediction by days of five-day period

Allowance for advective factors in formation of air t-perature anomalies
At mean five-day temperature

. 2E precipitation for five-day period
28. A

5 mean ten-day tanperature
Atmn' max mean five day
A_t_ 3, lo, 5 days

At second five day period
At, 6th, 1th, 8th, 9th days
Improved At mean five day
ZR up to 68 hours

27
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A fiVe-level global spectral model of general circulation of the atmosphere. now
used for investigations [28]. created at the Hydrometeorological Center; is also
extremely promising. The hydrodynamic forecasting subsystem must give a forecast
by days for up to 7-10 days for surface pressure, for geopotential of the isobaric
surfaces 850, 700, 500 and 300 gPa, temperature, vertical movements and wind velo-
city components with the availability of the above-mentioned information.

with the availability of a forecast of these fields use is then made of the synop-
tic statistical relationships among the elements of circulation and weather ele-
ments, much as is done in the automated forecasting system [12] now in operation
at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. The operational archivization of synoptic
data is an important element of this subsystem.

The development of the "Liniya" ("Line") system (Fig. 2) requires the outfitting of
the USSR Hydrometeorological Center with considerably more productive electronic
computers. a substantial improvement in the communication system for the collection
of hydrometeorological information and the creation of a global observation system
meeting the necessary resolution and accuracy requirements [35].

Weather Forecasts for One Month

A long-range weather forecast, especially a weather forecast for a month in ad-

vance, is one of the most difficult problems in the earth sciences. The reasons

for this are as follows:

-- the unusually broad spatial (1 km - 10.104 km) and temporal (tens of minutes -
several months) spectra of atmospheric disturbances forming the weather at each

point;

-- the global character of atmospheric interactions exerting an influence on the
course of weather in a particular region;

-- the unusual diversity of the processes and the spatial scales of transforma-

tion of energy from one form to another;

-- the many forms of interaction between the atmosphere and the earth's complex

underlying surface, etc.

The solution of the problem of reliable long-range weather forecasting is complicat-
ed by the absence of a global system of observations satisfying the necessary reso-

lution and accuracy requirements and the lack of archives of the results of observa-
tions with an adequate duration and completeness.

Despite these difficulties, practical needs have forced and are forcing the routine
preparation of forecasts for a month on the basis of already existing imperfect
methods [38]. Operational forecasts of the sign of the monthly temperature anomaly,
monthly anomaly and quantity of precipitation are prepared by the synoptic method

a half-month in advance [13] and with a zero time in advance with the use of empir-
ical influence functions [36]. During the past five-year plan the development of
the synoptic method proceeded along the lines of a clarification of the prognostic
value of such predictors as the anomaly of water temperature in the North Atlantic
and its difference between successive months, the monthly sum of precipitation and
the snow cover. An immediate task is a critical analysis of the points in the of-
ficial synoptic method in the light of the results obtained.

28

FOR OIIWC1A1.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The method for hydrodynamic long-range forecasting based on the well-known work

of Ye. N. Blinova [7] has been further developed by a more complete allowance for
climate-forming and weather factors [8]. 0n the basis of these investigations there
is systematic preparation of a forecast of the monthly temperature anomaly. whose
quality, although somewhat poorer than the quality of the forecast prepared by

the synoptic method. is nevertheless continuously improving. In our opinion. the
broadening of the information base in the future as a result of the employment of
data on the global distribution of cloud cover, snow and ice and on air tempera-

ture at the earth's surface should lead to a further increase in the probable suc-
cess of rh3<e forecasts.

The most important achievement during the elapsed period is the application of the
new reSulLs obtained by G. l. Harchuk in the theory of long-range weather fore-
casting in the practical work of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center [25-27]. On
the basis of the G. I. Harchuk solutions a method was created for diagnosis of

the mean monthly anomaly 0T 500. averaged for six geographic regions (Fig. 3) and
its testing under operationa9090nditions was initiated [39, 40]. These computa-
tions. carried out post factum immediately at the end of the month, make it pos-
sible to comprehend what contribution was made to formation of the monthly anomaly
by circulation and nOnadiabatic factors. Table 3 gives an example of formation of
the anomaly in August 1980. This table shows. first of all, a very good agreement
of the value and sign of the computed and actual anomaly for all six regions and
second, that the decisive contribution to formation of the sign in regions Nos 0,
l. 2. 3, a is introduced by nonadiabatic factors. In addition to diagnosis, the
created method makes it gossible to give an adiabatic forecast of the sign of the
mean monthly anomaly Ong0 for the six regions indicated above. The guaranteed

probability of such forecagts during the period December l979-0ctober 1980 with
respect to sign was />- 0.30, which is considerably better than for inertial fore-
casts (P r -0.15). Everything stated above indicates that this work direction is
extremely promising since even the simplest models give such highly encouraging
results. It is therefore important to continue and broaden these studies: in ad-
dition to carrying out diagnostic computations it is necessary, using the tool of
conjugate equations, to create more complex models describing the ocean - atmo-
sphere system with the parameterization of the external heat influxes in them

and to broaden the bank of hydrometeorological data for the purposes of long-range

forecasting.

 

79

INJR‘OFINCIAL USE:CN‘LY
FOR 0FFHJA1.US£!DNLY

Table 3

Diagnosis of Anomalies 0T1333' August 1980

 

0 1.0 —2.9 -1.0 0. .
1.0 -2.» 10 "~7 0.3 3.3

1 1.3 -:1.2 —l.9 0,3 0.10
1.4 -J.2 —1.9 " e 0.3 0.17

2 1,1 -2.6 -1.5 - 0.0 0.
1.1 -2.4 -13 “"5 0.1 0.3;

a 0.7 -2.1 -I.4 0.0 0.00
0.1 -1,9 -1.2 “A 0.2 0.13

4 0.9 —3.9 —:1.0 0.1 .
1.0 4.0 —3.0 "2 9 0.1 3.33

s 0.11 —0.2 024 . 0.10.19
0,6 -0.1 0.5 °-° 0.0 0.09

KEY:
1) Region

2) Contribution
3) Anomaly, °C
4) Computed

5) Actual

6) A Tabs 00

7) lsTabs/Tact

Note: T'o is the contribution of the initial field of anomalies OTlggg to the com-

puted value of the monthly anomaly OTlggg; B' is the contribution of external

heat sources to the computed value of the monthly anomaly Oflggg. The upper line

gives the results of computations with the use of real data on circulation of the
diagnosed month; the lower line gives these same results with the use of the cli-
matic circulation of this month.

 

Heather Forecasting for Seasons

Systematic forecasts (uith an advance time of 1-3 months) of the anomalies of tem-
perature and precipitation for the natural synoptic seasons of winter, spring.
first and second halves of summer, autumn and prewinter have been prepared by the
synoptic method since 1963. The success of a forecast of the sign of the tempera-
ture anomaly is p - 0.35 and for the quantity of precipitation is P . 752 [l].

A decisive contribution to the development of the modern operational method for
seasonal forecasting was made by S. T. Pagava [32, 33]. An analysis of incorrect
seasonal forecasts reveals that the principal failures are related to an incorrect
determination of the precursor and its circulation. Accordingly, further efforts
must be directed to an objectivization of determination of circulation of the pre-
cursor. Studies in this direction have already begun. A method for objective

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

determination of the limits of the seasons, a method for computing their antic-
ipated onset and the appearance of precursors of the future seasons have been
proposed. However, these results can be considered only as a beginning.

During the elapsed period extensive investigations were made of the heat fluxes
between the ocean and the atmosphere over the North Atlantic and the possibilit-
ies of their parameterization with use of the extent of cloud cover. Important
neg.:i.e asynchronous relationships have been established between cloud cover
anomalies over the Atlantic and temperature anomalies over the auropean USSR [30].
On this basis a statistical method has been developed for predicting the mean two-
month temperatn.e anomaly over the European USSR with an average advance time of
five months [17, 31]. Tests of this method have given encouraging results (f>-
0.34, Q - 0.68). More detailed data are given in Table 4. Analysis of successful
and unsuccessful forecasts revealed their great dependence on the character of
circulation: the forecasts were successful when there was a predominance of zonal
forms of circulation and unsuccessful when there was a predominance of meridional
processes. The next problem which follows is a study of the possibility of combin-
ing this method with a prediction of circulation on the basis of the precursor.

Predictions of Temperature and Precipitation for One Year in Advance

The principal investigations of this problem have been concentrated at the Main
Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov and at the Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute. At the USSR Hydrometeorological Center investigations
began relatively recently of the possibility of predicting air temperature and pre-
cipitation for the growing season by statistical methods for a long time in ad-
vance (up to 1 year) [3]. The results of the investigations show that the success
of forecasting of the sign of the temperature anomaly and quantity of precipitation
(with breakdown into three equally probable phases) is optimum with an advance time
of about 4-6 months. However, the indices of success of forecasts are not very
greatly dependent on the advance time (see Table 6). The same result is also ob-
tained when attempting to give a forecast of the monthly anomaly for a time up to

a year by the method of selection of an analogue of the temperature variation
curve in a month from the entire available archives of observations [16].

Implementation of Program of the First Global Experiment CARP

The past five-year period was the period of the most intensive preparation for and
implementation of the First Global Experiment (FGGE) CARP, whose field phase be-
gan on 1 December 1978 and lasted to 30 November 1979. Under the F663 program.

the Hydrometeorological Center. as one of the world meteorological centers, has
been assigned definite responsibilities for the collection of level 11a data and
preparation of level-Illaoperational analyses. Taking into account the diversif-
ied character of observations of special TGGE systems and the total volume of in-
formation of all observation systems, including the surface and space systems of
the "UH, a special plan was developed for increasing the productivity of the com-
putation complex at the Hydrometeorologi-al Center. In order to achieve compat-
ibility with the other processing centers which are on the main UH" telecommunica-
tions line, a contract was signed in 1975 with Control Data Corporation for the
installation of a "Saber—lB—ZO"-"Saber-7200"-"Saber~7600" computer complex at the
Hydrometeorological Center. Unfortunately, for reasons of no fault of the Hydro-
meteorological Center, only "Saber-l8-20" and "Saber-172" electronic computers

)1.

FOR 0F11C1A1.USIE(MHLY
FOR OF?IC]AL.USE(NNLY

were installed. which then were used intensively for nonoperational experimental

studies with models of general circulation of the atmoaphere and numerical weath-
er forecasts.

Independently of the contract. in addition to the existing data exchange line
("M-226"~"BE5M-6" communication channels) a second data exchange line was created
("Minsk-32"-"BESM—6“ communication channels). "Yes-1020" and "YeS-thO“ electronic
computers were also installed and connected to the communication channels. These
measures made it possible to register all primary FGGE information (with small
interruptions) arriving in Moscow through communication channels since 15 January
1979 and also to prepare an objective analysis of geopotential for 1200 hours GMT.

Table 4

Guaranteed Probability of Forecast of Sign.P of Air Temperature Anomaly for the
European USSR

 

l .

- _ .. .1 0 7 0.45 0.00 — —
Jon-:3“ I H l g 9-6 +42 ’— — +0.40 +0.24
run—1x u—m , 6 Loo +0.00 +0.24 +0.30 +0.77 -o.34
Ix—x III—IV ' 0 -o.07 +0.92 +0.37 +0.77 +0.23 -o.|a
IL); |\-_\' I 7 +0.37 +0.39 +0.3: -0.70 +0.06 -o.15

”—11: \'_\1 3 +0.29 +0.40 +0.41 +0.30 +0.05 -0.10
u—m \‘1—vu 4 +0.04 +0.13 +0.29 +0.50 +0.07 +0.11
I—ll \‘u—nn 6 +0.05 +0.20 —0.20 +0.73 —0.14 -
\‘l—\'ll vm—tx 2 how +0.72 +0.35 —0.I4 +0.50 —
5
4

w—v Ix—x +0.05 +o.|4 +0.06 +0.19 +0.53 -
\'l-—\’ll x-xn +0.40 +0.:0 —o.no +0.04 +0.07 —
v-w xn—xu 4'» +0.47 +0.50 +0.71 —0.50 +0.35 —
\‘n—vm xu—I . 5 +0.20 +0.12 —0.21 —0.26 +0.33 —

c. .3 . +0.44 +039 +0.32 I +0.l8 +0.44 .—

.___iL_JE2EE______________a4__________—_.—_——_________.

1. Month

2. Initial, with respect to cloud cover
3. Predicted

A. Advance time. months
5. Mean

Summary

In this brief article we have attempted to discuss only those results of investi-
gations which have already been introduced into operational practice or have been
brought to the testing stage. Many important scientific results have remained be-
yond the limits of our exposition. although they constitute the scientific basis
which will exert an influence on weather forecasts in the future.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

6.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aristov, N. A. and Ped', D. A., "Present Status of the Method of Seasonal
Weather Forecasts and Prospects for its Development," WROLOGIYA I GIDRO-
LOGlYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 4, 1979.

Bagrov, A. N., "Operational Scheme for the Objective Analysis of Aerological
Information for the Northern Hemisphere on a Bliss-6 Electronic Computer,"
TRUD‘! GIDROKETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydrometeorological Cen-
ter). No 19‘, 1.78.

Bagrov. N. A.. "Statistical Long-Range Forecasts." PYAT'DESYAT LET TSENTRU
GIDROME'I'BOROIDGICHESKIIGI PROGNOIDV (Piftieth Anniversary of the Center for
Hydrometeorological Forecasts), Leningrad, Gidrometeoiadat, 1979.

Belousov, S. L.. et al.. ”Operational Model for the Nmerical Forecasting of

Meteorological Elements for the Northern Hemisphere," TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA
SSSR, No 212, 1978.

Belousov. S. I... "Short-Range Operational Hydrodynamic Forecasting of Meteor—
ological Elements at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center," PYAT'DESYAT LET
TSENTRU GIDROHETWROLOGICHESKIKH PROGNOZOV, Leningrad, Gidrometeolzdat, 1979.

Berkovich. 1.. V. and Tkacheva, Yu. V., "Nonadiabatic Hemispherical Model of
the Atmosphere for Forecasting for Several Days in Advance," TRUDY GIDROHET-
TSENTRA $5812, No 242, 1981 (in press).

Bl inova. Ye. N., "Hydrodynamic Theory of Pressure Haves, Temperature waves and
Centers of Action in the Atmosphere," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR
Academy of Sciences). Vol 39, No 7, 1943.

Blinova, Ye. N., "Development of the Hydrodynamic Theory of Long-Range Heather
Forecasting," PYAT'DESYAT LET TSENTRU GDROMETWROLOGICHESKIKB PROGMZOV, Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

Bortnikov. S. A., "Construction of a Multilevel Prognostic Model on the Basis
of Experience With Operational Short-Range Forecasting Using Pull Equations for
Two Levels in the Atmosphere," TRUDY GIDROHETI‘SENTRA SSSR, No 16, 1968.

Bugayev, V. A., NOVOYE V PROGNOZIROVANII POWDY (New Developments in Heather
Forecasting), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1972.

Euldovskiy, C. 3., Bortnikov, S. A. ard Rubinshtcyn, H. V., "Prediction of
Zones of Strong Turbulence in the Upper Troposphere," HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO-
LOGIYA, No 2, I976.

Vasil'yev. P. P., Gromova, C. c. and Knyaaeva, V. I., "Forecasting of Air Tem-

perature and Precipitation for 5-10 Days, " PYAT'DESYAT LET TSENTRU GIDROHETl-DR-
OLOCICHESKIKH PROCNomV, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vasyukov, K. A. and Zverev. N. 1., "Heather Forecasting for a Month and Ways

to Improve Quality," PYAT'DESYAT LET TSBN'I'RU GIDWROLOGICHESKIKH PROG-
nozov, Leningrad, Cidrometeoizdat, 1979.

Vel'tishchev, N. F. and Zhelnin, A. A., "Numerical Model of Moist Intense Con-
vection," TRUDY CIDROMBTTSMRA SSSR, No 238, 1981.

Degtyarev. A. I., "Use of the Meshed Grids Method in a Three-Dimensional Model
of the Atmosphere," mmmwcrm I GIDROLOGIYA, No 11, 1980.

Dtogaytsev, D. A., "Automated Choice of an Analogue for the Long-Range Fore-
casting of Mean Monthly Temperature and Air Pressure," TRUDY CIDROME‘I‘TSBN'I’RA
SSSR. No 98, 1978.

Zadorozhnaya, '1‘. N., "Evaluations of the Correlations Between Cloud Cover
Field Anomalies Over the Ocean and Temperature Anomalies Over the Continent
With hoe-Month Averaging Intervals," TRUDY GEROME‘I‘TSEN’I'RA SSSR, No 192, 1977.

Kata, A. 1... "Scheme for Synoptic-ﬂydrodynamic-Statistical Heather Forecasting
for 3-10 Days in Advance," METEOROLOCIYA I CIDROIDGIYA, No 6, 1973.

Kate, A. I... Borodina, A. V., Vasil'yev, P. P., "Refinement of a Complex Meth-
od for Predicting Mean Five-Day Air 'I-perature," MB'I'KOROLOCIYA I CIDRDIDCIYA,
No 6, 1977.

Kibel', I. A., WEDENIYB V GIDRODINAMICRBSKIYE ME'IODY PROCMZA POOODY (Intro-
duction to Hydrodynamic Heather Forecasting Methods), Moscow, Gostekhizdat,
1957.

Kisel'nikova, V. 2., Pekelis, Ye. M. and Pressman, D. Ya., "Numerical Integra-

tion of the Equations of Intense Convection," TRUDY GIDROMBT‘ISBNTRA SSSR, No
238. 1981.

Krichak, S. 0. , "Nonsdiabatic Model of the Atmosphere in Full Equations for

Predicting Meteorological Elements Over Europe," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA,
No 7, 1981.

Lomonosov, Ye. 6., Gromove, C. C. and Vasil'yev, P. P., "Creation of a Unified
Programing-Technological Line for Intermediate-Range Weather Forecasts at the
USSR Hydrometeorological Center," TKUDY GIDROME‘I‘TSENTRA SSSR, No 251 (in
press).

Marchuk, G. 1., CHISLENNYYB HENDY V PROGNOZE POCODY (“tactical Methods in
Heather Forecasting), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1967.

Marchuk, G. 1.. "Fundamental and Conjugate Equations of Dynamics of the Atmo-
sphere and Ocean," MBTBOROLOGI‘IA I GIDROLOCIYA, No 2, 1974.

Marchuk, G. I.. ”Methods for Long-Range Heather Forecasting on the Basis of
Solution of Fundamental and Conjugate Problems,“ METHMIOLOCIYA I GIDROLOCIYA,
No 3, 1971..

310

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

36.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

60.

IKNIOFFNJALIEEZONLY

Marchuk, G. I., CHISLENNOYB RESHENIYE ZADACH DINAMIKI AJHOSFERY I OKEANA
(Numerical Solution of Problems in Dynamics of the Atmosphere and Ocean),
Leningrad, Cidrometeoizdat, 197k.

Mashkovich, S. A. and Veyl', I. 6., "Multilevel Spectral Model for the Study
of Global Atmospheric Processes," TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions
of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center), No 165, 1976.

Mertsilov, A. N.. "Numerical and Synoptic-Hydrodynamic Forecasts of the Sur-

face Prcssu'c Field for 24 Hours in Advance," TRUDY GIDRDMETTSENTRA $883, No
129 ‘974.

Husayelyan, Sh. A., 0 PRIRODE NEKOTORYKH SVERKHDLITEL'NYKB ATHOSFERNYKH
PROTSESSOV (Nature of Some Ultraprolonged Atmospheric Processes), Leningrad.
Gidrometeoizdat, 1978.

Musayelyan, Sh. A., Ugryumov, A. I. and Zadorozhnaya, T. N., "Asynchronous
Correlations Between Cloud Cover Anomalies Over the Ocean and Air Tempera-
ture Anomalies on the Continent," TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR, No 177, 1976.

Pagava, S. T., Aristov, N. A., Blyumina, L. I. and Iurketti, 2. L.. OSNOVY
SINOPTICHESKDGO METODA SEZONNYKH PROGNOZOV POGODY (Principles of the Synop-
tic Method for Seasonal Weather Forecasts), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1966.

Pngava, S. T., "Development of the Synoptic Method for Long-Range Forecasting
of Considerable Anomalies and Sharp Changes in Heather During the Last Five
Years," TRUDY CIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR, No 155, 1975.

Ped', D. A. and Sevalkina, N. A., "Computation of the Anticipated Onset of
Natural Synoptic Seasons," TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR, No 202, 1978.

Petrosyants, M. A.. SLUZHBA POGODY I PERSPEKTIVY YEYB RAZVITIYA. PROBLEHY
SOVREMENNOY GIDROMETEDROLOGII (Weather Service and Prospects for its Develop-

ment. Problems of Modern Uydrometeorology), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Rafailova, Kh. Kh., ISPOL'ZOVANIYE KHARAKTERISTIK STRATOSFERY, TROPOSFERY I
PODSTILAYUSHCHEY POVERKHNOSTI V DOLGOSROCHNYKH PROGNOZAKH POGODY (Use of the
Characteristics of the Stratosphere, Troposphere and Underlying Surface in
Long-Range Weather Forecasts), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1973.

Rudenko, S. L. and Solomakhov, A. Yu., "Automatic Generation of Programs for
Decoding Meteorological Summaries," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 1, 1981.

RUKDVODSTVO P0 MESYACHNYM PROGNOZAM POGODY (Manual on Monthly Heather Fore-
casts). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, ii72.

Sadokov, V. P., "Hydrodynamic Numerical Model for Describing Macroscale Atmo-
spheric Processes," TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR, No 192, 1977.

Sadokov, V. P. and Shteynbok, D. 3., "Use of Conjugate Functions in the Analy-
sir and Prediction of Temperature Anomalies," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No
10, 1977.

35

IKMICHﬂﬂCIA1.USE(MNLY
41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Snitkovskiy, A. 1., "On Air Temperature Prediction." METEOROLOCIYA I GIDRO-
LOCIYA, No 12, 1980.

'I‘rosnikov, I. V., "Model of General Circulation of the Atmosphere of the USSR
Hydrometeorologtca! Center," HEIEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 11, 1980.

Uspenskiy, B. D., Hertsalov, A. N., Orlova. Ye. M., Belouaov, S. I... Petrich-
enko, I. A. and Calakhova, T. A., "Synoptic-Hydrodynamic Scheme for the Quan-
titative Prediction of Steady Precipitation," TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR, No
157, 1976.

S'nmel'kin, Yu. L., "Identification of Meteorological Summaries," WMOGIYA
I CIDROLOGIYA. No 5, 1980.

Yudin, H. I., NOVYYE METODY I PROBLDIY KRATKOSROCHNOGO PROGmZA POGODY (New

Methods and Problems in short-Range Heather Forecasting), Leningrad, Gidro-
meteoizdat, 1963.

THE CARP PROGRAMME 0N NUMERICAL EXPERDIENTATION, CARP PUBLICATIONS SERIES,
No 7, 1971.

Kiselnikova, V. 2., Pekelis, E. H., Pressman, D. Ya., Veltishchev, N. F. and
Zhelnin. A. A., "Mesoscale Numerical Weather Forecast," PROC. SYMPOSIUM 0“
CURRENT PROBLmS 0F WEATHER PREDICTION, Vienna, June 23-26, 1981.

36
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FTNICMWHCJAL.USE1DNLN

unc 551.583
STUDY or CLIMATE AND rrs PRACTICAL Asncrs*

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
10 Feb 81) pp 32-48

[Article by Ye. P. Borisenkov, professor, Kain Geophysical Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: The article traces the influence of
climate on man's activity in the historical
past. It is demonstrated what an immeasurable
increase there has been in the dependence of
man's activity on climate at the present time,
as a result of which, in the author's opinion,
optimum allowance for climatic information must
be regarded as one of the ways to increase the
effectiveness of social production. The problem
of how man's activity can exert an influence
on climate, and accordingly, also on the condi-
tions for his life in the future, is discussed.
Possible ways to further develop this problem
are discussed.

This article examines one of the most important aspects of the World Climate Pro-
gram (RC?) and the USSR climate research program: the influence of climate on

different facets of economic activity.

As is well known, in addition to practical aspects, the WC? emphasises study of
the physical theory of the formation of climate and its dynamics, study of the
changes and variability of climate on the basis of factual data and evaluation of
the influence of anthropogenic factors on climate. Each of the mentioned problems
merits special consideration. Information on these aspects of the work carried
out in the USSR can be found in the special literature [10. 27-29].

It is not the objective of this article to give a full analysis of the investiga-
tions carried out up to the present time in the field of applied climatology in
the USSR, especially at the Main Geophysical Observatory. There are also a number
of extensive generalizing publications in this area [8.11,lb.l$.l9,20.22.23.30.31].

—-_..

* Main content of a report at an expanded session of the Presidium of the Sci-
entific and Technical Council, State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Honitoring, 13 October 1980.

37
FOR‘0FFK]AL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal objective of this article is an analysis of the factors (and their
tendencies) leading to the sharply increasing role of climate in the life of
mankind, an evaluation of the tendencies in the development of research for the
study of climate and the field of applied climatology, especially in relation to
implementation of the HCP. Such an analysis is extremely necessary due to the
clearly noticeable tendency to the transformation of the science of climate into
a real force favoring an increase in the effectiveness of social production by
means of the rational use of climatic resources by society.

The mentioned tendencies make it necessary to examine the history of climate and
its relationship to historical events in the past from somewhat different points
of View, as is also true of the tendency in the development of climate and eval-
uation of its influence on the economic and social aspects of the unmeasurably
developed and ever-increasing activity of human society.

It is well known that climate has exerted and even now is exerting a substantial
influence on man‘s activity during the course of the entire history of develop-
ment of civilization. Nevertheless, never during the entire history of civiliza-
tion has the problem of climate as a whole, including such problems as long-term
tendencies in change of climate and its variability, climatic anomalies. the phys-
ical mechanisms responsible for the change in climate, the influence of climate

on man's activity and the reverse effect of human activity on climate, caused

such interest in the broad scientific community, among government agencies and
users of climatic information as during the last decade.

This is attributable to a number of circumstances, especially the enormous in-
crease in the scales of economic activity and the unquestionably increasing de-
pendence of society on climate and its changes.

The rapid increase in the development of productive forces is leading and indeed
has already led to the result that the dependence of a whole series of branches
of economic activity and entire countries on changing climatic conditions is

not decreasing in absolute terms but is instead increasing and this increase is
accompanied by a growth of production. Precisely for this reason during recent
years there has been a rapidly increasing comprehension of the dependence of

the national economy and well-being of society on changes in climate on the

part of agencies concerned with the planning of socioeconomic development and
control of production [1, 3, 7, 9, 12, 18. 25. 26].

A number of major climatic anomalies of recent years which exerted a substantial
effect on the economy of a number of countries and even on the conditions for
the existence of some states to a considerable degree served as a stimulus for
the increased interest in the problem of climate and its changes. In a number of
cases the consequences of major climatic anomalies also affected the sphere of
international relationships [7, 36, 47, SO, 53].

A second important circumstance favoring increased interest in the problem of
the influence of climate on human activity is a clear understanding of the fact
that as a result of economic activity man himself has unintentionally begun to
exert an influence on climate. For the time being his influence is manifested
on a limited scale and is reflected only in some features of climate for the

38

IN)R‘0F1N(JAL.USE1(NNLY
FOR OFFIC1A1.USE10NLY

most part of a local character. However, under the prevailing conditions of

a growth in population and more intensive activity there can be an inad-
vertent change in climate over great areas even in the course of the life of a
few generations to come [18].

A third circumstance which has increased interest in the discussed problem is
the following.

It has also been found that a sufficiently reliable scientific basis making it
possible to 0‘ !t.te the influence of climate on the economy, the biological
and sca--1 aspects of the development of society, has also not been created.
There is a definite detachment between climatologists, who are inadequately
aware of all the demands upon them and are not capable of evaluating the needs
and requirements of numerous users, and the probable users. who do not adequate-
ly know the possibilities of climatologists and the ways to make effective use
of climatic information in their field of practical activity. Due to this and a
number of other factors. the already available information on climate is not
used sufficiently effectively and in a number of countries or branches is not
used at all [7, 53].

The principal factor in such a situation is that the climate problem was extreme-
ly complex. It is among the highly complex interdisciplinary scientific tasks and
there has been no appropriate scientific and material-production base. At present
it is impossible to mention any other scientific and practical problem which re-
quires such a broad interdisciplinary approach to its solution as the problem of
climate and man.

The fourth circumstance is that in addition to its interdisciplinary character,
this problem is global in scope. It cannot be solved either completely or par-
tially at national or regional levels without bringing together the efforts of
countries throughout the world. Accordingly, this problem with respect to both
its scientific program and with respect to the monitoring of climate and its
changes. as well as with respect to the solution of practical problems, can only
be regarded as an international problem.

At the present time the attitude toward the role of climate in the life of society
is being considerably changed. However, many more efforts are required for this
tendency to affect all the necessary aspects of human activity to an adequate
degree.

Apparently it is possible to discriminate four types of knowledge concerning cli-
mate. each of which can be applied to a definite category of decisions made by
man.

First of all, a knowledge is required oi the general statistical characteristics
of climate and its variability for different regions and for the entire earth

and this requires the use of such information in working out a policy or plan
for such development over a long-term period and also in the control of produc-
tion.

A second type of knowledge is information concerning the influence of climatic ex-
trema, that is, states of the climatic system atypical for the mean climate, on
different aspects of economic and social life and the principles for adoption

of optimum solutions with this information taken into account.

39
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
 
   

  
   
  

mph-noun glut»
-ru tun" maul. nwoﬂpnu-ntm gum
menu 0 "III'IPMH'J nmm u we

(£2

   
 
 
    
    

nun
190m? manna nnnunon runny
mun" num nuonuuw "(own

(22

   
 

      
     
    
  
 
    

nun

«Mun: auawna’ nnnnulmnn um (IZ
mum!" mm! a ”Will/Ml!!! H mm

        

 

Inn (oz
40ml nmulutm'uunlw mu! I n
owuodu nrnwlauﬂt "unwind!”

I”! u ynpllnnn

   

”on"
you», Juneau]! ”nonunion”!

nun/no Imam" up n nmmmx (8'!
:: mwuﬁ 9 any": nmudu neon/an
nunp ”mu (LI
~11lean run; IIWIIIIIIINIIWIMUJ

(6T

Munch: anmunuuuo mammal:-

      

tuiuun unaunauuuni la n:

ﬂpunrma unndaluuu In
npuunlnd unnamuuau

  
    

we annual "1:17:01!"qu IM-
rumour/m1

Inn" Inna: aunt/nu n [unw-

A
N

(.0

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
KEY TO FIGURE 1'

IW3R 0F1WCJAI.'JSEZ(NULY

I) Rvuvnrrh prugrnm In npplled climatology

2) Evaluation of influence of climate on
different aspects of economic activity

3) Creation of information base

4) Methods for optimum planning and control

5) Agriculture

6) Water management
7} Electric power
8) Transpo.tn|‘vn

9) Plzr :19 and Construction

10) Forestry

11) Fishing
l2) Land improvement

13) Operation of equipment and structures

lb) Public health

15) International economic relationships

16) Climatic survey

17) Specialized climatic data banks

18) Methods for predicting climate

19)

20)

21)

22)

23.‘

with allowance for natural and
anthropogenic factors
Informational support of data
banks

Climatic expert evaluation of
projects and major national econ-
omic decisions

Methods for optimum allowance

for climatic data in planning
system

Methods for optimum allouance

for climatic data in control
system

Methods for evaluating social and
economic effectiveness of allov-
ance for climatic data

Changes in Mean Five-Year Values of Climatic System Parameters for Period 1951-1975

M
! h n es n decade C

 

 

 

Mea
I. I 9
:Climaticl Region, §
Ipara- degrees é
Hemisphereimeters 2
l
TMA 0—90 -
Northern SAT I 0—90 +0.0“
m I 55—90 + o. 536
SAT 70-90 —0. 760
TMA | 15—90 I vb 0. J28
SAT 30—90. —0 I56
SST North +0304
Pacific
531' Nor th “0430
Atlantic
mm 0-M
SAT 0-30 I +0. l56
Southern “VI I 63:33 ' :
TMA I 30—90 ._
I m; uo—Jo — _
i SAT 0— 20 1' JJOB

 

 

IMO 490$}

 

—0944 —0.300 -0. 208
—0. 428 —0.l8~l +0.“?
—03I6 —0.620 —-0. I60
—0 .476 -0.$84 -—0 .264
—0 012 —-0.368 + 0. 324

-0.492 70.188 -0.5I2

4200 -o.-.»eo -

.2" *0.'0.’8 —0.??0

-0.508

—0.068 —0. 324 --0l96
—0.'204 —0.060 —0.088 —0068

- "NSF

Mean,
°C

i a

I.“ l

"370-

 

—0 220
-0. 2‘0
—0. I 92
—0.2l 2
—0.0|8

—0. I 28

—0.3|-’I

+0. I44 —0. 3|8 —0.086

—0.070

+amn
+0332

+onw oo.mw
+0 .396 +0. 465
—0.0I6 emu-o +0.05:
+0.272 +0.!0I +0.I88
+0.07? —0.I I '2 -—0.095

 

Notes. The drsh denotes absence of data. TMA - temperature of middle atmosphere;
SAT - surface air temperature; SST - sea surface temperature.

[,1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFHJAI.USE13NLN

The third type of knowledge includes an evaluation of the influence of economic
activity on climate.

The fourth type of knowledge is prediction of changes and variability of climate
which is based, among other factors, on an allowance for the reverse effect of
economic activity on climate.

Figure l is a general diagram characterizing the influence of the state of the
climatic system on different aspects of economic activity.

The first block in this diagram includes a study of the influence of climate on
agriculture, electric power production, water management, fishing and forestry,
construction, transportation, public health, etc.

Each of the mentioned branches of economic activity to a greater or lesser degree
itself influences and on an ever-increasing scale will exert an influence on
local, regional or global climate. At the same time, each of these branches is
complexly dependent on changing climatic conditions caused by both natural and
anthropogenic processes. Accordingly, the problem of interaction between climate
and economic activity and society as a whole is complex with numerous feedbacks.
It therefore must be evaluated using the formula "state of the climatic system

- influence on branch - new state of climatic system - influence on branch."

Practical requirements even now give rise to the question of how possible future
changes of climate will exert an influence on the economy and social processes.
However, at the present time we still cannot satisfactorily answer the questions:
lnw does the existing structure of climate exert an influence on different as-
pects of man's activity and what is the best way to take into account the exist-
ing information on climate?

The second block of this diagram provides for creation of an information base on
the state of the climatic system, including the creation of a system for access
to climatic information which combines accessibility with convenience for the
user.

Unfortunately, this problem is as far from a satisfactory solution as the problem
of creation of data banks for research purposes, including the creation of meth-
ods for the prediction of climate, although considerable efforts have been under-
taken in this direction.

The third block includes modern planning methods, taking into account climatic
information on changing climatic conditions, climatic expertise on major and long-
term measures and solutions in the planning and control system. This direction

is in the very initial stage of its development.

In our opinion fundamental scientific investigations directed to the study of the
physics of climatic changes should be oriented primarily to the creation of a
scientific basis for solution of the already mentioned practical problems.

The complexity and scale of these practical problems are so great that their for-
mulation in the first place in the “C? only intensifies and clearly orients the
direction and scales of the fundamental scientific research in the field of cli-
mate.

[.0
FOI.OFTHCJAI.USEIDNLY

There are several arguments in support of the reasonings cited above.
3"
£1
I!
.V

  
  
 
   
 

E

”0 "I0 1!"? ”M 1.930 I”! ma 1!“ 1170

Fig. 2. Mean annual air temperature (1) and moving five-year averages (2) in the
zone 40-750N.

  

\ ”
n ’3 I \ n
J!) ,’ \
\
’ x
' r
u , \ 1’ \ :0
I \o‘ ‘
I \
\
ll \ 10
. centuries - ---------- f
'11 n a an mmmnu'a :1 mm” mmnmt
1“ half [-1 undue - 1“ half 1-! nnlm

Fig. 3. Frequency of recurrence of climatic anomalies according to Russian ar-
chival sources. a) total number of climatic extrema, b) number of cases of
drought (1), rainy periods (2), returns of cold (3). extremely cold winters (4),
famine years (5).

First of all it makes sense to turn to the history of changes in climate and the
socioeconomic processes and phenomena related to them.

We will not be concerned with ancient history. It is known from ancient history
that prolonged glacial periods prevailed on the earth when there was virtually

no growing season in the temperate zone [4, 7, 17, 32, 64]. The last glacial per-
iod was replaced by a rapid warming of climate and the onset of a climatic opti-
mum approximately 8,000 years ago when civilizations developed in a number of
regions in which there are now deserts (Sahara region and others).

63

FIHICNHHC]AI.USE¢MNLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After this, about 0,000 years ago there was a sharp cooling of climate, leading
to the downfall of individual civilizations [7, 36].

Here we will not give any analysis of the factors, in many respects disputablc,
explaining climatic changes in the past. He will only emphasize that there have
always been climatic changes. Some climatic fluctuations, even within the current
interglacial period, not to mention its variations with transition from a glacial
to an interglacial period and back, were so significant that they led to the
fluorishing or destruction of individual civilizations [7, 36].

We have more reliable data concerning the climate of the last thousand years. Dur-
ing this period climatic fluctuations had lesser amplitudes in comparison with

those mentioned above, but nevertheless they were extremely significant with re-
spect to their influence on human activity.

In the climatic epochs of the last thousand years it is necessary to discriminate
the "small" climatic optimum in the 8th-12th centuries. the "small" glacial per-
iod which followed it and which lasted to the middle of the 19th century, the
warming of climate lasting from the middle of the 19th century to the 1930's-
1940'3, and the period of cooling of climate with some fluctuations beginning then

and continuing even now. He will characterize the climate of the last period as
modern climate. '

Beginning with the "small" glacial period we have instrumental observations whose
results, according to different sources, are given in Pig. 2. This figure clearly
shows the period of climatic warming at the beginning of the current century, the

cooling which followed and the shorter-period fluctuations registered during all
periods.

He can draw conclusions concerning the climate of the period preceding the "small"
glacial period for the most part on the basis of indirect data, including tree
rings. historical chronicles, etc.

An analysis of these data very clearly shows that during all periods there were
regional peculiarities in the changes of climate. It is apparent that never dur-
ing the last thousand years have the changes in climate been identical in all re-

gions of the earth and the regional consequences of climatic changes have not
been identical.

In Europe the warming maximum was noted somewhere between the years 1200 and 1250,
and in individual regions between the years 1265 and 1312.

There are indications that in the periods which followed with the onset of cooling,
and especially during the period of the "small" glacial period, these changes had
an unfavorable effect on economic activity. For example, according to the data in
[32, 44, 45], during the years 1312-1326 in Western Europe the yield was 201 less
and in the years 1326-1346 -- 62 less than during the preceding period 1265-1312.
In the late l3th-early 14th centuries there was a marked increase in the intra-
seasonal variability of climate.

Available data indicate that after transition to the "small“ glacial period and on
the "eve" of the "small" climatic optimum (between 300-1000) there was an increase
in the intensity of cyclonic activity and the frequency of recurrence of climatic

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKHAl.lEEZONLY

anomalies (droughts. return of cold periods, flooding. etc.). This was manifest-
ed particularly clearly in Europe in the years 1360-1450, in the l6th-17th cen-
turies and during other periods. Increases in the frequency of recurrence of cli-
matic extrema were accompanied by underharvests, years of famine and a number of
social conflicts. This occurred not only in Europe, but also on other continents
(America. Japan. New Zealand and elsewhere).

Without being able to cite all the available information within the framework of
this article, we will limit ourselves to an illustration of extremal phenomena

in old Russia ancsrding to chronicles. We made such an analysis in collaboration
with V. “. Pasetski; {35]. Some results of this analysis are given in Pig. 3.

This figure shows that in Russia in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries there was a
marked increase in the frequency of recurrence of extremal phenomena. Virtually
synchronously with an increase in the frequency of recurrence of climatic extrema
there was an increase in the frequency of recurrence of famine years. hunger riots
and some other social phenomena.

According to Lamb's data. for Great Britain the maximum duration of the growing
season (the time interval when the temperature was above 5.500) during 1870-1895
was 255-265 days and the minimum -- 205-225 days [44]. During the period of warm-
ing during 1930-1949 these durations increased on the average by 10-15 days and
became 270-275 and 237-263 days respectively. However, during the period 1950-1959
the duration of the growing season again decreased to 265 and 226 days respective-

1y.

During the decades of the "small" glacial period the average growing season in
England was 3-4 weeks shorter than during 1939-1949. Superposed on this was a
great variability of climate which considerably aggravated the unfavorable effects
of climate on economic activity.

The following conclusions can be drawn as a result of an analysis of the history
of climate of the last thousand years:

1. Analysis of the history of climate of the past and the social phenomena asso-
ciated with it is extremely important for an understanding of the effect of c11-
mate on the economy, on public and social life in the future.

2. The principal unfavorable effects of climate were related to climatic anomalies.

3. The most unfavorable climatic effects occurred during the period of cooling of
climate when there was a shortening of the growing season and against this back-
ground of a shortened growing season there was an increase in the frequency of
recurrence of climatic extrema. that is. an instability of climate.

The cited conclusions are extremely important for evaluating the possible influ-
ence of climate on economic activity in the future. The fact is that we are in a
stage of slow cooling of climate caused by natural factors, in particular, a de-
crease in insolation as a result of change in the orbital parameters of our plan-
et (eccentricity, inclination and orbital precession) [17, 62]. Because of the

mentioned factors during the course of the next 8,000-10,000 years the cooling of
climate will continue. In addition. an analysis of the natural factors and an an-
alysis of the statistical patterns of shorter-period climatic changes indicate

65

FOR OFIHCJAL USIZCMQLY
FOR OFFICIAL.USE2ONLY

that in the course of the coming decades a general cooling of climate will con-
tinue with some fluctuations [6, 7, 17, 36, 38, b3, 47].

In [63], on the basis of a composite analysis of available data on current cli-
mate, an unambiguous conclusion was drawn: "indicators of macroscale climatic pro-
cesses indicate that the oscillating cooling observed during the last 30 years

in the northern hemisphere has not ended."

This conclusion is illustrated by the data in the table which give information on
change in virtually all the principal and registered parameters of climate during
the last 25 years taken from the cited source. 1his table shows that virtually
everywhere there was a cooling of climate in the northern hemisphere and a warm-
ing in the southern hemisphere with a mean rate of 0.2°C per decade.

Such a tendency in natural processes should be regarded as unfavorable.

Superposed on this tendency (and this effect will increase) is the influence of
anthropogenic factors (€02, aerosol, heat "surges," radiationally active small im-
purities, etc.). Taken together, the influence of anthropogenic factors should

favor some warming of climate, which in principle can compensate or even somewhat
overlap the natural cooling.

However, this evidently will not be a decisive factor in evaluating the influence
of anthropogenic factors on climate.

Numerical experiments with models of general circulation of the atmosphere, includ-
ing those which we carried out [5, 6, 26, 41]. show that the regional character
of anthropogenic effects should lead to a change in circulation processes, an in-
crease in the frequency of recurrence of blocking processes, an increased fre-
quency of recurrence of climatic extrema associated with them, and in general an
instability of climate. In other words, the anthropogenic influence should be re-
flected to a greater degree in the climatology of the second, rather than the
first moments. The latter means that both in the case of the tendency in natural
cooling of climate and in the case of the tendency in anthropogenic warming of
climate or an invariability of the thermal regime society in any case in the im-
mediate future will have to contend with an increased frequency of recurrence of
climatic anomalies and instability of climate.

As we have attempted to demonstrate, in the past it was specifically the instabil-
ity of climate and climatic anomalies which exerted the most unfavorable effect

on society. This tendency, with an increase in the scales of human activity, in
all probability will be intensified.

Now we will examine the dependence of the principal branches of economic activity
on climate. He will begin this examination with agriculture and the grain prob-
lem. We will analyze data on grain production for the principal grain-producing
regions of the world [16]. The trend line characterizes the crop yield as a re-
sult of improvement in agricultural techniques. The variations relative to the
trend line reflect the influence of climatic anomalies. These variations attain
tens of millions of tons annually. Such climatic anomalies as the droughts of

46

FI”I("HRCJAI.USEh0mﬂN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1972 and 1975 in the USSR and a number of countries were reflected not only in
the crop yield in the countries affected by the droughts but also in the world
grain reserves. Such situations in turn immediately affected the sphere of in-
trrnntiona! relationships.

The grain problem is an acute problem in the world and it can only become more
acute. The world production of grain is now about 1,300 million tons annually,
that is. on the average grain production is one ton per three inhabitants of
the planet. In the well—developed countries (United States, USSR) this produc-
tion attain, or“ . '1 per capita.

The mean annual population increase is about 80 million persons [33, 51]. Thus.
without taking into account the hungry, the annual increase in grain production
throughout the world should be not less than 30 million tons annually, but with
allowance for the consumption norms for the well-developed countries -— about 80
million tons. This means that just for supplying grain to the increased popula-
tion. not to mention that there is an insufficiency of food in the world and
hundreds of millions of people are hungry, the annual increase in grain production
must be not less than 25-30 million tons. but with allowance for the norms for

the development of countries -- about 80 million tons annually.

The annual increment of food production must be not less than 2.52 annually, or
with allowance for the hungry -— not less than 5-61 annually. However, accord-

ing to FAO data. for foodstuffs as a whole the annual increment was 2.72 during
1961-1970, but during 1970-1976 it fell to 0.5%. Without question, there will be
an increase in crop yield as a result of improved technology. By the year 2000
experts estimate that the increase in crop yield as a result of improvement in
technology will be 24% [38]. But this rate obviously does not correspond to the
rates of world population growth. which by the year 2000 will double [21, 33, 51].
Variations in crop yield due to climatic trends and variability (instability) of
climate can be superposed on such a generally stressed situation.

Source [16] gives data on the dependence of crop yield on climatic conditions (tem-
perature and precipitation) for 15 "country - crop" combinations. The cited data
unambiguously indicate an exceptional dependence of crop yield on temperature and
precipitation anomalies. This dependence has a clearly expressed regional char-
acter [38]. In this connection many experts feel that a marked increase in crop
yields in the 19SO's-l960's (during the subsequent period the increase in crop
yield was slowed) was caused not only by an improvement in technology. but also

by more favorable climatic conditions. In evaluating the increase in crop yield

as a result of improvement in technology it is impossible not to take into ac-
count the price at which this increase was achieved. During the last 100—200 years
the grain yield has increased by a factor of 2-3, but the energy expenditures en-
suring this increase have increased by l-Z orders of magnitude. Accordingly, a
further increase in crop yield will be a.sociated with an increase in energy ex-
penditures. However. the problem of climate and energy in itself is extremely com-
plex. We will give particular attention to it.

In the analysis of the available data it is impossible not to focus attention on
at least the two following circumstances:

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Climatic anomalies can cause such variations in grain production which are

completely capable of meeting the necessary increase in grain production or sub-
stantially aggravating the situation.

2. Some specialists, not without basis. feel that in the coming decade the scien~
tific and technical "explosion" in agriculture will not occur in the field of biol-
ogy and technology, but in the field of improvement in the technology of collection
and effective use of information on climate, that is, in the field of improvement
in crop cultivation based on the optimum use of climatic information.

In the field of agriculture alone the expenditures on practical investigations in
the field of climate can give an enormous economic and social advantage from the
realization of scientific results in the field of agroclimatology. The losses in
agricultural production from climate as an average for the world, according to the
most modest estimates, attain tens of billions of dollars annually.

The fishing problem is closely related to the food problem. More than 202 of all
animal protein in the world is obtained by fishing and in some countries this per-
centage attains 502 or more. Practical climatology has a major debt to the fishing
industry and in turn the fishing industry has many demands to place on climatolo-
gists. A whole series of dependences between fishing and climate has now been
established. For example. according to data from the special Taalfe expedition,
along the western shores of Greenland there were virtually no cod during the per-
iod 1908-1910. However, during the period of climatic warming toward the 19é0's
the cod catch in this region was increased to 70-100 thousand tons, and in the
1950'5—1960'3 it rose to 650,000 tons. Now the exploitation of cod is/Nirtually
banned due to its virtual disappearance. This process is not unambiguously depend—
ent on climate, but is related to it.

It has been established that the exploitation of some species of fish fluorishes
and goes into a decline with a period of 80-100 years. The dependence of these
periods on climate is very complex and has an obviously nonlinear form. It is
characteristic that climatic variations have a relatively small amplitude, where-
as the amplitude of the fluctuations in fishing associated with this is very

great [13, 24].

It is easier to trace the influence of climate on the fishing industry in internal
water bodies and rivers. Here climatic conditions are the decisive factor, as has
been demonstrated in a special UN document on food and agriculture [7]. And al-
though ichthyologists have not established a clear correlation between the volume
of fish production and climate, such a correlation exists and must be studied fur-
ther. especially in relation to the development of fishing in internal water bod-
ies and rivers.

Now we will discuss energy and its dependence on climate. Energy is related to
that branch of economic activity whose development to a greater degree determines
the anthropogenic effect on climate than dependence on it. But these two problems
are closely intertwined. ibwever, the dependence of energy on climate is manifest-
ed in sevaral directions [5-7, 18, 33, 40].

68
FOR OFIHCJAL USEZCNVLY

Estimates made at the Main Geophysical Observatory have shown that allowance for
natural illumination, which, in contrast to temperature. for the time being is
not taken into account, can give a saving of approximately the sane order of mag-
nitude. For the Lenergo system alone the potential saving can be up to 32 of the
total expenditure of electric power.

However, the problem of interaction between climate and the fuel-energy complex
can radically restructure the strategy for the development of this vitally neces-
sary branch. This is associated with the general negative influence of the devel-
opment of energy on climate. There is a rather extensive literature on this sub-
ject [5-7. 33. .5. ~11.

As is well known. in the not too distant future the traditional types of fuel, es-
pecially petroleum and gas, will be exhausted. In addition, orientation on coal,
whose reserves are also limited, is fraught with danger for the environment (an
increase in the discharge of sulfur and its compounds, aerosol, carbon dioxide,
etc.). In this connection the sense of duty to future generations. economic feas-
ibility and inevitability are evidently forcing society to conserve the remaining
volumes of chemical energy, especially petroleum and gas. and convert to a new
form or energy. This may be a combination of nuclear and thermonuclear energy and
renewable sources (wind, solar energy, geothermal heat, energy of tides and pho-
tosynthesis). One of the shortcomings of renewable sources is the low energy den-
sity. In the case of wind energy this is several watts per square meter and for
solar energy it is hundreds of watts per square meter. In the well—developed
countries, where 901 of the capital investments are in buildings and structures
with their high concentration and poor adaptability to solar and wind energy, or-
ientation on new types of energy causes serious objections. But in those places
where there is presently no such concentration of production, development from the
very beginning can be oriented on a fundamentally new strategy of development

of energy. In countries or regions where the population is scattered, the devel-
opment of decentralized energy is completely justified and in this case orienta-
tion on renewable energy sources is justified. Their use is also possible in com-
bination with traditional energy sources. But the development of renewable energy
sources is unthinkable without allowance for the climatic potential, the cli-
matic regime and its changes in the operation of power systems. Unfortunately,
there is an underevaluation of this fact and this can be expensive for society.

Now we will proceed to a brief analysis of the influence of climate on construc-
tion. where this influence is exceptionally great, especially in countries with ex-
tremal climatic conditions. It should be noted that in this field the most work

has been done for taking climatic information into account, primarily in the plann-
ing of construction. Estimates for the United States show that a temperature de-
crease by only l°C would result in additional expenditures on construction of

about 10 billion dollars annually. Howeve'. the total effect of this change, tak-
ing human health into account. would be 47.7 billion dollars [1, 7]. In this

branch there are several problems related to allowance for climate.

The first problem is allowance for climatic information in planning. Projects cost-
ing billions and tens of billions of rubles are now being carried out. A reduc-
tion in their cost by only 1% by means of an optimum allowance for climatic

69

FOR OFFICIAI.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFHOAI. USE ONLY

conditions would be converted into sums attaining tens and hundreds of millions

of rubles, not to mention the potential effect as a result of reduced operating
costs.

It is possible to define several types of problems related to planning and con-
struction whose dependence on clinate is unquestionable and requires only a quan-
titative evaluation.

One of the problems is the development of methods for the effective use of cli-
matic data in such a way that there will not be an unjustifiable increase in

the cost of projects and as a result, a partial nullification of capital invest-
ments, on the one hand, and on the other hand. so that there is no possibility of
an inadequate strength (or heat resistance, etc.) of these objeccs. With errors
of any sign, in addition to the mentioned losses, over the course of a long per-
iod of time there will also be an overexpenditure of operational costs.

Here it should be added that at the present time planning is being carried out for
the exploitation of new regions. In these cases there is a partial lack of the
necessary preproject preparations and the collection and analysis of climatic in-
formation begins simultaneously with the planning. Here there have been solutions
which have inevitably been nonoptimum in climatic respects. This situation must
be changed.

The second problem is related to the planning of barrier structures, heating sys-
tems, air conditioning and ventilation systems, etc., whose operation to a decis-
ive degree is determined by climatic conditions. The effectiveness of these meas-
ures can be estimated at from hundreds of millions to tens of billions of dollars
for the world as a whole.

The next problem is related to the influence of climate on the actual performance
of work, especially outside work. As is well known, the duration of construction
work is influenced by the duration and frequency of recurrence of extremal weather
conditions during which open-air work ceases and also mean temperatures, wind vel-
ocity, precipitation, etc. Many technological construction cycles (such as con-
crete work, paving, operation of cranes, transportation facilities, etc.) are
highly dependent on climate. There is no question but that an optimum allowance
for climatic conditions will afford great possibilities for increasing the produc-
tivity of construction work solely by its more effective planning.

The fourth problem is related to the construction of electric power lines and their
operation with wind, glaze and glaze-wind loads taken into account. The influence
of climatic conditions here is related not so much to losses due to nonoptimul
planning and increasing costs for structures and their operation. The principal
material losses under unfavorable climatic and weather conditions are not governed
by the cost of work on reconstruction of electric power lines, but by the losses
of industry and agriculture, which are dependent on the functioning of these
lines.

The fifth problem is allowance for wind, glaze and snow loads on buildings and
structures of general and special types, especially on structures with a height of
1.0 m or more (buildings, supports, stacks, ‘l'V towers, etc.). An exaggeration of

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FT)R 0F1JCJAI.IJSE2(NULY

these loads leads to a marked and frequently unjustifiable increase in construc-

tion costs, whereas an underevaluation of these loads will result in a probability
of damage.

we have enumerated only the principal aspects of the influence of climate on plann-

ing and construction. The listing of these problems could be made still more de-
tailed.

In countries with a tropical climate there are special problems involved which are
related to the t3n°t'v::iun of dikes, protection against tropical cyclones and
hurricanes. against corrosion, etc.

It cannot be said that little is being done in this direction. But the need has

now arisen for a scientifically sound allowance for climatic information and a1-
lowance for it must be opthmized. This cannot be done without serious investiga-
tions.

Now a few words about the influence of climate on forestry [2]. Forests occupy an
area of 50 million square kilometers or 331 of the land surface. whereas on the
average the productivity of lands on the earth is 0.31-103 tons/(kmz'year), for
the forest it is 1.3-10 tons/(ka-year), or 130 tons/(hectare-year). The total
increment of wood is 65-109 tons/year. In turn the production of one ton of dry
matter is equivalent to the absorption of 1.8 tons of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and the release of 1.3 tons of oxygen into the atmosphere. Altogether,
the forests absorb 119 billion tons of carbon dioxide and 86 billion tons of oxy-
gen are released annually.

The fixation of energy in the forest biomass is about 1.2-1.021 J/year (as a com-
parison we point out that in 1980 the annual production of all types of energy
throughout the world was about 0.3-21 J, and by the year 2025 this quantity will
be 1.2-1021 J). Thus. this problem is important both from the point of view of
the influence of the forest on climate and from the point of view of the influ-
ence of climate on the forest, being an important energy and raw material re-
source in the world economy. It is not impossible that in the immediate future
in place of the cutting of forests for agricultural and construction purposes
we will be forced to pose the problem of unconditional preservation and mandatory
reproduction (on a global scale) of forests as sources of energy and a regulator
of gas and water exchange in the climatic system.

Available data indicate that changes in the components of the heat and water bal-
ances exert a very strong influence on the productivity of the forest and in dif-
fcrcnt climatic zones this influence is different. For example, in countries with
a cold climate a temperature increase favors an accelerated growth of trees.
whereas an increase in evaporability does not exert a very strong influence on

the growth of trees. In countries with a warm climate a temperature increase in
itself does not decisively determine the growth of trees. However, in this process
evaporability increases and as a result there is a decrease in tree growth.

Forests always have reacted sensitively to a change in climatic conditions and
evvn now are excellent indicators of climate of the past, including climatic anom-
alias.

51

F0R10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time the problem of interaction between climate and forestry must
be examined both from the point of view of the influence of climate on forests

and from the point of view of the reverse effect of forests on climate.

Now we will discuss the interaction between climate and water management [7, 37,
53]. Among the three principal water balance components (precipitation, evapora-
tion and runoff) the first two components are the most important and vary signif-
icantly in dependence on climatic conditions.

Estimates show that for a population of 8 billion people with norms of one ton of
grain for each three persons it is necessary to produce not 1.300 million tons of
grain. but about 2.700 million tons. if a norm of 800 kg per person is used as

a point of departure, production must increase to 6,500 million tons, which is
2-5 times greater than present-day production. If 60% of this grain is produced

on irrigated lands, with a crop yield of four tons per hectare and with an expend-
iture of 2.200 m3 of water per ton of grain or 9,000 m3 per hectare at the beginn-
ing of the next century it will be necessary to withdraw about 6,000 km3 of water
annually from the annual runoff, as well as 4,000 km3 of water for industrial pur-
poses. In other words, about 252 of the annual runoff will be withdrawn for econ-
omic purposes. About 90: of this volume will be lost in evaporation (at the pres-
ent time about 73,000 km3 is evaporated on the land).

The dependence of runoff, evaporation and precipitation on varying climatic condi-
tions is extremely important. For example, according to data in [7, 37], for the
United States the ratio of maximum runoff to mean annual runoff can vary from 3—5
to 25-30 in dependence on changing climatic conditions. The most important and
primary evaluations of the influence of climate on water management will relate
to the following problems:

-- planning and operation of reservoirs;

-- planning and construction of major hydroengineering complexes;

—- planning. construction and operation of irrigation structures;

-- allowance for climatic factors in regions of intensive use of ground water
from boreholes and wells.

We will cite an example: in 1977, during a drought period in California, the need
for water immediately increased by 532. As a result, about 10,000 new wells were
drilled in a single year. The ground water level dropped sharply and the cost of
water doubled.

Nevertheless. inadequate attention is being devoted to the problem of climate and
public health {7]. Here we can define several scientific directions which are in
the initial stage of formation and development. Among these we feel it important
to define the field of bioclimatology. Bioclimatology is a relatively new science
and is concerned with study of the influence of climate on human feeling of well-
being and health and also the study of the microclimate of different natural and
urban landscapes and buildings and its influence on man's conditions for survival.

As is well known. the temperature zone for climatic comfort falls in the relative-
ly narrow range 20-25°C. However, man survives in a temperature range from +55 to

-60°C. Determination of the optimum climatic conditions for the organization of
conditions for work, rest. survival and therapy is one of the important economic

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFIHCJA1.USE‘0NLN

and social tasks of applied climatology in the public health field.

He still have not enumerated here a number of branches of economic activity where
climate exerts an extremely significant effect. we could mention sea. air, railroad
and highway transportation, exploitation of the sea shelf, etc.

As we have already emphasized, the overall problem is a serious reexamination of
the role of climate in economic activity on the basis of socioeconomic evaluations
and optimum solutions in the sphere of planning and control.

However. the proper evaluation of the economic and especially the social conse-
quences or man's actions, without taking real climatic conditions into account,
is an exceptionally difficult problem.

Due to the exceptional complexity, diversity and uncontrollability of climatic con-
ditions, any economic solutions relying on climatic information involve a definite
risk of reducing the effectiveness of actions and measures taken in accordance
with the adopted strategy in comparison with the potential effectiveness. Here by
the term "potential effectiveness" we mean the effectiveness attainable with a
knowledge of reliable climatic conditions, and it goes without saying, with proper
actions by the user.

In this connection the question arises of the need for finding such a strategy
which under conditions of possible uncertainty in the evaluation of climatic in-
formation would reduce to a minimum the risk and loss from unfavorable climatic
conditions or would yield the maximum possible effect under favorable conditions.

At the present time it must be admitted that despite the obvious influence of cli-
matic conditions on the principal aspects of human activity the available climatic
information is by no means used rationally. The most discouraging fact is that not
in all branches of the economy do users understand how to make rational use of this
information in the adoption of optimum solutions.

As is well known, the principal economic decisions are not made by the possessors
of climate data, but by its users. They determine the strategy to be followed.

Among them there are evidently three types of users. The first type takes "willful"
decisions or is guided by some norm-setting document, not taking climatic informa-
tion into account and at times even completely ignoring it.

The second type uses climatic information, but very cautiously, being oriented 0n
the "mean climate," that is. on the "norm."

Finally, a third type is trying to use more complete climatic information, includ-
ing predictions, without taking their stochastic character into account. This is
the most risk-taking type of user, although both the second and third types of
users usually understand that the climatic information which they use contains a
measure of uncertainty.

It can be said with assurance that not one of the above-mentioned three approaches
to the use of climatic information is scientifically sound.

53

FOR OFFICJAI.USE(HHLY
FOR 0F?1(]Al.USE<DNLY

For this reason the first and foremost task must be considered the development

of Scientifically sound methods for the adoption of optimum socioeconomic deci-
slnns on the basis of an allowance for climatic information and its correct ap-
plication to specific fields of human activity. By the term "climatologically op-
timum decision" (user's strategy) we mean economic decisions adopted by the user
on the basis of climatological information and ensuring the maximum effect in ac-
cordance with the selected optimality criterion. As the optimality criterion it
is possible to use the mean climatic losses, the minimum probability of losses,
the maximum mean profit. etc. By the term "climatic losses" we mean the losses
which the user of climatic information sustains due to the noncorrespondence of
the adopted decision to the actual climatic conditions.

Proceeding now to an evaluation of those measures which in our opinion should
stimulate development of research in this field, we will mention only a few of
the most important and priority measures.

First of all there must be a marked change in the attitude toward climate in all
spheres of activity and climatic resources must be regarded as one of the most
important factors in increasing the effectiveness of social production.

The next stage must be the creation of a long-term program for investigations in
the field of applied climatology, taking in the activity not only of scientific

institutes, but also primarily organizations whose activity is dependent to the

greatest degree on climate or exert an influence on climate. Such a program will
require serious interdepartmental coordination and control.

The implementation of these measures should lay the groundwork for creating in the
country a clearly functioning system which routinely and over a long-term basis
would evaluate climatic resources, would evaluate and predict the climatic situa-
tion developing in the world. not just in the country, taking into account both
natural and anthropogenic factors, and would give recommendations for optimum
decisions in the planning and control sphere, taking climatic information into
account.

The implementation of these measures will unquestionably favor the transformation
of climatology into a real means for increasing the effectiveness of social produc-
tion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Arge, R. K.. "Climate and Economic Activity," VSEHIRNAYA KONFERENTSIYA P0
KLIMATU (World Climate Conference), Geneva, WHO, 1979.

2. Baumgartner, A., "Variability of climate and Forestry," VSEHIRNAYA KONFERENTS-
IYA P0 KLIMATU, Geneva, HMO, 1979.

3. Borisenkov, Ye. P., ”Climate and Tasks of CARP-Climate," HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO-
LOCIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No l. 1975.

d. Borisenkov, Ye. P., "Climate and its Changes," NOVOYE V ZHIZNI NAUKI I TEKH-
NIKI. SERIYA "FIZIKA" (New in the Life of Science and Technology. "Physics"
Series), No 6, 1976.

54

FIHI()FIN(JAI.IEHE(NVLY
6.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Borisenkov, Ye. P., "Status and Modern Problems in the Energy of Atmospheric
Processes," PROBLEHY SOVRBIENIDY GIDRWROLOGII (Problems in Modern ny-
drometeorology), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Borisenkov, Ye. P., Heleshko, V. P., Shneyerov, B. Ye. and Priyemov, V. P.,
"Effect of Heat Effluent on Weather and Climate," TRUDY GGO (Transactions
of the Main Geophysical Observatory), No 438, 1980.

VSI-HIRNAYA KONFERENTSIYA P0 KLIHATU. KONPERENTSIYA EKSPERTOV "KLD‘IAT I CHEL-
OVBCHESTVN' ('Jarld Climate Conference. Conference of Experts on "Climate
and Litnkind"), RASHIRBNNYYE TBZISY DOW (Expanded Sunnaries of Reports),
Geneva, February, 1979, Izd-vo HMO, 1979.

"The Main Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov During Fifty Years of
Soviet Rule," TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical Observatory),
No 218, 1967.

"Declaration of the World Climate Conference," HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA,
No 7, 1979.

"Natural and Anthropogenic Changes in Climate," RUDY GGO, No 438. 1980.

Zavarina, M. F., STROITEL'NAYA KLIMATOLOGIYA (Construction Climatology),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1976.

Izrael', Yu. A. and Sedunov, Yu. 8., "Horld Climate Conference," WWW-
IYA I GIDROLOCIYA, No 7, 1979.

Kushnig. D. K., "Climatic Change and Marine Fishing," VSDlIRNAYA KONFERBNTS-
IYA P0 KLIMATU, Geneva, R40, 1979.

EMTICHESKIY‘B PARAMETRY ZONY OSVOYERIYA BAYKALO-AMURSKOY HAGIS‘I'RALI (Cli-
matic Parameters of the Zone of Exploitation of the Baykal—Auur Railroad),
edited by L. Ye. Anopol'akaya and I. D. Kopanev, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,

1977.

Kopanev, I. 0., "Cl imatology - National Economy," SOVRDIENNYYE FUNDAMENTAU-
NYYE I PRIKLADNYYE ISSLHJOVANIYA GLAVMY GMPIZICHESKDY OBSERVA‘mRII DIEM
A. I. VOYEYKOVA. YUBILEYNYY SBORNIK (Modern Fundamental and Applied Invest-
igations of the Main Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeylwv. Annivers-
ary Collection of Articles), Leningrad, Gidrometeoisdat, 1977.

Mokkvig, D. D., "Climatic Variability and Agriculture in Regions of a Ten-
perate Climate," VSEHIRNAYA KDNPERENTSIYA P0 KLDIATU, Geneva, W, 1979.

Honin, A. S. and Shishkov, Yu. A., ISTORIYA KLIHATA (History of Climate),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

NEPREDNAHERENNYYB VOZDEYSTVIYA NA KLIMAT (Inadvertent Effects on Climate),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat. 1971..

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

FOR‘0FFNJA1.USE(MNLY

Pivovarovs. Z. I., RADIATSIONNYYE KHARAKTERISTIKI KLIMATA 8858 (Radiation
Characteristics of Climate of the USSR), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Romanova, Ye. P., HIKROKLIMATICHESKAYA IZHENCHIVOST' OSNOVNYKH ELEMENTOV
KLIHATA (Hicroclimatic Variability of the Principal Climatic Elements),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Svaminotkop, H. 5., "Global Aspects of Food Production," VSEHIRNAYA KDNPER-
ENTSIYA P0 KLIHATU, Geneva, HMO, 1979.

SOVREHENNYYE FUNDAMENTAL'NYYE I PRIKLADNVYB ISSLEDOVANIYA GLAVNOY GEDPIZ-
ICHESKDY OBSERVATORII IHENI A. I. VOYEYNOVA: SBORNIK STATE? (Modern Funda-
mental and Practical Investigations of the Main Geophysical Observatory

imeni A. I. Voyeykov: Collection of Articles), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1977.

TRUDY V VSESOYUZNOGO HETEDRDLOGICHESKDGO S"YBZDA (Transactions of the Fifth
All-Union Meteorological Congress). Vol III, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1972.

Welcome, R. L., "Influence of Climatic Changes on Fishing in Internal Haters,"
VSEMIRNAYA KDNFERENTSIYA PO KLIHATU, Geneva, “MO, 1979.

Fedorov, Ye. K.. "Climatic Change and the Strategy of Mankind.“ HETEOROLOGIYA
1 GIDROLOCIYA, No 7, 1979.

FIZICHESKIYB OSNOVY TEORII KLIHATA I YEGO HDDBLIROVANIYA: TEDDY HBZHD. NAUCH-
NOY KONFERENTSII VHOIHSNS/YuNEP, STOKGOL'H, 29 IYULYA-lo AVGUSTA 1974
(Physical Principles of the Theory of Climate and its Modeling: Transactions
of the International Scientific Conference HMO/HSNS/UNEP, Stockholm. 29 July-
10 August 1974), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

FIZICHESKIYB OSNOVY KLIMATA I YEGO IZHENENIY. NATSIONAL'NAYA PROGRAHHA SSSR
PIGAP-KLIHAT (Physical Principles of Climate and Its Changes. National USSR
CARP-Climate Program), Moscow, Sov. Komissiys PIGAP Mezhduvedomstvennogo Geo-
fizicheskogo Komiteta pri Prez. AN SSSR. 1977.

FIZICHBSKIYE OSNOVY IZMENENIY SOVREHBNNOGO KLIMATA: TRUDY VSBSOYUZNOGO SIM-
POZIUHA, MOSKVA, 23-25 APRELYA 1979 (Physical Principles of Changes in Modern
Climate: Transactions of the All-Union Symposium, Moscow, 23-25 April 1979),
Mask. Filial Geogr. Obshchestva SSSR, Goskomgidromet, Moscow, No l, 1980.

FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I PROBLEHY KLIHATA. SB. STATBY (Physics of the Atmosphere and
Climate Problems: Collection of Articles), Moscow, Nauka, 1980.

BKONONICHESKAYA GEOGRAFIYA HIROVOGO OKEANA (Economic Geography of the Ubrld
Ocean), Leningrad, Nauka, 1979.

YUBILBYNYY SBORNIK: TRUDY GGO (Anniversary Collection of Articles: Transac-
tions of the Main Geophysical Observatory), No 346, 1974.

ABSTRACTS OF INTERNATIONAL CONPERENCE 0N CLIMATE HISTORY, 8-15 July, 1979, Nor-

wich, 1979.
56

FOR OFFNJAL.USE(NNLY
33.

35

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

FORIOFFK3A1.USE(NNLY

AHBIO, Vol III, No 3-4, 1974.

A STRATEGY FOR THE NATIONAL CLIMATE PROGRAM, Report of the workshop to Review
the Preliminary National Climate Program P1an,Ju1y 16-21, 1979, Nat. Acad.
Sci., Hashington, D. C.

Borisenkov, E. P. and Pasetsky, V. M., "Extreme Meteorological Phenomena Ac-
cording to Russian Historical Sources of the 10th to 19th Centuries," AB—
STRACTS OF INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE AND HISTORY, 8-14 July, 1979,
Norwich, (‘2.

Bryson, R. A. and Ross, 1. E., "Climatic Variation and Implications for world
Food Production," HORLD DEVELOPMENT, Vol 5, No 5-7, 1977.

CLIMATE, CLIMATIC CHANGE AND HATER SUPPLY, Nat. Acad. Sci., Panel on Hater
and Climate, Washington, D. C., 1977. .

CLIMATIC CHANGE TO THE YEAR 2000. A SURVEY OF EXPERT OPINION, Fort Lesley J.
McNair, Hashington, D. C., Feb 1978.

CROP YIELDS AND CLIMATE CHANGE: THE YEAR 2000. PROGRESS REPORT, Fort Lesley
J. McNair, Hashington, D. C., August 1978.

ENERGY AND CLIMATE, National Academy of Sciences, Nbshington, D. C., 1977.

Haflle. H., et a1., "Second Status Report of the IIASA Project on Energy Sys-
tems, 1975, Research Report R. R-76-1, International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 1976.

Herman, J. R. and Goldberg, R. A.. SUN HEATHER AND CLIMATE, NASA, SP-426,
Hashington, D. C., 1978.

Kukla, G. 3., Angeli, J. K., Namias, J., et a1., "New Data on Climatic Trends,"
NATURE, Vol 270, 1977.

Lamb, H. H., CLIMATE: PRESENT, PAST AND FUTURE, London, Methuen, Vbl 1, 1972,
Vol 2, 1977.

Lamb, H. H., THE DEVELOPMENT OF CLIMATE, MAN'S HISTORY AND FUTURE, Univ. of
East Anglia, Norwich, 1975.

NATIONAL CLIMATE PROGRAM. FIVE-YEAR PLAN, July 1980, NCAA.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE FOURTH ANNUAL CLIMATE DIAGNOSTICS HORKSHOP, U. 8. Depart-
ment of Commerce, NOAA, Oct 16-18, 1979.

PUBLIC LAW 95-367, Sept 17, 1978, 92 STAT.
REDUCING THE CLIMATIC VULNERABILITY OP FOOD SUPPLIES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.

PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ALTERNATIVES, Schnitter Associates, Hashimgton, D. C., Oc-
tober 1978.

FOR‘OFPKJAI.USE(MNLY
50.

51.

52.

53.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL WRKSHOP ON CLIMATE ISSUES. Austria, Apr 26-28,
1978, Nat. Acad. Sci... Washington. D. C., 1978.

REPORT OF THE SYMPOSIUM ON POPULATION, RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT, United
Nations World Population Conference, 1976.

UNDERSTANDING CLIMATIC CHANGE. A PROGRAM FOR ACTION, Nat. Acad. Sci... Hashing-
ton, D. C.

WELD CLIMATE CONFERENCE. A CONFERENCE OF EXPERTS ON CLIMATE AND HANKIND.
DECLARATION AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS, Geneva, Feb 1979.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.583

PRESENT S‘uuUS 0P CLIHATIC RBSMCM

Moscow HETEOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6. Jun 81 (manuscript received
28 Oct 80) PP 49-62

[Article by H. I. Budyko. corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences, State Hy-
drological Institute]

[Text] Abstract: The article is a review of modern in-
vestigations of different problems of climatol-
ogy, including studies in the theory of climate
and study of its natural and anthropogenic
changes.

Scientific revolution in the field of climatology. During recent years there has
been such a significant restructuring of what was formerly the science of climate
that in the Soviet and foreign literature there is more and more discussion of the
scientific revolution in the field of climatology which is now taking place.

In the recent past climatology was for the most part an empirical discipline in
which the comparative and historical research methods were used. Although with the
use of these methods it was possible to establish many important patterns of the
climates of the present epoch and the geological past. these methods were ill-suit-
ed for clarifying the genesis of climate, that is, for a quantitative explanation
of the relationships between climate and exterml climate-forming factors. For this
reason until recently it was extremely difficult to explain the reasons for the
changes in climate and answer many other questions which are of considerable sci-
entific and practical importance.

The principal features of the restructuring of climatology. occurring for the most
part in the 1970's. are, first of all. the extensive use of modern theoretical and
experimental methods of atmspheric physics, and second. determination of close
relationships between earlier isolated different branches of cliutic science.

The formulation of models of the theory of climate is of particular importance among
the theoretical methods used in modern climatology. We should also note the rapid
progress in use of detailed methods of statistical analysis of materials from

 

 

* Rt'POl't presented at an expanded session of the Presidium of the Scientific and
Technical Council. State Comittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental anitoring,
13 October 1980.

FOR OFFICIAL [.83 ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

meteorological observations in investigations of climate. The successfully develop-
ing work on the numerical modeling of the influence of climate on different natural
processes, including studies of the hydrological regime, the vital functioning of
plants, geographic zonality. and others also is worthy of great attention.

Hhereas earlier in climatological investigations use was made almost exclusively of
materials from standard surface meteorological observations, now in these investiga-
tions increasing use is being made of data from actinometric and aerological observ-
ations, materials obtained on oceanographic expeditions, and also data from satel-
lite observations, which are especially valuable in the study of climate.

A second characteristic feature of modern investigations of climate is the organiz-
ation of major multisided investigations which bring together different earlier
poorly interrelated branches of climatology and in which extensive use is made of
the methods and materials of many sciences bordering on climatology. The best known
examples of such investigations in our country and abroad are the projects for in-
vestigating the influence of man's activity on climate.

Mention should be made of the special role of the problem of the anthropogenic
change in climate in the restructuring of climatology which is now occurring. In
the 1970's it was established that in the immediate future there will be a change
in global climate caused by economic activity and this will exert an influence on
many natural processes and on a number of such branches of economic activity as ag-
riculture. fishing, hydroelectric power, construction, sea transport and others.

The problem of anthropogenic changes of climate has attracted the attention of
governments of different countries and a number of international organizations, in-
cluding the world Meteorological Organization.

It can be surmised that with continuing clarification of the scales of impending
changes of natural conditions caused by anthropogenic effects on global climate
measures will be taken for the further expansion of investigations of this excep-
tionally important problem.

In discussing the restructuring of climatology which is now taking place it must

be noted that this restructuring was prepared by the studies of several generations
of researchers, among whom an outstanding place was occupied by the scientists of our
country.

A profound influence on the development of Soviet and world climatology was exerted
by the investigations of A. I. Voyeykov in which for the first time he formulated
the problem of solving a number of problems in physical climatology, including the
problem of study of the earth's energy balance. In the works of A. I. Voyeykov
studies were initiated for investigating the influence of general circulation of
the atmosphere on climate. The successes later achieved in the development of syn-
optic meteorology provided a possibility for a considerable broadening of the study

of circulation factors in the genesis of climate, as was done in the studies of B. L.
Dzerdzeyevskiy, 0. Ya. Vangengeym, S. P. Khromov, 0. A. Drozdov. A. A. Girs and oth-

ers. Already in the 1930's in the studies of V. V. Shuleykin, leading the way for
similar foreign investigations, it was established that interaction between the

60
FOR 0F?1CJAL.USE¢MVLY

ocean and the atmosphere exerts a profound influence on climate. The investiga-
tions of Ye. N. Blinova. in which she proposed a model of the theory of climate
taking into account circulation processes in the atmosphere. work done in the 1940's,
also considerably outpaced foreign science.

Beginning in the 1960's at the Main Geophysical Observatory, and later at the State
Hydrological Institute, investigations were made of the energy balance of the
earth's surface and the atmosphere, during which atlases of world maps of energy
balance components were prepared. Over a period of years the world water balance
was studied at the State Hydrological Institute. Institute of Geography and other
institutes. The ;.terials on the energy and water balances of the earth obtained

in our Country with respect to their completeness have no equal in foreign investi-
gations.

An outstanding achievement in Soviet science, the launching of an artificial earth
satellite. made possible the development of satellite climatology. The publication
of materials of satellite observations of the radiation regime of the earth-atmo-

sphere system, initiated in the late 1960's, exerted a substantial influence on the
development of physical climatology.

0n the basis of successes in the development of computers in the 1960’s there was

an appreciable acceleration in the deveIOpIent of climatic theories. During these

years models were constructed of general circulation of the atmosphere which made

it possible to compute the nonsvcraged fields of meteorological elements. Then the
first energy models of the atmospheric thermal regime were formulated.

Below we will discuss in greater detail three directions in modern investigations
of climate: formulation of models of the theory of climate, study of natural changes
of climate and investigations of the influence exerted on global climate by anthro-
pogenic factors, which developed particularly rapidly in the 1970's. These direc-
tions. however, do not take in all the outstanding achievements of recent years in
the study of climate. Worthy of mention are the investigations of the statistical
patterns of the fields of meteorological elements carried out in our country by H.
l. Yudin, G. V. Gruza, I. l. Polysk and others. the studies made by 0. A. Drozdov,
V. N. Adamenko and Yu. L. Rauner on variations in the regime of moistening and
droughts, studies relating to different problems of applied climatology (including
in the field of agricultural climatology), on microclimntology and many others.

hydromechanics and thermodynamics, and also the regularities of radiation transfer

of energy and phase transformations of water and the other relationships in modern
physical meteorology.

In addition to the development of detailed models of climate, including allowance
for general circulation of the atmosphere, during recent years considerable atten-
tion has been devoted to the formulation of simplified models of climate in which

simultaneously with general physical laws use has been made of different empirical
relationships.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘0FF1C1A|.IJSE§(MVLV

Investigations devoted to the development of multiparameter models of general cir-
culation of the atmosphere were initiated by Smagorinsky and his colleagues, Hints

and other authors.

In the investigations of Manabe and Bryan (1969) a numerical model of the theory of
climate was developed, including an allowance for the influence exerted on climatic
conditions by circulation of waters in the oceans. In the studies of Holloway and
Hanabe in 1971 maps of the principal components of the heat and water balances of
the earth's surface were constructed for the first time by a theoretical method.
These maps were similar to the similar maps constructed earlier by empirical meth-
ods.

Many substantial results have been obtained during recent years in studies in this
direction.

In 1975 Hanabe and Uetherald made computations of the influence of a change in the
concentration of carbon dioxide on the mean latitudinal distribution of elements
of the meteorological regime. In this same year in a study by Hetherald and Hanabe
an investigation was made of the influence of changes in the solar constant on
climate. In 1980 Hanabe and Netherald computed changes in climate with an increase
in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere for a hemisphere part of
which is occupied by a continent and part of which is occupied by an ocean. In
that study conclusions were drawn concerning the change in moistening on the con-
tinents with the development of a global warming.

In a study by Hanabe and Stouffer, published in 1979, computations were made of
the influence of 002 on the thermal regime for real topography, taking into ac-
count the annual variation of meteorological elements.

Investigations in this direction are of great importance in a study of anthropo-
genic changes of climate.

Studies devoted to reconstruction of climates of the geological past are worth not-
ing. In the investigations of Hanabe and Hahn, Gates and other authors published
in the late 1970's. on the basis of development of models of general circulation
of the atmosphere it was possible to plot maps of climate for the time of the last
glaciation which were very similar to the maps based on paleogeographic date.

In the development of models of general circulation of the atmosphere in the Soviet
Union the most general results were obtained in the studies of G. I. Harchuk and
his colleagues. We should also mention the hydrodylamic three-level model develop-
ed by V. P. Heleshko (and co-authorc). The use of this model made it possible to
compute the characteristics of the heat and water balances. which agree with
available empirical data.

Despite the existence of many outstanding achievements attained in creating models

of general circulation of the atmosphere, the difficulties standing on the path of

development of these models have not yet been completely overcome. This, in partic-
ular, limits the possibilities of using these models in studying climatic changes.

In addition, as pointed out by Smagorinsky, in order to compute changes in climat-

ic conditions using models of the general theory of climate on electronic

62

INDR 0F!1C1Al.lEHI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computers it is necessary to employ an enormous amount of time, frequently ex-
ceeding the capabilities of computation centers supplied with the highest-speed
machines. In this connection Smagorinsky noted the need for developing methods
for the parameterization of circulation processes in the atmosphere and oceans
for the purpose of describing macroscale disturbances in this circulation stat-
istically, by analogy with the usual method for investigating small-scale turbu-
lent processes. Such an idea was used in a number of studies of the theory of
climate in which the transfers of heat and moisture in the atmosphere were re-
garded as macroturbulent processes.

Taking 11-. account the difficulties in using more general theories of climate in
studying its changes, in a runaber of studies an attempt was made to use semiempir-
ical models for this purpose in which at the price of a strong schematization of
macroscale atmospheric processes, restriction of the formulated problems and use
of empirical correlations it is possible to meet the following requirements: 1)
the model does not include empirical data on the distribution of individual cli-
matic elements; 2) the model realistically takes into account all types of heat
influxes which exert an appreciable influence on the temperature field and in
which there is satisfaction of the law of conservation of energy; 3) the model
includes allowance for the feedbacks among climatic elements.

With satisfaction of these conditions the model of the theory of climate can be
used for clarifying the genesis of climate and the mechanism of its changes.

In the late 1960's. first in the USSR and then in the United States. semiempirical
models of the thermal regime of the atmosphere were proposed based on study of the
earth's heat balance. In these models use was made of the heat balance equation
for the earth-atmosphere system and empirical expressions relating the distribu-
tion of mean latitudinal air temperatures and the meridional redistribution of
heat in the atmosphere and hydrosphere, determined from heat balance computations.

In the considered models an allowance was made for the principal feedbacks exert-
ing an influence on the thermal regime, including the feedback between air temper-
ature and the area of polar ice. Since these models in the first approximation sat-
isfied the above-mentioned requirements. they could be used in studying climatic
changes.

A number of laws of the genesis of climate were established as a result of use of
these models. Among these laws, in particular, is that there is an "ambiguity" of
climate (it was found that together with modern climate with the existing external
climate-forming factors there can be at least one other climate variant -— a "white
earth." completely covered with ice with very low temperatures at all latitudes).

A similar conclusion was later also obtained from models of general circulation of
the atmosphere.

In the 1970's more than a hundred studies devoted to the development of semiempir-
ical models of the thermal regime of the atmosphere were published. A considerable

contribution to investigations in this direction, in addition to many foreign sci-
entists, was made by G. S. Golitsyn. I. L. Karol' and their colleagues.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition to the development of semiaupirical models, the authors of a number
of studies proposed more detailed parameterized models of the theory of climate

which were used in the study of the genesis of climate and in analyses of climatic
changes.

In checking existing models of climate use has been made of different methods, in-

cluding, for example, comparison of the computed fields of meteorological elements
with the corresponding observational data.

In clarifying the possibility of using a climate model for computations of climatic
conditions it is of great importance of compare the results of computations of the
sensitivity of climate to changes in climate-forming factors with evaluations of
this sensitivity obtained from observational data.

Table 1
Sensitivity of Thermal Regime to Changes in Heat Influx (AT1)
I II III IV
1.4-1.50c 1.s°c 1.1-1.45°c 1.1-1.2°c
Table 2

Sensitivity of Thermal Regime to Changes in 002 Concentration in Atmosphere (ATc)

I II III IV
2.5-3.s°c 2.0-3.o°c 3.3°c 3.s°c

Table 1 gives the values of the ATI parameter, equal to the change in mean air tem-
perature at the earth's surface with an increase in the heat influx toward the out-
er boundary of the atmosphere (solar constant) by 11. These values were determined
using a semiempirical theory of the thermal regime of the atmosphere (I), using
models of general circulation of the atmosphere (II) and two empirical methods:
using data from satellite observations of seasonal changes of radiation fluxes at
the outer boundary of the atmosphere (taking into account data on seasonal changes

in air temperature and cloud cover) (III) and using materials on the modern change
in climate (IV).

The data in this table pertain to conditions of a constant or little-changing al-
bedo of the earth's surface.

Table 2 gives data on the parameter ATc which characterizes the sensitivity of
the thermal regime to changes in the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide.
This parameter is equal to the change in mean air temperature at the earth’s sur-

face with a doubling of the carbon dioxide concentration in comparison with its
modern value.

Table 2 includes data on the values of the ATc parameter, determined using a
semismpirical model of the thermal regime (I), using models of general circula-

tion of the atmosphere (II), and also evaluations based on materials on the modern
change in climate (III) and empirical data on the climates of the past (IV).

610

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢MWﬂﬂAl.USE(NVLY

The data in Tables 1 and 2, together with other similar materials, make it pos—
sible to draw two conclusions. First: the use for computations of sensitivity
of theories of climate which take into account the most important components of
the atmospheric heat balance and also the principal feedbacks between the ther-
mal regime and different climatic factors gives results very close to empirical
evaluations of sensitivity. Second: the results of use of models of general cir-
culation of the atmosphere and schematic aemiempirical models of the thermal re-
gime for evaluating this sensitivity are rather close to one another.

It follows from these conclusions that existing theories of climate can be used
successf"‘ly in sol"ing the most important problem in modern climatology --.
computations and predictions of climatic changes. For this purpose it is pos-
sible to use both schematic and the most detailed models under the condition that
they satisfy the requirements mentioned above.

Natural climatic changes. Although the problem of the mechanism of natural changes
of climate has been studied over the course of many decades, until recently it
was considered unsolved. Such a situation created great difficulties in the in-
vestigation of the central problem in modern climatology -- the anthropogenic
change of climate. It was difficult to explain the physical mechanism of this
change without explaining the reasons for the natural variations of climate,

which made it necessary to solve the above-mentioned problem.

In studies made in the late 1960's and in the 1970's results were obtained ex-
plaining many patterns in natural climatic changes. The successes attained in
these investigations were related, first of all, to progress in the theory of
climate, models of which could be used in studying climatic changes, and second,

with the appearance of new empirical data considerably expanding information on
the climatic conditions of the past.

Here we will give a brief review of the results of recent investigations of cli-
matic changes relating to three time intervals: Phanerozoic (last 550-600 mil-

li n years), Pleistocene (one-two million years) and modern epoch (last hundred
years).

with respect to the climate of the Phanerozoic, in paleogeographic investigations
it was already established long ago that during most of this period climatic con-
ditions over the entire surface of the earth corresponded to the modern climate
of the tropics or subtropics, that is. were very warm. Although glaciations ap-
peared over part of the surface of the continents during individual relatively
short time periods (for example, at the end of the Carboniferous and at the end

of the Permian), nevertheless, during these epochs as well the climate over most
of the earth was very warm.

Only during the course of the last 100 million years, that is, since the end of
the Mesozoic, has there been a gradual change in climate in the direction of a
cooling, especially conspicuous in the high latitudes.

It was difficult to explain such a change since until recently only one factor

was known which exerted a significant influence on mean global air temperature
in the geological past: the quantity of solar radiation, which gradually increased

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during the entire course of the Phanerozoic. Simple computations show that if this
factor was the sole reason for change in climate during the last 500-600 million
years it should have led to a considerable rise in the mean global temperature

at the earth's surface, which completely contradicts empirical data.

        

- ' cfn) 9MP)

Fig. 1. Changes in the concentration of Fig. 2. Empirical data on change in

carbon dioxide (a) and mean air temper- air temperature in the Cenozoic.
ature (b) in the Phsnerozoic. The let-
ters on the horizontal axis correspond KEY:
to the names of the geological periods A) Millions of years
and the Cenozoic: B) Paleocene
Cambrian — Ordovician - Silurian - Dev- C) Eocene
onian - Carboniferous - Permian - Tri— 0) Oligocene
assic - Jurassic - Miocene 3) Miocene
F) Pliocene

The possibility of explaining climatic conditions in the Phanerozoic appeared
after investigations of the chemical composition of the atmosphere in the past
were made. One of the results of this investigation is shown in Fig. la, where

we have shown the change in the quantity of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
during the course of the Phanerozoic. The figure shows that during almost the
entire Phanerozoic the quantity of C02 in the atmosphere exceeded its present-
day concentration, equal to 0.032, by several times, which considerably intensif-
ied the greenhouse effect in the atmosphere and increased the temperature at the
earth's surface.

Over the course of the last 100 million years there was a predominance of a ten-
dency to a decrease in the CO; concentration in the atmosphere, which was the
reason for the Cenozoic cooling.

Figure 1b shows the results of computations of changes in mean air temperature at
the earth's surface during the course of the Phanerozoic. In these computations
we took into account changes in solar radiation, variations in the concentration
of carbon dioxide and changes in albedo of the earth's surface caused by differ—
ences in the area of the continents and (in some epochs) the influence of polar
glaciations.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of computations for the epoch of Cenozoic cooling can be compared
with the determinations of paleotemperatures in different regions of the earth
obtained during recent years. Figure 2 gives data obtained by Burckhardt on
changes in the temperature of surface waters in the North Sea (curve 1) and the
data obtained by Shackleton and Kennet on water temperatures in the middle lati-

tudes of southern hemisphere oceans (curve 2).

m ~-- -

U. ' . I ,
.1 {7% *4";

X '1'

.’

100

.A'
7

:5 - __:
rm mo ma ml 151

 

Pig. 3. Anomalies of direct radiation r13. 6. Comparison of measured (1) and
(2) and mean air temperature (1). computed (2) air temperature anomalies.

By comparing curves 1 and 2 with the results of computations it is possible to
note a good qualitative agreement of these independent materials. In particular,
on all the curves one can see a warming occurring in the Eocene in comparison
with the Paleocene. On all the curves there is a marked cooling in the Oligocene,
a temperature increase in the Miocene and a cooling in the Pliocene. Some dif-
ferences in the time of appearance of these temperature increases and decreases
are related to an incomplete coincidence of the time scales used in different

investigations.

The more considerable amplitude of the temperature variations on curves 1 and 2
in comparison with the curve in Fig. lb can be attributed to the fact that the
first two curves are for the middle latitudes. where, as indicated by the results
of theoretical computations and empirical data. the temperature variations with
changes in climate are greater than the variations in mean global temperature.

A problem of considerable interest is the reasons for the sharp climatic varia-
tions in the Pleistocene associated with the advance and retreat of continental
and sea ice covers.

The use of the energy model of the theory of climate indicated that a positive
feedback between the ice cover and the thermal regime is of considerable import-
ance for these variations. Since ice increases the albedo of the earth-atmosphere

system, a broadening of its area leads to a decrease in the quantity of absorbed
radiation, which favors a decrease in air temperature. Thus, an increase in ice

66a

FOR OFIICIAI.lﬂﬂE(ﬂﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

area can be both a result of climatic change in the direction of a cooling and
also the reason for this change.

Allowance-for this feedback in energy models of the theory of climate made pos-
sible-a unantitative explanation of the development of glaciations as a result
of the relatively small variations of the radiation registered in the high lati-
tudes, caused by periodic fluctuations in the position of the earth's surface
relative to the sun.

With these results taken into account, the initial reason for the Quaternary gla-
ciations must he assumed to be the general process of cooling in the high lati-
tudes caused by a decrease in atmospheric C02 concentration. Under the influence
of this cooling in the polar zones of both hemispheres there was development of
ice covers. when these covers attained a definite thickness the atmosphere-ocean-
polar ice system was very sensitive to changes in radiation in the high latitudes
which up to this time had not exerted any appreciable influence on climate. In
the Pleistocene periodic variations in inclination of the earth's axis, eccentric-
ity of the earth's orbit and the time of occurrences of the equinoxes were ade-
quate for the development of glacial epochs. Such a conclusion, drawn for the
first time in investigations of the theory of climate, was later confirmed by
materials from paleogeographic studies in which a close relationship was estab-
lished between the time intervals between glaciations and the periods of varia-
tion of the position of the earth's surface relative to the sun.

In order to study the anthropogenic changes in climate a factor of special impor-
tance is a clarification of the reasons for the modern variations in climate dis-
covered during the period of existence of the world network of meteorological
stations, that is. during the last hundred years.

In the late 1960's a comparison was made of the secular variation of anomalies
of mean air temperature in the northern hemisphere and anomalies of direct radi-
ation. The first of these parameters is represented in Fig. 3 by curve 1 and

the second by curve 2. The presence of a definite correspondence between these
curves was the point of departure for quantitative computations of the influence
of variations of the meteorological solar constant (that is, the quantity of
short—wave radiation entering the troposphere) on the seasonal temperature of
the lower air layer.

The results of such computations are given in Fig. 4, where curve 1 characterizes
anomalies of mean air temperature in the northern hemisphere, determined on the
basis of observational data, whereas curve 2 shows these same anomalies, computed
on the basis of variations of the meteorological solar constant, taking into ac-
count the thermal inertia of the earth-atmosphere system. The similarity of these
two curves indicates a decisive role of changes in the influx of radiation into
the troposphere for modern changes in climate.

Since the changes in the meteorological solar constant for the most part are de-
termined by variations in the aerosol concentration in the lower layers of the
stratosphere, which in turn are dependent on volcanic activity, the principal
reason for the modern changes in climate is volcanic eruptions of an explosive

67

FOR 0F11C1Al.USEGDNLY
l1)lt0FF1CJAl.l£SEZ(NVLY

character. in epochs of lessened volcanism there are global warnings, whereas
with an intensification of volcanic activity there is a cooling.

This concept was confirmed in the 1970's in many studies carried out both in our
country and abroad.

All the reasons for changes in climate enumerated above were known as hypotheses
over the course of a number of decades. Since there were many other contradic-
tcry hypotheses not one of them was regarded as demonstrated.

The prlnzl;al achieVement of investigations of natural changes of climate during
recent years was the collection of far more detailed empirical data concerning the
studied changes in climate and the use of models of the theory of climate for the
analysis of this information. The agreement of the results of generalization of
empirical data with the conclusions drawn from theoretical computations made pos-
sible an approach to understanding the reasons for climatic changes.

Anthropogenic change of climate. In the early 1960’s Soviet scientists concluded
that with the continuation of modern tendencies in the development of energy pro-
duction there would inevitably be a major change in global climate in the direc-
tion of a warming which would occur in the immediate future. Scientific confer-
ences were held in 1961 and 1962 for discussion of this problem. In accordance
with the recommendations of the first of these conferences, beginning in 1961

the plans for scientific investigations by the Main Administration of Hydrometeor-
ology included studies of the anthropogenic change in global climate. It should

he noted that these measures were carried out in the USSR considerably earlier
than abroad, where similar investigations were organized only in the 1970's.

In the early 1970's specialists in our country published studies in which they
evaluated the concept of an important influence on the climate of the near future
from the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere formed as a result of
combustion of fossil fuel. The same conclusion was drawn in the resolutions of a
series of national and international symposia and in the reports of a number of
scientific organizations published in the years 1976-1979.

For example. it was noted in a report of the United States National Academy of
Sciences that in the coming centuries the main influence on climate will be ex-
erted by the increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
This can lead to an increase in the mean air temperature at the earth's surface
by more than 60C; the temperature increase in the high latitudes will be several
times greater. The authors of the report postulated that the danger of a change
in climate may require suspension of the use of carbon fuel in the near future.

In 1979 the problem of an anthropogenic change in climate was examined at the
Horld Climate Conference in Geneva. In a report at this conference Ye. K. Fed-
orov stated: "Climatic changes in the future are inevitable. They are becoming
appreciable and possibly will be irreversible in the next few decades... In this
connection it is obvious that it would be necessary to formulate some strategy,
that is. a system of preplanned actions which for mankind would ensure the avoid-
ance of negative effects of possible climatic changes... What are the principal

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

elements of such a strategy? It goes without saying that the first and foremost
problem is the prediction of climatic changes..."

Without question, an immediate solution of the problem mentioned by Ye. K. Fedorov
is necessary. The practical importance of the problem of climatic conditions of
the future is determined, in particular, by the fact that the economy of all
countries is essentially dependent on modern climatic conditions. Appreciable
climatic changes will require great capital investments in order to ensure adap-
tation of economic activity to the new conditions.

Information on the climate of the future is necessary for the planning of many
structures which will be used over a number of decades, for example, in the plann-
ing of hydroelectric power stations. It is evident that with a change in climate,
and especially with a change in the quantity of falling precipitation the existing
regime of river runoff cannot be maintained, and accordingly the designers of hy-
droelectric power stations must take into account not only information on runoff,
but also on the runoff regime in the future. Another example of the practical im-
portance of data on the possible change in climate is the validation of a project
for the shifting of the runoff of rivers. Since it is proposed that this project
be carried out over the course of several decades, it is clear that in this case
it is impossible to limit ourselves to the use of data on modern climate and the
river runoff regime -- the validation of the project should provide for allowance
for the probable change in climatic conditions.

Many consequences of a global warming can be favorable for the national economy
of our country since a considerable part of its territory is situated in the zone
of a cold climate where the development of agriculture is difficult, where much
money is spent on the heating of dwellings in the cold season of the year, etc.
However, it is impossible to expect that the probable changes in climate will not
create new and complex economic problems both in our country and abroad.

A change in the precipitation regime can be of particularly great importance be-
cause in many regions of the earth the resources of fresh water even now are in-
adequate for meeting the existing needs and in the future with a further in-
crease in population this deficit should become still more acute. Under these
conditions the decrease in the precipitation sums which may occur in some re-
gions will lead to definite difficulties.

There are a great many other problems of practical importance which will arise with
a change in global climate. Among these, for example, is the problem of the soil

permafrost regime, whose change will exert an influence on the conditions for the
construction of different structures in the permafrost zone. A decrease in the area

of sea polar ice can improve navigation conditions in the high latitudes. Major
consequences can follow an increase in the level of the world ocean as a result
of melting of part of the continental ice cover, which would lead to the inunda-
tion of a number of coastal regions.

Without enumerating the other practical problems related to the impending changes
in global climate, we note that all these problems must be taken into account in

long—range economic planning.

69

FORloFFKJALlEﬁZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Allowance for possible climatic changes is of special importance in the long-
range planning of power production because changes in climate themselves are
significantly dependent on the structure of the energy balance.

Up to the present time the meeting of the needs of the national economy for data
on climate has been accomplished by furnishing materials characterizing the cli-
mate of the last several decades. It is obvious that such data can be used in
characterizing the climate of the next few years when its anthropogenic changes
will be relatively small. However, for a correct answer to many inquiries there
must be inforM'iou on the climate of the future for a time interval of several
decades. in this case the use of data on the climate of the past can lead to
major errors having dire economic consequences. In order to avoid such errors

it is necessary to supplement materials on the meteorological regime of the past
with a prediction of this regime in the future. It can be surmised that a proper
solution of this problem will lead to a substantial increase in the economic ef-
fect of climatic data.

The increase in the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide is determined to
a considerable degree by the formation of C02 as a result of the combustion of
coal. petroleum and other types of fuel. A considerably lesser quantity of €02
enters into the atmosphere in the manufacture of cement.

The change in C02 production with time in the course of the mentioned processes

is represented in Pig. 5 at a semilogarithmic scale. The quantity of carbon dioxide
produced in a year is expressed in millions of tons of carbon. This figure shows
that except for three relatively short time intervals (World War I, economic cri-
sis of the 1930's, World War II) the total entry of 002 into the atmosphere in-
creased exponentially, increasing by 4-52 per year.

It is evident that due to the limitation of reserves of carbon fuel the rate of
this increase sooner or later should decrease. However, a fact worthy of note is
that it follows from the data in Fig. 5 that there is a reverse tendency in the
increase in C02 production: the rate of increase in this production in the second
half of the 20th century was somewhat greater than the rate of its increase at
the beginning of the century.

It can be concluded from the data in Pig. 5 that changes in the concentration of
atmospheric carbon dioxide over a period of years and decades are now completely
determined by anthropogenic factors. The natural components of the balance of at-
mospheric carbon dioxide correspond to its receipt or expenditure during gas ex-
change between the atmosphere and the lithosphere and with interaction between the
atmosphere and the plant world (for the most part due to noncoincidence of expend-
iture of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis and its receipt from oxidation of organ-
ic matter). Both these components of the natural cycling of carbon have the order
of n-1013g/year, which is approximately a hundred times less than the present-day
entry of carbon into the atmosphere. as is clear from the data in Pig. 5. It fol-
lows from this figure that the anthropogenic production of carbon dioxide became
the principal component of its balance in the atmosphere more than a hundred years
ago. Thus. a century was needed for this important fact to be discovered by reli-
able observations.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If?

;rr:au tons/year

  
        

I!” "I! 1565‘

"qu Idle 1!" 1.9M mo

 

u u n (or

Pig. 5. Increase in C02 production. Fig. 6. Air temperature change at different
latitudes.

It must be postulated that an additional anthropogenic source of carbon dioxide for
the atmosphere is a decrease of the reserves of carbon in the plant cover under the
influence of economic activity (primarily with the cutting of forests) and in the
soil (decrease in the quantity of humus when working the soil). Although an appre-
ciable percentage of the carbon dioxide ejected into the atmosphere is dissolved

in the waters of the ocean and is expended in an increase in the biomass of plants.
only about half of the total quantity of 002 entering the atmosphere in the course
of economic activity is expended in this way. As a result a rapid increase in the
concentration of 602 is ensured; according to data from observations made during
recent years, C02 is increasing by approximately 0.51 per year from its value in
the preindustrial era. .

In addition to carbon dioxide, the atmospheric greenhouse effect can be caused by
an increase in the volume of a number of small impurities in atmospheric air (fre-
ons, nitrogen oxides and several other gases) due to economic activity. Although
relatively small concentrations of these gases can exert an appreciable influence
on climate. the release of all gases of such a type can be controlled, that is, be
kept at a relatively low level by economically feasible methods. Accordingly, they
will exert an influence on the climate of the future only in the absence of mon-
itoring of the state of atmospheric air. In such a case the increase in the con-
centration of the mentioned gases will lead to an additional warming, intensify-
ing the warming caused by the increase in the 002 concentration.

In contrast to the gases constituting small admixtures to atmospheric air, the en-
try of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere as a result of economic activity is so
great that the cessation of this process in the next few decades is evidently
technically infeasible. This makes it necessary to evaluate the climatic changes
caused by an increase in the 002 concentration. Numerous investigations carried
out on the basis of use of different models of the theory of climate are devoted
to this problem.

Since there are no precise models of the theory of climate, the problem of the
reliability of the results of computations of climatic changes on the basis of
existing approximate models is sometimes considered inadequately clear. In order
to check these computations it was possible to use empirical materials on change

71
FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the meteorological regime in its annual variation, data on modern changes in
climate, and materials on climates of the geological past. Some results of com-
putations of changes in mean global temperature at the earth's surface in the
future are represented in Table 3.

Table 3
Change in Sean Air Temperature (00) in Comparison With Hid-19th Early 20th
Centuries
Sourm, years 2000 2025 2050
Budyko, 1972 0.7 1.7 3.2
Kellogg, 1977 1.2 --- 6.0
Bach. 1978 0.8-1.2 -- 2-lo
Flohn, 1978 1 2.5 I.

It can be concluded from the data in the table that different investigations give
close results in determination of climatic conditions of the future. It is worth

noting that already in 1972 estimates of changes in mean air temperature were ob-
tained which were very close to the results which are now regarded as most reli-

able.

It is of considerable importance that in the middle and especially in the high
latitudes the anthropogenic changes in climate will be greater than those values
which are included in Table 3.

Figure 6 gives the changes in mean annual air temperature at different latitudes
in the northern hemisphere with an increase in mean global temperature by 3°C.
Curve 1 in this figure was constructed using computations based on use of a mdel
of general circulation of the atmosphere and curve 2 is based on paleoclimatie
materials relating to the end of the Tertiary. It follows from these data, which
are in good agreement. that the temperature in the high latitudes is increasing
approximately three times more rapidly than the mean global tanperature.

It can be surmised that an increase in air temperature in the Arctic by 840°C
will lead to the destruction of perennial polar sea ice. This conclusion follows
both from an empirical analysis of the correlations of the modern regime of ice
with thermal conditions, and from computations using different theoretical and
semiempirical models. It is more difficult to solve the problem of the future
of the glacier in Antarctica during the development of a global warming. Due to
the possibility that with the partial destruction of this glacier there will be
a rise in ocean level and inundation of extensive coastal territories this prob-
lam is of great practical importance. It is discussed in a number of investiga-
tions, from which it can be seen that this probl- has not been clarified ade-
quately and is in need of further study. The problem of the influence of warming
on the moistening regime of the continents is also of considerable importance.
The results of computations using models of general circulation of the atmosphere
and conclusions from use of paleoclimatic analogues lead to the conclusion that
after several decades there can be an appreciable increase in precipitation in
regions of excess moistening and a decrease in its totals in regions of unstable
and inadequate moistening in the middle latitudes of the continents.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'0FFNJAI.USEI)NLX

Data now available make it possible to draw a number of conclusions concerning

the climatic conditions of the future which can be used in meeting the needs of
the national economy. However, these data are very schematic and inadequate for
the complete satisfaction of the mentioned needs. The problem of obtaining detail-
ed information on the climatic conditions of the future is central for modern cli-
matology.

Prospects for investigations of climate. The restructuring of climatology which is
now transpiring, together with many outstanding advances in the study of climate,
is creating a number of ambiguities which to some degree are inevitable in the
rapid development of any scientific discipline. The appearance of a great many new
results in some cases is leading to a contradiction between recent advances in cli-
matology and concepts which only recently were considered as fact. Accordingly,
sometimes it appears that there are disagreements in solution of a number of prob-
lems in modern climatology, although in actuality there are usually no disagree-

ments among specialists who for many years have been engaged in the study of cli-
mate.

It should be stated that for the rapid and precise solution of the most timely
problems in modern climatology there must be a considerable improvement in the or-
ganization of research in the field of climate.

Prospects have now opened up for the extensive development of the principal direc-
tions in modern climatology. among which are the following:

1. Formulation of detailed and realistic models of the theory of climate.

2. Empirical study of modern climate and its changes when using effective stat-
istical methods.

3. Empirical study of climates of the geological past.

a. Physical explanation of the patterns of natural changes of climate.

5. Detailed computations of anthropogenic changes in climate and evaluation of
climatic conditions of the future.

6. Study of the influence of climate on the hydrological regime and the entire com-
plex of processes forming the geographic medium.

7. Study of the dependence of agriculture and other branches of economic activity
on climate.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFFICIAL USU" 0N! \'

UDC 550.3:551.510

THE HELIOGEOPHYSICAL SERVICE, ITS TASKS AND PROSPBC'IS FOR DEVELOPMENT"

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
22 Jan 81) pp 63-76

[Article by s. I. Avdyushin. candidate of technical sciences, Institute of Applied
Geophysical

[Text] Abstract: The article examines the main problems
involved in the development and operation of the
heliogeophysical service. which makes observations,
analyzes these observations and disseminates to
departments and national economic organizations
data from such monitoring and predictions of the
state of circumterrestrial space for use for the
purpose of supporting space flights, radiobroad-
casting, radiocommunication, navigation and other
practical and scientific probleas. The directions
in development of the heliogeophysical service
are outlined.

In this era of vigorous development of radiocolmunication and the conquest of space
a highly important task is solution of the problem of monitoring and predicting the
conditions in circumterrestrial space, including the state of the magnetosphere,
ionosphere and upper atmosphere.

It is becoming increasingly important to know the physical properties of the medium
in which the flight of space vehicles and manned ships is occurring; what influence
this medium exerts on the propagation of radio waves, the orientation and naviga-
tion of a space vehicle, man's vital functions in space; how the parameters of this
space medium change with time, in other words: what is the space weather at a par-
ticular moment and what is its prediction?

Investigations of recent decades have indicated that the physical conditions in cir-
cumterrestrial space are determined for the most part by the earth's magnetic field,
by the gas and aerosol components of tho upper atmosphere which are constantly be-
ing affected by solar electromagnetic and corpuscular radiation.

" Main content of a report at an expanded session of the Presidium of the Scientific
and Technical Council, State Comittee on Hydroaeteorology and Environmental Mon-
itoring, 13 October 1980.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

30

       

 
 

 
   

  

   
           

     

          

   
    
    

 

   
   

  

    
    

   

       
   

  

A A o
{3.1%}...
a: tiduﬁ§ / as §
8° . «3.3%... x 3m .3 a
E: : :5. / / HE - x _ o~
. El
'5' 2;
an . ..mu.vs. 5.33... E
Q s ‘ t
8.“ V, . . 3.3:? ~ g A:
_ . n 3‘ s a
2n ... {“39“ SH
.
“ 3.3.5.3.. .A n .—
Ac n I‘M‘huuthh‘é. e c a 3‘ x ‘In: . . £h~usuzuh§ jﬁuﬂie A z
t» .52!‘ 5:33.335 . W ~33: .3333: .
n3u-~i3bnt _ a an n . .A n A
A: II . u: Emmi .Ea \ E
. I! . -E
gE . m g E
Aen ~=~Nuru¢~§syx "I I“ m A . 3%“ “MN“ \ ~ It.» Ac .—
I II IIIIIIII n .
353:3 _ A .— .~ 3“: _ HA A o
A n n 3:233 35:33.3- . 33¢ » Ac
3-»; .o~ss‘u:t~\i r lllllllll l— mM A n
. r 3
an ﬁﬁﬁhﬁ: .AS «ﬁauﬁ. mMa Emil . , n
£23323...- =- r .txs C A %& Sh \ 5 ”A . .. - v
. n . .8 .iz-{lu‘q {ti-Q A M QN E E An A N
r . 92! ﬁt...» .
E E 8 .45 E _III N; :

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070008-2

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KEY TO FIGURE 1

1. Solar serV1ce bl. Neliogeophysica]
2. Sunspots 52. Models

3. Mpatrol 1.3. Data bank

6. x-radiation 44. Information-com]
5. UV-radiatlon AS. Forecasting met!
6. solar wind (06. Activity of ion:
7. SCR high-energy components sphere and uppel
8. Radio observations 47. Scientific invei
9- 5018f m"ﬁ"*‘*¢ 11916 48. Balloon and p11(
10. Radiation conditions service 49_ Monitoring and I
11. Radiation belts 50, Users

12. OCR, SCR
13. Earth's magnetic field 51. Radiation condit

14.

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
20.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.
3S.

- 36.
37.
38.

39.
60.

Ionospheric-magnetic service
Electron concentration profile in
F2 region

State of ionosphere in E and D
regions

Variations of earth's magnetic
field

Upper atmosphere H7 80 km

Density

Composition

Optical properties

Temperature, dynamics
Ascronomical observatory
Instrumentation for artificial
earth satellites

Meteor

Prognoz

Geostationary

Heliocentric artificial earth sat-
ellites

Ionosonde

Salyut MSS

Regional centers
Instrument-programming complex for
operational data reception and
processing

Surface network

Radiotelescopes for observing sun
Ionospheric probes "Avgur," ”Bazis,"
"Vertikal' S" and "AIS-5"
Magnetometric apparatus

Laser sounding

HR-lZ (HR-25) rocket complex
Telex: Moscow-Washington channel al-
located

Data received from United States
(heliogeophysical center. Boulder)
and other centers--URSIGRAM

52.
53.
54.
55.
56.

57.
so.

59.
60.
61.

62.

stratosphere
Prediction of 0|
quencies for rac
Short-range preu
ionosphere
Solar radioemis:
Solar activity
Density, compos
sphere for Ii) 11
Data for intern
Data for heliog¢
Boulder (USA)
Data for projec
igations of Magi
Data for invest
spheric relatiOI
Prediction of m
ances (magnetic
Other data

FOR(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(HHLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070008-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The variability of solar electromagnetic and corpuscular radiation leads to a
whole series of geophysical effects which can be regarded as a direct manifesta-
tion of solar-terrestrial relationships. Some of these relationships have already
been established. For exalple, such phenomena near and at the earth as magnetic
storms. auroras, sudden disruptions of radioconunication, ionospheric disturb-
ances and changes in radiation conditions in circumterrestrial space are names-
tionably related to processes transpiring on the sun. However, other manifesta-
tions of solar-terrestrial relationships, such as fluctuations in the yield of
different crops, the frequency of recurrence of droughts in individual regions of
the earth, cyclicity in the appearance of some epidemic diseases, and influence
on the health of persons suffering from cardiovascular diseases still require a
further careful study. They may be an indirect manifestation of the direct influ-
ence of the sun on the earth, for example, through meteorological conditions.

Thus, the monitoring of solar activity and the ability to predict it, in combina-
tion with the registry of geophysical phenomena. in principle make it possible

to monitor and predict the state of the upper atmosphere, ionosphere and circum-
terrestrial space.

The task of solving this problem has been assigned to the USSR State Comittee on
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. For this purpose since 1975 the
State Comittee on Hydrometeorology has had a heliogeophysicsl service, including
an ionospheric-magnetic service, a service for monitoring radiation conditions in
circumterrestrial space and a solar radio service. In creating the observation net-
uork, the system for the collection, processing and dissenination of information
the heliogeophysical service has relied heavily on the experience and technical
equipment of the hydrometeorological network, including meteorological satellites,
an automated information—c rmputation system, etc.

A number of observations necessary for the service (geomagnetic variations, iono-
spheric sounding, optical and radio observations of the sun) are being carried out
by the observatories of other departments (Academies of Sciences, Ministry of Bigh-
or and Secondary Specialized Education) independently or in collaboration with the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

In the course of creation of the heliogeophysical service the following principal
problems are now being solved (see Fig. 1):

-- development and creation of satellite, rocket and surface apparatus intended
for routine observations and the carrying out of investigations of heliogeophys-
ical parameters;

-- creation of a main heliogeophysical prognostic center and regional centers out-
fitted with modern information and computer equipment making it possible to auto-
mate the collection, routilm processing, analysis and dissenination of information
and predictions to users;

-- development of methods for short- and long-range predictions of space weather
based on investigations of the patlt-rns of behavior of heliogeophysical phenomena
and the creation of mathematical models of the magnetosphere, ionosphere, upper
atmosphere and radiation conditions in circumterrestrial space;

-- study of the types (1 information needed by the serviced organizations and de-
partments and the perfecting of the forms of output.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

«in m w as:

  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 

Mete r Prognoz It. Salyut
Ionozond [|| ;:1
I up
I l
I “ Heliocentric ar-
’ n uncm satellite

Observational systems of service

all?

Optical observ-
ations of so

International
exchange

  
 

collection

 
 
 

ayaten

 
 

Information-
computation

   
      

Operational
data bank

  

Prognostic
center

Fig. 2. Heliogeophyeical service observation systems
and elements.

78

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(HVLN
I-‘OR OFF" 1“ USP OVI \

Observational Systems of Service

The monitoring of radiation conditions in circumterrestrial space, state of the
ionosphere and magnetosphere, and solar activity as well, must be accomplished
by space and surface apparatus (see Figures 2 and 3).

The "Meteor-2" satellite monitors streams and the spectral distribution of charged
particles (electrons and protons) in the earth's radiation belts and in the polar
regions [2], which in combination with other measurements makes it possible to
compute radiation conditions on the flight trajectories of the manned "Salyut"-
"Soyuz" spaceships.

The monitoring of the state of the ionosphere over the territory of the USSR is ac-
complished using vertical sounding stations of the AIS-5 type which in the immed-
iate future will be replaced by more modern ionosondes.

In order to monitor the state of the ionosphere on a global scale (and this is im-
portant in computing transcontinental radio trajectories) it is necessary to de-
velop slant sounding and sounding of the ionosphere from a satellite. The crea-
tion of slant sounding and sounding from a satellite of the "Ionozond" type will

make possible a qualitatively new approach to solution of the problem of monitoring
the state of the ionosphere.

The monitoring of variations of the earth's magnetic field will be accomplished

by artificial earth satellites and magnetovariation stations located in the ter-
ritory of the USSR.

The monitoring of density and neutral composition of the upper atmosphere in the
future should be carried out directly aboard the "Salyut" space stations.

In order to predict the state of the magnetosphere, ionosphere, circumterrestrial
space and the upper atmosphere it is necessary to create a network for making
observations of geoeffective solar radiations. These are solar corpuscular, UV
and X radiations, the fluxes of which vary greatly in dependence on its activ-
ity. Important information on active regions on the sun is obtained by observa-
tions in the radio and optical ranges. Accordingly. the existing geophysical con-
trol network must be supplemented by a heliophysical network, including optical
telescopes and radio telescopes for continuous observations of flares and magnetic
fields on the sun and also solar satellites: artificial earth satellites of the
"Prognoz" type, which will make it possible to monitor geoeffective solar radia-
tions in the earth's neighborhood and a heliocentric satellite making it possible
to monitor the activity of the solar surface invisible from the earth.

In addition, in order to study and patrol the interaction of the solar wind with
the earth's magnetosphere it is necessary to monitor the streams of radiations and
parameters of the medium at the boundary of the magnetosphere. For this purpose

it is necessary to use a geostationary satellite which carries instrumentation

making it possible to monitor geoeffective solar radiations and the parameters of
the earth's magnetosphere.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
x. z; , ' .
h a -
L ' M " yin?
v 3 £93
at 3“"! /‘- a
0] w
n a

Pig. 3. Surface network of heliogeophysical service. 1) radio observations of sun:
2) optical observations of sun; 3) ionospheric stations: 4) magnetic stations; 5)
stratospheric soundings; 6) regional prognostic centers of service: Murmansk. Tash-

kent, Novosibirsk, Khabarovsk, Moscow; 7) international warning centers; 8) planned
stations.

Surface Network of Service

The collection of data from surface and space observation facilities is accomplish-
ed at regional centers (see Fig. 3). The collection network is based on use of
standard telegraphic communication lines, the communication channels of the
"Pagoda" automated data transmission system and allocated communication channels.
The telemetric data arriving from space vehicles is subjected to automated pro-

cessing using specialized apparatus and is introduced into electronic computers at
the regional centers for primary checking and analysis. Then this information is
fed through the data transmission channels to the electronic computers at the
prognostic heliogeophysical center.

In the future. with the development of observation facilities, plans call for the
development and creation of additional regional centers ensuring the automated

collection of heliogeophvsical data from distant space vehicles with the use of
satellite data transmission facilities.

Heliogeophysical Center (HGC)
An analysis of the technology of collection. the process of reworking of heliogeo-

physical data, preparation and output of current and prognostic data determines
the structure.of the information—computer complex at the heliogeophysical center

(see Vig. 4) [l].

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 051NC]AL.US£IJNLY

The structure of the information-computation complex should ensure:

-- collection of data from observation points (or from regional centers) through
automatic channels and their input into an electronic computer at the rate of re-
ceipt;

-- identification and selection of the arriving data; '

-- processing of data in a regime close to real time;

-- storage of operational data;

-- analysis and preparation of current and prognostic information;
-- display and dissemination of information to users.

Since the requirement of routineness is dominant in all stages of the technolog-
ical cycle, the center is constructed on the basis of high-output communication

facilities and computers with separation of the functions among the elements of
a multiapparatus information-computation complex.

The functions of collection and dissemination of data are handled by a coammnica-
tion processor which ensures the input of data into the computation complex, iden-
tification of data and their intermediate storage on magnetic carriers, the reli-
ability of the received data, preliminary processing of part of the data (at the
level of the input formats). data transmission to other subsystems, routine dis-
semination of data along communication lines.

Using a special program it is possible to ensure the control of the input of data
from communication channels into electronic computers and their output into the
communication channel. In addition, the program ensures the preliminary process-

ing of data and organizes an information interaction with other terminals in the
system.

The functions of carrying out of numerical computations for the purpose of obtain-
ing quantitative data for the diagnosis and prediction of weather in space and the
organization of the storage of data necessary for complex analysis are accomplish-
ed by a central processor which is a powerful electronic computer with a high
speed, operational memory with a considerable volume, memory on macnetic carriers
and a vell-developed operational system.

At the heliogeophysical center there should be a bank of operational data (BOD)
which will ensure the organization and use of data in formalized methods for check-
ing and computing a prediction of space weather.

Provision is made for two regimes for access to data: retrospective search for
information and its selective distribution.

The bank of operational data makes it possible to obtain requested summaries, graph-
irally represent heliogeophysical data on displays in a dialogue regime, document
information using a curve plotter and employ information in any processing programs
as initial data.

The programmed support of the bank of operational data is based on the principle

of a Londepcndence of data on the processing programs, which makes it possible to
introduce into the bank of operational data new types of information.

The dissemination of information to users is realized on the basis of terminal pro-

cesses outfitted with a complex of necessary peripheral equipment and having inter-
computer exchange with the central processor.

81
FI”!!)FF1C1AI.USIE(NQLY
SN

:35.
. .2235“ .35!
5.x»: .5. aﬁﬁak

Ann 23.: agyt 3.95635:
(“as 33693 3 .— . . 56§t3E Ex n

~aa~t§§$

       
      

   

  
     

     
          

              

       

      

nsﬁ9
at; .955 s: 253» I
. .35: ~55: . § «sarda \
. ...~:...§~t§ «a?» a: E v.3. n.— ~.t.» SSE ks“
.Q‘ :3 wu‘.‘ $ §h§~‘§§\2§s A O ‘98:. 3§§§
. : E‘eégsg 2 it 352E? 3.56.»
| 383:? $26 2.2:5‘2‘ 3x .

~:§a...v\. u ~Q§s§§uﬁt
. 2....) :13 :2:
an? .. .5. 35:3.

mi

«333‘. .4:
.5733.

Hush. u... 2-» .

            

u€‘~\§t z:
u§..~E..\§-\§ 3:
. -..a§§t~ﬁ§l u
gt»: 3: bit!
333‘ ~s§Eu§

                  

            

ﬁﬁ . Pa 953.; :2.
\Etaau n~ .—
33:28.53

N.>¢u§£ 9. III
» II
a ‘83::
N555»

w

        

Mt noun!!!” nniﬁuu ”tannin: ""ande

    

  

win ESE 5.x

9.3.»!nuvéu
.... Gavan? 3
51.2.6.3 .39..»

 

‘ I'I VJ.“

       

  

. up thy. . v a“
.an an»... 3. whatsihk.

 

§v a
1.:- ¥.3.§n~(‘t. It... .-
KEY TO FIGURE 4

1)

2)
3)
a)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
1!.)
15)
16)
17)
18)
19)
20)
21)
22)

23)
21.)

FIHI(HNWCIAL.USEiDNL¥

Information from terminals of regional centers and observation systems.
Including from foreign centers

Telegraphic communication lines

"Pogoda" automated data processing system

Automatic data transmission

Data at terminals of users

Long-term storage on magnetic carriers

Obninsk

Communication processor for input control, type SH-2

Comunication processor for input control, type 524-2 (reserve)

Heliogeophysical data bank

External memory -- magnetic carriers

Central processor of Yes-1060 electronic computer

Curve plotter

Magnetic tapes of MRK rocket complex

KSEREKS (Xerox)

Dispatch of information by mail

Special processor for
Catalog of programmed
Special processor for
Screen for display of
Screen for display of
Screen for display of

Screen for display of

processing and display, for input control. type SH-Z
support and mathematical prognostic models
processing and display, for input control, type 53-2
radiation data

ionospheric data

structural parameters of upper atmosphere

solar data

Terminals of operational "on-duty" heliogeophyaical service

83

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

p”. 0.205. "grimly-no,
(mm; 3 r ' ! i

3) (woman) . .j. . 3:
‘ a ' . I . .
' .1

. "-0: u:
.) mm c,

l ‘4'!

 

5) (Mon 0) '_' -‘53
(“name ' '_'_
lwu : '-

7) ﬁg’ﬁWW _ - _

rmnqg‘ "E-jn
8)x-1ui ..-- 1'
1n 9)
Fig. 5. Synoptic map of heliogeophysical phenomena.
KEY:
1) Movement of spot group
2) Ottawa

3) Sagamore Hill

4) K—index (Moscow)

5) Moscow

6) Cosmic rays

7) Sectoral structure of IMF
8) Hell

9) Days

At the present time the experimental information—computation center (8160), which
since 1970 has been carrying out the partial collection (for the most part from
the "Meteor-2" satellite), processing and analysis of heliogeophysical information,
has shown the correctness of the ideas applied in creation of the heliogeophvsical
center. At the 31cc an M~600 universal computer complex is used as a channel con-
munication processor and the role of a central processor is played bv two "Minsk-
32" electronic computers, the technical and systemic possibilities of which are
severely limited.

Short-Range Predictions of Ionospheric and Magnetic Disturbance

The prognostic centers issue four types of short-range predictions of ionospheric
and magnetic disturbance: monthly, five-day, two-day and semidaily [6]. The basis

for the prediction is a synoptic map of heliogeophysical phenomena, a schematic ex-
ample of which is shown in Fig. 5. The map shows the following intonation (from
top to bottom): active formations on the sun (flocculi, spots, flares); a stream

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFHJAL.US£GDNLY

of solar radioemission at A- 10.7 cm and 1.2 m; the three-hour K-index of magnetic
activity for Moscow station; deviations of the critical frequencies foFZ for Moscow
station; intensity of cosmic rays according to data from a space monitor; sectoral

structure of the interplanetary magnetic field (IMP); fluxes of electrons with B I
40—500 Hell and X-radiation with AI 1-8 A.

In the compilation of a monthly prediction on the basis of the corresponding ten-
dencies in the development of a recurrent phenomenon predictions are made of per-
iods of possible geomagnetic disturbances and manifestations of different iono-
spheric phenomena (foPZ disturbances, Bs layer, absorption). The synoptic map of
the sun makes it possible to correct the recurrent prediction. taking into account
the active formations appearing on the solar disk during the current rotation.

The monthly prediction includes a prediction for each day in the coming month, tak-
ing into accocnt the following parameters:

-- magnetic field disturbances for Moscow station;

-- deviations of the critical frequencies of the P2 layer (5 foPZ) in units from the
median for the stations Moscow, Kiev, Alma-Ata, Irkutsk, Khabarovsk, Krenkel' and
Murmansk;

-- the intensity and probability of appearance of the 3, layer for Murmansk and
Krenkel' stations;

-- the probability of appearance of absorption and diffusivity for Murmansk and
Krenkel' stations.

Monthly predictions are issued on the 25th of each month and are sent to requestors
by mail and to the regional service centers by telegraph.

A refinement of the monthly prediction of magnetic and ionospheric disturbance is
the five-day prediction in which the emphasis is shifted from recurrency to really
transpiring events (synoptic map). In this process an allowance is made both for
phenomena transpiring on the sun during the preceding several days (flares, ap-
pearance of new active regions and degradation of old regions) and prediction of
solar activity. 9 \ a! l' 0 g

 

I
L
I
I
"snub w nuuhg-Storm commencement

Fig. 6. Delay times 6 foFZ relative to the onset of a magnetic storm. a) 2-5 Novem-
cer 1975; b) 9-10 November 1975.

The five-day prediction includes the median values foFZ and the coefficient "-3000-
F2 for 22 Soviet stations and 3 foreign stations (Boulder, Juliusru. Hallops). The

prediction is issued on the 5th. 10th. 15th, 20th. 25th and 30th (31st) of each
month, is sent out to users by telegraph and is transmitted in a radio summary.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY

I

further refinement of the antici
0-day prediction, including the

(Krenkel' station), auroral zone Oiuraansk station).
d Middle Asia (Alla-Au

 

bal distribution of the critical frequency of the F2 layer with
reception range («.000 km (0400 hours Hoscov tine).

The final refinement of the prediction of ionospheric and magnetic disturbance is
the current nag-

givcn in a senidaily prediction in which the slain reliance is on
ric data, taking into account the final velocity of pronagation

f on the high to the middle latitudes. For example.
during the daytime the minimum on the JfoFZ curVe (mximl of negative disturb-
ance) sets in at Moscow on the average an hour later than at Leningrad, and at

Kiev an hour later than at Hoscou. The delay times 5%?
gnetic storm for stations situated at different latitudes are given

herefore be seen that the mean velocity of propagation of a
negative disturbance along the meridian is about 100 nlsec (which is close to the

mean velocity of meridional circulation at the altitudes of the
reaction of the low—latitude ionosphere is a manifestation of

86
FYHICNHHCJAI.USI:CMVLY

In the absence of clearly expressed disturbance a prediction of the deviation of

critical frequencies is given on the basis of a comparison of the really observ-
ed foPZ values and the median. given by a five-day prediction.

Long-Range Predictions of Ionospheric and Magnetic Disturbance

The prognostic centers issue two types of long-range prediction: maps of the pre-
diction of the distribution of the maximum useable frequencies (MU?) for the

earth and predictions of the propagation of radio waves along specific paths. The
basis for the compilation of these predictions is a description of the global dis-
tribution of the parameters of the P2 layer in space and time in the form of a set

of spherical harmonic functions proposed by the specialists of the USSR Institute
of Terrestrial Magnetisw. Ionosphere and Radio Wave Propagation [5].

The monthly prediction of the MU? is issued 4-6 months in advance and contains maps
of the global distribution of two main parameters: critical frequency of the F2 lay-
er with vertical incidence of radio waves (foPZ) and the critical frequency of the
F2 layer with the slant incidence of radio waves and a distance to the reflection
point equal to 4,000 km (HUF-bOOO-PZ) (Pig. 7). The input parameter in the prepara-
tion of a HUF prediction is the smoothed sunspot number H. At the present time work
is being carried out for the replacement of this parameter by more informative
parameters characterizing the amplitude or expected attenuation of the signal.

Figure 8 shows an example of MU? prediction for the Hoseow-Yakutsk path for March
1979.

It should be noted that long-range predictions, made on an electronic computer.
give the mean pattern of behavior of the predictable parameters and reflect onlv
regular variations (with latitude, longitude. season, solar activity, etc.) of the

paramnters of ionospheric layers. Mr HE:

.J'“

   

00 f I I? It 2.7 i“
Fig. 8. Example of predicticn of range of useable frequencies for Noscow-Vakutsk
radio trajectory (Moscow time).

The activity of the prognostic centers described above makes it possible to provide
most users with the basic types of current information and predictions. However,
there must be further improvement in the observation system and methods for making
predictions in order to achieve a significant increase in data output and in order
to enhance the reliability of the predictions. A method based on physical models

of the ionosphere should be a fundamentally new prediction method. At the present
time the testing of specially created physical models is being carried out at the

87

FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(NNLY
Pill! 0FH('IAI I'Sl" "NI \

main prognostic center from the point of view of the possibility of their use for
different types of predictions.

Methods for predicting the D region have been extremely poorly developed, whereas
the need for such prediction is constantly increasing. The organization of observ-
ations of the D region by the partial reflections method will make it possible to
evaluate and disseminate to users information on the current state of the lower
ionosphere and also to accumulate data for developing prediction methods. It should
be noted that the prediction of the electron and ion concentrations in the D region
can differ substantially from the now existing ionospheric prediction because ac-

cording t- modern COuccpts this state can be influenced by both heliogeophysical
and meteorological factors.

Prediction of Radiation Conditions

Radiation conditions in circumterrestrial space are very closely tied in to solar
activity because the principal source of radiation danger is streams of charged
particles generated by a solar flare. The physical mechanism of a solar flare has
not be.n thoroughly studied and therefore at present it is impossible to formulate
a unified and reliable method for predicting radiation conditions. Existing models
of solar activity do not contain schemes of the genesis and development of an ac-
tive region and do not make it possible to predict the time of a flare and the fact
of injection of solar cosmic radiations (SCR).

At the heliogeophysical center [7] methods are being developed for predicting the

time of onset and diagnosis of development of solar flares. The overall problem is
reduced to the formulation of a prediction of evolution of an active region based

on image recognition theory.

The prediction essentially involves successive evaluations of whether the observed
active region belongs to one class of events or another (dangerous and nondanger-
ous flares); the boundary of separation into classes is the background level of
the flux density of protons with E > 55 HeV. The initial data are the results of
observations of radiation in the o ticsl, X— and radio ranges because precisely
the characteristics of these radiations correlate best with corpuscular radiation
occurring during solar flares. The characteristics of X— and radio radiations are
the most significant in the identification of dangerous flares.

An investigation of the relationship between the characteristics of occurrences of
solar cosmic radiations with the parameters of heliogeophysical phenomena accom-
panying a flare made it possible to establish a number of patterns which served as
a basis for prediction methods.

0n the basis of these methods the service regularly issues the following prognostic
data:

-- qualitative predictions of flare activity. state of the magnetosphere and radia-
tion conditions for two days (daily) and for 27 days (weekly).

- prediction of the development of streams of protons accompanying flares on the
sun. including on the spaceship flight trajectory,

-- integral flux of SCR from a flare.

88

FOR OFF“JAI.US£(NNLY
FOR 0FF1CJAL.USEZ(MNLY

A method for predicting the development of fluxes of cosmic rays and the integral
flux during the entire event has now been developed and is used in the operation

of the service. It uses a model of isotropic diffusion and data from initial reg-
istry of SCR fluxes in auroral zones on the "Meteor-2" satellite [3].

The diagnosis of the current state of radiation conditions along the trajectories
of space vehicles in circumterrestrial orbits requires a conversion from observa-
tions of the fluxes of penetrating radiations in the orbit of the "Meteor-2" ar-
tificial earth satellite in the high-latitude zones of the earth's magnetosphere
to a description of the overall structure of particle fluxes. and in particular.
in the orbits of the manned spaceships (H88) "Salyut"-"Soyuz." This conversion
must be accomplished, first of all, for protons of solar cosmic radiation. taking
into account the real distribution of threshold geomagnetic rigidities. dependent
on the degree of magnetospheric disturbance.

with the use of this model. on the basis of the initial spectra of protons in the
polar caps and magnetospheric disturbances, a working catalogue was created for
the integral spectra of SCR protons for the flight trajectory of the "Salyut" -
"Soyuz" HSS.

With further development of prediction methods an allowance will be made not only
for the physically validated prediction prerequisites. but also the possibility
of a rapid. routine determination of the characteristics and parameters of the
used heliogeophysical phenomenon.

Investigations of recent years have demonstrated that an important factor deter-
mining the propagation of protons generated in a flare is photospheric magnetic
fields. Investigations of SCR events. jointly with photospheric magnetic fields
for the periods of the maximum and decline of the 20th solar activity cycle. and
also in the stage of increase of the 21st cycle. made it possible to discover a
relationship between the characteristics of propagation of protons with energies
from 5 to 90 HeV and the macroscale magnetic structure. The synoptic maps of the
sun constructed from photographs in the H.¢ line reveal the macroscale structure
of weak magnetic fields and have the property of continuity over a great extent.

With the use of the determined characteristics of propagation of solar flare pro-
tons and with allowance for the influence of the configuration of macroscale mag-
netic fields on the sun [4] on the propagation of SCR protons a method was devel-
oped making it possible to predict the following parameters of proton events:

-- the total flux of protons with E P) 5-10 MeV and RP) 40-60 HeV, normalized to

maximum intensity;

-- the time of onset of the maximum of the intensity of a SCR event with Bp>’5 HeV;
-- the decay constants for fluxes of protons with energies Ep >'S HeV;

-- the onset and duration of the event;

-- the rigidity indices of the integral spectra at the intensity maximum and at the
beginning of the event at the half—maximum level.

On the basis of data from radio observations in the centimeter range methods were
developed for predicting the parameters of proton events:

89

IN3R OWWWClAl.lEﬂE(NUIJV
“I. “VHF!“ INF 0N! \

-- flare coordinates;

- an evaluation of the probability of registering an event with a stipulated in-
tensity;

-- prediction of the upper limit of a proton flux with Bp>'10 HeV.

As already mentioned, the state of the interplanetary medium exerts a considerable
influence on the propagation of solar protons. Accordingly, the problems involved
in the diagnosis and prediction of the parameters determining the state of inter-
planetary space also play an important role in predicting radiation conditions. It
has been es.;b1*«hv4 in u number of studies that the characteristics of SCR are
related r- the direction of the radial component of the interplanetary magnetic
field. Conditions in the interplanetary medium are determined for the most part by
the density and velocity of the solar wind.

The principal direction in the development and improvement of work on prediction of
radiation conditions is the creation (on computer carriers) of global dynamic
models of radiation conditions with a limited number of controllable parameters

for each phase of the solar cycle. The evaluation and prediction of these para-
meters will be accomplished on the basis of an operational computer data bank.

tit

It is planned that investigations of the energy, structure, dynamics and optical
characteristics of the upper atmosphere and ionosphere be carried out under a
multisided program which includes scientific programs for observations using HR-
12 (or MR-ZS) rocﬁttg both on the basis of a set of measured parameters and on

the basis of the effects of solar activity and other factors (that is. seasonal,
diurnal, latitudinal, longitudinal and other effects). These investigations re~
quire the carrying out of joint synchronous satellite and rocket experiments on
scientific research ships used as mobile rocket polygons. The collected experimen-
tal data will be used in developing methods for the physical model prediction of
heliogcophysical parameters.

An improvement of the ionospheric—magnetic network provides for the creation of
slant, transionospheric sounding with the use of artificial earth satellites,
sounding by the partial reflections method, outfitting of the network of magnetic
stations with instrumentation and apparatus for measuring variations of the mag-
netic field in the range 0-1 "2 with the possibility of broadening the range to
10 Hz.

For the purpose of increasing the probable success of geophysical predictions and
increasing the number of predictable parameters an important task is the creation
of an operational solar service in the X-. UV. radio and optical ranges. For this
it is necessary to organize a continuous, around-the-clock patrol of optical, UV-,
X-radiations and radioemission from the nun. In this connection plans call for the
developmeut of a complex of satellite instrumentation and creation of a surface
network of stations outfitted with radio telescopes. For continuous around-the-
clock monitoring of radioenission it is desirable that provision be made for the
installation of radiotelescopes in the western hemisphere and on the scientific
research ships of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Hon-
itoring operating in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

FOR‘0FFNJA1.US£‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion it should be noted that in order to achieve the most complete and
highest-level satisfaction of users with current data and predictions during the
Eleventh Five Year Plan it is necessary to develop objective prediction methods
with use of the latest computers, modern methods for measuring heliogeophysicai
parameters, with the use of a broadened observational network of the service, out-
fitted with more modern apparatus designed at a modern scientific and technical
level.

1.

B IBLIOGRAPHY

Avdyusin, S. I., Dlilunan, F. I... Davydov, V. Ye. and Frishberg, F. PL, "Hath-
ematical Model of a Data Exchange System," TRUDY IPG (Transactions of the
Institute of Applied Geophysics), No 36, 1979.

Avdyushin, S. 1., Kngan, R. . ., Vyazemskiy, V. 0., Korotayev, G. A., Kulagin,
Yu. $1., Kurilenko, Yu. Ya., Polyakov, G. H. and Yudkevich, I. 8., "Radiation
Instrumentation of the 'Heteor-l' Artificial Earth Satellite," TRUDY IPG
(Transactions of the Institute of Applied Geophysics), No l, 1970.

Bezruchenkova, T. M., Nazarova, H. N. and Pereyaslova, N. K., "Application of
a Model of Isotropic Diffusion for Predicting the Development of Fluxes of
Solar Cosmic Rays in the High-Latitude Zones of the Earth's Hagnetosphere,"
GmHAGNBTIZM I AERONOHIYA (Geomagnetism and Aeronomy), Vol 16, No 6, 1976.

Mikirova, N. A. and Pereyaslova, N. K., "Influence of Photospheric Magnetic
Fields on the Characteristics of Propagation of Solar Flare Protons," DOKLADY
AKADEMII NAUK SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences). Vol 234, No lo,
1977.

Chernyshev, 0. V. and Vasil'yeva, T. N., PROGMZ MAKSIMAL'K) PRIMENIMYKH CHAS-
1‘01‘ (Prediction of Maximum Useable Frequencies), Moscow, Nauks, 1963.

Avdyushin, S. 1., Danilov, A. 0., Malyshev, A. 8., Novikova, G. N. and Svidsky,
P. H., "Forecasting Ionospheric and Geomagnetic Conditions at the IAG Fore-
casting Center," SOLAR-TBRRESTRIAL PREDICTIONS, USA, Vol 1, Prediction Group
Reports, 1980.

Avdyushin, S. 1., Pereyaslova, N. K., Dlikmsn, F. L. and Kulagin, Yu. H.,

"Forecasting of Solar Energetic Radiation at the Forecast Center of the In-
stitute of Applied Geophysics. SOLAR-TERMSTRIAL PREDICTIONS, USA, Vol 1, Pre-

diction Group Reports, 1980.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FYHICNNHC1AI.USE10NlN

UDC 551.‘6
MODERN PnfSLEMS IN OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH*

Moscow MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
9 Dec 80) pp 77-86

[Article by A. P. Treshnikov, corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences, and

F. S. Terziyev, candidate of geographical sciences, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute and State Oceanographic Institute]

[Text] Abstract: The authors formulate the prin-
cipal tasks of the State Committee on Hy-
drameteorology in the field of oceanograph-
ic research. The review gives an analysis
of its pesent status and outlines paths for
further development. It is shown that the
basis for study of the seas and oceans
should be a program of in situ experiments
which constitute an embodiment of the theor-
etical schemes. In addition to the collection
of information on the world ocean, plans call
for the extensive study of atmospheric process-
es. There is a need for strengthening funda-
mental investigations in the field of oceano-
graphy and especially theoretical studies di-
rected to a study of thermodynamic processes
in the world ocean for the purpose of develop-
ing and improving methods for sea and weather
predictions. In the field of practical research
an important place is occupied by the problems
involved in a study of the regime of seas in
connection with the successful exploitation of
mineral and biological resources of the shelf
zone, the problem of evaluating the consequences
of chemical contaminations 1n ecosystems and the
development of scientifically sound recommenda—
tions on the dynanics of the contamination lev-
el. The importance of different aspects of the
problem of a deficit of continental fresh run-
off is emphasized.

* Main content of a report at an expanded session of the Presidium of the Scientific

and Technical Council, State Cummittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Hon-
itoring, 13 October 1980.

92
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-1'11'IAI. USE ONIA’

The role of the oceans and seas in the life of mankind is increasing without in-
terruption. This is attributable. in particular, to man's increasing need for the
use of the biological and mineral resources of the oceans and seas, which to the
present time are not being fully used. work was begun on the exploitation of the
mineral resources of the oceans and seas relatively recently, but even now more
than 202 of all petroleum and gas production is from the continental shelf and in
the coming 10-15 years its production at sea should become dominant. Equally impor-
tant are oceanological investigations for creating a scientific basis for finding
and choosing promising regions for the exploitation of fish and other biological
objects because the dynamics of development of biological communities is directly
related to vertical and horizontal movements of waters and their turbulent mixing.

The transport of heat by ocean currents and the processes of interaction between
the ocean and the atmosphere are of primary importance for solving problems in-
volved in weather prediction and creation of a theory of climate.

The role of sea transport is increasing and it now accounts for 10-152 of the en-
tire mass of transported freight. The accumulation of a considerable part of the
contaminations of industrial and domestic character in the seas and oceans is
bringing to the forefront the problem of preserving the ocean medias. The success-
ful solution of the above-mentioned problems is unthinkable without a thorough

and profound study of the physical, chemical and biological processes in the
oceans and the seas.

The resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress point out the necessity for "expanding
complex investigations of the world ocean." Accordingly, the principal tasks of
the State Committee on Hydrometeorology in the field of oceanography are:

1. Study of the hydrometeorological regime of the seas and oceans.

2. Supplying interested organizations with hydrometeorological information.

3. Monitoring the state of the ocean medit- and chemical contamination regimes.
4. Prediction, including super-long-range prediction, of the hydrological condi-

tions and ecological consequences of natural and anthropogenic influences on the
sea and ocean.

A solution of these problems is possible only on the basis of work on the funda-
mental problems of oceanology, among which are the following:

- study of circulation of waters of the world ocean and its variability at differ-
ent time and space scales;

- study of macroscale interaction between the atmosphere and ocean for the purpose
of long—range prediction of weather and creation of a theory of climate;

-— study of the ice cover of the polar regions, its dynamics and role in climatic
chan es;

-- sEudy of the hydrometeorological conditions on the shelf zone of USSR seas;

-- investigation of the ecological consequences of chemical contamination of
waters of the world ocean and formulation of effective proposals and measures for
prevention of their negative effects on the environment.

The enumerated problems constitute the basis of oceanological investigations of
institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu (”Hi MI l‘Sh "NI.\

We will briefly discuss the results of investigations of the mentioned problems
in the Tenth Five-Xear Plan and the prospects of these investigations in the
Eleventh Five—Year Plan.

The investigation of the problem of macroscale interaction between the atmosphere
and the ocean was carried out both by the formulation of numerical models and pri-

marily on the basis of in situ observations.

In situ investigations in the ocean during the last ten years have assumed an
enormous scale. A cansiderable share of these investigations has been carried out
by the Sc {at Union, which has the largest scientific research fleet. Taking only
the last five years into account. the number of voyages of scientific research
ships, the number of hydrological stations occupied and the volume of collected
information add up to very impressive figures. however, it is not the volume of
work on this problem which attracts attention, but the qualitative changes in the
strategy for carrying out expeditionary investigations of the world ocean, mani-
fested in a tendency to study the ocean on the basis of extensive programs. Por
example, during recent years such large-scale interdepartmental research programs
as TROPEKS-72 and TROPEKS-7‘, "Huason-77,“ HONEKS-79, PGEP-79 (FCGE-79), "POLEKS-
Sever," "POLEKS-Yug," "Tayfuu," POLIHODE and a number of others have been carried
out or are continuing. An important point is that for the most part these programs
have been directed not only to the collection of information on the ocean, but have
provided for extensive study of processes in the atmosphere and interaction between
the atmosphere and ocean, as a result of which there is every basis for calling

them complex programs of in situ experiments.

The great attention which recently has been devoted to this type of programs is
not some sort of passing phase. Hultisided programs make it possible to coordinate
the efforts of institutes and departments and for their implementation use major
technical resources. For example, 10 scientific research ships, 2 aircraft detach—
ments of the high-latitude "Sever" expedition, 2 aircraft laboratories and an ex-
tensive network of surface aerological stations participated in the experiment
"POLEKS—Sever-76." Along these lines still greater possibilities are afforded by
international programs for in-situ investigations, of which GATE was an example.
It should be particularly emphasized that the basis for the mentioned programs

is definite theoretical premises. This is responsible for a clearly defined direc-
tion in the collection of data with specific purposes in mind. This, in the long
run. considerably increases the effectiveness of the scientific research.

without dwelling in detail on an exposition of the results of the enumerated in
situ experiments, we note that studies for investigation of heat exchange between
the ocean and the atmosphere were carried out in all latitude zones of the earth
from the Central Arctic and the Antarctic Ocean to the tropical regions. As a re-
sult it was possible to obtain estimates of heat flows through leads and young ice
in the Central Arctic and estimates of the heat balance components in the region
of the North European Basin and to the north of the polar frontal zone of the Ant-
arctic Ocean. Valuable information on energy exchange between the ocean and the
atmosphere in the tropical zone was obtained in the tropical experiment and the

results of investigations under the "Husson" and HDNEKS programs made it possible
to draw a number of important conclusions concerning the influence of the Somali

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Current on the monsoonal process, which is of great interest for solving problems

relating to monsoonal circulation in this region and a more extensive region of the
southern and eastern parts of Asia.

A generalization of the collected data for the purpose of ascertaining the global
patterns of heat exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere is one of the high—

1y important problems on which the institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeor—
ology and Environmental Monitoring are working.

In discussing the prospects for in situ investigations, there is every basis for
assuming that in the future they will be carried out on the basis of this sort of
program.

The problem of studying the mean circulation of the waters of the world ocean and
its variability remains one of the principal problems for investigation. As already.
mentioned, it is closely related to the problem of interaction between the ocean
and the atmosphere because heat transport by currents and heat loss from the ocean
in energy-active zones are two of the most important factors involved in the form-
ing of weather anomalies. For this reason it is necessary to discuss a program pro-
posed by Academician G. I. Harchuk for investigations of the interaction between
the ocean and atmosphere for the purpose of longirange prediction of weather and
development of the theory of climate, called "Razrezy" (Profiles). Covering a wide
range of problems, this program provides for carrying out a complex of in situ in-
vestigations for the purpose of detecting so-called energy-active zones of the
world ocean, that is, zones of active interaction between the ocean and the atmo-
sphere and estimates of heat transport by the main systems of currents in the At-'
lantic and Pacific Oceans. In addition to in situ experiments, within the frame-
work of the program plans call for carrying out a cycle of theoretical investiga-
tions. The timeliness of the formulated problems and the wide range of the prob-
lems to be studied dictate that the realization of the "Razrezy" program is plann-
ed as a mission of the State Committee on Science and Technology and a whole
series of institutes of the State Cmmmittee on Hydrometeorology, USSR Academy of
Sciences and other departments will participate. It can be assumed that the "Raz-
rezy" program will be one of the major multisided programs of the Eleventh Five-
Year Plan in the field of hydrometeorology.

The implementation of a broad complex of in situ observations requires a new ap-
proach to the problems of collecting, checking and automating the processing of
the collected data. Without discussing the tasks in this field in detail, we will
note only what is most important. Host of the users require information on the
actual state of the sea during the current period, that is, a knowledge of the
areal (sometimes three-dimensional) distribution of hydrometeorological elements

(temperature, level, currents, etc.). Under present~day conditions the system of
observations in the seas and oceans does not allow this because the world ocean

is too great. A solution of the problem can be obtained by the introduction of
telemetric and satellite observation systems. A draft of such a svstem was devel-
oped by the State Oceanographic Institute as the coordinating organization and

has been partially realized in the form of a component part of the 06808 system.
An improvement in the accuracy of observations from satellites will occur with
the planned introduction of the new satellite system. A multisided plan for work

95

FOR OFF"JA1.USE(MVLY
90R (WHOM. NSF. ONI.\'

on improvement of methods for the processing of satellite information and the re-
duction of its receipt to an operational regime has been developed by the Lenin-
grad Division of the State Oceanographic Institute in collaboration with the
State Scientific Research Center for the Study of Natural Resources. The realiza~
tion of the planned programs will make it possible, at definite times, to obtain
oceanological information at global scales and with the necessary discreteness and
accuracy.

However, any reasonable increase in the number of observation stations and observ-
ation syst°ms will not he nble to solve the problem of obtaining oceanological
information h» the use of actual obserVations alone. Here the problem of develop-
ing four-dimensional diagnostic methods for the processing and assimilation of

sea information based on hydrothermodynsmic models of processes transpiring in the
sea and ocean moves to the forefront. The experience in application of such an ap-
proach in meteorology gives positive results, and if it is taken into account that
meteorologists have recourse to the use of this method, having at their disposal
information exceeding by a factor of 1,000 times, in the opinion of specialists,
the volume of oceanological information, it becomes clear how urgent and necessary
is the problem of the development of diagnostic methods in oceanographv.

The multisided character of the in situ experiments which have been made make

it possible to obtain extensive information on the structure of circulation of
waters in the investigated regions and also on the propagation and transformation
of water masses. We will discuss onlv results which from our point of view are of
fundamental importance.

In discussing the processes transpiring in the earth's polar regions it is first
of all necessary to emphasize that up to the present time discussions are proceed-
ing on the possibility of the influence of the heat of Atlantic waters on hydro-
meteorological conditions, including on the ice cover of the Arctic basin. The
basis for such doubts is the fact that Atlantic waters are "buried" under a rela-
tively thick layer of surface and intermediate waters having a stable stratifica—
tion, which precludes the direct transfer of heat upward by convection. 0n the
other hand, waters heated to 3°C enter into the Arctic basin and waters cooled to
0.500 emerge from it. Nevertheless, the relative year-to-year constancy in the dis-
tribution of temperatures of Atlantic waters gave reason to speak of their "con-
servatism."

Oceanological observations of the "Sever" expedition, carried out annually since
1973 and entering into the complex of "POLEKS-Sever" investigations, made it pos-
sible for the first time to cast light on this problem. It was found that the var-
iability of the heat content of Atlantic waters is very great. It is possible to
discriminate two time scales of fluctuations of the heat content of Atlantic
waters, to wit: long-period fluctuations having an epochsl character and associat-
ed with a change in water temperature ann shorter-period, interannual fluctuations

caused by changes in the thickness of the layer of Atlantic waters. Similar fluc-
tuations have also been detected in the intensity of the anticvclonic circulation

of waters. According to the surveys made, the center of the anticyclonic circula-
tion varies relatively little in space. The principal changes are related to the

the intensity of this circulation, as is reflected in dynamic heights and its

96

FOR OFFICJAI.USE13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

total area. These changes are then manifested in the interannusl variability of
the ice content of the marginal seas in the eastern sector of the Arctic. It is
also important that the changes in the hydrological conditions of the Arctic basin
are associated with atmospheric circulation, and this makes it possible to con-
clude that they are caused by global factors.

A joint examination of data from oceanological surveys in the Arctic basin and data

obtained by scientific research ships in the North European basin leads to still
another interesting result.

As early as 1898 P. Nansen determined that more than 82 of the volume of the Nor-
wegian Sea is occupied by cold bottom waters with a temperature of ~1.3°c.

Later observations, carried out in the 1950's, did not reveal bottom waters with a
temperature below -1.1°c. In this connection doubt was even laid to rest concern-
ing the reliability of the observations of F. Nansen. However, since 1970 the tem-
perature of the bottom waters began to decrease and in 1977 fell to —l.2°C. A com-
parison of the temperature variation of Atlantic waters in the Arctic basin and
the temperature of bottom waters in the Norwegian Sea indicated that the cooling
in the Arctic, developing since the 1960's. affected not only the atmosphere. but
also the deep layers of the ocean distant $00 and even 2,000 m from its surface.
These were the first data in the world literature indicating that climatic changes
penetrate to great depths. Since bottom waters are propagated for-many thousands
of kilometers, it can be postulated that the influence of the processes of warm-
ing and cooling of these waters affects the entire world ocean. A study of these
processes is only beginning and for the time being it is difficult to make judg-
ments concerning their role. But from what has been said it follows that it is
important to continue investigations of Atlantic deep waters of the Arctic basin
because such investigations lead to an understanding of macroscale thermal pro-
cesses and provide a physical basis for ice, hydrological and meteorological pre-
dictions.

The investigations carried out in the Antarctic Ocean under the "POLEKS-Yug" ex-
periment made it possible to ascertain the spatial structure of the Antarctic Cir-
cumpolar Current (ACC) and evaluate the principal scales of its variability. The
problem of the structure and dynamics of the ACC is closely related to the problem
of studying the frontal zones of the Antarctic Ocean. As indicated by recent ob-
servations, the position of the Polar Front Zone for the most part corresponds

to the configuration of the main flow of the ACC, and the eddy formation process-
es in the frontal zone exert a substantial influence on the dynamics of the mean
flow. It must be emphasized that investigation of the frontal zones of the Ant-
arctic Ocean is of great importance in a study of the formation and propagation

of water masses. The most important problems are related to the formation and
propagation of antarctic intermediate waters and antarctic bottom waters, which,

penetrating far beyond the limits of the Antarctic Ocean, exert an influence on
the global circulation.

Proceeding to the warmer regions of the temperate and low latitudes. it is neces-
sary to discuss the results obtained from the POLTHODB and GATE programs. The

principal objective of the POLIMODE program is a study of the synoptic variabil-
ity of currents in the Atlantic Ocean, and in particular, eddy formations in the

97

FORIOFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ocean. The discovery of eddies in the ocean was a-major event in modern ocean-
ology. The existence of eddies considerably changes our ideas concerning process-
es in the ocean and brings to the forefront a number of problems new for oeeanol-
ogy. to the solution of which the POLIMODE program is directed.

One of the largest international expeditions of recent years was the expedition
under the GATE program. Although the expedition was for the most part directed

to the study of atmospheric processes, a cycle of oceanological investigations
was carried out in the course of the experiment. In particular, it was possible
to obtain tue v-::.itative characteristics of the system of equatorial currents
and espt-ially such a complex phenomenon as the meandering of currents in the sur-
face layer and at the deep horizons. A study was made of the variability of equa-
torial and tropical westerly currents and especially the subsurface Lomonosov
Countercurrent. A study of long-wave movements in this current (waves with a
length of about 3,000 km) made it possible to obtain information on the variabil-
ity of the thermodynamic characteristics of tropical waters and to make an ap-
proach to solution of the problem of the formation of heat anomalies in the trop-
ical zone of the Atlantic caused by meandering of the subsurface current in the
horizontal and vertical planes and its emergence at the surface.

Investigations of the principal regions of the Pacific Ocean made it possible to
obtain serious results for a complex and most dynamically active region of the
ocean affected by the Kuroshio. Quantitative estimates were obtained of the vari-
ability of oceanographic fields in this region, the meandering of the main and
secondary currents of the Kuroshio system, and also the thermodynamic characteris-
tics of the principal quasiconstant meanders and circulations.

During recent years a major step has been taken in study of the tropical zone of
the Pacific Ocean, and in particular, important conclusions were drawn with re-
spect to the procesaes associated with the heat reserve of tropical waters and the
thermal anomalies in these regions. on which. in the last analysis, the heat regime
of the Kuroshio system and the hydrological conditions in the northwestern part of
the ocean, one of the principal fishing regions of this ocean, are dependent.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan in situ investigations of water circulation

in the ocean and its variability at different time scales will be continued both

in connection with implementation of the "Razrezy" project and In a number of in-
dependent projects. such as "POLEKS-Sever," "Yuzhnyy okean," "Vestpak," "Tayfun"

and others.

In the implementation of expeditionary studies under the mentioned projects provis-
ion is made for an investigation of the structure of circulation of waters in the
energy-active zones of the world ocean and the variability of the principal ocean
currents. study of the interaction betwo-n the ACC and macroscale circulations in
the subtropical regions and in the regions to the south of the ACC, instrumental
investigations of the eddy structure of individual regions of the ocean and obtain-
ing of quantitative estimates of the transport of antarctic intermediate and bot-
tom waters into adjacent regions of the world ocean.

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
FI”!(M“H(JAI.[EHE¢)NLN

In discussing the prospects for further fundamental investigations in the field

of oceanology it is first and foremost necessary to emphasize the important role
of theoretical studies directed to an investigation of the dynamics and thermal
state of the waters of the world ocean. Such problems as formulation of models of
general circulation of the ocean, mesoscale variability, formation of the density
structure of the active layer and macroscale interaction between the ocean and the
atmosphere must be developed still further, especially at the organizations and
scientific research institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology. since

the practical aspects of these problems are usually beyond the scope of the inst-
itutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

In the field of practical investigations studies directed to the creation of meth«
ods for sea hydrological predictions. including ice predictions for arctic and
freezing sens. are of great importance. In the past special emphasis in our
country has been placed on the development of physicostatistical methods for sea
predictions. Experience shows that future successes in the field of sea and ice
predictions must be tied in to the development of methods based on hydrotherma-
dynamic models of predicted processes. Some results have already been attained

in this direction. Hydrodynamic methods for predicting the redistribution of ice
in arctic seas, a method for predicting the growth and melting of ice, and a method
for predicting the thickness and temperature of the homogeneous layer in the North
Atlantic have been developed and are in use. A method for predicting wind waves

on the basis of a bispectral model is in the introduction stage. Plans call for
the further development and creation of methods for predicting the temperature
distribution in the active layer of the ocean, predicting the temperature field

in seas and bringing about further improvement in methods for predicting waves

and levels on the basis of hydrodynamic models.

An important task here is the proper relationship in the development of fundamen-
tal and practical investigations at the institutes of the State Committee on By-
drometeorology and their mutual enrichment.

The following results have been attained in work on the study of sea ice covers
of the polar regions and their dynamics.

I. It has been established on the basis of materials collected during the last
four decades that changes in the ice cover of the Arctic Ocean occur consistently
with changes in the thermal regime of the atmosphere for the hemisphere; it was
found that an important role is played by the structure of the salinity field of
the upper layer of the ocean in the formation, propagation and stability of the
ice cover. The decisive importance of the halocline for the existence of the ice
or ice-free regime of the Arctic Ocean has been established. The conclusion that
the arctic ice cover is resistant to changes in external climate-forming factors
has been confirmed. It was discovered that under modern conditions the principal
regulator of the areas of arctic ice has been a change in the area of propagation
of the halocline. organically related to freshened surface waters.

0n the basis of investigations of mesoscale dynamic processes in the most variable
marginal zone of the arctic sea cover it was possible to clarify the principal
features of the structure of drift fields in this zone, the characteristics of

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (WI-1f ‘lAl. USE ONI.\'

deformation of the ice cover were established and the influence of different fac-
tors on the dynamics of sea ice was ascertained.

Specialists have developed a physicomathematical model of change in the state of
the i:e cover in arctic seas during the summer in which for the first time an al-
lowance has been made for a number of thermal and dynamic processes exerting a
substantial influence on changes in the thickness, continuity and other character-
istics of the ice cover. 0n the basis of this model it was possible to create a
numerical method for computing and predicting ice distribution in the western
arctic seas.

A new direction is being developed in investigations in the field of improvement
in the methodological principles for prediction work for the purpose of objectiv-
ization of the search for optimum predictors in hydrometeorological fields and de-
velopment of prognostic schemes for different times in advance. The preliminary
results which have been obtained have indicated a great promise of this direction
for long-range ice prediction.

A method has been developed for mapping the distribution and dynamics of sea ice
on the basis of television photographs of artificial earth satellites. This meth-
od includes a system of interpretation criteria making it possible to determine
the principal characteristics of the ice cover and an operational graph-optical
method for geographical tie—in ensuring a high accuracy in the plotting of ice
boundaries and features.

In the south polar region, on the basis of materials from satellite observations,
it has been possible to establish the principal spatial characteristics of dis-
tribution of the ice cover, the main position of ice masses has been clarified and
preliminary results have been obtained on the seasonal and long-term variability
of the ice cover in the Antarctic Ocean.

II. One of the urgent tasks in the field of further study of the ice cover is the
creation of a global system for the collection. processing and dissemination of
ice information. Accordingly, in the years hmmediately ahead there will be a
changeover from visual methods for ice aerial reconnaissance to instrumental meth-
ods on the basis of the extensive use of artificial earth satellites, aircraft
outfitted with side—view radar sets of the "Nit'" system, thickness gages, IR
radiometers and profilometers. The collection. processing and dissemination of
information will be automated within the framework of the ice information system
being created at the present time.

‘

Work will he continued on investigations of the physical laws of formation of the
ice cover and the mechanisms of spatial-temporal variability of ice conditions in
the oceans and sees for the purpose of predictions.

In the Antarctic Ocean region the main efforts will be concentrated on detecting
the long-term tendencies and patterns 01 development of the ice cover and evalu-
ating the influence of changes in the ice cover on the dynamics of climate in the

south polar region.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"U “.0“ t8! h‘l CU“ \

Among the most important scientific and technical problems of the present day
are the problems of investigating the ecological consequences of chemical con-
taminations of waters of the world ocean (including oceans, seas and estuaries)
and the development of scientifically sound proposals and measures for prevention
of their negative effects on the earth's ecology.

Ten years of investigations by the leading oceanographic institutes of our country
have made it possible to draw a number of important conclusions on this problem,
to wit:

-- the propagation of a number of contaminating substances (especially petroleum
and organochlorine hydrocarbons) with exceeding of the maximum admissible concen-
trations has a global character;

—~ the concentration of these substances in the surface microlayer considerably
changes the physicochemical properties of the water at the surface of the seas

and oceans (surface tension, viscosity, chemical composition, heat capacity, selec-
tive absorption of short-wave radiation, etc.);

-- the petroleum film in the seas and on the shelf zones extends over an area oc-

cupying about 102 of the area of the world ocean.

The prediction of the dynamics of levels of water contamination in the North Atlan-
tic and the northern part of the Pacific Ocean, prepared at the State Oceanograph-
ic Institute, indicates that by 1990 the mean concentrations of petroleum hydro—
carbons wiil increase by a factor of 2-2.5 and the area of coverage of the ocean

surface will increase up to 201.

According to the experimental computations of the Main Geophysical Observatory and
the State Oceanographic Institute, at the present time and in the future the pene-
tration of photosynthetically active radiation in the ocean will be lessened by
10-40% over the area of the Atlantic, being 10 and 202 of its entire area respec-
tivelv.

According to investigations of the All—Union Scientific Research Institute of Fish-
ing and Oceanography, in the case of low concentrations of petroleum products and
pesticides the rate of photosynthesis of sea algae is reduced on the average by 252.
In the i960's-l970‘s in the North Atlantic there was an intensifying decrease in

the number of species of phytoplankton and a decrease in the biomass of zooplank-
ton forms. Among the factors aggravating the negative effect of petroleum is the
large-scale superposing of the fields of maximum contamination on areas of maximum

biomass and productivity in the world ocean.

According to investigations of the Main Geophysical Observatory, carried out using
a three-level model of atmospheric circulation and on the assumption that about
23? of the area of the North Atlantic is covered by films, it was established that
there is a significant (up to 20-25!) decrease in evaporation from the ocean sur-
face and this in turn leads to a maximum decrease in zonal precipitation in the
latitude zone 30-50°N by 0.6-0.8 an per day and to an increase in aridity in North
Africa.

The investigations of the contamination of waters in the world ocean carried out
during the Tenth Five-Year Plan bring ID the forefront problems which are re-

lated to an evaluation of the influence of chemical contaminations on the ecosys-
tems of the most productive regions of the world ocean (shelf and frontal zones,

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKHICNHHKJAI.USEGDNLY

marginal and epicontinental seas. circumpolar zone, estuaries). formulating a pre-
diction of the dynamics of the level of contamination and its influence on the
ecosystem and determination of the maximum admissible discharges through the prin-
cipal channels for the entry of contaminating substances into the sea. Also of
great importance is an evaluation of the consequences of chemical contaminations of
the world ocean on the energy-, heat-, gas- and moisture exchange of the ocean with
with the atmosphere, the prediction of these consequences and their influence on
the earth's climate, including the development of measures for preventing the
chemical contamination of the surface and the active layer of the oceans and seas.

An urgent practical problem closely related to the problem of study of contamina-
tion of the seas and oceans. brought to the forefront by the modern level of the
economy and industry in the well-developed countries, is the problem of monitoring
of the disposal of wastes and other materials in the sea. The basis for the dis-
posal of wastes in the seas and oceans is the great oxidising capacity of the
waters of the world ocean. making it possible to rework a considerable volume of
organic and also inorganic substances. However, the localization of wastes in in~
dividual water bodies has the result that these basins are saturated with contam-
inants, the destruction processes do not affect the entire mass of wastes and the
quality of sea water here deteriorates sharply.

During the Tenth Five—Year Plan investigations of hydrometeorological conditions

on the shelf zone of the world ocean and national seas were made and in these inves-
tigations descriptions of hydrometeorological conditions in the shelf zone were
prepared. A new approach was developed for study of the dynamic characteristics

of the hydrological regime of seas. the basis for which is computation of waves.
currents. level and ice drift on the basis of data on the wind field regime over

the sea. This will make it possible to obtain the spatial characteristics of the
hydrometeorological regime of sea areas, including those for which there are few

or no observations.

in the field of study of the shelf in the coming five-year plan it is proposed that
multisided hydrometeorologicsl investigations be made of the seas of the USSR,
their shelfzone and the mouths of rivers for the purpose of exploitation of re-
sources and preservation of the sea. The essence of the investigations is a system-
atic generalization of the totality of present-day knowledge of the hydrometeorol—
ogy of the seas, processes and phenomena in their interrelationship and interac-
tion. a study of the patterns of formation of the fields of oceanographic elements
and their variability with time, an improvement in the existing physical and mathe-
matical models and the formulation of new models, making it possible to fill the
gap in our knowledge concerning the regime of seas and formulate scientific prin-
ciples for control of the regime of the seas for lessening or eliminating the nega-
tive consequences of anthropogenic effects on the sea. The plan calls for the im-
plementation of special additional investigations of an experimental and theoretical
character on the basis of available in situ experimental data and theoretical re-

search, as well as the preparation of a monographic generalization of the hydro-
meteorology of most of the seas in the Soviet Union.

In examining the prospects for oceanological investigations, it is impossible not
to mention some practical problems which in their national economic importance at
the present time have become especially important. In particular. this applies to

102

was omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the problem of the influence of a deficit of continental fresh-water runoff into
the seas and oceans. Recently there was a change in the entry of river waters
into the seas and oceans both as a result of natural factors and as a result of
man's economic activity. During the last 10 years 3,000 km3 of fresh water have
been withdrawn without return. and in the future this quantity will increase
still more. As a result of the decrease in the level of the Caspian Sea alone
there will be a loss of about 1,000 km3. which will exceed the present-day losses

by a factor of two. whereas at the beginning of the century they were only 600
kn3. The intensive change in the entry of fresh water into the seas and oceans

will exert a substantial influence on the regime of the world ocean. especially in
its coastal regions and seas, which in turn exerts a negative effect on the bio-

logical productivity of these regions. These processes transpire most intensive-
ly in the connecting link of fresh sources (rivers) and seas - in the mouth re-

gions of rivers where the interrelationship between the plant and animal worlds

and their habitat changes tens and hundreds of times more rapidly than in other
regions of the earth's land and water media.

The above-mentioned complex of scientific problems quite fully demonstrates how
many difficult and at the sane tune important problems are facing oceanographers,
who must combine all their efforts and clearly coordinate the plans for their fur-

103

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY
MI OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

UDC 556.(16:18)(67+57)

PRINCIPAL RESULTS AND PROSPECTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF INVESTIGATIONS IN THE FIELD
OF HYDROLOGY IN RELATION TO THE PROBLEMS OF SHIFTING OF PART OF THE RUNOF? OP

son-mass ravens 10 me sou'm*

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
9 Dec 80) pp 87-98

[Article by A. A. Sokolov, professor. State Hydrological Institute]

[Text] Abstract: The author briefly examines the prin—
cipal results of hydrological investigations
in the Tenth Five-Year Plan and the tasks of
hydrology in the light of the Principal Direc-
tions in Economic and Social Development of the
USSR during the Period 1981-1985 and for the
Period Ending in 1990.

In connection with the increase in the role of the water factor in economic and soc-
ial development, lnvestigatibns in the field of hydrology of the land during recent
years have considerably expanded and have acquired a particularly great timeliness.
They have been directed to solution of the problems formulated by the Party and the
government for the rational use and conservation of water resources. The State By-
drological Institute has about 20 scientific subdivisions, two major experimental
bases (the Valday Scientific-Research hydrological Laboratory and the Main Experi-
mental Base of the State Hydrological Institute). a computation center and experimen-
tal-production workshops. Each year it organizes a number of major expeditions in
the Far East, in Hestern Siberia, in the Trans-Vblgs region and in other regions of

the USSR.

The principal scientific and practical problems on whose solution the State Hydro-
logical Institute has worked during the Tenth Five-Year Plan, are:

-- formulation of the principles and scientific-msthodological basis for a national
system for observations of the regime, balance and quality of surface waters;
-- study of the water resources and water balance of river basins, economic regions

of the territory of the USSR. continents and earth;

 

* Main content of a report at an expanded session of the Presidium of the Scientific
and Technical Council, State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Hon-

itoring, 13 October 1980.
104

FOI‘OFFR3A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

-- formulation of methods for evaluating anthropogenic changes in the regime, bal-
ance and quality of waters and prediction of these changes over the long run, tak-
ing into account the growth of population and the development of the national econ-
omy:

-- hydrological support of the planned measures for the interzonal redistribution
of river runoff;

-- study of hydrological phenomena and processes and development of methods for com-
puting the elements of the hydrological regime for planning and construction;

-- investigation of sediments, channel processes and formulation of methods for com-
puting and predicting channel deformations and water erosion in the planning of
antierosion measures, water intakes, petroleum and gas lines across rivers and oth-
er engineering structures;

-- improvement in hydrological predictions for the support of water management and
other branches of the national economy;

-- hydrological support for the largest national economic measures, construction
projects and territorial-industrial complexes.

He will briefly discuss the principal results and prospects for investigations of
the mentioned problems.

Problems in the Development and Improvement of the Hydrological Network

The network of points for hydrological observations is the basis for the development
of hydrological science and filling the needs of the national economy. Accordingly,

the State Hydrological Institute has devoted and is devoting great attention to the

problem of its development and improvement.

During recent years the State Hydrological Institute has revised at a modern level
and has republished regulations, instructions and manuals on observations in the
hydrological network which will ensure unity and comparability of measurements.

At the present time, in connection with the aggravation of the water problem, there
is an on-going transformation of the entire system for registry, integration and
processing of hydrological data. A unified system for a national inventory of

waters and their use in the national economy is being created. 'lhis system is intend-
ed to bring together, on a unified scientific-methodological basis, the network of
observations of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology. the USSR Geology Ministry
and the USSR Water Management Ministry, taking in the regime and quality of all types
of waters: rivers, lakes, glaciers, ground waters and seas, taking into account the
use of waters in the national economy.

The unified system for the inventory of waters, as indicated by the experience of
its introduction, makes possible a considerable increase in the level of hydrolog-
ical support of the needs of the national economy. At a new level it makes it pos-
sible to solve one of the most complex problems -- restoration of the natural regime
of runoff and determination of non-return losses in regions with intensive economic

activity.
In connection with the introduction of a unified system for the inventory of waters,

the methodological and instrument-apparatus complex of network observations is ex-
periencing radical changes. Its improvement is directed to an increase in the

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!OFFK]AL.USEZONLN

reliability of hydrological information, an acceleration of measurements and the
introduction of new measurement techniques (ultrasound, radar, aerospace methods).
With allowance for modern water management problems the State Hydrological Institute

has formulated principles for optimizing systems for hydrological observations. the
makeup, frequency and accuracy of measurements.

On this basis the State Hydrological Institute, in collaboration with the administra-
tions of the Hydrometeorological Service. has prepared a plan, being implemented at
the present time, for the rationalization, development and technical outfitting of
the hydrological network in 1975-1980. This plan provides for measures for eliminat-
ing some lag, observed in recent decades, in the quantitative growth and qualitative
condition of hydrological posts, behind the rates of development of the country's

water economy, especially in its Asiatic part - in the Far East, in western and
Eastern Siberia.

The network will include about 8,000 river posts of which 3,500 will be control (key)
posts; there will be an increase in the percentage of "informational" posts (up to
60:). especially in the basins of large reservoirs. During the years of the Tenth
Five-Tear Plan the increase will be more than 900 posts.

During recent years there has been a considerable increase in the role of the State
Hydrological Institute and zonal scientific research institutes in the organization-
al and methodological direction of the network. It can be stated with satisfaction
that multisided inspections have acquired regularity and effectiveness.

In connection with the noted plans for the interzonal redistribution of river runoff
the State Hydrological Institute has been formulating methodological principles and
proposals for creating an observation system ensuring the collection of the lost re-
liable information for the planning and refinement of prediction of changes in the
regime, balance and quality of waters in the regions of withdrawal, transport and
use of the shifted runoff.

In discussing the problems related to the hydrological network it is impossible not
to note that the technical outfitting of the network and the level of hydrological
instrument making still do not correspond to modern requirements. The State Committee
on Hydrometeorology adopted a resolution on the creation (jointly with the Instrument
Making Ministry) of assembled complexes of hydrometeorological instruments. The im-
plementation of this resolution will be of the greatest importance for the develop-
ment of hydrological science.

Water Resources, Hater Balance and Water Inventory

In connection with the increase in water consumption, the development and implementa-
tion of measures for the rational use and conservation of water resources, the State
Hydrological Institute. in collaboration with the administrations of the Hydrometeor-
ological Service, has carried out a careful inventorying of the secular reserves and
renewable resources of fresh waters. Methods have been developed for computing all
the components of the hydrological cycle: precipitation, runoff, evaporation, changes
in the reserves of ground and soil water. As a result of these investigations it has
been possible to estimate the water balance, water resources and water supply of the

106

liﬂl¢ﬂWﬂCLtLIISEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country as a whole, union republics, individual regions, river and sea basins.
These data served as the basis for long-range plans for the multisided use of
water resources in the USSR.

The basis for the planning of the use of water resources is the materials from the
State Hater Inventory (SUI), constituting a systematized mmmmary of information

on USSR water resources. The multivolume edition of the inventory, being the prin-
cipal source of data on the water resources of the USSR, will consist of three
series: 1) information on the extent of hydrological study of territories, 2) prin-
cipal hydrological characteristics (PEG), 3) regional reference manuals on the re-
sources of surface waters.

The second series is the most important inventory series for the national economy.
It will be systematically supplemented with new data, which will make it possible
to maintain information on water resources at a modern level.

The systematizing of data on water resources and the compilation of a water inven-
tory manually, as indicated by experience, would require enormous efforts and to-
gether with publication would require 10-15 years. During this time the data in-
cluded in the inventory would become out-of-date.

In this connection the State Committee on Uydrometeorology, the USSR Geology Min-
istry and the USSR Hater Management Ministry have been assigned the task of creat-
ing an automated system for the State Water Inventory taking in all types of waters
and data on the use of water resources in all branches of the national economy.

The technical specifications for an automated data system for the State Hater Inven-
tory have now been developed, work is being done on creating a data bank. The gen-
eralization of these data using an electronic computer will make it possible to
provide an operational modern evaluation of the state of water resources and the
water balance of the country.

The State Hydrological Institute. in collaboration with the All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Hydrometeorological Information-world Data Center and the
scientific organizations of the USSR Geology Ministry and the USSR Hater Manage-
ment Ministry, has done much work on determining the makeup and format of inventory
publications. Methodological recommendations have been drawn up and introduced on
the preparation of annual data on the resources of surface and ground water and

on their use.

In the Eleventh Five-Year Plan the automated system for the SUI should be complete-
ly introduced into operation. On its basis the State Hydrological Institute, the
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrology and Engineering Geology and
the Central Scientific Research Institute for the Multisided Study of Hater Re-
sources during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan are planning to prepare a new edition
of the USSR Water Inventory in which there will be a generalization of data on sur-
face and ground water resources and an analysis of the present-day water balance
for individual regions, river basins and the country as a whole.

107

FINI¢HﬂﬂC1AI.l£§ELCMVLY
FOR 0FFﬂJA1.USE(NNLY

A major attainment is the work carried out by the State Hydrological Institute in
collaboration with the Main Geophysical Observatory, Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute, Institute of Water Resources and Geological Institute,
USSR Academy of Sciences on study of the global hydrological cycle at the scale of
the entire earth. The results of these investigations have been published in the
monograph HIROVOY VODNYY BALANS I VODROGO BALANS I VODNYYE RBSURSY ZEHlI (world
Hater Balance and Water Resources of the Earth) and the ATLAS HIROVOGO VODROGO BAL—
ANSA (Atlas of the world Hater Balance). These fundamental studies have been pre-
sented as a contribution of Soviet scientists to the program for the International
Hydrological Decade.

The monograph and atlas give a generalization of the results of Soviet and foreign
investigations of the moisture cycle and water balance of the earth. New data are
given on the water reserves on the earth, their distribution over areas, periods
of natural renewal of individual types of natural waters; there are also computa-
tions of the water balance of major river basins, natural water bodies, reservoirs,
regions and continents, the world ocean and the entire earth's surface. Taking in-
to account the great interest in these published studies, by a resolution of
UNESCO they have been published in the English and Spanish languages.

In the Eleventh Five-Year Plan provision is made for the development of investiga-
tions of the world water balance, bearing in mind the evaluation of natural and
anthropogenic changes in total moistening at different space and time scales for
the water regime of rivers, lakes, ground water. glaciers, continents, the world
ocean and the earth as a whole.

Anthropogenic Changes of water Resources

The problem of quantitative and qualitative changes in the water regime and water
balance during recent years has become especially acute as a result of the ever-
anreasing effect exerted on hydrological processes by anthropogenic factors and
the appearance of a threat of quantitative and qualitative exhaustion of water
resources.

Investigations of this complex problem are being made on a broad front by many
scientific institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology, USSR Academy of
Sciences. USSR Hater Management Ministry, USSR Geology Ministry and other minis-
tries and departments under the unified plan of the State Committee on Science
and Technology.

As a result of these investigations conclusions were drawn having great scientific
and practical importance for the planning, rational use and conservation of water
resources, for solving problems relating to internal seas, validation of the vol-
umes, times and regime for shifting part of the runoff of northern rivers to the
south.

For the first time on a unified methodological basis, with the broad use of mater-
ials from long-term hydrometeorological observations, an evaluation was made of
the changes in the annual runoff of the principal rivers of the USSR, inflow into
internal seas and the total river runoff of individual regions in the country as

a whole under the influence of economic activity during the period from 1936
through 2000.

108

FOR OFIWCJAI.US£{)NLY
lﬂlﬂ'0I1ﬂ(1Al.|EﬂE(NVLY

The most intensive change in the runoff of the southern rivers of the country, as
indicated by investigations, began from 1955-1960 (Fig. 1). By 1975 the mean an-
nual runoff at the mouths of the Dnepr, Don, Kuban', Dnestr, Ural, Ili, Syrdar'ya,
Amudar'ya, Terek and Sulak had decreased in comparison with the natural period by
17-302. A still more significant decrease in the runoff of the southern rivers of
the USSR must be anticipated over a long period. Already by 1985 the annual runoff
of many rivers, for the most part as a result of irrigation in basins, will de-
crease by 30-50%, and by 2000 - by 60-80:.

As a result of the investigations it was possible to determine not only the total
decrease in runoff, but also to ascertain the role of individual anthropogenic
factors (irrigation, drainage, urbanisation, etc.) in this process (Fig. 2).

The fundamentally new conclusions drawn with respect to possible changes in river
runoff under the influence of anthropogenic factors in extremal cases, in years
with exceptionally little and abundant water, are of great scientific and practical
importance. In particular, it was established that for most of the river basins in
years with a very small water volume the absolute decrease in runoff under the in-
fluence of economic activity will be considerably greater than in average years
and especially in years with an abundance of water and sufficiently moistened

years.

KEY:
:‘ ‘-—s .m-
l) Volga ' . “2C1“.— '-
2) Don ' * - “:=!I§II
3) Ural ' . u‘md
lo) Dnestr H —mm
I I '4‘!
5) Dncstr N . —!—.—-—l—- v “425
6) Kura Lu ' '. .
ﬂ \ ' -
g 5339* + M“ “L-
. ‘n H “-III§IIIIII .
9) Syrdar ya ' WERE-I'll
10) Kuhn" 1 mam,
ll) Amudar ya I . my. 7
12) 111 u . I Viki];
13) Yenisey ”[ ﬂigﬁgs
ll.) Amur " 00 ”BM Q “
15) Severnaya Dvins . 5‘!!%
16) Pechcra ﬂ "1 “MV‘D.EE
17) Nova [W ---_-_-u.:
[8) Zapadnaya Dvina ----.
19) Lena ”Tm - m?! ..A
.1 [ IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIllfCE!!!
In! rum" In! an

Fig. 1. Change in the mean annual runoff of rivers of the USSR under the influ-
ence of economic activity during 1936-2000. For the Kura, Terek and Sulak, Syrdar'—
ya. Amudar'ya and 111 Rivers the normal runoff at the mouth was assigned the value
1001 for a conventional natural period: for others -- the natural water resources

of the basin were assigned this value.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

kn3 ear
I! ”(7"

    

Fig. 2. Dynamics of changes in river runoff in the USSR under the influence of
economic activity. 1) decrease in total river runoff in USSR, including: 2) for
rivers of the southern regions of the USSR, 3) for the rivers of Siberia and the
Far East, 4) for the rivers of the northern slope of the European USSR, 5) de-
crease in river runoff in the USSR due to nonreturn water losses in basins (with-
out accumulation in reservoirs).

If the total river runoff of the USSR as a whole is considered, its decrease under
the influence of economic activity is small and in 1950 was 14 km3/year or 0.31;
by 1975 it had attained 92 kn3/year (2.22). and without allowance for the accur-
ulation of water in reservoirs —- 72 km3/year. By 1985 it is expected that there
will be a decrease by 170-175 km3/year 6' ‘2), and by 2000 -- by 240-250 km3/year
(~ 5.52); without allowance for accumulation in reservoirs these values are about
130 and 190 km3/year respectively.

The principal decrease in runoff will occur in the rivers of the basins of the
Black Sea, Sea of Azov, Caspian Sea, Aral Sea and Lake Balkhash, where already

by 1975 there had been a decrease in runoff on the average by 131, but a still more
significant decrease is anticipated in the future: by 1985 —- on the average by
232, and by 2000 -- by 312. At the present time the rivers of the southern regions
with natural resources of river runoff estimated at approximately 560 km3/year, or
121 of the total river runoff of the USSR. account for 781 of the total decrease
in river runoff in the country under the influence of economic activity.

An analysis of the role of individual anthropogenic factors in the change of river
runoff in the USSR during the considered period indicated that beginning with the
modern period and in the future irrigation will become the principal factor in
economic activity, favoring the greatest decrease in annual river runoff.

The conclusions drawn as a result of the investigations of the State Hydrological
Institute were sent to planning organizations and were used in preparing a sci-
entific and technical prediction of the nultisided use and conservation of water
resources in the USSR during the period up to 1990.

At the present time investigations of the influence of anthropogenic factors on
river runoff are continuing in the direction of a refine-ant of predictions of
changes in the reghne. balance and quality of waters.

llO

FOR1OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USEINVLY

The following is proposed for the immediate future:

-- improvement in methods for evaluating the influence of economic activity on
the hydrological regime, including the use for these purposes of mathematical
models of the formation of river runoff in watersheds;

-- preparation of recommendations on the restoration of natural river runoff and
allowance for the influence of individual types of economic activity on the ele-
ments of the hydrological regime of rivers under different physiographic condi-
tions;

-- in the example of a large river drainage basin with the intensive use of water
resources (of the Volga River type) formulate a simulated mathematical model of
the formation and use of runoff for a quantitative evaluation and prediction of
the influence exerted on the hydrological regime by the most diversified combina-
tion of natural and anthropogenic factors operative in the drainage basin.

The solution of these problems will make possible the effective and scientifically
sound implementation of the functions assigned to the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology with respect to the monitoring of natural water bodies which are in
intensive economic use.

Hydrometeorological Validation of Interzonal Redistribution of Water Resources

The interzonal redistribution of water resources with respect to its scales, nation-
al economic importance and influence on the environment is among the most important
scientific and technical problems of the day. The necessity for carrying out such
work is dictated by objective factors: the extremely nonuniform natural distribu-
tion of water resources over the territory of the country, the acute shortage of
water resources in the economically most developed part of the country and the

need for fresh water in internal water bodies, especially the Caspian Sea, Sea

of Azov and the Aral Sea, for maintaining their biological productivity.

There are many proposals, schemes and variants of interzonal redistribution of
water resources, among which the best developed in planning respects are variants
of shifting of part of the runoff of the northern rivers of the European part to
the south and from the 0b' River from Belogor'ye village through the main canal for
the shifting of runoff to Kazakhstan and Central Asia.

The planned volume of the first stage in the shifting of part of the runoff of the
northern rivers of the European USSR into the Volga basin in different schemes is
from 23 to 37 km3/year and for Siberian rivers -- 25 km3/year with a subsequent
increase to 60 km3/year.

As a result of the investigations carried out by the institutes of the State Com—
mittee on Hydrometeorology. the following data have been obtained:

-- for the northern rivers of the European USSR and Siberian rivers, from whose
basins plans call for the removal of runoff (Neva, Onega, Sukhona, Severnaya
Dvina. Pechora, Ob', Irtysh), preliminary quantitative estimates of the changes
in annual, seasonal and intraannual distribution of runoff. maximum water dis-
charges and levels, floodplain inundation processes, backwater phenomena, water
temperature. heat flow, freezing and breaking-up processes, chemical composition
of water for different posts along the lengths of rivers below the intended water
intakes;

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0I1ﬂCJAL USEZCH‘LY

-- for the lakes of the northwestern USSR affected by any future shiftings of
runoff (Lakes Ladoga, Onega, Kubenskoye, Lacha and Vozhe). estimates in changes

in the water balance, level regime, systems of currents and water quality;

-- for the territory of western Siberia, estimates of possible changes in the
structure and water-heat regime of swamp landscapes;

-- for the mouth reaches and seas of the arctic zone, computation methods and mod-
els for evaluating changes in the water and channel regimes of multiarm deltas,
the dynamics of waters and contaminations, thermal regime of mouth embayments; pre-
liminary predictions of the future regimes of the mouth region of the 0b' River,
Kara and Pechora Seas;

-- for the main Irtysh-Central Asia channel for the shifting of waters, estimates
of the lateral inflow of water and sediments, computation of water losses on evap-
oration from the water surface, preliminary data on channel processes, the balance
and regime of sediments, and also ice processes; approximate (with different as-
sumptions) predictions of water quality in the channel and data on the influence
of the channel on adjacent water bodies;

- for regions to which the water is to be shifted, estimates of the possible
changes in the quality of water in the basins of the Volga, Kama, Amudar'ya and
Syrdar'ya, the hydrological regime at the mouths of southern rivers, total in-
flow, level regime and salinity of internal seas in connection with the development
of economic activity in their basins and possible shiftings of runoff;

—- preliminary estimates of changes in the meteorological regime and heat balance
of the underlying surface. moisture cycle in the atmosphere and climatic condi-
tions accompanying the shifting of part of the runoff of northern and Siberian
rivers.

The results which have been obtained make it possible to draw a general, basic con-
clusion on the considered problem: the implementation of the first stage in shift-
ing part of the runoff of northern and Siberian rivers will not result in global
changes in hydrometeorological conditions; however, the planned measures may ex-
ert a substantial influence on the water regime and microclimate of regions of re-
distribution of water resources, but this influence will have a local character.

The results of investigations and evaluation of changes in hydrometeorological con-
ditions under the influence of the interzonal redistribution of river runoff have
been published in the monograph HBZHZONAL'NOYE PERERASPREDELBNIYE RECHNOGO STOKA
(Interzonal Redistribution of River Runoff), in a collection of reports presented at
the Seventh Congress of the USSR Geographical Society and in the Transactions of the
State Hydrological Institute, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute,
Main Geophysical Observatory and State Hydrochemical Institute.

A promising variant of the shifting of the runoff of northern rivers, making pos-
sible the most complete solution of the problem of control of the regimes of the

Caspian Sea and the Sea of Azov, is the shifting of the waters of the Onega River
with the construction of a reservoir for long-term regulation in Onega Bay. How-

ever, a more detailed scientific validation of this variant is required.

The first and foremost task in further investigations is a refinement of the pre-
liminary conclusions drawn concerning all the considered and additional hydrometeor-
ological characteristics applicable to different variants of the first and second
stages of redistribution of water resources on the basis of:

112

FOR‘OFFICLAL.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- implementation of multisided expeditionary investigations in regions affected
by the shifting of runoff;

- formulation of simulated mathematical models of the functioning of systems for
the shifting of such waters. making it possible to take into account all possible
combinations of meteorological conditions, water volume and economic use of waters
(including models of the mouth reaches of rivers and basins of internal seas).

Study of Hydrological Phenomena and Processes and Improvement in Methods for
Engineering Computations

Engineering-hydrological computations, that is. determination of so-called computed
hydrological characteristics, lying at the basis of projects for different kinds of
engineering structures, are one of the principal fields of practical application of
hydrological science.

For the development and improv-ent of computation methods the State Hydrological
Institute has carried out investigations of the patterns of formation of runoff
and other regime elements on the basis of an analysis and generalization of data
from long-term network observations. For a more profound understanding of the
mechanism of hydrological phenomena and processes there have been extensive ex-
perimental field investigations at the Valday Scientific Research Hydrological Lab-
oratory, zonal water balance stations and laboratory investigations at the Main
Experimental Base of the State Hydrological Institute. These investigations made
possible a considerable development of the theoretical basis of runoff formation
processes. clarification of the role of different factors and formulation of phys-
icostat istical computation sch-es.

A highly important achievement of the State Hydrological Institute was the work
done in the 1960's and 1970's on analysis of the methods employed in practical en-
gineering for determining the so-called computed hydrological characteristics and
the preparation of an all-union norm-setting document on hydrological computations
(SN-635-72). This norm-setting document. for the first time in our country and
abroad. on a unified scientific-methodological basis regulates the determination
of the following computed characteristics: annual runoff and its long-term fluctu-
ations; distribution of runoff within the year; maxinum runoff of spring high water
and rain-induced high water; minimal runoff; highest Hater levels.

The use of the SN-435-72 in the national economy gave a high economic effect. In
the designing of highways, roads and cities alone this saving was about 20 million
rubles.

In 1980 the State Hydrological Institute, with the participation of other scientif-
ic and planning organizations, is preparing a second edition of this norm-setting
document on the basis of a generalization of the experience of its use in engineer-
ing practice in the course of the last eight years.

In addition to the national norms for determining the computed characteristics of
the hydrological regime, the State Hydrological Institute has prepared a number of
interdepartmental norms and has introduced than into practical work:

-- for computing evaporation from a water surface and from a land surface;

-- for computing the silting of reservoirs;

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘0F1NCIAI.LEEICNULY

-- for hydrological validation of antierosion measures;

-- for computing channel deformations in designing river crossings for petroleum
and gas lines;

-- for designing dispersal outlets for waste waters, for dilution, mixing and self-
purification, etc.

In the Eleventh Pive4Year Plan it is proposed that there be further improvement in
engineering computation methods and an increase in their accuracy. The planned re-
search, providing for an improvement in the mathematical model for the formation of
meltwater and rain runoff, will make it possible to take a new step on the path of
increasing the accuracy and reliability of engineering computations.

Plans also call for preparing a norm-setting document for taking into account the
influence of economic activity in the designing of engineering structures and ter-
ritorial-industrial complexes. The introduction of this norm-setting document for
the first time will make it possible to take into account the change in the water
regime under the influence of economic activity not after, but prior to the imple-
mentation of different water management measures.

Development of the Theory of River Sediments and Channel Processes and its Use in
the Solution of Practical Problems

The study of channel processes occupies one of the important places in the activity
of the State Hydrological Institute. The hydromorphological theory of the channel
process developed at the State Hydrological Institute and its practical applica-
tion for solution of many engineering problems has put the State Hydrological In-
stitute into the ranks of the leading scientific institutes in this field in our
country.

The stimulus for the development of a theory of sediments and channel processes
was the large-scale construction of water intakes, underwater gas and petroleum
lines, crossings of power transmission lines. bridge supports, dikes, navigation
and irrigation canals.

For the first time in engineering practice, at the State Hydrological Institute,

on the basis of the hydromorphological theory of the channel process. recommenda-
tions have been formulated and put into practice for evaluating the channel process
in construction planning, in particular, in the planning of crossings for pipe-
lines and power transmission lines, outlets dispersing waste waters, etc.

In discussing the development of the theory of channel processes in the works of
scientists at the State Hydrological Institute and their use for the solution of
practical problems it is impossible not to note the fundamental studies relating
to the poorly developed fields of prediction of the forming of shores of reser-
voirs and channel processes in the interbasin shifting of river runoff.

During recent years specialists at the State Hydrological Institute have general-

ized long-term investigations of river sediments, this being finalized in the cre-
ating of the concept of a multisided science, taking in the theory and method for

computing the transport of sediments and geographical generalization of the para-

meters of sediment runoff. The results of these investigations, published in a

114

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
IKUIOFFKJALlEﬂZONLY

two-volume monograph. have been given a high evaluation by the State Committee on
Hydrometeorology (Clushkov-Uryvayev Prize).

Improvement of Methods for Hydrological Predictions

In connection with the development of the water economy and the construction of
the stages of gigantic reservoirs the role and importance of routine hydrological
predictions are constantly increasing.

The investigations of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center and the State Hydrolog-
ical Institute during the Tenth Five-Year Plan were directed to:

-— development of methods for long-range predictions of the seasonal inflow of
water into major reservoirs on the rivers of the country and the runoff of unregulp
ated rivers in zones where these predictions are of great importance for the ser-
vicing of the national economy;

-- development of methods for short-range predictions of discharges and levels in
rivers during a period of high water and rain-induced floods;

-- study of the processes of formation of surface runoff and development of mathe—
matical models as a basis for the further development of methods for long- and
short-range predictions.

Important results of studies in the first direction were:

-- development of methods for long-range predictions of the seasonal inflow of
water and its distribution in time to the reservoirs on the Volga. Kama, Don and
Dnepr (USSR Hydrometeorological Center, State Hydrological Institute, Ukrainian
Scientific Research Institute), seasonal inflow into the Vilyuyskoye Reservoir

and in the future the reservoir for the Ragunskeya Hydroelectric Power Station

on the Vakhsh River (USSR Hydrometeorological Center);

-- development of a method for predicting spring runoff and the maximum discharges
of high water in the Pechora basin -- in the zone of the future shifting of waters
(USSR Hydrometeorological Center).

In the field of short-range predictions of water discharges and levels the studies
which were most important in practical results were the methods, approved by the
Central Methodological Commission, for short—range predictions of water inflow in-
to Volga reserVoirs during the period of high water and the meltwater runoff of
mountain rivers. based on the realization of mathematical models (USSR Hydrometeor-
ological Center). An important contribution was the work of the State Hydrological
Institute on the improvement of methods for short-range predictions on the basis

of allowance for the water reserves in the channel network.

Among the investigations in the third direction we should note studies for creating
methods for computing heat and moisture transfer in the frozen soil and the indices
of water absorptivity of basins, also approved by the Central Methodological Com-
mission (State Hydrological Institute, USSR Hydrometeorological Center). The re-
sults of these investigations made possible a substantial refinement of the pres-
ently used methods for computing the losses of meltwater during the period of
spring high water.

As before, the most important practical problems in the field of hydrological pre-
dictions during the immediate future (5-10 years) remain the development and im-

provement of methods for predicting water inflow into reservoirs for different
times in advance.

115

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to achieve the further development of investigations in the field of hy-
drological predictions it is necessary to carry out a number of auxiliary stud-
ies. The following. in particular, can be mentioned:

-- during 1981-1982 development of a long-range plan for expanding the observation
netuork and methods for computing and predicting the inflow of water to the pro-
jected major reservoirs of the USSR;

-- creation, in the example of the Volga and 0b' basins, of hydro-eteorological
data banks on technical carriers, necessary for carrying out investigations and
developing methods for hydrological predictions;

-- improvement of methods for computing the actual inflow of water into major res-
ervoirs during different time intervals (day. ten-day period. month, season) for
the purpose of subsequent publication of these data in the publications of the

SW1 and storage on technical carriers.

In the field of fundamental investigations a task of hydrological predictions in
the irmnediate future is the further development of unified models of the forma-
tion of melt and rain water and investigations of individual processes associated
with this. especially the absorption and retention of melt and rain water in river
basins.

At the present time a sort of transitional process is taking place in the field of
hydrological predictions: traditional methods have virtually reached the limit of
their capabilities. but mathasatical modeling methods, deemed to alter the situa-
tion in a better direction, remain unrealized. It is becoming increasingly evi-
dent that the methods and capabilities of hydrological predictions must be closely
tied in to the principles of the overall strategy for the use of water resources
and their control.

Among the problems in the sphere of meteorological predictions on which the devel-
opment of hydrological predictions is dependent, the following should be among the
first to be solved:

-- quantitative prediction of rain precipitation;

-- prediction of temperature and precipitation during the period of formation of
the spring high water.

Hydrological Validation of the Most Important National Economic Measures

In addition to theoretical and experimental investigations of hydrological pheno-
mena and processes. during the Tenth Five-Year Plan much work was carried out
which as directly related to the hydrological validation of the most important
measures of the Party and government on the development of the national economy.

In connection with the planned broad development of irrigated agriculture and
melioration of lands in the nonchernozam zone, at the State Hydrological Institute
over the course of the last 15 years investigations have been carried out which
are of great importance for increasing the yield of lands which can be improved.
At the State Hydrological Institute extensive investigations have been made of the
water and heat balances of irrigable lands in Rostovskaya Oblast, in the Northern
Caucasus. in Kazakhstan, in Central Asia and in the Trans—Volga region.

As a result of 15 years of investigations, specialists at the State Hydrological
Institute have developed and are successfully introducing into the practice of ir-
rigated agriculture a new hydrometeorological method for ascertaining the shortage

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

of water supply for agricultural crops, relying on a detailed allowance for all
the components of the water and heat balances in an agricultural field. The ex-
perimental introduction of this method in the Trans-Volga region over a period

return water losses and the norms for water returned to the channel.

tion, during the last 15 years specialists at the State Hydrological Institute,
under an agreement with Giprotyumen'neftegaz, have carried out multisided exped-
itionary investigations of swamps and swampy lands. Their main task has been ob-
taining initial data and characteristics of the water regime necessary for the
development of engineering measures related to the drainage and exploitation of
lands where petroleum and gas are being produced (Samotlorskoye, Shaimskoye, Ped-
orovakoye, Var'yegonskoye, Kholmogorskoye, Povkhovskoye, Romsomol'skoye. Uten-
goyskoye and other deposits).

Siberia, Their Structure and Hydrological Regime). The TIPOLOGICHBSKAYA KARTA
BOLOT ZAPADNO-SIBIRSKDY RAVNINY (Classification Map of Swamps on the west Siber-
ian Plain) was compiled and published.

Year Plan.

The construction of the Baykal-Amur Railroad and the economic exploitation of ad-
jacent territories has brought to the forefront a whole series of problems related
to the almost complete lack of study of the hydrometeorological regime of this ex-
tensive territory. In this connection, in accordance with the instructions of the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology, the State Hydrological Institute, in collabor-
ation with the administrations of the Hydrometeorological Service and other scien-
tific research institutes, since 1975 has been carrying out multisided expedition-
ary hydrometeorological investigations of water resources, the water balance, mud-
flows, high waters, ice encrustations and avalanches in the region of the Baykal-
Amur Railroad for validation of the planning, construction and subsequent economic
exploitation of the territory of the Baykal-Amur Railroad.

The preliminary results of investigations by the State Hydrological Institute have
been generalized in the monograph VODNYYE RESURSY BAH (Hater Resources of the Bay-
kal-Amur Railroad Zone), containing recommendations on computation of the main

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hydrological characteristics necessary for the planning of construction. Eleven
specialists of the State Hydrological Institute have been awarded medals "For
Participation in Construction of the Baykal-Amur Railroad" by the Presidium of
the RSPSR Supreme Soviet.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan it is proposed that investigations in the Baykal-
Amur Railroad zone be continued and expanded. Particular attention will be devoted
to study and prediction of possible anthropogenic influences on hydrometeotological
conditions, water regime, water balance and quality.

In connection with the development of working of ore deposits by the strip method,
during which with a decrease in the ground water level there are radical changes in
the regime of surface waters, the State Hydrological Institute in preceding years
carried out extensive water balance investigations in the neighborhood of the Kursk
Magnetic Anomaly and the northwestern bauxite deposits. During the Tenth Five-Year
Plan similar investigations were carried out in the neighborhood of the Kartauzskiye
phosphorite deposits and in other places.

As a result of these investigations not only was a prediction given for the change
in the water balance in these regions, but materials were collected and conclusions
were drawn which are of great scientific importance for a study of the interaction
between surface and ground water.

Among the investigations directly related to solution of major water management
problems we should mention multisided investigations of Lake Issyk-Kul' for clar—
ifying the reasons for a decrease in its level and the development of recommenda-
tions with respect to the quality of its waters and investigations of the hydrolog-
ical regime and present-day water balance of the Amudar'ya and Syrdar'ya basins

for the purpose of predicting changes of inflow into the Aral Sea.

Recently the State Hydrological Institute has been participating actively in solu-
tion of the Lake Sevan problem. working on a more precise determination of the
water balance in connection with measures for stabilizing its level.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan the State Hydrological Institute is planning to
carry out nultisided investigations in the basin of Lake Balkhash.

During 1981-1985 plans call for a further strengthening of the creative and profes-

sional relationships between the State Hydrological Institute and many planning and
production agencies.

118

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.5:63

PRINCIPAL RESULTS OF AGROHEImROUJGICAL INVESTIGATIWS IN THE mm! FIVB'YEAR PLAN
AND PROSPECTS FOR THEIR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian 80 6. Jun 81 (manuscript received
16 Mar 81) pp 99-104

[Article by I. G. Gringof. candidate of biological sciences, and Yu. A. xhvalenskiy,
candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, All-Union Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Agricultural Meteorology]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of
agroneteorological investigations carried
out in the Tenth Five-Year Plan by organ-
izations of the State Cal-ittee on Hydro-
meteorology, especially those organized by
the All—Union Scientific Research Institute
of Agricultural Heteorology in 1977. Rays to
bring about the further development of sci-
entific research work in the field of agro-
meteorology are outlined.

The long-range agrarian policy of the CPSU Central Comittee provides for a further
intensification of agriculture by means of mechanization, lend improvement and in-
creased use of chemical fertilizers, and also the introduction of new high-yield

varieties of agricultural crops, taking into account the sgroclimatic resources in
different soil~climatic zones of our country.

The central task of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, as defined in the_"Principa1 Direc-
tions in the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the
Period Ending in 1990," adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress, is "ensuring the further
increase in the well-being of the Soviet people." The foodstuffs program is bacon-
ing a new stage in the development of the agrarian policy of the Party.

The operational and scientific subdivisions of the State Comittee on Hydrometeorol-
ogy are giving serious, ever-increasing assistance to the upgrading of agriculture.
Operational agrometeorological support of agriculture is based on scientifically

sound methods for evaluating and predicting the status, productivity and distribu-
tion of agricultural crops.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan agrometeorological investigations have developed
at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center, Institute of Experimental Meteorology (A11-
Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural Meteorology), at all the

119

MR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regional institutes and many hydrometeorological observatories and administrations
of the Hydrometeorological Service. One of the clear manifestations of the atten-
tion of the Party and the government to the development of scientific research in
the field of agrometeorology was the organization of the All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of Agricultural Meteorology (VNIISKhH — Vsesoyuznyy Nauchno-Is-
sledovatel'skiy Institut Sel'skokhozyaystvennoy Heteorologii) in late 1977.

The principal tasks of the new institute are:

-- development and improvement of methods for agrometeorological prediction of the
productivity of the principal agricultural crops and their introduction into the
routine practice of agrometeorological support of the country's agriculture;

-- investigation of agroclimatic resources for the purpose of solving practical
problems in the effective distribution of agricultural crops, development and im-
plementation of the USSR Agroclimatic Survey;

-- formulation of recomendations on allowance for weather conditions in carrying
out all types of agroengineering measures in agriculture;

-- development and improvement of methods and instrulents for the remote evaluation
of the status and productivity of agricultural crops and natural pastures;

-- improvement of methods and instruments for surface agrometeorological observa-
tions;

-- development of an automated subsystal for the collection. processing, transmis-
sion and storage of routine and regime agroaeteorological information.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan there was serious development of investigations di-
rected to the development of the sgrometeorological aspects of the quantitative
theory of the formation of yields of agricultural crops. As a result, the most com-
plete model of processes of energy and mass exchange in the "soil-plant-atmsphere"
system has been created. The task of computing the final productivity of an agro-
coenosis with known environmental conditions was formulated from beginning to end
as a boundary-value problem in mathematical physics. The solution of a closed sys-
tun of differential equations describing the exchange processes in two contacting
media (surface air and the soil) . joined together by plants, with boundary condi-
tions stipulated in the undisturbed atmosphere over crops and in the soil, makes it
possible to obtain the vertical profiles for all heat balance components for a crop
of any stipulated structure growing on a soil with stipulated hydrophysical con-
stants.

The successes of theoretical investigations made it possible for the first time for
agrometeorological purposes to create a dynamic model of yield formation whose par-
ameters have already been identified for a number of the most important agricultur-
al crops: barley, clover, potatoes, spring wheat, etc. On the basis of "weather-
yicld" dynamic models it has been possible to develop methods for evaluating the ag-
rometeorological conditions for yield formation (for spring barley, clover, pota-
toes), and also to predict the mean oblast yield of spring barley. For the first
time it was possible to formulate a physicomathenatical model for predicting the
wintering of winter grain crops. Some of these methods have already been introduced
into practical work or are in the production tests stage.

During the Eleventh Five—Year Plan there is to be a further improv-ent in the
theory of agrometeorological processes. First of all there must be a more detailed
allowance for the dependence of plant growth processes on hydrometeorological

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions and the conditions for mineral nutrition. Models must be formulated
making it possible to solve the problems involved in optimizing the water and
thermal regimes of plantings of agricultural crops, to evaluate the effectiveness
of artificial modification work directed to the prevention or weakening of the
negative consequences of the influence exerted on the yield by extremal hydro-
meteorological conditions. Studies in this direction must lay the theoretical

basis for creating a new system for the agrometeorological support of agriculture
in our country.

The development and improvement of methods for agrometeorological predictions of
the yield of agricultural crops have proceeded on a broad front: the yield of
grain crops and potatoes in the main regions of their cultivation, perennial

sown grasses in the nonchernozem zone of the RSPSR and in Kazakhstan, tea and sugar
beets in Georgia, cotton and vegetableamelon crops in Central Asia.

In cooperation with the hydrometeorological services and meteorological services of
a number of oocialist countries the "Manual on Agrometeorological Predictions of
the Yield of the Principal Agricultural Crops" was prepared.

Efforts were undertaken for increasing the advance time for agrometeorologieal pre-
dictions. For example, methods were developed for predicting the yield of spring
wheat prior to sowing for a number of regions.

At the present stage it was possible to define clearly two directions for the im-
provement of methods for making agrometeorologieal predictions. These are governed
by both the practical requirements for routine hydrometeorological support of ag-
riculture and advances in the field of mathematical modeling and development of re-
mote methods for the collection of agrometeorological information. A number of meth-
ods for predicting crop yield, for esample. the yield of spring barley and potatoes.
have already been developed for some regions of the country on a new methodological
basis -- in dynamic models of the growth, development and formation of crop produc-
tivity.

In the development of methods for predicting yield more extensive use has been made
of new types of information obtained employing remote methods. For example, a meth-
od for predicting the yield of grain and pasture vegetation over the territory of
Central Asia and Kazakhstan has been developed using aerial photometric information
on biomass.

The use of remote information on the state of agricultural crops and the soil over
large areas and advances in the field of mathematical modeling should become the
basic direction in the improvement of methods for agrometeorological predictions. an
increase in their accuracy in the new five-year plan.

During the past five years work has actively proceeded on the improvement of methods
for the remote determination of the state of the soil, state and productivity of ag-
ricultural crops over extensive areas using aviation and space vehicles.

The following methods have been developed: for remote determination of the projec-
tive coverage of the soil by winter crops during the autumn and spring; for deter-
mination of damage to potato crops by phytophthora; for determination of areas of

121
FOR OFIWCJAI.USE2(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beating down of crops; for determining the sparseness and damage of cotton plants.
A method was created for predicting the yield of grain crops on irrigated and un-
irrigated lands in Central Asia and Kazakhstan, based on the dependence of the grain
yield on the mean oblast quantities of above-ground biomass of fields of grain crops
determined by the aerophotometric method. A method was developed for computing the
yield of desert pasture vegetation on the basis of data from aerophotometric inves-
tigations and satellite photographs.

A series of aircraft instrument outfits was created and delivered for the implemen-
tation of a gem survey over large areas for the purpose of determining the water
reserves in the snow and in the cultivated soil horizon in several agricultural re-
gions of the country. Methods have been developed for ascertaining soil moisture
content, snow depth and water reserves in the snow cover in agricultural fields
using aircraft game-spectral surveys.

In general, in the system of the State Comittee on Hydrometeorology investigations
on the development of remote methods for the collection of information on the state
and yield of agricultural crops and pasture vegetation over great areas are at the
level of the best attainments in the country and abroad. During the Eleventh Five-
Year Plan this work direction will be further developed and will be tied in with
the development of airborne operational measurement systems for evaluating the
state of the soil, sown crops and their yield with a corresponding system for the
registry and automated processing of the collected information.

During recent years there has been some broadening of work on the creation of instru-
ments for surface agrometeorological observations by the network of stations and
posts. For example, the 'TON-H" and "Zhavoronok" biometric field photometers have
been developed for routine instrumental measurement of the quantity of above-ground
plant biomass, the density in fields and the degree of weediness. The first will be
used in any types of soils and the second in regions with light-colored soils. In
1980 field tests of these photometers were initiated and are intended for extensive
use by agrometeorologists and agronomists.

Testing of a universal conductometric instrument KlR-lOl is being completed. This
indicator is intended for the routine detection of plants which have perished due
to low temperatures and for determining the wilting point.

In accordance with the technical specifications of the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Agricultural Meteorology, in the new five-year plan development will

be completed for an instrument measuring complex for vehicle agrometeorological in-
vestigations. In essence. this will make it possible to create agrometeorological
field laboratories set up on the chassis of cross-country vehicles of the [Ml-1052
and GAZ-66 types, designed in two variants: for the implementation of standard ag-
rometeorological programs for field observations by hydrometeorological observator-
ies, weather bureaus and agrometeorological stations (first variant); for carrying
out a complex of special agrometeorological and biological observations within the
framework of scientific research work (second variant).

Work is continuing on the creation of a portable soil drill; development is proceed-
ing on an ecological gasometric chamber, etc.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWWHCJA1.USEIDNlY

During the new five-year plan work will be completed on the revising of the RUKOVOD-
STVO P0 OPREDELENIYU ACROGIDROLOGICHBSKIKH SVOYSTV POCHVY NA GIDROMBTSTANTSIYAKH
(Manual for Determining the Agrohydrological Properties of Soils at Hydrometeoro-
logical Stations), the NASTAVLENIYA GIDROMETEDRDLOGICHESKIM STANTSIYAM I POSTAM,

VYP 11 (h-e IZDANIYB) (Instructions for Hydrometeorological Stations and Posts, No
11 (4th Edition)), and other aids, and these will be published.

A major cycle of studies has been carried out by the scientific research institutes
of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology for the formulation of recommendations

on the agrometeorological validation of different technological procedures for the
cultivation of agricultural crops for a number of regions in the country. Among
these are recommendations on allowance for agrometeorological conditions in the dis-
tribution of nitrogen fertilizers on grain crops, recommendations on the undersowing
and resowing of damaged and poorly developed fields of winter wheat, on the times of
sowing of spring grain crops in Western Siberia and cotton in Central Asia. Methods
have been developed for predicting the influence of agrometeorological conditions

on the development of a predator of the potato, the Colorado potato beetle, and dis-
eases of this crop in the nonchernozem zone, methods for predicting the mass propa-
gation of a number of predators of agricultural crops in the territory of Trans-
caucasia, and a method for evaluating the effectiveness of snow retention over the
territory of Kazakhstan. Methodological recommendations have been formulated on an
evaluation of the economic effectiveness of the use of agrometeorological informa-
tion in agriculture. The potential economic effectiveness of use of recommendations

on allowance for hydrometeorological conditions in agricultural work is estimated
at 33.5 million rubles per year.

The "Principal Directions in Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-
1985 and for the Period Ending in 1990" call for a substantial increase in the
supplying of mineral fertilizers and highly effective plant protection agents to
agriculture. The task is set of increasing the role of the agrochemical service in
agriculture and its responsibility for the effective use of mineral fertilizers,
lime and chemical plant protection agents. Accordingly, the importance and neces-
sity for developing agrometeorological recomendations making it possible to take
into account the existing and anticipated weather conditions with the application of
large amounts of fertilizers and crop chemical protection agents, directed to an in-
crease in the effectiveness of use of these agents. is increasing still further.

In the field of agroclimatic investigations during the Tenth Pive-Vear Plan much work
was done for evaluating the agroclimatic conditions for crop cultivation and valida-
tion of the distribution of agricultural crops in the zone of the Baykal-Amur Rail-
road and in Transcaucasia, rice in the Ukraine. A series of reference aids was pre-
pared. The map ACROKLIMATICHESKIYE RESURSY RECHERNOZEMNOY ZONY YeT SSSR (Agroclimatic
Resources of the Nonchernozcm Zone of the European Territory of the USSR) was pub-
lished, as well as the reference manuals SREDNIYE MNOCOLETNIYE I VEROYATNOSTNYYE
KHARAKTERISTIKI ZAPASOV VLAGI V POCHVE POD OZIMYMI I RANNIMI YAROVYMI KUL'TURAMI
(Mean Long-Term and Stochastic Characteristics of Moisture Supplies in the Soil Un-
der Winter and Early Spring Crops) for the European USSR and Eastern Siberia. Sim-
ilar reference manuals have been prepared for publication for the territory of the
Uzbek, Kirgiz and Tajik SSRs, for the territory of western Siberia, and also the
ATLAS VLAGOZAPASOV POD OZIMYMI I YAROVYMI ZERNOVYMI KUL'TURAMI NA YeTS (Atlas of

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICiAL USE ONLY

Moisture Supplies Under Winter and Spring Grain Crops in the European USSR). Work
on the preparation of reference manuals on the agroclimstic regime of the terri-
tory of the country, intended for a wide range of users, will be continued.

In order to improve the system for supplying users with agroclimatic information,
and also for coordinating all investigations in this field, carried out by differ-
ent ministries and departments, during the Eleventh Five—Year Plan specialists will
formulate the methodological principles for creating and implementing the USSR
Agroclimatic Inventory.

The "Principal Directions in the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for
1981—1985 and for the Period Ending in 1990" provide for the continuation of work
on improving the distribution of agricultural production by zones and regions of
the country, an increase in the level of its specialization and concentration. In
the light of this task, investigations directed to an evaluation of the influence
of anomalous agroclimatic conditions on the yield of the principal agricultural
crops for the purpose of optimizing the distribution of agricultural production
are assuming particular importance and seriousness.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan a new method was developed for the multisided re-
gionalization of agricultural crops, optimum in the sense of a reduction of losses
of the gross yield due to the unfavorable weather conditions. It is necessary to
solve the problem, more difficult in scientific and organizational respects, of im-
plementing the developed approach and introducing the practical results of computa-
tions into the planning of agricultural production.

*tt

Work has been completed on the development of a first variant of a system for the
processing of routine agrometeorological information. On the basis of a Yes elec-
tronic computer, the system, together with the modernized KN-21H(2) code. is under-
going the stage of inventor's tests at the Belorussian Territorial Hydrometeorolog-
ical Center. Also lying ahead is more intensive work on the introduction of the
system for the processing of routine information into practical use and on mathe-
matical support for the creation of a bank'of agrometeorological data. Work along
these lines is an important aspect of the new system for the bydrometeorological
support of the country's agriculture. The availability of a modern information base
would make possible a substantial increase in the effectiveness of scientific re-
search work in the agrometeorological field.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan a textbook by Yu. I. Chirkov, entitled AGROMETEORO-
DOGIYA (AgrometeorolusY) was published for the students at agricultural colleges in
the country. as well as a study aid by A. H. Shul'gin entitled AGROHBTEOROLOGIYA I
AGROKLIMATOLOGIYA (Agrometeorology and Agroclimatology), to a certain degree fill-
ing a gap which has persisted for many years in the agrometeorological literature.
Nevertheless, during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan it is necessary to form creative
teams of authors for preparing modern textbooks and aids for students at hydrometeor-
ological colleges and technical schools.

The Scientific Council on the "Agroaeteorology" Problem, organized by an order of
the State Committee on Hydrometeorology in late 1980. should bring together the
scientific community of our country. focus efforts on the development of key

124

POI‘DFFIJAI.USEIMVLY
INVR‘OF?ICIAI.IISFZCHVLV

problems in ngrnmetcurulngy and [nvur an Improvement in the coordination of all
agromcteorological Investigations carried out in the system of the State Omnmittee
on Hydrometeorology and in other ministries and departments.

During the past five years Soviet agrometeorologists have assumed an active part in
agrometeorological research together with specialists of the socialist countries
within the framework of multilateral and bilateral cooperation. For example, on the
basis of such investigations in 1979 the third, final part of the monograph ACRO-
KLIHATICHESKOYE RAYONIROVANIYE PYATI OSNOVNYKH SEL'SKDKHOZYAYSTVENNYKH KUL'TUR NA
TERRITORII SOTSIALISTICHESKIKH STRAN YEVROPY (Agroclimatic Regionalitation of the
Five Principal Agricultural Crops in the Territory of the Socialist Countries of
Europe) was published.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan scientific cooperation with the agrometeorolog-
ists of the countries of the Socialist Economic Bloc will be further developed.

Major work must still be done by Soviet agrometeorologists within the framework of
activity of the Commission on Agricultural Meteorology of the HMO and other inter-
national organizations. In particular, the following work must be done: determine
the influence of climatic variability on agriculture, clarify the role of forests
in the global balance of C02, the water and energy balances. determine the agro-
meteorological aspects of land use in arid and semiarid territories subjected to
the greatest extent to the processes of advance of the desert. clarify the meteor-
ological aspects of the implementation of agricultural work in the tropical and
subtropical regions. Hork will be continued on the development of "weather-yield"
models and study of the problems involved in the influence of weather on the state
of livestock.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ltllfuﬂﬂClAl.US£(NNLY

UDC 551(510.S3:590.21)(98)
EFFECT 0? SOLAR ACTIVITY ON THE TEMPERATURE REGIME IN THE POLAR ATMOSPHERE

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
22 Sep 80) PP 105-112

[Article by G. A. Kokin, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences. L. A. Ryaza-

nova, candidate of geographical sciences, and G. F. Tulinov, doctor of physical and

mathematical sciences, Central Aerological Observatory and Institute of Applied Geo-
physics]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of an analysis of experi-
mental data from rocket and radiosonde sounding
on Kheys Island it was possible to ascertain the
characteristics of change in meteorological para-
meters and the state of different layers of the
atmosphere in dependence on the solar activity
level in the 11-year cycle.

The purpose of this study was a determination of the relationship between the
change in solar activity during the 11-year cycle and the temperature regime of
different layers of the atmosphere during winter in the polar region.

During the polar winter the direct influence of solar radiation in the electromag-
netic wavelength range is minimum and therefore the effects associated with dis-
turbance by the sun should be manifested most clearly. At the same time, the ef-
fect of corpuscular streams in this region is maximum and their contribution to
energy should be clearly conspicuous. Taking these circumstances into account. we
will examine the change in the temperature regime during the period of the 11-year
solar activity cycle in the polar region.

As characteristics of solar activity we used the minimum temperature of the euro5
sphere Te , which reflects the joint effect of radioemission at a wavelength 10.7
cm (P10.7§osnd geomagnetic disturbance (K9 index). A validation of the selected
characteristic and the computation method were given in’fs].

The mean monthly and mean seasonal Tgxo values during the period from 1966 through
1976 were compared with the values of the mean monthly and seasonal temperatures

over Kheys Island, obtained on the basis of radiosonde and rocket measurements [8].
As a characteristic of thermospheric temperature at altitudes greater than 80 km

126

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we used data from experimental measurements by the different methods employed in
[2, 6, 7, 9, 10].

Tibia 1

Mean "inter values Te,” and Temperatures Over Kheys Island in Years of Solar
Activity Maximum and Minimum

H km Mean winter temperature, K Temperature differences
during during during mentioned periods,
1968- 1975- K
1971 1976
Exosphere 1233 996 237
165 662 1025 -363
70 217 202 15
45 233 263 -30
S 235 233 2

There were two maxima in the mean winter Texo values (December-Janusry-Pebruary)
during the period 1966 through 1976: the first, main maximum, observed in 1968,
which was 1330 K, and a second, observed in 1970, and equal to 1230 K. Minimum

solar activity was observed in 1976, with T - 990 K. Thus, during the investigat-
ed period the maximum amplitude of the meanezgnter T330 values was more than 300 K.

In order to compare Texo with the temperature values in different layers of the at—
mosphere all the data were grouped into two main periods: solar activity maximum
(1968-1971) and minimum (1976-1976).

As an example, the table gives the mean winter Texo values and mean winter tempera-
ture values at altitudes 5 kn (troposphere), 45 km (stratosphere), 70 km (meso-
sphere) and 165 km (thermosphere).

After examining the table the conclusion can be drawn that in the years of the solar
activity maximum and minimum the temperature regime of the atmosphere in the polar
region is different. The temperature values in the years of the solar activity max-
imum are higher in the mesosphere and troposphere and lower in the thermoaphere and
stratosphere than during the period of low solar activity. Thus, the reaction to

the change in solar activity during the 11-year cycle in different layers of the
atmosphere is different. We note that the indicated differences in temperature are
significant in all layers other than the troposphere.

Figure l, which shows the vertical temperature profiles over Kheys Island for the
periods of the maximum (1) and minimum (2) of solar activity, clearly reveals the
altitudinal boundaries of the above-mentioned temperature changes.

We should note that sufficiently good agreement between temperature isothermy in

the thermosphere, measured by rocket methods, and temperature of the exosphere,
computed on the basis of data on the P10,7 and KP indices, is indicated.

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the period of the solar activity max-
imum the temperature in the isothermy region
was r - 1200 K, and reap, as indicated above,
was 1233 K; during the period of the minimum
T - 1025 K, T xo - 992 K. The mentioned suf-
ficiently good agreement of these data is
evidence of the reliability of the results
of rocket measurements.

The antiphsse character of the temperature
changes in different layers of the atmo-
sphere has been noted before; it has been
observed most clearly during periods of
powerful stratospheric-mesospheric warnings.
During these periods there are substantial
reatructurings of the thermal and circulation
regimes. It is possible that restructurings of
structure and circulation also occur with
changes in the solar activity level.

The character of the relationship between solar
activity and the temperature regime of differ-
ent layers of the atmosphere can also be judg-

ed from regression curves constructed in lin-
ear and quadratic approximations and shown in

Pig. 2. The figures near the dots indicate

 

I _ .
u 200 .um ”557—33371f the year for which the mean temperature val-
ue was obtained.

Fig. 1. Temperature change over

Kheys Island during the years of The greatest scatter of points relative to the
the solar activity naximum (l) approximating curve is observed at the level
and minimum (2). 5 km, which indicates, evidently, a predomin-

ating influence of the variability of tropospheric processes and the effect of the
underlying surface.

At the 70-km level the maxi-um deviation of the point relating to 1969 is evidently
attributable to the strong aesospheric warming observed during this period.

Now we will examine some possible reasons for such a significant change in the tem-
perature regime in dependence on variation in the level of solar activity during

the 11-year cycle, especially the temperature change in the atmosphere during a
period of rise in this level.

In our opinion, the redistribution of the thermal and energy regimes is attribut-
able to the totality of a whole series of factors, among which we can mention long
planetary waves. turbulent thermal diffusivity and vertical currents. In a one-

dimensional approximation the thermal diffusivity equation can be written [1] in
the form

Wc,p(:—r+ r)-7"-[K,c,p(%+f)]—Q, (I)

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI". ONIN

where H is the vertical component of wind velocity, K: is the vertical component of
the coefficient of turbulent mixing, c is specific heat capacity at a constant
pressure, )0 is air density, 0 is the sgecific heat absorbed in a unit time due

to radiation factors, dT/dz is the vertical temperature gradient, r - g/cp is the
superadiabatic temperature gradient, g is the acceleration of free falling.

          

1"! 1/00 [200 U". [M 17170 I?“ 7, Text’

Fig. 2. Regression relationships between minimum emospheric temperature Temo and
temperature at the levels 5, 20, 105, 70 and 165 km.

The solution of equation (1) with the boundary condition: with z - 0

dT/dz - (d'l‘ldz)o,
has the form

Kr

:1 «-

 

 

dT (RIC ”a 47‘
7;: —l"+ ’9‘,” [(7)04-1‘] e + (2)
’ w
J?“ r _67¥- d:
+ K10? £030 1 dt'

where (chpp )0 is related to z - 0.

It follows from (2) that the vertical temperature gradient is formed due to such
parameters as K2, mp and Q. We will examine each parameter separately.

Atmospheric turbulence is governed for the most part by atmospheric stability rel-
ative to external factors. A stability characteristic is the value of the Richard-
son number Ri. A modification of this number, expressed through the horizontal tem-
perature gradient, was obtained in [3].

l 29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

m ”0 ”II “It

Fig. 3. Change in Ri for period of maximum Fig. 5. Change in zonal (a) and mer-

(1) and minimum (2) solar activity. idional (b) wind velocities over Kheys
Island for levels of high (1) and low
(2) solar activity.

The Ri values were computed for levels of increased and reduced activity using
rocket sounding data. The results of the computations are given in Fig. 3. A

study of this figure indicates that in almost the entire stratonesosphere the per-
iod of increased solar activity is characterized by an unstable state of the atmo-
sphere. Accordingly, during this period the prerequisites exist for the develop-
nent of more intense turbulence. It can be anticipated that in this case there will
be a broader spectrum of turbulent fluctuations and accordingly, K; at the time of
the solar activity maximum will be greater than during the tins of the ninimm.
Thus, during the period of the solar activity maximum as a result of increased
turbulent mixing there should be a decrease in the vertical t-perature gradient.

Vertical currents R should also lead to a temperature redistribution. The R value
can be evaluated through the horizontal components of wind velocity. It follows
from the continuity equation that

_ l Edlpu) , N90)
W-‘ﬂl a *T 1“ - (3)

 

where u and v are the zonal and meridional components of wind velocity. In a geo—
strophic approximation we obtain

_ L -’ .
W_— a, '\ tgepvd." (6)

where 9 is the complenentary angle to local latitude, a is the earth's radius.

Approximate integration in the A 2 layer gives

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(5)

where I! is the altitude of the homogeneous atmosphere, p0 and p2 are the pressures
at the lower and upper levels of the A: layer, v is the mean velocity of the mer-
idional wind component in _t_he A 2 layer. Evaluations show that with A: 25105 cm
and 3:15.108 cm as 2-10-4 v.

0n the basis of experimental data we computed the scan v values for the levels of
high and low solar activity. The results of the computations are given in Pig. 4.
Using these data it is possible to evaluate the change in H with transition from
the maximum to the minimum of solar activity. Estimates show that during the period
of the solar activity maximum in the layer from 10 to 20 be v has a very low (5 2-
10'2 cmlsec) value and is directed downward. Below 20 km, due to descending cur-
rents, it is evident that there will be a tulperature increase. Above 20 hm and

to an altitude of 60 _km because of ascending currents there should be a temperature
decrease because the v value during the period of the solar activity maximum is
less than during the period of the minimum. It is evident that this process to a
considerable degree should be neutralized by turbulent thermal diffusivity. In ac—
tuality, the dimensionless value WEIRz characterizes the relative contribution of
these processes. “min: 0.6 cm/sec and “axe—'OA cm/sec at an altitude 60-45 km. Kg.
according to [l], is of the order of magnitude 105 cmzlsec, 1166-105 cm. According-
ly, m/Kzz 0.4-6.105/1058 2 during the period of the maximum and ws/xzas during
the solar activity minimal period. If it is taken into account that with transition
from the solar activity minimum to the solar activity maximum [(2 should increase.
then evidently in the considered range of altitudes at the solar activity mimmn
the WH/Kz value will even be somewhat less than during the period of the solar ac—
tivity minimum.

Thus, both these mechanisms should lead to a change in the vertical temperature
profile, as is actually observed. In addition to a change in stratification there
is also a change in the level of the menopause. Its altitude increases with the
solar activity minimum and is situated at 120-125 km. whereas with the minimum it
lies at about 80 km. The fact that in the altitude range 90-220 km the thermspher—
ic temperature during the period of the solar activity maximum is lower can evi-
dently be evidence of an increasing role of turbulent transfer. This same factor
should increase the altitude of the mesopause and the level of the turbopauae.

A decisive role should also be played by descending movements which possibly caus-
ed a temperature increase in the mesosphere during the solar activity maxim-I.

Using data from rocket sounding we calculated the vertical density profiles for
Kheys Island station. It was found that during a period of increased solar activ—
ity the density in the stratomesosphere increases in comparison with the solar ac-
tivity minimum. This circumstance should lead to a decrease in d'l'ldz during a per-
iod of increased solar activity because density is present in the denominators of
the second and third terms of expression (2).

Now we will proceed to an examination of the influence of Q on formation of the
vertical temperature profile. It is evident that during the period of the polar
night over Kheys Island there is virtually no solar radiation leading to heating

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the atmosphere. It is possible that radiation scattered by the thermosphere en-
ters into the stratosphere and mesosphere and is absorbed there, but its contribu—
tion is negligible. Accordingly, the radiation regime of the stratomesosphere is
characterized by radiation cooling. It is possible that heating of the atmosphere
occurs as a result of injections of corpuscular radiations through the polar cusps,
but in our opinion any estimate of the contribution of this factor to the thermal
regime of the stratomesosphere would be highly approximate.

ﬂu ‘ 93). ~ W645 ‘ (a)

we [3 '
P
where Q8 and Qe are the absorbed and emitted radiation energy.

It follows from the experimental data that the following condition is satisfied in
the stratomesosphere

,-4r ._."’_7“

' dz -' 3 <0. (7)

'4‘ m

Condition (7) is satisfied in a case when
.’ W ‘.
-—-l:
[17' a; H- 2] "on— Q""'“_‘Q'I_Qn‘alnlh"€ I" }<0.
The value ‘ _ e A: ._0.
since wlxz Azeoxo with A22: 105, «2.5105 and w-o.a.

Accordingly, the following condition is satisfied

(Q8 ‘ Q¢)m< (Q; ‘ Qe)m1n-

If it is assumed that at the solar activity minimum Qa<ﬁQe, accordingly the same
condition must also be satisfied during the period of the solar activity maximum.
Emission must increase to a greater extent than absorption. However. if during the
period of the solar activity minimum Qa>-Qe, it is obvious that during the solar
activity maximum the difference Q; - Qe should decrease in comparison with the
period of the minimum. This can occur only in a case when the emission increases
more in this period than absorption.

Thus. in both the considered cases during a period of increased solar activity
there should be an increase in radiation cooling.

The principal factor responsible for this process, according to [h]. is C02 emis-
sion in the band lsiLm. However. C02 is a quite conservative component and one
should scarcely expect its.changes in different periods of solar activity. A sec-
ond, less active factor responsible for the radiation balance is atmospheric
ozone, emitting in the 9.6}Lm band. However, its contribution to the radiative
cooling process is less significant than the C02 contribution.

It was demonstrated in [6] that up to the 60-km level radiative cooling by 03
emission does not exceed l'C/day. Even a significant (by several times) increase
in the 03 concentration during a period of increased solar activity, which to all

132

K]Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intents and purposes is an improbable event, scarcely will lead to the anticipat-
ed effect. Still another component responsible for radiative cooling is water
vapor. It was also demonstrated in [4] that in the case of use of a "mist" mde‘l
of the stratomesosphere the effect caused by this component is -8 K per day at an
altitude of 50 km. Thus, water vapor plays a substantial role in the radiation
balance of the stratomesosphere.

At the present time the literature contains no data on the water vapor concentra-
tion in the polar region, but it was demonstrated in [11] that the water vapor con-
centration in the stratomesosphere increases from the tropical to the middle lati-
tudes. There is an annual variation of hulidity with a maximum in the winter and

a minimum in the answer. If it is postulated that such a pattern can be extrapolat-
ed into the high latitudes, it is then possible to explain the increase in radia-
tive cooling during winter over Kheys Island. It can also be assmed that the

fact of an increase in radiative cooling during the period of the solar activity
maximum is associated with the increasing role of solar protons in the physica-
chcmical processes transpiring in the stratosphere and mesosphere and possibly re-
sponsible for an increase in the concentration of H20 molecules.

It can therefore be concluded that in the polar region all the principal meteoro-
logical parameters (temperature, wind, density. pressure). altitude of character-
istic levels (mesopause and others), characteristics of the thermodynamic state
of the stratosphere and mesosphere (turbulence, vertical currents, instability),
as well as radiation factors and physicochemical processes change or should change
with transition from the maximum to the minimum of solar activity in the 11-year
cycle.

Some assumptions concerning the role of individual factors presented here are quite
speculative and unquestionably should be backed up by rigorous mathematical coa-
putations. However, it is impossible to carry out such computations at the present
time due to the lack of a number of required physical characteristics.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zhadin. Ye. A. and Krivolutakiy, A. A., ”Coefficient of Turbulent Diffusion
in the Hesosphere and Lower Thermosphere," TRUDY 'i‘sAO (Transactions of the
Central Aerological Observatory), No 115. 1973.

2. Ivanova, I. 8.. Kokin, G. A. and Chizhov. A. F., "l‘emperature and Density in
the Hesosphere and Thermosphere in the Central Arctic," METEOROLOGIYA I
CIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 5, 1968.

3. Ivanovskiy, A. I. and Ryazsnova, L. A., ”Experience in Using the Instability
Test for Diagnosis and Prediction of Processes of Seasonal and Intraseasonal

Restructuring in the Stratosphere and Mesosphere," meonowctn I GIDROIDG—
IYA, No 7, 1974.

lo. Kivganov. A. F.. "Radiation Sources and Heat Losses in the Stratosphere and
and Lower Mesosphcrc," TRUDY ‘l'sAO, No 96, 1970.

5. Kokin, G. A., at al., "Correlation Between Processes in the Stratosphere and
Solar Activity," METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA, No 7, 1977.

133

V03 OFHCIAI. "SF. ONLY
7.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Novikov, A. S. and Tulinov, G. 17., "Rocket Bxperinents for Investigating the
Upper Atmosphere in the Central Arctic," GEOHAGNETIU I AERONOHIYA (Geomag-
netisn and Aeronomy), Vol XV, No 2, 1975.

Novikov, A. 8., Tulinov, c. F. and Pokhunkov, A. A., 'ﬁanonetric Investiga-
tions in the Polar Troposphere," TRUDY IPG (Transactions of the Institute of
Applied Geophysics), No 24, 1975.

"RBZUL'TATY RAKETMGO 7DNDIROVANIYA AMSFERY," 0. KHEYSA, 1966-1967 ("Re-
sults of Rocket Sounding of the Atmosphere," Kheys Island, 1966-1967), Hos-
cow, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Tulinov, G. P. and Chanin. M. L., "Experimental Investigation of the T-pera-
ture Regime of the Upper Atmosphere in the Central Arctic," TRUDY IPG (Trans-
actions of the Institute of Applied Geophysics), No 23. 1975.

Andreeva, L. A. and Chanin, M. L. (et a1.), "Measurements of Wind. Diffusion
Coefficients and Temperature Pros Artificial Luminous Clouds on Heine Island
Under Quiet and Disturbed Geomagnetic Situations," Preprint to the XVIII
Meeting, COSPAR, May-June 1975, Varna, Bulgaria.

Vedynski, A. V. and Jushkov, V. A., "Direct Measurements on Hater Vapour
Concentration in the Stratosphere and Mesosphere in Hid-Latitudes of the
USSR and in the Equatorial Zone," Preprint to the “Hat COSPAR, India, 1979.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

UDC 551.506.24
PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FCGB PROGRAM

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian “0 6, Jun 81 (manuscript received
16 Sep 80) pp 113-121

[Article by K. Ya. Kondrat'yev, corresponding member, USSR Academy of Sciences, Main
Geophysical Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: This is a review of the preliminary
results of implementation of the F063 program.
The emphasis is on an examination of the space
observation system. including both the collec-
tion of information by means of satellites and
the use of satellites for the localizing. col-
lection and dissemination of data from differ-
ent observation platforms (drifting sea buoys,
balloons, aircraft). The volume of observations
carried out during the FCC! period is character-
ized and the results of processing of the mass
of data are briefly examined. The author dis-
cusses some results of analysis of F668 data
and numerical modeling, the purpose of which was
an evaluation of the informational contribution
of different components of the observation sys-
tem to a weather forecast for a time up to five
days.

Within the framework of the scientific program for the next, 23d plenary session of
COSPAR, held during the period 2-14 June 1980 in Budapest. a symposium was organiz—
ed to discuss the results of functioning of observation systems and the preliminary
results of implementation of the First Global Experiment (FCC!) of CARP. The sympo-
sium, attended by a representative group of specialists from different countries,
made possible a sufficiently clear evaluation of the degree of implementation of the
P665 observational program and discussion of results. Naturally, the specific charac-
ter of COSPAR as an international committee on space research determined the priority
of the "space aspect" of the F662 program. It is well known, however, that it was
specifically the use of space observation vehicles, together with means for the
collection and dissemination of information from different platforms, which made a
decisive contribution to the attainment of the principal FGGB goal -- obtaining a
global mass of meteorological and oceanographic data for one year.

135

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE¢DNLY
F068 Observational Systems

Observation system Entire
POOR
period

Principal observation system

HUN surface observation system "NH network +

Operational satellite observa-

tion system 5 geostationary
satellites +

a satellites in
polar orbits +

Special observation system

Drifting buoys 368 buoys +
Constant-altitude balloons 313 balloons
Shipboard wind observations in
tropics #0 ships (SOP-l)
63 ships (SOP-2)

Probes dropped from aircraft 9 aircraft
(339 takeoffs)

Experimental satellite "Nimbus-7" +

Transmission of data from air-
craft via satellites ("PDSS") 17 aircraft +

Coordinated system of aircraft .
observations ("585“") 80 aircraft ' +

Special serological soundings on
islands 12 stations

 

SOP Periods
of in-
tensive
observa-
tions

+
+

+
+

The principal scientific goals of the FCC! program are: l) achievement of a better
understanding of the laws of atmospheric dynamics for increasing the reliability

of weather forecasts; 2) evaluation of the limits of weather predictability; 3) val-
idation of an optimum observation system meeting the needs of numerical weather
forecasting; 4) study (on the basis of data for a year observation period) of the
physical mechanisms causing climatic changes at time scales from several weeks to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

several years and also the development and checking (on the basis of observational
data) of models of climate.

Naturally, the primary task in summarizing FCC! results is an evaluation of the de-
gree of implementation of the planned observation program. However, it is still
more important to analyze the informational contribution of new observation sys-
tems supplementing the usual observational facilities of the world Heather Hatch
(WNW). This, in particular. relates to space observation systems, as well as
their use for localizing automatic platforms, collection of the corresponding in-
formation and its transmission to surface centers. All these matters have been
discussed in detail in reports at the symposium on P063 results. A number of re-
ports contained general information, overlapping to a considerable degree, on the
functioning of the F663 observation system (D. Rasmussen, WHO; 8. Goetz, Hungary;
W. McGovern, United States; D. Corby, Switzerland).

Table 1, presented by D. Rasmussen. characterizes the principal and special (in-
tended for special observation periods - SOP) space observation systems used in
combination with drifting buoys, constant-level balloons, shipboard wind observa-
tions, probes dropped from aircraft, aircraft observations, etc. Most of the data
from ordinary observations from the enumerated platforms was collected and (or)

transmitted by means of satellites.

The data mass included the results of observations of 3,104 surface and sea meteor-
ological stations and 1,375 aerological stations. Table 2 gives a generalized sum-
mary of the results of observations by means of satellites in polar orbits. The
principal contribution was from "TIROS-N" data, this continuously functioning dur-
ing the whole of 1979. A factor of great importance is the presence aboard third-
generation American meteorological satellites ("TIBOS-N" and "Nona-6") of the "Ar-
gos" system instrument complex, ensuring localization of drifting buoys and con-
stant-level balloons, and also the collection of data from them. The functioning

of the "Argos" system, developed by French specialists, was reproachless. This sys-
tem, described by H. Taillad (France) and intended for use at least until 1986 in-
cludes the following principal components: 1) observation platforms on which are
mounted measuring devices and radio transmitters; 2) two simultaneously function—
ing satellites; 3) a data processing and dissemination center located in Toulouse
(DPDC). Up to 32 different sensors with the volume of data transmitted by each of
them up to 256 bits can be mounted on the 0P. All OPs function at one and the same
frequency (401, 650 MHz) and transmit information in series lasting approximately

1 see each 40—200 set. If the OP is situated in the zone of reception from a satel-
lite, the information from it will be received. processed on board and stored in
an on-board memory unit until it is transmitted to the DPDC. Successful'reception
of information is ensured at least in a radius of about 2,600 km relative to the

subsatellite point (with a minimum angle of elevation of 5°).

Table 3 illustrates the possibility of interrogation of OPs from satellites. The
basic principle for the reception of data is the implementation of random contacts
between a satellite and the 0?. In order to separate the 0P transmissions in time
use is made of their asynchronization in different periods of repetition of trans-
missions. The separation of transmissions by frequency is accomplished by the use
of a different Doppler shift of the carrier frequency for transmitters on different

137

FIN!(HHH(JA1.USE¢DNIX
IN3RI0l1ﬂf1Al.lEﬂE(NQLV

Table 2
System of P665 Polar Satellites and Receipt of Level 11b Data From The-

In this table: * denotes that data output is not determined specifically and no
level 11b data have yet been received; *‘ denotes that the receipt of data for
the last few months of 1979 is likely; *** denotes that data will be received for

an lementin level 11b dat .

Name of satellite Purpose of
satellite

Total atmospheric mois-
forma and data collectio

ture content
Data from remote sound-

Wind velocity at ocean
ing of stratosphere
Localization of plat-
Additional information

Data on radiation of
surface

cloudless sky
Ocean surface temper-

Time of launching
Remote sensing data
ature

NOAA-S Second-genera-
tion meteoro-
logical satel-

 

lite 29 Jul + + +
1976
Seasat Oceanographic Fail
satellite 2 Jun ed
1978
TIROS-N Third-genera-
tion meteoro-
logical satel- .
lite 13 Oct + + + + +
1978
NIHBUS-7 Experimental
meteorological
satellite 26 Oct + + + +
1978 * * *
*tt *** *aa
Meteor Experimental 25 Jan + + +
meteorological 1979 * ** ***
satellite
Remote
NOAA-6 Second third- sound-
generation ing in-
meteorological + + + + 4.strumen-
satellite 27 Jun tation
1979 failed
138

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0?. If the transmissions are separated by frequency, up to four transmissions can
be received simultaneously. With a duration of the repeated transmissions of not
less than 10 minutes during one satellite revolution there is interrogation of
each 0? situated within the limits of the reception zone.

Table 3

Possibilities of Interrogation of Measurement Platforms From Satellites

Latitude, degrees Number of interrogations
minimum average maximum

0 6 7 8
:15 8 8 9
:30 8 9 12
:45 10 ll 12
155 16 16 18
165 21 22 23
:75 28 28 28
190 28 28 28

A determination of the OP coordinates is made only by means of measurement of the
Doppler shift of the carrier frequency of the received signal. With known satel-
lite orbital parameters a successful determination of 0? coordinates is possible in
those cases when for the particular orbit there are five measurements of the Doppler
shift with a different geometry of signal reception (this requires. for example,
separation of the first and last signals with a time interval not less than 420
see). If the position of the OP is detenmined using data for two revolutions, it

is important that the measurements on the preceding revolution be made within the
limits of the interval 30 minutes - 3 hours relative to data for the next revolu-
tion. Among loo 0? which the satellite "sees" in the course of one revolution, 60
may be localized with complete reliability (in 2b cases the geometrical test is

not satisfied). A high frequency stabilit of the 0P transmitter is of very great
importance. With a stability of about 10' it is possible to determine position
with an accuracy to 150 m (level lb) and 500 m (level lllb). Since the ”Argos" system
is free of systematic errors, the averaging of coordinates of fixed platforms over

a period of several days increases the accuracy of localization to not less than 100
Ill.

The "Argos" system was designed to function with 99% assurance of its operations.
Such a high reliability is guaranteed by a duplication of virtually all the import-
ant elements of the system. All the telemetric information from American meteorolog-
ical satellites received by ground stations is sent to a data processing center locat-
ed in Suitland (USA) and from there the data of the "Argos" system are transmitted to
Toulouse. The data received by the DPDC are processed and disseminated at a real time
scale. Upon receiving requests from users the DPDC carries out a specialized process—
ing of data. The theoretically possible time interval between the moments of recep-
tion of data of the 0? and the transmission of data by the DPDC at the request of
users varies from 1 hour 20 minutes to 3 hours, but in actuality delays for technical
reasons have led to a considerable lengthening of this interval. As an average for

139

F03¢lﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NVLY
FOR1OFHKJAI.USE|MVLY

six months 57, 85 and 972 of the entire volume of information was received not lat-
er than 3, 6 and 10 hours respectively. A telex is used most frequently for the
transmission of data to users. Table 4 characterizes the proposed use of the "Argos"
system for different purposes in 1980-1981. Estimates of the prospects for expand-
ing use of the "Argos" system are illustrated in Table 5.

Table 6

Use of "Argos" System for Collecting and Disseminating Different Information

Functions Number of objects
1980 1981

Data collection only

Fixed stations 54 76
Localization of 0? and data

collection
Buoys 654 472
Balloons 5 0
Icebergs 60 5
Ships 112 160
Sea animals 39 69
Total 724 760

One of the principal FCGB achievements was the simultaneous functioning of five geo-
stationary meteorological satellites (GHS): three American geostationary environmen-
tal satellites (ODDS); "Heteosat," launched by the European Space Agency (BSA) and
a Japanese GHS (Table 6). The basic information from the ass was data on the fields

of the wind vector at two levels, reconstructed on the basis of moveaent of lower-
and upper-level clouds.

In the United States two organizations have reconstructed the wind fields: the Eu-
vironmental Protection Agency and the Center for Engineering and Space Research at
the University of Wisconsin. 6308 data over the Indian Ocean were processed at the
Hisconsin center (separately with low and high spatial resolution).by the French
Dynamic Meteorology Laboratory and the West German Aerospace Institute. The Japanese
Meteorological Agency and the BSA were responsible for the processing of data from
the Japanese GMS and the "Meteosat" respectively. The JHA also was responsible for
reconstruction of the temperature fields of the ocean surface. A total of 5,100
wind velocity and wind direction values were determined on the average for each
day. For 1.060 "geostationary days" (with involvement of five GMS) during the per-
iod of 212 days from 1 December 1978 through 30 June 1979 at least two series of
data on the wind field were received for 901 of the days.

Three complications arose during the time of P668 implementation:
1) partial failure of 6808-2 in late December 1978, which made it necessary to re-

place this satellite first with the satellite GHS-l and then Gus-2 in order to en-
sure continuity of observations at the point where GEOS-East was situated;

140

FOR 0i1ﬂClALl£5E¢MULY
FOR 0FFNJAJ.USE(NVLY

2) beginning with 24 May 1979 there was intermittent (from time to time) failure

of the 6508-1 IR channel (Indian Ocean), which limited the restoration of data to
one series a day; however, in the course of SOP-2, in the absence of data for the
1R channel, the wind fields were reconstructed at 0600 and 1200 hours GMT;

3) failure of "Heteosat" on 25 November 1979. which was not of great importance be-
cause it occurred late in the P068 period.

The results of an analysis of the mass of P603 data, discussed in a report by D.
Zillman (Australia), revealed the major role which was played by drifting sea buoys
localized and interrogated by satellites in obtaining meteorological and oceano-
graphic data for the southern hemisphere. Seven countries set out 364 buoys (the
F603 program called for 300 buoys) which were placed in the oceans of the southern
hemisphere from the ships of 12 countries (these were primarily commercial vessels
making voyages to Antarctica); 19 buoys were dropped from aircraft. The instrument-
ation on these buoys ensured measurements of atmospheric pressure and water temper-
ature. This information was especially important for the tie-in of satellite tem-
perature profiles. If it is assumed that the data for each buoy are representative
within the limits of a circle with a radius of 500 km, the maximum coverage with
observational data in May 1979 for the zone 20-65°S attained 802, which provided

a denser network of pressure data than in the northern hemisphere. Statistics on

the malfunctioning of buoys revealed that during the 240 days only 21 of the buoys
failed.

The tracking of buoy trajectories made it possible to obtain a wealth of surface
information on currents in the southern hemisphere. The reports of D. Zillman (Aus-
tralia). D. Luteharms and H. Valentine (South African Republic) gave interesting
examples of analysis of the dynamics of currents and revealed the presence of a
major anticyclonic eddy in the Tasman Sea, rings and other mesoscale characteristics
of ocean circulation. Three typical circulation components were registered to the
south of Africa: a wind-induced coastal upwelling in the Benguela system, the main
westerly Alguhas boundary current (a study was made of intensification of the up-
welling front to the west of Capetown under the influence of this current) and the
zonal flow of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. All these components are highly
variable, which means that classical hydrophysical observation systems are inade-
quate and the joint analysis of IR satellite images, hydrographic data and observ-
ations from drifting buoys is promising.

The use of data on temperature of the ocean surface made it possible to carry out
synoptic mapping of temperature of the ocean surface in the high latitudes of the
southern hemisphere with a reliability and detail not possible earlier. The con-
struction of maps of the mean monthly values and anomalies of temperature of the
ocean surface on the basis of buoy and ship data affords new possibilities for
studying the ocean and atmosphere. Buoy data make an important contribution to in-
formation on the high latitudes. However. discrepancies in buoy and ship data on
temperature of the ocean surface can be noted.

Buoy observations were important for operational synoptic analysis and weather fore-
casting in the southern hemisphere during the F063 period. Data on atmospheric
pressure are usually adequate for a far more reliable clarification of macroscale
circulation over the ocean in the middle and high latitudes than was possible earl-
ier. There is a small but statistically significant increase in the reliability of

161

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB(NULY
or Hultibranch U:

ed localiz-
accuracy
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

982. ml:—
ia... n #982. 2. 33.3.. C

28... :2. _
.. 5.2.39 o_|_gl..n._=w..

2|: 13.30.. a... 233... 3

.. 2.2 98%.... o
Ina: _ «9.3.. a 31.3... 3

EEG - 5....
i: 538 2.19 93.3... 3....
.u-: x: 33.3 19.52. a 3

EU 8». .n 5.5:: .33
.13 saga-22... .52.: .n

9:. 9. a):
.2: 85.9.. $95.8: <2: 3

.q .n 98
Id .a on: son-aux: 8.31...
.33 an...» s 388.80.. A.

Sign

canton

Salsa. x .278

Saleem N onZIu

3 LEI .78

Sale.
Sm
coals.
3m
50.3.: _ «com
80.. H3 02:59.3.—

 

  

060"
2.321.

.3000

cannulwomo

sauce

:3" vamlwouo

: . 30000::

H .3. :«uuagm: mtu

. C
”mm .33.: can: 0 933...:
3.
8.3 12—3... 0&0- : ease-q m be
An . =3.
.33. 32.5.59“... 1....
9.8 .3...- 9 3.3.8 0.2.8....
38 ...= :3 098 o 3......“
AQ . :3—
BS .5... 3885 0.3.1::
8.2 .3: :3 038 a 89:3: m .3
8a. 3 .55.. 2.3.
.098 . 01.2: 5.25.95 .0
cod. no .995. o 03..
8.8 .2: 8.33325 £2:
2 .
8.; .09. - EAS¥J=OSNQ=Iaﬁﬂ 3 can.
8.2 3.
8a. 68... as.
8.8 03...: 3.33.9.5 3 .8.
An . n2.
8.... .55..» a §W=~ﬂ=§d
8.2
8N. .«nﬁ A000... 2—ho-
860 o 2.... 93.35325 3 .2
$Ili.-ll|.ll
as: u: on
coiuw 0033. 0.”:
Hanna“ no» .360 Iduumwnnm

u wvzlmao

umuzlmomu

35-83

uuwH—cuww

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1)R*0I1ﬂ(1Al.lESEZ(H‘LY

KEY TO TABLE 6

 

A) EPA. operational data on wind
8) Center for Engineering and Space Research at University of Wisconsin
C) Japanese Meteorological Agency, operational data on wind
D) European Space Agency, operational data on wind
8) Wind data. French Laboratory of Dynamic Meteorology
F) Wind data, West German Aerospace Institute
1) GEDS-East and west take in range l75°Ee90°H
2) The Japanese Meteorological Agency also receives data on ocean surface temper-
ature
3) Data for 1800 GMT are sometimes processed
4) During the period of failure of the 1R sensor only one series of data per day
5) Only during period 1 Hay-8 August 1979
6) Only during periods 17-18 January, l-lO February and 16 Hay-30 June
7) Only during period 5 January-5 March
Table 7
Comparison of "Navaid" System and Ordinary Aerological Soundings
Standard deviations
Ship Position of ship Comparison All It: At min A B C D
station
"Pariso" Vancouver "Quadra" 45 29 73 1.5 17 3.7
research
ship
"Vilex" Singapore 68694 17 52 27 1.3 5 5.7
"TTRS-9" Hankow 59287 57 l 89 2.0 7 2.3
"Spratley" Sydney 96767 35 0 36 1.6 26 2.2

A) altitude, m
B) temperature, °C
C) humidity, X

D) wind, m/sec

 

Table 8

Modified Submasses of Level IIb FGGE Data

Submass and type of data Number of magnetic tapes Number of days/tapes

All data except for satellite
soundings and radiation 61 6
1. Vertical profiles of meteorolog-
ical elements (including limb

scanning data) 19 20
2. Horizontal sounding data (air-
craft, constant-level balloons, etc.) 7 60
3. Characteristics of land surface 25 15
A. Sea data (ships, buoys, etc. including
sea surface temperature from satellite data) 13 30
166

FOR‘OFFNJAL,USE(N'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

numerical forecasts with the additional use of buoy data. The regional prognostic
centers of the southern states of Australia could more reliably identify the fea-
tures of weather-forming systems over the oceans situated to the south of the Aus-
tralian continent, which ensured a considerable improvement in regional forecasts.
It became clear, in particular. that many of the high-latitude cyclones are consid-
erably more intense and westerly transport is stronger than was assumed earlier.

Information from drifting buoys has already revealed some significant gaps in modern
concepts concerning climate in the southern hemisphere. A possible contribution of
this information to increasing the reliability of data on climate involves the fol-
lowing directions: 1) structure of the field of ocean surface temperature; 2) sur-
face currents; 3) surface pressure field; 4) wind field at the surface (determined
both from the pressure field and from the drift of buoys); 5) parameters of the

free atmosphere, reconstructed on the basis of the surface pressure field (geopo-
tentiai, thermal wind); 6) evaluations of humidity, cloud cover and other charac-
teristics.

A major contribution to the mass of FGGE data was made by observations within the
framework of the program of the system of ships for wind observations in the trop-
ics. More than 60 ships (Table 1) carried out 3,004 (SOP-1) and 3,938 (SOP-2)
soundings of wind, temperature, humidity and pressure. As noted by B. Yatila (HMO),
more than half of the entire volume of wind observational data was obtained using

a method based on the tracking of radiosondes using the existing international navi—
gation system "Omega," which is intended for the servicing of ships and aircraft.
The principle for functioning of this system involves the use of a coordinate sys-
tem for the geographic tie-in of radiosondes consisting of the hyperbolic isolines
of the phase difference of two radio transmitters: A and 3 (these isolines are geo-
graphically stationary). Data for a third transmitter are used in generating the
isolines A and C. The presence of two pairs of stations in the "Omega" system en-
sures a precise determination of the position of a point on a plane. The rising
radiosonde receives and transmits signals of the transmitter in the Wheega" sys-
tem to a corresponding shipboard or land station where this information is process-
ed for the purpose of tracking the horizontal coordinates of the radiosonde, whose
altitude is determined from measurements of the temperature and pressure values.
Applicable to the tasks of the 7665 program this method has been given the name
“Navaid” sounding system.

The international comparisons of the "Navaid" system and ordinary aerological sound-
ings revealed the standard deviations given in Table 7. Here AR and At are the
spatial and temporal discrepancies of soundings (the first could favor an apprec-
iable increase in the standard deviation).

The accuracy in wind determination is dependent on the quality of transmitter sig-
nals in the "Omega" system. If this quality is good, averaging of the signals over
a time of about one minute is adequate for ensuring an accuracy of about 2 m/sec.

in the case of a lower quality it is necessary to increase the averaging interval.
Statistical data for the F605 period indicate that for 98.51 of the soundings the

wind velocity standard deviation was less than 1.6 m/sec. In 751 of the cases the

averaging time interval corresponded to a thickness of the layer equal to 1,100 m

or less. In 902 of the cases the thickness of the layer was less than 1,600 m.

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R10FFKJAL.USE(HVLY

ture, humidity and wind in the tropical zones of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian
Oceans. During SOP-1 a total of 153 constant-level balloons were launched from
Easter and Canton Islands. The duration of functioning of 381 of the balloons was
less than 10 days; more than half the balloons drifted in the southern hemisphere.
A total of 160 balloons were launched during SOP-2 (launchings were also made from
the Marianas); once again a considerable number drifted in the southern hemisphere.

17 aircraft.

The problem of processing and analyzing the gigantic volume of FOG! data is of great
importance. In this connection an American data processing team (H. McGovern) pre-
pared and is carrying out an P668 program for modifying the structure and compress-
ion of the level-11b data mass, the intention being to make them more convenient
for the use of users interested in an analysis of only a small part (or a combina-
tion of different parts) of the entire data mass. The modification of the structure
involves the formation of a chronological sequence of the most important level-11b
data, which makes it more convenient to use data in numerical modeling. However,
for many users it is better to have data grouped by observational subsystems and
definite geographical regions. In accordance with these requirements, the data mass
will consist of four submasses at level-11b containing all the results of observa-
tions, ekcept satellite sounding data and outgoing radiation data for a cloudless
sky (Table 8). The forming of this data mass, accomplished in cooperation with the
United State Climate Center, should be completed in the autumn of 1980. The data
will be stored in World Data Center A. Both the complete and modified data masses
are global. Since even the use of the modified data mass can be difficult for some
users, and also for the purposes of excluding parallelism between the data process-

ing team and the National Climate Center, the possibility of a corresponding servic-
ing of users is being considered.

By the time of beginning of the FCC! program it was clear that it was necessary to
monitor the quality of satellite sounding data, but it was already too late to in-
troduce a correction into the method for operational processing of data. Accord-
ingly, provision is made for subsequent "editing" of all data for American satel-
lites with respect to temperature and wind. This was begun in late 1979. By late
1981 the reworking of data for both SOP should be completed. Its objective is not
the rejection of data, but an evaluation of their quality (for example, "reliable,"
"probably reliable," "probably unreliable," "unreliable"). The criteria for eval-

uation of the quality of the data are spatial-temporal consistency, correspondence
to other data and synoptic consistency.
POI OHIO“. USE ONLY

similar to the grid of a polar stereographic projection having an interval of
381 km. A finer grid is used for the regions of. the Gulf Stream and Mediterran-
ean Sea. In the atmosphere 11 levels (layer 100—925 gPa) have been adopted; the
wind is also examined in a boundary layer reduced to a height of 19.5 m. For the
ocean temperature is determined at the surface and at depths of 30, 60, 90, 120,
180, 260 and 360 m. and also depth of the mixing layer, temperature at the ther-
mocline level and thermocline tendency. In addition, infatuation: on the field of
waves (direction. period and height) is included. The compilation of the entire
data mass should be completed by late 1980.

Very interesting work on evaluating the informational contribution of data from
satellite remote sounding to numerical weather forecasting has been done by
specialists of the European Intermediate-Range Forecasting Center (L. Bengtsson
and P. Kalberg). The global data mass obtained as a result of implementation of
the F663 program is especially important for an analysis of weather-forming pro-
cesses in the tropics and in the southern hemisphere. Even an initial analysis
has revealed that general circulation of the atmosphere in 1979 was considerably
more intense than in the preceding years. This can be attributed only in part to
the usual climatological variability. Without question, a major contribution was
rude by the unique completeness of observations, especially the data from the
network of sea buoys, which made possible the detection of intensive weather-
forming systems of lesser scales and also synoptic analysis in earlier uncovered
regions. An examination of the data revealed an unexpectedly strong variability
of the tropical atmosphere at synoptic scales, intensive exchange of momentum,
heat and moisture at least in some regions of the equatorial zone. These results
confirm the soundness of the conclusions drawn during recent years from malerical
modeling, especially the conclusion that the exclusion of the southern hemisphere
leads to a considerable deterioration of the reliability of a forecast of super-
long waves in the northern hemisphere.

The new PGGB observational systems differ fundamentally from those existing
earlier in that almost all the observational data are asynoptic and nonuniformly
distributed in three-dimensional space. Information on the fields of mass and
wind proves to be independent and frequently inconsistent in space and time. The
new observational systems characterize several different scales of general cir-
culation of the atmosphere and spatial correlation of errors in both horizontal
and vertical directions is typical for some of them. All this determines the fun-
damentally great importance of use of improved methods of four—dimensional assim—
ilation. as well as models of general circulation of the atmosphere with a high
resolution capable of correct description of the principal physical processes at
global scales.

There has been discussion of the results of numerical forecasts obtained in such
a way that a forecast for a different time in advance is computed with the ex-
clusion of certain data (and the complete data mass) for evaluating the informa-
tional contribution of different components of the observational system. The
basis for the complete data mass was level-IlIb FGGE data prepared by the Euro-
pean Intermediate—Range Forecasting Center (global fields of meteorological e1-
enents interpolated at a point in a regular grid for three months for four times
a day). Methods for assimilation. prediction and monitoring the quality of data
have been described in detail.

1107

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

The assimilation method developed at the European Intermediate-Range Forecasting
Center is based on geostrophic balancing of the covariations of forecasting errors
for geopotential and wind. A lS-level model of the atmosphere (lo-1000 gPa) with

a grid having an interval of l.875° in latitude (longitude) is used.

The checking of the quality of objective analysis is accomplished in three stages:
1) an initial ”estimated evaluation; 2) a comparison with near-lying observational
data: 3) a comparison with the results of the preliminary analysis. The great dis-
crepancies between the results of IR and microwave thermal sounding (up to 10°C)

in the initial stage caused the rejection of use of microwave data, but after 10

February these data began to be taken into account with the exception of all data
from microwave sounding: over the land, in the tropical zone (latitudes less than
20°) or regions of the ocean with heavy precipitation. With respect to the space

observation system it is assumed that it will consist of the following components:
1) pressure measurements at the level of the underlying surface; 2) wind observa-
tions in the free atmosphere (constant-level balloons and aircraft); 3) satellite

thermal sounding; 4) the wind field, reconstructed on the basis of the movement
of clouds.

The results of numerical experiments indicate a considerable informational contrib-
ution of the space observational system used during the F063 period. Even with ex-
clusion of all the data from usual observations of the surface network, except for
data on pressure at the level of the underlying surface, the remaining data are
capable of ensuring information on the initial fields of meteorological elements
which is adequate for predictions of a satisfactory quality for several days in
advance for the entire earth. It is important that the data from the space observ-
ation system with surprising reliability reveal the macroscale characteristics of
atmospheric energy. Nevertheless. it is unquestionable that radiosonde observa-
tions considerably improve the quality of forecasting for the northern hemisphere
and substantially increase the useful advance time of the forecast.

The results indicate that the exchange between hemispheres was more intensive than
expected. There is every basis for assuming that the tropics can exert an influ-
ence on processes in the middle and high latitudes more rapidly and more signif-
icsntly than was assumed earlier. It therefore follows that it is categorically
necessary to make regular observations in the tropics in order to ensure a fore-
cast for 4-5 days and in investigations of climate.

In the planning of a global observation system ensuring the needs of weather fore-
casting and the study of climate it is important to take the following circum-
stances into account: first, numerical experiments have demonstrated the funda-
mentally great importance of satellite observations of the wind field in the trop-
ics, which is evidence of the need for achieving the highest possible accuracy in
reconstructing fields (the main difficulty in processing PUG! data was the rela-
tively low accuracy in vertical tie-in of wind fields); second, further efforts on
improvement in methods for reconstructing the vertical temperature profile and
four-dimensional assimilation are extremely important; third, a global system

constructed on a combination of data from ordinary and satellite observations is
important.

In conclusion it must be emphasized that the COSPAR symposium on P008 results re-
vealed success (on the whole) in implementation of the P663 observational program.
It revealed the great efforts which now must be applied for the processing and an-
alysis of the global mass of data and made clear the prospects for further devel-
opment of the global system of meteorological observations.

148
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOI’OFFﬂﬂAl.USE(NHLY

REVIEW OF MONOGRAPH BY I. F. KARASEV: 'RIVER HYDROHBTRY AND INVENTORYING 0F HATER
RESOURCES' (LENINGRAD, GIDROHETEDIZDAT, 1980)

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 p 122

[Review by N. B. Baryshnikov. doctor of geographical sciences]

[Text] A monograph by I. P. Karasev, entitled RECHNAYA GIDROHETRIYA I UCHET VODNYKR
RESURSOV (River Hydrometry and Inventorying of Hater Resources), with a volume of
about 20 printer's sheets. prepared by the Gidrometeoizdat, has now been published.

In presenting different aspects of hydrometry. its author as a rule avoids a repet-
ition of well-known subject matter and emphasizes the poorly studied points or
stresses the theoretical validation of the methodological recommendations used in
practical work.

In the monograph the author devotes much attention to evaluation of the accuracy
in measuring elements of the water regime. employing for this purpose both his own
findings and the methods used in related disciplines, especially in meteorology.
In the book more than a little importance is also placed on problems involved in
optimization of observations, new measurement methods and instruments which can be
used in the hydrological network of different departments.

The book consists of an introduction. nine chapters and a bibliography of Soviet and
foreign literature which includes about 600 items.

The introduction gives a concise outline of the development of the system for hydro-
metric observations in our country and briefly summarizes the book. There is a dia-
gram which illustrates the dynamics of development of the number of hydrological
posts in the Soviet Union. United States and Canada (p a).

Chapter 1 is evidently fundamental in the book. Each of its sections is devoted to
a problem which is independent and important for hydrometry. After an exposition of
a list of standard observations made at various stations and posts of the Hydro-
meteorological Service network. the author proceeds to an analysis of the accuracy
of observations. In presenting his theme he classifies all measurement errors as
random and systematic and cites criteria for determining their limiting values.

In this same chapter he examines some aspects of mathematical statistics as ap-
plicable to a description of hydrological fields on the basis of data from discrete
measurements. Subsequent sections are devoted to the principles of optimization of
observations and the possibilities of their use in optimizing the layout of the

169

FOR 05-1-10“. USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USEZONLY

network of points for making observations of hydrological parameters. Without giv-
ing a detailed analysis of this section, it must be noted that the principles for
formulation of the problem are correct and entirely timely.

Next the author sets forth the principal aspects of the method and the techniques
for measuring the principal elements of the water regime: water levels (Chapter 2),
water sections and channel relief (Chapter 3), current velocities in river channels
and on river floodplains (Chapter 4) and water discharges (Chapter 5).

Chapters 6 and 7 are devoted to the method for determining runoff as the problem of
constructing a continuous hydrograph on the basis of data from discrete measurements
of water discharge. The author establishes the difference between and the relative
order of operational and regime determination of runoff and proposes mathematical
models for this purpose which have a measurement-hydraulic basis. In describing
methods for the extrapolation of measured discharges he gives an original interpret-
ation of the "kinematic wave" equation. A scale of roughness coefficients for river
channels and floodplains proposed by the author is of great interest. It is based

on data in the literature which have been systematized with allowance for possible
errors in evaluating hydraulic resistance.

Chapter 8 is devoted to the hydrometric aspects of inventorying and use of water
resources. It gives the scientific-methodological principles for a national inven-
tory of waters and the corresponding methodological aspects are given in the chapter
which follows. This chapter takes note of the interesting (although not put to prac-
tical use) structure of a checking-calibration system which is intended for the
metrological support of hydrological observations.

The content of the monograph is based on investigations of recent years. The studies
of both Soviet and foreign authors are fully taken into account. as is indicated by
the cxtcsive bibliography of exploited literature.

The results of the methodological investigations carried out at the State Hydrolog-
ical Institute have been reflected in the hydrological publications INSTRUCTIONS
FOR HYDROHETEOROLOGICAL STATIONS AND POSTS. The validation of these highly import-
ant methodological documents, presented in the monograph, will ensure the effective
use of the instructions which they contain in the optimizing of observations on
rivers.

Unfortunately, the monograph contains regrettable misprints and inaccuracies which
must be eliminated with more careful editing of the second edition.

This book by I. F. Karasev on the whole is a very timely publication. The debatable
nature cf 3 number of the author's points of view favors the further progress of
hydrometry. It is already used for teaching purposes at hydrometeorological insti-
tutes and universities in the training of hydrological engineers and will become a
valuable aid for specialists working in the system of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring and other departments.

A more detailed analysis of all the points in the monograph, especially the debat-
able points, will require considerable time and evidently will be repeatedly re-
viewed by specialists.

150

INDR 0F?1(1Al.l£ﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIXTIETH BIRTHDAY 0F NATAL'YA LEONT'YEVNA BYZOVA
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 p 123

[Article by specialists of the Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

 

Natal'ya Leont'yevna Byzova, a well—known scientist in the field of the physics of
the atmospheric boundary layer, on 19 March 1981 marked her 60th birthday and the
35th anniversary of her scientific and public activity.

t**

The scientific research work of N. L. Byzova began in the Black Sea Division of the

Marine Hydrophysical Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, in 1946, after graduation
from the Physics Faculty of Moscow State University. She successfully defended her

candidate's dissertation in 1953.

Between 1957 and the present time N. L. Byzova has worked at the Institute of Ex-

perimental Meteorology of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environ—
mental Monitoring (inthe past an affiliate of the Institute of Applied Geophysics),
where she soon advanced into the ranks of the leading specialists. Since 1968 she
has headed the Scientific Division of Physics of the Atmospheric Boundary Layer.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJAI.USEZONLN

Under the direction of N. L. Byzova a major research group was formed at the Inst-
itute of Experimental Meteorology whose work on study of turbulence in the atmo-
spheric boundary layer and diffusion of impurities in the atmosphere, carried out
using a 300-m meteorological mast, received universal recognition.

The field of scientific interests of N. L. Byzova was closely related to the timely
problem of monitoring contamination of the air medium. ﬂatal'ya Leont'yevna invest-
ed much work and creative initiative in the development of studies for investiga-
tion of the diffusion of impurities in the atmosphere. Under her direction and with
her direct participation these investigations were carried out over a number of
years. The results of many years of scientific investigations were generalized in
the doctoral dissertation of N. L. Byzova in 1973. She is the author of almost 100
scientific studies, including the monograph RASSBYANIYE PRIHESI V POCRANICHNDH SLOYE
ATMOSFERY (Scattering of an Impurity in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer).

Natal'ya Leont'yevna devotes much attention to the editing and review of scientific
studies, the direction of young specialists and graduate students. She is always
ready to come to assistance and generously shares her rich experience and knowledge.

N. L. Byzova has repeatedly represented Soviet meteorological science at inter-
national conferences and meetings.

The scientific research work of Natal'ya Leont'yevna is successfully combined with
public activity. She is a permanent lecturer of the "Znaniye" ("Knowledge") Society
and is a propagandist in the political education network.

For her self-sacrificing work and successes in the development of meteorology N. L.
Byzova has been awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labor, the anniversary medal

"For Illustrious Work in Commemoration of the Hundredth Anniversary of the Birth of
V. I. Lenin" and the Honorary Lenin Diploma.

ln congratulating Natal'ya Leont'yevna on her noteworthy anniversary, we wish her
good health. creative successes and joy in life.

152

FOR1DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢MVLY

EVENTS AT THE USSR STATE COMMITTEE ON HYDROHETEOROLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Moscow HBTEORDLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 123-124

[Article by V. N. Zakharov]

[Text] An expanded session of the Board of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring was held on 23 March 1981 at the Central House
of Writers.

The Chairman of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitor-
ing, Yu. A. Israel, Corresponding Member USSR Academy of Sciences, presented a re-
port at the session entitled ”Results of the Work of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring During the Tenth Five-Tear Plan and the
Tasks of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan Following From the Resolutions of the 26th
CPSU Congress, the Positions and Conclusions of the Report of Comrade L. I. Brezhé
nev, General Secretary of the Central Committee CPSU, at the Congress."

In the introductory part of his report Yu. A. Izrael stated that the session of the
Board was taking place in an atnosphere of political and work ascendancy as a re-
sult of the recently transpiring 26th CPSU Congress. '

The speaker stated that the large body of personnel of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring unanimously approves the resolutions of

the 26th CPSU Congress, the positions and tasks set forth in the report of Comrade
L. I. Brezhnev. and accepts them as fixed goals.

In discussing the hydrometeorological support of the national economy, the speaker
noted that in three of five years of the report period there were unfavorable hy-
drometeorological conditions. In this section he mentioned the great work which
was done by the USSR Hydrometeorological Center, the Institute of Applied Geophys-
ics, the Estonian Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service and the Central
Volga Hydrometeorological Observatory in the hydrometeorological support of the 22d
Olympic Games. The probable success of short-range weather forecasts and warnings
of the occurrence of dangerous phenomena was increased by 1-32. There was an in-
crease in the area of agricultural crops protected against hailfalls and at the
present time it is 6.0 million hectares. At the same time, the report also mention-
ed a number of shortcomings in work on the hydrometeorologicsl support of the

national economy.

At the present time the scientific research and experimental design work at the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology is being carried on by 21 scientific research
institutes and the Central Design Bureau of Hydrometeorological Instrument Making.

153

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plan for scientific research and experimental design work for 1976-1980 for
the most part has been carried out and a number of results of great scientific

and practical importance have been obtained. It was possible to achieve new re-
sults in the improvement of methods for making weather forecasts for short and
intermediate advance times. Much work was carried out in the field of agrometeor-
ological and hydrological forecasts. Investigations were made in the field of for-
mulating a theory of climate and developing methods for the prediction of climate.
Complex predictions of the state of the environment were developed, as well as
methods for computing different hydrological characteristics. Scientific investi-
gations were made for developing new and improving existing methods for the arti-
ficial modification of meteorological processes. Major investigations of the world
ocean and investigations in the Arctic and in Antarctica were carried out, etc.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan work will be carried out on five programs approv—
ed by the State Committee on Science and Technology. USSR Gosplan and USSR Academy
of Sciences. for which the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring is the key department, and also a number of other programs for which

the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring will be a co-
administrator. In addition, at the present time eight purposeful complex programs
have been deve10ped by the State Comittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring along the lines of its activity in which there is reflection of both
scientific and production aspects.

The speaker also discussed existing shortcomings in the organization and implement-
ation of scientific research.

The following problems were also discussed: study and monitoring of environmental
contamination; development of a national system for observations and monitoring of
the state of the environment and climate: international cooperation; administrative
activity and material-financial support; work with personnel; work conditions and
work safety; socialist competition.

In conclusion the speaker expressed the assurance that the 100,000 workers of the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring will honorably
cope with the tasks assigned them.

Participating in discussions of the report were the heads of the Administrations of
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. directors of institutes and represent-
atives of the central headquarters of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring and the Central Committee of the Trade Union of Aviation
Workers.

The assemblage unanimously adopted a petition to the Central Committee CPSU. Pre-
sidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet. USSR Council of Ministers and Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee CPSU, Chairman of the Presid-
ium USSR Supreme Soviet.

The session was attended by the Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers,
Comrade Z. N. Nuriyev. responsible workers of the Central Committee CPSU, and also

the USSR Gosplan. USSR State Committee on Science and Technology. USSR Academy of
Sciences, other ministries and departments.

15h

FKNICNWHCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONFERENCES, MEETINGS ARD SEMINARS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 126-128

[Article by Yu. G. Slatinskiy and N. A. Zaytseva]

[Text] A regular session of the basin section "Indian Ocean and Southern Seas" of
the Scientific Council on the Problem "Study of the Oceans and Seas and Use of

Their Resources" of the USSR State Committee on Science and Technology was held dur-
ing the period 20-21 November 1980 at Sevastopol'. The session was attended by 67
persons from 15 scientific research, planning and other organizations whose activ-
ity is related to the sea. From the State Committee on Hydrometeorology the session
was attended by representatives of the Arctic, Antarctic and Marine Administration,
the Odessa and Sevastopol' Divisions of the State Oceanographic Institute. A total
of 28 scientific reports were presented. These summarized the results of studies by
members of the basin section in the field of hydrology. hydrochemistry and hydrobiol-
ogy of the Black and Mediterranean Seas and the Indian Ocean.

In discussing the preliminary results of oceanographic investigations in the Indian
Ocean under the "Kiprio" project, V. A. Kosnyrev (Marine Bydrophysical Institute)
noted that in a large-scale survey in the western part of the ocean it was possible
to discover more than 10 weak eddy formations. Their lifetime was approximately

2-5 times less than in the Atlantic; on the other hand, the velocity of movement was
rather great, up to 9 miles per day. The low eddy activity in combination with the
pronounced stratification of water masses (vertically) was also tied in to the re-
duced background of biological productivity in the ocean.

L. A. Koveshnikov (Marine ﬂydrophysical Institute) reported on the results of study
of the thermohaline structure of waters in the equatorial zone of the Indian Ocean
during the period of the sunner monsoon. The investigations were made in three poly-
gons situated in different parts of the ocean. The penetration of aubantarctic waters
into the northern hemisphere to 2°N was noted. A frontal zone with great horizontal
salinity gradients, separating the waters of the Arabian Sea from the remaining

part of the ocean, was detected.

V. A. Bryantsev (Sea of Azov and Black Sea Scientific Research Institute of Fishing

and Oceanography) told about the search for the most productive zones in the Indian
Ocean. It is noted that the horizontal advection of antarctic waters, favoring the

inflow of biogenous substances, is observed only to the south of 4008. In the re-
maining part of the ocean a constant inflow of biogenoua substances occurs only in
zones of upwelling on the continental shelf and in zones of current divergence.

155

F08¢0¥FKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. I. Hel'nik (Institute of Geological Sciences, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences)
reported on the results of investigations of bottom deposits in the northern part
of the ocean. It was possible to make a more precise determination of the compo-
sition and conditions of formation of bedrock and the most recent deposits and es-

tablish the dependence of the distribution of ferromanganese nodules on the nature
of bottom relief and tectonic conditions.

Several reports were devoted to the fish resources of the ocean. E. Z. Samyshev
(Sea of Azov and Black Sea Scientific Research Institute of Fishing and Oceano-
graphy) reported on investigations of the biological productivity of waters in
the open part of the Arabian Sea. L. V. Kuz‘menko, G. V. Barinov and A. D. Gor-
dina (Institute of Biology of the Southern Seas) discussed some problems involved

in study of primary production and ichthyoplankton in the equatorial zone of the
ocean.

I. M. Ovchinnikov (Southern Division, Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sci-
ences) in his report analyzed the results and prospects for study of the Mediter-
ranean Sea basin during the Tenth Five-Year Plan. A number of major expeditions
were carried out with the occupation of about 2,500 deep-water stations. A partic-
ularly great volume of work was carried out in the winter of 1977 when in a syn-
chronous survey it was possible to cover virtually the entire surface of the Med-
iterranean Sea. The research materials were used in publishing the monograph en-
titled GIDROLOGIYA SEEDZEHNOGO HORYA (Hydrology of the Mediterranean Sea) and
several specialized collections of articles, an atlas of currents in the Mediter-
ranean Sea is being prepared for publication and work has developed for creating a
specialized data bank which already includes more than 21,000 stations.

V. A. Zhorov (Marine Hydrophysical Institute) reported on the results of investi-
gations in the basin of the Black Sea under the "SKOICh" project. A detailed study
was made of the process of formation of deep waters and it was possible to trace
the propagation of the highly saline waters of the Sea of Marmara in the Bosphorus
region. On the basis of a great volume of experimental data it was possible to con-
struct seasonal charts of the quasistationary currents. A number of mathematical
models were usedin computing possible changes in physical fields and the intensity
of vertical exchange in connection with the withdrawal of part of the river run-
off. A generalization of data on the spatial-temporal variability of the oxygen
and hydrogen sulfide fields was initiated. The research data were used in publish-
ing two specialized collections of articles.

V. V. Belyavskaya and L. F. Yermakova (Sevastopol' Division of the State Oceano-
graphic Institute) reported on the results of hydrochemical and hydrobiological
investigations carried out in the open sea and individual regions of the coastal
zone. During the past five-year period more than 60 expeditions were carried out
during which 5,600 abyssal stations were occupied. A detailed study was made of
the statistical characteristics of the hydrogen sulfide fields. Regions of anomal-
ies in the salinity field were detected and long-term data on the content of dis-
solved oxygen were generalized. Intensive studies were made for optimizing the
network of stations in the open sea and choice of the most representative regions
of observations. Work proceeded on the development of methods for determining some
trace elements in sea water and work was initiated on the generalization of long-
term data on the hydrochemical regime of the mouth regions of rivers.

156

FOR OFFICJAI.USEioNlY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I. F. Gertman (Sevastopol' Division, State Oceanographic Institute) gave a de—
tailed discussion of some problems involved in the forming of a regional bank

of deep—water hydrological information for the basin of the Black Sea and Sea of
Azov. It is noted in the report that during the last two decades about 60,000
abyssal stations have been accumulated in the archives of where of the basin
section. In order to make effective use of information in the interests of the
national economy a centralized data mass on technical carriers has been created
and a set of programs is being developed in order to ensure the spatial-temporal
sorting and statistical processing of data. All the mathaatical support of the
bank was prepared in ALGOL-60 language. The materials in the bank have already
been used in computing the nean long-term monthly and seasonal norms for the tem-
perature and salinity fields in the Black Sea, evaluation of their variability and
analysis of the mean annual values of the heat and salt supplies in the sea and
the role of the anthropogenic factor in their changes.

A resolution which was adopted defined a number of leading tasks for the further
development of investigations in the basin of the southern seas and the Indian
Ocean. In particular, it was reconnended that further work on study of the Indian
Ocean be tied in with the specific nultisided programs of the USSR Fish Industry
Ministry ("Kril'," "Kal'mar" and others). It was deemed desirable that work be
continued on the multisided study of the Mediterranean Sea under both departmental
and international programs. In the Black Sea it is recommended that work be broad-
ened in the western part and in the region near the Bosphorus. Plans call for con-
centrating efforts on clarification of the factors responsible for freeze—ups in
the northwestern part of the sea.

The participants in the session approved the work of the Sevastopol' Division of
the State Oceanographic Institute on the organization of a regional bank of hydro-
meteorological information. It was recomended that all institutes in the basin
cooperate in this work in order to bring about the maximal: broadening of the data
base. The resolution called on the State Comittee on Hydrometeorology to assign
to the Sevastopol' Division of the State Oceanographic Institute the functions of
a regional center for oceanographic information for the Black Sea and the Sea of
Azov.

Yu. G. Slatinskiy

A scheduled international symposium on radiation was held during the period 10-15
August 1980. It was organized by the Radiation Comission of the International
Association of Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics with the support of the mo,
CJSPAR and the American Meteorological Society (such symposia are usually called
each four years). The symposium was held at the University of Colorado (Fort Col-
lins, Colorado) with the participation of 3100 representatives from 26 countries.
The USSR delegation consisted of four persons.

The symposium program included six sessions devoted to the principal directions
in study of atmospheric optics and radiation:
1 -- radiation in the middle atmosphere;

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

3 -- atmospheric optics and spectroscopy;

4 - radiation and modeling of climate and weather and forecasting;
5 -- the earth's radiation balance;

measurement laboratories. In addition to oral presentations the program included
stand sessions. A total of about 210 reports were read and presented at the stands.

Session 1 was devoted to the theory of and observations of the interaction between
radiation and dynamic factors, radiation and composition of the stratosphere and
the above-lying layers. 6. London and H. H. Barson (United States) examined the
absorption of UV and visible solar radiation by atmospheric ozone and also minor
gases (C02 and H20). A number of reports were devoted to measurements from air-
craft and satellites: UV radiation (in reports of American specialists from Vir-
ginia) and the parameters of stratospheric aerosol (Boulder, California). NASA is
carrying out a program for investigation of the climatic effects of aerosol from
satellites and aircraft. Several reports gave the preliminary results. Specialists

middle latitudes, carried out using balloons. Specialists from Boulder (United
States) presented reports devoted to the results of the LIHS experiment (Limb IR
Stratosphere Monitor , carried out on the NIHBUS-7 artificial earth satellite.

Using remote methods it is possible to reconstruct the temperature and pressure
fields, profile and total content of ozone. 002 and N02 (the reports were accom-
panied by profiles of these parameters, and also maps). 6. 0hring and B. ﬂee-an
(Israel) compared several methods for determining the thermal wind on the basis of
satellite radiation measurements. L. H. HacHillin (United States) proposed an im-
proved operational technique for excluding cloud effects from temperature sound-
ing from satellites, based on a comparative analysis of radiation from cloudy and
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cloudless sectors. Several reports by American specialists gave the results of
radiometric measurements carried out from aircraft during a number of FGGB exper-
iments, including during MONEX. These experiments were carried out for the purpose
of perfecting methods for remote sounding, as well as for the correction of satel-
lite data. A number of reports were presented on cloud cover: determination of the
optical thicknesses of clouds, the upper boundaries of clouds, water content in
clouds and the temperature profiles in the cloudy atmosphere.

At session 3 there was a discussion of new observations and theories related to
lidar and other methods for remote sounding and also the fine structure of spec-
tral absorption properties of different components of atmospheric composition. Re-
ports were presented which were devoted to study of the fine structure of spectra
of the atmosphere and contaminating impurities, investigations of atmospheric aero-
sol, opticsl properties of thin clouds of the C1 type, radiation transfer in haze
layers, and also Sahara dust and its influence on climate, measurements of the in-
tensity of sky glow at the zenith, etc. The principal methods are: photometry,
spectrometry, aureole measurements, lidars, etc.

At session 4 there was a discussion of the types and contribution of different radi-
ation components to numerical models. A large number of reports was devoted to an
examination of cloud-climate relationships; in different numerical models estimates
are made of the energy contribution of cloud cover (Australia, United States, ls-
rael); the possibilities of parameterization of radiation transfer processes ap-
plicable to prediction models (Heat Germany, England, United States) are examined;
estimates are made of the sensitivity of climate to changes in the solar constant
(United States), the C02 content, etc. A report by R. Venerald and S. Manabe (United
States) demonstrated the possibility of reconstructing the cloud cover using a

model of global general circulation of the atmosphere. The consequences of the
effect of anthropogenic factors on changes in atmospheric transparency, albedo of
urban and rural regions, etc. are discussed. A report by 0. Tenn and J. Pollack
(United States) gave an evaluation of the greenhouse effect of C02 in the example

of the Venusian atmosphere. A report by E. Rashke, et al. (Heat Germany) described
an adaptive and economical two-flow radiation model intended for use in models of
general circulation and in prognostic models.

Session 5 included the results of measurements and special computations of the radi-
ation balance of the earth-atmosphere system at all scales. Aboard several satel-
lites ("TIROS-N", NOAA—F, NCAA-G, "NIHBUS—6 and —7") a complex experiment was or-
ganized for the first time for determining the earth's radiation balance; a number
of reports gave preliminary results. T. Vonder-Haar (United States) examined the
possibilities of an investigation of climate based on satellite measurements of the
annual cycle of the earth's radiation balance. Radiation data from the GEOS satel-
lite afford a possibility fer investigating the temporal and spatial variability of
the cloud cover. The problems of calibration of satellite radiometers are discussed
separately. The reports of American specialists describe the technique for radia-
tion measurements made using satellite wide-angle radiometers.

The reports in session 6 examined experimental and theoretical data on cloud albedo,
radiation transfer in clouds, radiation properties of clouds of different forms.

light scattering and attenuation in clouds. A series of reports was devoted to the
study of cirrus clouds, their optical properties, liquid-water content, distribution

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<0FFNJAI.USE<ONLY

of crystals in clouds and their rule in climate. Several American reports examined
the possibility of remote determination of the index of aerosol absorption, the in-
tensity and degree of polarization, etc. Measurements of solar UV radiation and its
attenuation by clouds and haze were discussed. Data were obtained on the spectral
attenuation ofthc solar flux by ozone, Rayleigh scattering and aerosol and the de—
pendence of the optical density of aerosolon wavelength. T. Mackey, et a1. (United
States) carried out a laboratory and field checking of the Monte Carlo model on the
basis of scattering in restricted clouds. R. Welch and U. Zdunkowsky (West Germany)
computed a series of radiation characteristics of the fields of cumulus clouds.

N. Grassy, et al. (West Germany), also by computations, examined radiation transfer
in vertically inhomogeneous multicomponent clouds in comparison with restricted
clouds. R. Ellingson and E. Kolchinsky (Maryland) carried out computations of IR
heating in an atmosphere with cumulus clouds and constructed diagrams of the rate
of heating and cooling separately for the layer under the cloud and for the tropo-
sphere (0-15 km) with clouds in dependence on the quantity of clouds and their thick-
nesa.

The symposium defined the most timely modern directions in the study of radiation.
Studies related to the formulation of numerous experiments on artificial earth sat-
ellites are being vigorously pursued. In these experiments measurements are made

of the components of the radiation balance, temperature of the underlying surface
and air density; the vertical profiles of temperature. ozone and water vapor are
reconstructed; components of atmospheric composition at great altitudes are deter—
mined. In addition to satellites, abroad extensive use is being made of aircraft
and complex experiments are being organized with the simultaneous participation of
satellites and aircraft. During recent years considerable successes have been at-
tained in investigations of aerosols; data have been obtained on the global distrib-
ution. chemical composition, and optical properties of aerosols, etc. In the field
of investigation of the interaction between radiation and clouds increased atten-
tion has been given to high clouds and their role in climate. The results of radi-
ation-dynamic investigations have clarified the role of radiation in the formation
of climate. Different parameterization schemes have been created, intended for in-
cluding radiation in a model of circulation and climate. ways to use radiation in
forecasting are being developed.

160

FNJR OWWHCJAI.I£5EZ(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow HETmROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Jun 81 p 128
[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Text] It is reported in the NEH SCIENTIST, Vol 89, No 1237, 1981 that the United
States Council on Environmental Quality has presented the government with its 11th
annual report containing a prediction of the state of the environment in the next
few decades.

Within the United States, in addition to some indications of improvement in the
state of the atmosphere and waters, there are negative tendencies. For example,
during recent years it was necessary to ban the use of a large number of water
sources for drinking purposes because they were contaminated by toxic substances.
The most common among these were benzene, carbon tetrachloride, perchloroethylane
and vinyl chloride.

The United States Environmental Protection Agency pointed out that contamination

of ground water serving as a source of drinking water is observed in at least 34
states. The principal reasons for this include inadequate safety measures in the
mining, petroleum and gas industries, leakage from containers of harmful substances,
effluent from sewer systems and points for the collection of urban wastes and the
improper storage of chemicals.

The spreading of deserts, it has been discovered, is occurring not only in the de-
veloping countries with their slash-and-burn agriculture. In the United States
about 92 million hectares have undergone this process during recent years. In
these areas there are active processes of erosion and salinization of the upper
layer of soils and surface waters and the destruction of local vegetation.

This is attributable to incorrect irrigation methods, poor drainage, ground water
exhaustion, excess grazing of domestic animals or the unprecedented growth of major
populated places. The plans for a marked increase in coal production in the con-
bustible shales in the western United States and increased lumbering there consti-
tute a danger.

The authors of the report do not propose specific measures for contending with such
tendencies.

COPYRIGHT: "I‘I‘eteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1981

5303 -END-
CSO: 1864/11

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY