FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10455

14 April 1982

Translation

' THE MAP OF THE WORLD OCEAN

Ed. by

Ye.|. Dolgopolov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500050031-7

THE MAP OF THE WORLD OCEAN

Moscow U KARTY MIROVOGO OKEANA in Russian 1980 (si
80) PP 1-46, 73-83, 404-405, 424-446, 459-461

[Author collective, annotation, contents. introduc
excerpts from Chapters 2 and 7, Chapter 8 and conc
"At the Map of the World Ocean", edited by Ye. I.
copies, 461 pages]

Author Collective ......... ..... ................
Annotation ....... .........................................u
Contents.....................................................
Introduction .......... ...................................

Chapter I. The Horld Ocean and Its Significance ............
Economic Significance of the World Ocean ........ .......
Legal Regulatiun in the World Ocean .....................
The world Ocean on the Political Map of the World .......
The world Ocean Must Be a Zone of Peace .................

chapter II. Geography of the World Ocean ....................

Propagation of Acoustic Waves in the World Ocean ........

Ocean Dynamics .......

Chapter VII. Australia. Oceania. Antarctica mmmm...

General Description cocoon... ooooooooo .gecaaaaacaaaaaaaao

-a- l

|
son omen“ use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000800060031-7
Antarctica ........................................................

Chapter VIII. Along the Shores of the Arctic Ocean....................
General Description QIIOCOOOO00.0000.OGOOOCOIOOOOOOOOOCIOOOOOOQIOOI

The Arctic--the Most Important Economic and Strategic Region _
of the Earth OIIOIOOIOIOOIOOOIOOOOO0.00....IOOICODOODCIOOOOOOOIIO

The Soviet Arctic .................................................

The NATO Command Devotee Its Main Attention to Greenland ..........

- 5.. q.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_..____— - — .5. ‘

[Text] Author Collective

This book was prepared by the following author collective: G. A. Arzunanov,
'1'. x. Belashchenko, G. N. Grachikov, Ye. I. Dolgopolov (collective chair-an),
Yu. N. Ivanov, G. S. Mukhin, s. D. Osokin, P. P. 'I‘arutta, N. I. Chikhachev.

 

 

 

Annotation

This handbook reveals the economic, political and military significance of the
World Ocean. It describes the state structure, political parties. public organiza-

tions, economy. principal ports and armed forces of coastal states. he intrigues
of aggressive imperialist forces in various regions of the world are revealed.

'mis book is intended for a broad range of readers.

CONTBITS Page

Introduction................................. 3

ChapterI. menorldOceanandItssignificance. . .. . . . .. . . .... 5
EconomicsignificanceottheworldOceen . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 6
LegalRegulationintheWorldOcean.................... 7
meworldOceanonthePoliticalMapoftheworld. . . . . . . . .. . . l9

'rhevmrldOceanHustBeamneofPeace................. 41

chapterII. GeographyoftheﬂorldOcean .................. 47

PhysicalGeography...........................-
MeteorologyoftheﬂorJdOceen......................63
HvdrologyoftheworldOcean ..... . .............. 69

Propagation of Acoustic Waves in the World Ocean . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
OcesnDynamics ............................. 75

MWMMY
I'Ult OFFICIAL Uhl'; ONLY

ChapterIn. AlongtheShoresofBurope................... 84
General. Description . . . . . . . _ .
Union of Soviet Socialist Republic .
Albania......................
Belgiml....n..........o..--o.........o..98
Bulgaria..................... 100

GreatBritam.......-.........._....o......104
Gemnmmcraticmpublic.......................109
Gibraltar.’O.IOOOOOUU...OOOIOOOOOCOOOCCIolla
Greece. ................................115
mumkcoonODo-onoococ..oocosoonvoooanooll.’
Ireland.._...............................119
Iceland.................................121
Spain..................................122
Italy...‘.lIOOOOIICOO.OOCOICOIIOORUOOOOIZS
mac....0OOOOOIOOOI.ICOODIOOOOOOIO'..128
Monaco...........................'......129
Netherlands...............................130
Norway...................'..............133
PolandIO.IOOIOOOOIOIOOOUOOOOOOOIOOOOOCOI3S
Portugal................................143
PaetoeIslands.. ..........................145
Federatedﬂepublicoteemny......................146
Finland.................................150
France.u..-o.........-.....o. ...o.....152
Sweden.................................157
Yugoslavia...............................158

chapter-IV. AlongtheShoresofhsia .................. ..163
GeneralDascz-iption....................'....... -
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Soviet Par Bast) . . . . . . . . . . 167

Aomyn'(M|cao) .............................170
Bangladesh'...............................171

Bahrain.................... 174
Burma.................... 175

Brunei................... ..177

o
a
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
I

0
o
n
o
o
a
o
a
o
0
0
a
o
c

Vietnam..................u.......'.......178
Israel....o............................181
India..................................184
Indonesia................................187
Jordan.................................190
Iraqo....................-o...........192
Izan..... ...........................195
Yemenhnblhpublic...........................197

Kampuchea............
Qatar..............
Cyprus............. 202
China.............. .............204
Taiwan.................................209
Korea..... ...........................211
KoreanPeople'sDenocraticRepuhlic...................212
southKorea...............................2u

.............198
.............201

000.
u
c
a
o
o
.000
0
c
I
0
o
o
I
o
o
o
v
a
c

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kuwait ........
ubanon........
Malaysia .......
Haldiveliepublic

People's Demcratic Republic o:

mited Arab Emirates .
Oman
Pakistan

nee-00¢.-

Saudi Arabia . . . . .
Singapore
Syria ........
Hongxmg.......
Thailand.......
Timor.........

Turkey ........
Philippines . . . . . .
SriLanka.......

Japan.........

Chapter V. Along the Shores
General Description . .
Algiers........
Angola ........

Benin.........

IvoryCoast......

Gabon.........

Gambia .......

Ghana........

Guinea ........

Guinea-Bissau . . . .

Djibouti .......

Bgypt.........

Zaire.

west Sahara . . . .

Cape Verde Islands . .

Cameroon .......

Kenya.......L.

ComomIslands ..

0.00.0.0

Congo.........
Liberia........
Libya.........
Hauritius.......
Mauritania . . . . . .
Madagascar . . . . . .
Morocco........
Mozambique......
Nigeria........

Reunion.......
Sao 'Dome and Principe

St. Helena Island . .
Seychelles Islands .

one...

a a
a a
e a
c o
o o
o a
a o
a a
o e
o -
o a
a a
o 0

Yemen

e a
a a
a o
o o
o a
o o
a a
o a
a a
o o
o a
e e
e e
e a
a a
a c
a n
e e
a e
a e
o e
a o
o a
a a
o a
a a
a a
o a
e a
e a
a a

ace-cc

auto...

0000‘

one.

neat-e

0000

0.000

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

...... 00-0.

one.

soon...

a...

...-.00...

a

Ioeocaa-ooaaoaao

a...

4......

cacao

COO-0......

account.

on...

O'Cocopol

canoe-o

coco.

00000..

ID...

000.90....

0 O 0 O 8

00.400.00.90...

coco

0.0.0.

216
217
220
221
222
225
226
227
230
232
233
235
236
238
239
241
243
246

250
255
258
261
262
263
265
266
268
270
272
273
277
279
280
281
283
285
286
288
289
291
293
294
296
299
300
302
304
305

306
307
8")“ UI‘I‘IMU‘L DUI. “5‘...

Senegal....................
Somali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sudan.....................
sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tanzania...................
Togo ..
Tunis.... ..............
EquatorialGuinea...............
Ethiopia..... .............
Southnfricannepubllc ............

Chapter VI. Along the shores of America . . . . . .
GeneralDescription..............
Antigua....................
AntillesIslands...............
Argentina...................
Bahamalslands................
Barbados ...................

Belize....................
Bermudalslands................

Brazil ....................
Venezuela.... ............
Virgin (British) Islands . . . . . . . . . . .
Virginlslandsﬂsn) .............
Haiti......................
Guadeloupe..................

Guatemala...................
Guiana..............;.....
Honduras...................
Grenada....................
Greenland...................
Dominica ..................
Dominicanaepublic..............
CaymanIslands................
Canada....................
Colombia ...................
CostaRica..... ............
Martinique..................
Mexico....................
Ebntsertat..................
Nicaragua...................
Panama

Pemooaoooooooooooooooooo

Puertoluco..................
BlSalvador... . ............

SathierreandMiquelon...........
Saint Vincent and Grenadines . . . . . . . . .
Saint Christopher (Saint Kitts) . . . . . . . .
Nevis-Anguilla ................
SaintLucia..................

b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

308
310
312
314
315
318
319
321
322
32 5

329
332
333
334
337

338

339
340

343
345
346
347

348

349
350

351
352

353
354
355
356
358
360
362
365
366
369
370
371
373
375
377
378
379

380
United States of Maria

swim. ‘I "

Turks and Caicos Islands

Trinidad and mango . . .

Uruguay.--.r.........

Falkland innas)
(mile . . . . . . .

Bquador......

Jamaica......

Chapter VII.

Australia.
General Description

Australia . . . . .
Eastern Samoa . . .

cm 0 O

IIIII

Western Samoa . o .

Caroline, Mariana and Marshall Islands

Kiribati
Cocos (Keeling)
Cook Islands .
Midway Islands
Nauru . . . . .
Nine

IIIII

Islands . .

I-IIIII

I
I
IIIIII

Islands

NewZealand . . .

New Caledonia .
New ﬂebrides .
Norfolk . . . .
Papua-New Guinea
Pitcairn . . .
French Polynesia

Christmas Islands

I

Solomon Islands . . .

'nokelau (mien) Islands

Tonga.........

Tuvalu

IIIIII

Oceania.

I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I
I I I

I

I

I
I I I

Wallis and Putuna Islands

Wake
Fugi

Antarctica
Chapter VIII.

IIIIIIIIII

IIIIIIIIII

I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I
t t
O

IIIIIIIIII

Along the shores of the Arctic Ocean

IIIII

IIIII

I

GeneralDescription.................
The Arctic--'me Host Inportant Economic and strategic

of the Earth

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

TheSovietArctic..............
Arctic Regions of Capitalist Countries . . .

Oonclusion....................

Appendices :

1. National Holidays of Foreign Countries .
2. Currency of Foreign Countries . . . . . .

5
Iron omcm. use ONLY

I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I

I
I
I
I'IIIIII

I I I
I I I

I I I

I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I I
I I I -I

O O O O

IIII

IIIIIIII

381
393
394
395
396
398

399
401

.403
404
405
409
410
411

412
413

414
415
417
418
419
420
421
422

423

424
427

429
433
440

445

447
454
a ve\ we a I~Ill~ v-.. 9..“-

Introduction

The present international situation is characterized by further development and
deepening of the world revolutionary process. The positions of socialism continue

to be fortified and widened. The victories of the movement of national liberation
are opening up new horizons before countries winning their independence. The class

struggle of the laborers against the yoke of the monopolies, against the orders
of exploitation, is growing. The revolutionary-danceratic, anti-imperialist move-
ment is assuming ever-larger proportions.

Were we to glance from this point of view at the map of the World Ocean, with which
the life of the overwhelming majority of the globe's population is associated one
way or another, we would be confronted by a picture of profound social changes
occurring in different countries of the ocean basin.

In Europe we have universal recognition of the sovereignty of the German Democratic
Republic, the failure of fascist regimes in Portugal, meece and Spain and a grow-

ing struggle for security and cooperation in all of Europe.

In Asia we have the victory of the Vietnamese people and formation of the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam, the victory of patriots in Kampuchea, the new successes of
states with a socialist orientation, the fall of the Shah's regime in Iran and
serious changes in the life of peoples in other countries.

In Africa we have construction of a new society in Angola, Ethiopia and other
countries and initiation of a new stage in the struggle of the peoples in the conti-

nent's south.

In Latin America we have consolidation of the international position and authority
of the Republic of Cuba and reinforcement of the anti—imperialist position of
a number of countries.

At the same time influential inperialist circles led by the USA oppose international

detente and favor growing preparations for war and inflation of military budgets.
The enemies of detente and disarmament still have many resources at their disposal.
They act aggressively, in various forms and in various directions. Although in-
perialism's possibilities for aggressive actions have now been significantly cut
down, its nature continues to be the same.

The leaders of china are direct accomplices of imerialism. To implement their
great power, hegemonist plans, they are aligning themselves with the most reaction-
ary and militant forces.

The World Ocean and the regions and countries contiguous with it represent a zone
of active operations by aggressive forces. Evidence of this can be found in the
very names of the iuperialist military blocs and groupings as well as foreign
policy stances: The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Asian and Pacific
Council, the USA's new Pacific doctrine and others.

The program of further struggle for peace and international cooperation and for
the liberty and independence of peoples, which was adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and which is an organic continuation and development of the Peace Program, foresees
tasks aimed at improving both the international situation as a whole and the situa-
tion on individual continents and in specific regions. One of the important tasks
is to eliminate the remaining focuses of war, the vestiges of the system of colonial
oppression, transgressions upon the equality and independence of peoples and all
centers of colonialism and racism.

The struggle to inplement this program requires energetic actions, unity of all
forces in the world, good will and high alertness in relation to the aggressive
intrigues of the forces of reaction and militarism.

The author collective made it its objective to describe to the reader the World

Ocean, its military—econmaic and military-political significance, the countries
bathed by the oceans and seas and their armed forces: the achievements of the

countries of the socialist fraternity; the intrigues of the aggressive forces of
imperialism and the struggle of peoples for elimination of the threat of war and
for national and social liberation.

Information on the fighting and numerical strength of the armed forces of foreign
countries is based on foreign publications.

chapter I. The World Ocean and Its significance

The World Ocean occupies one of the most important places in the life of people.
It played a'great role in formation of many nations and in the creation of states.
The World Ocean has a significant influence on development of economic, political,
cultural and other ties between peoples and countries, on occasion being the
principal binding link between them.

All of the world's largest states and dozens of other countries are located on the
shores of the World Ocean. A large part of the globe's population lives here, and
thousands of large and small cities, ports and settlements are located here.

he World Ocean provides people with food and work. In its water they catch fish
and harvest marine animals, and extract minerals and raw materials for industry.
The ocean expanses are furrowed daily by thousands of vessels sailing under the

flags of almost all countries of the world. men: are large deposits of petroleum
and gas on the floor of the seas and oceans.

But the World Ocean is more than the sphere of trade, enterprise, cooperation and
communication of peoples. In the millenia of mankind's history the expenses of
the ocean have also been an arena of acute struggle between states. People and
ships perished in numerous armed collisions.

In our days colonists, imperialists and the reactionary military mchine have used

the World Ocean many times for the purposes of aggression and in behalf of the
mercenary interests of mnopolist capital. Nurturing their plans of plunder and

neocolonialism, highly developed iaperialist countries are strengthening their
armed forces, including their navies, they have created and are creating military
bases on foreign territories, they are maintaining troops there, and they are
trying to preserve existing aggressive military blocs and create new ones.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI WI'ILIAL UM UNI-I

In keeping with their peace-loving foreign policy, the Soviet Union and other
countries of the socialist fraternity are following a course toward further relaxa-

the World Ocean into a zone of peace, one free of the aggressive military blocs of
imperialism and its bases, of nuclear missiles and of the danger of war.

of further struggle for peace and international cooperation and for the liberty and
independence of peoples, the USSR is making the World Ocean something that is
utilized not only in behalf of mankind's progress but also for the good of all
peoples of good will.

Boonanic significance of the World Ocean

The ocean, with which the advent of all life on our planet is associated, has highly
important significance to the life of mankind. Great and multifaceted is the in-
fluence of the ocean environment upon the economies of states. The seas and oceans
contain huge reserves of various industrial raw materials and energy. This is why
what the famous Soviet scientists Academician S. G. strumilin said sounds so im-
portant today: The economy of the world ocean is the economy of the future.

But even at the present level of development of productive forces, development of
the World Ocean's resources has great economic significance.

The most important and most economical communication routes between countries pass
over the seas and oceans. The role of marine transport is growing today in this
connection. It is the sole means of transport capable of supporting mass shipments
of cargo across the oceans and seas.

Marine transport plays the decisive role in deepening and expanding international
division of social labor. Marine transport is responsible for more than 80 percent
of international freight turnover. Marine transport is the most economical. The
cost of shipments by sea is almost twice lower than by railroad and 20 times lower
than by highway. The reason for this lies in the great loading capacity of the
vessels, the relative low capital investments required to organize marine routes
and the lowest relative outlays of power, given the same speed of cargo movement.

Marine transport supports predominantly the foreign trade and other transport ties
between states. More than any other sector or the national economy, it is associ-

ated with the international situation, and it is used in the defense of political
and economic interests of states.

Farine shipping routes evolved historically as lines of comunication predominantly
linking industrially developed and dependent countries. Transformations that oc-
curred on the political map of the world following World War II changed the tradi-
tional directions of marine routes. They are categorized in relation to purpose and

geographic characteristics as international oceanic, international regional and _
coastal (between ports of the same country). Mixed ”river-sea" routes are enjoying

increasingly greater development.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Changes occurred in recent years in the development of international shipping.
indicators such as the speed of vessels, their dimensions and loading capacity in-
creased, and specialization broadened. me technical resources have been signifi-
cantly renewed and the possibilities of the fleet have grown due to achievements

of scientific-technical progress. International shipping is developing with regard
to the economi'c, social and political interests of almost all countries of the
world, including countries not having direct access to the 'sea. While in 1950

the volume of international marine shipments was equl to 550 million tons, in 1976
it increased by almost seven times to 3,650,000,000 tons. Growth was especially
great in relation to shipments of petrolem and petroleum products, as well as
cargoes in containers.

Development of shipping is typical of almost all countries, but shipping is develop-
ing at the highest rate in socialist countries. Socialist states, primarily the
cam countriesuhave the possibility for supporting and developing trade relations
with all maritime countries of the world with the assistance of their own transport
fleet. By 1978 the CEHA countries established marine conmunications with many
countries of the world. ‘

Many developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are devoting considerable
attention to creating and developing their own fleets (both merchant marine and
fishing). The Soviet Union and other socialist countries are providing significant
aid to most of them.

The marine shipping of. the capitalist world, with its continuously expanding
monopolist tendencies in all sectors of the economy, is dominated by the largest

shipping companies and international imperialist monopolies. Development of mono-
polies is accompanied by increasingly higher concentration of capital.

The coordinated economy and policy of the socialist countries acts as a counter-
weight to monopolist capital. Growth of the maritime fleet of the USSR and other
socialist countries and their active aid to developing countries have helped to
put an end to unshared domination of marine trade routes by the monopolist capital
of imperialist powers and their fleets.

The USSR's merchant marine is developing atanespecially high rate . In terms of

the total displacement of its merchant marine, which was over 20 million registered
tons as of 1977, the Soviet Union had joined the club of the world's leading mari-
time powers. In terms of the composition of its vessels and their equipment and
speed, the Soviet transport fleet is one of the most modern in the world. Large-
capacity vessels--dry cargo, bulk cargo, refrigerator, container and others-—make
up its backbone.

The "Basic Directions of the Development of the USSR's National Economy in 1976-
1980," approved by the 25th CPSU Congress, foresee further development of marine
transport in order to more fully satisfy the growing demand of the national economy
for foreign trade and coastal shipments, iaprove deliveries of cargo to the Far
North and the Far East. and raise the volume and effectiveness at export transport
serVic-cs.

FOR 0mg“. USE ONLY
I'VK UI'I'ILIAI. UM Ul‘lol

'me role of the Soviet merchant marine is often distorted in the West. he mass
mdia of the western countries serve up the innocent comercial operations of Soviet
marine organizations at international shipping markets as an aspiration to establish
'comunist domination" over world marine routes. Such slanderous materials are
aimed against participation of the shipping enterprises of the Soviet Union and
other socialist countries in international comercial navigation.

As we know, the Soviet Union is developing its merchant marine mainly to satisfy the
demands of national foreign trade and domestic coastal shipments. Participating

in international shipping, Soviet marine organizations are guiding themselves
mainly by the desire to achieve equitable and mutually profitable cooperation

with all parties interested in this. "...our program," emphasized V. I. Ienin,
"...consists of total freedom of commercial navigation." Lenin's premise lies

at the basis of the USSR's marine trade policy, which primarily serves the interests
of the country's economic development and which is aimed at equitable and mutually

profitable cooperation among all countries of the world in international marine
shipping.

Ports at which cargo is transloaded from. one form of transport to another, and
where a significant part of the cargo is often processed as well, have exceptionally
important significance to marine shipping. 'lhere are more than 7,000 ports in the
world, of which more than 500 have a freight turnover of more than 1 million tons.

Ports on the Atlantic Ocean handle 65 percent of the total freight turnover of
the world's marine transport, ports on the Pacific handle about 28 percent, and the

rest is handled by ports on the Indian Ocean. The freight turnover of ports of the
Arctic Ocean is still low.

Straits and regions in which maritime routes are concentrated for one reason or
another play a great role in marine shipping. These regions have not only great
economic but also strategic significance.

unmade connecting waterways-~canals--are an important supplement to the open sea
and to natural waterways connecting sea basins. They have great economic and
political significance. A nunber of canals play a strategic role. 'lhe most im-
portant marine canals are the Suez, Panama and Kiel.

The Suez Canal, construction of which took a little more than 10 years and was coul-
pleted in 1869, has become one of the most important shipping canals of the world.
Marx called it the great path to the East. The canal was dug across the low sandy
Isthmus of Suez, and it does not have any locks. The total length of the canal is
173 km, to include 161 km crossing the Isthmus of Suez itself; its breadth on the
surface is 120-150 meters, and its depth in the main channel is 12-13 meters. The
Suez Canal connects the Atlantic Ocean (by way of the Mediterranean Sea) with the
Indian Ocean (by way of the Red sea). The canal decreases the distance for European
vessels by 6,000-11,000 km. For examle the distance between Odessa and Bodaay is
4,198 nautical miles (7,780 km) via the channel and 11,878 nautical miles (about
22,000 km) around Africa.

 

*Ienin, V. 1., "Poln. sobr. soch.” [Complete Collected Works], V01 45, p 241.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Panama Canal' joins the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, and it significantly de-
creases the distance between them (the distance beaveen New York and San Francisco
is decreased by 16,000 km) . The total length of the canal is 81.6 km. An average
of up to 100 million tons of cargo is shipped through the canal each year. The
canal has six locks that raise and lower vessels 25.9 meters. The locks are paired,

and they are intended for two-way traffic. The locks are 360 meters long, 42 Inter.
wide and 12.2 meters deep.

The Panama Canal belongs to the USA. However, a Panamanian-American treaty on
gradual transfer of this interocean canal and the zone along both of its banks to

the jurisdiction of Panama went into effect on 1 October 1979. The Canal Zone has
now become an inseparable part of Panamanian territory.

The Kiel Canal ’joins the Baltic Sea to the North Sea. It decreases the distance
between Kiel and Hamburg by 425 nautical miles (787 km). Each year about 50 million
tons of cargo are shipped through the canal. More than half of the freight turnover
between the North and Baltic seas is handled through it. The canal is 98.7 km long,
its width on the surface is 104 meters, and its depth is more than 11 meters. The

canal was dug across a lowland isthmus, and except for looks, it possesses no lift-
ing structures.

The World Ocean plays a great role today as a source of biological resources. The
quantity of living matter formed in the ocean exceeds the quantity of living matter
on land by many times. While plant protein dominates on land, the sea's foodstuffs
provide more-valuable animal protein. This means that the ocean can be used in the
future as one of the principal sources in solution of the food problem of a fast-
growing population on earth.

People harvest significant quantities of biological foodstuffs from marine waters.
They make up as much as 70 percent of the total volume of all resources obtained

in the seas and oceans. Past growth of world fisheries and marine hunting is making
it possible to obtain animal protein from marine products faster and cheaper than

in animal husbandry.

Many millions of people in the whole world are employed in fisheries, to include
about 7 million persons in industrial fishing. Fore than 80 countries possess
fishing fleets. They total about 20,000 vessels (of 100 register tons and more).
The world catch of - fish and marine foodstuffs was 69.8 million tons in 1974, to
include 59 million tons of fish, over 4 million tons of invertebrates and more than
2 million tons of algae.

The marine fishing grounds are irregularly distributed depending on many factors:
the biological resources available, the historical development of fisheries, the
locations of the principal regions of consumption, the populations of individual
countries and of different regions of the globe, the fishing intensity, the level
of development of fishing and fish processing technology and international policy.
changes in the distribution of the world's fishing grounds have depended to a sig-
nificant extent in recent years both on significant transformations in the politi-
cal map of the world and on the action of the factors listed above. New indepen-
dent states atteupting to develop their national economies, including fisheries,
have developed many new fishing grounds. Owing to fast improvement of marine
fisheries technology the fishing fleets of these countries can now travel to remote
fishing grounds.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
s 9“ Va a ass/cu Hua- we can

Among the regions in which sea creatures are caught, the Pacific Ocean holds first
place (56 percent of the catch) and the Atlantic holds second (39 percent of the
catch).

Marine fisheries is developing at a high rate in the Soviet Union. In the postwar
years the harvest of fish and other marine foodstuffs has been going on far fro-
native shores. Since 1948 Soviet fishermen have been regularly catching fish in
different regions of the Atlantic. Soviet fishermen are also catching fish in the
Pacific and Indian Oceans, in the northern seas and on the shores of Antarctica.

Owing to the fact that the USSR possesses a highly mechanized comercial fishing

fleet, the catches and the processing of fish and other marine foodstuffs are in-
creasing. The Soviet Union has the world's largest flotilla of freezer trawlers.
These are unique floating combines. They not only catch fish but also process it.

The harvest of fish and other marine foodstuffs in our country increased from 1.8
million tons in 1950 to 9.6 million tons in 1977. During the Ninth Five-Year Plan
the harvest of fish and other marine foodstuffs was almost 45 million tons.*

The 25th CPSU Congress devoted much attention to further development of the World
Ocean's biological resources. The “Basic Directions of the Development of the

USSR National Economy in 1976-1980" pose this task: "Increase the output of comer-
cial dietary fish products (including canned goods) by 30-32 percent. Raise effec-
tiveness of the commercial fishing fleet's use, and increase its strength with
highly productive vessels. Inprove existing and create new, highly effective
fishing methods and gear, equipment and instruments promoting mechanization and
automation of the harvesting and industrial processing of fish and other products
of the sea.

"Continue studying and developing new regions and targets of fishing in waters of
the World Ocean. Develop fisheries in the coastal waters of the USSR. ""

The biological resources of the World Ocean are of great value to mankind. 'lheir
sensible use is one of the most important principles of international cooperation
in sea and ocean fishing. International fishing treaties (about 90) have been
drawn up and are working successfully on the basis of this principle, which has
been made into law by a number of international regulatory acts. Many of these
treaties have been signed by the Soviet Union. Owing to compliance with a nunber

of the treaties, we have managed to significantly improve the reserves of some
valuable targets of commercial fishing (fur seals, halibut, salmon etc.), or regu-
late their harvesting with sufficient effectiveness.

The ocean's mineral resources are colossal; they are a potential source of raw
materials. They are divided into chemical elements dissolved in water and minerals
on the floor surface and in rock beneath the floor.

 

*See "SSSR v tsifrakh v 1977 qodu" [The USSR in Figures in 1977], lbscow, 1978,
pp «Id-45.

M"Materialy XXV s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1976. pp 196-197.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ocean water is an enormous ”ore bed" containing various isotopes of oxygen and
hydrogen, and practically all elements of Mendeleyev's periodic system, dissolved
in it to one extent or another. Inparticular, sea water contains a sizeable quanti'
ty of deuterium-~the most promising raw material for thermonuclear energy. onecubic
kilometer of sea water contains: 28 million tons of table salt, 1.3 million tons
of magnesium, 31,000 tons of boron, 300 tons oi bromine, 79 tons of copper, 11 tons
of uranium and so on. Table salt, sodium sulfate, magnesium chloride, potassium
chloride and bromine are extracted in sizeable quantities tram sea water. The

scientific-technical revolution is opening up prospects for significantly expanding
the conposition of the chemical elements extracted.

Sea water is also becoming a raw material from which to obtain fresh water. As we

know, the earth's fresh water reserves are diminishing. The lakes and rivers are
being polluted by the wastes of industrial enterprises. Industrial consumption of

facility in the USSR using nuclear fuel is already operating near shevchenko on the
Caspian Sea. Many of the world's countries have recently begun obtaining desali-
nized water from sea water. Its production is increasing by about 25 percent a

represents 90 percent of the world's extraction of rutile and about 75 percent of
zircon. Such placers are widespread along the coasts of New Zealand, India and
elsewhere. The mining of tin ore--eassiterite, magnetite and titanomagnetiteuis .
acquiring great significance. These minerals are widespread in the Asiatic shelf
belt extending from India and Sri Lanka along the coast of Thailand, Vietnam, the
Philippines, China, Korea and Japan to the Chukchi Peninsula. According to Ameri-
can figures marine placers (excluding beach placers) provide minerals worth $50
million per year, with cassiterite making up half of this volume.

Gold, platinum, silver, chromite and diamonds have also been discovered on the

seabed in a number of regions. Judging from the latest research these minerals
are rather widespread on the shelves. Industrial gold deposits are being worked

depths (200-600 meters) in many regions, especially along the coasts of Africa
and North America, along the east coast of Australia, and at New Zealand.

over enormous expanses of the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans. The total re-
serves of such concretions are several trillion tons. They contain huge reserves
O‘Vlb Ul'a‘ewanu was. 05‘”!

of metals. may contain 620 times more cobalt than discovered on land, 90 times

more copper and 42 times more manganese. There are grounds for believing that the
concretion reserves are growing. -

Even greater reserves are encountered on deep-sea red clay floors, which contain
aluminum, iron, copper, nickel, vanadium and cobalt. According to tentative estie
mates red clays contain 9,000 times more aluminum and copper than do deposits on
land. It is believed that the reserves of iron-manganese concretions and red clays
are being continually enlarged due to their precipitation out of ocean water.

'me subsoil beneath the ocean floor has been studied even less than the surface of
the floor. It is only in recent years that we have begun drilling the floor in
deep-sea regions. The most valuable minerals now obtained from the subsoil of the
shelf are petroleum and gas. They represent more than 90 percent of the total cost
of minerals extracted in the ocean. According to expert estimates the total area of
ocean subsoil containing promising petroleum deposits reaches 45 million square
kilometers (15 million square kilometers more than on land) , while the potential
reserves of petroleum and gas. corrected for petroleum, are estimated at
l,4lo,000,000,000 tons. Petroleun extraction in the sea represents one-fifth of
the world's total petroleum extraction. According to the predictions it will make
up about half of the world‘s petroleum extraction by the year 2,000. Petroleum and
gas are already being extracted from marine deposits in 25 countries (exploratory
operations are being conducted by almst 100 states). hggravation of the energy
crisis in a nur-‘aer of major capitalist countries will promte activation of opera-
tions at sea connected 'with extraction of petroleum and gas.

As we know, the first practical steps toward industrial extraction of petroleum and
gas from the seabed were made in Russia. Wells were built 20-30 meters from shore
in the vicinity of Baku back in the 1820's. These wells, which were isolated from
the surrounding water, produced "black gold” for several years. Awakening some of
the most active scientific and scientific-technical forces of the country, the
Great October socialist Revolution was a powerful impetus to development of all

of the country‘s productive forces, and it promoted progress in various areas of
the economy. In particular efforts to study the possibilities of extracting petro-
leum and gas in regions contiguous with the Caspian Sea and in the sea itself were
subjected to extensive study. The accumulated experience made it possible to begin
large-scale extraction of petroleum and gas for the first time in international
practice from marine deposits at Neftyanyye Kamni. near Baku, in 1947. since that
time millions of tons of valuable raw materials were extracted here and at other
offshore deposits of petroleum and gas in the Caspain Sea. The offshore fields of
Azerbaijan provide more than half of all of the petroleum extracted in the republic.
Eight hundred eighty steel islands and more than 300 km of trestles have been
erected here. They make it possible to service the oilfields irrespective of the
weather.

The "Basic Directions of Development of the USSR National Economy in 1978-1980"
pose the task of accelerating the revelation and exploration of new deposits of
petroleum. natural gas and condensates mainly in the central reaches of the 0b'.,
in the north of 'l‘yumenskaya Oblast and in East Siberia, the Yakut ASSR, the Koni
ASSR, Arkhangel'skaya Oblast, Central Asia and the Kazakh $811 (the Caspian trench).

1
FOR OFFIClkL USE ONLY
'Ihey also pose the task of expanding geological explorations in the shelf zones'of
the seas and oceans, mainly for petroleum and natural gas.‘

Great and encouraging are the energy resources of the ocean. We can obtain energy
from the ocean by capitalizing on the force of waves, the daily variation of sea
level due to the tides or the difference in the surface and internal temperatures
of the water. The energy transferred toe raging sea by wind is enormous. When
waves strike an obstacle, they shoot up several dozen meters. A wave 3 meters high
aontaingenergy ecual to 100 kw in every meter of its crest. However, all attempts
at utilizing the energy of waves have not yet gone beyond the experimental stage.
If mankind ever finds ways to concentrate the scattered energy of waves, it will
master a new large, inexhaustible source of energy. Nor is the problem of assimi-

lating the energy,of the tides, the power of which is estimated at 1-6 billion kw
for the ocean as.a.whole, any less complex. while people have been aware of this
powerfora long time, they were not able to build the first tidal electric power
plant for industrial purposes until the late 1960's (Rennes, France). An experi-
mental facility was built in 1968 in the USSR (at Kislaya Gulf) on the Kola Penin-
sula). The floating building of the tidal electral power plant has an original
design. Plans for large capacity tidal power plants are being developed on the
basis of this experience in Canada, the USA and Great Britain.

There are plans for creating new tidal power plants in the USSR as well (Lumbovsk,
Mezen', the Sea of Okhotsk and elsewhere).

Legal Regulation in the World Ocean

The World Ocean has been utilized by mankind sinoetimeimnmorial. All states have
an interest in the ocean, even those without direct access to it.

Today the World Ocean is becoming an increasingly more actively developed part of
our planet. Trading and transport routes and lines of communication leading from
one region to another cross the ocean expanses.

Reluctant to accept the changes that have occurred in the world, monopolist capital
of the imperialist powers and their aggressive political and military circles would
wish to dominate the World Ocean as they had before, exploiting it for their own
mercenary purposes. The political, economic and military interests of different
countries are colliding with each other violently as a result of the actions of
imperialist forces in the World Ocean, leading to formation of centers of tension
and conflict. In recent years such regions have included the eastern Mediterranean,
the Near East, regions around the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, the Bay of Bengal,

waters bathing countries of Southeast Asia, the West Pacific, the North Atlantic,
the Caribbean Sea and the most important oceanic straits.

The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist fraternity and all peace-

loving states are making an effort to see that the regime of the world Ocean would
ensure total freedom of navigation for all peoples and states. The existing pre-
mises of international law of the sealuveteen codified in numerous conventions and

'See "Haterialy XXV s'yezda Krss," p l83.

1
INJR‘OIWWEIAL.IISE1(NNLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAI. Dbl: Ul‘hl

treaties, particularly in conventions signed at the Geneva Conference in February

1958. Delegations from 86 countries took part in the conference proceedings. They
signed the so-called Final Act consisting of four conventions: on the territorial

sea and the contiguous zone, on the high seas, on fishing and conservation of the
living resources of the high seas and on the continental shelf. hgreemnt was
reached by special resolutions of the 1958 Geneva Conference on the Law of the Sea
in regard to testing nuclear weapons on the high seas, control of contamination of
waters by radioactive wastes, protection of fisheries and so on.

tries of the world and by subsequent conferences on the law of the sea. In parti-
cular, sessions of the Third Conference, which has been proceeding since 1974, are

examining the need for drafting a new convention that might regulate a nunber of
problems of the legal regime and use of the World Ocean that have come to light in
recent years.

Defending the principles of peaceful coexistence in international relations, the
Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist fraternity are exerting a great
amount of effort to see that all countries would have the right to freely use the
high seas and other portions of the World Ocean, as well as its resources. They
decisively oppose attempts by some capitalist states to essentially divide the

World Ocean up and to conpletely cancel the agreements that had been reached at
the 1958 Geneva Conference.

Countries of the socialist fraternity and a number of other states are arguing, in
particular, against attempts by some states to excessively widen their territorial
waters. Certains states are trying to undo some fundm principles of the
international law of the sea such as the freedom of the high sees, the freedom

of passage of all vessels through straits and archipelagos used for international
shipping and the freedom of fishing, the harvesting of other marine products and

scientific research in the World Ocean.

The position of the soviet Union and the fraternal countries of socialism is
supported by a number of realistically thinking politicians, representatives of
the business coununity, scientists and various strata of the public of capitalist
countries. The regime of the World Ocean must ensure the possibility of obtaining
equal benefits from its development for all countries. It must promote not only

economic progress but also further profound social changes in the world in keeping
with the interests of the broad popular masses.

The World Ocean on the Political Map of the World

Powerful social and political forces opposed to war exist in the modern world, and
they are active. They include the Soviet Union, the socialist fraternity, the
international workers' demcratic and national liberation movement, the neutral
countries, broad circles of the international public, major democratic organizations
and realistically thinking political circles of the capitalist countries.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
together with fraternal socialist countries the Soviet Union is waging an active
and consistent struggle for peace and security of nations and for further relaxe-
tion of international tension. Major successes have been achieved in this noble
effort. Conditions have been created permitting us not only to eliminate the
danger of a new world war and other armed conflicts but also to lake the entire
process of international relaxation irreversible.

It was noted at the 25th CPSU Congress that 'although universal peace is not at all
guaranteed yet, we have all the grounds for asserting confidently that the inprove-
ments in the international climate presently occurring show that achievement of a
sound peace is not a noble dream but a fully realistic task.M

However, forces which are trying to halt relaxation and fan the arms race create
new forms of lethal weapons and reinforce aggressive blocs exist in the world, and
they are active;- The World Ocean is also an arena for the_aggreseive activities of
imperialist forces. It has occupied a special place in the policy and military
plans of major capitalist states since ancient times. long ago, when capitalist
relations were just beginning to come into being, countries such as England, France,
Spain, Portugal, Holland and others longed to acquire new lands. The age of great
geographic discoveries (16th-17th centuries) was used by the classes of exploita-
tion and the war machines of these states primarily to seize colonies. enslave

the peoples of entire continents and plunder captured countries.

Within a historically short period transoceanic colonial expires were created by
Spain, Portugal, England, Holland, France and other European states. Colonists
seized huge dominions in North and South America, the Caribbean basin, the Indian
subcontinent, the Near East, Africa, Southeast Asia and other places.

"Discovery of gold and silver placers in America," wrote Karl Marx, 'the uprooting,
enslavement and the live burial of the indigenous population in mines, the first
steps toward the conquest and plunder of the East Indies and transformation of
Africa into a Negro hunting preserve-~such was the sunrise of the capitalist era
of production.""

The first to assume the road of colonial expansion at the end of the 15th century
were Spain and Portugal, the largest sea powers at that tine. Possessing a size-
able fleet, they seized Latin America and territories in the Caribbean basin, and
they penetrated into North America and other regions of the world. In the 16th
century Great Britain joined the struggle for world domination. Destroying the
Spanish flect--the so-called "invincible amda"--in 1588, the English seized the
richest lands in the Indian Ocean basin, in Africa and North America, in the Near
East and in Southeast Asia, and they created powerful strongpoints in Gibraltar,
Malta, Hong Kong, Singapore, Cape Town, Jamaica and other places.

Following England, France and Holland assumed the road of creating significant
colonial possessions. The French seized some regions of North Mnerica, the Hest
Indies, Southeast Asia and a nunber of archipelagos in the Pacific, while the
Dutch seized part of the territory of Latin America and Asia (Indonesia).

"Material XXV s'yezda KPSS," p 1?.
“Marks, K., and angel's, P., "Soch." [Works], Vol 23, p 760.

 

FOR 0m€%1l. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Somewhat later Germany and Italy, and then Japan joined the colonial land grab.

In the 19th and early 20th century German militants seized a number of colonial

possessions in Africa and the Pacific basin, Italian capital and military forces
penetrated mainly into regions of North and East Africa, and Japanese colonists

took some regions in Southeast Asia and the Far Best.

A savage struggle between colonial powers (to which we can also add Belgium, Denmark
and some other countries) , one which broke out into war many times, was a perpetual
phenomenon. Especially serious collisions occurred between England and Spain in

the Caribbean basin and in South America, and between England and France in North
America, Africa and elsewhere. This to a certain extent eased the struggle for
independence waged by the populations of former English as well as French and
Spanish colonies in North America, and it promoted arisal of a new bourgeois state
in the second half of the 18th century--the United States of Marisa.

peoples. At first it furthered its expansion on continental North America: It
seized mnerous Indian territories west and south of its boundaries, it fought the

French and Spanish in Florida, Louisiana and California and it engaged in armed
aggression against its southern neighbor--Mexico. In the first half of the 19th
century the USA seized territory in Latin America, in the Pacific basin and in
other regions. In a relatively short time the USA transformed into a major colo-
nial power possessing a significant navy intended for transoceanic conquests.
During the Spanish-American War of 1898 the USA seized the Philippines, Guam and
Puerto Rico, and it established a protectorate over Cuba.

on the seized territories the colonists created strongpoints, built fortresses,

forts and bases, and concentrated major troop and naval forces. with the support
of the latter they strengthened their power and established a regime of monstrous
exploitation and tyrann .

the colonies. and it had to engage in the shipping of strategic supplies and raw
materials.

The navies of imperialist countries also took part in the unseemly enterprise of
transporting Negro slaves. They were captured in various regions of Africa and then
transported to North and South Merica to work on cotton and other plantations.

The small island of Goree-—a permanent condemnation of colonialism and slavery--
lies at the approaches to the port of Dakar (Senegal). Goree was discovered in

the mid-15th century. European traders purchased ivory, gold and spices from the
local population and from natives. But this did not seem like enough to them.

And so they began trading ”live goods"--slaves. slaves were transported to Goree
from different regions of Africa. From here. ships, English for the most part,
delivered them to America. Just between 1783 and 1793 more than 300,000 Negroes
were carried away to slavery. In all, more than 20 million persons were exported
to America from the African countries. The slave trade was one of the shameful
pages in the bloody history of imperialism.

18
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
The campaigns of. plunder by European 'civilizers,’ the armed interimperialist
struggle for reap'portionment of the world and- for new colonies and markets, and
monstrous exploitation of the popular masses did colossal harm to the countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America in the years of colonial domination. Discussing how
the wealth and power of the "civilized powers" of Europe and America were created,
Marx cites the following quotation by the uglish historian w. (Hauitt). - "me
barbarism and shameless cruelty of the so-called Christian races, connitted at all
points of the compass against all peoples that they managed to enslave, surpass
all horrors committed in any historical era by any race, no matter how wild and
disrespectful, unpitying and shameless."

Not only the navies but also pirate ships--"free corsairs" —participated in colonial
wars and other transoceanic adventures of the imperialists, whenever this was ad-
vantageous and convenient to the imperialists.

Under pressure from progressive forces of those times the ruling circles of mgland, France
and other capitalist countries made an official stand against the slave trade,
periodically sending their ships against vessels carrying slaves. But as a rule
these operations were directed not against the slave traders but against marine
competitors and trade rivals.

Colonial conquests, the armed struggle of major bourgeois countries for markets
and spheres of influence, and the economic and political contradictions in the
capitalist world were one of the main reasons why the World Ocean became an arena
of collisions between international predators.

Firmly entrenching itself as the world‘s greatest sea power, in the 18th and early
19th century England created a vast network of strongpoints in different regions of
the World Ocean. Its possessions included Gibraltar, Malta, Cyprus and Port Said
in the Mediterranean, Singapore, Hong Kong, Cape 'mwn, Trincomalee, Aden and others
in the Indian and Pacific oceans, and Jamaica, Barbados, Antigua, Trinidad and
Tobago in the Caribbean basin.

France possessed a number of bases in. the World Ocean--on the coast of North
Africa, in the Near East, in the Caribbean Sea, the Indian Ocean basin, New Cale-
donia and other islands of the Pacific.

The United States of America took over the Panama Canal Zone and former Spanish
colonies in the Caribbean and the Rest Pacific. They aspired for other regions
as well.

World War I, which went on mainly in Europe and on the Atlantic Ocean, significantly
changed the positions of the imarialist states, including in the World Ocean.

The Great October Socialist Revolution in Russia dealt an annihilatory blow on
imperialism and its colonial aspirations. As a result of the revolution one of

the world's largest states with extensive sea borders on the Pacific and Arctic
oceans and the Baltic, Black and Caspian seas, and deeply interested in all aspects

We: . ., an angel's, a, 'soch.,'" Vol 23, p 761.

1
FOR OFFIZIAL USE ONLY
I’Vh Vl'l'lblﬂh Ua". Vl'bl

of the world Ocean's development, was thrust out of the world of capital to assume
a new, socialist path of development. '

During the war and especially after it, the maritime positions of countries such
as Germany and Turkey were significantly undermined. Most former German colonies
and military bases were seized by the USA, England, France and Japan.

In the period between the first and second world wars, the internal struggle within
the imperialist camp assumed large proportions. Waging predatory wars, Italy and
Japan significantly expanded their colonial dominions. The USA, England and
France created a number of new military bases on foreign territories. This led

to further aggravation of interimperialist conflicts.

During World War II the policy of Western imperialist powers was determined to a
significant extent by their anti-Soviet designs. The ruling circles of the USA,
England and France wanted to unleash Germany and Japan on the Soviet Union so as
to destroy the socialist state and concurrently weaken their rivals. with the
support of the imperialist circles of the USA, England and France, Nazi Germany
and Japan made feverish preparations for war.

However, the course of history confused the map of the imperialist strategists.

Countries that had incited Germany and Japan to armed aggression against the USSR
ended up the sacrifices to the aggressors themselves.

On 22 June 1941 Germany treacherously attacked the USSR. The USSR's entry into
the war, which was elicited by the attack of fascist Germany, culminated transfor-
mation of World War II, which began 1 September 1939 with Germany's invasion of
Poland, into a just, antifascist war on the part of forces opposing the Nazi bloc.
The Soviet-German front became the decisive front of all World War II.

The arena of the combat activities included not only Europe, Asia, Africa and
contiguous water basins but also the most remote regions of the Atlantic, Pacific,

Indian and Arctic oceans, as well as dozens of seas-—from the North and Baltic
seas to the Java and Philippine seas. Several million persons and an enormous
quantity of warships, transport vessels, warplanes and transport aviation took
part in combat at sea, in convoys carrying strategic raw materials, troops and
military equipment and in assault and anti-assault landing operations during World
war II.

The Soviet Navy made an enormous contribution to the victory over the enemy. Naval
seamen dependably kept the maritime flanks of the Soviet Army stable, made powerful

thrusts against the enemy's ships, bases and lines of communication, selflessly
defended marine shipping, landed assault parties, and when necessary they even

fought on land.

The naval forces of the Allies, mainly the USA and England, also made their con-
tribution to the victory over the common enemy. To a certain extent they maintained
the stability of the lines of communication in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean,
and they participated in major assault landing operations in North Africa, Italy
and, in the final stages of war, Normandy. The naval forces of the Allies managed
to restrain the offensive operations of the Japanese armed forces, and later on,
going over to the counteroffensive, they conducted a number of successful opera-

tions.

20
F0R10FFKJAI.USEIDNLY
As a result of the defeat of German fascism and Japanese militarism in world War II,
in which the Soviet Armed Forces played the decisive role, fmdamental change
occurred in the balance of powerinthe international arena in favor of socialism.

A number of countries in Central and Southeast Europe as well as in Asia abandoned
the capitalist system. In then, the dictatorship of the proletariat trimbed in
the form of a people's democracy.

The victory of peace-loving forces in World War II promoted extensive development
of the movement of national liberation in countries of Asia, Africa and Latin
America. while the deepest crisis of the colonial system was initiated by the
Great October Socialist Revolution, its disintegration began following World War II.
Dozens of former colonies and dependent countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America
were liberated from the colonial yoke. The struggle of national liberation pro-
ceeded on, and the colonial system of imperialism broke apart.

The world socialist system came into being as the result of fundamental changes
that occurred in the world following World War II, and it is now successfully
developing. At the same time the capitalist system suffered tremendous losses.
Following the war, the positions of capitalism continued to weaken. Under the
USA's lead, international imperialism did everything it could to unite the efforts

in the struggle against world socialism and the revolutionary movement of libera-
tion.

Fighting to establish world domination, the ruling circles of the USA openly de-
clared that their goals could be achieved only “from a position of strength."

They unleashed the "cold war,” and they elevated anticommnism and anti-Sovietism
to the rank of state policy.

0.5. imperialists took on the role of the "saviors" of capitalism. 'mey attempted
to hamstring West European and other countries that had been economically and
politically weakened by the war, transform them into obedient tools of their own
policy and place an obstacle before the path of the national liberation and revolu-
tionary movement. As a result many capitalist countries found themselves brought
into imperialist military-political blocs--NA'IO, ANZUS, ASPAC and others--against
the will of the people.

he North Atlantic bloc (mm) was created in 1959. It is the largest and, in
military and economic respects, the strongest grouping of capitalist states. There
are 15 countries in NAN-USA, England, France, PEG, Italy, Canada, Netherlands,

Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Turkey, Greece, Portugal, Luxembourg and lceland.’ The
total area of states in mm is more than 22 million square kilometers, with a

population of more than 550 million. The NATO countries are responsible for almost
three-fourths of all industrial production of the capitalist world.

HA'I'o's zone of operations includes vast expanses of water-the entire northern
part of the Atlantic and the Barents, Norway, Baltic, North, Mediterranean and

'France left NA'i’O's military organization in 1966, and Greece declared its departure
from the bloc's military organization in 1974.

21 .
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
Black seas.“ The fighting strength and reserves of the NATO navies total more than
2,000 ships, a third of them being submarines and large surface ships. The USA.
England and France possess a large transport fleet and a high-output ship building
industry. Other partners in the bloc do nct have such strong navies. aowever, their

geographic location helps NATO create a threat against the USSR and other socialist
states of Europe from the oceans and seas. Preparation for war in the Atlantic is

given a special role in NATO's aggressive strategic plans. "We believe,‘ military
theorists of the USA declare, "that in any war, supremacy in the Atlantic must be
the main concern of the ISA and our allies.... We do not wish to belittle the
significance of the Pacific and Indian oceans, but we must assert that in the final
analysis, even they depend on the Atlantic."

In terms of NA'IO's military structure, the Atlantic is singled out as an independent

theater of war, commanded by the supreme comander in chief--an American admiral.
His headquarters is located in Norfolk (USA).

The three main commands of individual regions of the ocean (Western, Eastern,
Iberian) and their staffs, as well as the three commands of the branches of forces--
the NATO strike fleet, the submarine forces and the permanent combined naval forma-
tion--are all subordinated to NA'no's supreme commander in chief of the combined
armed forces on the Atlantic. Commands and their staffs in individual regions of
the ocean represent the subordinate NATO units on the Atlantic.

the Rest Atlantic is divided into two regions--Canadian and oceanic, and three is-
land regions--Bermuda, Azors and Greenland. The so-called comand of the combined
antinubmarine forces of the West Atlantic operates here as well.

The East Atlantic is divided into the northern and central regions and the Faeroe
and Icelandic island regions. A comand was created here consisting of naval land-
based aviation in the Bast Atlantic and the combined sumarine forces of this
region.

The part of the Atlantic directly contiguous with Gibraltar has been isolated as
the so-called Iberian main command. It includes the command of the combined naval
forces in the Gibraltar region and the combined armed forces of the island of
Madeira.

The European cannand of the NATO combined armed forces also possesses specialized
naval control organs. These include the main command for the English Channel,
the consand of combined naval forces in Northern and Southern Europe, the-naval

command of the Baltic, the command of the naval strike forces in the southern
European theater of war, the comand of combined land-based aviation in the Medi-

terranean and a number of others.

The nature of the principal missions of NA'm's combined naval forces is no secret.
They nainly include performing nuclear missile strikes on the territory of

 

”the NATO countries are also extending their tentacles into the South Atlantic,
and the Indian and Pacific oceans. They are sending squadrons of ships and expedi-

tionary troops to these areas to support reactionary regimes in countries located
in these basins.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
combat operations against the navies of the Warsaw Pact countries, supporting trans-
Atlantic NA'm shipping, and assisting ground-troops engaged in combat operations on
the European continent. The composition of the fighting core of the navies of the
leading NATO countries is indicative in this.respect. It includes about 50 nuclear
missile submarines, 70 nuclear torpedo submarines, more than 140 diesel submarines.
more than 20 aircraft carriers (strike and antisubmarine), guided missile cruisers
and destroyers, frigates, escort ships and more than 200 landing ships.

'lhe organizatiohal structure of imperialist military blocs operating in the basins
of the Pacific and Indian oceans is not as distinct as that of mm. But these

blocs pursue the same goals as the North Atlantic bloc. Using these blocs, imperi-
alists are trying to create a tense situation on the eastern and southeastern borders

of the USSR,,retard development of the national liberation movement, use the tremen-
dous human resources of the developing countries in the interests of militarism and
keep sizeable markets, spheres of advantageous application of capital and sources
of the most valuable raw materials in imperialist hands.

The Pacific Ocean pact (ANZUS)--a military-political alliance consisting of the
(SA, Australia and New Zealand--was signed in 1951 and went into effect in 1952.

'lhe Asia and Pacific Council (ASPAC) was created in 1966. Its members include
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, mailand, the Phili pines and the puppet regimes of
Taiwan and South Korea.

me ANZUK military-political grouping was created in 1971. It included Great
Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore.

In addition to creating the multilateral blocs listed above, imperialist states

signed a number of bilateral military treaties and pacts in order to enact the
policies. The USA alone has such treaties with 60 countries.

The bloc stategy of imperialism is evperiencing an acute crisis today. The reasons
for it lie in processes occurring both in the international arena and within the
blocs themselves. The main ones are a change in the balance of powerinthe world
arena in the favor of socialism, growth in the international authority of countries
of the socialist fraternity and of their policy of peace, and the successes of
socialist countries in economics, science, culture and in maintenance of the
necessary defensive potential. The system of imperialist blocs is also weakening
because the peoples of the world now know from whence the military danger emanates.
Another reason for the crisis is that the USA's authority as the one-time univer-
sally recognized leader of the militaryhpolitical alliances has been seriously
undermined. Not at all long ago the menbers of aggressive blocs blindly followed
U.s. policy. Recently we have been observing growth in a tendency toward indepen-
dence in determination of foreign policy on the part of countries dependent on

the USA.

Realistically thinking representatives of the ruling circles of capitalist coun-
tries recognize the hopelessness of bloc military strategy and the fallacies'oi'

the hopes for surpassing the military might of the socialist powers. Imperialist
hopes for maintaining a monopoly on nuclear weapons have long gone into oblivion.

cii
FOR om I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

———-—1
___._. , ,—————————-—-——_
.M—

The plans of imperialists to use their navies to achieve supremacy in the World
Ocean have turned out to be unfounded.

In response to the imperialist threat from the sea, within a historically short
period of time the Soviet people have managed to create a powerful oceanic navy
capable of effectively protecting the state interests of the $51!, remaining for
long periods of time in remote regions of the marine theaters of war, successfully
opposing a strong enemy navy, and repelling enemy strikes from the ocean. Created
through the concern of the CPSU and by the labor and genius of the Soviet people,
the USSR Navy possesses modern ships, the design of which accounts for the latest
scientific-technical achievements and discoveries. The power of the Soviet Armed
Forces and particularly of the Soviet Navy, both of which are standing guard over
the peaceful labor of the Soviet people and the peoples of fraternal socialist
countries, has a sobering effect upon politicians and military officials in

capitalist countries who avoid the realities and continue to advertise plans for
a new world war.

There are many concrete manifestations of the crisis being suffered by imperialism's
bloc system. One of them was the 1977 break-up of the military bloc in Southeast
Asia--S£ATO. It was created in September 1954. The bloc contained seven countries,
USA, England, France, Australia, New zealand, Thailand, the Philippines and Pakistan.
This military grouping participated actively in almost all conflicts of Southeast
Asia. In 1979 the CBN‘TO bloc fell apart following the departure of Pakistan, Iran
and Turkey.

A number of significant changes have taken shape in NATO in recent years. As was
noted earlier, France left the bloc's military organization in 1966, and Greece
announced its departure from the military organization in 1974. Sharp disagree-
mnts also exist on NATO's northern flank. Despite pressure from the USA, Norway
and Denmark refuse to place foreign troops and nuclear stockpiles on their terri-
tory. The question of 0.5. and NATO bases is a topic of serious debate in the
government and in broad circles of the public of Iceland. In 1975 Iceland broke
diplomatic relations with its nearest neighbor and partner in NATO--Bngland-—for
a nutter of reasons having to do with economics and international law. Their

restoration in 1976 did not eliminate significant disagreements between England
and Iceland.

In all NATO countries the class struggle is growing more acute, the wave of
demands to reduce military budgets is rising and the way is being paved for im-

proving eoonomic ties with socialist countries and for reinforcing and widening
the attained level of political detente.

However, the reactionary forces of imperialism continue to actively pursue a
policy of maintaining military-political blocs, they are increasing allocations

to the arms race. they are creating new military bases and strongpoints in differ-
ent regions of the world, and they are continuing to interfere in the national
liberation and democratic movement of peoples. They are presently being supported
in this by the Beijing leadership, which has assumed the road of betrayal of the
interests of peace and socialism.

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Inperialism is intensifying the arms racenthat is, material preparations for war--
within the framework of its aggressive military blocs. In just the last few years
the military expenditures of the RAID countries grew by more than 20 percent.

Steps are beingtaken to widen the spheres of influence of the bloc, to spread this
influence far beyond the zone initially intended by the North Atlantic Treaty. “MO
is establishing contacts with Japan, and military ties with Israeli extremists and
with the racist regime in the Republic of South Africa are growing stronger. Naval
squadrons of the rum countries are perpetually present in the Indian Ocean. IMO

countries, especially the USA, have been making an effort in recent years to draw
Spain into this‘bloc.

In 1976 the NATO leadership decided to create a special squadron for operations in
the South Atlantic--scuth of the border of the bloc's former zone of operations--
the Tropic of Cancer. 'me future plans are to create, in the image and likeness of
“Am, a South Atlantic bloc which would unite, under the USA's leadership, Argen-
tina, Brazil and the Republic of South Africa.

Now that SEA'm has fallen, imperialists intend to create a "strategic island arc"
from Japan to Southeast Asia and to include, besides the Pacific Ocean, the Indian

Ocean in the sphere of influence of the militant blocs. me USA is attenpting to
restore its influence in the Near and Middle East following the overthrow of the

Shah's regime in Iran and disintegration of calm. American iwerialism is trying
to create, within the framework of the so-called "Carter Doctrine,‘ a new aggressive
bloc in this region containing Israel, Egypt and some other countries.

me bloc policy of imperialism is being opposed in the Soviet Union and other
countries of the socialist fraternity by organizing collective security both on a
regional basis (Europe, Asia etc.) and on a worldwide scale. 'Ihe concept being

followed here is that the cannon interests of all peoples, without exception, in
preventing destructive military conflicts create a connon platform for sensible

actions for the purposes of safeguarding the security of each state. As defined

by countries of the socialist fraternity, collective security calls not for military
blocs and groupings and not for opposition of one state against another, but for
development and promotion of good-neighbor cooperation of all states interested in
peace, irrespective of their sociopolitical structure.

neactionary imperialist circles are exerting considerableeffort to place the armed
forces contingents of capitalist countries over all the world, and primarily by
the borders of the Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist fraternity.
Relying on their aggressive military blocs, imperialists of the USA, England and
other countries have created a network of military bases on foreign territories,
they are continuing to outfit forward springboards at an intense pace, and they
have organized a global system of military communications, reconnaissance and
support for submarines and strategic aircraft. A significant part of these bases

and strongpoints are located in the sea and ocean basins, in the coastal regions
of West Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America and on islands and archipelagos.

In recent years the USA has been displaying increasingly greater recognition of

the strategic conception of maximum concentration of offensive military resources
primarily on islands, mainly on sparsely inhabited or completely uninhabited is-

lands. This conception can be explained by the wish of iuperialist strategists to

25
son OFFICIAL use om:
to conceal their aggressive activities more carefully from the eyes of the public
and to shield the bases and the troops stationed at them from the growing protest

of the popular masses against the imperialist policy of the USA and other capitalist
countries.

As we know the USA, England and other imperialist countries have many different
military facilities on foreign territory. Just the Pentagon alone, wrote the Qiban
journal VERDE OLIVO in October 1978, possesses more than 300 military bases cate-
gorized as large ones according to the standards of the armed services department.
Moreover up to 2,000 other military facilities are located in more than 30 countries.

About 5,000 army, air force and navy enlisted men and officers are permanently de-
ployed at these bases--two field armies, two operational fleets and several major

formations of strategic aviation and submarines--carriers of nuclear missiles.

The well known American politician N. Fulbright estimated that each year the
American treasury spends $25-30 billion--that is, 20-25 percent of its military
budget-~on the maintenance of this enormous network of bases and on the troops
stationed within it.

There are especially many military bases and facilities on the territory of NATO
countries in the Atlantic and Mediterranean basins._ Just the USA alone possesses

(in addition to bases on its own territory) more than 100 large and several hundred
other military facilities in the PRC, England, Holland, Belgium, Italy, Greece,
Turkey, Iceland, Greenland, the Bemuda and Bahama islands, Canada and so on.

A number of 0.5. military bases are located in Spain. More than 300,000 American
soldiers and seamen are deployed at these bases.

The most important ones are: the nuclear missile submarine bases at Holy Loch

(Scotland) and King's Bay USA), naval bases at Bremerhaven (ERG), Naples and
Maddalena (Italy), Piraeus (Greece), Izmir and Iskenderum (Turkey) and elsewhere.

The Pentagon attaches special significance to its bases in the Mediterranean Sea
basin. These play an important role in supporting the USA's notorious ”military
presence" in South Europe and North Africa, in implementing the USA's aggressive
policy course in the Near East, and in fighting against national liberation and
patriotic forces in this region. Using these bases, the USA supports the extremist
aspirations of Israel and supplies weapons to Israeli troops.

The USA possesses numerous military bases,- primarily naval and air bases, in the
western part of the Atlantic Ocean. Directly challenging the ideals of detente
and improvement of international relations, the Pentagon maintains the large naval
base of Guantanomo on Cuba and military facilities in the former Panama Canal Zone,
on the island of Puerto Rico and in other regions of the Caribbean basin.

Military bases are given an extremely important role in the Pentagon's so-called
"Arctic strategy." In its desire to ensure, for its armed forces and primarily

its navy, the possibility for maintaining control of straits leading from the
Arctic Ocean to the Atlantic, the USA is improving its network of military bases,

early warning radar, guidance and communication posts and other military
facilities in Northwest Canada and Newfoundland, Greenland and Iceland, and it is
making broad use of so-called "NATO bases" in this region, including Norway and
Denmark, in behalf of its interest as the "senior partner" in NATO.

26
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
England also possesses a number of important military bases in the Atlantic Ocean
msin. 'mese include the huge naval bases at Gibraltar and Famagust (CYprus) in
the Mediterranean and at Kingston in Jamaica, and a amber of facilities having

military significance on Trinidad and ‘lbbago, on the islands of Barbados and
Antigua, the Falkland Islands and elsewhere.

One of the most important components of the so-called "new Pacific doctrine” of the
USA is a highly developed network of American military bases in the Pacific basin.
The Pentagon has more than 100 air and naval bases on the territory of countries
dependent on the USA in this region, not counting hundreds of other military facili-
ties. The Pentagon maintains more than 150,000 soldiers and officers on foreign
territories in the Pacific basin.

Japan is the largest region of concentration of American bases in the Far East.
'lhe USA's large air and naval bases alone total more than 20. The main base of
the 0.8. Seventh Fleet is Yokuska. Sizeable forces are deployed at the naval base
of Sasebo, and the USA has created a number of naval and marine facilities on the

island of Okinawa. which has been transfoer by the Pentagon into the nuclear
missile arsenal of the Far East.

The (1.5. Armed Forces possess military facilities in South Korea (Mokp'o, Inch'on,
'l'aegu and elsewhere), in the Philippines (Subic Bay, Clark Field and so on).

Implementing its “strategy of withdrawal to the islands,“ the USA is creating mili-
tary facilities on Guam, Hake, Tinian and other Pacific islands, which are said
to be "protectorates of the USA” but which are actually simply annexed to the

latter. One of the largest American forward naval bases was created on Guam in
Apra Bay. A flotilla of nuclear missile submarines that patrols the western part

of the Pacific is based here. Anderson Air Base, at which major strategic air
forces, 3-52 bombers primarily, are concentrated is also located on this island.
During the period of American aggression in Indochina these bodaers made barbaric
raids against Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia (the People's Republic of Kampuchea as of
1979).

Relying on its military blocs and aggressive alliances (ANZUS, ANZUK, ASPAC and
others) as well as on so-called “bilateral treaties” imposed by the USA upon

states dependent upon it, the American war machine is forcefully penetrating into
Malaysia, Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand. In Australia, the OSA possesses
important centers of communication, long-i-...\ge reconnaissance and support to strate-
gic forces--at Pine Gap. Cockburn Sound and aorth Nest Cape. Since July 1976 a
nunber of ports and naval bases of Australia have been open to American warships
operating in the South Pacific and in the Indian Ocean.

The network of American bases in the Pacific is associated with the system of

bases in the Indian Ocean. As early as in the 1950's the Pentagon created military
and naval bases in a number of countries of the Indian Ocean basin. me Pentagon

built an air base in Dhahran (Saudi Arabia), a naval base at the port of Manama
(nahrein) , a forward naval base near Doha (Qatar), a nuuber of reconnaissance
facilities in Pakistan and so on. Simultaneously the USA managed to obtain the
right from England to use some English naval facilities in this region (Helfort in
Rhodesia, the Maldive Islands and so on).

27
_ ma 01??!an use ONLY
But time passed, the situation in the world changed, and the people's national
liberation struggle intensified, including in countries of the Indian Ocean basin.
The Pentagon was compelled to make significant concessions in the face of this

struggle. Military facilities were closed in Pakistan, the Maldive Islands and a
number of other countries of Asia and Africa. Nevertheless American imperialists

are still trying to preserve their positions in this region under the new conditnxn.

The USA obtained permission from England to create a new large naval base on the

territory of an English colony-~the island of Diego Garcia. On this island. located
in the very center of the Indian Ocean, the Pentagon built a huge airfield for

naval aviation and long-range airplanes, modern port facilities, a communication
center, storage dumps and repair shops. The base at Diego Garcia is a direct
threat to the peace and security of peoples in the Indian Ocean basin, and a brazen
challenge to the peace-loving forces of most states in this region.

As before, England possesses large military facilities in the Indian Ocean basin.
Despite the fact that the British Empire suffered sizeable losses as a result of

the national liberation movement in the colonies, English inperialism is aspiring
to preserve its ”military presence" in regions ”east of Suez.“ The English armed

forces are using a number of bases in the Republic of South Africa (in particular
the naval base at Simonstown), they are maintaining troops and naval forces in
Singapore and Malaysia, and they are holding onto some military facilities in the
Persian Gulf (Sharja, Muscat, etc.), on the Chess Islands, the island of Masira,
and in some other places.

Laying its hopes as before on military intervention, the USA continues to maintain
its large and most combat ready naval formations--the Sixth and Seventh operational
fleets-~near the coast of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. More-
over there are three flotillas of nuclear missile submarines operating in waters
contiguous with the borders of the USSR, mainly in the North Atlantic, Mediterran-
ean and Host Peeific. According to the Western press theSe flotllias are intended
mainly for surprise missile strikes against the principal economic and political
centers of peace-loving states. American strategic 8-52 bombers make flights in
the direction of the borders of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving countries.

The Sixth and Seventh fleets play the most active role in implementing the military-
political course of reactionary circles.in the USA.

The sixth Fleet is permanently deployed in the Mediterranean basin, taking its
support from American and NATO bases in Spain, Italy, Turkey, Greece and some
other countries. It interacts actively with naval and other combined forces of
the North Atlantic bloc and with the fleets of other aggressive states, primarily
Israel. The fleet usually consists of 20—25 warships and approximately as many
auxiliary vessels, assault transporters, tankers, floating drydocks and so on.

The ships are combined into seven formations (a carrier strike force consisting
of one or two aircraft carriers and security ships, antisubmarine, submarine,

amphibious assault and so on). The strength of the fleet is more than 30,000 men,
to include a reinforced marine batallion containing l,600-l,800 enlisted men and
officers, permanently deployed aboard assault landing ships and moving together
with the fleet's main forces.

28
Fox OFFICIAL use ONLY
The fleet's coﬁcsition if variable. It grows larger quickly when the situation be-
comes aggravat "in the Mediterranean Sea or in contiguous regions and when the
Pentagon holds threatening demonstrations or conducts operations in support of
antipopular regimes and reactionary forces. Such was the case, for examle, in
October 1973 during the Arab-Israeli conflict. m Sixth Pleat was nearly doubled:

'NO strike car-E’iérs, two helicopter assault carriers and other ships as well as
a second marine battalion reinforced with tanks, helicopters and nuclear missiles

ware added to its composition from the east coast of the USA.

The Seventh Fleet is deployed in the West Pacific. According to the Pentagon‘s
plans its "zone of responsibility‘I also includes the Indian Ocean basin and contigu-
ous regions. In this connection it has a somewhat larger number of ships than the
Sixth Pleet--40—50 warships, as well as more auxiliary vessels of different kinds.
Usually the fleet consists of two or three strike carriers, four or five guided
missile cruisers, up to 20 frigates and destroyers, five or six sdamarines and up
to lo assault landing ships, brought together into the same formations as in the

Sixth Fleet. Its strength is about 50,000 men, to include a reinforced marine
battalion deployed on assault landing ships. ‘lhe 3d Marine Division, which is

deployed on Okinawa, is operationally subordinated to the fleet.

Ships of the Seventh Fleet regularly make military preparations and make so—called
"flag demonstrations" in the Indian Ocean. In this connection, the Western press
reports, certain circles in the USA are suggesting more and more persistently to

create a fifth operational fleet specifically for the Indian Ocean. They explain
this by the notion that the Pentagon allegedly ”needs a sea watchdog in the Indian

Ocean identical to the one displaying the American flag at the shores of Southeast
Asia and the Far Best."

For the moment these missions are performed by, in addition to ships of the Seventh
Fleet that make visits to the Indian Ocean, a special formation deployed in the
Red Sea (with its main base on the Bahrein Islands)--Hiddle Eastern 0.8. naval
forces consisting of a control ship, two destroyers and a hunter of auxiliary
vessels.

The English war machine also maintains its naval forces on foreign territory,
at bases located in colonial and dependent countries. ships of the British fleet,

airplanes and marine subunits are located in the Near East and in the Mediterranean
basin (Gibraltar, cyprus, the Persian Gulf area), the Indian Ocean, the Far East
and Latin America. Together with the navies and other forces of the USA, the

MG and other numbers of aggressive blocs, the English fleet participates regularly
in various exercises and maneuvers, it develops new springboards and regions, it
provides aid to antipopular regimes. and it conducts operations in colonial and
dependent countries against national liberation forces. Such was the case in the
years following World War II in Burma, Malaya and a nmber of other countries in
Asia and Africa, then in Brunei, Sarawak and Guiana, in recent years in a nuaber of
regions in the Persian Gulf and Southeast Asia, and so on.

The armed forces of the imperialist powers, including their fleets, are doing more

than developing remote theaters and basing areas, and more than performing maneuvers
and demonstrations of force. 'Ihey are actively attempting to interfere in the life

and policy of other states, primarily those that do not wish to align themselves

29
FOR OFFICIAL use om:
with the plans and designs of imerialism, that prefer to pursue a truly independent
policy, follow a noncapitalist path and develop ties with socialist countries.
Therefore the USA, England and other capitalist countries are using their armed
forces in an attempt to preserve their positions in the World Ocean. Reactionary
imperialist circles have no intention of abandoning their aggressive global designs
and their plans of aggression against the Soviet Union and other socialist countries.

Imperialist countries, and primarily the USA, Pm and England, are continuing to
maintain armed forces with a strength clearly not in keeping with the aspiration ,
for peace and peaceful coexistence asserted by the ruling circles and by bourgeois
propaganda. 'lhe ISA alone has about 2.1 million persons in regular formations, not
counting almost 1 million in the so-called National Guard and in reserve formations
of the army, air force and navy. There are almost half a million men in the army of

the PKG, and the English armed forces total about 300,000 men. The total strength
of NATO armed forces exceeds 5 million persons.

These troops possess modern armament, canbat equipment and other resources of war.
The best prepared formations are manned by regular personnel. In some countries
(the USA, England and, in part, the PM) the armed forces are manned completely
by mercenaries, a significant number of whom have had codaat experience (Vietnam,

Korea. colonial wars and punitive expeditions). Personnel of all branches of the
armed forces undergo intensive combat training. Privates and seamen are subjected

to daily brainwashing based on the ideals of militarism, anticommunism, pseudo-
patriotism, racism and colonialism.

The navy occupies an important place in the overall system of imperialism's war
preparations. Supremacy at sea has always been and continues to be one of the core
issues of the foreign policy and military development of large imperialist countries,
primarily the USA and England. The navies of these countries are given one of the

min roles in implementing an aggressive foreign policy course, supporting anti-
popular, colonial and imperialist policies and fighting against national liberation
forces.

The navy makes up about a third of all of the USA‘s armed forces. Allocations for
the navy have been 33-35 percent of the total military budget in all postwar years.
While expenditures have grown by an average of 3.3 percent per year for ground
troops and 4.5 percent for air forces in recent years, they have increased by

6.3 percent per year for the navy.

The American navy is the largest in the capitalist world. The operating fleet
consists of more than 300 warships of different classes, more than 1,900 naval
aircraft and three marine divisions. There are 656 Polaris and Poseidon inter-
continental ballistic missiles aboard 41 nuclear missile submarines contained
within the strategic strike forces. The navy's personnel total 715,000, to include
about 190,000 marines.

The ships of the navy are divided between two basic major combat formations-the
Atlantic and Pacific fleets. Each of them includes both operational major forma-
tions (operational fleets, squadrons and so on) and formations of homogeneous

forces (carrier, cruiser-destroyer, amphibious, submarine, auxiliary and so on),
as well as marine aviation units and shore services. The Atlantic fleet includes

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one marine division (the 2d) while the Pacific fleet contains two (the let and 3d).

one air wing (containing more than 100 airplanes and helicopters) is attached to
each division.

’Ihe U. 5. Navy contains special "overseas comands" such as, for example, the naval
couunand for Western Europe, the naval command for the Middle East, naval forces in
Japan, South Korea and the Philippines, and so on. These overseas couands are
used to implement a global aggressive policy, to prepare theaters and springboards,
to conduct count activities against national liberation forces and to implement
"gunboat diplomacy."

So-called ”rapid deployment forces" created in the USA for armed intervention in
the Near East,' Southeast Asia, Africa and Latin America are a special danger to

peace.

Other imperialist countries possess sizeable naval forces as well. Most of them
aspire to increase the strength of their navies (in part through their own ship
building and in part through acquisition of ships, armaments and military equipment
from the USA and other NAN countries), subject their personnel to intensive coubat
training and use their navies in colonial adventures and aggressive provocations and
operations mainly together with their ”main partners” in the aggressive military
blocs.

The open desire of aggressive imperialist forces to oppose the internationn course

toward detente, and to prepare and conduct dangerous acts against peace-loving
forces is eliciting the serious apprehensions of all to whom peace and the security
of peoples are precious, all who would wish the World Ocean to serve the purposes
of raising the welfare of peoples and improving their cooperation in various areas
of economics, trade, politics, progress and peace.

The World Ocean mist Be a Zone of Peace

The main factor creating an objective possibility for bridling the inerialist
policy of aggression and transforming the World Ocean into a zone of peace is the
peace-loving policy of countries in the socialist fraternity, lead by the Soviet
Union.

The Program of Peace, which was proposed by the 24th CPSU Congress and which enjoyed
its further organic continuation and development in a program for further struggle
for peace and international cooperation and for the liberty and independence of
peoples, adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress, is promoting alteration of the entire
system of international relations in the interests of the security of peoples,

their liberty and independence. It is aimed at implementing a complex of concrete
measures called upon to consolidate a strong and just peace on our planet for many

generations of people. The further struggle for peace. liberty and independence
of peoples requires that we pursue the following specific objectives:

concentrate efforts of the peace-loving states on liquidation of remaining centers

of military danger, and mainly on achieving a just and firm settlement in the Near
East, and promote cessation of the arms race in this region of the world:

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in compliance with the principles of peaceful coexistence, continue successive
development of the relationships of long-term mutually advantageous cooperation in
various areas-~in politics, economics. science and culture-with the USA, France,
FRG, Great Britain, Italy, Canada, Japan and other capitalist countries:

attempt to conclude a world treaty on intolerability of force in international
relations;

develop a course toward full assurance of security in Europe and Asia;

completely eliminate all vestiges of the system of colonial oppression, infringe-
ments upon the equality and independence of peoples and all centers of colonialism
and racism.

Together with the fraternal countries of socialism the Soviet union is constantly
fighting for implementation of this noble task, one in keeping with the interests
of millions of people throughout the entire world.

The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist fraternity are exerting a
great deal of effort to develop relaxation of international tension. The USSR

is for strict compliance by all countries with the principles of freedom of the
high seas and freedom of navigation in the World Ocean, it is for prohibition of
the use of the floor of the seas and oceans and its subsoil for military purposes,
and it is against attempts by certain states to unilaterally widen their territor-
ial waters and extend their jurisdiction to straits used for international shipping
and to enormous expanses of the continental shelf.

These efforts resulted in the signing of a Soviet-American treaty on preventing
incidents on the high seas and in the airspace above them in May 1972, and a treaty
on cooperation in exploration of the World Ocean in June 1973. The Treaty Pro-

hibiting Installation of Nuclear Weaponsandcmher Forms of Mass Destruction
weapons on the seabed and Its Subsoil also has important significance. This

treaty was signed in 1971 by representatives of the USSR, Great Britain and the
USA .

Unfortunately the struggle centering on these issues is far from finished. They
are now becoming increasingly more acute at times. In some capitalist countries
efforts are being made to create self—powered missile systems with nuclear warheads
that would be capable of "hovering at a certain depth" or ”just barely touching"

the bottom. The USA is working on a new underwater weapon called 'CAPTOR." It is
a combination of an anchored mine and an antisubnarine torpedo carrying a nuclear

charge. The effective radius of the "CAPTOR" acoustic apparatus exceeds l km,
it can be deployed at a depth of 800 meters, and its life is up to 5 years.

The Soviet Navy is a resource of peace-loving policy and friendship of peoples,
a policy of toiling the aggressive desires of imperialism. restraining military
adventures and decisively opposing threats to the security of peoples on the
part of imperialist powers.

when the oceanic expanses became a part of the operational area of the USSR Navy,

the USSR obtained new, broader possibilities for using the navy in peacetime to
support its state interests.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Imperialist propaganda tries to portray the presence of soviet ships in the World
Ocean as "aggression," as "'a threat to the freedom of navigation." But at the sane

away from theirown bases, and that they are maintaining tension on the sea borders
of the socialis'tnand developing countries. Imperialist propaganda also says nothing
about the fact that it is our country, together with other countries of the
socialist fraternity, that constantly initiates proposals ained at relaxing ten-
sion, at reducing. armed forces and arnanents, at reducing military activities of
noncoastal states- in the Mediterranean and Indian Ocean and at transforming the
expanses of the World Ocean into a zone of peace. And it is not our fault that
these proposals are not yet adequately understood by the capitalist world.

was unmasked in the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 25th
CPSU Congress: "The principal motive of proponents of the arms race is to assert
presence of a so-called Soviet threat. This motive is utilized whenever a higher
military budget that would reduce expenditures on social needs must be railroaded
through, whenever new forms of death-dealing weapons are developed, and whenever
attempts are nude to justify NA'm's military activities. In fact, of course, there
is no Soviet threat, neither from the Nest nor from the East. All of this is a
monstrous lie--from the beginning to the end.“

Official visits by Soviet ships to the ports of foreign states serve the policy of
peace and increase the international authority of the USSR. Each year Soviet
seamen visit dozens of foreign countries as guests. Visits by every vessel rein-
force friendship and mutual understanding between peoples.

Soviet seamen often provide assistance to the peoples of a particular country.
Thus, helping the people of Egypt to surmount the aftermath of'inperialist
aggression, seamen of the Pacific and Black Sea fleets swept nines from the Gulf
of Suez. The crews renaincd in the minefields for more than 6,000 hours. Having
swept a distance of more than 17.00 nautical miles, they eliminated the mine
threat from an area of 1,250 square stiles.

Helping the young People's Republic of Bangladesh to cur-cunt the aftermath of the
Indo-Pakistani conflict of 1971, Soviet seamen did a great deal of work to clear
the port of Chittagong and to sweep nines from its approaches. Soviet divers
worked under water 45,000 hours, helping to raise 26 sunken vessels. Minesweeping
operations were conducted over an area of more than 1,000 square miles.

Soviet naval seamen honorably represent the country of the great Lenin far from
the motherland. The high culture of their behavior, their discipline, their
friendly attitude toward the local public, and their respect for the latter's
traditions and customs elicit deep sympathies toward Soviet people. As a result

of every visit of a Soviet ship to a foreign port, the Soviet people gain my
new friends.

______— .
*"Materialy xxv s"yezda KPSS," p 22.

33
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
Soviet naval seamen consistently perform their international duty to socialist
countries. Our friends hold the great support rendered to them by the Soviet Union
in high esteem. Brotherhood in arms grows stronger, coordination develops and the

best experience is exchanged at joint exercises and in cruises conducted by Narsaw
Pact countries.

Soviet seamen have made a significant contribution to studying the pressing problems
of oceanography. This is not only promoting progress in world science, man's

development of the expanses of the World Ocean and solution of many problems of
worldwide nature conservation, but it is also helping us to raise the effectiveness

of our motherland's national economy. The labor of Soviet oceanographere is helping
us to understand the laws of oceanic and atmospheric processes better, which is

important to developing methods of long-range weather forecasting and to revealing
theological, hydrological and other features of the seas.

About 500 new atlases and maps made by Soviet oceanographers, including naval sea-
men, were exhibited at the Sixth Congress of the USSR Geographical Society, held in
December 1975. Jointly with vessels of the USSR Academy of Sciences‘ scientific
research fleet, oceanographic and hydrographic vessels of the USSR Navy have parti-
cipated and continue to participate in many international programs of exploration
of the Caribbean and Mediterranean seas and the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans.

The fight to avert further pollution of the world Ocean by liquid wastes, petroleum
and radioactive and other toxic substances has tremendous significance today.

The Soviet Union has initiated a number of international agreements on protection
of the seas from pollution by toxic substances. In the USSR, protection of water
from pollution is treated as a nationwide task. Soviet legislation foresees

strict liability for pollution of the seas by substances harmful to human health
and to living organisms of the sea. An example of successive implementation of
major socioeconomic programs to improve the natural environment can be found in
the decree adopted in 1976 by the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Government,
"On Measures to Prevent Pollution of the Black and Azov Sea Basins.“ The navy has
special regulations on preventing pollution of the seas by ships, vessels and
shore facilities.

Experience shows us that the situation in the World Ocean continues to be complex
and conflicting, as is true on the entire globe.

On one hand owing to the peaceful policy of countries of the socialist fraternity
and as a result of their struggle to transform the world Ocean into a zone of
peace, significant successes have been achieved.

on the other hand imperialist circles continue to inflame the situation in the
World Ocean, implement a strategy of bases and blocs and pursue a policy of neo-
tnlonialism. The aggressive, antipopular course of the Beijing leadership is
promoting aggravation of the situation in the World Ocean, and chiefly in countries
of Asia and in the Far East. Under these conditions the main guarantee of bridling
the aggressors is dependable protection of the revolutionary achievements of the
people and reinforcement of the economic and defensive might of the USSR and other
countries of the socialist fraternity.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Chapter II. Geography of the World Ocean
Propagation of Acoustic Waves in the World Ocean

One of the most iaportant physical features of sea water is that it blocks electro-
magnetic waves. At the same time ocean water is a conductor of acoustic waves.
Sound propagates in sea water almost five times faster than in air; a l kw sound
can be heard 30-40 km away, and farther in some conditions. In air, a 100 kw sound
is audible at distances up to 15 km.

Propagation of hydroacoustic waves is influenced by temperature, salinity,
pressure, depth of the sea and the nature of the bottom, the sea state, turbidity
of the water due to suspended impurities of organic and inorganic origin, and
presence of dissolved gases.

Differences in water density cause change in the speed of sound. Consequently a
hydroacoustic wave propagates not in a straight line but along a couple: trajectory
depending on refraction. Bubbles of gas, suspended particles and plankton scatter
and absorb acoustic energy. sharp irregularities in water masses (transition
layers, so—called "cold walls." and so on) create considerable interference to
propagation of acoustic waves.

The causes influencing propagation of sound in water are divided into constant ,
which are easily accounted for, and random, which yield to analysis and accounting

with difficulty. Both the former and the latter depend on the tine of year and day,
geographic position, depth, currents and other factors characterizing the state of
the sea water column.

Among all factors influencing propagation of sound in water, 'the temperature of
the environment has great significance. A beam of sound traveling in sea water
tends toward colder (and less saline) layers. At night the colder layers are at the

sea surface, and beams tend toward the latter (positive refraction). On a hot day
beams descend (negative refraction).

Parameters characterizing change in speed of sound, temperature, salinity and
hydrostatic pressure with depth are respectively referred to as the gradients of
speed of sound, temperature, salinity and pressure.

As was noted earlier, water temperature drops quickly with depth, eliciting a
sharp drop in the speed of sound. At a certain depth the speed of sound begins to
grow due to an increase in hydrostatic pressure. A unique waveguide, called the
underwater sound channel (USC), arises in the layer in which the speed of sound is
minimum. once in it. an acoustic wave is no longer able to emerge from it (it is
reflected from its walls). Hydroacoustic energy can propagate over treoendous
distances in this channel. For example according to observations a 0.25 kg bomb
exploding in the Atlantic Ocean can be heard well for a distance of about 1,500 km,
while one weighing 2.7 kg can be heard up to 5,750 km. A 22.5 kg bomb that was
detonated at the coast of Australia was heard at the Bermuda Islands (it took the
sound 3 hours 43 minutes to travel 19,200 km).

35
son omcmz. use ONLY
In the Atlantic Ocean. the depth of the axis of the 05C.increases from 600-800
meters in its northern part to l,300-l,500 meters in the tropical region. As we
approach the equator the depth of the axis of the use decreases to 600 meters, and

then it grows in the southern tropical zone to 9004.000 meters. In the vicinity
of the South Pole the depth at which the axis of the use lies once again decreases

to 100-200 meters. The same distribution of depths of the use axis is typical of
the Pacific Ocean.

The USC axis lies at about 100 meters in the polar regions of both hemispheres.
In the Indian Ocean the depth at which the USC's axis lies rises from 100 meters in
the south to 1,500 meters in the north.

hydrological conditions in which the axis of the USC rises to several dozen meters-—
that is, in which a surface acoustic channel forms--may occur in a mnber of regions

and in certain seasons. This channel arises when tenperature is vertically dis-
tributed-~that is, when there is a temperature minimum at a certain depth. In

certain cases, relatively rare, a surface sound channel may also arise in response
to change in sea water salinity.

Ocean Dynamics

In addition to horizontal and vertical movements of water masses, waves are typical
of the dynamic state of the ocean. Waves are produced by wind, tides and earth-
quakes. wind waves arise as a result of the transfer of energy from the atmosphere
to water. In this connection their size depends on the time of presence and speed
of the wind.

A unified nine-point wave force scale was introduced in our country in 1953. Ab—
sence of waves is given zero points, and extreme waviness is given nine points
(wave height--more than 11 meters, wave length--more than 220 meters).

The zones of maximum waviness of the World Ocean were charted on the basis of
numerous studies. 'No such zones were discovered in the North Atlantic. One of
them is on the east coast of North America. Here the waves reach a height of up

to 20 meters. Another zone with waves up to 16 meters high is located west of
Scotland. The center of largest waves in the Pacific is located in the north-

western and central parts of the ocean. A wave 34 meters high was observed in the
central Pacific on 6 February 1956. On 30 mrch 1956 Soviet explorers aboard the
diesel-electric ship Ob' registered a wave 26 meters high north of the Balleny
Islands.

The map of zones of maximum waviness compiled by Soviet scientists has great
practical significance. Using it, seamn can avoid hazardous storm regions. This

is especially important to vessels or structures that cannot endure storms for one
reason or another. In July 1964 Soviet seamen had to move a giant floating d::y-

dock from the Baltic to the Black Sea. Calculations showed that the dry dock would
break up if it found itself on the crest of a large wave. Some experts suggested
cutting this large structure in half and towing each part separately. But wind

wave researchers gave assurances that stormy weather was improbable along the
suggested route in July, and that in the most difficult section of the route, the

36
ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
Biscay Bay, wave height would not exceed 4-5 meters, and length would not exceed
160 meters. Throughout the entire trip the weatherman carefully monitored the

weather, so that in the case of danger the drydock could enter the nearest port.
The drydock was delivered to its destination safely.

Waves gradually-lose their height as they move from the region of their arisal
(they lose about half their height in 2,000 km). Waves travel enormous distances.
Waves originating in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean were observed 13,000 km
away, on the coast of California.

In addition to surface waves, internal waves may arise within ocean water. They

form at the boundary of two layers of water differing in density. The speed of
such waves is usually lower than that of surface waves, but they can have a larger

amplitude. Tyagm's--intemal resonant oscillations of water--are sometimes ob-
served in bays and ports.

Underwater movements of the earth's crust (earthquakes, volcanic eruptions) elicit
long-period waves in the ocean--sunamis. Information on sunamis reaches back to

479 B.C. Since that time there have been about 355 sunamis, 30 of which were
elicited by volcanic activity. Three hundred eight sunamis were noted in the Pacific,

15> were observed in the Atlantic and 21 were observed in the Mediterranean.

The length of a sunami can attain 200 km, and its speed can reach up to 900 kin/hr.

A sunami can cross an ocean, for example from Chile to Kamchatka. In the open

ocean sunamis are barely noticeable, since in comparison with their length, the
height of such waves is negligible. But when such waves reach shallows, and es-
pecially constrictions in the coastline, they may cause enormous havoc in the coastal
area.

Currents have an important place in the dynamics of water masses having a great
influence on navigation. They ury be subdivided in relation to the factors or

forces eliciting them, in relation to stability, depth, nature of movement and
physicochemical properties. Currents are divided in terms of factors eliciting
them into gradient, wind, drifting and tidal.

The pattern of water movement is almost identical in all surface currents of the
World Ocean.

Navigators are interested in closed rotating systems of currents which oceanologists
usually refer to as circulations. Certain parts of circulations exhibiting a
clearly expressed orientation (meridional or zonal, along parallels) are commonly
called branches. Masses of water rotating clockwise are called anticyclones, and
those rotating anticlockwise are called cyclones.

There are large subtropical anticyclonic circulations in the' Atlantic, Indian and
Pacific oceans. The Northern and Southern tradewind currents are made up of low-
latitu-lc branches of these circulations. These are broad (up to 2,000 km on the
meridional axis) and stable currents with a speed of 0.4-1 knots (0.7-1.8 kin/hr) ,
and they may achieve a speed of 3.6 knots (7.2 km/hr). In these oceans, approxi-
mately between the equator and the tropics, currents are oriented from east to
west.

37
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
sun ya. -\...u- v-.. —......

The Gulf Stream and the Japan Current are western branches of the subtropical cir—
culations of the Northern Hemisphere. These are relatively narrow (100-500 kmo and
fast streams that hug the shore near their places of origin and turn out into the
open ocean at moderate latitudes. Part of these streams breaks away from the
common flow to form a current traveling toward the equator. The bulk of the Gulf
Stream and Japan Current moves eastward, and further on these currents form the
North Atlantic and North Pacific currents respectively. In turn, the latter par-
tially feed in to the circulations of the northern latitudes (most intensively in

the Atlantic), initiating unstable eastern currents: the Portugese and Canaries in
the Atlantic and the California in the Pacific, which link up with the huge sub-

tropical circulations of the Northern Hemisphere.

In the Southern Hemisphere subtropical circulations are even larger, but their
western branches——the Brazil and East Australian currents-~are much weaker than
the Gulf Stream and Japan Current. In the Pacific the eastern branch of the
circulation--the Peru Current (it is sometimes called the Humboldt Current)--
is an exception: It is strongest and narrowest of the currents on the eastern

shore of the ocean. The strong Igol'nyy Current (sometimes called Agulyasov's
Current) forms in the western part of the Indian Ocean circulation. It opposes

the weak and diffuse West Australian Current in the east.

The largest current in the World Ocean is the West wind Current. This is a powerful
and deep (2,500-3,000 km) current moving at speed of 0.5-0.7 knots (0.9-1.4 km/hr).
It crosses three oceans, and it links up with the southern subtropical circulations.

Currents at moderate and high latitudes exhibit cyclonic rotation. They are

clearly pronounced in the northern parts of the oceans, especially the Atlantic.
The powerfulness of the North Atlantic and North Pacific currents influences the
intensity of the entire circulation.

The principal circulations are located northwest of the North Atlantic Current.

The latter contributes a part of its waters successively to the warm Irminger and
West Spitsbergen currents. Then it enters the Arctic Ocean as the Norwegian Current.
Owing to the warmth of these currents the winters on Iceland, Spitsbergen and the
north coast of Scandinavia are unusually mild for these latitudes. The cold

Eastern Greenland current enters the Atlantic from the Arctic Ocean, linking to-
gether all circulations of the moderate and polar latitudes in the northern part

of the ocean. The southernmost branch of the circulation--the cold Labrador
Current—-pentrates farsouthward, where it meets the Gulf Stream.

In the Pacific we observe two ring currents-~in the Gulf of Alaska and the Bering
Sea. The western branch of the circulation-~the cold Kamchatka and Oyashio
currents—-descends southward, cooling the entire east coast of Asia. The North
Pacific Current warms the high latitudes much less than does the North Atlantic

Current. In the North Pacific the boundaries of the continents force the warm
currents to turn southward.

Subpolar circulations in the Antarctic are very weak and unstable. They exist in
the Ross, Bellingshausen and Waddel seas. The southern branch of this circula-
tion--the Antarctic Coastal Current--is especially unstable, and its speed is low.

38
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
One anticyclonic circulation is observed in the Arctic Ocean, the integrity of which
is disturbed by circulations in the seas and by a branch flowing from the Glukchi

Sea over the North Pole to Greenland. Currents in the Arctic are weak, growing in
intensity only as they reach the boundary of the Atlantic.

The equatorial and tropical zones are distinguished by especially high activity.
Trade winds in the tropics are responsible for powerful tradewind currents. A
band of still weather and weak winds is located between the North wind and trade
wind zones. The Equatorial or Intertradewind Countercurrent is observed in the
band of weak winds. Countercurrents are observed in all oceans. A countercurrent
arises in the Pacific Ocean near the Philippines, and it moves directly eastward
somewhat north of the equator. It crosses the entire ocean for a distance of
8,500 nautical miles (about 15,700 Inn) at an average speed of 1-1.5 knots (2-3 kin/hr).
A countercurrenb- originates in the Atlantic 700-l,000 nautical miles (l,300-l,850
km) from the shores of South America, from where it proceeds eastward, gradually
growing in intensity as it crosses the equator. It then continues on as the
Guinea Current. The latter travels southward to feed the waters of the Southern
Tradewind Current.

In the Indian Ocean the system of equatorial currents, which is displaced southward
from the equator, is under the intense influence of monsoon winds. In winter
(December-February) in the Northern Hemisphere, when the northeastern monsoons

blow, the system of equatorial currents behaves as in the other oceans. Tradewind
currents and countercurrents form here. Only the Somali Current (similar to the

Gulf Stream and the Japan Current) behaves unusually. It moves southward as a
wide band. In summer (June-August), in the period of the southwestern monsoons,
the Equatorial Countercurrent disappears, and the Somali Current races northward
at high speed as a narrow stream.

Circular movement of waters also dominates in the seas. In this case movement of
waters in seas of the Northern Hemisphere is cyclonic. Sea circulations are less

stable than oceanic circulations, but they exist almost constantly.

Surface currents have been studied for many centuries. Interest toward them arose
especially in recent times in connection with intense development of the submarine
fleet. Surface currents also have great significance to fishermen. The latter are
especially interested in zones in which waters of different origins come together.
These are so-called frontal zones, or zones of convergence. Such zones are dis-
tinguished by high biological productivity. At river mouths, at boundaries between
cold and-warm currents, andwherever a current neighbors on a countercurrent,
plankton-«the food source of inhabitants of the oceans and seas--thrive.

Many new things have been discovered about the most powerful and best known cur-
rent--the Gulf stream. As we know, this giant system extends all the way to
Spitsbergen and Novaya Zemlya (10,000 km). The latest research has established
that the Brazilian "corner" of South America, which protrudes into the ocean,
forces not only waters of the Northern Tradewind Current but also a significant
part of the waters of the Southern Tradewind Current to enter the Caribbean Sea.
From there, these currents proceed as the Guyana Current across the Lesser Antilles

island chain. Under the influence of the trade winds, these currents merge and
penetrate through the Yucatan strait and head westward through the southern part

39
FOR orucm use ONLY
of the Gulf of Mexico and then through the Florida strait into the Atlantic. The
Gulf Stream carries 50-70 times more' water than do all rivers of the earth. 1310
width of the current is 75-120 km, and the depth to which water flows is 700-800
meters. The waters of this current carry a colossal quantity of heat which warms
almost all of Europe, especially Western and Northern Europe. In our country the
(half Stream influences the tremendous amount of territory west of a line extending
through Odessa, Gor'kiy and the mouth of the ob’. Owing to the Gulf Stream the
climate on the north coast of Europe is significantly warmer than at the same
latitudes in North America. For example evergreen plants grow in England, while
the northernmost of the Lofoten Islands, which are near the Arctic circle, enjoy
the mean annual temperature of the Crimea.

At the same time it has been established that the Gulf Stream does not fully justify
the name attached to it: Waters of the Gulf of Mexico take almost no part in its
formation. The (half Stream is far from a homogeneous current. It consists of

a number of intermixing streams that move at different speeds. The maximm recorded
speed of the current is 2.75 meters/second. Narrow countercurrents have been
discovered along both sides of the main current, but on the ocean side the current
is more stable.

Soviet oceanographers discovered a'nunber of powerful currents deep in the ocean.
In 1958 an expedition aboard the research vessel "Mikhail lomonosov" discovered
another huge countercurrent in the equatorial latitudes of the Atlantic Ocean
beneath the waters of the Southern Tradewind Current. Between 1959 and 1968 Soviet
scientists systematically studied the new current. They collected and computer-
processed about 1.5 million figures characterizing the size of this "underwater
river.“ Treatment of the measurements made it possible to establish the speed of
the current, its width, depth, the volumetric flow rate and the boundaries. Its
"banks" can be discerned on both sides of the equator-at latitudes 2° to the

north and south. In terms of scale and size, this current, which came to be
called the lomonosov Deep Countercurrent, may be ranked on par with the Gulf Stream.

Detailed investigation of underwater currents, particular aboard the Soviet vessel
“Vityaz”, has shown that oceanic circulation in the equatorial region exhibits a
complex, multilayered structure. Several currents traveling in different direc-
tions exist in the layer down to 1,000 meters: In the superficial layer they
travel eastward, a layer in which the water masses move in the reverse direction
is located beneath the former, and then the water moves eastward once again, and
so on. The causes behind these phenomena have not yet been established.

Ocean waters know no rest in the vertical dimension either. First of all they

undergo continual density-based (convective) mixing throughout the entire water
oolum of the world Ocean. Warmth from the sun penetrates into the water, but at

a depth of 100 meters the sun's energy is not more than 3 percent of the total
amount of energy received by the surface of the sea. It follows from this that
warming of deep layers can occur only due to mixing of water masses.

The height of the ocean surface, when considered free of the influence of wind
waves and swells, and when measured relative to a conditional horizon, changes
constantly under the influence of many forces (cosmic, geodynamic and geothermal
influences in the earth's crust, aswell as mechanical and physicochemical influences

no
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
-temming from solar radiation and the influence of the atmosphere). Tidal phenomena
have the greatest significance.

The tides are periodic fluctuations in the sea level steaming from the gravitational
forces of the moon and the sun. The tide-creating force of the moon is 2.17 times
greater than that..of the sun. This is why the position of the moon has the princi-
pal influence upon the tides. Because the mutual position of the earth, the noon

and the sun changes continuously, the magnitude of the tides changes as well.
When the moon and the sun are aligned together during a full moon and at a new

moon, the tides attain their greatest proportions.

when the moon and the sun are at a 90° angle relative to the earth (a waxing or-
waning quarter moon), the magnitude of the tides is the least. '

Physicogeographic conditions of different regions have a significant influence on
the magnitude and nature of tides: coastal contours, the dimensions and depth of

seas and oceans, presence of islands and so on.

Tides elicit currents, the speed of which may be very large depending on local
conditions. Thus near the French port of Cherbourg they attain 6-9 knots, in
channels through the Japanese, Philippine and Aleutian Islands the speeds of
currents reach 8-10 knots, and in the Skierstd-fjord (Norway) they attain 16 knots.

The nature of the World Ocean still harbors many secrets. However, the joint
efforts of scientists and seamen representing different countries are helping to

uncover them and to obtain new data on the "great river streaming around the earth."

Chapter VII. Australia. Oceania.. Antarctica

General Description

The Australian continent is located between the Pacific and Indian oceans. Oceania
(consisting of about 10,000 islands) is also conditionally grouped with Australia.
Actually, Oceania is an independent island region of the globe. A large contri-
bution to its discovery and exploration was made in the 19th century by the

Russian navigators I. P. Kruzenshtern, Yu. P. Lisyanskiy, O. Ye. Kctsebu, V. H.
Golovnin and M. P. Lazarev, the Russian scholar N. N. Hiklukho-Maklay and many

othe rs .

The islands of Oceania are located in the southwestern part of the Pacific Ocean.
Their area is about 1.3 million square kilometers, and their population (less
Australia) is about 8 million.

Oceania is divided into three party-Melanesia. Micronesia and Polynesia. Mela-

nesia includes New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, New Hebrides, New Caledonia,
Fiji and others; Micronesia includes the Mariana, Caroline and Marshall islands

and a number of other archipelagos; Polynesia includes the Hawaiian Islands, the
Phoenix, Sporades (Line) and Samoan archipelagos, and others.

with the exception of Australia and Antarctica, a large part of the dry land in
the Central and South Pacific consists of volcanic or coral formations. Large

141
FOR OFFICIAL use: ONLY
continental islands (New Guinea being the largest) are found in the western part of
the Pacific.

Host islands of Oceania are colonies of imperialist states. In the postwar era the
USA has been pushing its rivals out of Oceania. Many islands are used by the
imperialists as military strategic strongpoints, bases and springboards. Special
attention is devoted to Micronesia (the Mariana, Marshall and Caroline islands),
which the UN placed under the USA's protection in 1947. American colonists imposed

a “treaty of cooperation" upon the inhabitants of the Mariana Islands, according to
which the islands will be treated as permanently "annexed" to the USA. me designs

upon the Marshall and Carolina islands are similar; the status of ”free association
with the ISA” has been inposed upon them.

The Pacific islands have great strategic significance. In coupliance with the
"island strategy,“ which is enjoying increasingly greater development in the (BA
following its loss of bases in Indochina, military complexes are being created on
these islands. American strategists believe that island bases, being less populated

and more remte from major countries, will become a dependable springboard for the
USA's war plans.

However, it is becoming increasingly more difficult to implement these plans due

to the growing resistance of progressive strata of the public of the Pacific islands.
The national liberation movement is growing stronger in Oceania. The political map
of the region is changing under its influence as well. In recent years Western
Samoa, Nauru, Tonga, Fiji, Papua-New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Kiri-
bati have become independent.

The region of Oceania has great economic significance. Oopra, phosphates, nickel

ores, chromites and other strategic raw materials are exported to Western countries
from Oceania.

Many islands of Oceania located at the intersections of marine and air transport

routes play an iaportant role in supporting the activities of the transport fleet
and aviation.

Antarctica

Antarctica is a continent in the Southern Hemisphere occupying the central part of
the South Polar region (Antarctica). The continent has an area of about 14 million

square kilometers, of which about 1.5 million square kilometers are occupied by
shelf glaciers that steadily creep off the Antarctic continent into the sea, and

contiguous islands. Almst the entire continent is covered by a thick glacial
crust. The average thickness of the ice is 1,720 meters (the maximal: is more than

4.5 km). The total volume of the glacial mantle of Antarctica is about 24 million
cubic kilometers (almost 90 percent of all of the planet's fresh water is locked
within it). This glacial mantle descends into the ocean (small portions of the
coastline consisting of bedrock are an exception), and shelf glaciers--flat ice
fields (up to 700 meters thick) floating on the water and reaching the floor of the

ocean in certain uplifted areas of the floor-form over a significant area. Conse-
quently a large mnber of icebergs form along the shores of Antarctica. These ice-

bergs are then carried by currents and wind, and they may reach as far north as
40° 5. Lat..

he
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Antarctic coastline (more than 30,000 X- long) is rather featureless, and it
consists, for alncst its entire length, of glacial cliffs up to several dozen enters

high.

The Antarctic climate is the harshest on earth. The planet's cold pole is located

at the center of the continent. A temerature of -88.3° was recorded at the Soviet
"Vostok" station'on 24 August 1960. The mean winter temperature on the coastline
varies from -8 to -35°, while the sinner temperature is about zero; the corresponding
figures for Central Antarctica are correspondingly from -60 to -70', and from -30 to
~SO°. The polar night lasts several months in the central regions.

Perpetual winds blowing from the continent are typical of the coastal area. When
they merge with cyclonic air currents, hurricanes form.

Antarctica is the most isolated continent on our planet. The closest distances to
it are about 1,000 km from South America, 2,650 frun Australia and 3,870 km from
Africa. The sixth continent is surrounded by a continuous ring of water consisting
of the southern parts of three oceans-~Atlantic, Indian and Pacific. Because of the
significant hydrological features of these waters. there have been suggestions for
isolating the waters of the oceans surrounding Antarctica as the Southern Ocean.

The honor of discovering the sixth continent belongs to Russian naval seamen, who
sailed near the glacial continent for the first time in history under the leader-
ship of F. P. Bellinsgauzen and M. P. Lazarev on 15 (27) January 1820. Despite
numerous expeditions to this continent following its discovery, prior to 1957--
before the start of the International Geophysical Year—knowledge on Antarctica was
meager.

Beginning in the late 1950's Antarctica began to reveal its secrets more fully.

The ice-locked continent has been transformed into a zone of productive cooperation
among scientists representing many countries. Permanent and tesporary scientific

stations have been created on the glacial continent. Soviet scientists have
achieved especially great successes. since 1956 they have been continuously con-

ducting diverse research on the bleak continent and contiguous waters. The perma-
nent Soviet stations "Molodezhnaya," 'Hirnyy,‘ "Vostok," “Sovetskaya' and others

have been created on the continent. In 20 years, Soviet caterpillar-sled trains

have traveled a sum total of more than 80,000 km in the harsh conditions of Antarc-
tica. The USA, Japan, England and others countries are displaying considerable

interest in studying Antarctica.

The waters of Antarctica are rich in fish and marine mammals (whales, seals) as
well as water birds. Ninety percent of the world whale catch occurs in this region.
Rich deposits of minerals have been discovered in Antarctica-~coal, petroleum, gold,
silver, copper, zinc, platinum, iron ore and so on.

On 1 December 1959 12 states signed the Treaty on the Antarctic (USSR, USA,
Australia, Argentina, Belgium, Great Britain, New Zealand, Norway, France, (mile,

South African Republic and Japan). According to the treaty this region of the
planet "met be used forever exclusively for peaceful purposes, and it must not

become an arena or object of international disagreements.“ Later on, seven more
countries signed the treaty (Czechoslovakia, Poland, Denmark, the Netherlands,

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a van III a sauna: v-.. vs ‘ul

Romania, the GDR and Brazil). The international legal regime of Antarctica and
other territories located south of 60° 8. Lat. is regulated by this treaty.

Occupying the leading position in research on Antarctica, the soviet nation has
consistently favored preserving and confirming the regime established by the 1959

treaty and guaranteeing peace and peaceful cooperation among states in Antarctica
for the good of all mankind. '

Chapter VIII. Along the Shores of the Arctic Ocean
General Description

The Arctic Ocean is the smallest of the earth's oceans. ’lbgether with its seas,
it occupies 13.1 million square kilometers (2.8 percent of the area of the World
Ocean). The total area of its islands is about 4 million square kilometers.

Three areas are distinguished in the Arctic Ocean depending on physicogeographic
features and geological structure: The deep water part of the Arctic Ocean delimited
on the south by the margin of the continental shallows of Urasia and North America
(with an area of about 5.3 million kilometers): the North European basin, including
the Greenland, Norwegian, Barents and White seas, and the seas located within the
limits of the continental shallows—Kara, Laptev, Bast Siberian, Chukchi, Beaufort
and Baffin.

The shores of the Arctic Ocean are diverse in nature. While the shores of Scandinavia,
Iceland and Greenland are predominantly high and cut by deep fjords, the shores of
the White, Barents and Kara seas are occasionally interrtpted by bays, they are

low and level in parts and deltoid in some places. In the vicinity of the Laptev,
Bast Siberian, Chukchi and Beaufort seas the shores are deltoid in some areas, and
lagoons are found in others; the shore of the Canadian Arctic archipelago is for

the most part low and level.

The Arctic Ocean is distinguished from other oceans by lesser depth (averaging
1,130 meters, with a maximum of 5,449 meters in the Nansen trough) and highly
developed continental shallows having a maximum width of 1,300 km (in the Barents
Sea) .

The Arctic Basin is subdivided by a system of underwater ridges--(Gakke1'),
Imonosov and Mendeleyev (together with the Alpha underwater rise) «into a nunber
of deep-sea basins.

The depths of seas such as the White, Barents, Kara, Laptev, East Siberian and
Chukchi do not exceed 50-100 meters, only occasionally reaching up to 200 meters.

These seas are essentially gulfs in the Arctic Ocean.

The cold Arctic climate of the Arctic Ocean is a product of its hydrological cycle.
A large part of the Arctic Ocean is covered by a thick glacial crust, which occupies
an area of more than 11 million square kilometers in March and 7 million square
kilometers in Septenber. The Norwegian Sea and an insignificmt part of the Green-
land and Barents seas are free of ice year-round owing to the warm Gulf Stream

current. The rest of the Arctic Ocean (the Arctic basin per se) is covered by
drifting perennial ice fields, the thickness of which attains 4.5 meters.

141:
mu OFFICIAL use ONLY
Scientific research has shown that each year up to 170,000 cubic kilometers of
water enter the Arctic Ocean from the Atlantic Ocean (by way of the North Atlantic
current--a northern branch of the (half Stream) and from the Pacific Ocean by way
of the Bering Strait. In addition Siberian rivers discharge another LOGO-5,000
cubic kilometers of fresh water into the ocean. Inasmuch as evaporation from the

Arctic basin is very low, excess cold water is carried by a powerful current to
the east shores of Greenland and then southward into the Atlantic Ocean. This
current is called the East Greenland Current.

This hydrologic .cycle significantly hinders navigation on the Northern sea route and the

Northwest Passage (a marine route between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans passing
through the straits of the Canadian Arctic archipelago), where shipping is.possible

for only two or three sunmer mnths, in the conpany of icebreakers as a rule.

The animal world of the Arctic Ocean differs in terms of abundance and diversity in
warm and cold waters. It is more diverse in the North European basin, where there
are more than 2,000 species of animals, to includes whales and a large nmber of fish
species-~herring, cod, bass, haddock etc. The Arctic basin is dominated by the
polar bear, walrus, seal, nawhall white whale and others. Fish species are few

in number (Arctic cod, navaga, sayka and. in river mouths, freshwater fish species).
The seas of the North European basin and the Baffin Sea are traditional fishing and

hunting grounds .

Herring, cod, halibut, bass and other fish are caught in the Barents Sea, by the
shores of Iceland and in Baffin Sea. Hunting continues to be one of the principal
means of survival for the indigenous maritime population of northern Greenland,
Canada and Alaska.

Despite the unique hydrologic and ice cycles and the harsh natural conditions,
the Arctic Ocean is acquiring increasingly greater military significance in the
plans of imperialist reactionary circles.

Great is the significance of the Arctic Ocean to transport. The principal shipping
countries are the USSR on the Northern route and the USA and Canada in the Northwest
Passage. As a rule the shipping lanes to Greenland, Iceland, northern Scandinavia
and Spitsbergen are independent of ice conditions in summer.

The airspace above the Arctic Ocean is intersected by routes from west Europe to the
west coast of the USA (by way of Greenland and Canada) and Japan (by way of Alaska).

The Arctic-~the Most Important Economic and Strategic Region of the Earth

The word "Arctic" is a concept with broad meaning. The Arctic is the North Polar
region of the globe, to include the continental margins of Eurasia and North
America (north of the zero annual isotherm) and almost all of the Arctic Ocean
(except for the eastern and southern parts of the Norwegian Sea) together with all
islands contained therein (besides the coastal islands of Norway) and the adjacent
portions of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The Arctic Ocean occupies the larger

part of the Arctic (about 13 million square kilometers).

145
ron OFFIGAL use ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILMI. use URL!

The legal regime of the Arctic is based on an evolved system of Arctic sectors which
have achieved recognition in international law and in the national legislation of
Arctic states.

he Arctic is divided into five sectors, with their bases represented by the northern
borders of the USSR, USA, Canada, Denmark and Norway, with lateral borders repre-
sented by meridians and with the apex at the North Pole.

All land and islands located within the limits of each sector are within the terri-

tory of the contiguous states. ﬁrm the Soviet sector of the Arctic includes
Mrmanskaya Oblast (the northern regions), the Nenets, Yamalo-Nenets, him and

Chukchi national areas, the northern regions of the Romi A558 and Yakut Assn, and
the islands of Franz Joseph Land, Novaya Zemlya, Severnaya Zemlya, New Siberian

Islands and Wrangel- Island. The Soviet sector occupies almost half of the entire
Arctic. .

me U.S. sector includes the northern regions of Alaska, the Canadian sector in-
cludes the Canadian Arctic archipelago, the Danish sector contains Greenland, and

the Norwegian sector includes the Spitsbergen archipelago, Bear Island and Jan
Mayen Island.

'Ihis system of sectors evolved on the basis of aconsideration of the rights and
interests of the corresponding states, and recognition of their priority in explora-
tion and discovery of different regions of the Arctic.

The Arctic has long attracted and continues to attract the attention of mankind.
Some peoples aspired to the discovery of new lands and to the development of the

natural wealth of the Far North, others sought the shortest route to the Pacific
Ocean, and still others attempted to reveal the secrets of the glacial silence of

the Central Arctic and reach the North Pole. 'Ihis harsh and poorly explored region
attracted many scientists, explorers, researchers and sinply rugged individualists.

As long ago as in the 12th century Russian coastal inhabitants occupied themselves
with marine hunting and fishing in the White and Barents seas. In the 15th Century
their camps were concentrated on Spitsbergen and Novaya Zemlya, where they caught
fish and hunted marine animals.

Russia rightfully occupies an important place in the history of the exploration
and development of the Arctic.

In 1648 Semen Dezhnev discovered the strait between Asia and America. The Russian
scholar M. V. Iomonosov made an enormous contribution to the study of the northern
seas. He was firmly convinced that “mssian power would be multiplied by the
annexation of Siberia and the Arctic Ocean.“ An expedition to the Central Arctic
by V. Ya. chichagov was outfitted on Lomonosov's initiative.

In the l9th-20th centuries the development of the Arctic was brought under the
sponsorship of the state. Expeditions by famous pioneers and scientists-—V. Bering,
s. chelyuskin, the Laptev brothers, 1’. Vrangel', P. Litke, V. meanov, G. Sedov

and others--discovered and mapped the north coast of Asia and the Arctic islands.

1:6
roe omcuu. use ONLY
The first Russian icebreaker "Yermak' was built in 1898 in response to a proposal by

the talented man navigator Admiral S. O. Makarov. This significantly advanced
the study and development of the Arctic.

The Russo-Japanese War forced the Czarist government to imlenent a nulber of

measures to study and organise the Northern sea route. Subsequently, the 1911-1915
expedition aboard the icebreakers "Taymyr' and ”Vaygach" comanded by B. Vil'kitekiy
was the most inportant in terms of its scientific significance.

The famous Norwegian polar explorers F. Nansen and R. Amundsen played an outstanding
role in the study of the Arctic.

since ancient times, man has tried to penetrate to the most inaccessible part of
the globe--the-Oentral Arctic. Following many long and persistent attempts, the
North Pole was‘ reached for the first time by the American R. Peary. In 1926 the
North Pole was overflown by an airplane piloted by Adniral Byrd or the USA and by

the dirigible “Norway“ of the Anundsen-Nobile expedition, and 2 years later by the
dirigible ”Italia" of the Nobile expedition.

The Great October Socialist Revolution initiated a new era in the study and develop-
ment. of the Arctic. For the first time Soviet Arctic research began to be conducted
on the basis of statewide interests, in a regular manner, using icebreakers, avia-

tion, radio and other technical resources.

The Northern Scientific-Industrial Expedition of the Scientific-Technical Division,
Supreme Council of the National Economy was organized in March 1920. In 1925 it
was reorganized as the Institute of Northern Studies, and in 1930 it became the
All-Union Arctic Institute. In 1958 it was renamed the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute (AANII). In the time of its activity the institute
organized hundreds of expeditions, during which many new islands were discovered
and regular research was conducted on the geophysics of the Arctic regions and on
the navigation conditions of the Northern sea route.

Hero of the Soviet Union Academician 0. Yu. shmidt made a great contribution to the
study and development of the Arctic. He headed a number of polar expeditions
(aboard the "Sedov" in 1929-1930, aboard the "sibiryakov" in 1932 and aboard the
"dielyuskin" in 1933-1934) , and he was the leader of the air expedition to the
North Pole in 1937.

The first "severnyy polyus" drifting station was organized in the vicinity of the
North Pole in 1937 under the guidance of I. D. Papanin. In 1950 the second

"Severnyy polyus" drifting station was created in the Central Arctic. Since 1954,
two Soviet "Severnyy polyus" drifting stations have been continually serving a

year-round watch simultaneously in the Central Arctic.

The nature of the Central Arctic has been studied in the postwar era by integrated
air expeditions as well as on the basis of materials obtained from earth satellites.
All of this has been an assistance in the mapping of the bottom relief of the Arctic

basin, the currents, ice drift and terrestrial magnetism

1:?
FOR omcm. use ONLY
I'VR Vl‘l‘lbll‘l‘ U58- Vl‘hl

Following World War II the ISA and Canada became more active in Arctic research.
since 1946 these countries have been performing oceanographic studies in the
eastern part of the Chukchi and Beaufort seas. A number of cruises have been made
into Arctic waters bathing the shores of Canada, Greenland and the islands of

Jan hayen and Ellesmere. since 1951 the USA has organized a mmer of high-latitude
air expeditions and drifting stations in the Arctic basin.

'me USA's attention to the Arctic regions can be explained mainly by the fact

that it is aspiring to create, and is presently creating, air and naval bases in
this area.

In the ISA, the defense department and the primarily the navy is conducting the
broadest research in the Arctic. This research is being conducted with the purpose
of expanding the possibilities foroperations by nuclear submarines. Evidence of
this can be seen in the numerous subglacial cruises by American atomic submarines

in the Central Arctic, which the Pentagon leadership believes would be an important
strategic region in a future war. Following discovery of large reserves of petro-

leum, gas and other minerals in northern Alaska and in Canada, the USA dramatically
increased its attention in the Arctic. Navigation came to be viewed in a new

light in this area as well, especially following the cruise of the tanker “Hanhattan'
through the Northwest Passage within a single sailing season. All of this promted
creation of the corresponding scientific base and the conduct of scientific research
in Arctic regions.

American ruling circles are aspiring to use the territory and natural wealth of
Arctic regions belonging to other countries. For this purpose they are undertaking

various foreign policy acts.

The Soviet Arctic

‘me territory of the Soviet Arctic covers about 9 million square kilometers, of
which 6.8 million square kilometers are water. The population density is 0.1-0.2
persons per square kilometer. Indigenous nationalities live here--Yakuts,
Chukchis, Nenets, Dolgans and tweaks, as well as Russians, Ukrainians and repre-
sentatives of other USSR nationalities.

According to a decree of the Presidium of the USSR Central Executive Comittee

dated 15 April 1926 all lands and islands, both discovered and those which may be
discovered in the future and located between the 0653's Arctic coast, the North

Pole and 32"4'35" 8. Long. and 138"49'30" w. Long., were declared USSR territory.

Prior to the Great October Socialist Revolution the Arctic regions were studied

and developed economically on the initiative of individual scientific organizations,
some explorers and scientists. The aarist government was not much interested in
these regions.

It was only after the Great October Socialist Revolution that regular utilization
of the natural wealth of the Arctic and development of the Northern .ea route

began. The North's economy began to grow swiftly, industrial regions increased in
size quickly, the limits of farming advanced far northward, and the secrets of

\

he
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the glacial expanses of the Arctic were uncovered. All of this produced major
social changes in the life of peoples of the Far North.

The Northern sea route--a major shipping lane extending along the northern shores
of the USSR through the seas of the Arctic Ocean (Barents, Kara, Laptev, East
Siberian, Chukchi, Bering)-played an enormous role in the development of the
Arctic. This main route links together European and Par Bast Soviet ports as well

as the mouths of navigable Siberian rivers into a single unionwide transport system.
The Northern sea route is promoting the utilization of the Arctic' a natural wealth

and its economic development.

The Northern Sea route has long attracted the attention of Russian explorers and
scientists. However, it was not until after the Great October Socialist Revolution
that it transformed into a permanent shipping lane and that the northern regions of
Siberia ceased to be a wild and distant land.

The Main ministration of the Northern Sea Route (Glavsevmorput') was created in
1932 to organize the Northern Sea route from the white Sea to the Bering strait,

to maintain it and to ensure safe navigation.

The icebreaker "Sibiryakov" traveled the entire Northern sea route within a single
sailing season for the first time in the history of its development in 1932.

The Communist Party and Soviet government attach great significance to strengthening
the defense capabilities of the USSR's northern maritime borders. It was with this

purpose that the Northern Military Flotilla was created in 1933; it was reorganized
as the Northern Fleet in 1937.

The Great Patriotic Nar confirmed the correctness of this decision. The Northern
Fleet dependably protected northern ports, bases and sea routes from the fascist
German invaders. In battles both on land and at sea, seamen of the Northern Fleet
multiplied the glorious coabat traditions of Russian and Soviet naval seamn, and

entered a brilliant page into the chronicle of our motherland's combat glory. In
the harsh years of the war the Soviet people continued to develop the Arctic. In-
dustrial construction developed more and more extensively, polar cities and settle-
ments grew, and highways were laid to link up individual regions with ports and

river docks.

A new rise in the North's economy and further development of the Northern sea route
began in the postwar years. The Northern sea route transformed into a regularly
operating shipping lane, which made it possible to utilize the natural wealth of
the Far North for the further development of the country‘s economy and reinforce-
ment of its defense capabilities.

The cosmissioning of new powerful vessels in the icebreaker clasr-the nuclear power-
powered ships 'lenin,' "Arktika" and "sibir'," the icebreakers ”mskvaﬂ' "Lenin-
grad.“ "Kapitan Sorokin,‘ and "Krasin" and other icebreakers of this class.
modernization of Arctic ports, expansion of the network of polar stations and ob-
servatories, and the achievements of science all helped to create real possibili-
ties for fulfilling the tasks. posed by the Oomnist Party Central Oomittee and
the Soviet government, of transforming the Northern sea route into a major shipping
lane for national economic cargoes.

1:9
roe omcuL use ONLY
a was veaae—ua- vu... u. ".4.

Efforts associated with making the Arctic navigable in late fall and winter took

shape in recent years. lengthening the sailing season is now one of the most im-
portant tasks of polar navigation.

'lhe dream of many generations of navigators and scientists was fulfilled by the
August 1977 cruise of the nuclear—powered icebreaker 'Arktika" to the North Pole.
demonstrating the outstanding achievements of Soviet science and technology.
Capitalizing on the cruising experience of the "Arktika," the nuclear-powered ice-
breaker 'sibir'" opened up the Arctic sailing season 2 months earlier than usual
in 1978. It successfully escorted the transport vessel "Kapitan Myshevskiy" into

the high latitudes. The caravan skirted the Arkticheskiy Cape—the extreme northern
point of Komsomolets Island--and delivered its cargo to Magadan. .

A number of transport problems of extreme importance to the national economy were

solved--for example ones such as lengthening the sailing season in some portions of
the Northernseaoroute and its transformation into a practically year-round operation
between Murmansk and Dudinka in support of our Arctic mining and metallurgical
combine in Noril'sk. The technology of transporting cargo to remote Arctic regions
in winter and unloading it on shore ice (on the renal peninsula and Cape marasavey)
was developed and practically implemented.

Development of the Northern sea route proceeded simultaneously with the study and
development of mineral deposits in Arctic regions of the Soviet Union.

Discovery of the world's largest apatite deposit in Khibiny (on the Kola Peninsula)
in the 1920's created the possibilities for satisfying the country's demand for

phosphates, which are now being processed by the 'Apatit" Combine imeni S. M. Kirov.
Copper, nickel and cobalt are being produced on the Kola Peninsula in Honchegorsk

by the "Severonikel" Combine, and iron ore is being mined and concentrated in
Olenegorsk and Kovdor for the Cherepovets Metallurgical Combine. Cascades of

hydroelectric power plants have been created in mmmanskaya Oblast on the Niva,
'mloma, Paz, Kovda and Voron'ya rivers in order to provide electric power to the

mining industry and nonferrous metallurgy of these regions. The largest thermal
electric power plant is the Kirovskaya GRES. The Kol'skaya atomic electric power
plant began producing industrial current in 1973. The Soviet Union's first tidal
experimental electric power plant—-the Kislogubskaya P£s--was built in Murmanskaya
Oblast. ‘

Fishing and fish processing play a major role in the economy of Murmanskaya Oblast.

Fishing industry produces more than a third of the oblast‘s gross industrial pro-
duct. Logging industry has been developed. The exports of commercial lunber total

more than 1.5 million cubic meters. There are sawmills and furniture factories.

The oblast is the location of the Kola branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences imeni
S. H. Kirov (in the city of Apatity) , which possesses five scientific research
institutes.

The economy of Arkhangel'skaya Oblast, which is one of the leading logging regions

of the USSR, is developing intensively. Arkhangel'skaya Oblast provides a third
of the exported timber.

50
ron omcm. use ONLY
Arkhangel'skaya Oblast is a region of integrated development of logging industry,

timber export, fishing industry, expanding machine building. hunting and fur
trapping.

Reindeer herding (there are about 200,000 reindeer) and fishing are developed in
the Nenets Autonomous okrug, which is part of the oblast.

In the early 1930's development of large deposits of petroleum (Ukhta) and coal
(Vorkuta) beganin the Komi assn in the Pechora River basin. Large gas deposits

were also discovered there, and they are presently being exploited. The Northern

Pechora Railroad, stretching more than 1,200 km from Konosha to Vorkuta, was built
in 1941.

The extraction of petroleum and coal and construction of 'the railroad in the Pechora
basin were enormously helpful to our motherland in the difficult time when the
troops of Nazi Germany temporarily occupied the Donets Basin.

Owing to the selfless labor of the Soviet people the Pechora has become a major
industrial region.

Reconnaissance and development of nickel-iron ore reserves in the north of
Krasnoyarskiy Kray created the foundation for developing a large mining and metal-
lurgical combine in Noril'sk. Discovery of extremely rich deposits of nickel and
copper in the vicinity of Talnakh (not far from Noril'sk) and creation of the
"Mayak," "Konsomol'skiy," and "Oktyabr'skiy" mines in 1960 raised production of
nonferrous metals-~nicke1, copper and cobalt--to a level almost nine times higher
than in 1950.

Large deposits of coal (the Tungus coal basin) and of natural gas and petroleum on
the Taimyr Peninsula were discovered in Krasnoyarskiy Kray.

Large deposits of tin, gold, tungsten, mercury and other minerals have been explored
and are now undergoing development in the Yakut ASSR and on the Chukchi Peninsula.

Arctic cities and ports were built simultaneously with development of the Northern
sea route and the natural wealth of the North. Major industrial centers grew up _
during the years of Soviet rule: Kirovsk, Vorkuta, Ukhta, Salekhard, Igarka,
Noril'sk, Tiksi, Anadyr' and others.

Following are the ports and industrial centers of the Soviet Arctic:

Murmansk: The center of Murmanskaya Oblast, an ice-free port, and a railroad
station. The city is located on the east shore of Kola Bay, 50 km from the outlet
to the open sea. It was founded in 1916. A railroad linking Petrozavodsk to
Murmansk was built concurrently with construction of the city and port. This
railroad, which is 987 km long, went into operation in 1916.

Fascist aviation did considerable damage to the city during the Great Patriotic
War. The enemy made about 800 air raids against the city, he dropped tens of.
thousands of bombs, and he destroyed 74 percent of the city‘s housing. Following
the war Murmansk was quickly restored. It became the largest city of the Arctic.

51
FOR omcm. use ONLY
run UI'I'IMIAU U§h VAILI

Murmansk is a city of seamen, a city of fishermen. It is the base of the trawler,
herring and transport fleets, and it is the home of the Burmansk Marine steamship
Company. Its large enterprises include the "Sudoverf‘" Association and fishing,
house building and wood packaging combines.

The humans): Fish Combine is one of the largest fish processing enterprises in
the country and the biggest in North Europe. Modern production equipment is in-

stalled at the fish combine. It produces about 100,000 tons of fish products of
up to 400 different kinds each year.

me country's largest polar research institute is located in the city-—the Polar
Scientific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography imni N. :4. Knipovich
(PNIIRD). It is also the hem of the Higher Engineering Navigation School, a
pedagogical institute and several secondary technical schools, as well as of the
oblast performing arts theater and the oblast regional museum.

Arkhangel'sk: A large city and port located at the mouth of the Northern Dvina.
'me city was founded in 1884. and it is the largest logging and timber exporting
center of the Soviet Union.

Arkhangel'sk is the home of the Soloubal'skiy and Arkhangel'sk pulp-and-paper

combines and several sawmilling and woodworking conbines, which export three-fourths
of their products.

The most important industrial sector is shipbuilding (cargo and fishing vessels)
and ship repair.

Arkhangel'sk contains several higher and secondary educational institutions, a
regional museln and the oblast performing arts theater. The hydrogeographic base
of the Northern sea route is located in the city.

Expeditions to study the Arctic seas have left from the wharves of Arkhangel'sk
for several centuries.

Nar'yan—Mar: Center of the Nenets Autonoms okrug, and a trading sea and river
port. It is located on the right bank of the Pechora River. The city is the
supply base for Arctic regions and the most important center for fish catching
and processing, fur trapping and logging; it is a reindeer herding center.

Dikson: One of the most important ports on the Northern sea route. During the war
it became the site of the Dikson Hydrogeographic Base, which is still playing a
major role in the study of the Kara Sea and in maintaining shipping safety.

Dudinka: City and transportation center of the Taimyr (Dolgan-Nenets) Autonoms
Okrug. The industrial products of Nori).'sk are shipped out from here.

Noril'sk: One of the northernmost cities of the world. The city is linked by rail
to the port of Dudinka (122 km). Noril'sk is undergoing construction with a
consideration for the climatic conditions (permafrost, strong winds, polar nights).

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Noril'sk Min'ihg and Metallurgical Combine ineni A. P. Zavenyagin is an enter-
prise of USSR non'ferrous metallurgy. It is outfitted with highly productive equip-
ment. It produces nickel, copper, cobalt and other nonferrous metals.

The city has a. performing arts theater, a swiming pool, a House of Culture and
an indoor skating rink.

Igarka: A port 163 km from the Arctic Circle and 673 km from the mouth of the
Yenisey River. It is a Kara Sea port specializing in tinber processing and export.

The city's logging combine and sawmills work with raw materials from the entire

Yenisey basin. The city has a fish processing plant, the Pedagogical School of the
Peoples of the North and a branch of the Krasnoyarsk Polytekhnikum.

Pevek: A young city (since 1967) . and one of the most important ports in the
eastern portion of the Northern sea route. It has several enterprises.

Thus owing to the concern of the Ocunmmist Party and the Soviet government dozens

of new cities and hundreds of worker's settlements have appeared in the Soviet North,
and public health institutions, higher and secondary special educational institu-
tiors preparing specialists for different sectors of the national economy have been
created.

Growth of new population centers and the discovery and development of new mineral
deposits in polar regions of the USSR attest to the great changes occurring in the

country's distribution of productive forces.

In the last 10-15 years the country's northern regions provided much fuel, iron ore,
nonferrous metals, bauxites and timber. Just during the Ninth Five-Year Plan
petroleum extraction in these regions increased by four times, while gas extraction
increased by 3.2 times. The petroleum and gas of these regions are carried to the
country's industrial regions by main pipelines.

Scientific-technical progress, continual growth in labor productivity and creation

of territorial-production conplexes had a tremendous influence on the North's
economic development.

Arctic Regions of Capitalist Countries

Following World War II the ruling circles of the USA intensified their attention
toward the Arctic regions. 'lhe Arctic basin is now viewed by the American mili-
tary and by the NM!) leadership primarily from the point of view of military
strategy. As early as in 1959 the American newspaper UNITED PRESS IN'IERNATIONAL
wrote: "The Arctic will become an important theater of war in any future global
conflict, and the North Pole will be the strategic center of the Third World War.”

The Pentagon and the NM!) staffs have been working on the so-called "Arctic
strategy" for more than a decade. As the disposition of forces in the inter-
national arena changed and as new forms of armament and equipment developed,
' certain changes occurred in this strategy as well.

53
ron omcm. use ONLY
eves v. sayuan vv- v: none

In the first postwar years American strategists laid high hopes on their air power
and atomic weapons. They created a network of air and naval bases in Arctic

regions--in Greenland, Iceland, northern Norway, Alaska and northern Canada.

The Arctic was viewed by the American military as a region offering the shortest
air routes for American strategic aviation to important nuclear targets on the
territory of the USSR and other socialist countries.

However, the USA's atomic monopoly soon toppled. 'me Soviet union acquired atomic
weapons as well. In this connection the Arctic calm to be viewed by the ruling
circles of the USA as a potential region of application of atomic missile submarines.

By the early 1960's the possibility of subglacial navigation by atomic submarines
was confirmed. '

Beginning in 1958 the us. Navy's atomic submarines began to regularly perform sub-
glacial cruises in the Arctic basin.

In the opinion of foreign military experts subglacial cruises byetomic submarines
confirmed the possibility that the latter could sail beneath Arctic ice, and find
and use openings in the ice at any time of the year to launch their missiles against
enemy objectives.

These features of the Arctic basin serve as the motivation behind a complex of
various military measures being implemented by the Pentagon and the NM!) comand
to transform the Arctic into a fundamentally new marine theater with specially
outfitted antisubmarine lines.

Using the Arctic territory of Norway (Spitsbergen), Denmark (Greenland), Iceland
and Canada, the NATO command is continuing to outfit the Arctic basin for military

operations. It is building and improving the network of air bases and airfields,
Arctic air routes are being developed, radar and navigation stations are being
set up, and communication centers and comand posts are being built. Much atten-
tion is being devoted to reconnaissance from space.

According to an assertion in the Western military press "a new strategic situation
has evolved in connection with disturbance of. the balance of forces" on the northern

flank of NATO. Taking cover behind anti-Soviet fabrications, executives of NAN
and the USA are calling upon the bloc's countries to strengthen the armed forces

of the North Atlantic bloc in the vicinity of the Norwegian, Greenland and Barents
seas as quickly as possible.

Northern Norway is playing an increasingly greater role in NA'l'O's plans. A signi-
ficant number of air and naval bases have been outfitted here: Bodo. Bardufoss ,
Olafsvern (Ramfjordnes), Harstad, Ramsund, Tromso and others.

A network of NATO radar and electronic posts has been deployed on Norwegian terri-
tory. NA'i'O's “Ace High" tropospheric oonanunication line passes over all of Norway,

and "LORAN-C" radio navigation stations are located on the islands of Jan Mayen and
Langoy. There is a large radio coemunication center supporting control of atomic
submarines in the North Atlantic in the vicinity of Bodo.

Sh
FOR Ol-‘HCIAL use ONLY
Further developnﬁnt of NATO's infrastructure is continuing in Norway. According to

official data Néiuey received about 6 billion krone from mm in the last few years
to build military facilities.

Aggressive imperialist circles are attempting to draw Spitsbergen and Bear Island,

making up Norway's Svalbard administrative region, into the orbit of military pre-
parations.

The Spitsbergen archipelago contains more than 1,000 islands with a total area of
62,000 square kilometers. The discovery and development of the archipelago began
back in the 13th century, when Russian coastal inhabitants began paying visits to
the archipelago to catch fish and hunt marine animals. They were the ones to give
it its first ancient Russian name-Grumant. However, it was not until the early
20th century thit,any steps were taken to determine the ownership of the archipelago.
An international treaty establishing Norway's sovereignty over Spitsbergen was
signed in Paris in 1920. The Paris treaty obligated Norway not to erect military
bases and fortifications on Spitsbergen or to use its territory for military pur-
poses.

The Soviet Union became a party to this treaty in 1935, and in 1947 the Norwegian
Parliament (storting) adopted a decision according to which the USSR enjoys the
right of free settlement on Spitsbergen, mining, fishing and hunting marine
animals on land and in territorial waters.

There is a Soviet consulate and three settlements in the archipelago: Barentsburg
(1,200 persons), Piramida (800 persons) and Grumant (moth-bailed).

The Norwegian population totals up to 1.200 in the archipelago. The largest
Norwegian settlements are longyearbyen, Ny-Alesund and Sveagruva.

Following Norway's entry in the North Atlantic bloc, the USA attempted to prepare
for deployment of a-network of military airfields on Spitsbergen under the guise

of scientific activity. Construction of a telemetric station intended for observa-
tion of artificial earth satellites was completed near the village of Ny-Alesund.
The command of the Norwegian navy regularly sends warships to Spitsbergen and

lands warplanes on its territory. all of this is contradictory to the obligations
Norway adopted in the Paris treaty. '

Iceland occupies an important place in the military-strategic plans of the USA and
NATO. An American military base and other facilities have been created and Ameri-
can troops have been deployed on its territory. According to information in the
foreign press atomic weapons are being stored in munition dumps at the air force
base near Keflavik.

The NATO command devotes its main attention to Greenland.

Having concluded a treaty of 'joint defense" of Greenland with Denmark in l95l,
the USA obtained the right of locating its military bases and radar facilities

there. The USA built naval bases at Godthaab and Julianehaab, and around 10 air
force bases and airfields, of which the main ones are Thule, Sondre Stromfjord and
Nord.

55
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. Ubl URL!

The largest air force base in all of the Arctic is at Thule, which is the base of
American strategic aviation. The base .is outfitted with high-power radio and radar
stations. There is a special port for receipt of cargo. All services are located
in subglacial buildings.

The Pentagon attaches important significance to military preparations in Alaska
and the Aleutian islands, which are part or the state of Alaska and are located
in direct proximity to the Soviet Union.

The area of Alaska is 1.5 million square kilometers. Its population is 325,000.
The indigenous population consists of Indians, Eskimos and Aleuts.

Alaska was discovered in 1741 by the Russians, and it belonged to Russia, but in
1867 it was sold by the Czarist government to the USA together with the Aleutian
Islands for '$72 million.

The main industrial sectors are petroleum, gas and woodworking. Construction of

as petroleum pipeline extending 1,280 km from Prudhoe Bay to an all-weather port on
the southern end of the Valdez Peninsula is nearing completion.

Alaska became the 49th state in 1959. The Alaskan contined U.S. Armed Forces
conmand was created on its territory. It included land, air and naval forces.

Hore than 100 airfields have been built on Alaska and the Aleutian Islands, of
which not less than a dozen can be used by strategic aircraft. The largest air-
fields are at Anchorage, Bielson, Juneau, Elmendorff, Fairbanks and elsewhere.
Naval bases are located at Nana, mtch Harbor and on the islands of Kodiak and Adak.
A number of air and naval bases have been moth-ballad.

Alaska and Canada are within a single air defense system subordinated to the com-
bined air defense command of the North American continent—NORAD, headed by an
American general. A significant part of Canada's military aviation and the air-
space above its territory are actually controlled by the Pentagon.

A dense network of permanent and mobile radar posts is deployed in the northern

part of the American Arctic coast-~on the territory of Alaska, the Aleutian Islands,
Canada and Greenland.

The long-range airplane and missile detection system consists of two basic ele-
ments--the "DEW" line and a special early warning antimissile system, 'BIHEWS."
The complex of radar stations belonging to the early warning system extends from
the Aleutian Islands through Alaska, Canada, Greenland and Iceland, and terminates
at the English city of Yorkshire.

The Pentagon aspires to use the Arctic region for space reconnaissance. An artifi-
cial earth satellite tracking station has been placed into operation near Fairbanks

in Alaska.

In addition to outfitting and preparing Arctic regions as a possible theater of
war, the USA and the NATO command are conducting research in this area to learn

56
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
about the natural conditions, air and sea (including subglacial) routes and the
possibilities and details of. basing ships and airplanes in Arctic conditions.

Special control centers have been created in Elmendorff (Alaska) and in Thule

(Greenland) to control flights by strategic aviation into the Arctic regions of
North AmericaJand-European NATO countries.

Thus the American military and the NATO command view the Arctic regions as the

most important theater of military operations, one which will coebine the European
zone of mm and the Atlantic with the regional U.S.-<hnada zone and the 0.8.
Armed Forces in the Pacific.

The NA‘IO leadership is using the Arctic zone for all-out preparations of a theater
of war, with a consideration forits unique features.

Conclusion

The military-political and military-economic characteristics of the world Ocean
and our review of the countries in the World Ocean basin allow the conclusion that
despite the great diversity of sociopolitical, economic and other features in the
development of these countries, we can distinctly discern tendencies dependent

upon the struggle between two opposing social system--socialist and capitalist.

'lhe continual growth in the strength of fraternal friendship and comprehensive
cooperation, and of the economic and defensive might of the socialist states,
confirmation of the national independence of developing countries, and the crisis

phenomena and growth of the class struggle in capitalist countries all attest to
the continuing and ever-deepening historic process of mankind's transformation

from capitalism to socialism, initiated by the Great October Socialist Revolution.

In this connection the problems of utilizing the World Ocean occupy an important
place in today's world policy.

The interest in development of the World Ocean can be explained by its truly in-
exhaustible wealth. All of this wealth may be utilized most fully in behalf of
mankind only in the event that the seas, the oceans and their floor would remain
within the sphere of peaceful cooperation, only if they are not transformed by
the imperialists into springboards for the deployment of new forms of weawns.

As we know, reactionary imperialist militarism is attempting to concentrate a
significant proportion of its nuclear potential, aimed at the Soviet Union and
other countries of the socialist fraternity, on the broad expanses of the World
Ocean and in the airspace above it.

The seas are broadly enployed by the imperialists for armed intervention in the
internal affairs of liberated states, and to exert pressure upon the champions of

national and social liberation. The aggressive actions of imperialist reactionary
forces are being supported by Chinese leaders. 'i'hey are cooperating with im-

perialists on the soil of anti-Sovietism and the struggle against world socialism
and the international revolutionary movement.

57
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
a too. we a ago“... a..-“ v. una

The soviet Imion and other countries of the socialist fraternity are persistently
working to see that the world Ocean would beoale a zone of international cooperation.
and that its enormous resources and space would be used for peaceful mix-poses.

for the good of all mankind.

Performing their patriotic and international duty, the Soviet Armed Forces are

alertly monitoring the intrigues of reactionary imperialist circles. Soldiers 0!
the Soviet Army and Ravy are doing everything they can to live up to their important

task—dependably protecting the socialist fatherland. and being in a constant state
of combat readiness guaranteeing an imediate repulse to any aggressor.

oovmmrr: Voyenizdat, 1980

11004
CSO: 1801/1413 END

58
FOR omcm. use ONLY