FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10337
19 February 1982

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 12. December 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10337
19 February 1982

USSR REPORT

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 12, December 1981

Translations or abstracts of all articles of the Russian-language

monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by
Gidrometeoizdat.

CONTENTS

*Air Surface Temperature Forecasting for 48 and 60 Hours in Advance............. 1

*cOrrelation Between Temporal and Spatial Intervals in Numerical Heather

Predictionoooo0.00000IOOOOOC0.00009......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIDOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI'O 2
*Global Temperature Trend in Cenozoic........................................... 3

*Friction and Air Heat Exchange With Surface During Transport of Sand, Salt and

Ice Partlclesoeooaeaaaseespatterorreoneoeaooaoea...asseoooooeoeoeoleoeaaaasbe 5

*Prevailing Wind at Altitudes 80-100 km at Different Longitudes During Winter
and spring 1976-1977....IOI0'...OO...OOOOOCOCUQOCCO...0.....COCOOO.DOCOOOOOOO 6

Effect of Radiation on Turbulent Cloud Hediuﬂ....o.....c.....................-. 7

*Peatures of Mass Exchange During Collision of Water Droplets of Noncomparable

$1220.00...oneneaeooeeaeoeease-e...aoeooaeoooeeaseooeeaeseevooeaeaeoeoeseeeee 18

*Computation of Vertical Turbulent Fluxes in Near-Hater Atmospheric Layer Over
Ocean in Tropical Latitudes.....o...o.-..................................o... 19

Objective Analysis of Ocean Surface Temperature in Northern Hemisphere......... 20
*
Tsunami of 23 November 1969 on Kamchatka and Features of Its Development....... 29

*River Flow as Dissipative System............................................... 30

1"Spatial Correlation Functions of Maximum Hater Discharges in Mountain Rivers... 31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

*Influence of Climatic Conditions on Variability of Yields of Green Mass of
Perennial areas“ in RSPSRUOOO0.0....................IIOCOUCOOCOOOOOOOIOOOOOOC

*lnterannual Changes in Atmospheric Zonal Circulation in Northern Belisphere
During Five‘Yur Period.IQCO0.0IQO'OIOOIOOIICO0C000......IOCOCIOIIICCOOOOOOI.

*long-Range Forecasting of Mariana Water Levels During Ice Jams on Ansara at

hunks...toooooone.oooooooooooooooooeno...oooooooooooooooooooosoooouoootoooo

*Autumn Growing Season of Grassy Plants in Moderately High Elevations of

central “usesoooooooooooolooooooooooeooosoooooooooooaooooooo'oooooooooboos.

Measurement of Paraueters of Wave-Covered Surface From Shipboard...............
Remote Registry Unit for Float Automatic Level Recorder........................

conferences, Meetings and seninarsoooeoooooooooocooeosoooeooooooooooocoooooosoo

*Mtes Fro. Abroadoololit.00...OOOOIOOIO.IIOOOOOOOIOIOOOIICOOODO0.0000DOOIOOO...
*Annivetsary of Birth of Yu. M. Shokal'skiy (1856-1960).........................

Index of Articles Published in 'HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA' in 1981...........

*Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- b -

FOI‘OFHKJAI.USEIDNIN

32

33

35
36
44
49
56

58

59
FOI‘OFEKJAI.USEIDNL¥

UDC 551.509.323
AIR SURFACE TEMPERAIURE FORECASTING FOR 68 AND 60 HOURS IN ADVANCE

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
22 May 81) PP 5-13

[Article by A. I. Snitkovskiy, candidate of geographical sciences, USSR Hydro-
meteorological Scientific Research Center]

for the first day. The HOS concept was used in developing an archives of data for
predicting temperature for 48 and 60 hours. The initial data selected were for
1976-1980 - 226 cases of minimum and maximum temperatures separately for each

of the four seasons. The breakdown of the archives into four parts made it pos-
sible to take into account the characteristics of seasons of the year. The author
arrived at a list of the potential predictors for solving this problem. It was
found that the easiest season for prediction was autumn and winter the most dif-
ficult. Beginning in March 1980 the derived regression equations were used daily

in preparing temperature forecasts for 68 and 60 hours. Checking of the tempera-

of maximum temperatures using the derived regression equations was somewhat poorer
than a synoptic forecast. Accordingly, the procedure was corrected in order to

rectify this situation. Now the prediction of minimum temperature for 68 hours is
approximately 20! better than a synoptic forecast and the prediction of maximum
temperature for 60 hours is better than a synoptic forecast on the average is 5-

102. An example of the forecast is given. Tables 5; references: 2 Russian.

FOI'OFHKJAI.USI(MVLY
M “PILDAL 03'. URL!

UDC 551.509.313
CORRELATION BETWEEN MORAL AND SPATIAL INTRRVALS IN NUMERICAL HEATHER ' "EDICTICN

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 81 (manuscript received
3 Apr 81) pp 16-21.

[Article by V. H. Kadyshnikov. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
and V. H. Ryazantseva, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] The basis of numerical methods for short-range weather prediction is
the approximate integration of the equations of a hydrostatic atmosphere. When
using explicit finite-difference integration schemes the ratio of the temporal

and spatial intervals must be related to the velocity of propagation of the front
of wave disturbances by the Coursnt criterion, otherwise linear instability arises.
In order to find this velocity it is necessary to examine a corresponding linear—
ized system of equations, determine the energy interval for it and for wave solu—
tions obtain the ratio of ﬁne energy flux to its density, that is, find the velo-
city of propagation of wave energy. The maximum of this parameter for all wave

numbers will also be the sought-for wave front velocity. The authors illustrate
this first in the enmple of the equations for a barotropic atmosphere. Then the
horizontal velocity of propagation of the wave front in a baroclinic atmosphere

is determined and finally, it is shown that the wave front is not propagated ver-
tically in a hydrostatic atmosphere. Accordingly, the temporal interval in finite-
difference models of a baroclinic atmosphere is dependent in explicit schemes only
on the horizontal resolution. The velocity of wave front propagation in these mod-
els only slightly exceeds the corresponding value for a barotropic atmosphere, so
that the interval can be the same as in barotropic models. The temporal interval
is not dependent on the vertical resolution. This circumstance is well known in
numerical forecasting, but its validation has evidently never before appeared in
the literature. Figures 1; references: 9 Russian.

MWMONLY
FIIICMNHCJAI.1EHE(NVLY

UDC 551.526.36

GLOBAL TEMPERATURE TREND IN CENOZOIC

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) PP 25-35

[Article by I. I. Borzenkova, candidate of geographical sciences, State Hydrolog-
ical Institute]

[Abstract] This is a generalization of the results of determination of paleotem-
peraturea by the oxygen isotopic method for the analysis of organogenic residues
of marine plankton and benthos microfauna and also data from a paleobotanic anal-
ysis of fossil flora over the course of the Cenozoic (last 60-65 million years).
The presented materials on the nature of change in parameters of mean water tem-
perature and air temperature over the continents in different latitude zones lead
to the following conclusions. 1. During the course of the last 60 million years

at all latitudes in both hemispheres there has been a gradual decrease in temper-
ature of the air and ocean (surface and deep layers), against whose background
there were considerable variations in the direction of warming-and cooling. 2. Af-
ter the temperature maximum in the Early Eocene a gradual temperature decrease be-
gan, particularly strongly expressed in the high and middle latitudes. 3. Over

the course of the Oligocene (38-22 million years ago) at all latitudes there was

a predominance of a relatively cold climate with temperatures in the equatorial
and tropical latitudes lower than at the present time. 6. The temperature increase
beginning at all latitudes at the end of the Oligocene ended with the temperature
maximum in the Early Miocene when the air and water temperatures in the equatorial
latitudes attained values close to those of today. This period was the only period
in the course of the entire Cenozoic when there was a considerable positive tem-
perature trend. 5. The Early Miocene temperature maximum ended with a new temper-
ature decrease in the high and middle latitudes which developed to the end of the
Miocene and continued in the Pliocene. 6. The temperature regime of the equatorial
and tropical latitudes in the course of the Miocene and Pliocene remained virtual-
ly unchanged; the temperatures in the Late Miocene attained values characteristic
of the Late Eocene. 7. The temperature difference between the pole and equator
changed during the course of the Cenozoic by a factor of almost 3 from values less
than 10°C in the Early Eocene to 30°C in the Late Pliocene. Due to insignificant
temperature variations in the low latitudes during the second half of the Cenozoic
(Miocene-Pliocene) a change in the gradient occurred only due to a temperature de-
crease in the high and middle latitudes. 8. A sharp decrease in water and air tem-
perature in the Middle and Late Miocene led to the formation of permanent glacier
covers in the polar regions. first in the southern hemisphere and then in the

l!“l(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(l¢LY
toe (”Flush use; umu

Middle Pliocene also in the northern hemisphere. In this connection, over the course
of more than 10 million years there was a clearly expressed asymetry of the earth's
climte when in the absence of glacier covers in the northern hemisphere the gla-
ciation in the southern hemisphere already attained its present-day extent about

11 million years ago, that is, whereas the permanent glacier cover in the northern
hemisphere appeared no sooner than 3 million years ago. 9. The northern hemisphere
remained ice-free up to the beginning of the Pliocene, although individual traces
of local momtain glaciations, such as in Alaska, date to 9-10 million years ago.
The permanent glacier cover in Greenland began to form abOut 3.1-3.5 million years
ago. The most ancient precipitation containing information on the presence of sea-
sonal ice in the Arctic dates back some 6.5-5.0 million years ago. A permanent ice
cover in the Arctic basin appeared only about 0.9-0.8 million years ago as a re-

sult of a marked decrease in global temperature. Figures 2; references 30: 6 Rus-
sian, 24 Western.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI|0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

UDC 551.511.6

FRICTION AND AIR HEAT EXCHANGE WITH SURFACE DURING TRANSPORT 0P SAND, SALT AND
ICB PARTICLES

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian 80 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 36-40

[Article by 0. K. Zakharova, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
State Hydrological Institute]

[Abstract] On the basis of solution of the equation for the dynamics of the sur-
face.air layer it is possible to compute the characteristics of sand particles in
deserts. The saltation of particles with the diameter d occurs with satisfaction

of the relationship _2 2
1° 9’. Paar/Pairsd<1~

where v* is the dynamic velocity of the flow, ‘Dair is the density of air,)° a

and d are the density and diameter of the particles. 3 is the acceleration of free
falling. The presence of saltating particles in the air changes the dynamic charac-
teristics of the flow. The method is applicable for computing the transport of par-
ticles of an identical diameter and a stipulated density. This article gives the
results of solution of the problem of air heat exchange with surfaces consisting

of unconsolidated material. The examination is applied to deserts. the shores of
dessicated lakes covered with salt and ice surfaces. The results were obtained on
the basis of numerical solution of a system of equations for thermal conductivity
and dynamics taking the presence of heat sources in the air into account. For sal-
tating particles of sand, salt and ice with a diameter of 3-6-10" m the author
has obtained expressions for the coefficients of heat exchange and resistance for
the level 2 m above the surface. These coefficients increase with wind velocity
and are approximately twice as great in the case of moderate winds and three times
greater during winds of hurricane force than in the case of absence of transport
of particles by an air flow. Figures 2; references 5: A Russian, 1 Western.

lNDI‘OFFICIAL UEI:(NVLV
FOR (”"ILMI. use UNI-I

UDC 551. 557. 3(670. 318) (571.62)

PREVAILING WIND AT ALTITUDBS 80-100 KM AT 011m WGITUDES DURING "INTER AND
SPRIIB 1976-1977

Moscow WOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 61-45 '

[Article by N. A. Maharov, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Abstract] A continuous cycle of observations was made from Decoder 1976 through
June 1977 at Khabarovsk (59°N, 135°E) in the Far East for the purpose of study-
ing the wind regime at altitudes 80-100 km. A comparative analysis was made of

the wind regime over Far Eastern and European regions using the results of long-
term measurements at Obninsk (SS'N, 38'3). The experimental data revealed that
long-term series of the mean hourly wind velocity values in the meteor zone con-
tain a broad spectrum of variations with periods from several hours to a year. For
the purpose of discriminating changes in wind velocities with periods more than

a day the time series of mean hourly values of the meridional and zonal components
of wind velocity during the entire period of observations were subjected to har-
monic analysis. The data indicated that zonal flows predominated over IOIabarovsk
at altitudes 80-100 kn during most of the investigated period. In the behavior of
the seasonal variation of the zonal component ‘of the wind there are the same reg-
ularities which are revealed on the basis of long-term measurements at European
aiddle-latitude stations, that is, westerly winds with velocities up to 20 m/sec
during the winter season, restructuring to easterly at the beginning of spring,
easterly winds in spring and at the end of spring to early summer, the setting-in
of a some: regime of circulation with westerly winds. Accordingly, the results of
measurements at Khabarovsk and Obninsk indicate that in general the seasonal varia-
tion of the prevailing wind at altitudes 80-100 km is similar over the Far Eastern
and European regions. Figures 2, tables 1; references 9: 7 Russian, 2 Western.

mommussoutv
F0R1OFFICIAI.lEiE(MVLY

UDC 551.509.616:621.37S.826

EFFECT OF RADIATION 0N TURBULENT CLOUD MEDIUM

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 46-55

[Article by R. Kh. Almayev, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, and
L. P. Semenov, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, Institute of Experi-
mental Meteorology)

[Text] Abstract: The authors investigated fluctuations
in the intensity of transmitted laser radiation
arising during the clearing of a turbulent cloud
medium. In the approximation of geometrical optics
and using the smooth perturbations method expres-
sions are derived for the dispersion of fluctua-
tions of the radiation intensity level. It is
shown that the presence of fluctuations of the
real and fictitiOus components of the dielectric
constant of the cleared medium leads to the ef-
fect of a partial compensation of intensity fluc-
tuations. The changes in the profiles of mean
characteristics of the cleared cloud medium, as-
sociated with fluctuations of the radiation act-
ing on the medium, are computed.

The problem of artificial modification of clouds and fogs by laser radiation for
the purpose of creating extended zones of clearing, without the presence of drop-
lets (for example, see [a] and the references therein) has been attracting great
attention. Interest in this problem is dictated primarily by the fundamental pos-
sibility of the use of cleared zones for-practical purposes. In [A], for example,
there is a discussion of the possibility of using the clearing effect for improv-
ing visibility over airport landing strips and for increasing the effectiveness of
operation of an optical signaling system in the presence of clouds and fogs.

As is well known. the principle for the clearing of cloud media by laser radiation
is based on the evaporation of cloud droplets due to the absorption of the energy
of radiation of definite wavelengths. In addition to the principal effect, an in-
crease in medium transparency during interaction between radiation and the cloud.

accompanying effects arise which are associated with the nonuniform heating of the
air by evaporating droplets. In particular, during clearing of the turbulent cloud-

medium random nonunifornities of temperature, liquid water content and the diel-
ectric constant are induced in addition to that existing prior to modification

FOI:OFIWC141.USEJDNIN
(II. We Isms; voo- vnua

[1, 3, 5]. Depending on the modification conditions, the parameters of the medium
and the radiation beam, the intensity of the induced fluctuations can vary in a
wide range and considerably exceed the values observed in the undisturbed medium [1,
3, 5]. One of the most important mechanisms of the development of fluctuations of
medium parameters is the mechanism of mixing of spatial inhomogeneities by the ran-
dom wind field [1,5]. §pecif1cs of formation of inhomogeneities of the dielectric
constant 6 in the cloud medium during the propagation of radiation is determined,
first of all, by the fact that heating of the medium occurs by means of heat trans-
fer from the heated droplets, and second, because of the peculiarities of evolution
of the disperse fraction under the influence of radiation. The random field 5 in
the cloud medium to be cleared in turn is a source of scattering and attenuation

of the transmitted radiation. The fluctuations of intensity of radiation arising in
this case and their influence on the mean characteristics of the medium to be clear-
ed are examined in this article.

Assume that the transmitted beam of laser radiation of the initial radius a0 With
the initial divergence 6% is propagated along the z-axis in an aerodisperse medium
occupying the region a) O and carried by a wind with a fluctuating velocity and
forms a cleared region in it which is characterized by a random field of the induc-
ed complex dielectric constant 6 . We will assume that the influence of the drop-
lets is limited to a nonuniform attenuation of the transmitted coherent part of the
wave, whereas the radiation scattered by the droplets is completely carried beyond
the limits of the beam. Such an assumption is correct for the optically narrow
beams 2a «0‘1 considered here on paths with ’Cog'fnmwto, ‘Eo are the attenua-
tion coefgicient and the optical thickness of the undisturbed cloud medium). Ac-
cording to [7]. in the atmosphere €11,525 for the densest clouds and 2a0<l m.

In this case the disperse medium can be considered quasicontinuous and it can be as-
sumed that the induced fluctuations of e in the modification zone are caused primar-
ily by turbulent mixing. Since the dimensions of the inhomogeneities arising in the
medium are 1)}. the propagation of radiation in the medium can be described by an
equation for the complex phase of an electromagnetic wavelﬁin a parabolic approx-
bastion

undo—Z+.\_v+(‘-.u'y+2k’(t+—.;—+‘—;)-o. (1)

Here H!- In E. E - Aeis; A, § are the amplitude and phase of the electromagnetic
wave; k is the wave number; a, e' are the mean and fluctuation changes of the di-
electric constant of the medium to be cleared, equal respectively to

01 ' 1- , _ 3' ., 1'

(71"),(T- To)+" —. ‘ _(W)p 1 + I T! (2)
where T, r'.éI, oL' are the mean and fluctuation components of temperature and the
attenuation coefficient of the medium, To is the temperature of the undisturbed
medium.

The spatial distribution of E is described by the expression

a—: a?“ .. €")+"% e_" - (3)

INDI‘OFIWCIAI.USEICHNLY
FOR G'FICIAL USE ONLY

where . ..
9.3 . ‘ , _ (1—3,) am a. .
“‘77—. 3:. .[d-"(X’.y.z) ""—3—.:. ‘(77'),' (a)

is a function of the thermal effect of the radiation; F , FT are coefficients,
averaged for the droplet spectrum, determining the fract on of radiation energy
absorbed by a droplet from the beam and the fraction from the absorbed radiation
energy expended on the evaporation of the droplet [4, 9]; W0 is the liquid water
content of the undisturbed medium; I. is the specific heat of evaporation of water;
Cl, is the heat capacity of a unit volume of air; I is the intensity of radiation; V0
is mean wind velocity, coinciding in direction with the x-axis.

It can be seen from (3) that 8 rapidly tends to saturation with an increase in the
thermal effect function. The latter occurs with movement of the observation point
in the direction of an increase in the optical transparency of the medium to be
cleared.

Here we will mention another peculiarity of the considered problem: the presence
of fluctuations of the fictitious part of E , which, as will be demonstrated here-
after, lead to the appearance of new effects. Making use or‘ the smallness of fluc-
tuations of the dielectric constant 8' 4 l, we will seek the solution of (l) in
the approximation of the smooth perturbations method. We will write the first two

equations for this method:

2ih‘3-—'f‘+aur,+(v,w,y+2r(t +17)=o, (5)

2 it 23?+.\;W,+2 :1"er +k’:' =0.
(6)

Equation (5) is nonlinear, and not only due to presence of the term (Vﬁfﬂ, but
also as a result of the dependence of S on A7- caused by the effect of me ium
clearing. A solution of (S) was found in [8] in the approximation of geometrical

optics. Such a solution is correct for paths with the extent zékag - 2d (for ex-
ample, for so - 20 cm, A- 10.6;1. m, zd - 25 km). Assuming the solution of (5) to
be known, henceforth we will concentrate our emphasis on solution of equation (6).
He will assume that all, - )Lk + 181,, 1r - 0, 1, where )L is the amplitude level of
the radiation, X0 - 1n A0, $1 = ln A/Ao. Since, as a rule, ao>10 (9-0 is the
minimum scale of the fluctuations of 2'), in (6) it is possible to omit the term
V; YIVLXO, having the order of

3—OAL‘II
and write an equation for 9/1 in the form

95

2M 01 +51- vl+2IV3SOVqul+k’.'=o- (7)

The 8' value is found in [1]:

z'=(—K'§-il3)’;~IV;. (j=xv y). (8)

where

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

'0

"=5? “=55. Franc". aﬁidx’ﬁ.

PJ - (x', y). V' is the pulsation component of wind velocity.

He will neglect the nonlinear divergence of the beam of modifying radiation in com-

parison with the initial value:v‘Soﬁkgo [8]. Assuming that theo igin of coor-
dinates is situated on the axis of the radiation beam, we select 30 in the form

'9’: [W W} (9)

where F is the radius of curvature of the wave front along the j-axis at the entry
into th medium; - z/F . Taking (8) and (9) into accOunt, from equation (7) we
obtain the following expression for 1411(p, 2):

W9. =17(—t.+h.\\-.T.r,-9 (2'. 2)9‘”(2 :)x (10)

e— ' '
"he" de9’ F; (9. 2’) V, (9 (no! "(“13”, MI’. 0},

F=(xp,(z'. 2‘. vp,(z’.=)). Mz’ z)=—.—I7’}-g—;l. (l=x.y)-

Here and in the text which follows the recurrent indices on the parameters I', V, 5,

P , p indicates emanation. The claring of cloud media in regular regimes of evapor-
ation of droplets along adequately extended paths can be achieved only by use of
broad beams of modifying radiation [10]. Accordingly, without substantial linita-
tions it can be assumed that s<ka8. Due to the rapidly oscillating exponent the
principal contri ution to the integral for ;' in expression (10) is from the re-
gion ao>|p'- Pl“? (Jz/ , I 8.) Since the characteristic spatial scale of
change of the function is of t2 e order of so, can be considered a smooth func-
tion at the scales [3' ~13: 7k, Q°<ao and on this Pgasis it can be removed from the
integral for p' Expressing the V' (hf) value through its Fourier transform

gd (2, i) and integrating (10) for 'with allowance for what has been stated above,
we obtain a'

v. (9. z)-—--’;-(—«. “PM“? mi: 1”fo

 

H3“-8)n(:9)

xe‘“x;(12')exn‘-—r-—.(I=X.y) 7 (11)

Using (ll) and assming a local homogeneity and isotropicity of wind velocity fluc-
tuations and their 6 -correlation in the direction of the z-axis, we obtain an ex-
pression for the dispersion of fluctuations of the level of intensity of the modify-

ing beam
«in, p) yrhzl: Re {Sdr’ Fl“: 2 ’) F,(E. z’n‘d’xx
a (12)

.. ‘2 _.
x¢[.(z’v ‘)[| __ cxp{_i_‘_:m}]'+ﬂki‘;x

* The condition for the indicated neglecting, obtained in a "stipulated field" ap-

proximation, has the form 1.“)
0°) —2— " ‘0‘»:

10

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

x Re U dz'F, (E. 2') F, (i, 3') who" (3" Z, x

 

ll:( .._ i ll '0
X[l+exp’- 3 32p (3 1)} }+2Rl’a,s,

9"? n

«iii-“,6. 2') x (12)

XF- <5 2714'». (a. 3:11:14;th .

where éjku', 3;) is the spectral tensor of wind velocity fluctuations;

RelB], ImIB] denotes separation of the real and fictitious parts of B,
x.-=2 1.. I, k, that, y.

In the approximation of geometrical optics (Ir? 00) expression (12) coincides with
the expression obtained in [2].

In (12) the first term, proportional to 6%, determines the fluctuations of the
level of intensity of radiation caused by scattering on temperature inhomogeneities
$’(Re 6'); the second term, proportional to s 2, determines fluctuations of radia-
tion caused by fluctuations of optical thickness (In 5'). The third term describes
fluctuations of radiation associated with cross-correlation of Re 5' and In 5'.

The presence of the second and third terms in (12) reflects the specific features
of clearing of a cloud medium.

Fluctuations of the level of intensity of radiation in a medium to be cleared are
nonh geneous and nonisotropic. This is indicated by the presence of the products
P ( , z')Pk(§, z') in (12). Thus, laser modification of a cloud medium, character-
iied initially by homogeneous and isotropic fluctuations of the parameters, leads
to a qualitative change in its stochastic properties. We will note another pecul-
iarity in behavior of fluctuations of the intensity level in the medium to be
cleared. Formula (12) shows that the sign on the last term is dependent on the sign
on 8 (35/) Tp. For most gases (ac/a 1') <0 and therefore in the considered case
£1< , and accordingly, the third term 12) is negative. The latter means that the
presence of the cross-correlation Re 5 'and In 6' in a medium with (dc/J T)<0 leads
to a decrease in the 0'; value in comparison with a case when Re 5' and 1135' are
not correlated. The degree of compensation is determined by the parameters of the
beam and medium to be cleared.

A graphic interpretation of the cross-compensation effect can be obtained by exam-
ining a single event of interaction of radiation with an individual random inhomo-
geneity E . Since 1‘

Ree'~— w)" F, V}.
P

and 1m £'~FJV'J, in a medium with (ac/a 1') <0 a random increase in the velocity
of transport V' )0 leads to a simultaneous increase in Re 5' and 1m 5'. A local
increase in Re e' in turn causes a focusing of the radiation incident on the inhomo-
geneity 5'. that is, increases the intensity of radiation due to the inhomogeneity.
0n the other hand, a synchronous increase in In 9' is equivalent to an additional
attenuation of the radiation. that is, exerts an effect inverse to Re E'. With a
decrease in the velocity of transport (v'j<0) a change in Re 5' leads to a

11

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decrease in the intensity of radiation and a change in In 5' accordingly leads to
its increase. In media with ()6 / a ‘1')>0 the indicated mechanisms are in phase
and lead to an increase in fluctuations of X1.

We will compute 6% for the spectrum of fluctuations of wind velocity in the fore

_.._.—..‘ ..---~——--.—._...—....—..—.—

4’1: 0‘)" — qua“ y: ) "W“ e‘ "“3" (13)

 

and the symetric initial beam divergence 90 x - 90 -9 0(p*.py I,p). In (13) "m

. 5. 92/ l CY }. are the structural characteristic Xnd internaly scale of wind
velocity 91cc uatgons respectively, 5 is the Kronecker symbol. Substituting (13)
into (12) and making computations, we Strain

ow. M35“; comm (4;); MW? ﬁx

xRe l(|+11)"‘—ll+§—'5'-50 'gﬁwjdfﬁéoﬂ't (m

saw I ‘ -‘
+ —5— 62 -..,.;m [(7); dr’FﬁE, 3’) In: (I + mm+

+ 6 «'1... .,c3, .3314: (2— z’)p(z’, z)F7(E. 2').
0

where _ (I-x’n (1'. 1):}...
7 — . .

 

r (x) is a game function; 7‘0 - 21r/L ; L0 is the characteristic maximum scale of

wind velocity fluctuations. determining the induced fluctuations 1m 6'. A rigorous

choice of the L0 value is not possible. an evaluation off 9 can be obtained taking
n

into account the conditions of smallness of the relative w d velocity fluctuations
in the atmosphere [6]:

J2 - VTZIVTS 0.1.

-12 ”2/3 ,. 2/3
Assuming v ~ 0 V0 L0 (L0 is the external scale of turbulent pulsations V),

we find LOS 63Lo.

we will examine2 two limiting situations: a) D l -- approximation of geometrical op-
tics, b) D - 1312/1191 - in this case diffraction on 5 fluctuations is important.

a) Approximatigy of geometrical optics. gue to the inequality D41 we can write
that (1 + 17) 5x1 + 5/6 1r + 5/72 y + and formula (11.) is reduced to the
following expression:

.. . ., _ .
62(2.p)=-;-q:§:2’r(+)§dr’(r—s’)'x

Xp'(x'.x)F:(?.z’) + Egi’cexgmqjamin + (15)

12

m OFI'IGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

'
+ *’ C’vcmhll‘l‘ﬁ) jab—rm“. z’)p(z’.r). m.)

The dependence of the first term in (15') on the internal scale of fluctuations 1.0
is similar to the dependence of 0,2‘ on obtained for the case of e "pure" turbu-
lent atmosphere with an 6 spectrum of tee type (13) [6]. The dependence of the
third correlation term on [0 is considerably weaker than the first. The value of
the second term is determined by the scale 1.? of fluctuations of the dielectric

constant since the greatest changes in radia ion intensity are related to macro-
scale fluctuations of optical thickness.

He will compute the square of fluctuations of the intensity level in the clearing
zone in the approximation of geometrical optics for paths with the extent 2a-
<2<F. we will characterize the cleari zone in the cloud medium by the consi-
tion q(z,p )“qo($)-°‘o z)l, where qo( ) - q(z,p)L¢.o is the value of the ther-
mal effect function at the cloud medium boundary. In egrating for s' in (15), we

 

 

obtain

‘ I -2 I ‘ ’

°’,(z.o)== m; C’v-.u’..’r(%)‘ "q *3” *3 ””'+ (16)
+ 3;::=C€‘;sla';e-ﬂ[q’ f q + 4' 4’ ﬂy!“-
3
_, r (ac-«W + . m1-
,0 _
.t "0

where ‘10:. 54171.“;

It can be seen from (16) that fluctuations in the intensity level decrease with an
increase in the degree of clearing of the medium ((1 value). The minimum of the
fluctuations in the clearing zone for radiation beam with an intensity decreasing
from the center of the beam to the edge is attained in the plane y - 0, where the
degree of clearing is maximal.

Now we will evaluate the effect of compensation of fluctuations of the radiation

intensity level in the clearing zone. Comparing the first and third terms in (16),
we find that - -
[a] 24:, c, a}. 3. (new ,

~

—— _— ~ _—.___ - “In a ‘ ‘ '
I. (l 3,, WJ. (0|) :7 03”(|_:1') W0 1| It“, (17)
d'
P

3

It can be seen from (17) that the role of compensation of fluctuations increases
with an increase in #1., 060 and the internal turbulence scale.

A comparison of the contributions of fluctuations of the real and fictitious parts
of 8' to 0'2 for typical values of cloud meditaa parameters indicates that in the

geometrical optics approximation the contribution of In i' is usually small.

13

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
f” UI‘I .bmh M Vl‘lal

b) Now we will examine the 1m: n91. In this case (1 + 1r)5’6"7”/ 6 1:
(cos SIT/12 + i sin 51r/12)

and expression (14) for 012‘ acquires the following form:
‘- 3=2 . ' " ' '
'2“'PI=T*"‘C’v"F(%‘)['n°°‘%§-2t.x

X 5‘“ hr] J 42’ (z — z'w'n"? (x'. z) E; m + “—25 x

X Q’3‘3”’§ 61' F; (E: 2') + 6:’ke.e,C-;,zgli {x
i ‘ (18)
x 42’ (z — :’)p (2’. 2) F3“. 1’)-

It follows from (18) that the second term, responsible for the X fluctuations. caus-
ed by pulsations of optical thickness, coincides with the corresponding term in the
approximation of geometrical optics (see (15)). The latter is associated with the
fact that the principal contribution to this term is from gacroscale inhomogeneit-
ies 9', diffraction on which for paths with an extent I: Io<z<ka3 is insignif-
icant.

In the clearing zone for paths with the extent 2°! 61< z<P formula (18) is reduced
to the form

. " := l . 5 l _.. n ‘ .

¢;(z.9):= 4- ‘54:; k’l‘C;,I‘(-o.-)l'(-6~)e 4(1, cos-Fi—‘thsln TIP“
7 . e (19)

X“, + -%q+ {'31 +95!) + 15% V‘G'm-‘ge'nh'i-q + “17+ 93’) *-

+ ﬁlm: ﬂaw-"(0’ + 2e + 5;- + 93,)

0

Comparison of expressions (19) and (16) shgws that the application of the results
of geometrical optics to the region z>k 10 leads to an exaggeration of the fluctu-
ations caused by scattering on thermal-inhomogeneities of E by a factor of

my?"
a. k

It follows from (19) that there is a substantial increase in the role of fluctua-
tions of the intensity level caused by pulsations of the optical thickness for
extended paths: the contributions of fluctuations of the intensity level due to the
real and fictitious parts of 8' on the paths z)k1% in the clearing zone can be
comparable.

The O i distribution in the entire volume of the beam, including the transition
zone, was computed numerically using formula (18) and is represented in Fig. l. The
figure shows that the nature of the distribution of the intensity fluctuations in
the beam cross section is determined primarily by the relationship of qo(0) and
0‘02. In the case of a poorly cleared medium (curve 110(0) - 1), the radiation fluc—
tuations in the beam cross section increase with movement from its windward edge

16

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
lillCHﬂﬂClAl.llﬂi¢H§LY

(8- -l) to the leeward edge (5 I l). Hith qo(0)23 there is a clearly expressed
maximum of the intensity fluctuations which is displaced to the windward side of
the beam with an increase in qo(0). In the clearing zone the intensity fluctua-
tions decrease sharply with an increase in q0(0). We note that the nature of the
behavior of a; in dependence on g, qo(0) is similar and agrees entirely with the
behavior of 5 fluctuations [1].

 

Fig. 1. Typical distribution of induced fluctuations of intensity level of modify-
ing radiation along axis 57' I x/a in section y I 0, fI 3 for different values of
parameter qo(0) I 1, 3, 5, 7 and ﬂ(aL°P)"1 I 0.05.

we will discuss the problem of change in the mean characteristics of the medium to
be cleared (temperature, liquid-water content, transparency) caused by pulsations
of the modifying radiation. In [3], where a study was made of the problem of clear-
ing of the cloud medium by radiation with an intensity fluctuating at the entry
into the cloud, it was demonstrated that the presence of intensity fluctuations of
the modifying radiation should lead to a smoothing of the profiles of the mean
characteristics of the medium in comparison with a case when the modification is
accomplished by radiation with regular parameters. The intensity of the indicated
effect is determined by the dispersion cr2 of fluctuations of the thermal effect
function q. For the case considered here it can be assumed that

t .
2., 2 22 w r 2"
[m _ correlation] °.. m0) ,0 in ms.y.z)e,«.y.x). (20)

where . ° _ ~71?) .
I") — ’.(o)'

T(r) is the mean radiation intensity in the medium to be cleared; Pc is the cor-
relation radius of the )- fluctuations; a; was stipulated by formula 2%).

Numerical computations of change in the mean characteristics of the medium to be
cleared due to the induced q fluctuations, stipulated by expression (20), carried

out for a large set of cloud and radiation beam parameters, indicated that in the
considered situation these changes are insignificant. As indicated by an analysis,
the latter is attributable to the fact that the fluctuations of radiation

15

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
roe mun. USU. ONLY

intensity, determining (7:. are small both in regions with a high degree of clear-
ing, due to the smallness of the a pulsations induced in the medium, and in re-
gions with a low degree of clearing due to a considerable attenuation of radia-
tion by nonevaporating cloud droplets.

We note in conclusion that the investigation of the induced )6 fluctuations was
carried out without allowance for the influence of gas absorption of radiation on
the formation of 8 fluctuations. Such an examination is correct for dense clouds
and fogs when “ONE (0! 8 is the coefficient of attenuation of radiation by the
gas component of the atmosphere). As indicated by the analysis, gas absorption
can change the distribution of 8 fluctuations in the region

._. _. 12‘3' ..___
[f - s - sea] Diallinb—l.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Almayev, R. Kh., Nerushev, A. P. and Semenov, L. P. "Fluctuations of Tempera-
ture and Liquid-Hater Content in the Zone of Clearing of a Cloud Medium."
IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATMOSPERY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 14, No 3, 1978.

2. Almayev, R. Kh. and Semenov, L. P., "Fluctuations of Parameters of Radiation
Modifying a Cloud Medium Caused by the Mixing Mechanism,” TBZISY DOKLADOV
12-y VSESOYUZNOY KONPERENTSII P0 RASPROSTRANENIYU RADIOVOLN (Summaries of Re-
ports at the 12th All-Union Conference on Radio Have Propagation). Tomsk, Part
2, 1978.

3. Almayev. R. Kh. and Svirkunov, P. 8., "Role of Laser Radiation Fluctuations in
Clearing of Disperse Media," PIS'MA V ZhT? (Letters to the Journal of Technical
Physics). Vol 6, No 12, 1978.

a. Volkovitskiy, 0. A., "Experimental Investigation of the Influence of Radiation
of 002 Lasers on a Droplet Cloud Medium," METEOROLOCIYA I CIDROLOGIYA (Meteor-
ology and Hydrology), No 9, 1977.

S. Volkovitskiy, 0. A., Didenko, N. K. and Pinchuk. S. D.. "Appearance of Optical
Inhomogeneities in the Clearing of a Turbulent Cloud Medium," TRUDY IEM (Trans-
actions of the Institute of Experimental Meteorology), No 18(71), 1978.

6. Curvich, A. 5., Kon, A. 1., Mirnov, V. L. and Khmelevtsev. s. s.. LAZERNOYE IZ-
LUCHENIYE V TURBULENTNOY ATMOSFERB (Laser Radiation in a Turbulent Atmosphere),
Moscow, Nauka, 1976.

7. Zuyev, V. Ye. and Ksbsnov, M. V., PERENOS OPTICHESKIKH SIGNALOV V ZZMNOY ATMO-

SFERE (V USLOVIYAKH POMEKB) (Transfer of Optical Signals in Earth's Atmosphere
(Under Noise Conditions)), Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio. 1977.

8. Nerushev, A. P. and Semenov, L. P., "Propagation of a Light Beam in an Evapor-
ating Liquid-Drop Medium in the Presence of 'Hind' Refraction," KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA (Quantum Electronics), Vol 3, No 6, 1976.

16

FilllﬂﬁﬂCIAl.USEllVLY
9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAI.UEIZCHVLY

Senenov, L. P., “Evaporation of a Water Droplet in the Radiation Field,"
TRUDY IBM (Transactions of the Institute of Experimental HeteoroloSY). No

18(71), 1978.

Sedunov, Yu. S. and Seuenov, L. P., "Geometry of a Clearing Zone in a Cloud
With an Arbitrary Wind Field," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy

of Sciences), Vol 236, 1977.

17

FOR10FFKJA1.USE(NQLY
F08 oil-lust. use; ONLY

UDC 551.576.1
FEATURES OF MASS EXCHANGE DURING COLLISION OF WATER DROPLBTS 0F NONOOHPARABLB 8123

Moscow HHEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 56-60

[Article by A. V. Kolpakov and S. M. Kontush. candidate of physical and
mathematical sciences, Odessa State University].

experieents for investigating the phenomenon of partial coalescence of droplets at
the tile of collision of droplets of noncomparable sizes. The experiments were
carried out with droplets with a radius 50‘ r1<150pm which collided with target
droplets with a radius 500<R€1500um with a change of velocity in the range 20<
v14 200 cn/sec. The experimental apparatus is described. The authors derived func-
tional expressions relating the parameters of the droplets before and after col-
lisions and the partial coalescence mechanism is explained. Expressions are also
derived which determine the limits of existence of partial coalescence for a stip-
ulsted range of change of the collision parameters. All this not only makes it pos-
sible to take into account the existence of the partial coalescence phenomenon
when designing different kinds of aerosol apparatus, but also to control actively
the various processes changing the value of the input parameters. The results once
again indicate the need for a separate examination of experimental studies on the
value of the r1/R parameter because when this parameter has substantially different
values it is necessary to expect a prevalence of different processes. Figures 3;

references 12: 8 Russian, 10 Western.

18
ml WHOM. USE ONLY
FOI1OFFIJA1.USE(NVLY

UDC 551.551.8

COMPUTATION OF VERTICAL TURBULENT FLUXES IN NEAR-HATER ATMOSPHERIC LAYER OVER OCEAN
IN TROPICAL LATITUDES

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) PP 61-68

[Article by T. P. Hasagutov, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Abstract] It is generally recognized that the turbulent exchange of heat, momentum
and moisture through the ocean-atmosphere interface plays a highly important role
in the formation of weather over the earth. But at the present time there is no
technical possibility for organizing measurements of these characteristics by a
direct method on the necessary scale. Moreover, it is virtually impossible to or-
ganize measurements of fluxes of these substances, for example, in a zone occupied
by a tropical cyclone. This accounts for the fact that during recent years an ef-
fort has been made to develop indirect methods for computing the fluxes of heat,
momentum and moisture on the basis of data from standard meteorological observa-
tions. However, on the basis of direct experimental data it has recently been dem-
onstrated that the presently widely used indirect methods for computing the fluxes
of heat and momentum on the basis of data from mass hydrometeorological observa-
tions do not provide the accuracy required for practical purposes. This article out-
lines an improved method with application of the great volume of recently acquired
experimental data, for example, data on the structure of turbulence in the near-
water layer of the atmosphere obtained in "ATEX-69," "BOHEX-69," "ATEP-74" and on

a number of other expeditions. The author has obtained an explicit form of the de-
pendence of the energy exchange coefficients on the characteristics of the flux and
sea surface roughness. These results are used in formulating a refined scheme for
computing the fluxes of heat, moisture and momentum on the basis of data from stan-
dard meteorological observations. Figures 6; references 23: 12 Russian, 11 Western.

19

FINICM"HC1AI.[EIE(NVLY
lIlR‘urrI\4AI.\alsanvml

UDC 551.463.6(215-17)

.OBJBCTIVE ANALYSIS 0? OCEAN SURFACE TEMPERATURE IN NORTHERN HENISPHBRB

Hoscov HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, 1981 (manuscript received
14 Apr 81) pp 69-76

[Article by A. N. Bagrov, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, and
N. N. Koahevnikova, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: The article describes a scheme
for the objective analysis of the tempera-
ture field of the ocean surface in the north-
ern hemisphere by the optimum interpolation
method. The analysis is made using data from
shipboard observations accumulated during a
five-day period. The data were subjected to
climatic and horizontal checking. The scheme
was applied using a BBSH-6 electronic comput-
_er in FORTRAN algorithmic language. The re-
sults of the analysis are fed out for the
points of intersection of a grid 2.5 x 2.5'
covering the entire northern hemisphere (ex-
cept for the territory of the land and polar
regions). Recommendations are given for fur-
ther improvement of the results.

Anomalies of the thermal state of the ocean surface exert a substantial influence
on meteorological processes in the atmosphere. Objective analysis of ocean sur-
face temperature is also intended for taking into account nonadiabatic factors in

different prognostic models of the atmosphere. In addition, in the future it is
desirable that the results of this analysis replace the manual analysis of ocean

surface temperature now employed at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center, involving
manual plotting of a great volume of data on the map.

In a study by V. A. Avdeyev [2] a scheme was proposed for objective analysis of
water temperature for the North Atlantic. But it was oriented on an antiquated

technology and never entered into operational practice. Our analytical scheme, as
well as that described in [2], is based on the optimum interpolation method and

in many respects conforms to the operational scheme given in [3] for analysis of
surface meteorological fields (including the air temperature fields). The same as
scheme [3], it is applied using FORTRAN language with s BBSH-G electronic computer.

20
FOITOFFKJAI.USE(N§LY
FOR‘051WC1AI.(EHE(NVLY

Initial data. As the initial data in the analysis use is made of synoptic tele-
grams (in the KN-09 code) from commercial and scientific research ships in which,
in addition to other information, data on temperature of the ocean surface are
given. The number of such summaries from the northern hemisphere arriving at the
USSR Hydrometeorological Center at any main observation time (0000 or 1200 GMT)
averages 650. The commercial ships from which the overwhelming number of shipboard
telegrams arrives for the most part sail along standard routes. Thus, information
for the northern hemisphere is distributed extremely nonuniformly: in addition to
regions of vigorous marine shipping, from which even some excess of observational
data is obtained, there are some extensive regions which are extremely poorly cov-
ered by data. As a rule these are the tropical regions of the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans. Since the temperature of the ocean surface is an extremely inert character-
istic, and also due to the inadequate volume of data received for one observation
time, in oceanological practice at the present time it is customary to "mix" these
data for a five-day period, that is, plot all the information arriving during a
five-day period. In actuality, in regions of vigorous shipping only some part of
all the arriving summaries is plotted, whereas in poorly covered regions all the
water temperature summaries are plotted.

Although data on water temperature of the ocean surface are transmitted with an
accuracy to 0.1°C, the actual accuracy of these measurements is probably consider-
ably lower and does not exceed il°C, but according to the considerations of some
authors, :1.5°c [8]. This occurs as a result of the primitive technique for the
measurements themselves, mixing of the water surface layer due to ship movement,
etc. In addition, the observations are not made by professional observers and
therefore a rather high percentage of error is obtained. The plotting of this in-
formation on one map helps in averaging it somewhat and facilitates checking. In
Our work on the objective analysis of temperature of the ocean surface we also
"mixed" data on water temperature for a five-day period, as this is now done in

oceanological practice.

We made use of the already existing techniques of the operational data processing
system organized for the purposes of numerical short-range forecasting on a BBSH—

6 electronic computer employed at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. All the hy-
drometeorological data from the communication channels are fed to the magnetic tapes
of a "Minsk—32" electronic computer. Then at the necessary moments in time ("cut-off
times") through a special inter-machine communication channel it is transmitted to
a BESH—é electronic computer. The "cutoff time" for a regional operational fore-
cast is 2.5 hours, but for a hemispherical forecast -- 5.5 hours from the moment of

observation. During these times it is possible to receive about 75 and 951 of all

the shipboard synoptic telegrams respectively relating to a particular observation
time (it should be noted that the shipboard synoptic summaries lag considerably be-
hind similar telegrams from land stations in the northern hemisphere). In the Bash-
6 electronic computer the arriving information, including shipboard synoptic tele-
grams, is subjected to primary processing [5]. As a result, "hard" formats of ship-
board telegrams are obtained, that is, such formats in which each meteorological
element corresponds to a definite place. In this process repeated summaries are
eliminated, there is some syntactical control of communications, etc. After com-
puting the regional and hemispherical forecast the processed initial data for each
observation time are accumulated through a data bank system (authors - V. A. Ants-
ypovich, V. R. Al'tshuler) in a special five-day cyclic archives (author of pro-
gram -- A. Yu. Birkgan). We use information from this archives for computing an

analysis of ocean surface temperature.
21

FOIioFFﬂJAl.USE(MVUY
I'UK WPILIAL USI- Win!

In this analytical scheme an important role for shacking and interpolation pur-
poses is played by the climatic characteristics t and oF(norm and standard devia-
tion) of the water temperature field. As the t fields we used the mean monthly
characteristics at the points of intersection of a 5 x 5° grid from the American
DST-6 archives, registered on magnetic tapes in the international format and
available at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. It was important that these
fields are smoothly continued onto the _territory of the land. A comparison of
these fields with the climatic fields t available to us revealed their good cor-
respondence. The monthly fields of the mean square variability were taken from
magnetic tapes prepared at the Swedish Hydrometeorological Institute for the pro-
cessing of data in FCGE level-II form [7). These fields, in our opinion, corres-
pond well to the geographical distribution of CT; although they are somewhat un-
derstated in absolute value. Special mathematical support for the readout of cli-
matic data was created by A. H. Gofen and A. D. Naumov.

Preliminary checking. First all the data on ocean surface temperature are subject-
ed to some preliminary checking. For this purpose the ship coordinates and water
temperatures are selected from the formats of the shipboard synoptic telegrams.

Ships in the southern hemisphere are excluded, as well as data for ships with in-
correct coordinates. that is, ships whose coordinates erroneously fell on the

land, not at sea. There is also a rough' 'climatic checking" of communications

on water temperature on the basis of the degree of their deviations from the cli-
matic values. Using the ship's coordinates from the 5° grid_ in which the climatic
values are stipulated there is a bilinear interpolation of t and Ofvalues for

this ship. All_ the shipboard communications on water temperature t falling beyond
the framework tiacr are considered erroneous. This type of checking henceforth

can be made more effective if instead of climate one uses the results of an anal-
sis of water temperature for the preceding five-day period. A subsequent more pre-
cise type of checking is already carried out within the framework of the optimum
interpolation method.

Interpolation; horizontal checking. As the interpolation method we used the well-
known optimum interpolation method based on use of the statistical characteristics
of the fields to be analyzed. This method has won wide recognition and is finding
increasingly wider use in the analysis and assimilation of different meteorolog-
ical fields. It is assumed that the fields of deviation of a meteorological field
from the norm are homogeneous and isotropic. For the water temperature field this
assumption is more or less satisfied.

Then computations of the value of a meteorological element at a point of intersec-
tion of a regular grid (or at a ship being checked) are accomplished using the
formula

t «5+ t'.
n s 12:!“ I (1)

Here Eb is the climatic water temperature value at a grid point of intersection (at
the ship to be checked); t'1 - t1 - t1 are the deviations of water temperature

from climate at the influencing ships (we took only four influencing ships); p1

are the weights of the influencing ships, which are determined by solution of a
system of linear equa:ions

22

I")! 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬂﬂE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J
20:91;+'P1"l= I‘M (i: '- 2’ 3v 4"
m . (2)

where p. are the corresponding values of the normalized autocorrelation function;
n- 0.02 is a term specially introduced into the matrix diagonal for better con-

ditionality of the system of equations.

The problem of the autocorrelation function for ocean surface temperature has not
yet been investigated adequately. Difficulties in determining the water tempera-
ture spatial correlation functions are related to the absence of a constant net-
work of stations in the ocean which would ensure simultaneous observations of
water temperature in different regions of the ocean, such as, for example, synoptic
stations on the land. We know of results of an investigation of autocorrelation
functions [1, 6] which are contradictory. The autocorrelation functions p-(r) ob-
tained in [1], in our opinion, are improbable because the correlation coefficient
remains extremely high for distances, of even more than 2,000 km. which is prob-
ably attributable to failure to take the measurement errors into account. As
‘14“) we took the power-law expression

Mr): (1 + %) exp (—' {—). (3)
where r is the distance in thousands of kilometers, 1. - 0.35.

An autocorrelation function of the type (3) is used in an analysis of the surface
meteorological fields [3] and is close to the air temperature autocorrelation
function. Source [6] presented statistical investigations of the water temperature
fields on the basis of expeditionary data and one of the autocorrelation functions
obtained there is close to that which we adopted.

The checking of the communicated initial data on water temperature is accomplished
by the horizontal checking method [lo] by an interpolation of values from the four
ships closest to the particular ship. As in any interpolation method it is import-
ant here that all the influencing ships insofar as possible uniformly surrounded
the particular grid point of intersection (ship to be checked). Accordingly, in
the scheme the search for influencing ships is carried out in such a way that

not only the nearest influencing ships were selected, but also that insofar as
possible they be situated in all four quadrants surrounding the particular point
of intersection (ship to be checked). The discrepancy between the temperature con-
municated by the ship and the interpolated value A t is comared with the theoret-
ical interpolated error, increased by several times. The need for such an increase
is attributable to the fact that in a number of cases there is an impairment in
the condition which we adopted concerning the homogeneity and isotropicity of the
fields of deviations from the norms. The possible interpolation error is computed
using the formula

‘I’Ef; N, V:, (A)
.4,
where F. - 1-2, piyoi is the theoretical measure of the interpolation error;
t-l

0’13 the standard deviation of water temperature; N - 10 is an empirically select-
ed factor.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM Ufa-tutu. use out:

The F, parameter is essentially dependent on the density of the network of ships
and their relative locations and also on the autocorrelation function used. The

N factor was selected in such a way that insofar as possible shipboard communica-
tions with incorrect data were rejected and correct comunicstions were retained.
If in the horizontal checking it appears that I A t|< E, the data for the ship
to be checked are considered correct. However, if |A tl>V§, there is an error in
the initial data -- for the ship to be checked, or for some one of the influencing
ships. For solving this problem use is also made of informtion from a fifth near-
1ying ship and interpolation is carried out for the ship to be checked with alter-
nate exclusion of data for each of the four initially selected ships. If in all
four cases 'At|>\/E remains, it is obvious that the data for the ship to be
checked are incorrect and they are rejected; otherwise it is seemed that the data
for one of the surrounding ships are erroneous (which will be checked in turn).
Detailed information on all types of checking is printed out.

Horizontal checking is ineffective in those rare cases when ships in a row com-
municate incorrect information with an error in one and the same direction. In
these cases either a more preliminary checking (on the basis of deviation of the
analysis for the preceding five-day period from the field), or, sometimes, the re-
peated carrying out of the horizontal checking procedure can be of assistance.

Search for influencing ships. In a rapid search for the influencing ships use is
made of the so-called "machine map" method. For this purpose a square is construct-
ed on a map of the northern hemisphere in a stereographic projection at a scale of
1:30 000 000. This square is described around the circumference of the equator,
which is in turn broken down into 160 x 160 small squares with 5-mm sides on a
blank map (150 km at latitude 60°). We require that in each such small square there
will be no more than two influencing ships; preference is given to data for later
times from the five-day period. The remaining information is considered excess and
is discarded. This limitation is related to the electronic computer memory; it en-
ables us to have a network of more uniformly spaced ships.

The octal numbers of one or two ships are entered in each such square; if not one
ship falls in a square, it remains empty. Using this number it is easy and quick to
find the Cartesian coordinates of the ship, data on temperature for the ship in the
form of deviations from climate, conditional index, etc. present in the individual
data masses. In the search for influencing data the first step is to determine the
stall square corresponding to the interpolation point (ship to be checked); then
the search for the nearest nonempty squares begins. The search is carried out in

a spiral with a gradual increase in radius to a maximum of 1500 km. In addition,
the already mentioned symmetrization of search in four quadrants is introduced. If
the ship is situated closer than 50 km from the interpolation point, the interpol-
ation is not carried out and the point is assigned the water temperature value at
this ship. If there is not a single ship within the radius of maximum search, the
point is assigned the climatic value.

Results. Interpolation is carried out at the points of intersection of a grid meas-
uring 2.5" x 2.S° for the region of the entire northern hemisphere with the excep-

tion of the land and polar regions (to the north of 70°“). As an example of the
computations we give the results of an analysis of water temperature during the

2!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(MILY

five-day period 11-15 June 1980. For technical reasons during this period we used
information only for the two principal observation times - 0000 and 1200 GMT; for
0000 hours the "cutoff time" was 2.5 hours, and for 1200 hours - 5.5 hours. The

volume of arriving data and the volume of data discarded as a result of different
kinds of checking and the adopted search system are as follows:

Total shipboard telegrams received.................... 6095
of which the number from the southern hemisphere is. 492
ships with land coordinates....................... 115

no data on water temperature...................... 624
no climatic checking.............................. 236
did not enter into "machine map".................. 1632
enter into "machine map".......................... 2998
did not undergo horizontal checking............... 105
useful comunications-IOIOII.00....OOIOOOIOIIOOCOC 2893

r: 7 m :o
IIIIIIIIIII
' n I! :7 A

III IIIIIIII
. :r u :5 m :7 u
.IIIIIIIIIII
ﬂ '
,, Z’E I
I} II
., ,, “I x ,, IIIII
M ’1 1! I,
IIIIIIIIIIIII
2o
”IIIIIIIIIII
0 ' ' JO ‘0 0 U

Fig. l. lnforma:ion for the North Atlantic on the availability of information in
"machine nap." 31-15 June 1980.

 
      
   
   
   
   
     

In particular, we see that there are great losses of information due to the system
for the search of influencing ships which we used. We nose that for interpolation
purposes it is best to have a dense and uniform observation grid. In actuality, a
dense network of water temperature observations is available only along standard

sea routes. In these regions there are even significant losses of information due
to our search system.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1 schensti
10° squares. The

as are very great. Th1 utable to the fact that an extremely busy shipping
lane passes only along the northern shore of the Scandinavian peninsula, whereas the
O

nap" and carry out interpolation in a denser regular grid of points, such as l x 1'.

Figure 2, as a comparison, give maps of manual (operational) and objective analyses
of water temperature for the North Atlantic for 11-15 June 1980. These naps agree

entirely satisfactorily. we note some inevitable smoothing of the results of ob-
FOR(NHWCJA1.USE(NVLY

maximum differences at individual points of intersection attained 3°C (primarily
due to an inadequately rigorous checking system).

The USSR Hydrometeorological Center is now receiving a considerable quantity of Am-

erican data from satellite sounding of the atmosphere in the SAT!“ code. In addi-
tion to other meteorological information the SATEH sumaaries also contain tempera-
tures of the underlying surface (land or sea). It would be desirable to use these
data for supplementing the information for poorly covered regions, primarily for
the tropics. However, it was found that the water temperature values present in
these satellite summaries very poorly agree with data from shipboard observations;
some of them contain blunders.

The computation time when using the scheme is about 10 minutes on a DESK-6 elec-
tronic computer. The scheme is now undergoing operational testing.

Other possible ways to improve the quality of objective analysis can be the follow~
ing:

1. Participation in the analysis of all the information for all available observa-'
tion times, because this can somewhat improve the results in poorly studied re-
gions.

2. Use of the results of analysis of the preceding five-day period instead of cli-
matic data.

3. Carrying out of investigations of water temperature autocorrelation functions in
different regions of the northern hemisphere.

4. Inclusion in the analysis of data from satellite sounding on temperature of the
underlying surface (in the case of improvement of their quality).

5. Telescoping of the scheme for individual most interesting regions.

6. Inclusion in the analysis (as reference points) of data from more precise water
temperature measurements - summaries from scientific research ships. buoy observ-
ations, and also data from the upper level of abyssal measurements (BATHY, TBSAK).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Avdeyev, V. A., "Investigation of the Statistical Hacrostructure of Water Tem-
perature at the Ocean Surface." TRUDY VSESOYUZNOY KONFERENTSII HOLODYKH UCHEN-
YKH GIDROMETSLUZHBY SSSR. OKEANOLOGICHBSKIYE RASCHETY I PROGNOZY (Transactions
of the All-Union Conference of Young Scientists of the USSR Hydrometeorological
Service. Oceanological Computations and Predictions), Leningrad, 1972.

2. Avdeyev, V. A.. "Plotting of Water and Air Temperature in the North Atlantic,"
TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydrometeorological Cen-
ter). No 127, 1973.

3. Bagrov, A. N. and Loktionova, Ye. A., "Objective Analysis of Surface Meteorolog-
ical Fields for the Northern Hemisphere on a BBSH-6 Electronic Computer,"

TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydrometeorological Cen-
ter), No 196, 1978.

27

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
I‘VO Wrounh we. Una-I

Belousov, S. I», et al., OBRABOTKA OPERATIVNOY METEOROIDGICHESKDY INPORHATSII

s POHOSHCH'YU ELEKTRONNYKH VYCHISLITBL'NYKH HASEIN (Processing of Operational
meteorological Infornation Using Electronic Computers), Leningrad, Gidroneteo-
izdat, 1968.

Kastin, 0. H. and Semendyayev, K. A., SISTEHA PERVICHNOY OBRABOTKI METEOROIDG-
ICHESKOY INPORHATSII (System for Primary Processing of Meteorological Data),
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1973.

Sukhovey, V. P. and Suvorova, H. 1., "Investigation of the Spatial Statistical
Structure of Hacroscale Hydrological Fields," HDRSKIYB GIDROFIZICHESKIYE IS-
SLBDOVANIYA (Marine Hydrophysical Investigations), No 6, Izdaniye HG! AN
UkSSR, Sevastopol', 1971.

CIuCCher, H. L. and Davis, 0. M” US NAVY MARINE CLIMATIC ATLAS OF THE WORLD,
Vol 8, NAVAIR 50-10-54, 1969. -

Gemmill, H. and Larson, L., "Real-Tine Ocean Thermal Structure Analysis,"
PAPERS SUBMITTED TO THE JOINT IOC/HMO SEMINAR ON OCEANOGRAPHIC PRODUCTS AND
THE IGOSS DATA PROCESSING AND SERVIQS SYSTEM, Dbscov, 2-6 April 1979.

28

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR€DFFKJALINHEONIN

UDC 551.466.62:550.3h(57l.66)

TSUNAMI 0F 23 NOVEMBER 1969 ON KAHCHAIKA AND FEATURES OF ITS DEVELOPMENT

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLDGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 81 (manuscript received
26 Mar 81) pp 77-83

[Article by Yu. A. Zayakin, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskaya Hydrometeorological Observa-
tory] .

[Abstract] An earthquake with an intensity 3 - 7.7 and a hypocenter depth 30 kn
occurred on 23 November 1969 at a distance of 35 km to the east of Cape Osernoy
under the floor of the Bering Sea continental slope. Such an earthquake is a rath-
er rare phenomenon and was the strongest earthquake of this century in the western
part of the Bering Sea. A tsunami is also a rare phenomenon in the western part of
the Bering Sea. The earthquake and tsunami of 1969 have refuted the idea that this
region is free of strong earthquakes and taunamis and this necessitates amendments
to tsunami-earthquake regionalization. Figure l is a map representing the focus of
the tsunami of 23 November 1969; Figure 2 is a map showing the travel time of tsu—
nami propagation. The tsunami had a complex focal mechanism. The tsunami was form—
ed as a result of changes in bottom relief and due to an underwater slide. The in-
fluence of the latter was more important. This is indicated by the southern part

of the tsunami focus, lying beyond the limits of the focal region of the earth-
quake, as well as the good comparability of tsunami wave energy, computed under the
condition of formation of the tsunami by a suspension flow,witb the energy actually
observed. Despite the fact that the strong earthquake of 23 November in the Bering
Sea, causing the reported tsunami, was unique in this century, on a preliminary
basis a tsunamigenic region must be defined in this zone. It is a continuation of
the Kurile-Kamchatkan tsunamigenic zone to the north, along the continental slope,‘
to parallel 58°. The most dangerous sector of the coast, really subject to a threat
of a tsunami, is situated opposite the defined zone from the Kamchatkan Peninsula
to 02ernyy Peninsula. Figures 2, tables 2; references: 9 Russian.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC $56.52:556.53
RIVER PLOW AS DISSIPATIVE SYSTEM

[Article by V. I. Nikora, Odessa Hydrometeorologicel Institute]

[Abstract] In 19107 H. A. Velikanov outlined three fundamental principles which must
be applied in an approach to the study of the channel process. These principles are:
interaction between flow and channel. limitedness of natural complexes and minimum
of energy dissipation, representing application of the ideas of Rayleigh and Helm-
holtz to the "flow-channel" system. Although the first two principles have been
accepted without special objections, the third has been subjected to acute critic-
ism. Accordingly, the author has reexamined this problem from the point of view of
the theory of dissipative structures. With respect to structure, the following as-
sunptions are made in this study: 1. The systea is thermodynanically open, that is,
there can be an exchange of matter and (or) energy with the median. 2. The dynamic
equations of the pertinent system are nonlinear. 3. Deviations from equilibriun
exceed critical values. 4. Microscopic processes occur "cooperatively" (consistent-
ly). The "flow-channel" physical system fully corresponds to these assumptions. It
is clear that it is thermodynamically open, its dynamic equations are nonlinear,
microscopic processes occur cooperatively. it is far from thermodynamic equilibrium
and therefore the development of structures in it is possible. Investigation of a
river from the point of view of the theory of dissipative structures can be carried
out at three scale levels: 1) microscale -- a short river reach in which its hy-
draulics is interrelated to bottom nicroforms; 2) mesoscale - a river reach of con-
siderable extent, whose hydraulics form mesoforma; 3) macroacale - the river as a
whole. Depending on the level at which the "flow-channel" system is investigated.
the input external factors must be stipulated (for example, when examining the riv-

tive structures is entropy. which is a measure of the unordered character of the
system. Proceeding on this basis, the author demonstrates that the principle of
a minimum of energy dissipation proposed by M. A. Velikanov corresponds to the
Prigogine-clensdorf fundamental principle of a minimum of entropy production ap.
plied to fluvial hydraulics. Figures 1; references: 8 Russian.

30

FINI¢MHWCIAL USEZCMVLY
ROI OFIWCIAI.lEﬂB(H‘LY

UDC 556.535.3
SPAIIAL CORRELAIION FUNCTIONS OF HAXIHDM HATER DISCHARBES IN HOUNTAIN RIVERS

Moscow HBTBOROLOGIYA I GIbROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
20 Apr 81) pp 89-93

[Article by H. A. Mamedov. candidate of technical sciences, Azerbaijan State Uni-
versity] '

[Abstract] A study was made of the spatial structure of variations of maximal water
discharges in mountain rivers of Transcaucasia and Dagestanskaya ASSR. The paired
correlation coefficients method was used employing a "Minsk-32" electronic conputer
in accordance with a program prepared at the State Hydrological Institute. It was
found that the mean elevation of the drainage basins in mountain regions exerts a
substantial influence on the formation of maximum runoff. The spatial correlation
function was represented in the form of the dependence of the paired correlation
coefficients on the difference in the mean elevations of the drainage basins. The
investigation involved conputing the spatial correlation functions for the maximum
high—water discharges of rivers on the southern and northeastern slopes of the
Greater and Lesser Caucasus and the naximun discharges of flood waters of rivers

on the southern slo e of the Greater and Lesser Caucasus and elsewhere. The correl-
ation line r - f(| HI) was constructed with allowance for the computed mean weight-
ed values of the paired correlation coefficients for each elevation gradation, assum-
ed equal to |£§HI - 200 m. The spatial correlation functions of maximum high-water
discharges were computed on the basis of 881 paired correlation coefficient values
and for flood waters - using 215 such values. It was established that in mountainous
areas the values of the paired correlation coefficients are dependent not only on
the distance between the centers of drainage basins, but also on the difference in
the mean elevations of the drainage basins. For mountain rivers the spatial correla-
tion function for maximum discharges can be represented in the form r - f(JIAED.
Figures 3; references: 5 Russian.

31

FOIIOIIHCJAI.UBIJUNEN
POI OFFICIAL use: out!

UDC 551.583:632.21.3(470)

INFLUENCE 0P CLIHAIIC CONDITIONS 0“ VARIABILITY OF YIELDS 0P GREEN MASS OP
PBRBNNIAL GRASSBS IN RSPSR

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
6 Apr 81) pp 96-101

[Article by V. M. Hokiyevskiy. candidate of agricultural sciences, and N. K. Shal-
yavina, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural Meteorology]

[Abstract] The paper gives an analysis of variability of the yields of green mass
of perennial grasses in the RSFSR in relation to climatic conditions. Mean oblast
data and data averaged for individual economic regions were used for the period
from 1961 through 1979, that is, for a period of 19 years. The analysis indicated
that the yields of grasses vary considerably from year to year. Table 1 gives stat-
istical data on the yields of green mass of perennial grasses by economic regions
and oblasts with information on yield increments over the course of the 19-year
period. In all economic regions there was a substantial increase in the yields of
grasses during the considered period. The greatest increases were in the European
RSFSR in the Volga, Central Chernorem and Northern Caucasus economic regions. In
the Asiatic BSPSR the yield increment was considerably lower, especially in the Far
Eastern region. High yield increments were obserVed in the Volgo-Vyatskiy, Central
Chernozem, Volga and Northern Caucasus economic regions, attributable not only to
an increase in the quantities of mineral fertilizers applied, but also due to an
increase in the areas of cultivation of grasses in irrigated lands. Table 2 gives
the frequency of recurrence of deviations of yields of green mass of perennial
grasses from the trend line as a result of meteorological conditions. Relatively
low yield variations occur in the Northwestern and Central regions. Over most of the
territory of the RSPSR climatic conditions make it possible to obtain stable yields.
Figure 2 is a map of climatic variability of the yields of green mass of perennial
grasses in the RSPSR. There is a tendency to an increase in the yield variation co-
efficient as a result of meteorological conditions from northwest to southeast.
This agrees with the general tendency to a decrease in precipitation and an in-
crease in evaporability in this direction. These findings make it possible to pre-
dict yields for a long time in advance, assuming an unchanged level of agricultural
technology. Figures 2, tables 2; references: 7 Russian.

32

IMHI(IﬂﬂC1Al.UEIi(H'LY
FOI:OI15CJAI.IIHI(”WLY

UDC 551.513(515-17)

INTERANNUAL CHANGES IN ATMOSPHERIC ZONAL CIRCULATION IN NORTHERN HEHISPHERB
DURING FIVE-YEAR PERIOD

Moscow METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
21 May 81) pp 102-104

[Article by G. Ye. Vayndiner, T. L. Hukhina, V. P. Gladilins and L. L. Karakova,
USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] Some results of an analysis of year-to-year changes in zonal circulation
in the northern hemisphere over the five-year period beginning 1 January 1976 are
given. The intensity of zonal circulation is characterized by the index of zonal
circulation “/0 (die the angular velocity of the air relative the earth, die
the angular velocity of the earth's rotation. (At the present time the zonal in-
dex aria) is widely used in practical work and in developing physicostatistical
weather forecasting methods for different times in advance.) In characterizing the
year-to-year changes in zonal circulation the authors computed the mean annual and
mean monthly values of the indices of zonal circulation at the levels of the iso-
baric surfaces 700 and 500 mb. Use was made of the daily values of the indices,
computed in the process of preparation of experimental hydrodynasic long-range
forecasts of deviations of the mean monthly air surface temperatures and absolute
topography of the SOO-mb surface from the norm for the northern hemisphere, com-
puted on a reutine basis on a DESK-6 electronic computer by the section on planet-
ary dynamics of the atmosphere and hydrodynamic long-range weather forecasting at
the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. The results are summarized in two tables and
two figures. These show that the intensity of zonal circulation in the course of
the considered period was subjected to great year—to-yesr changes. Considerable
negative anomalies of the circulation indices appeared early in 1977, 1978, 1980
and 1981. Great positive anomalies of the indices were discovered in early 1976,
in the spring and autumn of 1977, and late in 1978 and 1979. Zonal circulation was

considerably weakened during 1980. Figures 2, tables 2; references 8: 7 Russian,
1 Western.

33

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556. 535. 24656 . 535. 54-556. 06(282. 251. 2)

LONG-RANGE NEBCASTING 01' HAXIMUH HATER LEVELS DURING ICE JAMS (N ANGARA
A'l' RAMA

Moscow WWWIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 81 (manuscript received
8 Dec 80) pp 105-107

[Article by V. N. Karnovich, candidate of technical sciences, and T. V. Kuleshovs,
Scientific Research Institute of Hydraulic Engineering]

[Abstract] Almost every year the breaking-up of the Angers in its lower reach is
scconpanied by the formation of ice jams. The greatest jams during the last 20

years were observed on 18-26 Hay 1973 when the water and ice rose more than 12 m

above low-water level on the Angers. inflicting great material losses. In order to

develop a method for long—range prediction of the naxinun water levels during ice
jam ()1 all) on the Angers the authors analyzed the following long-tern series of
data fron hydro-eteorological observations: t - sum of negative mean daily air
temperatures for the period of ice cover; 2t -— a parameter indirectly charac-
terizing the thickness of the ice cover; 31“ (on —- maxi-In water level in initial
period of ice cover; I —- duration of setting-in of ice cover. The analysis (using
the correlation of II as with the indicated factors) indicated that not one of the
considered factors, {siren by itself, with an adequate accuracy deternines the maxi-
nun water level during ice jams. However, it appears that the decisive factor deter-
mining ice jam formation on the Angers is the conditions for setting-in of the ice
cover in autumn. A figure shows the dependence H3“ - f (“ice for.) for the Angara
at Kanenka obtained by the authors using data from long-tern series of hydroutsor-
ological date (27 cases of floods); the correlation coefficient for this dependence
is r - 0.81. The equation for long-range forecasting of maximum water levels during

its jams on the Angers can be represented in the general fora:

ﬂjan ' f0‘ice form T) (1)

with the factors indicated in equation (1)
it was possible to derive a numerical prognostic equation for the Angers at Kamenka

“jam - 1.53 Rice for“ + 13.77 T - 1‘3. (2)

A forecast of maximum water levels during ice jams on the Angers at Kenenka can be
aede not less than 5-5.5 months in advance. The method can be applied for other

rivers. Figures 1, tables 1; references: 4 Russian.
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE¢MWLY

UDC 551.50:58l.543(575)

AUTUMN GROWING SEASON 0? GRASSY PLANTS IN HDDERAIELY HIGH ELEVATIONS OF CENTRAL
ASIA

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
18 Feb 81) PP 107-108

[Article by Yu. S. Lynov, candidate of biological sciences, Chatkal'skiy
Mountain-Forest State Preserve]

[Abstract] A study was made of the influence exerted by the conditions of the hy-
drothermal regime on the course of the autumn growing season at moderately high
elevations (1000-2000 m) in Central Asia and the productivity of green mass. An-
alysis of data for such areas made it possible to derive a regression equation
describing the influence of temperature and precipitation sums during the autumn
period on productivity. The limits of applicability of the equation are: 50-160
mm of precipitation, temperature sum 300-500°C. A considerable influence on the
course of seasonal development of plants is exerted by endogenous factors caused
by the biology of the plants themselves, especially during the late summer period
and in the reproductive phases of development. During the autumn growing season,
during the advent of winter, the development of plants is also held back by endo-
genous factors. A comparison of indicators of seasonal development during periods
identical with respect to hydrothermoregime conditions: autumn (October—November)
and spring (mid-February to late March) indicates that spring is more important:
in spring the development is more clearly expressed, there are more vegetating
species and the productivity of the above-ground part is greater. Although in
spring and autumn the length of day differs by l-1.S hours. this factor cannot be
regarded as important because the length of day exerts a greater influence on the
rate of the reproductive phases (flowering, maturing of fruits), whereas in aut-
unn there is a predominance of the growth phases. It is clear that the differences
in the indicators of autumn and spring development are attributable for the most
part to the influence of endogenous factors during the autumn period. This influ-
ence must be taken into account in computations of the autumn productivity of green
mass. References: 5 Russian.

35

ltllClﬂﬂClAl.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

UDC 551.66.086
MEASUREMENT OF PARAMETERS OP WAVE-COVERED SURFACE PROM SHIPBOARD

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 81 (manuscript received
28 Oct 80) PP 109-113

[Article by I. P. Trubkin, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, State
Oceanographic Institute]

[Text] Abstract: The article describes a unit for
measuring the slopes and rises of the wave-
covered sea surface used by the author in
work on the scientific research ship ”Akad-
emik Korolev" during the period of the Soviet-
American microwave experiment. The author gives
the results of an analysis of possible distor-
tions of the spectral components of slopes during
drift and rolling of the ship.

Experhmental data on wind waves obtained in the open sea are of great scientific
and practical interest. Measurement apparatus has been developed for the collec-
tion of these data [2, 7, 15]. However, known apparatus is still far from perfect
and does not always meet the formulated requirements. In such a case the need arises
for developing new measurement apparatus best taking into account the special fea-

tures of the experiment.

During the period of the Soviet-American microwave experiment (SAHBx-76) special-
ists aboard the scientific research ship "Akademik Korolev" carried out measure-
ments of the slopes and rises of the wave-covered sea surface. These measurements
were made for the purpose of interpreting data on radio emission of the sea surface
obtained using microwave apparatus installed aboard the ship. The developed methods
and apparatus made it possible to register the rises and slopes of the wave-covered
surface in two mutually perpendicular directions relative to the ship. The slopes
were measured using wire sensors cut into a finite-difference circuit. The signal
characterizing the surface slope in the selected direction was discriminated using
a differential measurement circuit. The rises were determined using two sensors
(wire and accelerometric) whose signals were subjected to mathematical processing
on shipboard using an electronic computer.

The apparatus consists of wire sensors, accelerometer, measurement unit and record-
er. The design of the sensors is represented schematically in Fig. 1. It includes

four transducers 1. each of which is a high-resistance nonoxidizing wire (Nichrome
£30.36). The wire is drawn between two rings 2. Attachments in the form of rings

36

FOI‘OFiWCIAI.LEI1(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were used for the purpose of ensuring the minimum influence of waves on rotation

of the sensors in the horizontal plane. The sensors were placed in the ship's prow.
A weight 3 with a mass of about 20 kg was suspended to the lower ring. The upper

ring by means of flexible couplings lb was fixed in the horizontal plane. The wire
sensors were submerged in the water to half their length. The distance between the
wires was selected in accordance with [11], taking into account the frequency

range of the measured process and the level of instrumental errors. The accelero-

meter 5 of the tensometric type (measurement range :1 g) was attached on the ship
above the wire sensors.

 

Fig. 1. Diagram of design of wire sensors and their positioning in prow part of ship.

The block diagram of the apparatus (Fig. 2) shows the wire sensors 1 in the form of
changeable resistances Ill-Rio, situated along the axes of Cartesian coordinates XOY.
The current source for these sensors is an amplitude-stabilized a-c generator of
an acoustic frequency 2. The difference circuits 3-5 serving for the discrimination
of the relative change in the level of the input signals constitute differential
a-c amplifiers. Circuits 3 and 5 serve for discriminating the differences of the

—signals of the wire sensors, whereas circuit 4 discriminates the-difference between—-
the signals of the sensor R1 and the reference signal 00 serving for compensation
of the constant component of the output voltage of the transducer. The amplitude-
phase demodulators 7-9 are for discriminating the envelopes of the output signals
of the difference circuits and the d-c amplifiers 10-13 are for amplifying signals
from the amplitude-phase dcmodulators and from the tensometric accelerometer 6.
The signals are registered using a multichannel loop oscillograph 110.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PW Uruguu. USI- Vl‘hl

 

Pig. 2. Block diagram of apparatus for measuring slopes and rises of wave-covered
surface from on shipboard.

Principal characteristics of described measurement apparatus:

Range of measured slopes - *11/6 rad

Range of measurement of relative displacements of sea surface and ship - *5 m
Distance between wire sensors -- 0.5 m

Length of sensor wires - 12 m _
Limiting error in measuring each of registered signals - not more than 52

The operating principle of the apparatus is essentially as follows. The wire sensors,
fed an amplitude-stabilised a-c current, transform the sea level fluctuations into
changes in resistivities, linearly determining the amplitudes of the output volt-
ages of the sensors. The difference circuits 3 and 5 discriminate and amplify the
voltages of a-c current whose envelopes are proportional to the slopes of the wave-
covered surface in the directions of the 0X and CY axes. The circuit 4 discriminates
a voltage whose envelope is proportional to the relative vertical displacements of
the wave-covered surface and ship. The envelopes of the signals of the difference
circuits are discriminated by means of amplitude-phase demodulators. The accelero-
meter transforms the vertical acceleration of ship movement into an electric signal
which after amplification, the same as the signals for slopes and relative displace-

ments. is registered on the tape of a multichannel loop oscillograph.

With the use of the described apparatus it is important to take into account the
possible distortions of the measured characteristics caused by drift or rolling of
the ship. In general form problems of this type were formulated in [4, 13] and
solutions were obtained. However, a quantitative evaluation of the possible errors
in determining the spectrum of slopes was not made. We will evaluate the mentioned
error, assuming that the sensors measuring the slopes move at a constant rate in an
arbitrary direction. We will denote the components of the velocity of movement of
the sensors, projected onto the axes of the Cartesian coordinate system, by u and v.

IND! OIIJCJAI.IEHI(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL l5! ONLY

We will seek a solution of the formulated problem within the framework of a linear
spectral model of wind waves. than the slopes of the wave-covered sea surface in
the direction of the X-axis, coinciding with the main direction of wave propaga-
tion, can be described by the expression MU) _ Hue—moan? ”up x

IO.

. (1)
x [lurowul +hunew—un.

where 80:, 0’) is a random stationary process with independent increments related
to the energy spectrum of waves 80:, a!) by the expression [11]

< ‘5“. 0015‘“. H!) II 3“,. w) (Md 0

ut, vt are the components of the horizontal spatial vector characterizing the move-
ment of the sensors; k - (k, 6 ) is the wave vector stipulated in polar coordinates;
a) is angular frequency; t is time.

Using the dispersion expression a) 2 - gk adopted in the linear theory of wind waves,

we transform expression (1): ‘ _._ ..
MU) -£Ilcm“d£(7 0) exp (hat).

a (2)

where .

m
v-(T) (score +usln0)~-l.

It follows from (2) that with movement of the sensors the slopes of the waves, meas-
ured in the direction of the x-axis, will have a time scale transformed by a factor
of V . This change in scale finds reflection in the frequency region. The spectra:
of the transformation process in this case can be represented by the expression

[3] N
3(a) - 91-2 3(3)

V

If, using the dispersion expression, we express the two-dimensional spectrum of
slopes as a function of only two arguments [8] S x(k,0) - S(k, 6)k2 cos 29 and take
into account the changes in the wave number modulus with I. change in the time scale

I: (ﬂy) - 732- N“).

then it is possible to obtain an expression for the spectrum of slopes of the trans-
formed process -
__.H 3,,(10) . s(—:,)' s — Mono. (3)

The two-dimensional wave spectrum is written in the form [6]

Shani 'osn ‘ Ir“
(. 3cm. (). —-§-<e..,--2..,

Taking into account that the distortions of the spectral components of slopes dur-
ing movement of the sensors will be maximum in the high-frequency region, and it is
precisely they which in this case are of interest, we will represent the wave number
spectrum by its approximation in the equilibrium region [12]:

' ' 50).“.

39
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then, from (3) we obtain
3:0. 9) * 'é'llv'h": cos-'0. (k)

In integrating (4) for all 0 , we find
~ 3 .. .. . .
:.(k)-nt"[1- ; 7:- x (1%.: + +w)].

Hence it is easy to obtain the sought-for expression for the relative error in the
spectrum of slopes, measured in the general direction of wave propagation:

. ... — _._._-_‘.__.

~

.0 _s “-1 3:.

’ A.) '*.:x - (5)
5 l '

X(T"+T")'

Performing similar computations, it is possible to obtain an expression for the
relative error in the spectrum of slopes measured in the direction perpendicular to
the general direction:

_. a .
‘y-W(U~ +o’).

(6)

It follows from (5), (6) that with an increase in the velocity of movement of the
sensors the errors in determining the spectrum of slopes increase quadratically.
The maximum errors will be observed during movement of the sensors along the gener-
al direction of wave propagation. If we stipulate the level of the maximum admis-
sible error in determining the spectrum of slopes at 102. the region of undistorted
values will be limited by a curve corresponding to the wavelengths

1:5.(91'5: .
For example, with a velocity of ship drift u - 0.5 m/sec there will be a distortion

of the spectral components of the slopes corresponding to wavelengths shorter than
1.3 m, and with u - 1.0 m/sec - shorter than 5.3 m.

Now we will evaluate the influence of the ship's rolling on the spectrum of measured
slopes of the wave-covered sea surface. He will assume that the slopes ’7‘ are meas-
ured 1n the plane perpendicular to the ship's diametral plane. The true slope in the
selected direction is denoted by '21 and the slope of the wire sensors caused by the
ship's rolling by ’72. In this case the measured value will be ’7: - ’11 + r12.
Since the nx process is determined by the sum of two dependent random processes,
its frequency spectrum 8x09) can be expressed by the sum of the auto- and cross-
correlation spectra of the termsr—-——-- -
5, (~)..$.(u)(l+|¢(e)l=_
+0(u)+¢' (0)]. (7)

 

where 810“) is the spectrum of slopes; §( 0’) is the transfer function for the
ship's rolling.

Then the relative error of the spectrum of slopes will be equal to

’00

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3"...)
hum -l-|¢(~)|.i
N») 0 Mn). (8)

15 the tragfer function for the ship's rolling is represented in exponential form
(a!) u I ((J)| exp[-1(f(w)], then ._-_-.. -._. ._ .. ..._..._ . .._.... ..
. u-l.¢(-)I=+i0(-)!|¢"M-.-‘H-’1.

’.;'3
us: — .2):—4 mar” '

According to [1], '0‘ )l
I -

- - .32..
N) ml: .3").

where 01 is a proportionality factor, 4’0 is 'the characteristic frequency of oscil-
lations of the ship; r is the linear coefficient of resistance to rolling.

As a result we obtain I - a-u,

--—r—.-—-+
7‘ (”mm-44”.:

2“,”.

+ “-3 --')’1’-i ﬂv'l‘" " (9)

2” \
~:-~=;'

 

x cos (am:

For a quantitative evaluation of the level of errors, for a ship with a displacement
of 7000 tons, in accordance with [l] we will assxme: d- 0.5, 0’0 - 0.532 rad/sec,

r - 0.1. Then, if we stipulate the level of errors in the spectrum of measured
slopes at 10%, using (9) it is possible to find the limiting frequency «’1 deter-
mining the region of undistorted spectral values. For the particular examplg by use
of the iteration method it is possible to find Ulmz1._2_5 rad/sec.

 

_£ig..3. Sample of records obtained using the described measurement apparatus. ’73:, '1’
are the wave slopes; n is the relative displacement of the sea surface and ship;
7-. is the acceleration of the ship's rolling.

The results show that the ship's rolling causes considerable distortions of the
spectral components of slopes at frequencies close to the frequency of character-
istic oscillations of the ship 0’0. With an increase in frequency relative to 0’0
the level of errors Y,‘ decreases rapidly. In an ideal case the correction of dis-
tortions caused by rolling can be accomplished using the known transfer function

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ute-Lu“. var. 01‘s.!

‘04)). However, a precise determination of this function is a complex problem.
However, if the maximum of the spectrum of slopes corresponds to a frequency great-
er than es and «a , then, subjecting the measured process to high-frequency fil-
tering witg a cutoff frequency ‘Qlim it is possible to obtain records whose spectral
characteristics will not be essentially dependent on the ship's rolling.

The error in the spectrum of slopes, measured in the longitudinal direction of the
ship, caused by longitudinal pitching, can be evaluated similarly using the trans-
fer function for pitching. In this case in order to exclude the signal companents

determined by pitching the resulting records of the slopes can also be subjected to

high-frequency filtering with a cutoff frequency found from computations.

We note that the ship's rolling also exerts an influence on the vertical component
of acceleration, measured using an accelerometer at the point of placement of the
wire sensors. It is possible_§o evaluate this,in{luengg‘_gsing the known expression

[1‘] ',uA,Iinﬂ+A,(‘—:':;!Bm-+

I
A.
+ m +tg’1v)(ll+trl)lm'

where Ax ’2 are the components of acceleration in the coordinate system related
to the ship; ,6 is the pitching angle; 9’ is the angle of side-to-side rolling.

(10)

It follows from (10) that with small rolling angles the sought-for vertical compon-
ent of ship acceleration R; will for the most part be determined by the vertical
component of acceleration Ax» measured with the accelerometer.

The results of this analysis indicate that using the described apparatus it is pos-
sible to measure the slopes and rises of the wave-covered surface from a ship with

drift velocities less than 1 m/sec and with rolling angles less than ilO’; then the
measurement error does not exceed 10!.

The primary processing of the measurement data obtained using the described appar-
atus was carried out using a shipboard computer. First the records, represented in
the form of curves on the tape of the loop oscillograph (Pig. 3), were transformed
into a digital form and punched on a paper tape by means of an analog-digital con-
verter-recorder [S]. In order to determine the displacements of the wave-covered
sea surface the accelerations of the ship's rolling were twice integrated with sub-

sequent high-frequency filtering of the series with a Bartlett filter [9] and then
subtracted from the values of a number of relative displacements measured by means

of a wire sensor.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Blagoveshenskiy, S. N. sad-Kholodiliny-ﬁv-ﬂvyiSPRAQOCENIK,PO STATIKE I DINAMIKE
KORABLYA (Handbook on Statics and Dynamics of a Ship), Vol 2, Leningrad, Sudo~
stroyeniye, 1976.

2. Glukhovskiy, B. Kh. and Vilenskiy, Ya. G., "Open-Sea Wave Meter," METEOROLOGIYA
I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 12, 1956.

3. Jenkins, 6. and Watts, 0., SPEKTRAL‘NYY ANALIZ I YEGO PRILOZHENIYA (Spectral An-
alysis and Its Applications), Part 1, Moscow, Mir, 1971.

42 ‘

F0!!OFFKJAI.USE¢NULY
4o

5.

6‘

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15-

FOI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Zagorodnikov, A. A., "Dependence of the Results of Measuring the Parameters
of Haves on Velocity of the Carrier," TRUDY COIN (Transactions of the State
Oceanographic Institute), No 117, 1973.

Kozlov, H. V., "System for Automated Collection and Processing of Data on
Haves Using Minsk-22 and Minsk-32 Electronic Conputers," TEDDY COIN, No 126,
1975.

Krylov, Yu. H., Strekalov, S. S. and Tsyplukhin, V. 17., "Investigation of the
Angular Energy Spectrum of Wind Haves," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AMSPERY I
OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and
Ocean), Vol 2, No 7, 1966.

Haksinov, V. A., "Shipboard Have Recorder," 1100‘! COIN, No 103, 1970.
Hatushevskiy, G. V., "Investigation of the Correlation Between the True and

Mean Slopes of the Wave-Covered Sea Surface," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AMSFERY
I OKEANA, Vol 5, No A, 1969.

Natushevskiy, G. V. and Prival'skiy, V. Ye., "Filtering of Time Series in By-
drometeorology," OKEANOLOGIYA, Vol 8, No 3, 1968.

Honin, A. S. and Yaglom. A. 11., STATISTICHESMYA GIDRONEIGIANIKA (Statistical
Nydromechanics), Part 2, mscow, Nauka, 1967.

Trubkin, I. P., "Evaluation of Error in Measuring Slopes of Nave-Covered Sea
Surface by Finite-Difference Method," TEDDY COIN, No 144, 1979.

Phillips, 0. 11., DINAMIKA VERKHNEGO SLOYA OKEANA (Dynamics of the Upper Layer
in the Ocean), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1980.

Snyder, R. L., "On the Estimation of the Directional Spectru- of Surface Grav-
ity Nave From a Prograued Aircraft Altimeter," J. GEOPHYS. “5., Vol 78, No
9, 1973.

Taira, K., Takeda, A. and Ishikawa, K. A., "A Shipborne Nave-Recording System
With Digital Data Processing," J. OCEANOGR. SOC. JAPAN, V01 27, No ’0, 1971.

Tucker, M. A., "Shipborne Have Recorder," TRANS. INST. NAV. ARCIlIT., London,
Vol 1.8, 1956.

63

FOR OFFICIALUSEONLY
F0.‘0FF"JAI.US£(JVLY

UDC 556.03
REMOTE REGISTRY UNIT FOR FLOAI AUTOMATIC HATER LEVEL RECORDER

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) PP 113-115

[Article by I. H. Shenderovich, candidate of technical sciences, and L. S. Kleben,
Scientific Research Institute of Instrument Making]

[Text] Abstract: The article describes the design
and technical specifications of remote ap-
paratus for observation of water level in
rivers, lakes, reservoirs and coastal re-
gions of seas and oceans. The apparatus de-
veloped at the Scientific Research Inst-
itute of Instrument Making has success-
fully undergone state acceptance tests and
has been included in the USSR Register of
Measurement Instruments.

Instrumental observations of the water level in rivers, lakes, reservoirs and in
the coastal zone of seas and oceans at most hydrological stations both in the USSR
and abroad are made using different types of float automatic recorders. These in-
struments are reliable in operation, simple to service and their readings are vir-
tually unaffected by change in water density and tenperature. However, they also
have a number of shortcomings. among which the most important is the lack of re-
mote transmission of data on the measured water level values. This complicates
work with the instrument, since it is necessary to wind the clock and remove the
tapes on a regular basis. In addition. during a period of critical changes in lev-
e1, for example, during floods and taunamis, when there is a need for routine ob-
servation of the water level. when the level gage is remote from the building of
the hydrometeorological station. it becomes virtually impossible to use it.

A number of-anthors'f17'21'have repeatedly made attempts to construct float level
gages with remote transmission of data, but for a number of reasons they have not

been widely employed and have not been industrially produced or introduced in the
network of hydrological stations.

Specialists of the Scientific Research of Instrument Making of the USSR State Com-
mittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring during 1978-1979 develop-
ed a unit by means of which network float automatic water level recorders of the

44

FtHICIﬂﬂKIAl.U§£1NULY
IN)! 05F1C1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY

SUM, SUV-H and GR-38 type, already in operation in the field, acquire an additional
quality -- remote registry of level values measured with the float automatic re-
corder. This unit, which has been called the 'remote registry unit' (index number
AZhN3.009.000), consists of two components: transducer and recorder, shown in the
photograph. The transducer in the remote registry unit is mounted directly in the
SUV complex, installed over the tide gage well. and serves for transforming the
angle of rotation of its float wheel into an electric signal. The recorder, situat-
ed in the room of the hydrometeorological station, receives data on the water level
and registers it on a standard Len-2 graph paper. In addition, in this recorder pro-
vision is made for the possibility of data output for the purpose of its continuous
accumulation on a technical carrier.

 

Fig. 1. Remote registry unit for float automatic water level recorder. At left --
recorder, at right - transducer (for SUM complex).

The operating principle for the remote registry unit [4] is based on a d-c bridge
circuit with a balancing system involving use of a reversible electric motor. The

arms of the measuring bridge are two precision PPHL multiturn potentiometers: one
detects the rotation of the float wheel of the SUV complex and is placed in the
transducer; the second is for balancing the bridge circuit and is situated in the

recorder.

The remote registry unit has the following technical specifications:
-- range of registered water level values - from 30 to 1200 cm H20 (depending on

the design of the unit);
-- input signal of remote registry unit -- number of revolutions of transducer axis

from 2 to 20;

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFWKJAI.USE(HVLY

- output signal - movement of arm with pen and mark of recorder -- 300 mm;

- limit of principal error with respect to input signal -— $0.51 of measurement
range, with respect to output signal - $1.5 mm;

- distance of transmission - up to 5 km, electric current from sources of d-c
current. voltage 12 V;

- computed probability of faultless operation in course of 10 000 hours - not
less than 0.9.

Three modifications of the unit were developed. These were intended for use in an

outfit with float automatic recorders of the SUM. SUV-H ("Valday") and GR—38 types,
which differ from one another in the designs of the transducers.

Table 1
Design of unit Type of automatic level Range of water level
recorder measurement, cm

DU—300—I SUM 300
DU—éOO-I . 600
DU-lZOOeI 1200
DU-30-II SUV~H 30
DU-60-II "Valday" 60
DU—lSO- 150
DU-300-II 300
DU-300-III GR-38 300
DU-600—III 600

The transducers for all modifications of the units consist of a reducer with a defin-
ite reduction factor. the final link in which is a multiturn precision PPHL potentio-
meter. The input axis of the transducer carries either a pinion or a toothed wheel
which is connected to one of the wheels of the transmission mechanism of the cor-
responding automatic level recorder. In addition. they differ from one another with
respect to the point of attachment to the level gages. The reduction factors of the
transducers were selected in such a way that regardless of the number of revolutions
of their input axis in the working range the potentiometer axis makes 20 revolutions.
All three modifications of the transducers with their installation in the correspond-
ing automatic level recorders do not require any additional mechanical changes in

their parts and can be placed in already used automatic level recorders without
stopping the latter.

With respeCt to design. the recorder is a cylinder with a diameter of 220 mm and a

height of 350 mm. Its main components are a clock mechanism with drum, reducer driv-
en into rotation by a DPM-ZO electric motor. electronics unit, zero-setter with con-

trol contacts, a vertical guide screw kinematically connected to the reducer and

66

FOIIH"WC1AI.USE¢IVLY
FOIIOFIICIALlJSE‘ONlN

serving for movement of a carriage, a supporting arm with pen, mark and perman-
ent magnet along a drum and a vertical scale for visual readout of level values.

The electrical connection of units of the remote registry unit, that is, the trans-
ducer and recorder. with one another is accomplished using a three-strand line with
a resistance of each strand not greater than 50 ohm.

The circuit diagram of the remote registry unit in an equilibrium state is a bal-
anced bridge consisting of the potentiometers for the transducer and recorder and
a zero-setting unit, whose input voltage in this case is equal to 0 when the con-
tacts are open. With a change in water level the automatic water level recorder
comes into motion, which results in movement of the potentiometer slide and as a
consequence, an unbalancing of the bridge and the appearance of a voltage across
the input of the zero-setting unit. At this time the different control contacts
close, which determines the direction of water level change. Accordingly, the re-
versible electric motor is cut in and the direction of rotation of its axis is de-
pendent on the polarity of the imbalance voltage of the circuit. An electric motor,
connected through a reducer with the slide of a potentiometer installed in the re-
corder, moves it up to the moment of circuit balancing. At the same time, the el-
ectric motor, also through a reducer, moves along the guide screw a carriage with
the pen and mark by a value proportional to the water level change. A second relay
in the circuit is used for the output of a signal when the water level attains
critical heights - the maximum and minimum water levels. It is triggered with
closing of one of the magnetically controlled contacts mounted on the recorder sup-
port and corresponding to the extremal level values.

A calibration device was developed for carrying out laboratory tests and checking
the remote registry unit. Developed in three variants, it simulates the angles of
rotation of the float wheel of a specific type of automatic wave level recorder
[3]. With respect to design it constitutes a mechanical counter of revolutions
with two scales. The error in reading the angle of rotation of the transducer axis
in the remote unit mounted on the device does not exceed 45 minutes. The calibra-
tion device has undergone metrological certification at the Moscow Standardiza-
tion and Hetrology Center.

The remote registry unit for float automatic level recorder has successfully under-
gone testing and has been included in the State Register of Measurement Instruments

which have undergone state tests and which have been certified by the USSR Gos-
standart for standard production and use in the USSR.

G. N. Mar, 8. A. Polimonov and A. L. Kuskov, specialists at the Scientific Research
Institute of Instrument Making, took an active part in developing, adjusting and
testing the remote registry—uniEFI‘rm .

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Popandopulo, G. K., Zubova, L. A., Shenderovich, I. H. and Volkovs, 0. A..
"Attachment to Automatic water Level Recorder," USSR AUTHOR'S CERTIFICATE,
173430.

47

FIHICHHWCJAL.USI10NLN
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Dimksysn, A. 14., CIDlDIDGICHESKIYB PRIBORY (Rydrolosicsl Instruments), Lenin-
grad, Gidroueteoizdat, 1972.

3. nebsn, L. 8., Her, G. N., Eydinov, A. and shenderovich, I. H., “Hetrologicel
Support of Checking and Testing of Remote Apparatus for Plant Automatic Level

Recorders,“ TRUDY NIIP (Transactions of the Scientific Research Institute of
Instrument Making), No 41, 1981.

(08

FOROI’FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIC1A1.1EIE(HNLY

CONFERENCES, MEETINGS AND SEMINARS
Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 116-119

[Article by L. V. Rukhovets, L. F. Yermakova, Yu. 0. Slatinskiy and N. N. Podgay-
skiy]

[Text] An All-Union Conference on "Present Status and Problems in Dynamic Meteorol-
ogy" was held at the Main Geophysical Observatory during the period 22-24 April

1981. The conference was dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Soviet school of
dynamic meteorology. In the early 1920's A. A. Fridman organized a Mathematics Bur-
eau in the Main Physical Observatory and thereby laid the beginning of the Soviet
school of dynamic meteorology.

The objective of this conference was not only an evaluation of the successes attain-
ed by the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology during a 60~year period, but also
the outlining of the prospects for its further development._ -

The conference sessions were attended by about 150 persons representing 39 organ-
izations of the State Committee on Nydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring,
the USSR Academy of Sciences, Ministry of Education, Academies of Sciences of the
union republics and other departments. The participants included specialists from
Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Minsk, Tashkent, Tbilisi, Alma-Ate, Novosibirsk, Odessa,
Kazan', Perm and other cities.

The subject matter of the conference sessions was represented by four sections:

1. History of creation of the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology.

2. Methods for the hydrodynamic prediction of weather.

3. Numerical modeling of general circulation of the atmosphere and climate.

a. Investigations of atmospheric processes by the methods of dynamic meteorology.

In accordance with these sections of the program in the course of the first two
days there were conference sessions at which requested reports were presented.

In a report by Academician A. M. Obukhov entitled "A. A. Pridman and N. Ye. Kochin
-- Founders of Geophysical Hydrodynamics" there was a timely evaluation of the work
of A. A. Fridman and N. Ye. Kochin with the influence of this work on subsequent
investigations in the field of dynamic meteorology being considered.

49

mommuspmv
to“ UI'I'ILIAI. 03!. URL!

A report by Academician P. Ya. Polubarinova-Kochina, entitled "Activity of the
Mathematics Bureau of the Main Physical Observatory," was devoted to the history
of formation of the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology. The report gave inter-
esting details relating to the history of creation of some classical studies of

A. A. Pridman, N. Ye. Kochin, L. V. Keller and I. A. Kibel'. The recollections

of P. Ya. Polubarinova-Koehina concerning these outstanding scientists, the pecul-
iarities of their human characters and diversions were heard with interest by the

conferees.

v. M. Pasetakiy developed his report "0n the History of the Dynamic Meteorology
Section of the Main Geophysical Observatory" on the basis of an analysis of little—

known archival materials. The report described the scientific-historical conditions
under which the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology was formed. A number of docu-
ments were cited showing how A. A. Fridman validated the idea of creating the Math-

ematics Bureau.

A report by H. I. Yudin, entitled "Principal Stages in the Development of Dynamic
meteorology in the USSR," dealt with problems relating to the history of creation
and development of the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology and the present-day
problems in this science and also the prospects of its development. The speaker
told about the principal achievements of the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology
in the 1920's and 1930's and examined the matter of the sequence of investigations.
The author pointed out the successive nature of formulation of a number of highly
important problems and approaches to their solution. M. I. Yudin noted that the
successive nature of the investigations in many respects distinguished the Soviet
school of dynamic meteorology and that this is also characteristic of today, al-
though the scope of the problems to be solved has increased by many times and the
problems themselves have become much more complex.

The subject matter of the conference, devoted to hydrodynamic weather forecasting,
was represented by two reports.

H. A. Petrosyants and V. P. Sadokov, in a report entitled "Hydrodynamic Methods
for Short-Range Heather Forecasting," characterized in detail the principal direc-
tions in research carried out at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center in the field
of short-range weather forecasting. The authors traced the close relationship be-
tween the fundamental studies of I. A. Kibel' in this field and further investiga-
tions. Emphasis was on investigations in the field of mesometeorology directed to
the development of local (mesometeorological) weather forecasts. These investiga-
tions, to which I. A. Kibel' also made a major contribution, have now been

brought to the stage of formulation of a model having prognostic importance.

A report—by'§:_A. Mashkovich. entitled "Use of the Methods of Dynamic Heteorolugy*-
in Middle-Range Forecasting," was devoted to an exposition of hydrodynamic methods
for the forecasting of meteorological elements for intermediate-length periods;
these are based on use of the spectral approach. Investigations in this direction,
initiated by a study of Ye. N. Blinova in 1943, are now being developed intensive-
ly at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center, at the Main Geophysical Observatory and

at other institutes.

50

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three reports were devoted to the problem of numerical modeling of general cir-
culation of the atmosphere and climate. '

A report by Academician G. I. Harchuk and V. P. Dymnikov, entitled "Modeling of
Climate and Its Changes," gave a formulation of the general principles lying at
the basis of solution of the problem of hydrodynamic modeling of climate and its
changes, caused by different factors. The application of these principles was
illustrated in the examples of models of climate developed at the Computation Cen-
ter of the Siberian Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

The report of G. P. Kurbatkin, corresponding member, USSR Academy of Sciences, en-
titled "Influence of the Ocean on the Dynamics of Climate,“ contained a new ap-
proach to solution of problems in the theory of climate, making it possible to
evaluate the influence of nonadiabatic factors of different spatial scale on the
mechanisms of climatic change. In particular, this approach will make it possible
to evaluate the contribution of processes transpiring in the ocean on the dynamics
of climate.

Ye. P. Borisenkov and V. P. Meleshko. in a report entitled "Investigation of Gener-
al Circulation of the Atmosphere," presented the results of work on study of the
patterns of general circulation of the atmosphere using a number of models of dif-

ferent complexity developed at the Main Geophysical Observatory. Using these models
it was possible not only to study the patterns of the existing regime of general

circulation of the atmosphere, but also to evaluate its possible changes as a re-
sult of anonalous sources of anthropogenic and nonanthropogenic origin. Using one
of the developed models, a study was also made of some features of the circulation
regime of Mars.

A. M. Yaglom, in a report entitled "Fridman-Keller Equations for the Moments of
Turbulent Pulsations and the Problem of Their Closure," gave a detailed analysis
of investigations devoted to one of the most important problems in the theory of
turbulence - the so-called "closure problem."

A report by L. T. Matveyev discussed the principal problems of cloud dynamics. In
order to clarify the peculiarities of formation and structure of macroscale cloud
cover fields a numerical solution was obtained for a system of equations in hydro-
thermodynamics for a turbulent atmosphere. Some characteristics of the global
cloud cover field are considered, in particular, the dependence of the the dis-
tribution for the quantity of clouds on the averaging area.

The last day of the conference sessions was devoted to "stand" reports in which a
number of problems in dynamic meteorology were considered.

The following studies were presented:

1. V. A. Shnaydman (Odessa Hydrometeorological Institute). "Theoretical and Prac-
tical Aspects of Boundary Layer Physics."

2. V. M. Kadyshnikov (USSR Hydrometeorological Center). "Role of Turbulence in the
Setting-In of a Geostrophic Balance of Macroscale Atmospheric Movements."

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0‘ OFFICIAL USE UNLY

3. L. V. Berkovich (USSR Hydrometeorological Center). "Nonadiabatic Hemispherical
Model of the Atmosphere for Prediction for Several Days in Advance."

0. Yu. P. Perevedentsev, M. A. Vereshchagin, V. V. Gur'yanov and K. H. Shantalinsk-
1y (Kazan' University). "Some Results of Investigation of Meridional Transports of
Matter and Energy in the Free Atmosphere."

5. V. V. Khvedelidze (Tbilisi University). "Wave Propagation in Atmosphere With
Allowance for the Simultaneous Influence of Orography and the Beta Effect."

6. V. I. Hartem'yanov (Central Asian Scientific Research Institute) "Choice of
Reckoning Levels Vertically in Forecasting Schemes in Dependence on Horizontal
Resolution."

7. V. V. Shpotov (Central Asian Scientific Research Institute). "Formulation and
Analysis of Computation Properties of Semi-Implicit Schemes for Integration With
the Second and First Orders of Accuracy."

A resolution adopted by the conference notes the considerable successes attained by
the Soviet school of dynamic meteorology. in many respects standing at the fore-
front of modern meteorological science.

The conference reconnended the development of research in the following fundamental
directions:

-- improvement in numerical methods for short-, intermediate- and long-range weath-
er forecasting;

-- development of a hydrodynamic theory of climate and general circulation of the
atmosphere;

-- formulation of a theory of atmospheric turbulence;

-- study of mesometeorological phenomena and local processes;

-— improvement in methods for parameterization of the most important physical pro-
cesses in the atmosphere;

-- investigation of interaction between the ocean and atmosphere.

It was decided to hold an All-Union Conference on Dynamic Meteorology and Its Prin-
cipal Practical Applications during the current five-year plan and also to hold
special working conferences regularly on the use of the methods of dynamic meteor-
ology in numerical models of climate and weather forecasting, especially with re-
spect to the parameterization of hydrological processes and the atmospheric boun-
dary layer, cloud formation processes, etc.

The conference also noted the immediate need for preparing a new textbook on dynamic
meteorology for colleges in which there would be a systematic exposition of the

modern aspects of this science and in which proper attention would be given to the
historical development of the ideas and methods used in dynamic meteorology.

It was decided that a collection of papers from the conference he prepared for pub-
iication.

52

FINICHWHCJAI.U§E¢DNLY
L. V. Rukhovets

A conference-seminar on methods for determining contaminating substances in sea bot-
tom deposits was held during the period 23-28 March at the Sevastopol' Division of
the State Oceanographic Institute. The conference—seminar was attended by represen-
tatives of the State Oceanographic Institute, Azerbaijan, Amderma, Georgian, Kazakh,
Murmansk, Northern and Ukrainian Administrations of Hydrometeorology and Environmen-
tal Monitoring. The conferees examined the peculiarities involved in determining

administrations of hydrometeorology and environmental monitoring. Under the method-
ological direction of the State Oceanographic Institute they annually carry out a
great volume of observations. In the Black Sea basin alone subdivisions of the
Ukrainian, Northern Caucasus and Georgian Administrations of Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring during 1976-1980 made more than 350,000 hydrochemical ob-
servations, including about 100,000 in the mouth regions of the Danube, Dnepr, Don,
Kuban and Rioni. At the same time, investigations of bottom deposits for the time
being have not been fully developed in the marine network.

The participants in the conference-seminar noted that in connection with the in-
creased attention to the problem of preservation of the sea medium from contamina-
tion the study of the surface layer of bottom deposits both within the continental
shelf and in the abyssal zone of the seas is now becoming one of the timely problems
at network hydrochemical laboratories. Accumulating a considerable part of the con-
taminating substances entering the sea, the bottom deposits are an integral indi-
cator of the degree of their contamination. 0n the basis of the results of an an-
alysis of the bottom deposits, which in contrast to a water mass are a more static
and conservative zone, it is possible to evaluate the degree of the anthropogenic
influence on the hydrometeorological regime in different regions of the sea.

regions of the shelf, in the case of heavy waves can favor a secondary contamina-
tion of sea waters. The level of accumulation of chemical substances in the bottom
deposits is determined by the total effect of a great many factors, but all other
conditions being equal, the intensity of accumulation is highly dependent on the
mineralogical and granulometric composition of the bottom material, that is, in-
creases with transition from sandy to clayey ground and from coarsely disperse to
finely disperse (pelitic) fractions.

53
l-‘OII UFHLIAL use unu

In characterizing the introduced unified methods for determining contaminating sub-
stances in bottom deposits it was noted, in particular, that in the process of ac-
cumulation of heavy metals in the bottom material an active role is played by nat-
ural sorbents - complex formers, as a result of which the nature of distribution
of many metals in the bottom material is closely associated with the content of
natural organic substances in them. Such a consistency was established for most

of the elements, a determination of which is provided for by the used methods.

The mechanism of this consistency is related to the peculiarities of the molecular
structure of some organic compounds, which in this case play the role of complex
formers and sorbents in the water-bottom material system. For example, the migra-
tion of mercury (especially in organic form) occurs with the active participation
of the biomass in the surface layer of bottom deposits. For chemical compounds of
other metals (copper, lead, cadmium, etc.) there was found to be a dependence of
migration on natural aorbents of mineral origin.

In discussing the material-technical support of work for introduction of unified
methods for determining contaminating substances in sea bottom deposits the par-
ticipants in the conference-seminar emphasized that in this problem there is need
for more active assistance on the part of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology
and Environmental Monitoring and local administrations of the Hydrometeorological
Service. In particular, it was noted that it is necessary to accelerate the output
of new modifications of samplers (corers, dredges, etc.) and in the hydrochemical
laboratories of the key hydrometeorological observatories in all basins organize

a system for the internal and external monitoring of adherence to methods for carry-
ing out the most complex and responsible work. It was noted that each year it is
desirable to carry out training of specialists in the sea network in the field of
gas-fluid chromatography and atomic absorption spectrophotometry.

In the adopted resolution the participants in the conference-seminar formulated a
number of priority tasks for the further development of hydrochemical investiga-
tions and monitoring of the state of bottom deposits in basins.

L. F. Yermakova and Yu. G. Slatinskiy

A coordination conference on improvement in the hydrological study of the territory
of Sverdlovskaya Oblaat was held in Sverdlovsk on 17 February. It was organized on

the initiative of the Ural Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring. It was attended by representatives of a number of scientific research
and planning institutes, production-technical enterprises, the oblast sanitary-epi-
demiological station and other organizations.

The conferees heard reports on the prospects for rationalization and further devel-
opment of the network of hydrological stations over the territory of the oblast, on
measures for improving reciprocal hydrological information, on coordination of in-
terdepartmental efforts in improving hydrological study of the territory of the
oblast and organization of hydrological reserves in the Urals.

An adequately high level of hydrological study of the Ural region was noted. On

all the major and intermediate rivers hydrological engineering investigations were
made. The exploitation of water resources is also expanding. In the oblast there are

no longer any rivers which are not used by national economic organizations.

54

FOR OFF"3A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Numerous hydraulic structures regulating runoff, the discharge of industrial efflu-
ent, and the great number of water supply boreholes substantially changed the nat-
ural regime of the water features. The hydrological characteristics and parameters
obtained earlier no longer reflect the present-day water regime. An acute need has
arisen for study of the impaired regime of rivers and lakes and also for solution
of the problem of creating hydrological reserves.

The conferees emphasized that the success of the expanded and deepened hydrological
study of the territory under conditions of a disrupted regime for solution of the
national tasks of inventorying of waters and conducting the USSR Water Survey to

a considerable degree will be dependent on the coordination of efforts of the ad-
ministrations of the Hydrometeorological Service and all interested organizations
and departments.

The conference assigned to the Sverdlovsk Hydrometeorological Observatory the task
of preparing a plan of measures for coordination of interdepartmental efforts for
improving the hydrological study of the territory of Sverdlovskaya Oblast in 1981-
1985.

It was deemed necessary to strengthen checking of the volumes of water intake and
discharge of industrial runoff and improve the determination of water discharge
from dams and other structures.

The conference recommended that major water users organize year—round runoff posts
with the methodological assistance of the Ural Administration of Hydrometeorology

and Environmental Monitoring.

It was proposed that interested organizations annually send to the Sverdlovsk Hy-
drometeorological Observatory their proposals on development of the hydrolog-
ical network.

it was pointed out to departmental organizations that it is inadmissible to send
requests and programs to the Nydrometeorological Archives at a late date for ob-

taining permission for the carrying Out of hydrological work or delaying the
sending of data on the work done by them.

A resolution was adopted calling for the petitioning of the Sverdlovsk Oblast Bx-
ccutive Committee for the creation of hydrological reserves at the headwaters of
a number of regions in the oblast.

The opinion was expressed that it is desirable to hold coordination conferences on
hydrological study of the territory not less than once every other year.

N. N. Podgayskiy

SS

FOI¢0FFHJAJ.USE(NWLY
son woman. on was

NOTES PRO“ ABROAD

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 119-120

[Article by B. I. silkin]

[Abstract] During the last thousand years some of the phases of activation of vol-
canic activity on the earth have coincided in time with macroscale climatic
changes. However, an analysis of cause-and-effect relationships in the presence

of two fluctuating systems is usually difficult. Such an attempt, limited to the
time interval between 1870 and 1970, has now been made by Doctor s. Porter at the
University of Washington. The periods of advance of glaciers in the northern hemi-
sphere were 1880-1895, 1910-1925 and the time from the mid-1950's through the pres-
ent time. In the southern hemisphere they do not coincide with the northern hemi-
sphere: there the advance of glaciers occurred in the mid-1870's and 401108 the
period from 1906 through 1910, the first half of the 1930's and the late 1940's.
Studying ice cores obtained by drilling in both hemispheres, S. Porter, in addi-
tion to absence of synchronism in the glaciation cycles, discovered that in each
case the period of advance of glaciers coincides with a time interval during which
the deposition of acid-bearing substances ejected in the course of volcanic erup-
tions increases. This is easily traced in the glaciers of both Greenland and Ant-
arctica. Thus, at least during the last century it is possible to speak of the
presence of a cause-and-effect relationship between volcanic activity and glacia-
tions operative independently in the two hemispheres.

ﬁtt

An environmental contamination bank has been established at Aachen, in West Ger-
many. Until now measures for contending with contamination in West Germany have
frequently been impeded by the.lack of a clear picture of the preceding state of
the medium. In West Germany there are ten groups, established since 1979, for col-
lecting data in this field. The new data bank was organised at the Institute of
Atomic Energy Research. It will coordinate all work along these lines. In the first
stage the bank will concentrate its attention in the field of data relating to nan
himself, his food chain and habitat. This includes the collection of samples of
human blood, liver, fatty tissue and certain food products such as fish, mollusks,

wheat and milk. Other samples include algae, soils, grass, earthworms and various
insects. Their content of hydrocarbons, pesticides and toxic metals will be ans

alyzed. Each sample will be analyzed immediately upon receipt and then at equal
time intervals. The storage of samples is in dust-impermeable rooms at tempera-

tures in some cases attaining -190'c. These rooms have an emergency cooling system.

56

initOFFKJA1.USIlIVLY
FIIICHHNC1A1.USE(MVLY

*“i’k

In April 1981 American scientists began carrying out the four-year program CODE
(Coastal Ocean Dynamics Experiment), the objective being study of the dynamics of
coastal waters in the Pacific Ocean washing the northwestern shores of California.

In the course of these studies they are collecting diversified information on the
processes exerting an influence on the development of currents, on wind fields,
physics of the upper layers of the ocean and its coastal part, sea level, pressure
at the bottom in the shelf zone, seasonal circulation and other parameters. Over

a distance of 97 km along the coast anchored velocity meters are being set out, to-
gether with instrumentation for measuring current direction. Participating in the
experiment are scientific research ships of the University of Oregon and the
Scripps Oceanographic Institute, as well as the national laboratory at Boulder.
Other participants will include the Geological Survey, NASA and NOAA.

S7

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOIilﬂﬂLlhltﬂﬂWUNLl

ANNIVERSAR! OF BIRTH 0? Yu. M. SHOKAL'SKIY (1856-1950)
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 120-121

[Article by V. M. Chuvashov]

[Abstract] This year marks the 125th anniversary of the birth of Yuliy Mikhaylo-
vich Shokal'skiy, outstanding Russian and Soviet oceanographer, meteorologist and
cartographer. After studying at the Marine Institute, he spent two years in the
Navy, after which he became a student at the Marine Academy in the hydrography
division. During 1880-1882 he headed the marine meteorology section of the Main
Physical Observatory. Between 1882 and 1907 he taught at the Marine Institute and
then through 1930 at the Marine Academy. From 1925 to his death he was also a pro-
fessor at Leningrad University. Meanwhile, during 1907-1912 he headed the meteor-
ology section of the Hydrographic Administration and from 1925 through 1931 he

was directcr of the State Cartographic Institute. On his initiative and with his
direct participation various neasures were undertaken for investigating the re-
gime of water basins. He was responsible for numerous aerological and ice observa-
tions. He organized oceanographic expeditions for studying the Black Sea. Be made
large-scale observations of currents in the Baltic, Black, Caspian and Far Eastern
seas. He organised publication of the first YEARBOOKS 0P TIDBS and established

the Sevastopol' Marine Observatory. Yu. M. Shokal'skiy was one of the supporters
and founders of study and exploitation of the Northern Sea Route. As early as 1883
he was an advocate of study of the Arctic and Antarctica. A major result of his in-
vestigations was the generalizing work OKEANOGRAPIYA (0ceanography)(l9l7). In this
monograph the scientist for the first time pointed out the interrelationship of
processes and phenomena transpiring in ocean and sea waters and also in the world
ocean and atmosphere. The scientist published about 1,500 scientific works - mono-
graphs, articles, atlases and reference books with an astonishing breadth in vir-
tually all fields of geography. Shokal'skiy was an outstanding cartographer and
headed work on compilation of maps of the relief of Russia. He calculated the area
of the Asiatic part of Russia and the lengths of major rivers. He played a major
role in the preparation of innumerable atlases. Be participated in preparations
for the Second International Polar Year and represented the USSR at many inter-
national geophysical congresses. Yuliy Mikhsylovich devoted 58 years of his sci-
entific activity to work in the Geographical Society. Between 1917 and 1931 he was
chairman and thereafter was honorary chairman. He was a doctor of geographical
sciences, a doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, a corresponding member
of the USSR Academy of Sciences and an honorary member of countless societies in the
USSR and abroad. His contributions to the development of Russian and Soviet geo-
graphy were enormous. References: 5 Russian. '

S8

FOIIOIIICIAI.USE4DNlN
IIIl(NﬂﬂK1Al.lIIE(ﬂ'LY

INDEX 01’ ARTICLES PUBLISHED 111"}8TBOROIDGIYA I GIDROWIYA' IN 1981
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 122-128
[Unsigned index]

[Text]

Avdyushin, S. I. "Heliogeophysical Service, Its Tasks and Prospects for Develop-
ment," No 6, pp 63-76

Israel, Yu. A. ”Principal Results and Prospects for the Development of Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring," No 6, pp 5-18.

"Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of Soviet Research in Antarctica," No 1, pp 5-12.
Meteorology

Avaste, O. A., Kyarner, 0. Yu. and Keevallik, 8. Kb. "Quantity of Clouds in Zone
bS’N—kS’S Over the Earth," No 7, pp 54-60.

Adamenko, V. N., Bogdanov, A. L. and Novorotskiy, P. V. "Evaluation of the Spatial-
Temporal Variability of Components of the Heat and Water Balance in the Eastern
Part of the naykal-Amur Railroad Route," No 11, pp 58-70.

Alekseyeva-Obukhova, I. A. and Petrichenko, I. A. “Use of Observational Data on
Clauds in Numerical Forecasting of Air Surface Temperature," No 9, pp 35-40.

Almsyev, R. Kh. and Semenov, L. P. "Effect of Radiation on s Turbulent Cloud Medi-
um." No 12, pp 46-55.

Aloyan, A. Ye., Yordanov, D. L. and Penenko, V. V. "Numerical Model of Transport of
Impurities in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer," No 8, pp 32-63.

Aloyan, A. Ye., Yordanov, D. L. and Penenko, V. V. "Paramstsrization of Surface
Layer with Variable Height," No 1, pp 37-66.

Andrash, U. and Shenk, R. "Computation of Transport of Substances Contaminating
Air," No 3, pp 56-58.

Arabadzhi, V. I. "Possibility of Predicting Lightning Discharges," “0 3, pp 107-108.

59

lili¢ﬂﬂﬂChULlﬁli(lVLY
M (”'le USE. UNIJ

Bakirbayev, B. and Kostyukov, V. V. "Determination of Parameters of Correlation
Functions in Process of Objective Analysis of Hydrometeorological Fields," No
10, pp 108-110.

Biryulina, H. 5. "Modeling of an A Priori Set of Solutions of Inverse Problem and
Stability of Optimum Plans of Ozone Satellite Experiment," No A, pp 45-51.

Borzenkova, I. I. "Global Temperature Trend in the Cenozoic," No 12, pp 25-35.

Borisenkov, Ye. P. "Study of Climate and Its Practical Aspects," No 6, pp 32-48.

Borisenkov, Ye. P., Neleshko, V. P. and Sokolov, A. P. "Influence of Upper-Level
Cloud Cover on Thermal Regime and Atmospheric Circulation," No 11, pp 5-17.

Bryukhan', F. P. and Cuterman, I. G. [deceased] "Climatic Characteristics of Ver-
tical Hind Shears in Atmospheric Surface Layer Over USSR." No 5, pp 17-23.

Bryukhan', P. P. “Indirect Computation of Characteristics of Prevailing Hind."
No 8, pp 15-18.

Budyko, H. I.. Byutner, E. K., Vinnikov, K. Ya., Golitsyn, G. S., Drozdov, 0. A.
and Karol', I. L. "Anthropogenic Changes in Global Climate," No 8, pp 5-14.

Budyko, H. I. and Yefimova, N. A. "Influence of Carbon Dioxide on Climate," No 2,
pp 5-17.

Budyko, M. I. "Change in Atmospheric Thermal Regime in Phanerozoic." No 10, pp 5-10.
Budyko, H. I. "Present Status of Investigations of Climate," No 6. pp 49-62.

Buykov, H. V., nodnarchuk, Yu. V. and Simeonov, P. ”Evaluation of Effectiveness of
Antihail Protection in Bulgaria," No 2, pp 69-56.

Buykov, H. V. and thorost'yanov, V. I. "Numerical Modeling of Diurnal Evolution of
Atmospheric Boundary Layer in Clouds and Pogo," No 6, pp 35-44.

Byutner, B. K., Zakharova, O. K., Turchinovich, I. Ye. and Lapenis, A. G. "Anthro-
pogenic Changes in Carbon Dioxide Concentration in Atmosphere in the Next Fifty
Years," No 3, pp 18-31.

Vayndiner, G. Ye.. Hukhina, T. L.. Gladilina, V. P. and Kazakov. L. L. "Interan-
nual Changes in Zonal Circulation in the Northern Hemisphere in the Course of
a Five-Year Period," No 12, pp 102-104.

Vinnikov, K. Ya. and Croysman, P. Ya. "Empirical Analysis of the Influence of 602
on Modern Changes in Hean Annual Air Surface Temperature of the Northern Hemi-
sphere," No 11. pp 30-63.

Vinogradova, L. I. and Shakina, N. P. "Vertical Circulation in the High-Altitude
Frontal Zone Over Western Siberia and Krasnoyarskiy Kray," No 8. pp 26-31.

60

INJR OIIICJAI.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY

Cavrilov, A. S. and Petrov, Yu. S. "Evaluation of the Accuracy in Determining Tur-
bulent Flows by Standard Hydrometeorological Measurements Over the Sea," No 6,
pp 52-59.

Cavrilov, V. P. and Kostrikov, A. A. "Scattering and Transport of a Claud of Input-
ity in the Tropoaphere," No 10, pp 19-25.

Gavrilov, V. P. "Determination of the Coefficient of Turbulent Diffusion," No 3,
PP 66-53 a

Cirdyuk, G. V. and Malevskiy-Malevich, S. P. ”Method for Computing Effective Radi-
ation of the Ocean Surface Vith Allowance for Different Cloud Levels," No 10,
pp 46-52.

Gordin, V. A. "Method for Computing Heat Plow Into the Soil Prom Temperature," No
1, pp 54-60.

Gruza, G. V. and Apasova, Ye. C. "Climatic Variability of Monthly Precipitation
Sums in the Northern Hemisphere," No 5, pp 5-16.

Gruza, G. V., Kleshchenko, L. K. and Ran'kova, 3. Ya. "Prediction of Mean Monthly
Air Temperature Over the Northern Hemisphere Using an Automated Scheme of Group

Analogs," No 2, pp 28-39.

Cruza, C. V. and Ran'kova, E. Ya. "Use of Analogs in Evaluating the Predictability
and Long-Range Prediction of the Fields of Mean Monthly Air Temperature," No 1,
pp 13-22.

Devan, A. K. "Variations in the Intensity of the Summer Indian Monsoon Using Satel-
lite Cloud Data," No 2, pp 55-61.

Didenko, N. K., Ivanov, V. N., Korovin, V. Ya. and Smirnov, V. V. "Modeling of Ther-
mals," No 5, pp 24-32.

Dinevich, L. A. "Some Features of Structure and Evolution of ﬂail Cumulonimbus
Clouds," No 9, pp 41-49.

Dobryshman, Ye. M. "Analysis of Simplest Zonal Models of Circulation of the Equa-
torial Atmosphere," No 9, pp 12-22.

Disycheva, N. Ye. and Krigel', A. M. "Parameters of Thermal Stratification of the
Planetary Boundary Layer," No 1, pp 102-105.

Drozdov, 0. A. "Formation of Moistenlng of the Land With Variations in Climate,"
No 1., pp 17-23.

Dushkin, P. K. "Prediction of Radiation and Radiation-Effective Pogo," No 9, pp
50-57.

Zakharova, 0. K. "Friction and Heat Exchange of Air With the Surface in the Pres-
ence of Transport of Sand, Salt and Ice Particles,“ No 12, pp 36-b0.

61

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(HMLY
UU"UII"JAI.0&I|M‘LI

Zimin, B. I. "Correlationnetveen Electrification of mmderstorm Clouds and Pre-
cipitation," No 8, pp 66-51.

Zolo'tarev, V. N. and Uspensltiy, B. D. "Prediction of Surface Air Humidity," No 1,
pp 23-28.

Ivanov, V. P., Maslennikov, P. A., Sidorenko, V. I. and Filippov, V. 1.. "Features
of Variations of Microstructure of Aerosols," No 5, pp 33-38.

Imyanitov, I. M. "Structure and Conditions of Development of Thunderstorn Clouds,"
No 3, pp 5-17.

Nigel', L. Kh. and Depikash, Ye. R. "Motion of Particles on a Rotating Sphere,"
No 1, pp 67-53.

Kabanov, A. S. and Klykov, A. Ye. "Axisynetric Problem of Free Convection and
Nmerical Experiaents Hith Dynamic Effect on a Cumulus Cloud," No 7, pp 46-53.

Kagan, R. L. and Khlebnikova, Ye. 1. "Influence of Density of Network of Stations
on Characteristics of Variability of Interpolated Values," No 5, pp 39-67.

Kadyshnikov, V. M. and Ryazantseva, V. M. "Correlation Between Temporal and Spatial
Intervals in Ntmerical Weather Forecasting," No 12, pp 16-26.

Kadyshnikov, V. M. "Telescoped Scheme for Hydrodynamic Short-Range Heather Pore-
casting," No 2, pp 18-27.

Kashtanov, A. P. and Novikov, B. M. "Role of Hydrogen Peroxide ([1202) in Formation
of Mesospheric Clouds," No 7, pp 105-107.

Kenzhibayev, A. '1‘. and Petrichenko, I. A. "Improvement of Method for Predicting In-
tensity and Quantity of Precipitation During Harm Period," No 3, pp 103-106.

Kokin, G. A., Ryazanova, L. A. and Tulinov, G. 1'. "Influence of Solar Activity on
the Temperature Regime of the Atmosphere in the Polar Region," No 6, pp 105-112.

Kolpakov, A. V. and Kontush, s. M. "Features of Mass Exchange During the Collision
of Water Droplets of Noncomarable Sizes," No 12, pp 56-60.

Koprovs, L. 1., Utkin, Ye. F. and Bakhmatov, A. Ye. "Results of Checking of Methods
for Determining Temperature of the Water Surface From the 'Meteor' Artificial
Earth Satellite," No 7, pp 61-69.

Krivolutskiy, A. A. "Discrimination of Traveling Haves Prom Experimental Data," No
10, pp 102-106.

Krichak, S. 0. "Nonadiabatic mdel of Atmosphere Using Full Equations for Predicting
Meteorological Elements Over Europe," No 7, pp 18-26.

Kuznetsov, V. V. and Pavlova, L. N. "Optical Properties of Clouds," No 10, pp 60-43.

62

FOR OFFICIAL In ONLY
FOI:0I1HCJAI.lEﬂE(HNLY

Kutsenko, 3. Ya. "Numerical Investigation of Frontogenesis With Allowance for
Phase Transitions," No 9, pp 23-34.

Ionilina, L. Ye. "Influence of Highlands in the Asiatic USSR on Glaze-Hoarfrost
Deposits." No 8, pp 52-57.

Lopatenko, S. V. and Kontush, S. M. "Charge Separation During Partial Coalescence
of Droplets," No 11, pp 54-57.

Makerov, N. A. "Prevailing Wind at Altitudes 80-100 kn at Different Longitudes
During "inter and Spring 1976-1977," No 12, pp 41-45.

Harten'yanov, V. I. "Evaluation of Statistical Interrelationship of Horizontal
and Vertical Resolutions in Geopotential Field," No 11, pp 49-53.

Martsinkevich, L. M. "Two-Channel SH? Radiometric Method for Determining Hind
Velocity From a Satellite,” No 3, pp 59-67.

Masagutov, T. P. "Computation of Vertical Turbulent Flows in Near-Water Layer of
Atmosphere Over the Ocean in Tropical Latitudes," No 12, pp 61-68.

Masterskikh, M. A. "Computation of Wind Velocity During Gusts in Narrow Zones of
Cold Fronts," No 11. pp 93-94.

Matveyev, Yu. L. and Soldatenko, S. A. "Model of Cloud Cover on Stationary Front,"
No 2, pp 40-48.

Makhon'ko, K. P. and Rabotnova, P. A. "Concentration of Mineral Dust in the Atmo-
sphere Over the Territory of the USSR," No 1, pp 61-65.

Milyutin, Ye. R. and Yaremenko, Yu. I. "Experimental Investigation of Correlation
of Meteorological Range of Visibility and Altitude of the lover Cloud Boundary,"
No 3, pp 32-38.

Minina, L. 8., Petrosyants, M. A. and Portnyagin, Yu. I. "Seasonal Restructuring of
Circulation in the Meteor Zone (80-100 km) and Their Relationship to Processes
in the Stratosphere." No 9, pp 5-11.

Mokhov, I. I. "Influence of CO; on the Thermal Regime of the Earth's Climatic Sys-
tem," No 6. pp 24-34. .

Musayelyan. Sh. A., Tavadyan, A. D. and Shteynbok, D. B-.’ ’Dynamic-Statistical Para-
neterization of the Process of Thermal Effect of the Ocean on the Atmosphere,"
No 10. pp 11-18.

Muchnik, V. M. "Distribution of Precipitation Over the Territory of the Experimental
Meteorological Polygon," No 10, pp 34-39.

Nikitin, A. Ye. "Investigation of the Energy Cycle in a Model of General Circulation
of the Atmosphere Developed at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center." No 8, pp 19-
25.

63

FOI10l11CLAl.lﬂﬂl(lVLY
rm WI‘IMIIII U“ Vl‘hl

Nuriakhmetova, H. P. "Comparative Analysis of Methods for Computing Turbulent
Flows of Heat and Moisture From the Ocean Into the Atmosphere," Ho 7, pp 70-76.

Orlova, I. C. and Petisov, L. P. "Chlorated Hydrocarbons in the Hear-Hater Layer of
the Atmosphere Over the North Atlantic," No 4, pp 60-64.

Pavlova, L. N. "Visibility of Light signals in a Crystalline Fog," Ho 2, pp 108-109.

Pataleyev, V. A. "Allowance for Heat Receipts From Solar Radiation on Sloping Sur-
faces," Ho 9, pp 75-78.

Petrosyants, M. A. "Weather Forecasting: Status and Immediate Tasks," Ho 6, pp 19-
31.

Pinus, H. 2. and Kapicanova, T. P. "Some Features of the Energetics of Cyclonic For-
mations in the Temperate Latitudes," Ho 6, pp 5-16.

Pokrovskiy, 0. M. and Kaygorodtsev, A. Ye. "Information Content of Global Systems
for Observing Total Ozone Content," No 7, pp 36-45.

Polkhov, A. P. "Prediction of the Hovaya Zemlya Born Using the Canonical Correla-
tion Method," No 5, pp 59-64.

Polkhov, A. P. and Terziyev, F. 8. "Prediction of Evaporation Pogs by the Quadratic
Discriminant Analysis Method," No 9, pp 58-66.

Romanova, N. A., Kool', L. V. and Romanov, Yu. A. "Structure of Atmospheric Pres-
sure and Hind Hear the Equator in the Central Pacific Ocean," No 7, pp 102-105.

Rossov, V. V. "Formation of a Stratiform Cloud Cover and Page on Hydrological
Fronts," No 10, pp 110-112.

Rubinshteyn, K. G. and Shilyayev, V. 3. "Method of Variational Assimilation of Ver-
tical Climatic Fields of Temperature and Ceopotential," Ho 10, pp 26-33.

Snitkovskiy, A. I. "Short-Range Forecasting of Precipitation," No 7, pp 5-17.

Snitkovskiy, A. I. "Prediction of Air Temperature at Surface for 48 and 60 Hours,"
No 12, pp 5-13.

Tooming, Kh. G. "Correlation Between Mean Annual Albedo and Short-Have Radiation
Balance Values With These Same Indices in Early Spring," Ho 5, pp 68-52.

Fedulova, M. N., Borodina, A. V. and Shuvalov, A. V. "Use of Composite Analog in
Physicostatistical Method for Forecasting Weather for 5-10 Days," No 1, pp 29-36.

Khain, A. P. "Numerical Modeling of Passage of Tropical Cyclone Onto Land," Ho 9,
pp 67-74.

Khrgian, A. Kh. "Methods of Dendroclimatology in Studying History of Climate,"
Ho 11, pp 18-29.

66

FINI¢IHWC1A1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapurskiy, L. I. "Brightness Variations of Cloud Fields in Observations From Differ-
ent Altitudcs." No 5. pp 53-58.

Cholekh, I. V. "Investigation of Convergence of Scheme of Dry Convective Adaptation
in Models of Macroscale Atmospheric Processes," No 10, pp 105-107.

Sharifullin, N. K. and Romanov, L. N. "Moving Checking and Evaluation of Alterna-
tive Models," No 3, pp 39-65.

Shmerlin, B. Ya. "Investigation of Patterns of Movement of Mscroscale Eddies Rela-
tive to a Purely Zonal Flow," No 7, pp 27-35.

Yurov, A. G. "Distribution of Temperatures and Turbulent Near-Hall Currents With
Allowance for Stratification of Air Flow," No 11, pp lob-68.

Hydrology

Alekseyev, c. A. "Joint Determination of Statistical Parameters, Lengthening and
Modeling of Time Series and Reduction to Long-Term Period," No 5, pp 70-81.

Anisimova, Ye. P., Ivlev, I. I. and Speranskaya, A. A. "Computation of Turbidity
Profile in Flow With Transported Sediments," No 8, pp 92-96.

Antonov, A. Ye. "Complex Prediction of Interannual Variability of Inflow of North
Sea Haters Into Baltic According to Data From On-Shore Observations," No 3,
pp 76-79.

Bagrov, A. N. and Kozhevnikova, N. N. "Objective Analysis of Ocean Surface Temper-
ature in Northern Hemisphere," No 12, pp 69-76.

Bagrov, N. A. "Mean Slope of Drainage Basins," No 9, pp 111-114.

Baryshnikov, N. B. and Subbotina, Ye. S. "Dependence of Slopes of Free Surface on
Morphometric marscteristics of Channel and Floodplain," No 1, pp 82-88.

Blatov, A. S. "Hydrological Structure and Energy Reserve of Eddies in the Main Black
Sea Current," No 7, pp 86-93.

Bogachev, A. 6., Volkova, G. 8.. Kvon, V. I. and Pilatova, '1'. N. "Numerical Model-
ing of Hind-Induced Currents in Lakes," No 7, pp 94-101.

Boyarinov, P. H. "Case of Upwelling in Southern Part of Lake Onega," No 1, pp 72-75.

Buzuyev, A. Ya. and Fedyakov, V. Ye. "Variability of Ice Conditions on Ship Navi-
gation Routes,“ No 2, pp 69-76.

Byshev, V. I. and Snopl av, V. 6. "Influence of Cold Synoptic Ocean Eddies on Trajec-
tory and Evolution of Tropical Cyclones," No 10, pp 53-57.

Vladimirov, 0. A. "Lagging Effects in Ocean-Atmosphere System and Their Modeling,"
No 4, pp 77-8‘.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI ul'rayun. we Vina

Gavrilyuk, R.V . "Possibility of Seasonal Prediction of Water Temperature in
North Atlantic," No 4. pp 71-76.

Ginsburg, A. I. "Methodological Problems in Measuring Temperature and Salinity in
the Ocean Boundary Layer," No 4, pp 65-70.

Grinval'd, D; I., Nikora, V. I. and Boyko, T. V. "Statistical Characteristics of
the Ridged Relief of the River Bottom," No 8, pp 87-91.

Crishin, N. I. "Mechanism of Detachment of Hard Particles From Bottom by a Tur-
bulent Flow of Fluid," No 5, pp 82-91.

Grishin, N. N. "Influence of Hard Particles on the Kinematics of the Fluid Flow
Transporting Them," No 2, pp 86-91.

Dmitriyev, P. A. and Pivovarov, S. V. "Distribution of Hydrocarbons in Freshly Pall-
en Snow and in Ice at 'Severnyy Polyus-ZZ' Station (According to Observations of
1977-1978)," No 5. pp 65-69.

Yelshin, Yu. A. "Thermal Runoff of Rivers in the European Territory of the USSR,"
No 9, pp 85-93.

Zholudev, V. D. "Mechanisms of Formation of the Upper Quasihomogeneous Layer of the
Ocean," No 11, pp 77-82.

Zayakin, Yu. A. "Tsunami of 23 November 1969 on Kamchatka and Features of Its De-
velopment," No 12, pp 77-83.

Zotov, Yu. G., Nasterov, Yu. P. and Saks, S. Ye. "Spatial Variability of Current
Fields in Shallow-Hater Zone of Shelf," No 9. pp 79-84.

Inishev, N. C. "Use of a Stochastic Model of Travel Time for Computing High-Hater
Hydrograph (In Example of Chulym Rivet)," No 9, pp 9h-100.

Karaushev, A. V. and Heyerovich, L. N. "Model of Formation of Stationary Zone of
Contamination in Water Bodies," No 1, pp 105-107.

Karnovich. V. N. and Kuleshova, T. V. "Long-Range Prediction of Maximum Water Lev-
els During Ice Jams on the Angara River at Kamenka,“ No 12, pp 105-107.

Kogan, B. A. and Orlov, N. P. "New Ice Forecasting Methods for the Northwestern
Atlantic," No 11, pp 71-76.

Komlev, A. H. "Joint Evaluation of the Intraannual and Long-Term Probability of
Exceeding Hean Daily Hater Discharges," No 11, pp 97-100.

Kopylov, A. P. "Hean Level of Drainage Basin Slopes," No 9, pp 109-111.

Kostsov, G. V. "Experimental Validation of Computations of Race of water Runoff
Along the Plowed Surface of Slopes," No 3. pp 93-96.

66

INJI‘OFIWCJA1.USEIHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liser, I. Ya. "Expressions for Predicting Maximum Ice Jam (Ice Run) Water Levels
During the Opening-Up of Siberian Rivers," “0 11, pp 83-87.

Makin, V. K. "Interaction of Swell Raves With a Head Wind," Nb ll, pp 95-97.

Mamedov, M. A. "Spatial Correlation Functions of Maximum Hater Discharges of Moun-
tain Rivers," No 12, pp 89-93.

Moskvin, Yu. P. "Evaluation of Applicability of Different Methods for Determining
Evaporation From a Hater Surface in the Zone of Bummocked Swamps," No 3, pp 112-
115.

Nezhikhovskiy, B. R. "Influence of Errors in Statistical Characteristics on the Ac-
curacy of Optimum Interpolation," No 2, pp 77-85.

Nesterov, Ye. 8. "One Mechanism for Formation of Macroscale Hater Temperature Anour
alies in the Ocean," No 1, pp 66-71.

Nikora, V. I. "River Flow as a Dissipative System," No 12, pp 84-88.

Noskov, V. G. "Laboratory Investigations of the Influence of Structures for the Pro-
tection of Leningrad Against Inundations on Water Level Rise in the Gulf of Pin-
land," No 1, pp 76-81.

Ponomarev, V. I. and Gazova, L. A. "Diagnostic Model of Circulation of Water and Ice
in the Arctic Basin,“ No 3, pp 68-75.

Raspopin, G. A. and Kovalev, Ye. A. "Computation of Dynamics of River Flows Under
Nonstationary Conditions," No 10, pp 79-87.

Rumyantaev, V. A. and Kondrat'yev, S. A. "Use of Radar Data in Hydrodynamic Model
of Rainwater Runoff with Distributed Parameters," No 3, pp 86-92.

Ryabinin, V. E. "Model of Circulation of a Baroclinic Ocean Under the Influence
of Wind and the Heat Flow From the Atmosphere," No 8, pp 58-70.

Sklyarenko, V. L. "Some Methodological Problems in Application of the Main Compon-
ents Method in Investigations of River Runoff Fields," No 8, pp 71-77.

Sokolov, A. A. "Principal Results and Prospects for Development of Research in the
Field of Hydrology in Relation to the Problems of Shifting of Part of the Runoff
of Northern Rivers to the South," No 6, pp 87-98.

Terziyev, F. S and Goptarev, N. P. "Kara-Bogaa-Gol Gulf and the Caspian Sea Prob-
lem," No 2, pp 62-68.

Treshnikov, A. F. and Terziyev, F. 8. "Modern Problems of Research in the Field of
Oceanography," No 6, pp 77-86.

Trubkin, I. P. "On the Angular Spectrum of Wind Waves," No 10, pp 67-71.

67

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(MVLY
rust WIILML UM UNA-I

Fedorov, K. N. “Physical Structure of the Ocean Surface Layer," No 10, pp 58-66.

Pilippov, Ye. M. "Status of Problem of Study of Element-Salt Composition of Sea
Haters by the Nuclear Physics Method," No 3, pp 80-85.

Pridrikh, G., Kochergin, V. P., Klimok, V. I., Protasov. A. V. and Sukhorukov. V. A.

"Numerical Experiments Using a Model of Upper Layer of the Ocean." No 7, pp 77-
85.

Khristoforov, A. V. “Evaluation of Parameters of Distribution of Probabilities
of River Runoff Values," No 8, pp 78-86.

Shishkayev. s. M. and Yegorov. A. N. "Method for Computing the Thermal Conductivity
Coefficient of Bottom Deposits of Large Shallow-Water Lakes (In Example of Lake
Kubenskoye)," No lo, pp 85-92.

Shmakov, V. M. "Supply of Solar Energy to Reservoirs in the Dnepr Cascade," No 10,
Pp 72-78.

Shtykov, V. I. "Determination of the Filtration Coefficients of Cohesive Bottom
Haterials in a Frozen State Through Their Kinetic Specific Surface," No 3,
pp 109-112.

Agrometeorology

Anisimov, 0. A. and Nenzhulin, G. V. "Modeling the Radiation Regime in the Plant
Cover," No 10, pp 88-93.

Garmaahov, V. N. and Selivanov, A. N. "Influence of Meteorological Factors on the
Yield of Spring Barley," No 7, pp 107-110.

Gringof, I. G. and Kel'chevskaya, L. s. "Direction of Investigations for Supplying
the National Economy With Agroclimatic Information," No lo, pp 93-102.

Gringof, I. G. and Khvalenskiy, Yu. A. "Principal Results of Agrometeorological
Investigations in the Tenth Five-Year Plan and Prospects for Their Further De-

velopment," No 6, pp 99-104.

Ksendz, A. T., Savchuk, L. P. and Pokrishchenko, V. N. “Regulation of Phytoclimate
as a Means for Validating the Components of Hatched Crops," No 8, pp 97-101.

Lynov, Yu. 5. "Autumn Growing Season of Grassy Plants at Intermediate Elevations in
Central Asia," No 12, pp 107-108.

Hakhmudov, K. "Determination of Losses to Cotton Pros llailfalls at Different Stages
in Its Development," No 3, pp 97-102.

Mokiyevskiy, V. H. and Shalyavina, N. K. "Influence of Climatic Conditions on Vari-
ability of Yields of Green Mass of Perennial Grasses in the RSPSR," No 12, pp
910-101.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lNJI‘OFFICJAI.I£SIi(HVLY

Muromtsev, N. A. "Influence of Temperature on Potential of Soil Moisture and Its
Accessibility for Plants," No 5,_pp 92-98.

Polevoy, A. N. "Dynamic-Statistical Methods for Predicting Yield of Agricultural
Crops," No 2, pp 92-102.

Pigareva, L. G. "Agrometeorological Conditions, Crop Yield and Quality of Spring
"heat Grain," No 10, pp 96-101.

Svisyuk, I. V. "Rate of Growth and Development of Winter Wheat During Winter Thaws,"
No 11, pp 88-92.

Eyyubov, A. D. and Ragimov, Kh. Sh. "Influence of Meteorological Conditions on the
Quality of Pomegranate Fruits," No 1, pp 98-101.

Global Atmospheric Research Program (CARP)

Belousov, S. L. and Gofen, A. M. "Use of an Electronic Computer in Organizing an
Archives of Data on Analyses of Meteorological Fields Obtained Under the F668
Program," No 2. pp 103-107.

Durkov, V. A., Zubin, A. 3., Titov, V. D. and Kharlemov, A. I. "Spatial-Temporal
Variability of Current Discharges in PGGB Atlantic Equatorial Polygon," No 9,
pp 101-108.

Volkov, Yu. A., Yelagina, L. G. and Koprov, D. M. "Investigation of Heat Flows in
the Near-Hater Layer of the Atmosphere Under the Atlantic Tropical Experiment
Program," No 8, pp 102-109.

Dobryshman, Ye. M. and Sitnikov. I. G. "Analysis of Wave Disturbances of a Synoptic
Scale in TROPEX-72 and GATE," No 5, pp 99-108.

Kondrat'yev, K. Ya. "Remote Sounding of the Atmosphere Prom Satellites in the F668
Period," No 4, pp 103-111.

Kondtat'yev, K. Ya. "Preliminary Results of Implementation of the F063," No 6, pp
113-121.

Peskov, B. Ye., Zhelnin. A. A. and Shupyatskiy, A. B. "Thermodynamic Conditions in
Convective Cloud Cover and Precipitation at the Equator (According to MONEX
Data)," No 4, pp 111-116.

Debatable Questions

Yurchak, B. S. "Optimum Measurement of Radar Parameters of Meteorological Features,"
No 4, pp 117-121.

Instruments, Observations. Processing

69

FOI‘OFIﬂClAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
I'm ("III-MI. USE URL!

BagautdinOV, A. A., Krysov, V. P., Pakhomova, T. M. and Pushistov, P. Yu. "Some
Applications of the 'Heatherman-Electronic Computer' Dialogue System in 0p-
erational Processing of Data and Numerical Heather Forecasting," No 8. pp 110-
116.

Bovsheverov, V. M., Kallistratova, M. A., Knyazev, L. V., Gorelik, A. G. and
Yegorov, M. Yu. "Radio Apparatus of a System for Thermal Sounding of the At-
mosphere by the Backseattering Method," No 3, pp 120-123.

Gavrilov, A. A. "Information Yield of Meteor Radar Stations Used in Measuring the
Wind in the Upper Atmosphere," No 5. pp 109-114.

Yelanskiy. N. F.. Truttae, Yu. L. and Matveyeva, 0. A. "Experimental Investigations
of UV Radiation in the Lower Atmosphere," No 7, pp 111-116.

Kofman, R. I. and Monakhov, A. V. "Application of Computer Graphics for Visual Rep-
resentation of Archives of Meteorological Data," No 5, pp 117-119.

Koshel'kov, Yu. P. "Matching of Temperature Values in Mesosphere Measured by Dif-
ferent Rocket Sounding Systems," No 3. pp 116-120.

Masagutov, T. F. "Computation of Air Humidity Over Sea Prom Air and Water Tempera-
ture," No 5, pp 114-117.

Rudenko, S. L. and Solomakhov, A. Yu. "Automatic Generation of Programs for the De-
coding of Meteorological Summaries," No 1, pp 113-116.

Toktomyshev, S. 2h. and Tolbayev, L. K. "Measurement of Ozone Concentration in the
Troposphere," No 2, pp 110-112.

Trubkin, I. P. "Measurement of Parameters of Have-Covered Surface Prom Shipboard,"
No 12, pp 109-113.

Usol'tsev, V. A. "Model Means for Measuring Air Humidity at Negative Temperatures,"
No 1, pp 108-113.

Shenderovich, I. M. and Kleban, L. 8. "Remote Recording Unit for Float Water Level
Recorder," No 12, pp 113-115.

Reviews and Consultations
Berestovskiy, I. P. and Viktorov, S. V. "Role of Promising Space Systems in Imple-

menting Oceanographic Section of the world Climate Research Program,“ No 10,
pp 113-119.

Drofa, A. S. and Katsev, I. L. "Some Problems in Visibility Through Clouds and
Pegs," Mo 11, pp 101-109.

Kolokolov, V. P. "Activity of the World Data Center on Atmospheric Electricity,"
No 2, pp 119-120.

70

FOR OIIICJA1.1EIE(NVLY
FOIIOFIICLALIINECMNLY

Musayelyan, Sh. A. "Work of an Unofficial Conference of HMO Experts on Long-Range
Weather Forecasting," No 9, pp 115-118.

Exchange of Work Experience

Voyevodin, V. A. and Nurzin, A. I. "Experience in Scientific-Operational Hydro-
meteorological and Ice Support of Winter Voyages in the Arctic," No 8, pp 115-117.

skripnik, N. P. "Experience in Using a Couple: System for Quality Control of work
at Aerometeorological Stations of the Ukrainian Administration of Hydrometeor-
ology and Environmental Monitoring," No 1, pp 117-119.

Snitkovskiy, A. I. and Chistyakov, A. D. "Meteorological Support of the USSR Hydro-
neteorological Center for the XXII Olympic Games in Moscow," No 2, pp 113-118.

From the History of Science

Brodskiy, A. V. "Piftieth Anniversary of the Main Aeroneteorological Center," No
2, pp 121-124.

Krichak, S. 0. and Pinus, N. 2. "Experimental and Synoptic Investigations of the
Atmosphere in the Hork of 0. G. Krichak (Seventieth Anniversary of His Birth),"
No 11, pp 110-113.

Rakhnanov, V. V. "Meteorological Activity of I. N. Ul'yanov (One Hundred Piftieth
Anniversary of His Dirth)," No 7, pp 117-118.

Tolstobrov, B. "Piftieth Anniversary of the Leningrad Hydrometeorological Insti-
tute," No 3, pp 126-127.

Criticism and Bibliography

Alekseyev, G. A. RASCHETY STOKA REX I VREHENNYKB VODOTOKOV (Computations of Runoff
of Rivers and Interim Watercourses), Izd-vo Voronezhskogo Universiteta, 1979,

200 pages, No 1, pp 120-121.

Baryshnikov, N. B. RBCHNAYA CIDROMETRIYA I UCHBT VODNYKH RESURSOV (Fluvial Hydro-
metry and Determination of Water Resources), by I. F. Karasev, Leningrad,
Gidrometsoizdat, 1980, No 6, p 122.

Boykova, 0. V. LED. PIZICHESKIYE SVOYSTVA. SOVREHENNYYE HETODY GLYATSIOLOGII
(Ice. Physical Properties. Modern Methods in Glaciology), by V. V. Dogorodskiy,
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1980, 386 pages, No 5, p 120.

Vendrov, S. L. KOHPLEKSNYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA VODOKHRANILISHCH, VYP III. 'MOZHAYSKOYE
VODOKHRANILISHCHB (Hultisided Investigations of Reservoirs, No III. 'Hozhaysk-

oye Reservoir), edited by V. D. Bykov and K. K. Bdel'shteyn, Moscow, Izd-vo
M00, 1979, 399 pages, No 1, pp 121-122.

71

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
run UPI-aunt. woe. vnus

Dibobes, I. K. and Hazarov, I. H. EKOLOCIYA I KONTRDL' SOSTOYANIYA PRIRDDNOY 3830!
(Ecology and Monitoring State of the Environment), by Yu. A. Israel', Leningrad.
Cidrometeoizdat, 1979, No a. pp 122-123.

Karol', I. L. and Frol'kis, V. A. FIZIKA AIHDSPBRY I PROBLSHA KLIHAIA (Physics of
the Atmosphere and the Climate Problem), collection of articles edited by G. S.

Golitsyn, corresponding member USSR Academy of Sciences, and A. H. Yaglom,
professor, Moscow, Nauka, 1980, No 7, pp 119-120.

Nikolayev, A. C. ATHOSPERA ZEHLI S 'SALYUTA-6' (Earth's Atmosphere From the 'Sal-
yut-6'), by A. I. Lazarev, V. V. Kovalenok, A. S. Ivanchenkov and S. V. Avskyan,
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1981, No 11, pp 114-115.

Sirotenko, 0. D. AGROPIZICHESKIYE, AGROHETBOROLOGICHESKIYE I AGROTBKHNICHESKIYB
osm Pnocnmnaovmru UROZHAYA (Asrophyucal, Agrometeorological and Agro-

engineering Principles of Yield Programming), by I. S. Shatslov and A. P. Chad-
novskiy, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1980, No 10, pp 120-121.

Tolatikhin. N. I. and Tolstikhin, 0. N. KAIALOG NALEDEY ZONY BAH. VYPUSK I. NALBDI
VERKHNEY CHASTI BASSEYNA R. CHAR! (Catalogue of Ice Encrustations in the-Zone
of the Baykal-Amur Railroad Line. Issue I. Ice Bncrustations of Upper Part of
Chara River Basin), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1980, No 8, pp 118-119.

Purman, H. Sh. POLEVYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA NALEDEY (Field Investigations of Ice En-
crustations), by V. R. Alekseyev and B. L. Sokolov, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1980, No 3, pp 126-125.

Kharchenko, S. I. and Tsytsenko, K. V. ANTRDPOGENNYYE IZMENENIYA VODNOSTI REX
(Anthropogenic Changes in Liquid Water Content of Rivers), by I. A. Shiklomanov,
Leningrad, Cidrometeoizdat, 1979, 300 pages, No 2, pp 125-126.

Letters to Editors

Gidrometeoizdat. "Letter to Editor," No 9, p 128.

Personalities

"c. A. Alekseyev (70th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 4, p 12‘.
"V. A. Belinskiy (75th Anniversary of His Birth), No 1, p 124.

"N. L. Byzova (60th Anniversary of Her Birth)," No 6, p 123.
"S. S. Cnygerov (70th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 10, pp 123-124.
"I. A. Gol'tsberg (75th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 7, p 121.

"C. V. Gruzs (50th Anniversary of Her Birth)," No 8, p 120.

"I. G. Guterman (70th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 2, pp 127—128; "I. C. Outer-
man (1911-1951)," No 5, pp 127-128.

72

IIIICIHHCIA1.LEIECHWLY
FOI(ﬂﬂWCDULlEEUONLY

"F. P. Davitaya (1911-1979)," No 11, pp 127-128.

"P. K. Yevseyev (1911-1966)," No 9, pp 127-128.

"Ye. S. Korotkevich: Auard of Title of Hero of Socialist Labor," No S, p 121.
"n. s. Kulik (1907-1980)," No 3, p 128.

“N. G. Leonov (60th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 10, pp 126-125.

"P. S. Lineykin (1910-1981)," No 8, pp 126-127.

"A. S. Honin (60th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 10, pp 122-123.

"T. V. Pokrovskaya (1900-1981)," No 10, p 128.

"B. G. Rozhdestvenskiy (70th Anniversary.of His Birth)," No 11, p 116.

"Ye. S. Rubinshteyn (90th Anniversary of His Birth)." No 1, p 123; ”Ye. S. Rubin-
shteyn (1891-1981)." No 11, pp 126-127.

"C. G. Svanidze (60th Anniversary of His Birth)," No 9, pp 119-120.

"Ye. S. Selezneva (75th Anniversary of Bis Birth),".No S, p 121.

"List of workers of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Hon-
itoring Granted Awards for Active Participation in the Organization and Imple-
mentation of Soviet Antarctic Expeditions and Major Scientific Contributions
to Study of Antarctica," No 7, pp 121-124.

"List of Hbrkers of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology Granted Awards for In-
plementing the Tasks of the Tenth Five-Year Plan and Successes Attained in the
Hydrometeorological Support of the National Economy," No 9, pp 121—126.

"A. Yo. Cherunkov (60th Anniversary of His Birth)," “0 9, pp 120-121.

"C. I. Shauov (1891-1956)," No 8, pp 127-128.

"N. S. Shishkin (1912-1981)," No 7, p 128.

"Yu. H. Shokal'skiy (1856-1940)," No 12, pp 120-121.

COPYRIGHT: "Heteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1981

5303
050: 1864/6 — END -

73
FOI:0FIICIAI.lEI!(ﬂULY