FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10471

21 April 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 25/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information use
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in-context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of 4?
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN RSQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 25/82)

CONTENTS

”IONIC

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Future Union Leadership Changes Viewed
(Barbara Schardt; CAPITAL, Mar 82)......................... 1

FRANCE

Stress on Domestic Market Sean To Worry Trading Partners
(VALDJRS AcrUBLLw, arch 82)....000000000000000OOOOOIOOOOOIO 1.

Foreign Trade Balance .by Alain Margaron
Methods To Regain Marketgby Jacques Ferry

NEHSRLANLG

Confidential Government Plan To Cut Spending
(VRIJ NEDmm’ 13m82)....00000000000IOIOODOOIOOCCOOOOOO 9

POLITICAL
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Landtag Elections Seen As Crucial For PD? in 198?.
(mtin Bemtort; CAPITAL,m82):.0000eeeeeeoeeoeeeeeee .0. 12

FRANCE

Giscard on Poland, Franco-German Ties. Defense, Gas
(Valery Giscard d'htaing Interview; PARIS MM. 19 Feb 82).. 15

Rocard on P3P Policies: Franco-German Relations
(Michel Rocard Interview; CAPI'ML. Mar 82)................... 23

- a - [III - WE - 150 P0001

FOR OFFICIAL USP 0N! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

635m

PRAISE

Thomson-CS? Reorganizee Space Activities, Plane New Facilities
(“Rmmm’ 6m82).00....OOCOOO'OOOOOOOOOOOOOIUO0...... 26

Briefs
some Renamed, Reorganized 30

Senior SDECB Officers Fired 30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

FUTURE UNION LEADERSHIP CHANGES VIEWED
Hawurg CAPITAL in German Mar 82 pp 93-96
[Article by Barbara Schardt: "Pour-Year Plan"]

[Text] German trade unions owe their international
reputation to the continuity of their leadership. Now
the German Trade Union Federation faces decisive leader-
ship changes through the middle of the 1980's.

When the delegates of the German Trade Union Federation congratulate their
newly elected executive council in Berlin this May. a new epoch will be
starting for the powerful labor organization. They will not only have a new
chairman. executive board member Alois Pfeiffer of the Horticulture. Agri-
culture and Forestry Union. but also five new council neubers in the
nine-member body.

More than that: after Pfeiffer'a four-year tenure he will have to retire

and the entire 063 will no longer be the sane. Because by that tine it will
not only be just the council which will have a new Ian at its head but the

real movers and makers. the heads of the individual trade unions. will all
have different nanes. This will be particularly the case within the industrial
unions, whose Metal workers Union ranks as the world's largest single labor
organization, where leadership will change within Pfeiffer'a tine in office.
Approximately half of all 063 organized masters. 3,816,294 members in three
unions, will be electing new heads.

The long-tenured council neabers will be headed for retirement one after
another:

--th is fall Rudolf Sperner. chairman of the Construction. marrying and
Construction Material Workers Union (533,054 eaters. 6.8 percent of the
063 total) will retire after 16 years in office.

"Eugen Loderur. head of the Hetalworkers Union (2.622.267 teeters. 33.3
percent of the 003) can look back on 11 years in office when he retires in
the fall of 1983.

Last Novenbcr the chairman of the Cbeniatry. Paper and Ceranics Workers
Union (560,973 members. 8.1. percent of the 06!). Karl Bauenachild. began

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his last year in office. His tenure will end in Septeﬁer 1984. When the
successors of these three men are appointed. the executive council of the
German Trade Union Federation, consisting of nine mesbers of the national
executive connittee and the chairman of the 17 individual trade unions. will
be made up of two-thirds newcomers who will have been five years or less in
office.

"Par-reaching change" was the term applied by the Institute for the German
Economy in its publication GEHERKSCHAFTSREPORT to the iapending change in
view of the undeniable stature of the retirees. Whether this will actually
be the case is questionable. The trade unions have traditionally been very
careful in the selection of their leadership; changes taking place among the
rank and file do not reach top echelons that quickly. For that reason there
is little fear that radical class warriors will be raking any long march
through the institutions after the new appointments to the D03 executive
council or for the three individual trade unions. 0n the contrarj, in the
case of both the Metal Workers and the Chemical Workers. clear-headed
successors are even now in sight.

That Franz Steinkuehler's name would be brought up in the leadership debate
within the Metal Workers Union is now part of the drill. The Stuttgart
regional leader is little inclined to make any statements about his prospects.
however. "He keeps his mouth shut and sniles when he's asked about them."
his press secretary remarked laconically. This breezy provincial also denies
any coolness between him and his chairman Loderer. what is a fact: the
Metal workers Union chief has only recently given the dynamic southerner

the brushwff. Loderer does not see his successor in Steinkuehler but in
Bans Hayr as an interim solution in the national executive council. Hayr

now heads the union's planning. personnel and press sections.

The prophets regard it as a sure thing that the congress in October 1983
will give Hayr its votes. Yet that would put Steinkuehler out of the running

only temporarily; Hayr. born in 1921. can only hold the office for one
legislative period or three years.

Chemical Workers Union leader llauenschild. like Loderer. also seems to be
putting his estate in order. Hardly half a year afterHauenschild‘s reelection,
it is still a sure thing into whose hands he would like to deliver his office--
the favorite is Hermann Rappe. At the moment Rappe. who is also a member of
the SPD fraction in the Bundestag and chairman of the committee on labor and
social security. functions as deputy chairman. responsible for the departments
of education. vocational education. research and youth. His election (in
September 1986) would assure a longer-term solution because Rappe. then 55
years old. would be able to hold the reins through at least two terms.

Rudolf Sperner of the Construction workers Union is in no less a hurry to
nominate his successor than are his colleagues. Although the election is
scheduled for this fall, he has not yet set the candidate carousel spinning.
Guessers give the edge to his deputy Juergen Joana.

Faced with this recasting. it will be the job of the Printing and Paper
Workers Union, the Mining and Energy Workers Union and the Public Service and

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Transport Workers Union to maintain continuity in the DOB. Although elections
among these unions are scheduled by 1986. no changes are expected. Adolf
Schmidt can look forward to another four years from 1984 on to the leadership
of the union with the highest success rate in organizing workers in its
sector. the Mining and Energy Workers Union. Public Service and Transport
workers chief Heinz Klunker will run again if his health permits. In the
small but militant printers union. which will elect a new executive in 1983,
Leonhard Hahlein will probably remain for another term.

While the printers executive council member, Datlef Henache. is said to

have snbitions for the position of council chairman. it is thought doubtful
that this left-wing figure will run again in 1986. The reason is that ﬂensche
is a university graduate and lawyer, and academicians have scant prospects
among the class—conscious printers. Such types. they say, lack the savvy

that comes with experience of the trade.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 6 Co.

9878
CSO: 3103/356

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCONGIIC MOB

STRESS on 1101183111: MARKET 3m to wont mm PAWS
Foreign Trede Belence
Paris VALEUIS inn-um.” in French 8 Peh 82 p 58

[Article by Alein Hergeron under the bending ”fiznnciel Highlights" end the
euhheeding “Trade“: "The cum: Flow of the Deficit: The Overveluetion of
the Prenc Still Heighe on Our Foreign 'rrede end On: Coupetitiveneee"]

[Text] In epite of the good reporte of eeverel benk bulletin. regerding
French foreign trede reunite, Michel Jobert in many: "The externel
deficit will reech et leeet 75 billion frence theee not 2 yeere. And if
we succeed in holding to that figure we will be lucky. He ere going to
have to be very cereful if we ere to etey cleer of the lOO-billion-frenc
lurk."

Overall, the 1981 reeulte ere feirly eetiefectory. the enormue trede
deficit hence hee bed for 2 yeere (60 billion) hee~etebilieed in current
frence, in epite of the doller'e riee, which increeeee our oil bill, end
in epite of the eoonoeic etegnetion which exec erbetee coepetition.

however, the ninieter of foreign trede notee: "This inporv-ent met not
obe‘cure eoee worrieoee eigne: the eegging trend over the couree of the
yeer, end the increeee in the deficit with induetriel netione."

He is being politicelly honeet, recognizing that it ie the excellent reeulte
registered froe hbruery to June 1981 which nede it poeeible to cone out
eetiefectorily et yeer'e end.

The new govern-ent'e recovery plen hee led to e greet increeee in inporte:
up 3 percent in volue in Nov-bet end then egein in Decuber. For obvioue
reeeone of price, coneu-ere heve given preference to Jepeneee, Ger-en, end
Dutch producte. hr houeehold durable goode, the inport level went in 1
year froe so percent to 56 percent of the doneetic eerltet. Selee of Ger-en

cere heve greetly increeeed. while our eutoeobile exporte to Geruny went
down by neerly half for the firet 9 ’nthe of the peet yeer.

All the figuree for foreign trade in 1981 ehow thet eachenge rete develop-
lento ere pleying e deciding role. the frenc hee etrcngly deprecieted vereue
the doller but it hee re-eined et too high e rete verm the Deutech-erk.
the guilder, end the yen.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

French industry has been gaining narket shares in the dollar area. Our
traditional deficit with the was States has been slightly reduced. to
23 billion francs. we have nsnaged to sign sizable equip-ant contracts in
"Fourth world" countries without oil (32 billion francs) and in OPEC
countries (36 billion francs), but very few in industrial countries (15
billion).

Our overall deficit with the BBC has quintrupled in 2 years. With Germany
it has gone free 11 billion francs in 1979 to 23 billion francs in 1981,
and with the Netherlands from 5.2 to 13.6 billion.

The shell October devaluation within the EMS has not been sufficient to
prevent the deterioration of external accounts.

In spite of the soaring dollar, which for purely financial reasons weighs
aore heavily on the Deutschamark than it does on the French franc, it is
still possible for us to permit our currency to find its proper rate within
the EMS by lowering our interest rates. But the size of our overseas
borrowing needs-needs that are proportional to the trade and budgetary
deficits-will soon not allow that anymore.

In its latest econoaic study on France, the OBCD seems to take for granted
a new slide in our currency. It is in disagreement on this point with

Mr Jobert, who attributes the decline in our exports "to a deterioration
in nonaonetsry factors of conpetitiveness: the kind of goods sold, the
quality of after-sales service, the establishment of trade networks."

The minister's progran flows fron that observation: support exports, a
reorganization of certain branches of industry, and control of imports.

However, it is difficult to support French exports sore than they have been
supported the past few years. Export credits, still partially unsupported,
are less costly than domestic credits along with having adverse effects:

neglect of the domestic narket, and too much stress on Third Horld Iarkets.

Banks-the ones established outside our borders, broadly speaking-give an
exaggerated amount of credit to make it possible for their industrial
custoaers to land contracts in those countries. An exanple is project
development for construction and public works where we are registering a
very great surplus. The banks finance not only the amounts which will be
paid to French companies under the heading of fees but rise the onsite
construction work.

A deputy directorate of para (Foreign Econoaic Relations Directorate) will
be tasked with conbatting duaping, aids and subsidies, and business
diversion. Exports of textiles and chemical products free the East via

the two Geraanys are particularly targeted. It is to be feared that this
homeopathic nedicine may not be on the appropriate scale of the illness
to be treated.

5
FOR OFTWCJKI.USE!DNLY
FOIIOFFKJAL.USE|DNLY

According to the OECD, "the (French) government will be strongly tempted
to take protectionist measures, because its demand recovery program is
probably going to casue it disappointments."

The repeated declarations in favor of a donestic market reconquest are
starting to frighten many of our trading partners, sometimes justly so.
The government has already intervened to limit leather imports because
that industry is labor-intensive.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs Actualles"
Methods To Regain Market
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 8 Feb 82 p 61

[Article by Jacques Ferry under the heading "Financial Highlights“ and
the subheading “Commentaries": “Regaining the Domestic Market: An
Ambiguous~Fbrmuls"]

[Text] Regaining the domestic narket had already figures prominently among
the objectives of the previous governments. Lately it is being talked about
again : the Interim Plan and the work of the national symposium on research
have expanded on it at great length. But the formula is ambiguous.

In actuality, there are two processes for promoting this same bojective. One
originates from concerns which are eco n omic right from the start: bringing
the trade balance back into equilibriu. The other is inspired by more
generally political concerns regarding national independence. Even though
these sets of concerns eventually come together, they imply choices of trade
policy end industrial policy which of course are not identical and depend

on whether those choices derive their inspiration from socialist conceptions
or liberal conceptions.

To tell the truth, the difference is less clear-cut than it seems, apart
from the fact that (and this reservation is a considerable one) in order

to bring down the trade deficit, the present government seens more inclined
than the previOus ones to give in to protectionist temptations. Its
analysis of the situation is less of an overall analysis and is more
limited, less conscious of the basic trends which affect the international
divi ion of labor. Hence its less selective and more sutarhic industrial
policy, placing the hmmadiate imperatives of employment before those of
competition, and also its trade policy, oriented less toward general trade
expansion, which in itself induses growth, than toward a number of sectoral
objectives. And it is not certain that all of these latter objectives

are attainable at an acceptable cost.

The previous governments- favored advanced technology industries. This one
claims to be restructuring the whole of French industry by organizing each
sector on the basis of complete pathways, integrating all stages of produc-
tion and processing, and even distribution, right up to the final consumer.
This is a normative view of the economy which, regardless of the inflex-
ibilities of and increase in the constraints of state control which it
assumes, would in extreme circumstances be suitable to a defined area

infinitely vaster than that of our nation. But that defined area does not
exist; industrial Europe has yet to be born.
6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That does not nean that one must resign oneself to seeing the doaeatic market
disappear and therefore resign oneself to seeing a certain nuaber of the
more particularly threatened industries just plain disappear. But before
one thinks about implementing specific neans, the competitive capability

of the industrial system in general must be restored. Fewer burdens,

fewer administrative constraints, and less government intervention in the
nanagenent of firms, but more effective aid to research—these constitute

so nany prerequisites for that restoration.

Selec t ion Criteria

Assming that these requirasents are satisfied, one still has to specify
the sectors where special aid is required. Authoritative selection
criteria are not provided by the idea of national independence, any nore
than they are by the idea of bringing the trade balance back into
equilibriu. Independence is not judged only by considering levels of
foreign penetration in this or that sector on the domestic market. In
the content of time, independence is relative. if only because of rapid
and often unforeseeable technological ~banges; in space it is relative
because of constantly changing geopolitical situations. In this regard.
the example of oil is remarkably illustrative.

In the trade area, so is the example of the Airbus 320, which will be
equipped with an American engine. without a doubt this is not for rusons
of that engine's technological superiority over a French or Franco-British
engine, but sinply because that choice is imperative at this tine if we
want to guarantee the airplane's conercial success in the 0.8. narket.
What is the best industrial pathway in this specific case? The most
desirable one in theory, which is completely donestic? Or the pathway
which provides the marina net profit for the trade balance?

One could give many examples. In today's globalised economy there is no
genuinely autonomous industrial policy. The expansion of international
trade is a given elusent of that. The effort to achieve equilibrium, which
must be extended to the dimensions of the balance of pay-ants on current
account, cannot be made by adding up sectoral balances or by forning large
integrated public sector nonopolies. Trade policy is a strategy made up

of reciprocity, deterrence, and cooperation.

The: is the reason so-called doneatic narkat reconquest actions mat be
carried out with a great deal of caution. If they are linked too directly
to the solution of employment or regional probl-s, they run the risk in
the final analysis of backfiring on their promoters. Ths is either because
they contravene the am agreeaenta or European tic-unity undertakings,
thereby causing retaliatory measures of greater scope, or because step by
step they tend to become standard practice in the fern of unproductive
protectionisn, which drags in its wake a gradual establish-ant of state
control over the economy.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

It 1a true that not. all our perm-re honor the free trade code. It io

true that certain French inductriea that ore suffering sore aerioualy
than other. fro- the diatortiona of competition need short-lived aaaiatance.
But it to even more true that it in the whole body of French induatry which

needs nobility and room. mm: econoniea cannot be cut up into slices.

Let us be careful. while allowing for enceptiona, not to reason out an
issue in tone of protection which ahould bo analyzed in tma of

conpetit iveneu .

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeura Actuallea"

9631
cso: 3100/378

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC NETHERLANDS

CONFIDENTIAL GOVERNMENT PLAN TO CUT SPENDING

Amsterdam VRIJ NEDERIAND in Dutch 13 Mar 82 p 2

[Text] One of Van Agt's ninisters said last week: "Some of my colleagues will have

a hard time if the cabinet should fall. Then everyone who has been calling
constantly for more alterations will Mve to tell where they can be found.
And they cannot do that."

That conclusion can also be drawn from a—highly confidential—report that

a work group composed of civil servants placed before the cabinet's pentagon,
the five ministers who were trying to set up the Spring Note this week (Van
Agt, Van Der Stee, Den Uyl, Terlouw and Van Thijn). The name of the report
is prosaic: "Report of the work Group to Inventory Savings," but the con-
tents are no less explosive for that reason. The mission of the "ID [Work-
group to Inventory Savings], not to be confused with other frivolous Hague
accronyms like NIP [Society for Industrial Projects] and VIP [Progress Com-
mittee for Industrial Policy], was to find 2 to 3 billion guilders savings
which can still be carried out this year in the areas of social security and
support, public health, and in the civil servants' salaries. If, besides
that, l to 2 billion can be gathered in the other departments, you come
nicely into the neighborhood of the (0.5 billion Van Agt and Van Der Stee
want. what makes the "ID Report so explosive: those 2 to 3 billion can be
found. but only by completely destroying the coalition agreement.

The civil servants-~from the hinistries of General Affairs, Domestic Affairs,
Economic Affairs, Social Affairs and hployment, Public Health and particu-
larly many from Finance-did not try to hide that for a moment: "In carrying
Out the measures inventoried, to the amount specified, it will not be pos-
sible to hold the negative effects on the income of the groups involved
(benefit entitlees, civil servants, trend followers) to the limits set forth
in the coalition agreement: 1 to 4. (That means that those receiving the
minimum income would lose 1 percent of their buying power. while these re-
ceiving higher incomes would lose up to lo percent-«he editors.) The nega-
tive effects can go appreciably beyond that."

Such warnings were repeated on page after page. This much saving can be done
in one year, but not without uncoupling the benefits from wages, not without

reducing the minimum wage relative to higher wages, not without interrupting
the trend policy for civil servants [the Dutch equivalent of COLA, where

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

civil servants' salaries are adjusted according to a trend establist by
business salaries), and not without higher unemployment. Even if you are
willing to put up with the disadvantages in the interest of a good thing-
the recovery of business profits—the difficulties are still great, for, so
say the civil servants, "the total of the procedures to be carried out makes
the realization of a possible policy package in s time frame such that sig-
nificant effects can be felt in 1982 extremely difficult." the R13 mentions
a number of practical impediments: laws are needed, executive regulations,
rccomendations from the SBR [Social and Economic Council], race-endations
from the Health Insurance Fund Comcil, and many more recosnendstions.

The study group has a solution for that, even though it is a rather unusable
one: "In general, not employing the advisory groups is only possible by in-
voking very special circumstances. The term, 'the national interest' is
used in this respect in Article 42, section 3 of the Business Organization
Act." This can be done, naturally, but it is becoming rather a habit for
the supporters of what used to be known as a parliamentary democracy.

Undismayed by that, the work group raises radical measure after radical
measure. But it is striking in the report that many of the rather obvious
savings are not even mentioned, such as attacking the salaries of medical
specialists. On this topic, there is only the cool mention that "negotiations
with professional groups have begun." 0n the other hand, very many words are
devoted to "reduction of the number of hospital beds" ("8,000 beds as a re-
sult of partial or total closing of hospitals"), a payment by the patient

of 10 guilders for each referral to a medical specialist and an actual con-
struction halt for hospitals. This is troublesome for Hoop Den Uyl [PvdA
leader and minister of social affairs and employment], for, as the work group
drily notes: "The big savings which are called for from this sector can only
be realized with extensive direct negative results on the employment develop-
ment earlier undertaken in this sector." So much for promoting public health.

Apart from the civil aervanta' salaries, the biggest figures are to be found
in the category of "social security and support." Savings can be made there

by reducing the highest "A0 [Law on Labor Disability], W [Unemployment Law]
and WV [Law on Unemployment Provisions] benefits (savings: 560 million
guilders in 1983!), by abolishing the tax and premium deduction for old age
and disability (65 million this year alone!) Other small but still profit-
able alterations can be made: take away the support payment for independently
living 16- and 17-year olds (living with your parents can be nice, too!) and
you have 25 million.

Naturally, AW benefit recipients can keep the survivors' benefits after the
death of their spouses, but shorten the period of mourning a little and you
have another 50 million next year. And the work group naturally wrote with
a great deal of respect concerning for-er members of the resistance and those

who were formerly persecuted ("These measures occupy a special place, based
on the special duty of solidarity with respect to this target group"), but
they are still good for 36 million guilders.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'l'lw "In report becomes curious when the big milch cow of the WM [Labor
Party] which is also the sacred cow of the m [Christian Duocratic Appeal],
the children's allotment, is mentioned. The PvdA suggestion to make the
children's allotment dependent on earned income is called wonderful, but it
is simultaneously rejected for this year: "From a technical point of view,
it cannot be realized before 1984." and "is very complicated." Thus the work
group has recourse to such measures as lowering the children's allotmmt by
10 percent across the board as of 1 July 1982 (350 million) or of freezing
the children's allotment at its present level through 1 July 1986 (100
million).

It is bothersome thet--unlike the PvdA‘s plan to make the children's allot-
nent dependent on income--the across the board lowering of the level has a
precisely deleveling effect on incomes. Those receiving the lowest incomes
lose the most. Or, as the workgroup put it in its own jargon: "Lowering the
children's allotment or freezing it as its present level over the whole line
has an increasing effect on the buying power as that buying power is less and
the number of children is greater. A general lowering of the children's
allotment by 10 percent structurally decreases the disposable income of, for
instance, a minimum wage earner with two children by 1.6 percent." Gone,
then, is the promise in the coalition agreemmt that those on minimum incomes
would not lose more than 1 percent.

Thus, the official report contains a number of variations. He will just
mention one more, because this suggestion has served CDA politicians Lubbers
and De Grsaph so richly as a source of inspiration: "a general reduction of
the application of the indexes for the mini-Ina wage and the social security
henef its and to the salaries in the collective sector as of 1 July 1982"
(yield: 500 million quilders). According to Lubbers and De Graaf, this
would be a harmless one-time measure. The "13 report with which Van Agt
and his ministers are now wrestling bluntly states what it comes down to:
"It is evident that this possible measure in itself conflicts with the pro-
mises in the coalition agreement with respect to the trend-following policy
regarding the aployees in the collective sector and regarding the coupling
of the social security benefits."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 WIN Heekbladpers

6940
CSO: 3105/1310

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

IANDTAG ELECTIONS SEEN AS CRUCIAL FOR FDP Ill 1982
Hamburg CAPITAL in German Mar 82 pp 102-103

[Article by Martin Bernstorf: "Fourth Party"]

[Text] Guenther Verheugen, secretary-general of the FD? and irrepressible
faith healer of the Bonn coalition. waxed mataphoric when he recently
reaffirmed the liberalsunflaggingloyalty to the coalition, "when I look around
at all the belles at the ball. I don't feel any urge to dance with a new

partner."

In talking about the belles at the ball he meant. of course. the CDU/CSU--
Verheugen's party is not left with all that many choices in case his urge

should become a matter of necessity. It could come to pass-not in Bonn. but
at the Land 1evel--that the liberals will not be able to pick Their own
partner for a cabinet because the possibilities for an alternative would be
reduced to one: either with the C00 or not at all. In at least three
Landtag elections it can happen that they will have to put the matter to the

acid test.

As a matter of fact the PDP is already sitting on the opposition benches in a
number of Land legislatures--as in Rhineland-Palstinate-althongh they could
have been admitted to the cabinet. In this case they feel bound to the
principle that they would rather allow a party having an absolute majority.
as the CDU does at Heinz. to govern by itself rather then see their own ideas
effected into law by their offer of cabinet participation. But any satisfac-
tion to be found in such virtuous abstinence nay soon fade away.

Berlin excluded. the liberals are now represented in seven Land legislatures.
Yet they are only represented in the Land cabinets in two Laender: in Hesse,

where the sole surviving "Bonn model" of an SPD/FDP coalition still governs at
the Land level and in the Saarland. If the liberals do not manage at the

Land elections in Lower Saxony on 21 March and in Hamburg on 6 June to return
to these Land parliaments, and if they should fail to attain the 5-percent
mark in Hesse or do not constitute a majority with the SPD, then the FD? would
be left to participate in the government of only one Land, namely the Saarland
and there in company with the CDU. How much tine is left for the coalition

in Bonn?

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"hut f or decades had been a skillfully led third force has now become little
more than a fourth party. A party which would no longer matter-if it were
not 1' or the circumstance so important for the FDP--that neither of the two
major parties wants to form a coalition with its alternative fraction. Thus
the Berlin FD? fraction. with the sanction of the party headquarters in Bonn
but against the will of the local party organization. was able to at least
tolerate a 000 minority govern-ant.

Much the same thing could also happen in Hamburg. though there are serious
doubts as to whether the FD? will be able to gain readaittance to the
Buergsrschaft, the Hanseatic city-state legislature. If they do. than the
next question is whether the SP1) and the FDP can create a majority capable of
taking office. Judging from recent opinion polls. it is likely that the CD!)
and the Greens together will have more seats than the social-liberals. The
CDU will have no part of the Greens and vice versa. Then the only possibility
of creating a governing majority would be the combination CDU/FDP.

The liberals return to Parlianent is thought to be more likely in Lower
Saxony than in hamburg. At the same time opinion polls give the CW goods
odds on attaining an absolute majority. If they fail to do so. then the SPD.
the Greens and possibly the PDP would have more seats than would the Union,
though such a three-way coalition does not seem to he in the cards. Since
the SPD and the FD? by themselves would probably have no chance to form a
governing majority, the PD? is left. in the event that they return to the
Landtag. with the Berlin alternative: alliance with the 6011 or toleration
or a C00 minority cabinet.

It will be in Septeﬁer that the FD? will really feel the heat in Hesse.
According to polls, the CDU would still comand less than 50 percent of all
votes it the election were to be held in Hesse today. That could mean, after
all the votes were counted. more than 50 percent of the seats. The SP1) and
the FOP together would be able to count on some 45 percent of the votes. the
Greens somewhat more than 5 percent. Assuming that the CW narrowly fails
to gain an absolute majority, the FD? will return to the Landtag but cannot
constitute a government with the 8?!) alone: then they will once again and
for the last time face the question: how do you feel about the CDU‘!

"A fateful year for politics" is what the FRANKFURT!!! ALLGEMEINE sees coming;
the lesson to be drawn will be: the old alliance is finished. It no longer
shows signs of life even in North Rhine-Westphalia where it all began and
where the FD? had to leave the Landtag after the last elections.

The consequence does not necessarily have to be the inediate collapse of
the Bonn coalition. The malaise can drag on as a result of the Union parties

then comprising a two-thirds njority in the Federal upper house. This can
lead. it the Christian Democrats want it that way—though the Union heads of

the Land governments are certainly not going to press for this to happen
automatically--to every piece of legislation being blocked.

The reason for all this Free Democratic distress is not so much the lack of
COI'IIOI'I ground with the SPD. Even without this. Schmidt and Genscher would

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

still be able to govern and if that didn't work, they would at least be able
to continue administering. Con-on grounds could be rediscovered as they were
needed. The "turning." however. that Minister of Economics Lanbsdorff and his
party chairman Genscher were talking about so ominously lest fall. can. in
reality. only bring about a change in power relationships. The party heads
draw their power from the voters. "hen the votes are not there. then even a
Genscher will have to do some strategic rethinking. where until now he has
been able to manage with fairly superficial tactics. And all the established

parties are now beginning to lose votes: the Greens have been nibbling away
at all of then.

What Franz Josef Strauss had been trying in vain to do for years on the

right is now suddenly a fact on the left: a new party. The chances are that
it will fade away after a few years. but for the moment politicians will have
to live with the fact that the old three~wsy functionalisn no longer work
There is not one COU leader any note who would call the FD? a "block party."
It no longer is such and, in fact. is in danger of becoeing a negligible
quantity-—something to be forgotten about whenever possible.

Rudolf Augstein, for a short tine an PDP member of the Bundestsg. assured
his readers in his weekly DER SPIEGEL that the party could survive a

resignation by the minister of economics. Count Lanbsdorff, who had been
implicated in party donation scandals. but not an election fiasco in Hamburg.
Lower Saxony and Hesse. Party leadership in Bonn. still dazzled by the
results of the last Bundestsg elections (10.6 percent) see things differently:
the tide could start to turn in the other direction as early as the elections
next year in Schleswig-Holstein.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AS a Co.

9878
cso: 3103/355

1h

FORIOFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY

POLITICAL FRANCE

GISCARD 0N POLAND, FRANCO-Gm TIES. DEFENSE. GAS
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 19 Feb 82 pp 38-51

[Btclusive interview with former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing: "The
Historic Decline of muope Hust be Stopped"; date and place not specified]

[Text] PARIS HATCH: Mister President. you haw always repeated that amps
should unite to prevent others from dictating the fate of our continent.
Hasn't Europe. in the context of Poland. proven that it is far from being able
to define its own policy?

Valery Giscard d'Estaing: Alas. yes. We are now faced with the question of
whether we will be able to put a stop to the historic decline of Europe. Over
the last 100 years. the weight of Europe in the fate of the world has not
ceased to go down. no large stages of this decline were the two world wars.
which in reality were civil was in Europe. After the second world war. it
was two big powers. the United States and the Soviet (hion. which. in a face
to face meeting at Yalta. decided the fate of amps. in spite of the presence
of a Bin-opean. Hinston Churchill. I profoundly believe that the historic de-
cline of Europe can be stopped. This will require close cooperation and a
Franco-Gem will. They are not enough. I on thinking here of our other
partners: Italy. Great Britain. the Benelux countries. and the other meabers
of the am. But this Franc-Germ cooperation is a geographic. economic and
political prerequisite. Cooperation proves itself in action: this is why
Chancellor Schlidt and myself have strengthened the understanding through the
development of the Airbus. the starting of the European monetary systen. of
which we were promoters together and which has hitherto resisted all the chance
mishaps predicted by the oracles of disaster at its birth. and the construction
of a Franco-Gown tank and of a direct television satellite. And if I had
been reelected. I planned to examine with Helnut Schmidt the possibility of
developing con-on ideas on the problens of the security of our two countries
and of Europe.

As far as the United States is concerned. there is a contradiction in criti-
cizing successively a week Aaerica and a strong Anerica. I publicly rejoiced.
following President Reagan's election. over the fact that the United States
intended to become once again a strong nation. assuming its international res-
ponsibilities. While it is legitimate to denand a consultation prior to any
decision in order not to sub-it to constraint. it is regrettable that the poli-
tical recovery of the United States has coincided with a hesitant and wavering
attitude on the part of Europe.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.Quaestionj There is henceforth a common Franco-Goran position on natural. gas.
oven though in a different sense than the one you had anticipated during your
? year term. The hench governsent has Just concluded a contract with the
USSR for the supply of natural as. even though the state of seige is still in
force in Poland. while the Conan-Soviet agreenent had already been concluded
prior to the crushing of "Solidarity." would you, as president of the Repuuic.
have signed the natural gas contract with the Soviet Ilnion under the current
circumstances?

[Answer] No. I will give you two reasons for this. First of all, I would
like to note that such a question must be examined carefully. in the light of
all the interests concerned. and that it was thus legitimate for the for-er
government to open such anegotiation with the Soviet Union and. for the new
governnent. to pursue it. But there is a difference between negotiating and
signing! was it necessary to conclude the agreement at the quantity levels
which were set and under the political circumstances of the noment? I don’t
think so. Here is why: in the first place. I believe that it is imprudent to
increase France's energy dependence on any foreign supplier, and thus on the
Soviet Union. we should only accept delivery up to the level at which we would
be caught short in case of a suspension of supply. By 1990. France will import
between 32 and 1&0 billion cubdc neters of gas. At a 15 percent level of these
deliveries. we could interrupt the supply without too much damage to our indus-
try. This constitutes the threshold of our dependence on foreign countries.
You will note that it is located at the level of 5 to 6 billion cubdc meters
for a single supplier. If we go beyond that. we will put ourselves at the
mercy of foreign pressures. And. on the other hand. the circunstances of the
moment leave the signing of the agreement open to criticism. an agreement
which. whatever its economic interest. will ensure significant gains in tech-

nology and in foreign exchange for the Soviet Union. and which is seriously
felt as a rejection of support for Polish public opinion.

[Question] what conclusions will the Soviet Union draw from this?

[Answer] I think that overall this passivity will have a negative effect on
East-Heat relations. because the limit of the mutual actions we accept from
each other will becone more confused. I repeat: our attitude toward the
Soviet Union must be very firm and very clear. This is why it is useful to
maintain an exchange of information. Meetings among leaders. even when criti-
cized. have a main goal. that is to avoid any misunderstanding by clearly de-
fining the limit of actions which are considered acceptable by both sides.
The worst mistake leaders can make is to allow a conflict to develop on the
basis of a misunderstanding or of a warning which was not delivered in time.
On top of this there is a significant circumstance. we all know that the Fe-
deral Republic of Germany is faced with special probless in its East-west re-
lations. which it would be unrealistic to ignore: the division of Ger-any.
the importance given to human relations between the two parts of Gernany, and
the question of transit. we are aware of the vulnerabdlity the special status
of Berlin represents for the PRC. This is why I wanted to go there in the
fall of 1980. The PRO is never safe from Soviet pressure. If only for that
reason. it is unfortunate that France and the PRC had different reactions with
regard to the events in Poland. These differences could one day lead the
Soviet Union to put pressures on the FRG alone. 0n the other hand. when Bonn

16

ton orncm. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Paris adopt a close common position. the Soviets know that their pressures
would not only affect their relations with the PRC. but also their relations
with Fiance. Such are the facts of the problem.

[Question] At the time. you were accused of Lot having shown enough firmness
with regard to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. You were the first airopeah
head of state to meet with Leonid Brezhnev. in My 1980. without achieving a
concrete result. In addition. ﬁance did not. as agreed. boycott the Olympic
games in Moscow.

[Answer] Let us leave aside the presentation. or rather the misrepresentation
of facts for electoral purposes. As I have Just told you. it seemed to me from
our exchange of messages with Leonid Brezhnev on the events in Afghanistan.
that the Soviet Union had miscalculated the profound reactions that would be
triggered by the entry of its forces into that country. and that it tlntuht
that after a period of tension the detente would go back to its natural course.
I decided that it was imperative to warn the Soviet Union about the consequen-
ces of its intervention and about the risks a new action would entail for the
USSR. That was the reason for the meeting: to give a clear warning. Eyery-
one will be able to Judge the clarity of this warning when I make public --

as I have already announced and after a period of time which respects the
rules of relations between heads of state -- the account of the Harsaw talks.

I purposely chose Harsaw. I did-.not go to Moscow as did -- without this being
a. criticism on my part -- Helmut Schmidt 1 month later. As for the sanctions
proposed as a result of the action in Afgtmistan. they were suggested by an
uncertain and changeable American adainistration. The grain eabargo has been
lifted since then. without any change in the situation in Afghanistan. As for
the boycott of the Olympic games. it was successively described as useless and
then finally proposed to us. all in the course of the same week.

[Quustion] The Soviets did not invade Poland. and consequently there has not
been a second Afghanistan.

[Am-war] The events in Poland should be judged by trying to understh the
reaction of the Poles themselves.

The majority of the Poles believe that what we call "martial law." and which
they themselves refer to as "the state of war." could not have taken place
without the support of the Soviets. The Polish Communist Party would not have
been able to impose the current repressive measures by itself: it is absolu-
tely in the linority in the country. and it is sufficient to observe the atti-
tude- of the people on television toward the militia. The Poles see the cur
rent established fact as the consequence of a foreign action which violates
basic democratic principles by preventing them from exercising their political
and union freedom. This is why the Hestem countries had to act.

Following the Polish crisis of August 1980. we concerned ourselves with the
events that followed. He took the initiative for secret talks which took place
in London between representatives of the four Western powers (the FRO. Fiance.
Great Britain and the United States). starting in December 1980. Their goal
was to examine the measures to be taken in case of a worsening of the Polish
crisis. Political hypotheses were studied. The whole of the proposed measures

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

involved a situation created by the entry of Soviet forces into Poland. It is
a fact that the event did not take place in this form. but we also considered
actions to be taken in case the worsening of the Polish crisis todtthe form of
an interruption of the process of "democratic renewal" together with repressive
measures. The conclusion was that the measures to be taken would be selected
from a list in function of the seriousness of the events in Poland.

[Question] Uhat kind of sanctions did you consider?

[Answer] Let us leave aside the word sanction. It evokes bad historical me-
mories because of its past ineffectiveness. Let us talk about measures then.
They involved credits to Poland and to the Soviet mien. exports of technology.
and the progress of negotiations on Soviet gas. Let us first consider our at-
titude toward credit financing. We allow credits to Poland and the Soviet
Union for the purchase of equipment and consumer goods at rates which are cur-
rently set at 10.5 to 11 percent. that is to say under conditions which are
more favorable than those we offer our .own enterprises. and at a time when the
French state has just borrowed at 16.20 percent. The usefulness of this could
be understood in a period of active cooperation. but from the moment that ten-
sion occurs. these measures provide a. means for useful warnings. The first.
of course. involved the demand for an actual payment at the normal deadlines
of the Polish debt. as long as the facts of the repressive situation continue
to exist. I specify the facts. because we should not be content with a simple
nominal change. He could also have demanded cash payment for a certain number
of goods. This is a measure which can be implemented and canceled at any time.
which can be adjusted according to the products involved. and which resembles
the cash and carry system the Americans applied to us at the beginning of the
war. Such a measure is all the easier to implement as.at the present time.

no enterprise or bank can agree to grant credits at special rates without the
effective guarantee of the governments. After consultation with their partners.
France and the PRC could have taken the initiative of such a measure. The

other measures to be taken were at the level of technological transfers and
involve. as I said earlier. a. common position on the delivery of Soviet gas.

It goes without saying that these measures do not take into account the humani-
tarian aid sent directly to the Poles. which should be maintained and if pos-
sible increased.

[Question] By increasing pressure on the Eastern countries through the expe-
dient of credits. aren't we running the risk of going against the desired goal?
Aren't we pushing them into the arms of the Soviet Union which is the only one
capable of paying back the debts and which. as a matter of fact. has already
done so in the case of Poland by naturally demanding in return the right to
examine the policy of those countries?

LAnswer] That is a possibility. I would note that in the case of Poland. the
Soviet Union's right to examine is already considerable. Furthermore. the
Eastern countries would not have turned to the Western countries if they could
have gotten the same credits from the Soviet Union. Finally. the USSR itself
is currently experiencing a sizable indebtedness toward foreign countries. It
cannot easily substitute for the Hestern lenders.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

lune-such] Instead of a common action. there were different stataents nade
by Mix-is and Bonn. Why is it that Rance-German coordination seen to be
failing even though both countries are headed by socialist govern-ems?

[Answer] This question should be addressed to the leaders of those two coun-
tries.

Louestion] The fact is that two socialists. President hitth and Chancel-
lor Schmidt. are having a hard tine understanding each other. while relations
between President Giscard d'Estaing. a conservative. and the social .deaocrat
Helnut Schnidt. were easier. Does the fact that the two heads of state conu-
nicated in English have anything to do with this?

[Answer] Those terns don't seem well chosen to as. I an a progessive liberal
and Helnut Schaidt is a liberal socialist. That is a fact. when you consider
the political actions of the German and French govern-ants in recent years. it
is hard to discern philosophicd. differences there.

[Question] Do you still have direct contact with crnncenor Schmidt?

[Answer] Yes. contacts by telephone and by letter. out these are private
contacts.

[Question] France is only an honorary member of NATO. so to speak, as it has
withdrawn its forces from the military alliance in order to prove its national
independence. 0n the other hand. the F36 is a full neaber of NATO. Drawing
the conclusions of its recent past. the PRC has completely integrated its
troops into the Atlantic alliance and is, loreovsr. dependent on the Anericans
for its security. Wouldn't a strengthening of Franco-German cooperation in
the area of defense autonatically mean a distancing of the ma from the United
States?

lAnswer] The problem does not arise this way. You have to analyse lore close-
ly the security of the PRC and of Europe. as well as their dependence on the
United States. The problem of defense is particularly delicate in the case of
the m, when you take into account its geographic location and the fact that
it does not have nuclear arms of its own. The pmblen does not lie in whether
the security relations between the United States of Aaerica and the PRC should
be loosened. but in knowing whether defense should renain a problem handled
bilaterally between the United States and each of the European countries taken
separately, or whether it would be possible to give Mops its own personality
in matters of defense, within a system of alliance with the United States.

[Question] would that noon the end of rum?

[Answer] Absolutely not. Such an evolution would have to take place within
the current alliance. One could conceive the ma'opean states adopting a con-
non position toward the United States in natters of defense. The first stage
of the process of thinking about this would take place between France and the
Fat: and. in case of a positive conclusion, it would be widened to include our
other partners. beginning with those whose participation would be indispensable.
specifically Italy and Great Britain. By coordinating our defense policy. by

19
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

"personalizing" the security of Europe. we would be in a position to formulate
a specifically European orientation toward the United States within mm.

[Question] Is it your assessment then that France. even though it is not a

member of NATO. should allow the Americans to deploy Pershing missiles and
cruise missiles on its territory?

[Answer] No. he concept of the defense of France is based on its independent
nuclear deterrent power. It would lose this characteristic if nuclear missiles
belonging to a foreign power. even an allied one. were to be stationed on its
soil. On the other hand. in order to prove that France stares the concern of
its allies with regard to the necessary balance of medium range nuclear mis-
siles in all-ope. the government decided 2 years ago to provide for the deploy-
sent of a new nuclear component. We hadto choose between mobile missiles and
cruise missiles. As the studies will be completed shortly. it will become pos-
sible to make a final decision in this. regard. On this subject, the position
of France is parallel to that of its allies. but“. will necessarily have to
remain separate from it if we want to preserve the independence of our deter-
rent.

[Question] Allow us to digress for a moment: would you. as president of the
French Republic. have allowed the Germans to obtain a right to examine the
French strike force?

[Answer] Not as a. deterrent force. But the nuclear strike force has two as-
pects: on the one hand. it is a strategic defense weapon which would allow
us to destroy the vital centers of the aggressor as soon as ours are threat-
ened. In such a case. we cannot leave the decision to others. It involves
long range strategic weapons. which would only fly over the FRO. as well as
over other countries as a matter of fact. But the strike force also includes
tactical nuclear arms. the short and sodium range missiles. These are weapons
which. under certain circumstances. could be used from the PRC or even hit its
soil. In the long run. this characteristic cannot be ignored. This is why I
decided that it would be useful to study this problem. It would be premature

to anticipate the conclusions this study wound cone to. It would first have
to be done.

[Question] Using the coordination of our defense policies as a point of de-
parture. do you want to revive the idea of a Btu-open defense conunity?

[Answer] Not in that fora. I don't believe in the possibility of integrated
defense forces. I am thinking of an ”organised cooperation" between our de-
fense systems.

[Question] why not a community?

[Answer] Simply because this would assume that the question of the division
of Germany has been settled. and also because it is contrary to the historic
tradition of our states.

[Question] Even if we didn't succeed in creating a European defense community.
wouldn't such a Franco-Genoa initiative arouse anxiety in the two big powers?

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] It is obvious that the Soviet Union would follow these talks with the
greatest interest. Moreover, they would have to be conducted in such a way as

to avoid increasing international tensions or provoking pressures on such vul-

nerable points as Berlin or inter-German relations.

[Question] Not only the Soviet Union. but also the United States would be
alarmed.

[Answer] Not necessarily. The United States would probably see this as an
evolution of the Atlantic alliance. But I an convinced that a strong and self-
confident American administration would recognize the validity of such a posi-
tion. especially if a close understanding were to exist between the PRC and
l-‘rance. The military and political situation of Western Europe was established
between 1916 and 1950. thus 35 years ago. It is natural for it to be updated.
History cannot be frozen. If we want to pursue an historic goal. if we want

to put an end to the decline of Europe. it will be necessary for arrope to dis-
cover one day the conunity of its culture. of its policy and of its security.
He cannot demand that this awareness correspond exactly to the situation pre-
vailing from 1955 to 1950.

[Question] Don't you think that such considerations favor neutralist trends
in the FRG and in the other European countries?

[Answer] Neutralisn is one of the expressions of the historic decline of
Europe. Neutralism and not pacifisn. Considering the wars which have torn
our continent apart. it is totally legitimate to claia to be peace loving.
what I mean by this is the desire to naintain peace in Europe as long as is at
all possible. 01‘ course. this peace should be compatible with our freedoms
and our basic principles. One should not mistake pacifisn for neutralise.
Neutralisn means a decision made beforehand not to do anything. not to defend
oneself or not to protect oneself, even if a foreign intervention were to
overthrow the foundations of your life and of your culture. It is an unlis-
takablc sign of decline. I think that this attitude is prevailing in certain
circles in amope precisely because people do not feel responsible for their
own security. If up to now neutralism has not yet become widespread in France.
it is because the government policy has given the impression that it has the
responsibilities and the means at its disposal to allow it to ensure its own
security.

[Question] Let us assume that your ideas have already been achieved: do you
think that the reactions toward Poland would have been different?

[Answer] I think so. I an convinced that there could be a common position
for Europe, a clear and active one. on the problem of Mt-llest relations.
With regard to the events in Poland. would an initiative have been possible
before the current stage of repression was initiated? It must be noted that
these events do a disservice to all of us. First of all to the unfortunate
Poles. but also to the countries of Eastern and Western Europe. The Heat has
once again proven that it is not in any position to support a. country whose
develop-ant is true to its own doctrine in terns of political freedom. As for
the Soviet Union, the situation in Poland is in the process of causing it to
assume growing responsibilities with regard to a country which is one of the

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

most populated ones in the Eastern bloc. to support economic and financial
burdens which will weigh heavily on it, and to trigger political repercussions
which will erode international relations.

[Question] What do you think about the statements ads by nunerous strategists
who believe that a war in the Northern hemisphere is at hand?

[Answer] One should refrain from answering such a question lightly. You have
to make a distinction between the desire for war and the risk of war. I don't
believe that at the present time there is any desire for war among the main
leaders of the world. For the Host, this is obvious. For Russia. I don't
think that the Soviet leaders consider a world war to be one of the usable
means to achieve their objectives. As for a preventive war by the Soviet Union
with regard to China. I have personal reasons to believe that such a project
is not being considered. Next to the desire for war. there is unfortunately
the risk of war. I alluded to this for the first time in my address to the
French on 1 January 1980. This risk has objectively increased over the last

2 years. Today, the fear of war. which was nonexistent a few years ago. is
present in the public mind as if they dreaded an inescapable chain of events.
This state of public opinion has often been a premonitory sign. Ihe increase
in the element of risk is due to the fact that actions have been carried out
in Afghanistan and in Poland which were not acceptable to the west. Eatery-

thing happens as if the knowledge of the limits of what is tolerable had be-
come more uncertain and exposed the world to unpredictable reactions. This is
why it is indispensable, as I noted earlier. to lake the limits of actions,
which the Nest considers acceptable. clear and legible. To trace these limits.
declarations do not serve any purpose. Only actions carried out with firmness,
as we did when the problem arose in Africa. allow us to make then known with
certainty.

[Question] Do you think that Europe might be abandoned by the Americans, as
the campaign conducted by that country's media. suggesting the return of the
61's stationed in the PRC. might suggest?

[Answer] No, I don't think so. And besides. the agreement being concluded
between the United States of America and the Federal Republic of Germany points
in the opposite direction. To avoid such an abandonment. you should not be-
lieve that it is in the interest of Europe to show its weakness to the Ameri-
cans, and to beg for their protection. 0n the contrary. it aust prove its will
to assume the main responsibility for its own defense. I am back to the pro-
posal I made earlier.

CQB’YRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse SA

8%3
cso: 3100/409

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pounczu. ' macs

ROCARD 0N PSF POLICIES: FRANCO-GERMAN RELATIONS
Hanburg CAPITAL in German Mar 82 pp 119-120
[Interview with Michel Rocard by Rudolf Hang: "Fraternal Assistance")

[Text] CAPITAL spoke with the French minister of state who

is a member of the circle closest to President Francois
Hitterand and who has a decisive influence upon the socialists
economic program. Rocard is a graduate of one of the so-
called great schools, the Ecole Nationale d'Admdnistration,
also attended by Hitterand's predecessor, Giscard d'Estaing.
He is regarded as a pragmatic socialist.

CAPITAL: hr Minister, you are looked upon as a pragmatist. It has been said
of you that you were an advocate of self-administration on the Yugoslav model
but that you have shifted away from that in the meantime.

Rocard: I am still an advocate of self-administration, but we have to be sure
of what this means. Self-administration is not a closed model but rather a
permanent democratization of decisionmaking processes, whether it be in the
production area or in administration. I would add to that the representation
of workers in plant management, for example in the discussion of welfare and
health problems and finally, their right to have a voice in plant management.
All of this has led us in France to introduce decentralization. We will prob-
ably not go as far as German federalism but the regional administrations are to
become more independent.

CAPITAL: Can you imagine co-determination on the German pattern?

Rocard: ”0. Every people has its history, its traditions. its own experiences
and the result of all this is not always something that can be easily exported.

CAPITAL: That sounds encouraging for industrialists and you have, in fact,
stated that France must become a nation of industrialists. How should we inter-
pret this?

Rocard: It's possible that our German friends are not aware that France only
became an industrialized country fairly late. actually some 70 years after
Ccrmnny really started. He experienced our Industrial Revolution only after

23
INDR OIIICJAL USIZCMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1965. The reason was that French capitalism was always somewhat timid and showed
little instinct for taking risks. As a result, we lived from 1892 until 1956
under the protection of very substantial custom duties. This almost caused the
stifling of French industrial development.

CAPITAL: So you need a free market?
Rocard: Absolutely.

CAPITAL: German exporters hadn't picked up this inression at first. During
the first few months of your government's time in office there were still sig-
nificent barriers to trade though, granted, these no longer exist. Is it not
likely that these will occur again?

Rocard: In a tin of economic crisis everyone distrusts everyone else and
everyone looks to protect hinelf from everyone else. And our American friends,
who are forever singing their litany of economic liberalism, have the worst
business ethics of all.

CAPITAL: All in all, you have been calling upon industrialists to take more
risks and to expand. When do you think your party is going to demand the
nationalization of a successful company?

Rocard: Nationalization is an inportant but limited program. We are finished
carrying it out and that's where things will remain, at least for the remainder
of the current legislatiVe period.

CAPITAL: But there is still the Roussel-Uclaf case. Here Boechst made a
dynamic and profitable company out of a mediocre firm that has now been national-
ized. Do you regard this action as very encouraging?

Rocard: As I said, the list of enterprises to be nationalized is limited. But
the Hoechst/Roussel-Uclaf case is still not yet closed. I am not responsible
for these negotiations but I very much hope that both sides will come to an
agreement. Basically I must say that the French government does not have an
interest in having a nice in the chemical and pharmaceutical areas. There

are social reasons for this, as in the case of the market for medications. But
we can assure you that we want to maintain good cooperation between France and
Germany.

CAPITAL: In which sectors would German firms be best advised to invest in
France?

Rocard: In all of them. Whether or not we will approve a foreign investment
will be examined by us in terms of four criteria: its importance for employment,
for growth, for technology and for the balance of payments.

CAPITAL: Does this mean that the economy has priority over social reforms?

214
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Off-TOM. USE ONLV

Rocard: Of course. Without a recovery in the economy we cannot carry out any
reforms. Besides this we ought to separate the economy and the social sector
in this way. There are always going to be reciprocating effects.

CAPITAL: So in your mind a socialist econony is not possible without economic
growth?

Rocard: Of course not. And the fight against inflation will have far greater
chances of success if we try to limit land and real estate speculation than
through a pettyfogging and bureaucratic price control aysten.

CAPITAL: Still, prices could break free of market conditions if. for example,
the nationalized enterprises were to pursue a "jobs at any price" policy.

Rocard: Jobs will have priority only when other necessities are taken into
account, such as the nutusl dependency between France and Ger-any. we are,
after all. each other'a most important trading partners.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr Ag 8 Co.

9878
C80: 3103/353

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.GBIBRAL FRANCE

THOMSON-USP KEORCANIZES SPACE ACTIVITIES PLANS NEH FACILITIES
Paris AlK ET COSMOS in French 6 Her 82 pp 39-61

[Article by P. L.: "Toulouse Space Capital"!

[Text] Toulouse's fate as a space capital is bees-ins confirled. Hith the
construction of new installations at the CRIS (National Center for Space Studies)
Space Center, and especially with the coepletion of the HAIRA Space Center.
presented to the press on 22 February, as well as with the project for a new
Thonson-CSF Space Center. presented to the local authorities on 23 February.
Toulouse now also houses the space laboratories of ONBRA (National Office for Space
Studies and Research) (Toulouse Study and Research Center). of National Center for
Scientific Research (Center for the Study of Radiation in Space and Autonstion and
Systems Analysis Laboratory), the Group for Developeent of Aerospace Renote Sensing.
the Aussaguel-Issus center for space teleco-lunications. and of course, the
University of Toulouse and the large aerospace schools (National School for
Statistics Applied to Econoaics, and so on).

Tho-son-CSF is Becoaing a General Contractor for Space Systens

Thomson-CSF has begun to completely reorganize its space sector. in favor of
dccentralizing and regrouping its satellite activities in Toulouse. at the new space
center which should be placed in service in the sunset of 1983. This operation is
part or a new strategy aiaed at turning Thomson-08F into the French general
contractor for space systens (satellites and stations), capable of taking charge of
all construction. space and ground. for a satellite teleconlunications progrea.
either for donestic use or for exportation.

In considering that its role as electronics specialist and supplier of the 'noble"
portion of space systees. now naturally leads it into assuaing this responsibility.
Thomson-65F reopens the question of space syste- contracting, which had been
traditionally provided by aerospace coepanies (Snias and Hatra), uhose task is in
fact liaited to the construction of the vehicle.

Thomson-65F. which has already participated in the construction of 40 satellites,
thus seeks to present itself as being in charge of systeas for a project for an
African space telecoanunications network, for the future French (or European)
Telecon 2 systen. successor of the Telecon l. as well as for the projects for future
space systeas for military teleco-sunications in France (successors of Syracuse) and
in Iraq.

26

ms orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

General view of the future Thomaon-CSF Space Center in Toulouse (top), as it may
appear by 1985 (for 1500 people). The first phase comprises the four buildings in
the foreground, including the principal technical building (below), with the
assembly buildings and the antenna testing station (on the roof).

Reorganization

The reorganization of space activities undertaken by Thomson-CS? has resulted in the
creation of two groups. One, the Space Division. directed since 1 January 1982 by
Gerard Coffinet. whose new Satellites Department located in Toulouse will be
directed by Jacques Chaumeron with the assistance of Philippe Blanchet. who will
have to replace him. The other, the Ground Stations Department. part of the Radio
Beans and Space Connections Division. whose direction has been entrusted to Jean
Lailheugue, who fills the joint functions of deputy director of the Space Division.

and administrator of 615 Telspace; the new deputy director of Telspsce will be
Bernard Culot.

27

FOR OFFICIAL l '
The Space Division will be responsible to its customers for all space systems and
notably for the formulation of satellite specifications with their
telecommunications payloads. entrusted to the Satellites Department. as well as of
ground stations, whose construction will be shared by Thomson-08F and Telspace.
Military stations (Syracuse for instance), will be assigned to the Thomson-CS?
Stations Department. while civilian stations will continue to be built by Telepace.
the world's largest builder of land stations. with more than 80 constructions.

615 Telepace. formed sore than 10 years ago by Thomson-CS? and 063 (CIT-Alcatel).
will remain the civilian station sales structure.

Telspace Role

However. Thomson-CS? wants to successfully re-establish participation balance within
Telspace, 90 percent of whose activity is currently assured by the electronics
group. A larger technical and financial effort on the part of ClT-Alcatel would
therefore be desirable if 613 is to retain its justification. Negotiations for
Telspace renewal agreements are currently being pursued.

Industrial participation of the major subcontractors has been reorganized. notably
for supplying antenna mechanicals. Neyrtec (068 group) has disappeared in favor of
a more dynamic small company. Ateliers de Haulage Plastique (AMP). in Orsay. which
will henceforth assume the task of studying and building A-standsrd (32.5-n in
diameter) and C-standard (lb-ZO-m) antennas. These antennas will use a reflector
integrated in a structure composed of honeycomb panels. which are easier to
maintain.

The very small antennas (3 m in diameter) of the plant-terminal type for Telecom i.
will be supplied by the LGT subsidiary of Thomson-08F.

Candle Feeter

The new Thomson-CS? Space Center in Toulouse. whose construction should begin soon.
will be located at Candie. on a 25 hectare site near the Francazal airport and
CITHc. As of this summer. this Thomson-CS? subsidiary will initially house the
first contingents of materiel and personnel of the Satellites Department of
Thomson-USE; at the same time, CITEc is to be completely converted for space
activities, simulators. and data processing (CIHSA) within the next 2-3 years.

Decentralization of the Toulouse Satellites Department is scheduled for completion
in the summer of 1983. There are plans for about 600-650 people. including

200 engineers and 250 technicians. who will come from Paris (300 people), free leEC
(250 people), and from local hiring.

On that date. the initial installation phase of the Candie space center will be
completed. This will include the offices and the large assembly building. which is
the center's major construction. It will provide a clean room (100.000 class)
measuring 650 square meters. 300 square-meter annexes, 220 to 100 square-meter
anochuic rooms. IOU square-meter shielded rooms. and several control rooms. as well
as all the necessary testing resources. This unit will make it possible to

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lBE ONLY

simultaneously integrate five civilian payloads and three military satellites. A
very advanced antenna testing station will also be attached to the building to
facilitate integration of payloads and satellites. These installations, covering an

area of 26,000 square neters, will represent an investeent of about 200 nillion
francs (buildings and equipment).

But the conplete installation of the center calls for an additional invest-ant of
100 niliion francs, to extend the enclosed space to 90.000 square asters. so as to

eventually shelter up to 1500 people. It mat be recalled that Thonson-CSF already
employs l700 people in Toulouse, including about 1200 at cusc.

This year, Thonson-CSF expects a business turnover of about 600 aillion francs.
including 300 MP for the satellites, and 100 MP for the stations (Syracuse). with a
total manpower of the order of 1700 people. It is forecast that by 1985 the space

division will enploy about a thousand persons, and will have a turnover of one
billion francs.

I 1.023
(250. 3100/1033

29

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
BRIEFS

some 2mm, RBORGANIZED—Spieex the sore: [loreign Intelligence end
Counter-intelligence Service] in no notes long live the NS! [Generel
Directorete or hternel Security]. the nein henoh intelligence egency

ie loeing ite old ecronye end ite duhioue eure oi nyetery et the one
tine. Yer fro- throwing the beby out with the Piecine'e [”ewi-ing pool":
nein French intelligence egency] hethweter. the governent ie going to
issue e decree defining the nieeion of thie new Generel Directorate of
External Security: priority [ie to he given] to politico-eeononic
infer-notion end penetretion of foreign egenciee. [Text] [Perie L'masss
in tench 5-11 Feb 82 p 66] [COPYRIQ‘D 1982 e.e. Groupe kpreee] 9631

SENIOR SDECE OFFICERS FIRED—Timid Hetero: Deep-tented egitetion in
the Piecine ["ewi-ing pool": nein French intelligence egency] eiter
the purge in Dec-her which hit some no along the noet ooepetent high-
renking officere of the nein French intelligence egency. Hilerity efter
the howling conedy et Roieey over Pierre Merton, the new director gonerel,
seeing hineelf refueed ecceee to the VIP lounge. Perplexity efter the
discovery of the "Dc'e" [director generel] nervoue inetehility. confined
by two reet curee. Pinelly, prohI-e for the few who rellied eround the
teen of the Piecine'e forner hoee, Alexendre de Herenchee: they eee

outwerd eigne of reepect increeeing. Thet ie elweye e bed eign in the
erny! [‘rert] [Petie L'mnzss in French 12-18 Feb 82 p 51] [COPYRIG'N
1982 e.e. Groupe Bxpreee] 9631

C80: 3100/ 378 END

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY