FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10552

28 May 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE
(FOUO 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE

(P000 8/82)

ConrzuTs

TILLING AND CROPPING BORROW!

Use of Aircraft in Agrochemical Work
(V. M. Kurilo; SEL'SKOIB KROZIAIS'NO TURKMENISTAN,

001': 81) 00......OOOIOOOOIOCOOOOOIO...OIIOOOOIOOOOIO

Effectiveness of Aviation-(menial Work in Turkmenistan
(V. Kurilo; SKL'SKOYB KROZIAISTVO mam,

Jm 82) 0.00.0.0...IOOODOOOOIOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOIIIOOOOO

Role of Sorghum Cultivation Reviewed

(W1 mm Feb-.82..3Un'3m3
“CHAN UmsTmA’ Nov 81) O‘COOOICOIOOQOOOOOOOO

(hiltivation on Irrigated Land, by V. I. Oetapov,

at 810
New Sorghum Varieties, by A. Kryahinekaya, ‘1'.

T. Turembayev

Extensive Use of Aircraft in Agricultural work Foreeeen
(B. Bychkov; SEL'SKOIB momrs'rvo WM'IA,

”er 82) 00......OOOOOOOIOOOOODOOOOOIOOOOOOOIOODOOQOOQO

Briefs
Arm-28 for Agricultural Work

Aerial Fertilizer Application

- a .. [III - 0553

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USE OF AIRCRAFT IN ACRDCHEHICAL HORK
Ashkhabad SEL'SKOYE KHOZYAYS’NO NWSTANA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 p 31
[Article by V. H. Kurilo: "In the Service of the liarvest"]

[Text] Agricultural aviation has become a constituent part of the program being
implemented by the party for extensive utilization of the country's industrial's
potential in order to advance agriculture and further improve the well-being of the
people. It has entered solidly into the lives of the kolkhozes and sovkhoses and

actively assists agricultural workers in their struggle for large crops and increas-
ed effectiveness and advanced science of farming.

Under the Tenth Five—Year Plan the aviators provided for successful fulfillment of
the planned assignments and treated 450 million hectares of agricultural land from
the air. There is a tendency for the proportion of chemical work done by aviation
to increase and by 1980 it amounted to about 1.0 percent of the overall volume of
work for applying chemicals in agriculture.

Distinguished by high productivity, maneuverability and universality. agricultural
aviation provides for conducting aviation chenical work at the best agrotechnical
time periods. The importance of this work has to do with the possibility of per-
forming regardless of the condition of the soil, the stage of vegetation of the
plants and the relief of the area, without disturbing the structure of the soil or
damaging the plants. In terms of economic effectiveness, for my kinds of work
airplanes and helicopters have a significant advantage over modern ground machines
that are intended for applying toxic chemicals. Replacing ground technical equip-
ment with aviation on just 1 million hectares relieves 1.300-l.600 workers and
LOGO-1,200 tractors of the task of field work for applying mineral fertilizers
during the busy periods on the farms, and when it is used to apply herbicides and
other means of plant protection it relieves 5,300-6,800 workers and 3,300 tractors
during a season.

The most widespread have been ultra low volume spraying (UK?) with 2.1:!) herbicide
for fighting against weeds on areas planted in winter and spring wheat and rice.
using centrifugal liquid sprayers with All-2 aircraft, and top dressing of spring
spike crops with liquid nitrogen fertilizers which provide for an additional yield
of grain of spring wheat of up to 3.3 quintals per hectare and barley-mp to 3.9
quintals per hectare, and the grain of the wheat has an increased content of pro-
tein and gluten.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agricultural aviation plays a large role in cotton growing. The cotton growing re-
publics successfully fulfilled the assignments of the Tenth Five-Year Plan for the
sale of cotton. In short periods of time agricultural aviation fully satisfied

the needs of the agricultural workers for aviation work to defoliate the cotton
plants. In order to increase the productivity of cotton they have developed: new
technology for spraying the cotton with a chlorocholinechloride preparation (TUR)
for chemical removal of the top foliage of the cotton plants, which provides in-
creased productivity and makes it unnecessary to use manual labor or mechanical re-
moval of the top foliage; technology for air application of the TsAKS defoliant

and a mixture of it and magnesium chlorate. which provides for replacing the highly
toxic butiphos defoliant. which changes the time periods for the beginning of de-
foliation by 8-10 days, considerably reduces the degree of pollution of the environ-
ment. doubles the productivity of the aircraft. and reduces the total national eco-
nomic outlays on the treatment of one hectare of agricultural land; technology for
the utilization of the biological preparation dendrobacilline for using aviation
to fight against pests of cotton, which makes it possible to reduce pollution of
the environment with toxic chemicals and improves the sanitary and hygienic condi-
tions for the work of the people engaged in tending the cotton plants.

In order to accelerate the solution to the feed problem we are increasingly using
technology for air top dressing of corn cultivated for silage with a solution of
urea in the phase of milky and milky-waxy ripeness, which increases the protein
content in the silage mass. In the practice of aviation-chemical work we are more
and more extensively utilizing technology for air planting of grain spike crops.

rice. and seeds of grass mixtures. which will be considerably more developed in the
future.

The development and effectiveness of aviation chemical work, like in air transpor-
tation as a whole, depends to a decisive degree on the level of planning work.
Methods of planning the use of aviation in the national economy should be formed
in close connection with the establishment and development of methods of planning
of the country's economic and social develoPment.

In the modern period, which is characterized by an orientation of economic develop-
ment toward intensiveness of management, the demands on the level of planning work
are increasing very rapidly. Therefore the arrears that have accumulated in re-
cent years in the methods of planning the appliation of aviation in the national
economy, whose effectiVenz-ss is evaluated by the basic indicator of flight hours
(to an An-Z aircraft) have become especially noticeable.

We are speaking about ensuring efficient and effective utilization of aircraft and
helicopters for aviation chemical work and fully satisfying the needs of agricul-
ture for aviation service. relying mainly on the intensive factor of management.

The task set in the Plain Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the
USSR During 1981-1985 and the Period Up to 1990 to increase the role of the agro-
chI-mical service in agriculture and its responsibility for effective application of
mineral fertilizers and chemical means of plant protection places high demands on
the :.gricultura1 aviation staff and its agrotechnical specifications and parameters.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An Important Stage in the chenization of agriculture and the development of scien-
tific and technical progress was the creation of the All-Union Production Scienti-
fic Association for Agrochemical Service for Agriculture. At the present tins this
specialized service has established business ties with kolkhozes and sovkhozes and
civil aviation enterprises and entered on a course toward development of the na-

terial and technical base and the creation of conplexea for chenization as well as

the introduction of the scientific achievements and the experience of the leading
enterprises.

COPYRIGHT: "Sel'akoye khozyaystvo hrkmenistana", 1981

11772
(ISO: 1826/2 70

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1‘11.le hND €30?le TECHRDIDGY

EFFIiCTIVrINt‘SS OP AVIATION-03111165.]. WRK IN TWSTAR

ushkhabad ssL'sme KlDLYAYSTVO TWISTANA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 32-33
Airticle by V. Kurilo, member of board and chief of Administration for Use of

iviation in the National Economy of the Ministry of Civrl Aviation: "Effectiveness
of Aviation-Chemical Uorkﬂ/

llexgl The 26th CPSU Congress outlined a program for further improving the welfare
of Soviet people based upon stable and progressive development of the national
economy, accelerated scientific-technical progress and the conversion of the
economy over to an intensive path of development, more rational use of the
country's production potential, aaximum economies in the use of all types of
resources and improvements in the quality of work.

with regard to raising the productivity and stability of farming, more and more
importance is being attached to the use of chemical processes and also to the

skilful use of organic and mineral fertilizers, plant protection agents and
growth stimulators.

In connectiur uith the use of chemical processes in agriculture, an important role
is being played by aviation-chemical operations -- one of the principal types of
aviation use in behalf of the country's national economy.

At the present time, approximately 40 percent of the overall volume of chemical
work is being carried out with the aid of aviation. Such operations as applying an
early spring top dressing to grain crops, the defoliation of cotton and the
treatment of rice plantings are being carried out only by aviation. The proportion
of work being carried out, using the aviation method, against certain types of
grain crop pests is high and on the whole it amounts to 54.6 percent and against

the chinch bug and corn weevils -- 81 percent and against cotton pests -- 52.8
percent.

The greatest proportion of aviation treatments has been reached in the Kazakh SSR --
and for aviation-chemical work against weeds -- 90.1 percent. More than one half
of the overall volume of chemical work in the Uzbek, Turkmen and Azerbaijan SSRfs
is being carried out by aviation. The zone of activity for agricultural aviation
embraces the entire country, including the most remote regions. Each year, more

than 3,000 aircraft and helicopters of agricultural aviation carry our agricultural
work.

I;
FIHRCHHHCJAI.USI2(MNLY
FOR‘0FFK1AL.USE(NHLY

The aviators are making a worthy contribution by assisting the rural workers in
fulfilling their socialist obligations. Jointly with the agricultural organs,
measures are being carried out aimed at improving organization and technology,
raising the effectiveness and quality of the aviation-chemical work and improving
the culture of farming and the intensity of use of the aircraft and helicopters.

The socialist competition among the collectives of enterprises of civil aviation
and Soyuzael‘khozkhimiya organizations is being employed on an extensive scale.

Agricultural aviation is making a great contribution towards the cultivation of
grain, cotton and other crops.

The USSR Ministries of Aviation and Agriculture are carrying out an entier complex
of measures aimed at improving the organization and technology of aviation-chemical
operations, raising the effectiveness of use of aircraft and improving the quality
vf applications of mineral fertilizers and plant protective agents.

The established practice of the two ministries with regard to the preparation of
joint plans, measures, normative documents and business-like relationships, when
solving operational problems, is viewed as a progressive method of economic
management and One which makes it possible to achieve high final results.

During the past few years, stronger business-like relationships have been
established with the organizations of Soyuzsel'khoskhimdya in the various areas,
with the kolkhozes and sovkhozes and with local party and Soviet organs.

The convening of joint production-methodologiesl conferences on exchanging leading
experience in the organization and carrying out of aviation-chemical work is being
practiced on a large scale.

Republic, kray, oblast and rayon operational staffs are created for the period in
which the aviation work is to be carried out, for the purpose of organising
efficient use of the chemical resources, aircraft and helicopters. Operational
plans and schedules are prepared for each aircraft and helicopter.

Measures are being undertaken aimed at maintaining the flight runways at kolkhozes
and sovkhozcs in good operating condition and also for creating, on the basis of
inter-farm cooperation, new flight runways for the kolkhos and sovkhoz chemical
SLﬂtiOnJ. This is a promising long-range trend. The carrying out of aviation-
chcmical work through a system of chemical stations makes it possible to lower
labor expenditures by one and a half times and to almost double the productivity
of the aircraft flights. This is borne out by aviation work carried out in the
north Caucasus, the Volga region, the Ukraine and in other regions of the country.

During the course of organizing the construction of flight runways, we
simultaneously devote a great amount of attention to the selection of dirt
airfields. A proper combination for the use of these two types of airfielda
serves to raise the productivity of the flights while lowering the costs for the
aviation work.

Support bases of agricultural aviation are organized for the purpose of providing
orerational management for the work of the crews, technical servicing for the

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft and helicopters in the regions where the work is carried out and also for
solving problems concerned with flight safety. The work of such bases makes it
possible to reduce the amount of non-productive time during flights and also idle
time caused by organisational-techie“ factors.

The Ministry of Civil Aviation is devoting a great amount of attention to
introducing scientific recomendations and leading experience into production
operations. riach year, jointly with the USSR Ministry of Agriculture, a plan is
prepared and implemented for introducing technical processes and methods for
carrying out the aviation-chemical work into production operations.

Great importance is being attached to the extensive introduction into operations
of such technological processes as foliar top dressings of mineral fertilisers, the
use of herbicides and pesticides for combating the weeds and pests of agricultural
crops, use of the TUB preparation for combating lodging in agricultural crops,
dessication and defoliation of plants and the aerial sowing of rice, wheat, other
grain crops and grass seed.

1;; 1980, on an area of 26.S_million hectares, the enterprises and subunits of ma
LHinistry of Civil .wiatiog/ employed new flight regimes and progressive
technologies for the carrying out of aviation-chemical operations, they introduced
new types of work and they continued to introduce wide-swath sprayers into
operations. This was all aimed at raising the effectiveness of use of the aviation
equipment and improving the quality of the aviation operations.

The small liquid expenditure norms associated with the ultra-low-vo.‘.ume method of
spraying constitute great reserves for raising the productivity of the flights and
lowering the cost of the aviation-chemical operations, both for aviation and for
agriculture. In 1980, our enterprises treated approximately 1.4 million hectares
using the ultra-low-volume method. The new method makes it possible to raise the
productivity of the flights by a factor of 2-2.5. This aviation method of
spraying was employed for combating the weeds of rice and wheat and for protecting
the crops against the agricultural pests.

At the present time, one of the chief tasks confronting civil aviation is that of
uncovering and utilizing all available reserves for accelerating scientific-
technical progress in the field of aviation-chemical work.

Some measures have already been implemented in this regard.

\Eork is being carried out in connection with creating new and more improved models
of agricultural and specialized on-board equipment for the aircraft and helicopters.
Connencing in 1978, the /.n-2 aircraft were equipped with more productive wide-swath
dusters for spreading mineral fertilisers. dxperimental models were developed for
more improved liquid Sprayers for low volume and ultra-low-voluae spraying.
Centrifugal sprayers are being intorduced into operations for the An-Z aircraft.
These sprayers have proved their worth during the carrying out of aviation work,
using the method of ultra-low volume spraying against weeds on wheat fields in
Kazakhstan. A centrifugal spreader has been developed for the Its-26 helicopter.

An [NP-1H instrument for the An-ZU aircraft -- for recording the number of landings
and the operational time of an engine both on the ground and when airborne -- has
been developed and is presently in the stage of being introduced.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.6""; banana-day‘s. “no Ian—vs- maven-r..— -w- -u—-v---—u on- ——.-_—— —-_..-

minimum flight speed for the An-2 aircraft. Use of the III-8 helicopter for
aviation-chemical work, for which agricultural equipment is being developed. is
of definite economic interest.

In improving the technological process of aviation work involving the use of
toxic chemicals, an important problem continues to be that of preventing the
chemicals from spreading beyond the area being treated and especially when use is
being made of the ultra-low-voluae method of spraying.

The agricultural organs are now devoting more attention to improving the working
and leisure conditions for the flight and technical personnel responsisle for
carrying out the aviation-chemical work.

A socialist competition among the crews of agricultural aviation is being employed
on an extensive scale in the interest of achieving timely and high quality
fulfillment of the aviation-chemical work and furnishing effective assistance to
the agricultural workers.

Socialist collaboration between the aviation enterprises and farms, based upon a
mutual agreement, is producing positive results. The greatest improvement in this

form of relationship between aviators and agricultural workers was achieved in the
north Caucasus.

During the nileventh Five-Year Plan, the aviators mat solve great tasks associated
with providing aviation support for agriculture. The state plan for agriculture
[or the 1981-1985 period calls for 482 million hectares to be treated. Specific
measures must be implemented aimed at improving the organization of work, reducing
unproductive flights, eliminating aircraft idle time, lowering the totality of

tr :nsport expenditures and obtaining a maximum return from each flight and from
each minute of flight time. Together with raising the voluaes and expanding the
sphere of- use of aviation in the national economy, priority attention must be given
today to those tasks concerned with raising the effectiveness of use of the
helicopters and aircraft.

COPYRIGHT: “Sel'skoye khozyaystvo Turkmenistan", 1982

7026
C30: 1824/259

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TILLING AND CROPPING TECHNOLOGY

UDC 626.85:633.174

ROLE OF SORGHUM CULEIVATION REVIEWED

Cultivation on Irrigated Land
Moscow GIDROTEKHNIKA I MeLIORATSIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 57-58

{Article by v.1. Ostapov, candidate of agricultural Sciences and director of the
Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute of Irrigation Farming, N.V. Belous,
candidate of agricultural sciences and senior scientific worker and L.F. Masks,
candidate oi agricultural sciences and head of the Department of Irrigation at

the Ukrainian Scientific Research Institutg of Irrigation Farming: "Technology for
Cultivating Grain Sorghum Under Irrigation/

lfex§7 For increasing grain production in the steppe zone of the Ukraine, a great
role can be played by the cultivation of grain sorghum on irrigated land together

with corn.

Owing to its biological characteristics. sorghum is well adapted to the conditions
of a dry climate, it is not very demanding with regard to soil, it endures soil
salinization rather well, it is thrifty in its consumption of soil moisture (20-25
percent less than corn) and it responds very well to irrigation. The degree to
which sorghum responds to irrigation is borne out by data obtained from tests
carried out at the UkrNIIO: [Ukrainskiy nauchno-issledovatel'akiy institut
oroshaygmogo zemledeliya; Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute of Irrigation
Farming], during which the grain yields obtained from the best hybrids, under
irrigation conditions and with an entire complex of agrotechnical measures being
carried out, reached 9.5-11 tons per hectare (without irrigation -- 2-2.8 tons per

hectare.

For the very first time in agricultural production practice in Khersonskaya Oblast,
grain sorghum was sown on a comparatively small irrigated tract of land in 1972.
Despite the fact that the technology for cultivating this crop under irrigation
conditions was still new to the production workers and not sufficiently mastered,
the grain yield obtained using the Stepnoy-S regionalized hybrid turned out to be
rather high. Thus, at the Serp i Molot Kolkhoz in Kalanchakskiy Rayon, following
four waterings using an irrigation norm of 3,200 cubic meters per hectare and an
application of 80 kilograms of active agent of phosphorus and 70 kilograms of active
agent of nitrogen, the sorghum grain yield obtained from an area of 20 hectares
amounted to 6.5 tons per hectare; the labor expenditures for the production of 1 ton
of grain did not exceed 0.9 man-hours and the production cost was 15.6 rubles per
ton. Ln even higher yield was obtained from this crop at the Komsomol'skiy
dxpcrimentul-Demonstratiou Sovkhoz in Skadovskiy Rayon -- 7.9 tons of grain per

hectare.
8

.ONLY
ReSearch was carried out over a period of 0 years for the purpose of studying the
norphobiological characteristics of sorghum grain hybrids, their suitability for
mechanized harvesting, the effectiveness of cultivation under irrigation conditions
and also the principal sgrotechnical practices for cultivating this crop on
irrigated lands of the UkrNIIOZ.

the experiments were carried out on dark chestnut weakly alkaline soils having a
humus lnycr of 30-35 cm. The climatic characteristics of the years in which the
experiments were carried out varied from damp and cool to dry and hot. Since the
duration of the period marked by an average daily temperature of -10° Centigrade is
150 days in the southern Ukraine, highly productive sorghum grain hybrids of the
mid-season to late grOup having a growing season of 130-136 days have proven to be
acceptable for cultivation in this zone. From a lergg number of hybrids, the most
promising and highly produgtive hybrids bred by V13 [ﬁll-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Plant Growing/ and the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of

Corn were singled out: Stepnoy-S, Vin-37, VIR-38, VIR-ao and 305-1 and some others.
These hybrids are uniform in terms of the height and ripening of the panicles and,
in this regard, suitable for direct combining. The average grain yield for these
hybrids, during the years in which the experiments were conducted, fluctuated from
7.5 to 11.4 tons per hectare depending upon the weather conditions and the type of
hybrid used.

The studies revealed that sorghum responds very well to applications of fertilizer.
with deep fall plowing, 100-120 kilograms of active agent of phosphorus and 70-80
kilograms of active agent of nitrogen should be applied per hectare.

The nest sowing method for sorghum grain is that of single grain sowing, with an
inter-rOw spacing of 70 centimeters. This method ensures uniform placement of the
plants in a drill row and better exposure to light for them. When use is made of
the single grain sowing method, the optimum density for a stand of plants is
200,000 per hectare. If the plantings are crowded to a density of up to
250,000-300,000 plants per hectare, the grain yield decreases noticeably (from 12
to 9 tons per hectare).

The use of triazine herbicides (in a dosage of 2 kilograms of active agent per
hectare) prior to pre-sowing cultivation is most effective for combating weeds in
sorghum plantings. During the growing season, the herbicide 2.hD is applied

(in a dosage of l kilogram of active agent per hectare) during the phase of 3-5
leaves.

The tending of the plantings includes 3-4 inter-row loosenings of the soil: the
first to a depth of 8-10 centimeters and the subsequent ones to a further depth of
Z-J centimeters. Simultaneous with the inter-row cultivations and irrigation
ringing and prior to the first foliar watering, a nitrogen fertilizer top dressing
is applied to the plants at the rate of 20-30 kilograms of active agent per
hectare. For combating aphids, which cause considerable harm to the growth,
development and yield of sorghum, the plantings are sprayed with 0.2 percent
emulsions of metaphos and rogor.

The water consumption of irrigated sorghum in the southern Ukraine fluctuates from
2,571 to 4,630 cubic meters per hectare, depending upon the weather conditions
during the growing season, especially humidity and thermal factors, which raise the
need for carrying out more waterings. Sorghum responds very well to waterings

Ft”!("ﬂﬁ(;;l.US£(ﬂﬁlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

begun during the ti llering phase, the heading of the panicles and the forming of the
grain. The principal watering meLhod -- spraying. Prior to spraying, the ridging
oi interrupted furrows and slit-furrows in each inter-row spacing is effective; it
reduces water losses through evaporation and runoff. 0n tracts having minor slapes
the sorghum plantings are watered 2-5 times during the growing season using an
irrigation norm of 600-650 cubic meters per hectare and for greater slopes the
number of waterings is increased to 3-7. with a watering norm of 400-450 cubic
meters per hectare. In both instances, the mgisture content in the 0.1 meter soil
layer is maintained at the 70-80 percent NV £minimum moisture capacity/ (see Table).

Irrigation Regime and Cropping Power of VIR-37 Sorghum Grain Hybrid
(average for years in which experiments conducted)

      
    

         
       

 

   
      
     
   
   

   
    
     
   
  

Waterings for a

    
       
 

   

Watering Irrigation Total Coeffic. Grain
moisture content noun, norm water of water yield.
in 0.7 meter layer waterings m3 per In3 par consump., consumpt., tons
of soil, Z NV hectare hectare m3 per m3 per per

hectare hectare hectare

  

*— ._ _ ---..——__

 

 

Uithout watering - - - 1859 . .2899 597 . . 1575 2 .75
50 1.....2 1050 1050..2100 2571..3860 453..869 5.03

60 1 ..... 3 850 850..2550 3291..3986 365..500 8.62

70 2.....5 650 1300..3250 3747..“630 355..47h 9.99

’ 80 3.;:.;;:_7__ “"329“ w" 1350 22.150 £27 . .4209 381.332? 10.16

It is apparent from the data in the Table that the maximum sorghum yield is obtained
when the moisture content of the soil is maintained at the 80 percent NV level.

The harvesting of sorghum grain is carried out during the phase of waxy or complete
ripeness of the grain, using direct combining and with the header of the SK-A
combine raised to the cutting height for the panicles and the speed of rotation of
the drum -- 550-600 revolutions per minute. The sorghum harvested in this manner
is ensiled in cement trenches or processed for flour, which thereafter is used in
the preparation of granules.

althOugh grain sorghum under irrigation is a new crop, nevertheless the areas being
set aside for it on farms in KherSOnskaya Oblast are increasing with each passing

year.

COLYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Kolos", 'ﬁidrotekhnika i melioratsiya“, 1982
New Sorghum Varieties

Tashkent SJL'SKDYE KHDLYAYSTVO UZB£KISTANA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 p 32

[Erticle by h. Kryghinskaya and T. Tursunbayev, scientific workers at UzNIIZh: "New
Sorghum Varietiesll

1Tex;/ In the breeding and seed production for fgrage crops at UzNIISh L Uzbek
scientific Research Institute of Animal Husbandrxl, work has been underway for many
years in connection with the creation of new and highly productive varieties of
sorghum (Joughara), which can be employed for a variety of purposes: for
cultivation for silage or grain.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
By crossing individual geographic forms obtained from the international collection
with local varieties of Joughara, we obtained hybrid material suitable for various
purposes.

As a result of crossing a specimen of Khigeri Dwarf with the Olty Oylik variety and
subsequent selection over a period of many years, a new variety for post-harvest
sowings was developed -- Uzbekskoye 5 (authors 3.x. Kadamov, I.V. Hassino and

A.V. Kryzhinskaya). The plants of the new variety are uniform and they have
panicies which stand up straight on elongated stalks and white bare grain. The
variety is resistant against lodging and diseases. The height of its plants --
165-173 centimeters and its growing season from sowing to complete grain ripeness --
113-115 days.

During competitive strain testing carried out during the 1976-1980 period, the variety
Uzbekskoye 5 surpassed the standard -- the early-ripening Kokandskoye Red variety --
in terms of all indicators: height of plants -- by 39.6 centimeters, length of
panicle -- by 8.6 centimeters, width -- by 1.0 centimeter, grain yield during
thrashing -- by 1.2 percent. The increase in grain yield amounted to 18.3 quintals
per hectare.

In terms of its chemical structure (crude protein, cellulose, DEV, ash), the grain
of the new variety differs markedly from the standard. For example, it contains
1.1-1.2 percent cellulose, or 2-2.5 times less than that found in the grain of local
and selected varieties. And this is of great importance with regard to raising the
food value and assimilability of feed in a ration, the composition of which will
include the grain of this new variety.

In 1976, under production conditions at the Halik Sovkhoz in Syrdar'inskaya Oblast,
the new variety proved its worth in post-harvest aowings -- the grain yield amounted
to 63.9 quintals per hectare,or 6.5 quintals per hectare higher than the indicator
for the standard.

Tests conducted at the Karakul 650 [state strain testing station] (1977-1979)
confirmed the superiority of the new variety over the standard in connection with
post-harvest sowings. Based upon the results of these tests, Uzbekskoye 5 has been
regionallzed for post-harvest sowings on irrigated land in Bukharskaya and
Kashkadar'inskaya Oblasts.

is a result of crossing a specimen of Afrikanskiy Buryy (K-l814) with the Olty
Oylih variety and the selection of a hybrid population. the Uzbekskoye 18 multi-
purpoac variety was created (authors S.K. Kadamov, I.V. Hassino, T. Tursunbayev).

The variety has a strong, succulent and sugary stalk and an upright white grain
panicle. The plants attain a height of 235.5 centimeters and they are resistant
against lodging, thus making it possible for the fodder to be harvested by combines.
The growing season from seedling to the stage of waxy ripeness of the grain is 109
days and from seedling to complete ripeness of the grain -- 142 days. It differs
from the Oranzhevoye 160 and Olty Oylik standards in terms of its late ripening

(by 10-19 and 20-23 days respectively), large height of plants -- by 76.9 -151.8
quintals per hectare, yield of dry substance -- by 40.3-49.9 quintals per hectare,
grain yield -- Ly a.26-27.72 quintals per hectare. In terms of feed unit yield,

it surpasses the standard by 37.10-04.21 quintals per hectare, digestible protein --
by 0.08-1.26 quintals per hectare. In terms of the content of fat, cellulose,

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

non-nitrogen extractive substances and ash, the new variety has intermediate
indicators between the sugar and bare sorghum varieties.

according to data obtained from a test carried out at the Chimbayskiy 65:! (1977-

1979), the new variety produced 999.5 quintals of fodder per hectare, whereas the
beat regionalized varieties -- Chilyaki local improved and Katta Bosh -- produced
only 730.9 and 702 quintals per hectare respectively.

The grain yield for the Uzbekskoye 18 variety was 73.8 quintals per hectare, for
the Chilyaki local improved -- 94.8 quintals per hectare and for the Katta Bosh
variety -- 90.9 quintals per hectare.

The Uzbekskoye l8 variety has been regionalized in the Karakalpakskaya ASSR.

Thus, varieties bred as a result of extended selection work are of considerable
interest and can be employed extensively on the fodder fields of Uzbekistan.

COPYRIGHT: "Sel'skoye khozyaystvo Uzbekistana", 1981

7026
C80: 1824/256

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BXTDJSIVB USE OF AIRCRAFT IN AGRICULTURAL WORK FORESEDI
Moscow SEL'SKOYE KllOZYAYS'l'VO NICBEINOZM'YA in mission No 3. hr 82 p 34
[A-rticle by B. Bychkov: "Wings Over the Fieldf/

Lacerpt/ Statement of the USSR Ministry of Civil Aviation. About 100 percmt of
the work on the chenicalization of agriculture is now performed from the air. Dur-
ing the past 5-year period state income from the use of aviation in rural areas
averaged more than 1.5 billion rubles annually. Ultrelow-volume spraying waewidely
used in the control of mass pests of field crops in 1981.

V. Kurilo, meter of the board of the USSR Ministry of Civil Aviation, chief of the
Administration for the Use of Aviation in the National Economy. cements on the
prospects for the use of aviation in the country's agriculture:

The solution of the food problem brought forth by the 26th CPSU Congress and the
dynamic development of all the directions in agricultural production require an
even more active participation of civil aviation in a rise in the yield of fields
and productivity of animl husbandry.

m kolkhozea and sovkhozea during the 11th Five-Year Plan 482 million hectares of
agricultural land will have to be treated by aerial chemical Iethods. This is ap-
proximately 18 million hectares more than during the past 5 years. Traditional
types of field treatment, which proved to be successful. such as the application
of mineral fertilizers, protection of crops against pests and diseases. control of
weedy vegetation: and plant defoliation, will account for the main volume of work.
Such advanced technological methods and types of field treat-lent as foliar top-
dressing of grain crops with mineral fertilizers in coubination with herbicides
and pesticides. application of chlorocholine chloride, which prevents the lodging
of grain crops, desiccation and defoliation of sunflower seeds. potatoes and lupin
and aerial sowing of fodder grass seeds will also be introduced into practice.

The construction of runways, including with a hard surface, on kolkhozes and sov-
khozes will be carried out at accelerated rates and on a larger scale than before.
A total of 1,248 new airfields~850 in the Russian Federation alone (the majority-
about 600--in the nonchemozem rone)--will be added to existing agricultural air-

fields during the five-year plan-

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

In contrast to the past five-year plan aerial chemical work will be carried out
everywhere in close contact with the All-Union Scientific Production Association
for Agrochemical Services to Agriculture. This will take it possible to lower la-
bor expenditures to two-thirds and to alnost double the seasonal output of air-
craft. The organization of so-called support bases deﬁned for a group placement
and labor intensive maintenance of aircraft will become further widespread in re-
gions of ones aerial chemical work. Following the experimce of past years the
maneuvering of the fleet of aircraft and helicopters will be practised. This sites
it possible to more efficiently use aviation equipment and to perform work in a
better way and in a shorter time.

'Ihe useful initiative of agricultural aviatorsu-socialist colpetition on the basis
of cooperation agreenents between aviators and the All-Union Scientific Production
Association for Agrochemical Services to Agriculture and between kolkhoaea and sov-
khozes--is also becoming more and more widespread. The fulfillment of these agree-
ments makes it possible to carry out the full set of aerial chemical operations on
a high organizational level and in an efficient and high-quality runner.

...Aircraft over the field—this has become a customry feature of the present ru-
ral landscape and not even because people have begun to live better. Sober cost
accounting is the nain thing here. Any mnager now knows well that outlays inves-
ted in aerial chemical work will always be repaid generously.

COPYRIGHT: Zhurnal "Sel'skoye khozyaystvo Nechernozem'ya", 1982

11.439
cso: 1824/265

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

Ali-28 FOR AGRICUL‘NRAL WORK-muting this five-year plan the fleet of winged machines
will also be replenished with the Inltipurpoae short take-off and landing Ali-28 air-
craft. As compared with the An-Z it has greater safety (two engines instead of one).
a cruising speed of 350 kn per hour, inroved contort and a large capacity—17 in-
stead of 12 seats. In 3’: decades the design bureau of academician 0. K. Antonov.
hero of socialist labor, winner of the Lenin Prize. deputy of the USSR Suprene So-
viet, gave amny winged achines a start in life. During this five-year plan the
An-Z will also be replaced with the An-3 aircraft. It has a more powerful turbo-
prop engine. Productivity in agricultural work will be increased 1.5-fold and the
coat of aerial chemical work will be reduced by 25 to 30 percent. however. let us
turn back to the An-28, A set of the latest pilot-navigation and radio col-unice-
tion Equip-ant msuring high flight safety day and night is used in the aircraft.
ﬁeng/ _/_Hoscow IZVES‘IIYA in Russian 19 Feb 32 p 37 11,439

AERIAL FERTILIZER APPLICA‘I‘Im-dlinsk, 18 Her-vAircraft over fields—this means tint
spring has cons. the An-2 crew was the first in Soligorskiy Rayon to begin the top-
dressing of winter crops on the Kolkhor ineni _Chkalov. ‘No other aircraft apply
mineral fertilizers on the Kolkhoz inani Krasnoananannyy in the Belorussian Military
District and on the 10 Let BSSR Sovkhoz in Lyubanskiy Rayon. Agricultural aviation
pilots service 146 kolkhozea and sovkhozes in Hinekeya (blast. 'lhey now have to
cultivate about 800,000 hectares of arable land and meadow and pasture areas. A
total of 38 aircraft and 12 helicopters of the United Minsk Aviation Detach-ant, as
well as 30 aircraft free the Heat Siberian and Ukrainian Administration of Civil
Aviation, will perform this volume of work. A special operational headquarters was
established in the oblagt for a better use of aviation equipnsnt in agricultural
work. [By v. Legan'koyj ﬂuff Lao-mu ssL'ser war in Russian 19 In: 82 p 17
11,639

CSO: 1824/265 END

15
was OFFICIAL use ONLY