FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10459

15 April 1982

East Europe Report

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and beaks, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli.
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS

(£0110 1/82)

CONTENTS

IﬁTERNATIGlAL AFFAIRS

Automatic Stabilized Platform for Interkosmos Solar Program
Described
(Frantiaek Rubes, et a1.3 AUTMATIZACE, No 11, 1981)...

Microprocessor Systems, Computer Component Base in cm

Outlined
(Eduard Schliksbier; WEIR! OBZOR, No 10,

1981)...-oooo-ccoocuoulooooooocoo-o.coco-oooocaoooccooo

CZECHOSIDVAKIA

Minister Outlines 1981-1985 Metallurg Tasks
(Ladislav Gerle; HUTNICKB us'rr, No 1, 1982)

Metal Recycling Saves Energy, Hard Currency
(Antonin Radvanovsky; ELBKTRO‘I‘ECHNICK! OBZOR, Dec 81) .

~a- [III-EE-GS POL?!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AUTOMATIC STABILIZED PLATFORM FOR INTBRKOSHDS SOLAR PROGRAM DESCRIBED

Prague AUTOMATIZACE in Czech No 11, 1981 pp 276-282

[Article by Eng Frantisek Rubes, Eng Jiri Ruzicka and Eng Jiri Recek,
Research Institutes Development and Operations Base, Prague-Bechovice: "An
Automatic Stabilized Platform in the Interkosmos Program"]

[Text] This article describes the main characteristics
of the equipment in the ASP-SKAN automatic stabilized

platform, which was developed for the new AUOS-S satel-
lites to be used in the Interkosmos program for the

study of solar radiation. The ASP-SKAN is an electro-
mechanical system for precise orientation of high-
resolution astronomical instruments.

1. Introduction

The development of rockets and space flight in the past two decades (1960-
1980) has made it possible to transport astronomical measuring instruments
(telescopes, spectrometers and the like) outside the earth's atmosphere. The
placing of scientific measuring instruments in automatic space stations has
increased the possibilities for studying short-wave radiation from bodies in
space (e.g., ultraviolet and x-ray radiation from the sun), which is absorbed
by the earth's atmosphere. Automatic space stations make it possible to con-
duct nearly continuous astronomical observation free from the disturbing

effects of the earth's atmosphere, thus markedly increasing the effective-
ness of astronomical observation.

As part of international cooperation in the Interkosmos program. the Soviet
Union has developed the new AUOS-S satellites (Automatic Universal Orbital
Station-Sun), which will be used to study the sun from earth orbit. The
AUOS-s satellite is capable of triaxial orientation in space. Its longitudi-
nal ax'n is oriented toward the center of the sun with an accuracy within a

few minutes of arc. It is in a nearly circular orbit at an altitude of 500 km

and an active life of 6 months is expected. ’

Bccnuxe of the high resolution of the optics in the astronomical measuring
instrument (within 10 seconds of are). the error in stabilization of the
optical axis must be within a few seconds of arc. In 1974, specialists of

l
FOR‘OFFNJAI.US£(MNLY
I‘VR Ufflbll‘h UOD Ul‘hl

the Space Physics working group in the Interkosmos program issued the
specifications for the development of the ASP-SW automatic stabilised
platform, which will he placed aboard an AUOS-S satellite and will carry

astronomical instruments intended for study of x-rays from the sun. The
specifications called for resolution of the above-mentioned problem of pre-

cisely orienting the optical axes of astronomical instruments toward a
specified area of the sun, as well as support of other program functions.

The task of developing and producing the electromechanical system for the

ASP-SKA“ was assigned to the Research Institutes Development and Operations
Base (VPZ) in Bechovice. The requester and principal coordinator of the task

on the Czechoslovak side is AsU [Institute of Astronomy] CSAV [Czechoslovak
Acadeuy of Sciences] in Ondrejov. The Space Research Institute (11(1) of the

USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow was designated manager and coordinator of
technical design on the Soviet side. An economic specification for the

design was that Czechoslovak or can components must be used. Micro-
processors could not he used in the design because none with high reliability

were available during the development and testing stage. An attempt was made
to assure maximum equipment reliability from the very beginning of develop-
ment work. Material and design tests carried out during development affected
the design of the final working model. But these matters, as well as a
description of the simlation of the weightless state, are outside the scope
of the present article.

2. Characteristics of the ASP-SKAN Equipment

The ASP-SW, which carries two devices for studying solar activity, performs
the following functions:

3. Automatic compensation of errors in the orientation of the orbital sta-
tion and definition of the relative coordinate system for measurement of the

motions described in points b through d;

b. Orientation of the optical axes of the astronomical instruments to a
specific point on the solar disk;

c. Line scanning of the image of the solar disk by mechanical movement, i.e.,
"coarse scan";

d. Line scanning of a selected section of the solar disk by mechanical move-

ment, i.e., "fine scan";

e. Automatic organization of functions under points b through d into a
selected program mode;

f. Provision of the necessary information on equipment operation to the
telemetric system.

Functions a and f are carried out independently, while functions b through e
are chosen by external comand. The external comands also specify the
coordinate values, in the relative system, which are required for the activ-

ities in points b and d.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. Technical Description

The ASP-SKAS equipment consists of mechanical and electronic sections con-
nected by cables (see Fig. 3.0).

 

Fig. 3.0. ASP—SKAN platforr with mockup of scientific instrument and auxil—

iary test frame holding a sclat simulator and equipment for simulating
weightlessness.

The mechanical section, whi<h i: the functional part of the system. is
dvhigued to operate in open space (vacuum, weightless condition and the like).

lhe tiectxonin «action provides power to the mechanical section and controls
its operation. With the ex‘eption of the position sensor, the electronic

suction is contained in the electronics unit. which is intended for opera—
rion In Ihe rllmate-controllcd environment of the sealed part of the satellite.

1.1 lkwuw’ptlnu of the Neuhanical Section

ﬁne klnnnutir orxuuirntion of the platf01m's mechanical design is shown in
Fig. ‘5.|.

1
Ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
scanning
WM diagram of

“ ”2:?! orientation “WW ”It". 3‘571-5“¢':.3”€z

    

‘“god of AUOS-S motor

   

I
v. |. I m... a 5.???
\\:5357 w satellite L 9
Fig. 3.1. Kinematic diagram of ASP-SKAN.
Key:
1. Measuring instrument frame 8. Disk malt for sensing motor
2. masuring instrument steps
3. Arm for solar sensors 9. Step motor
4. Ball circulating screw 10. Body of A008 satellite
5. Disk mask for sensing of middle SC. Solar sensor
and end positions SH. Adjustment servomechanism
6. Photoelectric sensors 9.. Length of swinging arm
7. Photoelectric sensors

The bodies of the two lower adjustment servomechanisms SHE: and SHBZ are fixed
to the body 10 of the satellite. The extensible part of adjustment servo-

mechanism SHez ends in a ball-and—socket joint with radial expansion, while
the extensible part of adjustment servomechanism SM82 ends in a ball-and-

socket joint with crosswise expansion. The upper part of the fixed leg of
the platform ends in a ball-and-socket joint located at the origin of the

three-dimensional rectangular coordinate system x2, y2, 22.

The lower part of instrument frame 1 is attached to the joints described
above. Arm 3 for the solar sensors is attached to the upper part of instru-

ment frame 1 in similar fashion by upper adjustment servomechanisms SMs1 and
51181, the bodies of which are fixed to the arm. The one-coordinate solar

sensors SC: and 8C3 are fixed at the midpoints of the solar sensor arm. The
scientific measuring instrument (or instrumnts) 2 is fixed to instrument

frame 1 with its optical axis perpendicular to the yz-zz plane. The x2 axis
is parallel to the longitudinal axis of the AUOS-s satellite, which is

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
approximately oriented toward the center of the sun, with an error of several
minutes of are. by a separate stabilizing system.

The origin of the two-coordinate relative system c, B is the center of the
solar disk, to which the system is oriented; it is determined by using the

two one-coordinate solar sensors SCc and 5C3. Lower servomechanism suez is
electrically connected to directional sensor scc, and the pair SHBZ and 5C3
are similarly connected. The directional error recorded by the solar sensors
SC is electromechanically compensated by displacement of the movable parts of
lower servombchanisms SHsz and snag. This linkage assures continuous stabili-
zation of the platform. The optical axis of measuring instrument 2 is shifted
to a specified point on the image of the solar disk by simultaneous specifi-
cation of the required displacement to a pair of opposing adjustment
servomechanisms, either She; and Shel or 5H8; and SMBl, with the direction of
displacement of the upper servomechanism having the opposite sign from that

of the lower.

With this linkage, angular displacement of instrument frame 1 does not dis-
turb thc orientations of the optical axes of solar sensors SC. so that the

stabilization of the platform described above is not affected. Scanning is
analogous to the shifting of the optical axis to a specified point, since

the process involves a program-controlled succession of coordinate shifts.

For illustration purposes, we present some kinematic parameters of the ASP-
SKAN equipment for a maximum motor stepping frequency of 200 Hz in the coarse

scan mode:

--step motor speed 300 rpm
--rotary speed of ball circulating screw 20 rpm
—-translational speed of nut of ball circulating
screw 1 mm/sec
--angular speed ratio, motor/platform 21.6 ° 103
--angular velocity t, B of platform 1.65 ° 10“3 rad/sec
--angular acceleration t, B of platform 5.81 ' 10" rad/sec2
--operating displacement of screw drive for
platform shift of 1§0' of arc ilz mm
—-maximum mechanical displacement of screw drive le mm
--scrcw drive displacement to achieve platform
shift of l" of arc 0.0033 mm
--moment of inertia of instrument frame and
instrument (calculated max value) 25 kg-m2

Host of the parts of the ASP-SKAN system are made of light aluminum alloys.

Conventional machine materials (stainless steel, bronze, brass and the like)
are used for the most important moving parts. The structural members and

drive assemblies of the servomechanisms, which perform the precision adjust-
ments, are prestressed to limit play. Si.ce operation takes place in the

deep vacuum of space. parts in sliding contact are lubricated with a micro-
layer of solid H082 (molybdenum sulfide) lubricant.

FCWICHHHCIA1.USE(MVLY
a V.‘ HI I I‘vll‘h U0.- Vl‘hl

The servomechanisms contain a set of optoelectronic sensors which sense:

a. The end positions of servomechanism displacements;
b. The sign of the deviation from the central position;
c. Motor stepping.

The mechanical part of the ASP-SKAN is protected against overload and vibra-
tion during launch of the carrier rocket by an arresting device which is
released by pyrotechnical means when in orbit (not shown in Fig. 3.1).

3.2 Description of Electrical Part

The organization of the set of electrical components, as shown in Fig. 3.2,
strongly resembles a microprocessor system. The electronic section contains
the following principal components: voltage transformer, control logic,
working counter, working memory, servo control unit and buffer memory.
Because the principle that data must change during equipment operation only
by increments of 1 was consistently adhered to, a three-decade reversible
counter is used to handle the data.

The equipment responds to commands which have been checked by the command
receiver unit. The purpose of this unit is to provide a certain degree of
noise immunity by testing the command's length. After checking. the com-
mands are executed in order of priority by the control logic unit. Another
type of incoming signal is the "point coordinate designations," which are
the data required for displacement of the platform in order to orient the
optical axes of the astronomical instruments toward a selected point on the
solar disk for fine scanning to be performed. The data are stored for sub-
sequent use in the coordinate register, consisting of nonvolatile memory
which need not be refreshed after each passage through the earth's shadow,
when the power is off. The final types of signal to which the instrument
responds are those from the solar sensors, the end position markers, the
markers of the mechanical Iidpoints of the platform movement range, and

servomotor steps. The mechanical midpoint markers allow calibration of the
coordinate system relative to the center of the sun.

The internal operation of the movement control can best be explained using
Fig. 3.3. The curve for platform position is shown in the figure in a
coordinate system whose origin is oriented toward the center of the solar
disk by means of the signals from the solar sensors. In this coordinate
system, the platform and its scientific instruments are controlled by servo-
motors with a digital link. The position of the platform is read off in
incremental form and the direction of motion is determined by step disks
located on the motors, which are controlled by the servo control unit; the
position is expressed in step increments. The columns on the figure repre-
sent the division of the platform's position into motor steps; above and
below the curve and at the bottom of the figure are shown the changes in the
states of the memories for "difference," "path" and “absolute magnitude”
respectively which result from stepping in the directions shown. The figure

shows a step with the designation CERTBR, covered by the mechanical center
marker, which during calibration initializes all of the memories described

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the specified coordinates. In sections A, C, and D the dotted line shows
a displacement by +4 steps of the actor in the required path, while B and 3

show a displacement of -6 steps.

.., C

‘ M l
Apnly 1’ 0% we Mu

     
 
 

    

g—
;
_

.Mae J
EMWK

        
   
  
      

    

   

’Ill’

 

\\\\\\“\\\‘
E \
‘ h
_| _ _ E :
I ”or.” W .:
g he's-I that": M_______
w x \ §
' s

l i ‘ t . -
ﬁlm try km connector
Fig. 3.2. Block diagram of ASP-5m equipment.

a. Sign of point coordinates

b. Address and setting for memory readout or entry
c. COARSE SCAN or FINE SCAN performed

d. Clearing. entry and up or down counting

e. Information on zero value, odd number. etc.
f. Memory entry

g. Samples within line, clearing of counter

[Key continued on following page]

7
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. U3: UNI»!

Correction, timing and required direction of motion

Motor steps

Control of multiplexer for monitoring equipment operation
Signaling on operation, synchronization of peripherals
Signal of passage through extreme and central positions of coordinates
0.40, 0.41, odd and even lines

Required servo speed

Commands

Power

Specification of point coordinates

Command receiver

Voltage transformer

Coordinate register (nonvolatile memory)

Control logic (time base generator, controllers, etc.)
"Absolute magnitude" of B or t

\

"Difference" for .3 or a

"Path" for 8 or c

Line number

Working memory

Constant recoder

Condition flip-flops

working counter

Speed memory

Line number memory

Absolute position of '3 (memory)
Absolute position of u (Emory)
Buffer memory

Sample counter

Servo control unit

Coordinate extreme position signals
Solar sensors

Step sensors

    
 
 
    

Servomotors
CEN'fER
I1 ‘ ' | 5 I ' -"Difference " above the curve
4| 9 deltas "1| 2"3' ”’1’ '
a I" t 7'??? '0 . "Path," below the curve
‘ 5;: f {Lil I Changeover from "path" to "difference"
’ I” J 2 ' . (and vice versa
0 ‘ "2
' I
i 5 Possible burst during "path"
-1
E ' I l | v
‘Gl-SH -:|-2 -! 0 01 " '5'!- "Absolute magnitude"

_ Stabilization of position
----- Required path, four motor steps long

Fig. 3.3. Recording of state in working memory.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The activity described above is performed by the other units shown in

Fig. 3.2. The working memory holds the independent addresses for each
coordinate and for the line number, which designates the length and direc-
tion of the path during scanning by means of the constant recoder unit.
Permanent functions always include suitable entry of data into the working
counter (from the working memory, coordinate register and constant recoder),
loading of the working counter (clearing, incrementing or decrementing by

l or by 0), and entry of the condition of the working counter into working
memory and into the other units.

This activity cycles through all addresses of working memory.

The buffer memory unit is intended for asynchronous parallel transmission of
data from the electronic unit to the telemetry unit, which transmits it in
suitable form to the ground receiving station. This method is used to trans-

ndt information on the absolute position of the platform, the number of the
line being scanned, and the sample number within the scan line (from the

sample counter). In addition. information on the activity currently being
performed (scan, line, correction and the like) is transmitted.

The transmission of test parameters is a completely independent operation
controlled from the test apparatus. For this purpose, after the test equip-
ment is plugged into the connector, the buffer memory and multiplex circuits
are operated on in such a way that the instantaneous state of the circuits in
question is shown on the test equipment panel. The circuits which are used

only for testing are powered by the test equipment. and only during tests.
3.3 The Servosysten

Since the kinematic arrangement of the platform which is used allows us to
consider it as independently controlled in each dimension, the servosystem

is divided into two independent associated channels, B and t. Each channel
performs two independent tasks: stabilizing the position of the platform

relative to the center of the sun. and moving the platform in response to
commands from the logical unit. This is done by having the servosystem
indupendently control the mutual deviation between the two frames of the
platform and the deviation of this pair of frames from the front surface of
the station. Fig. 3.h illustrates the situation in channel a and also shows
the significance of the angular designations c1, c2 and £5 used below. A
block diagram of channel n is shown in Fig. 3.5a.

The position is stabilized by a regulating circuit which includes solar
sensor SC. preamplifier P2, correction circuit KO. servoamplifier 822. motor

M2, mechanical drive P2, element DZ representing the dynamic properties of
the design, and kinematic sum element Ks.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 3.4. Geometric relations: 8. center of solar disk; RSC, solar sensor

arm; RAP, astronomical instrument frame; 0 2 , station axis; 01, optical axis
of astronomical instrument, oo, optical ax s of solar sensor.

 

A +72%:
":50-
n ' '
r—“"-w ’ 2.--- .. __--.=.--1 Pr:-
| .C""- . "1... 5—:
- on” .— —— -3+ __ _~'.—. —,-.-.:

 

- ‘.. -:..<.;-.. . .--_.. .__. _ ...___.._.._......-__..-.

Fig. 3.5. Block diagram of servosystem. (Note: Adjustment - increment of
position)

Key:
A. Sign of extreme position D. Required speed
B. Position increment E. Sign of extreme position
C. Logic section F. Position increment

The solar sensor measures the regulating error so of the position stabilizing
circuit and converts it into an analog electrical signal. A Cassegrainian
optical system projects the solar disk on the image plane, in which is located
a diaphragm with a pair of parallel slits. The slits pass light from oppos-
ing parts of the image of the solar disk onto two silicon photodiodes connec-
ted in antiparallel. 1he pair of photodiodes feed to the low-input

1'0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF" ’IAI. USP. ONLY

resistance preanplifiers a current proportional to the difference between the
incident light fluxes and relatively independent of the temperature. Since
the difference between the light fluxes depends on the transverse displace-
ment of the image of the solar disk relative to the slits, the sensor output
current is an odd function of the error so. The preamplifier both acts as a
current-to-voitage converter and, by means of linear feedback, adjusts the
transfer characteristic of the sensor to a form approximating the hyperbolic
arcsine. This assures that the beginning of the curve is sufficiently steep
and also that it is monotone over a wide range of regulating departures.

The correction circuit is of a proportional integrating type with a non-
minimal phase element to assure stability of the loop, which is disturbed
principally by element D2. The integrating component assures precise
tracking even when the station is turning at constant velocity.

The servoampiifior-motor system constitutes an astatic velocity-type servo-
mechanism whose design is shown in detail in Pig. 3.5b. To the axle of

motor M is attached the photoelectric rotor position sensor SPR, using a 2-bit
Gray code. The change in the sensor output resulting from turning of the
rotor produces in pulse generator 61 a pulse of constant width and amplitude
whose polarity depends on the direction of rotation. The average value of
the pulse gives the actual rotation speed. while the required speed is speci-
fied by input voltage "c' The difference between these two voltages. i.e.,
the speed error. is processed by integrator I, the output voltage from which
thus expresses the deviation in the servomechaniam's position. The sum of
the integrator output voltage and the input voltage ue, which is designated
ur, controls the Speed of the motor. Because of the unavailability of a
suitable DC commutatorless motor, we used an SHR 300-300 step motor with
active rotor, which allows such operation as a result of its relatively small
stall torque. The solar is fed a voltage proportional to the absolute value
of voltage "r by the controlled switching voltage regulator RN. Commutation
of the windings is performed electronically by commutator K according to the
sign of the voltage or and the output of sensor SPR, whose divisions match
the organization of the stator fields.

Mechanical drive P2 converts the rotation of the motor into changes in the
angle :2 between the optical axes of the astronomical instruments and the
longitudinal axis of the station. Term DZ represents the effect of the
inertial masses and the piiability of the construction and exerts an effect
in the higher frequencies, where it is partially compensated by correction
circuit K0. Kinematic element KS assigns to angle :2 an angle :1 determined

by the other branch of the servosystem; the resulting angle expresses the
deviation of the optical axis of the solar sensor from the longitudinal axis

of the station. The solar sensor balances this deviation against the devia-
tion of the renter of the solar disk from the station axis and processes the
regulating error to by the nethod described.

Sincr the position stabilization circuit constantly makes the optical axis
or the solar sensor truck the center of the solar disk, the task of the pro-

gram position control is to control the deviation of the instrument frame
from the solar sensor frame. i.e., angle :1. This is performed by a hybrid

regulating clrcuit with a digital measuring element contained in the logical

11
FOR omcul. USE ONLY
FOR 0FFI(1AL USE ONLY

part of the control system. This element compares the required displacement
value with the constantly changing value :1, which is measured incrementally
using intonation provided by sensor 39111. It uses the comparison results,
in accordance with the programmed function of the platform, to specify the
speed and direction of movement. Digital analog converter CAP converts this
information, in the form of parts of a constant time function, to an analog
voltage. Since the platform and astronomical instruments have considerable
moments of inertia, the reaction moments resulting from abrupt movement could
have a negative effect on the stability of the station. Accordingly, an
acceleration limiter 02 is placed between the digital-analog converter and
the servoamplifier to assure a smooth transition between the discrete speed
values, using constant acceleration of an acceptable magnitude.

To prevent changes in the angle :1 from disrupting the activity of the
stabilization circuit, angle C2 is simultaneously controlled in the reverse
direction in the same manner, providing a difference term in the input of
servoamplifier $22. For correct operation the servomechanism controlling
angles :1 and :2 must have the same transfer characteristics. This is the
reason for their relatively great complexity.

lo. Operation and Functions of the ASP-SKAN Equipment

4.1 Release and Correction

The first operation in orbit is release of the system on cor-sand from earth
(one-time action); in this operation, the mechanical part of the equipment,
which was secured against overload, is released. After each passage out of
the earth's shadow, the ASP-SKAN equipment always carries out automatic
calibration of the coordinate system, by means of a correction procedure,
after the power is turned on. In the initial part of the correction, the

frames are held in the central positions of their ranges of movement for a
period of obOut 6.5 minutes after the power is turned on. After the end of

this period, which is reserved for stabilizing the position of the orbital
station, the platform orients itself by means of the solar sensors. Follow-
ing this correction, which is also performed if some servomechanism reaches
its extreme position, the platform is ready to operate in any chosen mode.

4.2 Platform Working Modes

The operation or the platform is smarlzed in Table 4.1, which is organized
in term of the commands received from the station control unit (BUS). Mode
is used in case of low solar activity and mode 2 in case of medium or high
solar activity. The programmed activity ends with the reception of a new
comaud of the same or higher priority or with shutting off of the power.

A request for a single coarse scan or fine scan has a higher priority than
commands calling for modes 1-4. A request to record an eruption is produced
by the command ZAP 2, which has the highest priority.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 4.1. Survey of Activities of ASP-3m System.
[C. SCAN - coarse scan; P. SCAN - fine scan]

I POVIL cor-nandl equipment activit OWN“? ustmt
——.—__.._____-

nun: z —.’ stun -—. VIL. ans ~—. on. ”on.
Node 1 ' WT" '

OHM—e ILL? am *9 CA8. PMDL. :

I—e "all, -—D 0'“? -——e ILL? w —-O M PBODL.

 
  

 

 
 
      

 

 
   

 

 

 
   
 

     
 

“RID -—-e onus? —-o "Allin PLO“

train 3' sum. rotosr

srnan —. VILIYM-—e o A
min—3'3““
BTBID—o 03M% 1. mx-—. 0

snap —. onus:
CENTER AREA

earn: 3 Mode 3

“3“! Mode 1.
. SCAerutr s'n'x

. SCAN nun ens

 

  

 

       

WI

  
    

; run one o
. —————_.
S as no an; F. S M
I‘. . ~
- minim"
MP 8 + DRP

 

   

 

M
o spouts! Posnlnus maniac sumo! 04 “an 9: 1QP§E§G§§1§§ node “4)

The names of the operations presented in the table are:

CENTER—orientation of the platform to the center of the so1ar disk and
stabilization on this point;

AREA—-tranafer to the central point of a chosen area of the solar disk and

stabilization on this point; the coordinates of this point are supplied to
the ASP-SKAN equipment in advance;

COARSE SCAN. PINE SCAN--controlled movement as described below;
TIME DELAY-point stabilization for a period of about 4.5 minutes.

In case of an eruption, the counnd ZAP 2 is executed after performance of
the operations CENTER and AREA. Release from the performance of FINE SCAN
requires reception of the comand BRIO-ZAP l and completion of the AREA
operation. Termination of the FINE SUN operation requires silultaneous

reception of commands ZAP 3 and DRP. The durations of the individual opera-
tions are shown in Table 4.2.

Table 6.2. Durations of Individual Operations .

l l "'"“l
r ti c AR C F. SCAN “A“ any D ‘1
OloxOPcra on m I maﬁa-r I km "1 l I i us: soon.

Pnoxenxs 1'“;
AVG . DURATION

 

 

    
 

 

1
FOROFHClAiUSEONLY
I'Uﬂ vrrauna. we. Vl‘lsl

The operations COARSB SCAN and rum SCAN are shown in Fig. Ll. FINE SCAII is
COARSB SCAN magnified 16 tines. As can be seen from the figure, the scans
have 39 active lines (nuiaered 1-39); here they are specified both in ninutes

of arc and in notor steps. Because of differences in the frequency of.
sanpling of the aeasurenents (within the scan line, by the scientific

instruments), different scanning speeds are chosen within the lines; these
are called by conands ZAP l, ZAP 2, ZAP 3 and NP. In addition, in order to

prevent disruption of the operation of the satellite's stabilising system,
each scanning line has speedup and braking loops with contact acceleration

and deceleration.

A

 

Fig. 10.1. Graph of scanning notion

Key:
A. Outline of solar disk D. Pine scan
B. Coarse scan 8. Shift to area
C. Line

4.3 Description of Functions

The requirements regarding autonated stabilisation of the ASP-SKAN platfor-

result in routines of differing degrees of coaplexity. The-simplest routine
is stabilisation of the platforn on a point, which in practice is the most

frequent activity and whose perfornance characteristics prinarily affect the
precision of platforn operation. Other routines involve platform functions
performed directly [i.e., without the need to organise a prograr.) (centering,
transfer to a givenlarea). The most coqylex routines are those for progressed
actions (generation of seaming mtions, generation of a sequence of opera-
tions during correction and eruption operations and the like). In addition,

FORMUSEONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

A .
1C".
.5.

ptov‘lulml is made for the specification of an arbitrary succession of
routines, but the platform must perform them with the predetermined

priority. Accordingly. flowcharts were chosen to determine the operation
of the Asr-sm platform; these can cover the operation of the equipment in
any state.

10.3.1. Command Priority Flowchart (Fig. 6.2)

This diagram deals with asynchronous control of the ASP—5m platform. The
diagram shows clearly the priority of execution of individual col-lands, as

well as their storage in case of deferred execution. For clarification, the
flowchart notes only the terms "...RBQUIRED?" which cover the state between

the arrival of the external caused and completion of the required procedure.
In practice, commands are ignored only when a coarse or fine scan isbeing

transmitted. Hhen END OF PROGRAM is reached, the platform stabilizes at the
last point. The subroutines "...procedure" are outlined in Figs. 6.3 and 6.4.

 

Fig. 14.2. Command priority flowchart

Key:
A. COARSE SCAN or FINE SCAN J. Comand DNP ZAP 3 received?
8. Correction required? K. Execute isolated scans
C. ERUPTION subroutine required? I... Execute modes 1-4
I). Power turned on H. mus 1-4
I-'.. Center. clear and start time delay N. Isolated scan required"
I". Arrival at end switch of coordinate 0. Setting of nonvolatile
6. Enable fine scans memory for nodes 1-5 _
ﬂ. Execute CORRECTION subroutine P. Conand ignored
I. lixecute BRUPTION subroutine Q. End of program

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma 0mm“. USE ONLY

4.3.2. Flowchart for Main Controller (Fig. 4.3)

This diagram gives a detailed description of the generation of individual
operations. The equipment operates asynchronously and, when necessary,
cyclically, and accordingly operation is interrupted by initializing the train
controller every time "Begin ...procedure" occurs. Calibration of the coordi-
nate system is initiated by the fact that every procedure begins with the
CENTER operation, which, as can be seen from Fig. 4.4, cowares the contents
of the memories. The flowchart shows that the generated activity is stopped
only in case of the decision elements "CHANGE IN AREA SPECIPI-T" and "FINE
SCAN SELECTBDt'". This means that economical utilization of the equip-ant
requires that the relevant couands arrive the right time. The "Operation"
subroutines are diagranncd in Figs. 4.4 and 4.5.

A. Begin ERUPTION, isolated scan,
or nodes 1-4

8. Main controller initialized

C. Designation of area for node 1

1). Mode 1: second part?

E. CENTER operation

F. Mode 4?

G. COARSB SCAN or node 1, part 1?

ﬂ. Specification of area changed?

I. AREA operation

J. ERUPTIOII?

K. Fine scans enabled?

L. lbde 3?

H. SCAN operation

N. Pine scans enabled?

0. tbde l or 2?

P. Tine delay. about 4.5 minutes

Q. END

 

Fig. 4.3. Flowchart for main controller

16
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 4.4. Flowchart for auxiliary circuits

Begin AREA or SéAN operation
Enter required path’ for 8 and e; atop 101.0
Centering of. B coord lnate?

[Key continued on following page]

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lintOFFﬂJAL.USE(ﬂVLY

D. Stepping of 8 motor?
B. Set "absolute magnitude" 8 at zero; step 0.1

P. Adjust "absolute magnitude“ 8; step KR.l

G. Centering of e coordinate?

H. Stepping of 8 motor?

I. Set 'ahsolute nagnitude" c at zero; step KR.2
J. Adjust "absolute magnitude" e; step KR.2

K. Centering of B coordinate?

L. Stepping of 8 motor?

M. "Path" for 8 required?

N. Is "path" for 8 zero?

0. Is "difference" for 8 zero and in agreement with servo direction?
P. Adjust "difference" for 8; step KR.3

Q. Set "difference" for B at zero; step xn.3

R. Set "path" for 8 at zero; step KR.‘

s. Adjust'"pothW fcr 8; step Kk.b

T. Centering oi e coordinate?

U. Stepping of 6 motor?

v. Is "path" for t required?

V2. Is "path" for c zero?

w. Is "difference" for c zero and in agreement with servo direction?
X. Adjust "difference" for a; step KR.S

Y. Set "difference" for c at zero; step KR.S

2. Set "path" for e at zero; step KR.6

AA. Adjust."path" for s; step KR.6

BB. Initialize main controller?

cc. "Path" for e performed?

DD. Adjust line number; step KR.7

BE. Begin new entry?

FF._Emit "End of AREA or SCAN Operation"; step KR.7
68. Set line number at zero; step KR.7

6.3.3. Flowchart for Auxiliary Controller (Fig. 4.5)

This flowchart describes the permanent computation cycle, carried out in eight
steps designated KR.0 through KR.7. The computation cycle is modified'only on
the basis of external conditions, but these must occur before step Kk.0 and
last at least to the end of step KR.6, which is carried out by the main con-
troller. Between the end of an operation (and forced clearing of the main
controller) and the.beginning of a new operation, and also between individual

motor steps, at least one computation cycle is performed. It is clear from
the diagram that each coordinate is controlled separately. that all required
paths (including those of scan lines) are entered during step KR.0, and that

auxiliary conputations (scan line number) and decisions are made during
step KR.7.

18
FilltnﬂﬂtlAl.lﬂHE(MﬁLY
A. Begin correction procedure

B. Centering of coordinate 28

C. Centering of coordinate 2:

D. CENTER operations

3. Tine delay continuing?

P. Tine delay continuing?

C. Center nether of 28 found?

a. Center writer of 2: found?

I. Centering of coordinates 8.
28c, 2c conpleted‘l

J. End of procedure

K. Beginning of emu opera-
tion

L. Centering of B coordinate

M. Centering of e coordinate
N. Center narker of 8 found?

0. Center marker of e found?
P. Centering of B and c coordi-

nates completed?
Q. End of operation

R. Also sets "absolute dinen-
aion," "difference" and
"path" at zero

 

Fig. 4.5. Flowchart for auxiliary controller

5. Conclusions

In building the apparatus, we used primarily the technological experience of
many specialized organizations in Czechoslovakia, thus assuring the requisite

quality. For ground testing of the equipment, we used a special test bench to
sinulate weightleasness and the disruptive influence of the stabilizing notion
of the satellite. The neesureaents themselves were node by position sensing

using an LA 3000 interferometer; the neesurenent data were evaluated with an

HP 2m: computer. The measurement results confirmed that the system had the
intended properties.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury. Prague, 1981

8480
C30: 2402/26

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roa 0mm]. vs: onu

INTERNATIONAL AFEAIRS

MICROPROCESSOR SYSTEMS, COMPUTER COMPONENT EASE IN CEHA OUTLINED

Prague ELBKTROTBCHNICKY 03203 in Czech No 10, 1981 pp 578-581

[Article by Eng Eduard Schliksbier, CSc, Research Institute of High-Voltage
Electrical Engineering, Prague-Bechovice: ”Microprocessors and Their Trends"]

[Excerpt] The Component Base in the CEHA Countries

Currently the CEHA countries are devoting considerable attention to developing
semiconductor memories and microprocessors. In Czechoslovakia, semiconductor
components are developed and produced primarily by Tesla Roznov and Tesla
Piestany. Two promising basic sets of components are being developed.

a. The NH 3000 series of Schottky TTL [transistor-transistor logic] bipolar
circuits. The basic circuits are the HE 3001 microprogram control circuit. the
NH 3002 two-bit processor and the NH 3003 look-ahead carry generator; the HE
3205; HE 3212, HE 3214, HE 3216 and MR 3226 are auxiliary circuits. The demand
for all of these types of circuits will be met from 1981 on. To simplify the
use of MH 3000 series circuits it is planned to add to the already available
development system an emulator module and microprogram memory, including the
necessary service software. One advantage of the HR 3000 bit-slice processor
system is its high degree of versatility. with arbitrary word length and
structure and a user-selectable instruction set. However, constructing a
«system is complex.

b. The 8080 unipolar microprocessor system. The basis of this system (equiva-
lent to the Intel "CS-80) is the HEB 8080 eight-bit central processor with the
NH 8224 clock circuit and MB 8228 system control unit. In addition there are
the already-mentioned HE 3205, HH3212, MB 3214. MB 3216 and MB 3226 units and
the new HE 8255 parallel interface circuit and HR 8251 "SARI [universal synchro-
nous-asynchronous receiver-transmitter]. Deliveries of the complete set of
components from an experimental production facility are expected to start in
1982.

The standard set of microprocessor systems includes memory circuits, some of
which are already available. Bipolar memories include the MB 7689 64-bit RAM.

the MB 763 201 256-bit RAH, the HR 74 188 256-bit BPROM and the MB 748 287
lOZé-bit EPROK. The M3 74 $187 lOZé-bit ROM and the NH 74 8571 2048-bit EPROH
are in preparation. For the future, the unipolar memory circuits are oriented

20
INJR OFF1C1A1.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

toward CMOS and NMOS with silicon or floating gates. Some representative types
are the M88 1902 static RAM and a static RAM equivalent to the I 2102A (both

1,024 bits), a dynamic RAM equivalent to the MK allG-Pé (16 Kbit), and a REPEOM
equivalent to the I 8708 (8 xbit).

In the viet Union, microprocessor circuits and memories are designed using
S-TTL, I L and ECL [Schottley TTL, integrated injection logic, emitter-coupled
logic] technology, and for the future an attempt is being made to make then
compatible at the level of individual logic and memory nodules on boards. The
K-589 series, equivalent to the MB 3000 series of bipolar circuits, is in series
production. Also available is the fast K-584 IKl 6-bit processor (equivalent to
the [Texas Instruments] SBP0600). Production of the 8080 unipolar microprocessor
system (designated K-580 I180) has begun; in until 1980 it was provided in
flat-pack form, and since then it has been available in dual in-line packaging.
Also available is a series of RAM and PROM units with capacities up to 8 Kbit
using various types of bipolar technology. Import of selected components from
the Soviet Union is the responsibility of the Tesla 0? 012 [supply and engineer-
ing services establishment] in Prague.

East Germany has developed and is currently producing the 0-80800 8—bit micro-
processor, which is also available in Czechoslovakia. Also being successfully
produced is an'equivalent to Zilog'a 280. Bulgaria is concentrating its micro—
processor research on an equivalent to the [Motorola] M6800 and its supporting
circuits. Bipolar memory units are being developed and produced in Hungary as
well, including a PROM with the standard designation TM 622 (2 Kbit) and the
TM 624 6-Kbit PROM. Romania is also preparing to develop bipolar S-TTL memory
units.

Thus development in the microprocessor field in the socialist countries is
being supported with components analogous to tested world standards, in addi-

tion to which original-design components compatible with various kinds of
circuitry are being developed.

Development Systems and Industrial Microprocessor Systems in Czechoslovakia

Microprocessor equipment allows even less specialized users to design micro-
computers. Accordingly, Czechoslovak organizations are preparing auxiliary
hardware which will aid in the development of microcomputer hardware and soft-
wars.

The simplest resident devices include the MDT 1000 16-bit bipolar microprocessor,
developed by VUMS [Research Institute of Mathematical Machines] Prague. This

is a multiboard microprocessor using 881 and MSI integrated circuits. 0f
similar design is the T? 8 8-bit processor produced by VUVBT [Research Institute
of Vacuum Blectro-Technology] in Zilina, which is intended primarily for data
collection, control of manufacturing processes, and scientific experimentation.
The PROMES [expansion unknown] organization in Prague has used the I 8080 micro-
processor to build the TEMS-Ol single-board microcomputer.

One of the foremost resident systems based on microprocessor development systems
is the MVS, already developed by Tesla Kolin. This is intended for the develop-
ment of the hardware configuration and software of systems using the 8080 micro-

21 .
son oat-1cm. vs}: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processor. It allows entry of programs in a symbolic language, conversion into
machine language, program revision in machine-language and source-language form,
debugging and testing of peripherals. The MVS system is produced in two varie-
ties, the HVS 800 and HVS 801, which differ in the processor unit. In the HVS
801 this is a three-board unit built from circuits available on the Czechoslovak
market. The HVS 300 contains a single-board processor. The DDS-80. another
microprocessor modular system, has been developed by VUT [Telecommunications
Research Institute] in Prague. It is intended for the development. production
and servicing of associated telecommunications measuring equipment. Development
systems containing single-board processors have also been perfected by VUVT
[Research Institute of Data Processing Technology] in Zilina and VUAP in Prague.

Host systems may also be used for microcomputer program development. VUHS has
used the ADT minicomputer as a development system for the 8080 microprocessor.
The system software includes the 8080/ADT Cross Assembler program and the
8080/ADT simulation program. Ilnltﬁydrometeorological Institute] in Prague has
».a similar development system available.

Modular industrial microprocessor systems include a special unit for interfacing
with the environment. These are used to design microprocessor-based control
systems. One example is the modular microprocessor system developed by Tesla
Kolin national enterprise using the 8080 microprocessor. which is intended for
controlling machine tools. The MIKROSAT system of VUAP Prague intended for
similar purposes, is in the final stage of development. The DARIS system is
intended for control of power-production facilities. The PFC-4 polyprocessor
control system has been designed by CKD-Polovodice [Ceskomoravska-Kolban-Danek
Semiconductors] in Prague. In 1981, the K 1510 control microprocessor system
based on the U808 D microprocessor was imported from East Germany; also in pro-
duction is the K 1520, based on the 2-80 microprocessor.

Conclusion

Qualitative and quantitative changes in microcomputers result especially from
technological progress. Development of auxiliary equipment such as cheap per-
ipherals, analog-digital and digital-analog converters and auxiliary circuits
results from microcomputer system development. Thus this technical field is
becoming the most important aspect of electronics and data processing in
Czechoslovakia, and accordingly the scope of this article makes it impossible
to describe in detail all aspects of the current status and development of
microprocessor equipment.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, Nakledatelstvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1981

8480
050: 2602/16

22
Finl(“ﬁﬁC]A1.USE(MVLY
MINISTER OUTLINES 1981—1985 HE‘I‘AILURGY TASKS
Prague EUTNICKE LISTY in Czech No l, 1982 pp 1, 2

[Article by Eng Ladislav Gerle, Scc, deputy premier of the 0883 Government:
"Tasks of Metallurgy in the Seventh Five-Year Plan"]

[Text] During the era of the building of socialism extraordinary attention
was paid to the development of metallurgy in the 0883. The growth of our
metallurgical production enabled us to develop individual industries and,
above all, engineering and construction. The consumption of metallurgical
products was rapidly increasing. The 0889. produced 1,000 kg, and consumed
more than 7,000 kg of steel per citizen, thus reaching one of the highest
levels on the international scale. The high level of consumption of. metallur-
gical products in our national economy also underlines certain shortcomings
and problems in production as well as in the area of processing of ferrous
metals, such as a low share of high-grade steel and cost-efﬁcient profiles
in consumption; the obsolescence of certain technologies in production and
processing also exerted a negative effect.

The prolonged trend of continuous growth in the volume of production and
consequently, also in the consumption of metals is unacceptable for the CSSR.
The 16th crcz Congress stipulated that the level achieved in metallurgical
production must be maintained in the coming years. Any further growth of
engineering production and of all other sectors of our national economy is
incumbent on the annual achievement of 10.5 to 5 percent relative savings of
metals.

This task cannot be regarded simply-as a problem for consumer sectors but
also as the main' objective of our metallurgy. If in the past we viewed the
development of metallurgy as an increase in the volume of production, at
present we must consider it as the development of quality and utility value
of metallurgical products.

This development in our metallurgy as well as in fuel and energy economy is
not unexpected. State goal-oriented programs were adopted for fuel, energy
and metal economy toward the end of the Sixth Five-Year Plan. Their approval
was preceded by analyses in individual national economic sectors and by com-
parison with other countries. According to the estimate, we need approximately
30 percent more steel and energy in the CSSR than in comparable industrially

23
non OFFICIAL use ONLY-
advanced countries to create comparable national revenue. This is due to
high specific consumption of energy in metallurgical works and to inadequate
value added to steel and thus, also energy, in machine engineering. If the
volume of metallurgical production is decisive for many branches of our
national economy, we may speak equally of sources of energy whose stunts and
structure also limit our metallurgical production. For the first time ever
this year, a plan for metallurgical production based on the limits of our
energy balance was stipulated.

In 1981, our government weighed the main problems of the current situation,
the preconditions and trends for the further development of Czechoslovak
metallurgical industry. In terms of our national economy, its basic function
as the base for machine engineering, electrical engineering,-construction and
other industries was' reemphasized. Questions concerning the quality and the
line of metallurgical products manufactured from steel and nonferrous metals
appeared conspicuously in the forefront. Especially the development of elec-
trical engineering, consumer industry and power engineering depends totally
on the dananded line of products made from nonferrous metals, alloys and high-
trade steel.

The standard of metallurgical production is narrowly connected with the con-
ditions prevailing in the base of production and technology. The programs
for development organized during the Sixth Five-Year Plan are investment-
intensive and only their comprehensive exploitation may bring about the
necessary economic efficiency. This concerns above all the so-called pipe
and atomic programs and the related new capacities in the Tube _Rolling and
Iron Works in Chomutov, the State Iron Works in Podbrezova, the Poldi United
Steel Works, National Enterprise, in Kladno, and the Iron Works in Veseli nad
Horavou and in Vitkovice. The development of converter steel production was
organized in the Great October Socialist Revolution Iron Works in Trinec and
the production of high-capacity equipment was concentrated in the East
Slovakia Iron Works in Kosice and in the New Hetallurgidal Works of Klement
Gottwald in Ostrava. The necessary restriction of investment development
programs will also be reflected in our national economy as investment :cuts

in our metallurgy. More than ever we must focus on repair of metallurgical
equipment not only to ensure reliability of production but especially to
introduce programs of reconstruction and modernization in order to improve
the quality and consumption of power.

Furthermore, the management of scientific and technoldgical development must
correspond with the new situation. Its plans must be linked with other parts
of the plan, particularly with the plan for production, economy and re-
placement of capital assets. Relevant are only those solutions whose results
may be applied in production to cut the costs, material, power and raw-
mnterial inputs and to improve the useful value of production. The tasks of
technological development must be dealt with continuously in the following

directions: .

—-in the production of good-quality metallurgical coke from the deteriorating
coal charge;

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ouuun FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-—by reducing specific fuel consumption in production of pig iron, steel and
metal shaping; '

—-by utilizing waste heat and secondary sources of energy;

-—by better utilization of metal substances; by controlled processing of
metallurgical waste, metallurgical ashes, sludge and dumps;

--by introducing new types of steel, metal alloys and lines of metallurgical
products for the machine engineering and electrical engineering industries;

--by improving labor productivity and the working environment, and by de-
creasing the ecologically harmful effects of metallurgical works.

Toward the end of 1981 the Federal Assembly approved the law on the Seventh
Five-Year Plan. Over the coming months it will be specified in the form of
detailed plans for the VHJ [economic production units], enterprises and
plants. It is imperative to approach our labor with the plan in a creative
manner and not with the traditionally specified tasks. The government
stresses the plan as a means to fulfill the basic tasks in metallurgical
production and in utilization of metals as well as in fuel and energy economy
much more emphatically than during the first year of implementation of the
regulations contained in the Set of Measures. Over the past 30 years
Czechoslovak metallurgy successfully established important economic potentials.
Now we must use them efficiently so that they continue to serve as a base and
moreover, as a resource for problems facing the Czechoslovak economy.

comment: sm, Statni Nakladatelatvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1982

9004 I
080: 2’0 02/ 26

25
me omcm. use ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

CZBCBOSIDVAKIA

METAL RECYCLING SAVES ENERGY, HARD CURRENCY
Prague BLBKTROTECHNICKY OBZOR in Czech Dec 81 pp 673-674
[Article by Eng Antonin Radvanovsky: "Waste of Raw‘ﬂaterial?"]

[Text] The scrap metal industry (PKO): it does not sound very attractive.
It is little known to the public, is underrated, and hitherto has frequently

been considered something tolerated somewhere on the outskirts of the
advanced Czechoslovak industrial complex.

Even the name "industry" puzzles the layman. The concepts of "industry" and
"scrap" are opposed in his logic. What can scrap have in common with the
concept of a modern industry? For surely the latter typically has to do with

machinery, transport facilities, domestic appliances-in short, useful new
products. "hat has this to do with scrap, useless matter which the ordinary

citizen is happy to ignore and is glad to get rid of twice a year on "Iron
Heck."

The scrap metal industry--a seeming union of opposites. Chance rather than
design has bound up the past and the present together in this name. A con-
flict between the long since unjustified view of secondary raw material which
persists in the consciousness of the general public and its extreme importance
to the national economy.

To consider this raw material as waste, as is rather common today, is in

reality more than an anachronism. The idea is more than a century out of
date, because with the introduction of the open-hearth process toward the end

of the last century scrap metal ceased to be useless inert matter and became
a raw material-~at first, to be sure, as a tolerated substitute, but later as

a suitable addition to the charge, and today as an essential component. This
is something that e well-versed professional would know.

But even he does not always deal with scrap metal like a good manager. For

otherwise it would not be the case that, for example, of the 200,000 tons of
alloy steel cuttings which Rovosrot [scrap metal enterprise] receives from

mechanical industry suppliers, only 15 percent is unmixed. Some 117,000 tons
of alloy steel is mixed with other scrap in machining plants every year, which

destroys its value. This loses society at least 1,000 tons of chromium, 500
tons of nickel, 100 tons of molybdenum and considerable quantities of other

valuable alloy additives.

FORIOFFKJAIIUSB(MVLY
The situation is similar as regards conservation of nonferrous metals.
Mixtures of copper alloys with tin, zinc, or lead amount to 5,500 tons a
year. Because with available technologies we are capable of removing only
copper fron this mixture, year after year we are poorer by fully 1,000 tons
of zinc, 200 tons of lead and 70 tons of tin. The situation is the same
with aluminum alloys. If scrap operations were managed responsibly in the
machining plants, it would be possible, without additional measures, to
increase deliveries of nonferrous scrap to the metallurgical industry by
8.8 percent in the case of zinc and by almost a quarter in the case of tin.

Obviously, our opening statement about the misconceptions regarding scrap

metal and its value to society apply rather broadly-not only to housewives
and pensioners or other "uninformed" persons, but to certain economic work?
era as well. The facts presented show that secondary metal-containing raw

materials are handled unecononically and at variance with the interests of
society, even where they are the basic materials of the production process

and where there would be every reason to expect that every kilogram would be
used effectively.

A responsible attitude toward secondary metal-containing raw materials is
governed by a simple proportion: the more metal we save, the less we must
import-«and imports are by no means cheap.

He now import almost a full range of metal ores and pure metals. Their prices
on world markets are increasing rapidly. In the 1970's, the prices of iron
ores on capitalist markets increased 20 percent, while copper ores increased
in price by 56 percent, aluminum ores by 138 percent, zinc ores by 160 per-
cent, and tin ores by fully 390 percent. Even though a substantial part of
our imports cone from the Soviet Union and other socialist countries at
favorable prices, the increase in the price of iron ores alone on non-
socialiet markets costs us a quarter of a billion more foreign exchange
korunas annually than it did in 1970. The rising spiral of prices con-
tinues. It is estimated that world supplies of certain metals will last only
a few more decades, which supports the supposition that prices will rise
further. Accordingly, it is the duty of everyone society gives the right of
handling the country's metal supply to use it responsibly, effectively and in
the interests of all.

External factors are not the only ones to play a role, even though they are
unquestionably important. One of our economy's basic tasks is increasing
efficiency. And the use of scrap metals is very promising as regards effi-
ciency. It is a domestically available, easily obtainable and very cheap raw
material.

The expenditure on collection, preparation and transport of a ton of scrap
iron is less than Kcs 180. To produce the same quantity of pig iron we must
expend Kcs 1,717. The processing of a ton of nonferrous metal from scrap
costs an average of Kcs 790, while the purchase prices of primary raw mate-
rials are many times higher. In 1980 the price was Kcs 35,596 per ton for
copper, Kca 15,821 per ton for lead, Kcs 23,416 per ton for aluminul, and
Ken 269,507 per ton for tin. This speaks clearly in favor of scrap.

27
IN3R Oﬂﬂﬂ(1A[.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
But there is another important advantage. The use of scrap metal consid-
erably decreases transport costs. This is'because metal content is about
55 percent for iron ores, 5-6 percent for zinc ores, 2-3 percent for lead
ores, 0.5-1 percent for copper ores and 0.2-0.6 percent for tin ores: a
large amount of dross is transported in the ore.

In contrast, scrap metal contains almost 100 percent metal. If instead of
the 3.3 million tons of scrap metal which Kovoarot delivered to the metal-
lurgists in 1980, it were necessary to transport the equivalent quantity of
ore, the railroads would have had to load and transport over considerable
distances an additional several tens of thousands of railcars.

The use of scrap metals has a favorable effect on the energy balance, which
is becoming increasingly important to society. For every ton of iron pro-
ducted from scrap metal, 0.5 tons of blast furnace coke is saved. A ton of
steel produced from scrap yields a saving of 8,500 th, a ton of lead 9,000
th, a ton of zinc 9,500 kﬂh, a ton of copper 11,800 kﬂh and a ton of alumi-
num 62,000 kWh. If scrap metal deliveries to the metallurgical industry in
1980 had to be replaced by primary raw materials, their processing would
have required an increase of 3.2 CV in power consumption. These are real
values which cannot be ignored.

The scrap metal industry embarked on the path of socialist development 30
years ago. It has given almost a third of a century of useful service to
the development of the national economy. During this time, as the industry's
importance for the development of the national economy has increased
steadily, its nature has changed substantially. Today the mission, work and
processes of the Kovoarot national enterprise are fundamentally different.
From an industry which once was fused in the public consciousness with the
image of the scrap man with his wagon and his cry of "Rage, leather, iron,"
the scrap metal industry has changed into an organization which not only
collects large quantities of scrap metal, but also processes it using modern
industrial techniques and delivers it to the metallurgical industry.

During their existence, Kovosrot's facilities have delivered more than 60
million tons of iron and more than 3 million tons of nonferrous metals to the
metallurgical industry. The uninformed public frequently sees Kovosrot's
mills through the lens of the Raw Materials Collection Enterprise's purchase
points. But this is an image from the remote past of this industry. In 1952

the construction of new, modern facilities began, and in 1958 Kovosrot began
an intensive transition to large-scale industrial scrap processing. This was

a matter of sheer necessity, for the metallurgical industry's demands for
increased deliveries of scrap metals were increasing not by a few percent,
but by tens of percent annually. Kovosrot's equipment holdings gradually
adapted to this requirement. From 1958, with the beginning of large-scale
baling of scrap, through 1980, the volume of industrially processed scrap
increased 13-fold. Now baling cutting, breaking, fragmenting and other
processes are used to handle almost 2 million tons of scrap steal a year;
almost a third of scrap steel delivered to the metallurgical industry comes
from baling presses.

EB
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USElDNlY
The introduction of technology into the operations of the scrap metal indus-
try led to an increase in labor productivity and to higher quality raw
materials deliveries. One important benefit of baling was a 10-fold increase
in the iron content of processed light scrap, which resulted in a decrease
in the number of cars required for transport, but ends itself especially
felt at the furnaces, where charging time was decreased and melting time was
eliminated or decreased. One hydraulic shears for cutting heavy scrap
replaced the work of 20 or more gas cutters, and similar effects resulted
from the gradual introduction of breakers, rams and other mechanisms. The
construction of a modern production-equipment base is unquestionably one of
the most important successes in the still-brief history of the scrap metal

industry.

But technical progress is forging rapidly ahead. What was modern only
yesterday is barely satisfactory today, and tomorrow will be a byword for
obsolescence. This applies doubly to the growth industries, of which the
scrap metals industry is unquestionably one.

Only further modernization can assure that the industry will fulfill its
demanding tasks for the seventh and eighth five-year plans. Trifles are not
involved. By 1990, deliveries of ferrous metals must be increased 26 percent
and those of nonferrous metals by at least a fifth. A substantially greater
increase is expected in the case of the most important nonferrous metals:

130 percent for aluninum, and 146 percent for lead.

Without the installation of new machinery and the introduction of the most
modern technologies, the assignments included in the CPCZ's economic policy
directives and in the economic plans could not be mastered. One approach is
to speed up technical progress. Accordingly, new machines and processes are
steadily appearing in the production process. A considerable contribution to
the handling of ferrous metals will be the expanded baling of chips and the
construction of shredder mills. During the Seventh Five-Year Plan, baling
will increase from the current 30,000 tons to roughly 120,000 tons a year.
The handling of light obsolete scrap such as auto bodies, refrigerators,
washing machines and the like in shredders is to achieve a level of 280,000
tone by the beginning of the Eighth Five-Year Plan. This would mean that

the scrap metal industry would be approaching the worldwide peak in this area.

Gravinetric classification in heavy suspensions and hydrometallurgicsl

processes will be introduced in nonferrous metal preparation plants in the
future, and it is also planned to introduce classification technologies based
on deep cooling.

Thus, without exaggeration, the Seventh Five-Year Plan can be called the
five-year plan of new technology. This is a direction which has been fully
approved by the highest economic bodies of party and state. Their support is
expressed in CSSR Government Decree No 282 of 28 August 1980.

In comparison with previous five-year plans, the volume of investment is to

increase more than twofold; it will financially cover all of the main pro-
posed directions of technical development. Thus the government has decided

29
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to alleviate the grave situation in the transport of scrap netals. according
it the sane preferential treatment in railway transport which prior to

1 January 1981 was accorded only to fuels and export goods. The state docu-
ment also includes several economic. organisational and legislative measures
designed to produce a greater incentive for stepping up the intensity of
collection both at plants and among the populace. In particular, such is
expected from revamping the functions of scrap supervisors at the plants.

The first fruits of these positive approaches are already beginning to be
evident, so that the way is clear for the scrap metal industry to fulfill
its demanding task for the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

COPYRIGET: sun, Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1981

8480
(30: 2402/27 am

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY