FOR ()Fl'll‘lAl. IISF "NIX

JPRS L/10228
31 December 1981

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 11/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL Armas
(P000 11/81)

CONTENTS

CZECHOSWAKIA

Goal-Oriented Program To Reduce Fuel Consumption Viewed
(Ivan Kubec; WECHNICKY 03m, “0 8, 1981) e e o. 0 one. 0. o o

-a- [III-BB-S‘PO

MD human "6? WV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHDSLOVAKIA

COAL-ORIENTED PROGRAM TO REDUCE FUEL CONSUMPTION VIEWED

Prague uncmrwmrm 032011 in Czech so 8. 1981 pp 417-420

[Article by Eng Ivan Kubec. Scc, and Eng Jiri Chonat: "State Goal-Oriented Program
for Rationalization of the Consumption and Utilization of Fuels and Energy"]

[Text] In its decision concerning Iain directions for the economic and social
development of the CSSR from 1981 through 1985, the 16th CPCZ Congress stipulated
vital tasks for rationalized consunption and utilization of fuels end energy, which
it regards as an important source for the restoration of our fuel and energy balance.

The effort to reduce energy consumption in our national economy must not be under-
stood at the sane tine as a task for power-engineering experts alone but as a task
for all our citizens.

The Current Situation

0n the world scale Czechoslovak national economy still figures along energy-intensive
economies despite the conceptual control of problems related to rationalized con-
sunption of fuels and power since the early 1970's and despite considerable accos-
plishnsnts in that area. Our country still has untapped assets whose liquidation
will result in lower energy consumption when creating national income. He see the
main sources of potential conservation in:

--Hore efficient valorization of the fuel and energy inputs in the entire process of
production; i.e.. in higher technological standards of production and innovation on

the part of Czechoslovak manufacturers;

--Upgraded standards in utilization of fixed assets, which automatically implies
higher economic outputs in those capacities;

-¢Lower material consumption in Czechoslovak national economy and. by extension,
also lower consunption of power in the production and processing of materials;

-—Reduced volune of manufactured energy-intensive industrial products to a level
that is absolutely necessary for the further development of our national economy;

a

--Hore efficient use of energy in existing installations and capacities, particularly
boilers, furnaces, electric drives. etc.;

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL NSF ONLY

-‘l‘he standard of fuel and energy conservation in every area of consumption.

the above outline discloses the macroeconomic as well as the narrowly technical
economic, or power-engineering, character of the unused potential.

Hays Toward Solution

The long-range process now being introduced in the Czechoslovak national economy is
focused on the use of every potential for conservation, which will effect to an
increasingly greater extent every area of our life and which is implemented in two

closely interrelated directions.

One is focused on the highest possible increase of efficiency in the entire pro-
duction sphere and, thus, also on the solution of problems related to its consump-
tion of materials and energy. As an instrument for this process the management
uses the Set of lieasures for Improving the Planned Management System of the National
Economy after 1980, approved in early 1980 by the Presidium of the CPCZ Central
Committee and by the CSSR Government.

According to the principles articulated in the Set of Measures, the plan Inst
consistently upgrade the quality of production and raise it to a level higher than
ever before, reduce energy and material consulption, utilize fixed assets to greater
advantage and step up labor productivity. In the economic climate at present and in
the future, intensification of the khozrashchet methods of management implies that
every sector of management Mt strive to achieve the highest possible return on all
resources invested in the production, which applies to power engineering as well.

The other path to lower energy consumption in the Czechoslovak national economy is
a programmed goal-oriented approach combined with specific conservation measures
assigned to individual organisations.

In View of the gravity of problems connected with the reduction of energy conaump-
tion in our national economy, that particular approach had been applied already-
when the first symptoms of a world energy crisis were only beginning to emerge, in
other words, before the prices of crude oil and other fuels exploded.

Early in 1972, the CSSR Government approved the First State Program for Rationaliza-
tion in Fuel and Electric Power Economy, which stipulated that 10 key branches in
industry and transportation conserve during the 1972-1975 period 4.6 million tons of
specific fuels (tsf) at the 1975 level. Review of the isplementation of this pro-
gram demonstrated that actual savings had exceeded the projected targets with annual
savings of 6.6 million tsf on the 1975 level. During that period the consumption of
energy in the anchoslovak national economy declined more than 12 percent; i.e., an
average 2.9 percent annually.

At that time structural changes in the Czechoslovak fuel and energy balance dramat-
ically contributed to a rapid reduction of energy consumption by facilitating the

liquidation of low-telmerature carboniaation of bituninous coal in the chemical
plants in Zelusi, and the introduction of the production of synthetic gas from
heating oils as well as higher inputs of liquid and gaseous fuels in technological
consumption and boiler economy. A very significant measure culminating during that

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-f UNIX

particular period concerned the replacement of railroad steam traction with electric
and diesel traction.

The basic tasks for the second stage of the programmed goal-oriented solution for
reduced energy consumption in our economy were formulated in the Directives for
Economic and Social Development of the CSSR in the 1976-1980 Period, adopted by

the 15th CPCZ Congress in April 1976. The problems of a more efficient economy and
higher valoriaation of all types of fuels, power, materials and raw materials were
presented there as crucial tasks for improving the efficiency of our national
economy; at the same time it was stipulated that from 2 to 2.5 percent of annual
savings of fuels and energy be conserved in industrial branches during the 1976-1980
period.

On the basis of the tasks outlined by the [CPCZ] Congress a new state program for
rationalization in the Sixth Five-Year Plan was drafted and adopted. 1t applied the
experience gained during the preceding five-year plan in resolving problems con-
cerning lower energy consumption. This program was conceived on a substantially
broader basis; furthermore, it included a concept that resolved crucial problems by
higher orders of innovations focused on modernisation and expansion of the produc-
tion of energy-saving appliances and on measures using incentives to stimulate the
interest of our workers in conserving fuels and energy.

The task of the key industrial ministries to conserve 10.6 million tsf in 1980 as
compared with 1975 was exceeded by 22 percent: consequently, the consumption of.
energy in creating national income was reduced an average 2 percent annually.

Although the assigned tasks were markedly exceeded, numerous shortcomings in the
pursuit of basic objectives have come to light.

State Goal-Oriented Program 02

When planning the third stage of the programmed goal-oriented reduction of energy
consumption in our national economy, we were able to proceed from the experience
gained in the fulfilling the preceding two stages and from new conditions stemming
from the implementation of the Set of Measures. They are reflected in the planning
of the long-range goal-oriented program for rationalised consumption, conservation
and utilization of fuels and energy in the 1981-1985 period and up to 1990.

The formulation of the objectives of that program proceeds from comprehensive
assessments of all relevant social, economic, scientific-technological, technical
and international factors and is focused on achieving the highest possible society-
wide effect in the shortest possible time.

The planning of the long-range program began in 1977 with the selection of areas for
potential conservation of fuels and energy and with compilation of specific pro-
posals. The main sources of the proposal for the fulfillment of the program during
that period were the confirmed achievements of scientific and technological develop-
ment; introduction of international cooperation in the production of equipment;
application of patents, licenses and know-how; proposals for the reconstruction

and modernization of the existing power engineering installations and of technolog-
ical processes, as well as the iniative of workers, innovators and comprehensive

3
FOR OFTICJAI.USEIDNLY
FUR \lb'l’iulAL USE ONLY

rationalization teams, on which we may always count, particularly in terms of minor
measures of rationalization and technical organization.

Hhen drafting the proposals, the branches and the Federal Ministry of Technological
and Investment Development availed themselves of the work performed by our scientific
research base and focused on rationalization of fuel and energy consumption. In
particular. the results of the state research program at their disposal had been
resolved by the Research Institute for Power Engineering in Prague and 40 cooperating
organizations of scientific research in several other ministries. It focused on:

--An analysis of the state programs of scientific-technological development under
study and on their processing with estimates of their effects on the solution of
problems concerning reduction of power consumption in the Czechoslovak economy;

--An analysis of the development of specific consumption in the manufacture of
energy-intensive products with the specification of their potential reduction and
with proposals of specific measures that were simultaneously assessed in terms of
technology, power engineering, economy and investment;

--An analysis of the past, current and future trends in reducing energy consumption
in our national economy.

The solution of these problems offered a continuous, constantly complimented source
of potential proposals for rationalization programs whose effects are being assessed
in advance and which may be implemented at an opportune moment by means of the state
goal—oriented program and the state plan.

In addition to this cumulative solution that compiles data and proposes methods of
conservation, work is underway on specific technological research of new installa—
tion. Such programs are centralized in particular in the branches of metallurgy
and construction.

The initial period of preparations was concluded in the spring of 1979 by Decision
No 36,0f the Presidium of the CSSR Government, summarizing the areas of technolog-
ically and economically feasible conservation measures and stipulating further
operational programs.

In September 1979 the Presidium of the CPCZ Central Committee and the Presidium of
the CSSR Government adopted Decision No 250, by which they approved the targets of
the state goal-oriented program for rationalized consumption and utilization of
fuels and energy, appointed the coordinating project manager for the entire program
and project managers for partial programs, determined the extent of the required
savings and listed the most vital operations and measures.

The project served as the springboard for the planning of the state goal-oriented
program that was specified in cooperation with the coordinating project manager--
i.e., the Federal Ministry of Technological and Investment Development-and the
State Planning Commission with appropriate ministries for several chronological
stages for which the specifics of the program were gradually formulated. At the
same time our economic potential was considered in terms of the capacities of pro-
duction, international cooperation and scientific-technological development, as well
as in terms of achieving the projected structure of the Czechoslovak fuel and

power balance.

I.
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After consultations with the ministers of appropriate branches and with the chair-
men of the KNV [regional national committees] the project was submitted to the
Presiiium of the CPCZ Central Committee and the CSSR Government. which approved it
by Decision No 247 of 1980 as a part of the planning for the-Seventh Five-Year Plan.

The definitive version of the program is being drafted with the objective to plan
specific significant and efficient measures of fuel and energy conservation for
inclusion in the state plan for the development of the national economy in the
Seventh Five-Year Plan comprehensively in all structures from the viewpoint of their
implementation (in capital investment and procurement of machinery and equipment)

as well as of their impact on power engineering and economy.

It specifies total savings for individual branches and KNV, investment limits for
their implementation and lists of specific projects of the stats and economic plans.

Within the framework of annual plans the coordinating project managers of partial
programs, or their subordinated organizations, are responsible for all savings
stipulated by the state goal-oriented program as concerns both the amount of savings
and the amount of the required material, technology and investments. This applies
the principle based on the Set of MeasurEs that the state plan considers and
implements construction programs with budget costs over Res 10 million included in
the state goal-oriented program, while the state plan stipulates the tasks and
limits in whose framework economic plans must secure specifically as a priority pro-

gram other construction, machinery and equipment not included in the construction
budget.

In other words, in addition to the state goal-oriented program that will be a part
of the Seventh Five-Year Plan. all investment projects of the program with budget
costs over Rte 10 million are specifically listed in the investment section of the
plan, furthermore, the decision allocates to individual branches and KNV and breaks
down according to years the total amount to be saved by the program.

The plan of the state goal-oriented program 02 lists specific tasks and means to
conserve during the Seventh Five-Year Plan a total amount of 12.6 million tsf on the
level of 1985 as compared with 1980 and, moreover, during the Eighth Five-Year Plan
to t.rget a saving of 27 million tsf on the level of 1990 over 1980. The over-
whelming majority of such savings will be achieved by specific programs with invest—
ments of Ken 17.9 billion in the current five-year plan and additional Kcs 17.6
billion during the next five-year plan.

Structural changes in the concept of our national economic development (a lower
rate of the development of ferrous metallurgy and the change in the concept of

housing construction) will save 1.6 million tsf and technical organisational measures
will conserve 10.8 million tsf of the total savings in the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

Measures specifically controlled on the level of the center will generate 36.8
percent of the savings; the remaining 73.2 [sic] percent of conserved fuel and energy

will stem from measures specifically controlled on the level of the VHJ [economic
production units] and enterprises.

Material Incentives

Material incentives stimulate the interest of workers on various levels of manage-
ment, including managers in the enterprise sphere; in the fulfillment of the tasks

5
roe OFFIGAL use ONLY
FOR OFF‘K‘HI NSF (IVI \

specified in the state goal-oriented program for rationalized consumption and
utilization of fuels and power; they will be implemented mainly by including vital
objectives and tasks of the program in the state plan as mandatory tasks of the
plan and, furthermore, by including appropriate tasks aimed at rationalization and
development of specific consumptions in enterprise plans.

According to the Directives for Implementation of "age Differentiation, issued by
the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs in January 1981, all workers who
may influence the result of appropriate measures for conservation of fuels and
energy, from the plant manager through appropriate managers and technologists up to
workers operating the equipment and appliances or responsible for specific measures,
will be involved in the implementation of such tasks.

Implementation of planned rationalization measures and planned development of specific
consumptions of fuels and energy are among the decisive criteria for the rating of
workers, which determine the amount of their bonuses and rewards. If the planned
tasks and objectives are achieved, the workers who were able to affect the fulfill-
ment of the above-mentioned tasks receive the planned amount of bonuses and rewards.
If the tasks are overfulfilled and if the resulting savings are conspicuously higher
than the plan had projected, the amount of the bonuses is progressively increased;
conversely, if the tasks are unfulfilled, the rates are progressively reduced.

In addition, a statewide competition for conservation of fuels and energy will'
offer ample cash rewards as material incentives to stimulate the interest of
innovators and technicians in the introduction of the latest technology and top
solutions in rationalized consumption of fuels and energy in the production.

The Purpose of Control in the Implementation of the Program

Since the Fifth Five-Year Plan, the method of implementation of the program for
rationalized consumption of fuels and energy has been controlled and regularly
reviewed every 6 months. Those responsible for individual tasks present their re-
ports on the fulfillment of the plan to their superior central organs, which
transfer the collected data to the coordinating project manager; i.e., the FMTIR
[Federal Ministry of Technological and Investment Development].

Thus, the center receives prompt information about any emerging problems, which in
many instances enables the branches and the FHTIR even under changed circumstances
to set-preconditions for the fulfillment or, as the case may be, overfulfillment of
the stipulated rationalization programs.

Independently of the above-mentioned procedure, the People's Control Committee
conducts random and cross-sectional reviews of the fulfillment of the objectives
and specific Ieasures assigned in the program.

The State Energy Inspectorate, which plays an important role in the control system,
regularly verifies the accuracy of the data on the fulfillment of individual
specific programs and the resulting savings reported by enterprises implementing
measures specifically controlled on the central level. Furthermore, it reviews
minor programs at random.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON L\'

The State Energy Inspectorate. which plays an important role in the control system,
regularly verifies the accuracy of the data on the fulfillment of individual specific
programs and the resulting savings reported by enterprises implementing measures
specifically controlled on the central level. Furthermore, it reviews minor pro-
grams at random.

The State Energy Inspectorate also spot-checks consumers of gas, electricty and
heat for their discipline in consumption (this includes cash fines to workers
responsible for ascertained shortcomings). To all appearances this control is not
related to the rationalization program but in reality it prevents contradictory,
nonrational approaches that might negate the achievements of the program. The
power-engineering sector has been equally successful in controlling and accrediting
documentation of plans for new construction projects and energy installations
(particularly in central heat supply).

The third sector of the State Energy Inspectorate-rationaliaation sdvisory service
--is extremely important particularly for the implementation of minor rationaliza-
tion programs. This service focuses on analyses of power-engineering operations and

subsequent proposals of procedures to upgrade efficiency of operations, to survey
the operations and so on.

The results of completed reviews indicate that on the whole the tasks of rationalisa-
tion in fuel and energy consumption have been systematically exceeded during the
Fifth and Sixth Five-Year Plans. Nonetheless, it appears that the highly exceeded
savings stemming from minor rationalization programs that have been assessed by the
enterprises themselves are not systematically controlled. 0n the other hand, most
branches failed to implement to the full exte t specific programs controlled by the
center.

Direct investors blame this situation mostly on the problems connected with the
acquisition of necessary installations, on inadequate consumer-supplier relations,
on changes in the extent or in the technology of the production, which are reflected,
also in the changes of achievable savings. and on overestimated or incorrect cal-
culations of the results of rationalization programs.

The savings achieved in the Sixth Five-Year Plan could have been even higher if the
supplier, particularly the engineering branches. had provided more favorable condi-
tions for the material implementation of the program.

Problems with deliveries of high-voltage semiconductor technology for welders,
rectifiers and drive controls have been in evidence for many years. Approximately
50 to 60 percent of the requirements have been satisfied and no dramatic turnabout
in that situation may be forseen in the near future. Similar circumstances also
affect the delivery of streetcars manufactured by organisations of the Ministry of
Metallurgy and heavy Engineering.

The deliveries of new, highly efficient light sources for the industrial and non-

production sphere will be improved in the foreseeable future and their installation
will save our national economy 396,000 tsf on the level of 1985.

Also, the supplies of thermal insulating and heat-proof fibers and the deliveries of
instruments for meaSuring and control of heat consumption in housing and public
construction will improve.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. IISF "NIX

The state plan for the Seventh Five-Year Plan sets preconditions for overcoming
chronic shortages of such materials; now it depends on responsible approaches on
the part of the workers in appropriate branches to produce such materials promptly
and in sufficient quantities.

Rationalization Is Everybody's Perennial Duty

With the steady progress of the preparations for the Seventh Five-Year Plan it is
increasingly more self-evident that the increment of primary sources of energy
designated for our domestic consumption during this five-year plan will drop sub-
stantially below that in the past and that most of it will be allocated for purposes
other than power engineering (petrochemical industry). Under such circumstances
the fuels and power for new construction and investment projects, including housing
construction, may be acquired solely by conservation of energy in existing buildings
and by utilization of secondary sources of energy. Our national economy may pro-
gress further only if these principles are observed.

It appears with increasingly greater urgency that we must advance to a new, quali-
tatively higher level of rationalization where the choice of programs will fully
reflect not only the volume of the savings achieved but also the price and general
availability of the given type of fuel for our national economy.

Furthermore, it is unconscionable that our domestic manufacture of machinery and
equipment fails to respect the structural changes in the fuel and energy balance.

0n principle, the production of boiler equipment must be reoriented to combustion of
solid fuels available in our country. In the final years of the Seventh Five-Year
Plan and after 1985 more electric power will be generated in nuclear power plans

and in general represent the increment of resources in the fuel and energy balance.
However, priority must be given to its use in the existing areas of consumption as
replacement of crude oil products. Next to heat and power generation. this involves
also their exploitation in technological processes and in transportation. Necessary
equipment, especially furnaces, kilns, scans of transportation. etc., including
necessary accessories. must be made available for that purpose. In this conjunc-
tion the Federal Ministry of Metallurgy and heavy Engineering, Federal Ministry of
General Engineering and Federal Ministry of Blectrotechnical Industry, in coopera-
tion with the PMTIR and the State Planning Commission, must reevaluate the existing
structure of production with regard to the development of the fuel and energy
balance and must supply in the shortest possible time equipment corresponding to

the needs of our national economy.

At the same time, the period before 1985 should be used to plan structural changes
in organizations of production, in order to acquire equipment necessary for efficient
utilization of additional electric power generated in nuclear power plants.

a

The experience with the impleeentation of programs for rational exploitation of fuels
and power thus far has confirmed that the program of the goal-oriented approach to
the solution of positive development in power engineering consumption in Czechoslovak
national economy is correct. It is imperative to develop here a concept as

comprehensive as possible and to integrate it completely within the framework of the
whole state plan.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By adopting the directive for economic and social development in 1981-1985 by
the 16th cecz Congress and by approving the Seventh Five-Year Plan, the stage of
preparations for the state goal-oriented program of nationalized Commtioa and
Utilization of Fuels and Energy will be colpleted and we ehall proceed on to the
stage of its implementation.

At the ease tine we have reached a new atage in the search for ways to fulfill the
assigned tasks and also in the search for ways to intensify further rationalization
programs in the Eighth Five-Year Plan.

COPYRIGIT: sm, n.p. 1961

90010
(:50: 2400/62 END

9
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY