I'UK mm CAI. var. UNI.‘

JPRS L/10299
3 February 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial repcrts, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRCOUJED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(2000 6/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

MNG KONG

Reorganized Customs Service Helps (hunter Drug Smugglers
(Tony Lewis; SOUTH mm IDENING Pm‘r. 22 Dec 81)............. l

Stiff Prison Sentences Given 1b Deter Drug Treffickers
(50m mm mmucposr. 19' 26 he 81)....IOOOOIOOOOIOIOIOOO 3

Imposed by Chief Justice
Based on Quantity Involved

Smuggling of Drugs Into (him by Air, See Increasing
(Tony Levis; SOUTH (318A WIRING POST, 28 Dec 81)............. 5

Attendance at lbthsdone Treatment Clinics mun Slightly
(luau Ihrysnsni; soum GINA “MINING HST, 1 Jan 82)........... 6

Briefs
Drugs Aboard Freighter
new Opium Seizure

NW

NEW ZEALAND

Paper Backs Australian Drug Inquiry in New hslsnd
(Editorial; mpms, 1 me 81)....olseeoesesenses-0000...... 8

PAKISTAN

Briefs
Drug Abuse Discussed 10

- s - [III - WW - 138 F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK Url'lt IA]. Uﬁl'. ONLY

THAILAND

Deputy Prime Minister Cites Costs of Drug Abuse
(“HAN SIAM. 22 Sep 81)caocoo-oasessoooooooooooooossoosoot-as

BPP Operations Arm-1d Ban Bin ‘Ihek mscribed
(Sm RAT. ssep 81)0.0...OUOOIDOOCOOCOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOIOIOIOOO

Backgromd of [Own Sa's Ties With RIG Noted
(SIM RAT. 2‘ Oct 81).OCCOCOIC0.0000000000000000CIOOOCO0.0...

onus Report Lists Tribal Villages Cultivating Poppies
(no: mm NGAN SIAM HA1, 7 Nov 81)...........................

Briefs
Heroin Smugglers Seized
Austrian Held for Heroin
Convicted ank Arrested

IATIN “RICA
BOLIVIA

President Stresses Fight Against Narcotics
(Radio Illinani Network, 19 Jan 82).

Briefs
Drug Trafficker Extradition
Cocaine Laboratory Raid
Cmtons (bnfiscates Cocaine

BRAZIL

Briefs
Cocaine Seized
Drug Ring Dismntled

COLOD‘B IA

Briefs
Harihuana Fomd
Marihuana Seized, Traffickers Arrested
Coca Plants Gonfiscated

MEXICO

Calles Speaks at Drug Seminar
(Jose Vildnis Guerrero; El. SOL IE EXICO. 2 the 81)...........

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pilot Refuses To nanaport Drugs, Gaildren “chapped
(melslok’ 28 My 81)..O...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI0.0.0.0000...

Psychotropics Prom Barburg Seized at Veracruz
(hf‘el ham. Cruz; ”X31510!“ 1 NC 81)..........uuuoouo.

Break-up of Large-Scale Drug Growing. Processing Ring Described
(El. DIARIO I! NUBVO mm, various dates)... ..................

Traffickers Selling Drugs for Weapons Sentenced
(BL DIARIO DB NUBVO LARBID, 110 Dec 81)........................

13 Poppy Growers Captured
PJP '(bda' Area

Plantations matroyed
Official Iuprisonnenr Ordered
Probe Intensified

Trafficker Killed in Monterrey ﬂospitsl

(EL DIARIO DB NIEVO “REID. 9 [he 81).........................

Ibeline in Drug Traffic lbported in Sinaloa

Briefs

Briefs

(EL SOL m SWLOA, 15 NC 81)....0ssssssssssssssssssssssossss

Youth Addiction Increasing
Crackdown on Secret Runnys
Hirihuana Trafficker Released
Poppy Growers Claim Innocenca
ArIIy Antidrug Gawain (bntinued
Heroin Trafficker Caught

Prison Officials Accmed
Traffickers Caudtr in anterrey
Pill Seizures hported

Bar Association Inquiry

Large Ihrihuana Seizure

Porter Official Drug Suspect
Police. Traffickera in Shoooout

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Drug Arrest
Mashhad Opium Seizure
Heroin Seizure in Rash:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

40

141

42

103
43
63
«’06

1010
45
45
105
45

66
46

107
67
47
run ore-nun. um; ONLY

WEST EUROPE
GREECE

Drug Traffickera, Users Arrested in Piraeus
(Bummmn, 2‘ me 81)....00.000.000.000ooooooooonnoeooo

Briefs
Heroin Trafficken

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RmRGANIZED COWS SERVICE HELPS COUNTER DRUG W

Bong Kong som CHINA MORNIN POST in mglish 22 Dec 81 p 25

(Article by many Davis]

[acezpcl

A mutation and
expansion or the Custom
nnd Euiu service It:
helped counter new meth-

inlbccna’ ' hale-uh:
We: and w thin Hour

“3mm: have cnckcd

“mammoth
acclaim an.

.Inuad Md”
“tunic-mm

an witbiuumm
«aha switch m
undo.
Copier: would bril
«hummus-bum

5:
£5
E}

a:
2i?
2%

E 3
=i§
2

i
ﬁ

{if
2?
8g

:3:
f
5
3

:‘iii;
E???
r :5

ﬂ;
,3

an “m
"in the an
.1er .... J
u l 1
Ire-ﬁn Mum“ M
rad: bully. and tr
u m w
0'" wind. cum:
7% ..... .:°...'.
.. Wmdan
of 5”. million. ad m
“00mm.
“The have in“?
I I at a .
autumn-thy“
dhlyur.
TH: yar's many was:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030007-6
39

ﬂ

(n1 intereeptiom of drop at
the at n. the post ofﬁce
and nut e harbour brou’hl to
light new and tophttttated
methods of annulment.

Drop were found mal-
ed inside can: of abalone.
ban or map. tins of gimp.
hollowed-mt rambutn frutt.
metal cyltndcn and ut mo-
chinery ware pom.

(Io-operation from the
local Customs Investigation
Bnrau recently helped at the
m‘xure of 2.8 kilograms of
heroin Ime m! the arrul of
nix people l'." enforcement
agenctesrn m.

Customs ofﬁcers in Ban;-
knk alto treated two women
and mind about 10 kilo-
mm of No l heroin irLch-
tember u-a result of Intelli-
gm patted to them by the

untonu lnvutrptton Bu-
run.

 

FMHW hoe acorn w: Moo wnlh trues . . .

moo at K.- Tolr rpm.
STIPP PRISON SENTENCES GIVEN 1‘0 OFFER DRUG TRAFFICMS

Imposed by chief Justice

Bong Kong 8MB CHINA mRNING POST in mgllsh 19 Dec 81 p 17

[Text]

Th. attic! Justice. Sir
penys Roberts. yesterday
imposed untencee ran3iII3
from nine to 14 year: in
32'“ “‘“ ‘5‘ '3‘“: ”:5

II at or I

3cm: unlawful tref-
Page end menulaetore
olden3erottedru3s.

”To tsentenciq the defend-
Sir ‘Deny‘ eeid Ibo:
m had e
meny condone that for this
typddmoﬂmndeter-
rent team In: oormelly

ltvaseeoentiehl‘io IIIIhe
interest societyt tpeoole
sbonldbedhoonreudlrotn

(3‘)

Or pulled pilty to one
ehe ol Mil. II .166

“we culture 0! out! of

morphine for the perpoee of

unlevl‘nl inﬂicting end no
mad pone-moo ol‘ den-
3erqu re

Theooe'r’t nee to»I that on
1er ll. m olﬁoew
mounted on obeemtioe in
Grenville lloed. Tsimheuut.
n: Ian 0! lavie3 a building
a intolcar.

r93: to Tn Wan
Shea where he entered e

. He amped some
43:63:: Ian with e use
I e I: 3

The oﬂioen intuoepted
him end foeod «new:
dug in the olenic be3be
wee eerryI

0r then the allied: to
e ﬂat in Tie Wen Lone the
some eree when his wife end
childten were livin . There
were about ll I30 drop in
ebedroom.

Or eleo led the other: to
another ﬂat in Grenville
Rad where another quantity
arm-um

The day seized. if con-
verted ieto heroin. had e
meet nleeofSlo million.

Another Attendant. e 36.
grand former teem”. N3

urchin. not sentenced to

'Ily tnben
hepleedodnn toyoeteev
iocs.576.83reouolemix-

teteolieluol’stert olmor-

Moose-nicotine none
oouonooengotednttbtlte

tioe ol‘ den3eroee-

dro3e. meoelecturin den-
3t.eod m
dawn-p.

N3 nee aerated on July 9
when. cm oﬂ'noen Inter-
oeoted him outside the llm
bomlny Centre.

They loud at hime
quantity ol deem anp

mnedioeSIOnote.

After ' " the oll’I-
oere two ﬂats in the
Hen3hom district where
moredrep «rescind.

In one of the nets. II M
On Street. ollioere foen
etcneiIe ouIneeted with the
men-lecture of tho 3m

edtnitted thet the
rho enrlier been need
or'dn3tueeleetenn3,

The ettbneted veloe mot the

seized nee $150M
uotberaee. e 26-yar-

'oamlbxmmoee-

Ieeoe'dtonlneyem' lapel»
onmeetntvooonetadpw

3:... -~"

H0. '50 Ml!-
vuemued oll'Ioeufvom
tbeNerootlI: eoolone
won the roolol the Ocean
Tammerﬂemte

dmn3' the de M been
numbed. y

d.1"heyl'IIIanIltwobepol

W re s ugh-I:

”“13"“ emintnre

abdutmol’motphineln
oer

Hotootthepolloeoll'ioen
toeneﬁmhkeele-tion

§gﬁf1gﬁ$e¢u ”.m'

chain “mam

The tummhede etotel
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007l02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030007-6

Based on Quantity Involved

liong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 26 Doc 81 p 6

[Tutti

CSO:

5320/9109

Two Thai nationals who
arrived in Horteltort; wrth
heroin worth a total of
$1.3 million were sent to

'wn by Mr Justice Jones
tn the High Court on
Thunday.

The court heard that the
drug was hidden in the false
hottonu of plastic hatr cream
tars.

See an Per-the (‘7)-
.ho pleaded guilt to pena-
sion of the drug or trafﬁck-
ing. was sent to prison for ID
yean.

Amorntahottu-ech Kilt-
ettai (:1). who was «zoomed
by a turv after a trial. was
mated to ll years

The My noted that on

the hack of the South
China \dog’rti‘rt¢ Post that day

was a report .an Italian who
was sent to 'ron for 25
years in unﬁt after eon-
viction on a similar charge.
He said that the whey of
the Hangout court: was to
impow avy senteneea for

the offence. which was of the
utmost gravity

He referred to the fact
gm t3 Chiefl harmed
ourt A in it
had laid me a null o
recorttmcttded tentencee ac-
cording to the quanttty of
drugs tnvolved. and sand that
the two defendant: had been
found with a very subunttal
quantity. ~

“Dru. offendera thoold
make no mistake. severe pun;

ishrrtent trill he meted out to
them by the oourta if they
Indulge in this evil but lucra-
tive trade which has the most
appalling social and family
announces.“ the judge
said.

The court was told that
Sac arrived in Horr‘ltont
from Bangkok on July . He
was stopped and mrched
contour pflloera at Kai Ta
“”3. M? “.l l...“ ""

tars cream.
These had false bottoms
which contained 1149 kilo-
grams of a mixture contam-
t Ll” ofheroin.

drn had a meet value
00652 .

Curtomo officers question-
ed Sae and in hence of
what he told thern mt trith
it“ ‘s° magmas: "‘°

ar ra rt n
In Jordan-aloud. aentatt’.” y

Later that day Kittiehai
came into the premises.
wherehehadaroom. Heaaid
he had arrived in "when.
the day previously:

Customs officers found in
his room another 36 plastic
' ta of hair cream with falae

ottoma. There eontaind
IJSI kilograms of a mixture
eontainin Ll“ kilogranuof
heroin dru alto had.
attract valued 50.000.

Kittiehai denied that the
drier belonged to hint and
ta someone else had put
them in his room.

He was convicted by a
jury after a retirement of just
over an hour.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030007-6
MGGLIM OF DRESS IN’IO

Prong Kong

[Article by Tom huts]

[Text]

C50:

Narcolics’ ' “W5

chums oﬂicug us a;

mmmuum
91mm“ um

Du u data an
mayorcmsqmdﬂv
an an inn ‘ ado-
min. «I! gay Ihu

5320/9109

CHINA 3‘! AIR. SEA INCREASING

SOUTK CBINA MORNING P05? in 319115)! 28 Dec 81 p 10

to: yam new maid «may to
m m- M
W “”3“ Chin. '
”m M an on
"'0'“ W m
by tho Ind «gnu.
m 0°“ u Run“ Choose
m and: W

m all M ‘-
'ww‘“ onus. non-am
man. a» ‘Eud'd'n‘ h".
llama In.“

many." dun—mil!
w I“ I“. w--m
- Mac-Impound”
'Nﬁhhﬂ“ M“ h.”
'M lunar.”
M ﬁbula-u
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030007-6

ATTENDANCE AT ME TREATMENT CLINICS DOWN SLIGHTLY

thug Yong SOUTH CHINA PDRNING POST to English 1 Jan 82 p 7

[Article by Rent: Deryaneni]

[Text]

CSO:

.Anothet httmpetaopo‘
alumnae: ‘ted ftoatthe

mule this
month eed next month.
the Communion: for
Neteotice. Mt Peter Lee
heeemnetl

Immaterial
eeathetmtoeeee—the

em reaped any Iett yeet
— if Manet mitt
fevoere Neteetia linen

ee.

BetitLe-ettttelut d'mt'hetthe
meet pnee tte
hiehto Momma
mm Latent

"lt ieeeeetetteeev. feet
that hereto eaten we“:
chapheeoietoeheepteetheo
dole.”heeeitt

Thevheleeeleprieeolloo
nudNthemiemie
ehoetﬁn». In'th
”Mitten!“ .

Whee the eﬂeeta of the
I979 thee in the Geldee
Trleede housemate

ehnetﬂdhepdeethotup

to”).

The drought leeted t-o
mMeeuhiehtheenw
I] opium crop vet only ISO

Be the pmeet ' '

" t wee te
ttillahoetwpeteeethiehe:
then it wee hetote the
dtoeeht. eed it'e nil very
expensive in teletiee to the

.ol the eveteee an.

' til
“15% amateu-
tMtyiat dumbkthe

5320/9109

nethedenedieiaeteevele.
ehle eeytoohnieeheepte—
lief."MtLeeeeid. .
ughmmamy
beepent'tout yeet.
t mu evereoe
attenuates et methedeee
treetneetetiaiahed

w pee cent meet to

Mtlaeenﬂthedmee
m to eheet la) web
eedtheevetueettendeeeeet
a: m is eheet moo e

y. .

Thieutelldtopheem-
mummtheeedll
I thee precede
the ee-hael etteed-

ehcee vent den pew
elly.heeeid. .

Wont. ad“.
drug petal have teed
from the heights in I919. et-
teedeecee ate metehly
Mm” Mt Leeuitt

_ Theeeetne deilx meet!-
emu et the ditto were

iﬁ {too 1976 to July

When the dtoeeht set in.
attendance that up to woo
e «whet Jety.

' hilethe ettettdehoe ﬂ;-
um declined last year. they
heve not dediaedz neetliee
much“. ee l attest " Mt ee
9 .
About 7! pet «at 0! than
' to the clinics etc rege-
etteedeeu. he teid.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030007-6
BRIEFS

DRUGS ABOARD PREIGM'ER--Customs officers from the Anti-Smuggling Division were this
morning searching a Thai-registered freighter after two pounds of dehydrated pre-
pared opium, worth about $32,000. was seized. The opium was found in a false ceil-
ing compartment inside the crews' cabin in the freighter, Nah II, which plies regu-
larly between Hongkong and Thailand. 'No Chinese crew members were arrested in
connection with the seizure and are assisting customs officers with their investi-
gations. One of the arrested men, aged 53, will be charged today with possessing
dangerous drugs for unlawful trafficking and is expected to appear in South Kowloon
Court. The other seamen, who was detained last night, is expected to be released
when interrogations are completed. The vessel arrived from Bangkok yesterday af-
ternoon and was raided by customs officers as a part of a routine search of all
freighters arriving from Thailand. Customs officers said last night they would
search the freighter again today and possibly tomorrow to make sure they had found

all the drugs. [Text] [Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 23 Dec 81
p 15)

restaurant staff quarters at 47 Man Cheong Building, eighth floor, Perry street,
about 10.50 pm on Christmas We. Eight men and a women inside the premises were
arrested. Some raw opium and a quantity of paraphernalia usually associated with
the manufacturing of dangerous drugs were taken away. No charges have yet been
preferred against the people arrested, whose ages range from 23 to 35. [Text]
[Hong Kong 50th cums MORNING POST in English 26 Dec 81 p 1]

C30: 5320/9109
PAPER BACKS AUSTRALIAN DRUG INQUIRY IN NEW 2m

Christchurch THE PRESS in English 1 Dec 81 p 20
[Bditorialx "Australian Inquiry in u.z.")

{Text} The arrangement under which an Australian inquiry into the "Mr Asia" drug
ring may conduct some of its hearings in New Zealand may be unprecedented but it
seem a sensible one. Drug-running is an international business and if two coun-
tries of such sinilar institutional structures as New Zealand and Australia cannot
co-operate, the advantage would go to the drug ring. The point about similar in-
stitutional structures is an important one, hwever: it would not be practicable
for a country with a different approach to justice and procedure to be granted the
same facilities.

If a New Zealander or an Australian were wanted on a serious criminal charge in
the other country, he would be extradited. 1n the instance of the Australian Royal
Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking sitting in Australia: there is no way
in which New zealanders or the citizens of other countries can be cancelled to ap-
pear before the coenission; yet in the ”Mr Asia” affair there was New Zealand and
Australian involvement. The mohanics of the trafficking need to be learned so
that steps can be taken to avoid a repetition. The inquiry would be appallingly
incomplete if only the Australian activity of the drug ring could be considered.
More than that: if New Zealand failed to co-operete to the full, the failure would
appear churlish, if not suspicious.

If it comes to New Zealand, the Australian comission will be appointed as a com-
mission under New Zealand law. This would be necessary for several reasons. (he
is that in sir-toning any New Zealand citizens, if that has to be done, the inquiry
has to have the backing of New Zealand law. A second reason is that any New Zea-
land citizen who gives evidence before the inquiry has to feel the protection of
New Zealand law.

AlthOugh there is little difference between the laws of Australia and New Zealand
on the conduct of emissions of inquiry, New Zealand citizens still have to be
certain that their legal rights are being protected by the law that can be enforced
here. Because the Australian mission would in effect because a New Zealand com-
mission. New Zealand will have full access to the evidence that is presented to
the commission. Some thought night well be given to arranging the secondment of a
New Zealand judge to the emission for the tern of any inquiry in New Zealand.
The question of precedent is important, but should not be too daunting. the al-
ready-well-established formal and informal links between New Zealand and Australia
made this decision easy. The New Zealand Attorney-General, Mr McLay. was ap-
proached informally by the Australian Attorney-General. Senator Durrack. Hr McLay
consulted the Prime Minister, Mr Muldoon, on the point. and it was all settled
reasonably.

Whether other countries with similar institutions would be able to make similar
arrangements is a question for then if the need arises. Because of the special
relationship between Australia and New Zealand in many matters, particularly the
freedom with which people come and go between the two countries without restraint,
the facility with which a emission of inquiry can cross the Tasman may be excep-
tional. Were New Zealand to initiate a similar inquiry, its business would almost
certainly be unfinished if it could not have questions answered in Australia. Pro-
vided that any inquiry is held here under New Zealand rules, there seems to be no
serious objection to taking advantage of what is cannon to the laws and practices
of both countries to bring to light matters that are of concern to each.

C80: 5320/9110
BRIEFS

DRUG ABUSE DiSCUSSED--Federal Finance Minister Ghulam Ishaq Khan has stressed the
need for intensified efforts at the international level to curb the scourge of
narcotics. He said that drug abuse. addiction and trafficking are increasing

at the international level. During his meeting with 0.8. Assistant Secretary of
State Clyde Taylor. he said that Pakistan has enforced stringent punishments
within limits for drug addiction and trafficking. Dominic L. Dicarlo applauded
Pakistan's efforts in this regard and assured his government's assistance in this
campaign. [Text] |nx150a32 Karachi Domestic Service in Urdu 0200 GMT 15 Jan 82]

650: 5330/4598

10
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER CITES COSTS OF DRUG ABUSE
Bangkok TARA" SIAM in Thai 22 Sep 81 pp 3, 10

[Text] Gen Prachuap Suntharangkun, deputy prime minister, stated that the narcotics
has an adverse effect. both directly and indirectly, on national secruity.
especially internal peace and order, since drug addicts are ringleaders in crime.
From the aspect of the economy there is great here to the country. At present

there are about 500,000-600,000 addicts. Each one spends 50-60 baht per day for

the purchase of drugs. Calculated for a whole year this amounts to 10 billion baht,
not including the appropriations for suppression operations. Besides. the drug
traffic diminishes the prestige of Thailand because foreign nations understand

that Thailand is the site for production and one of the main trading centers.

However, in remedying the problem the govern-eat has taken steps to obliterate it
completely, particularly in the areas of prevention and suppression. For control
and correction it has requested aid from foreign countries. for to carry out this
task successfully it must receive cooperation froe every side.

9615
CSO: 5300/6527

11
BPP OPERATIONS AROUND BAN BIN TASK DESCRIBE!

Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 5 Sep 81 p 7

[Text] The drug suppression operation of the Border Patrol Police (BPP) must be
called a blue ribbon job by the DP? District 5, Amphoe Mae Chan, Chaing Rai
Province, which demonstrated force by seizing opium. making sensational news on
the pages of the press. For up to now it had not happened that anyone or any
narcotics suppression unit could confiscate the raw material, that is the opium,
for the production of heroin along with the production equipment, in great
quantities.

This Golden Triangle is well known in opium-heroin traffic circles in Thailand and
worldwide. The Golden Triangle covers the southern part of the Shan State, Burma,
continues to the LPDR, and extends to the northern part of Thailand that borders
on Burma, Amphoe Hae Sai and Amphoe Mae Chan of Chiang Rai Province.

Two heroin production sites were destroyed by the BPP Region 3 force on 10 and 12
August 1981. The first site was Doi Huai Hak, Amphoe Has Chan, Chiang n31 Province,
about one km from the Burmese border and 10 km west of Ban Bin Taek, Amphoe Mae
Chan. In the second operation the same BPP team destroyed opium production at Ban
Huai Yuak, Tambon Pa Sang. Amphoe Mae Chan, Chiang Rai Province.

The seizure and destruction of both heroin production locations were the respon-
sibility of the BPP Region 3 Headquarters, where a basic force under the command of
Police Maj Gen Hichai Hichathanaphat, BPP Region 3 commander. carried out the
operation to the end. '

This success brought honor to the unit in performing their duty with pride. Never-
theless. a great deal of heroin will flow out into Thailand where millions of Thai
youth will be destroyed, their energies wasted. It is killing Thai in cold blood.
The terrain on the Thai-Burmese border in the north is steep dense mountainous
jungle, especially the Golden Triangle area. It is easy to infiltrate and to hide
for those 111 intentioned toward the nation. The terrorists like this kind of
territory, just like the smugglers or the drug traffickers. All these murderous
grOups use this region as a sanctuary until they escape. Besides the terraine
which supports the ravaging of national security there are other problems such as
minority groups and an ill-defined border. This makes the Thai-Burmese boundary
very important. Government officials must realize these problems and be interested
sincerely in solving them.

12
The reporter himself does not understand why both these heroin factories were
located in Thailand, since the Thai do not support the opium trade. But there is

no puzzle about Burma. for Burma has many minorities who make their living "
raising opium and selling it because opium brings a good income. Some minorities
make the opium trade their occupation since they take the money to buy weapons to
fight the Burmese govenrment. for the establishment of independent states. The
Burmese government has used suppression forces against the sinoritiee with continual
struggle in the Karen State, Khaya State, and the Shan State.

Under these circumstances then the Thai-Burma border is the location for heroin
factories for ease of trade and transport into Thailand or for fleeing into
Thailand if they are hard pressed by Burma.

It might be that since the demarcation between the two countries is not clear
narcotics factories will be unintentionally located in Thailand. However, this

problem might not arise if our forces operating along the border perform their duty
in the area of their responsibility.

What must be considered is the group of Khun 8a or Chang Chi Pu, who is influential
and is the leader of the S.U.A. (Shan United Army) forces in the Shan State, which
seeks to liberate the Shan State from Burna. Khun Sa has a base for his force in
Ban Hin Tack, Amphoe Has Chan, Chiang Rai Province. Khun Sa has many heroin
factories on the Btrmcse border with Thailand. He is the world ranked heroin king.
His relatives and nest of the families of his group live in Ben Hin Taek. There-
fore. it can be surmised that the two heroin factories, which the 3?? Company 2,
Amphoe Hae Chan, seized on 10-12 August 1981 belonged to Khun 8a since they were
situated only 10 km west of Ban Hin Taek.

But at the same time from another viewpoint perhaps these factories were not Khun
Sa's, because he does not want to displease the Thai. If Khun Se is hostile to
Thailand, it will be difficult for his force to live peacefully in Ben Hin Teak.
He wants to develop Ban Hin Task as a supply base for his army. Prom evidence at
the time of Khun Sa‘s former arrest, it appeared that he had not even one opium or
heroin installation in Thailand.

In that case. the heroin factories on the Thai border that the BPP Company 2 seized
on 10-12 Autust 1981 must be presumed to belong to the Chinese Haw of the 93rd
division. The behavior of this group has shown that they have profited from the
opportunity offered by support from the Thai government to traffic in heroin and
smuggled goods, within the radius of Headquarters 0‘, which has supervision. Many
times these Chinese Haw evacuees took over state powers by setting up an illegal
customs collection post at Ben Bong Uh, Amphoe Chiang Bao, Chaing Mai Province,
bringing hardship upon the people. Besides this, the Chinese Haw in Amphoe Chiang
Bao monopolized the selling of goods along the border, preventing the Thai traders
from buying or selling. because there is never enough money to satisfy them. They
have enraged the Thai people along the border where the Haw Chinese are living.

The cleverness mixed with fraud, of the Chinese Haw evacuees. who live outside the
control of Headquarters on has made many of them rich. with money in the bank and
property worth millions of baht. These people do not pay taxes to the state and in
many ways their activities are indirectly destroying the national economy. This

is a problem for Headquarters 0d and those who administer the nation to resolve as
a matter of urgency.

13
While the reporter was gathering this information, he received an anonymous
threat warning him not to "touch the 93rd Division“. he did not understand the
reason.

The story of the 3?? is better. The reporter is happy at the success of the

narcotics suppression operation of 3?? Company 2, Amphoe Mae Chan. Their action

makes clear that though the terrain is very difficult, no matter how dense the

jungle and steep the mountains, this cannot conquer the staunch spirit that motivates

performance of duty. This drug suppression fight proves that the 3?? can reach

every square inch of the border. having a sense of accomplishment, and many times
they have given their blood and their lives for the success of their tasks.

If every company along the border had the spirit that support such action, like

8?? Company 2, Amphoe Mae Chang, Chiang Rai Province. we believe that they could
destroy the range of drug traffic from the Golden Triangle that passes south into
Thailand. This would obstruct the army of Khun Sa. the caravans of the ﬂaw

Chinese, and the groups of independent Maser soldiers in the Golden Triangle. It
would sap their strength and leave them crumbling in the end. But the BYP. working
alone, could not succeed because narcotics traffic is worldwide. Information must
be coordinated with working units on a world scale. For example, in this heroin
seizure, besides working with Thai officials concerned, there should be coordination
with the US drug enforcement units. of great importance is that the government

must dampen the fire from the winds, because the drug traffic in the Golden

Triangle has clearly disrupted friendly relations between thailand and Burma. Since
Khun Sa conducts the trade for economic reasons. to build his army for liberation
from the Burmese government, we must close the border with continuous military
operations by the BPP. to destroy those units working the world narcotics trade

in the Golden Triangle. These are the results that would benefit the nation.

1. Promote friendly relations, on a firm bssis, between Thailand and Burma.

2. Help to free the world's people from the great destr ction of narcotics.

3. Destroy the relationship of the ﬂaw Chinese 93rd Division with the Chinese
caravans in the Golden Triangle and destroy the influence of the 93rd Division over
the independent Muser soldiers and the connection with certain politicians who play
a role with the 93rd Division.

“‘15 is a major problem that occasioned threatening words to leave the subject alone.

So then this is courting trouble. But if it is a threat to a man who has a moral
standard, the reporter would be crazy to touch it if there is more news.

9615
C50: 5300/4527

1k
BACKGROUND OF KHUN SA'S TIES WITH RTG NOTED
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 24 Oct 81 pp 19-21
[Article: "Will Khun Sa's State Power Remain or Disappear?']

[Text] "Thailand once had a policy of using minority forces as a
buffer against the expanding influence of outside threats. But
it can be seen that this policy can not be used and is of no

use in the present situation," stated an officialof the national

news agency to SIAM MAI.

At 1700 hours on 7 August, there was a clash between Thai forces
and Shan State forces, a minority group in Burma that lives

in the mountains in the area of Ban Kophaya Samakhi, Mae Kham
Commune, Mae Chan District, Chiang Mai Province. Approximately
100 armed troops crossed into Thailand and surrounded a Thai
force. The clash lasted the entire night.

Concerning this Thai force, a news source stated that it was
composed of [Unit] 513 rangers from Pangthongchai District,
Nakhon Ratchasima Province. The Third Army Area sent the 7th
Infantry Unit, 3rd Battalion, and the 2nd Company of the Border
Patrol Police went to provide support.

"Before the clash broke out, there was a disagreement between

the KMT lenders and so the forces of another group moved down

in order to join the Shan State forces. Burmese troops put pressure
on the Shan State forces and so they had to flee into Thailand,
resulting in the clash mentioned above, “which was just coincidental,"

stated this military news source to SIAM MAI.

The leader of this Shan State force is an important person named
Chang Si Fu, or Khun Sa. He also has a Thai name, which is Chan
Chang Trakun. He is a Ho Chinese. As for the name Khun Sa, Burma
named him this during the period when he served as the leader

of Burmese governmenrt volunteers, whose aim was to suppress

the Shans. He was also once a soldier in a KMT unit. Later on,

15
when some elements 0! these forces in Burma returned to Taiwan,
Khun Sa joined General Li's KMT forces, which . e known as
the 3rd Army.

In the periond 1962-1969, Burma trained Khun 5a and made him
the leader of the volunteers for the suppression of Shan rebels.
But Khun Sa used this position for his own personal gain by
engaging in opium trafficking and he gained great influence.

He gathered together his followers and established a force

to transport opium and produce heroin. He set up checkpoints

to collect taxes illegally and he formed his own personal army,
which is called the Shan United Army, or SUA. Its stated goal

is to win independence for the Shan State. The Burmese government
looked for a way to stop this. Khun Sa was arrested in 1969

and the volunteers were disbanded. But Khun Sa's forces were
unwilling to give up their weapons and so they turned against
the Burmese government.

Then in 1973, these forces kidnapped Russian doctors, who were
serving as advisors to Burma in accord with the Medical Cooperation
Program, in order to bargain with the Burmese government for

the reelease of Khun Sa. Burma sent out even larger suppression
forces and this scattered Khun Sa's forces and sent them retreating
into Thailand. Burma asked Thai officials to help find a way

to negotiate with Khun Sa's group for the release of the two
Russian doctors. Air Chief Marshal Tawi Chunlasap concluded
negotiations at the end of the year.

As for Khun Sa's forces, they have grown from a small force

of approximately 800 men to a force of about 3,000 today. Khun
Sa has fled the suppression activities of the Burmese government
and established his headquarters at Ban Hin Taek in Mae Chan
Dislgrict, Chiang Rai Province, which is near the Thai-Burmese
border. Some of his forces act like civilians but they have
hidden their weapons in places where they are readily available
for use. Some of his men have posed as Chinese KMT soldiers

of General Tuan and General Li and had identification cards

made in order to pose as refugee Ho Chinese.

Khun Sa uses a policy of trafficking in opium and hoeroin like

a godfather. He has tried to expand his influence throughout

the northern part of Thailand that borders Burma. If someone
does not cooperate with him, he has him ”executed.“ For example,
the leaders of Burmesu minority groups that used to trade with
each other have been killed. Thus, it has reached the point
where he now controls 70 percent of the opium and heroin trade
in the north. He also controls five heroin refineries. Besides

16
trafficking in opium and heroin, Khun Sa also deals in jade
and precious stones from Burma: these are openly sent into
Thailand to his companies in Mae Hong Son and Chiang Mai.

Khun Sa's influence on an international level became evident

in 1977. He proposed that the United States government buy

20 million baht worth of opium each year, saying that this

should be done in order to solve the narcotics problem by stopping
the flow into the United States at the source and in order

to use the money to liberate the Shan State. In 1979, Khun

Sa sent some of his followers to assasinate U.S. congressman
Lester Wolff but the attempt failed.

This alter-state influence of Khun Sa in Thailand stems from
his having "high-level protectors.” He has travelled to and
from Bangkok freely and he has a house worth several million
baht in Bangkok. This house was searched by the police this
year but nothing was found. when Khun Sa comes to Bangkok,

he often meets former Thai political leaders of importance
and is very close to them. When great pressure is put on him
to take his forces out of the country, Khun Sa flies in and
discusses things with these important Thais. They always advise
him to ”leave temporarily until the matter dies down and then
enter the country again." This has happened again and again.

The police have never been able to do anything to Khun Sa because,
in addition to his having high-level protectors. some police
superintendents in Bangkok have built houses with money from

Khun Sa. And this is without mentining the policemen in the

north with the rank of police major general or police colonel

who serve as protectors for Khun Sa's narcotics trade even

though they are the ones who are directly responsible for suppress-
ing narcotics.

At the beginning of 1978, the Thai government issued a resolution
concerning chasing all of Khun Sa's forces out of Thailand.

But Khun Sa has continually played a game of hide-and-seek

with the Thai border patrol police. In July 1980, the Police
Department issued a warrant for his arrest. But to date, it

has been impossible to catch him. Also. a reward of 500,000

baht has been offered for his capture, dead or alive, and the
Thai government has distributed leaflets to Khun Sa's forces

to tell them about the reward, but he has still not been caught.

Khun Sa's men, who earn only 200 to 300 baht a month, do not
dare seize him in exchange for the 500,000 baht. The military
news source also told SIAM MAI that the reward will soon be
increased to 1 million baht. The air force once drOpped bombs
on Khun Sa's headquarters at Ban Hin Taek. But since then,

Khun Sa has moved back and forth across the Thai-Burmese border.

17
When Burma carxies on suppression activities, he flees into
Thailand and when Thailand carries on suppression activities,
he flees into Burma.

One [Thai] government once protected Khun Sa just as it protected
the Chinese KMT soldiers because of the return benefits for
doing this. It was claimed that these forces could be used

as a "buffer” for Thailand against outside threats and that

if they were pressured, they would join the communists or take
revenge on the villagers living in the border area. But now,
some government officials have proposed that Khun Sa's forces
are of no value at all to Thailand's security. They only sell
narcotics. which is a danger to humanity and the Thai people.
and they even have contact with the Burmese communists. The
present government should suppress Khun Sa.

The official from the national news agency also told SIAM MAI
in summary that, concerning the “great pressure applied by
Thailand, the Burmese government feels that we are sincere
about this. And do not overlook this clash because there may
be a change in the northern forces. To date, these forces have
never made such a strong attack.

11943
C50: 5300/4564

18
ONCB REPORT LISTS TRIBAL VILLAGES CULTIVATING POPPIES
Bangkok DOI THIM NGAN SIAM MAI in Thai 7 Nov 81 p 1
[ONCB Report]

[Text] Prom various reports received by the ONCE, it has been
learned that, this poppy growing season, Thai hill tribes have
planted large numbers of poppies. They are not cultivating
any substitute crops since opium is bringing an especially high
price this year. In particular, the tribesmen in the following
areas are engaged in this:

1. The Meo village at Ban Khun Chang Khien in Chang Phuok Commune,
Muang District, Chiang Mai Province.

2. The Lisu village at Doi Sam Mun in Wieng Haeng Commune, Chiang
Dao District, Chiang Mai Province.

3. The Mac village at Ban Khun Wang in Mae Win Commune, San
Padong District, Chiang Mai Province.

4. The Lisu village at Ban Nam Ru in Wieng Haeng Commune, Chiang
Dao District, Chiang Mai Province.

5. The Meo village at Ban Phui in Ban Thap Commune, Mae Chaem
District, Chiang Mai Province.

6. The "0 Chinese village at Ban Luang in Mae Ngon Commune,
Fang District, Chiang Mai Province.

7. The Lahu village at Ban Khop Dong in Mae Ngon Commune, Fang
District, Chiang Mai Province.

8. The Karen village at Ban Phamon in Ban Luang Commune, Chom
Thong District, Chiang Mai Province.

19
9. The Lisu village at Ban Pa Kiamai in Wieng Haeng Commune,
Chiang Dao District, Chiang Mai Province.

10. The Meo village at Ban Mae Samai in Pong Yaeng Commune,
Mae Rim District, Chiang Mai Province.

In particular, concerning Ban Luang (No 6), Ban Khop Dong (No 7)
and Ban Ang Khang in Fang District, Chiang Mai Province, there
have been reliable reports that have stated that Phisadet Ratchani

the director of Royal Projects, has given the tribesmen in these
areas permission to grow poppy and is supporting them in this.

11943
CSO: 5300/4564

20
BRI BPS

NEROIN SMUCCI.ERS SEiZED--'i\:o Thai men were arrested late Sunday night while alleged-
ly attempting to smuggle over I. kilograms of No 3 "brain sugar" heroin to West
Germany. The two men, Pramot Kaeoprasoet. 32, and Thoedsak Tosaks, 25. refused

to make a statement to customs and police officials upon arrest. The officials re-
ported thut they found the narcotic drug, neatly packed in 16 plastic bags, hidden
in specially-made secret compartments of the suitcases. The drugs weighed a total
of 4,190 grammes. [BK270930 Bangkok POST in English 26 Nov 81 p S]

AUSTRIAN HELD FOR HERON—Officials detained an Austrian woman about to board a
flight for Rome on Tuesday night and charged her with possession of 1&0 grsmes

of No A heroin. Officials named the woman as Miss Birgitte Ferrari, 21.. They said
they found the heroin in a package tied round her waist and in a tube concealed in
her vagina. The search was made by customs narcotics investigation unit officials
as Miss Ferrari and a male companion were about to board a Thai International flight
for Rome. The man was released after no drugs were found on him. She was detained
at Don Huang police station for further interrogation on charges of possessing

drugs with intent to sell and attempted smuggling. [81(270930 Bangkok POST in
English 26 Nov 81 p' 2]

CONVICTED mNK ARRESTED-~A convicted drugs traffickers, who became a monk three years
ago in an attempt to avoid serving a life sentence, was arrested by a Bangkok north
police team at a temple in Si Samrong District of Sukhothai Province. Deputy com-
mander of the Bangkok north investigation bureau, Pol Lt Col Kittichok Seangnil

said that Ont-at Peng Sae Tae or Phikkhu Sompong had gone to the temple to perform

a re] lgious rite. He was disrobed from the monkhood after his arrest, he added.

In October 1978 Chg-at was sentenced to life imprisonment in abstentia after es-
raping arrest in a police raid in Samut Prakan. During the raid 92.7 kilograns

of heroin, 58.4 kilograms of morphine and 81.2 kilograms of processed opium were
seized. [BK270930 Bangkok POST in English 22 Nov 81 p 3]

C80: 5300/49 18

21
PRESIan STRESSES FIGHT AGAINST NARCOTICS
PYl9l7lo9 La Paz Radio Illimni Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 19 Jan 82

[Text] [Begin Torrello recording] The Government of the Armed Forces wishes to
once again reaffirm its very strong desire to definitely do away with the social
scourge that involves the manufacture and trafficking of narcotics. Hy govern-

ment has repeatedly expressed that 1982 will be the year of the nation's economic
and moral reorganization. [end recording]

This assertion was made by President Gen Celso Torrelio Villa, when they installed
the new executive director of the National Council for the Struggle Against Drug
Trafficking, Lt Col Raul Gonzalez Ferrys who replaces Col (Rene Ocanpo Nonjes).
The ceremony was held yesterday at Government House. Executive branch officials,
members of the armed forces and national police personnel attended the ceremony.

The chief of state also reaffirmed that his government will in no way cease to
continue the head-on fight against the narcotics trade, no matter who is involved
or who falls in that fight.

[Begin Torrelio recording] It will, therefore, be the permanent obligation of the
National Council for the Struggle Against Drug Trafficking to use the law in all
its rigor, without contemplation or weakness, against all those who, directly or
indirectly, are involved in this type of nasty action. [end recording]

The president asserted that the recovery of the nation's dignity, both abroad
and internally, is a top priority task for the government.

[Begin 'l‘orrvllo recording] We will carry out this task no matter who is involved
or who falls. while the nation's armed forces are functioning as a government
and while 1 am the president of the republic, there will be no refuge or asylum
throughout our Va'.L territory for those Bolivians or foreigners who, individually
or by association, traffic in death, in the weakness of a few bad Bolivians

and in the prestige of the fatherland. [end recording]

On his part, the new director of the National Council for the Struggle Against
Drug Trafficking outlined the task he will carry out during the current year.

22
[Begin Gonzalez recording] Our program's priority is that of rationalizing

the production of the coca leaf, in other words, to see that it is used only

for legal purposes in View of the expansion that drug trafficking has undergone.
It would be nice to believe we could stop production completely, but there are
very viable reasons of an (?anthropological), cultural. (7econonic) and
medicinal nature that council us, before taking any auch measure. to be
knowledgeable about the topic, to delimit its conponmts, its benefits and the
evil it can cause. [end recording]

CSO: 5300/2 128

23
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKER EXTRAthluN--La Paz. 21 Jan (AFP)—-A local evening paper reported
here today that President Celso Torrelio Villa will request the extradition

of drug traffickers Roberto Suarez Gomez (Sr) and Roberto Suarez Levy (Jr) from
Switzerland. it was reported that Suarez Gomez and Suarez Levy were captured
yesterday in Locarno (Switzerland) carrying forged passports and trying to
introduce a large amount of money into the country, purportedly obtained from
the cocaine traffic. The newspaper pointed out that Roberto Suarez Gomez. who
has become the most important drug trafficker in Bolivia and perhaps in all
Latin America. has been wanted by the U.S. police for a long time. Therefore,
the possibility for the United States also requesting Suarez' extradition cannot
be dismissed since he is charged with having violated U.S. laws. [Text]
IPYZZIIO9 Paris AFP in Spanish 0010 GMT 22 Jan 82]

COCAINE LABORATORY RAID--A gang of cocaine manufacturers and traffickers using
submachineguns and other firearms had a shootout with police agents who had
diseovered a drug laboratory in the (Okinagua) Zone, Santa Cruz Department.

‘nlc official report, released by the National Council for the Struggle Against
Drug Trafficking, asserts that there were casualties among police officers and
agents, but it does not reveal the number. The incident took place on Saturday,
when the police discovered a camouflaged laboratory, where 4 persons were
captured and 20 kilograms of cocaine were confiscated. The council's report

adds that there is no specific information about what happened to the drug
manufacturers and it asserts that many of them fled and hid in the jungle. Arms,
munitions and a small truck were also confiscated in addition to the cocaine.

The rouncil's experts have begun the appropriate investigation to identify those
invulvcd and to capture those responsible for the manufacture of drugs. The
council alsu reported that its agents have discovered a clandestine warehouse

in whlch coca leaves were being held in the so-called (Pampas de La Isla)
neighborhood in the citv of Santa Cruz. 1he police have confiscated a total

of 10 drums. The drums have been deposited in the council's warehouses. The
pertinent investigations continue. IText] [PY191826 La Paz Radio Illimani Network
in Spanish IIOO GMT 19 Jan 82]

CUSTOMS CONFISCATES COCAINE--The customs inspector general has reported that his

agency has handed over 3.150 kilograms of cocaine to the National Council for the
Struggle Against Drug Trafficking. The drug was confiscated during an operation

carried out on 15 January in the neighborhood of (Cuati). [PY210150 La Paz Radio
lllimani Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 19 Jan 82]

C50: 5300/2126
BRIEFS

COCAINE SEIZED—-It has been reported that the Department of Political and Social
0rder (DOPS) seized 20 kg of unprocessed cocaine last weekend. No detainees were
reported. [PYZlOlSO Sun Paulo Radio Bandoirantes Network in Portuguese 1000 GMT
19 Jan 82)

DRUG RING DISMANTLED—-1he Department of Political and Social Order (DOPS) has
reported that the seizure of 40 kg of cocaine in the township of (Codie) has

led to the dismantling of a drug ring linking Hanaos-Sao Paulo-Miami. Three
traffickers have been arrested. while two others have been identified. [PYZlOlSO
Sao Paulo Radio Bandeirantes Network in Portuguese 1000 GMT 20 Jan 82]

650: 5300/2126

25
BRIEFS

MARIHUANA FOUND--Bogoto. 12 Jun (lASlN-REUTER)--The police last night reported
that a shipment of 62 tons of narihuana was found yesterday near a clandestine

landing field in Barrancas. La Guajira, 900 km north of Bogota. The police said
that the airplane that was to take the marihuana to the United States did not
arrive on time. There were no arrests. [PA160400 Buenos Aires LATIN in Spanish

0633 GMT 12 Jan 82 PA]

MARIHUANA SEIZED, TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED-~The Colombian authorities seized 4,680 kg
of marihuana and captured three well-known international drug traffickers. The
operation took place in a farm in (Matias) district, jurisdiction of Riohacha.

La Cuajira department. The drug traffickers were identified as: (Jose Adan
Padilla). (Luis Alfonso Nieles) and (Andrea Enrique Pautivas). [Bogota Cadena

Radial Super in Spanish 2330 GMT 13 Jan 82 PA]
COCA PLANTS CONPISCKTED--Bogota--Police authorities today confiscated 270,000
coca plants worth 60 million pesos. The seizures occurred in Barrancas and

Miraflores in La Guajira department. There were no reports of arrests. [Text]
[PA171509 Bogota Radio Cadena National in Spanish 1730 GMT 16 Jan 82 PA]

C80: 5300/632

26
CALLBS SPEAKS AT DRUG SEHINAR
Mexico City EL SOL DE MEXICO in Spanish 2 Dec 81 p lZ-A
[Article by Jose Vilchis Guerrero]

[Text] Dr Mario Calles Lopez Negrete. secretary of public health and assistance
[SSA]. said yesterday that to fight against narcotics traffic and the unlawful
consumption of drugs 18 not only a government duty, but also a duty of man toward
his fellow human beings.

0n inaugurating the Seminar for Agents Responsible for Drug Control in Latin America
of the United Nations, in the naee of the President Lopez Pbrtillo, Dr Calles Lopez
Negrete asked for international solidarity to intensify the battle and "to reach

the print where each human being is consciously master of himself."

The event is taking place in the conference center of the lbreign Ministry and
was organized by the International Narcotics Control Board of the United Nations,
with the support and coordination of the Mexican Government through the office of
the Attorney General of the Republic.

Yesterday, after the inauguration of the activities of the participants, the
Attorney General of the Republic, Oscar Flores Sanchez, referred to efforts made
in Hexico under the present administration. during which the cultivation of drugs
was reduced by 90 per cent.

The attorney general. Flores Sanchez indicated that the Mexican anti-drug program
was orchestrated in collaboration with all countries affected by the production
and traffic in drugs and now --being 90 percent successful--"Hexico places at the
disposition of all interested countries the experience it has gained."

For his part. Dr Calles Lopez Negrete informed the participants that in Mexico
"this business, the most criminal and irresponsible imaginable. has been fought
street by street. The severity of the penalties has been increased and preventive
measures. repressive operations and therapeutic measures have multiplied."

All for the purpose of preventing Mexicans froe becoming victims or perpetrators
of an offense which constitutes a crime against all humanity."

27
He then reiterated that "we will continue to seize and burn large shipments. He
will continue to increase measures of prevention and of rehabilitation among youth.

He will continue to apprehend and imprison those who produce or traffic in drugs in
our nation's territory.

Finally. the head of SSA stated that this battle against drugs lust be coordinated
with all countries, because it concerns a "crime which dehumanizes nan."

9678
050: 5300/2101

28
PILOT REFUSES TO TRARSPORT DRUGS, CHILDREN KIDNAPPED
Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 28 Nov 81 p 6-D

[Text] For his refusal to transport drugs to the United States, the children
of Pedro Rafael Lora Heyer, airline pilot of Aeronaxico; Abigail Daniela and
Rafael Lora Lopez, 2 and 1-yeardold respectively, were kidnapped in the 010 de
Agus district.

Lora Heyer inforled the Judicial Police that his wife, Blanca Lopez, was involved
in drug trafficking, and her acconplices, by means of telephone calls had

advised hin that if he did not carry drugs to the neighboring country, his
children would be kidnapped.

The kidnapping of the children occurred yesterday at 7:30 in the house of the Lora
Lopez family, Presaa Street. in the district mentioned.

Roman Hernandez Palscios, head of the Judicial Police group stationed in this
town said that there are no clues as to the whereabouts of the children and that
they search wide areas, since several witnesses who were present said that the
gunmen fled toward Pachuca. Hidalgo.

The kidnappers also beat the pilot's wife. The pilot stated that the drug
traffickers tried to force him to fly a plane loaded with drugs.

The traffickers used suhnachineguns and pistols to carry out the kidnapping of
the children. The airline pilot of Aeroaexico stated that his wife. Blanca, was
involved with criminals of this sort since she was 13 years old.

The first coanander of the Judicial Police of the State of Mexico, Alejandro

Cuevns Cones. said that note than 50 aenbers of the organization are investigating
the case and that they hope to recover the two children alive.

9678
C80: 5300/2101

29
PSYCHOTROPICS FROM HAMBURG SEIZBD AT VERACRUZ
Mexico City BXCBLSIOR in Spanish 1 Dec 81 p 8-D
[Article by Rafael Medina Cruz]

[Text] A cargo of drugs valued at more than 775 million pesos was intercepted in
the port of Veracruz by agents of Interpol Mexico, who also arrested three
narcotics traffickers who are part of an international gang which operates in the
United States, Europe and Mexico.

The drug had been brought into Mexico under the name of a chemical product called
"eulfaguanidina" but on making the analysis, it was determined that it was
methaqualone considered by the Health Code as a psychotropic.

Almost 5 tons of the drug were brought in from Hamburg, in a ship flying the
Swedish flag in the name of the laboratories Industria Medicinal Americana S.A.
where they were delivered.

The Interpol Mexico investigations rere begun when Interpol Ger-any discovered
that since 1979 large quantities of aethsqualone were being sent to Europe. the
United States and Mexico under another name.

That organization requested the collaboration of the Mexican attorney general.
and the chief of that organization, Oscar Flores Sanchez, ordered Cdr Florentine
Ventura Gutierrez. director of Interpol Mexico. to begin the investigation.

Ventura Gutierrez and his special group started inquiries and after receiving
reports from the United States. they continued their investigations in Jalisco.
Nnynrit. State of Mexico, Veracruz and the Federal District.

Having sufficient evidence already, Commander Ventura and the agent from the

Public Federal Ministry for special cases. Javier Coello Trejo. proceeded to

arrest the narcotics traffickers. Manuel Godoy Calderon, a narcotics trafficker
known in Guadalajara; Manuel Arnulfo Lopez Loera, for whom a warrant is outstanding
from the second judge of Monterrey District; and the German, Holger Markman Mamero.
an international narcotics trafficker.

The public federal sinister, Javier Coello Trejo. advised that two other members
of that gang were still at large, one Mexican and the other a foreigner.
..-.u t .....q‘ .... .\ .. .5.... . ... n..... ..u.. a... .u.u. ... .\..u.u .t.......h. ..". ... ...... ...
a partner of the company, ﬁlobe Chemical S.A.. which is engaged in the importation
of chemical pharmaceutical products, with offices in Mexico and Germany.

The gang, considered by the attorney general as one of the most powerful on an
international scale, in order to import the drug, made it under the name of '
another substance and were also giving as eonsignees different laboratories
involved in drug traffic.

Certain information was vorroborated and surveillance was instituted in the port
(if Veracruz. 19 November, the date the shipment arrived covered by invoices and
documentation which gave the appearance that L0 tons of "sulfaguanidina" were
coming in on board the vessel.

Those arrested confessed that since 1979 they were engaged in the bringing in of
this drug, with which they were processing mandrax pills, whose sale is prohibited.

with the seized rargu. they would process mire than 31 million pills.

The investigation oi the Attorney general, arcording to Coello Trejo. was started
Zlminrhs ago.

Those arrested were sent yesterday to Reclusorio Oriente of the city of Mexico.
at the disposition of the seventh judge of the district in criminal matters.

 

The drug arrived In these drums from Hamburg, Germany, which would be made into

more than 31 million psychotruplc pills.
9678
«so: 5300/210I

31
BREAK-UP 0F LARGE-SCALE DRUG GROWING. PROCESSING RING DESCRIBED
l3 Poppy Growers Captured
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUBVO LAREDO in Spanish 11 Dec 81 Sec C p 1

[Text] Federal Judicial Police agents under orders from Comdr Jose Siordia Jimenez
dealt a terrific blow to the drug traffic in the area of poppy growing and opium gum
processing when they captured 13 persons engaged in this illegal business, and also
seized approximately one kilogram of opium and other items used for processing that
drug.

The permanent campaign against drug trafficking being conducted by the Office of the
Attorney General of Justice of the Nation has brought splendid results, breaking up
large drug trafficking rings and confiscating all types of implements used by the
poisoners to convert and process drugs.

During a surveillance operation on the Mante Gomez Farias Highway, the group of
Federal Judicial Police agents detailed to this town succeeded in arresting 13
individuals responsible for growing poppies. who were questioned to determine the
sites on which the plantations were located and the number of persons engaged in
this illegal work.

During the questioning to which the 13 subjects under arrest were subjected, they
stated that all of them were natives of the states of Durango and Sinaloa. from

which they were taken by the ringleaders of the group to grow poppies in this state,
because it was a more strategic location for smuggling the drugs to the United States.

They claimed that they had brought the opium gum from the hill known as La Cima, in
the municipality of Xicotencstl. Tamaulipas. a site inaccessible by ground transpor-
tation. because the only way of reaching it is on foot or by helicopter.

Those in custody said that. on this hill. there were approximately seven poppy
plantations covering an area of about 16 hectares. nine of which were in the
productive state, because the rest were lost owing to the temperature.

The poppy growers also said that they had planted the crop about June, with 30
persons from the aforementioned states engaged in this.

Upun being interviewed. the Federal Judicial Police conmander, Jose Siordia Jimenez,
stated that the air surveillance units had not detected the plantations, because they
had been planted at the rate of about 100 plants per 500 meters. However, upon
the capture of part of the ring, a group of agents and members of the National
Army was assigned to "sweep" the area and destroy all the remaining plantations.

The group of 13 subjects arrested turned over to the Federal Judicial Police
approximately 1.5 kilograms of opium gum, which is worthy between 750,000 and'
800,000 pesos per kilogram.

The federal authorities estimate that there is more processed opium gum on La
Cima hill; which is why the members of the National Army and the Judicial Police
agents have specific orders to capture the other members of the ring and to
destroy the plantations.

Those in custody are: Manuel Quinones Quinones, Antonio Quinones Angulo, Eloy
Osunn Vidana. Oscar Villarreal Angulo. Roberto Quinones Quinones. Luis Vargas
Villa, Jose Guadalupe Ortega Ortega, Alfredo Honarrez Honsrrez, Pilar Magdalena
Torres. Bxiquio Rito Quinones Quinones, Manuel Navarrete Nevarez, Maximina
Arteaga Villa and Teodoro Quinones Torres.

All of them will be turned over to the agency of the Federal Public Ministry,
where penal action will be taken against them for the crimes that may be attributed
to them in connection with drug trafficking.

Moreover, the federal authorities have begun investigations for the purpose of
arresting the "ringleaders" of the group, because all those under arrest were
apparently only responsible for growing and processing the poppies.

PJF 'Comb' Area
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 12 Dec 81 Sec B p 3

[Text] After the tremendous blow dealt to the drug traffic with the capture of 13
poppy growers. the Federal Judicial Police have issued specific instructions to
all their agents to "comb" the area of "La Cima" hill in the municipality of
Xicotencatl. Tamaulipas. and to destroy the plantations of that crop which the
subjects in custody claimed to have in the aforementioned location.

Thus far. despite the swift action taken by members of the Army and the Federal
Judicial Police to capture the "ringleaders" of the group. the latter have succeeded
in evading the authorities; but the investigations will continue until the "fat

fish" fall into the hands of the law.

when interviewed, Federal Judicial Police Comdr Jose Siordis Jimenez said that steps
had been taken to locate and destroy the plantations which the 13 poppy growers
claimed to have.

He also gave assurance that a "hunt" has been started to capture 17 more persons
who are in collusion with this matter and who were not captured by the federal
agents during the first raid.

The capture of this group of individuals will expose a large ring of poisoners
who have beenoperutingin the entire northern section of the country.

33
Thln action has proven once again the magnificent job being done by the Federal
Judicial Police against the drug traffic, on the basis of the permanent campaign
begun by the Office of the Attorney General of Justice of the Nation.

Plantations Destroyed

H. Matamoros EL BRAVO in Spanish 14 Dec 81 p 8

[Text] Over a period of 4 days, a fleet of helicopers from the Office of the
Attorney General of the Republic was engaged in fumigating the poppy plantations
discovered in the municipality of Xicotencatl. Tamaulipas, over an area of 16
hectares. Specialized equipment was used for the aforementioned action, involving

the largest discovery ever made in this state insofar as drug plantations are
concerned.

The Federal Judicial Police agents, headed by the regional commander of that
entity, Jose Siordia Jimenez, and the general coordinator, Carlos Aguilar Garza,
took nearly 2 days to arrive at the highest part of the mountains where, based
on the investigations that were under way , those poppy plantations were located.
As reported at the time, the investigations began with the arrest of a woman who
had 75 grams of opium gum in her possession, and who had been supplied from those
plantations which were situated on a farm called "La Cima".

It had been raining; they traveled along paths for many hours; it was a very
arduous journey, and even more difficult owing to the harassment from hordes of
mosquitoes and other problems germane to the mountain area. However, it was
necessary to strike the sudden blow in order to be effective, and it all turned
out well.

When the plantations had been discovered, the assistance of the Army was requested
to carry out the destruction.

At some hour of the day, the especially equipped helicopters located each one of
the plantations. The vigilance was tightened up over several kilometers of the
vicinity to ward off any gunfire on the part of the drug traffickers who had been
affected. The entire operation took place in complete calmness.

Then the fleet of helicopters destroyed the plantations. There were several of
them. and each one had an area of from two to four hectares.

The poppies had been grown on any level plot of loud in the most obscure section
of the mountains, and the clandestine laboratory for processing the opium gum had
been set up.

The commander of the Federal Judicial Police in Matamoros, Mr Benito Estrada Villa-
gomez. explained the action which had been taken since the beginning of last

week and which ended last Thursday; an effort led by Comdr Siordia Jimenenz and

the coordinator, Carlos Aguilar Garza.

A large portion of the planted poppies had already been scored, to cause the
dripping of the gum from which the heroin and morphine are obtained after process-
ing. It is assumed that they had been supplying that drug for some time to the
market in the United States.

34
Samples of poppy plants and opium gum, and the laboratory equipment for the
processing thereof. were taken to Nuevo Laredo. Some samples of this action

taken against drug production are also being held at the Matamoros headquarters
of the Federal Judicial Police. '

The pertinent authorities will also have to consider this case an example of the
fact that there are areas in Tamaulipas where any kind of drug can be grown, and

that therefore the vigilance will have to be intensified in order to prevent
their cultivation.

The preliminary investigations of this case are still being conducted directly in
Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas, where the 13 persons who were captured are being held
in the federal jail.

Official Imprisonment Ordered
Nuevn Laredo BL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAKEDO in Spanish 19 Dec 81 Sec C p 3

[Text] The 13 persons recently captured by the Federal Judicial Police with opium
gum and poppy plants in their possession received the writ of official imprison-
ment yesterday in the third district court for crimes against health; while at
the same time the case is to be transferred to the circuit court of Tampico,
Tamaulipas, because the incidents occurred in the municipality of Xicotencatl,
which belongs to that jurisdiction.

Yesterday. the writ of official imprisonment was issued by Federal Judge Ricardo
Rodriguez Villarreal against 13 individuals who were captured last week by Federal
Judicial Police agents, for their presumed guilt of crimes against health in the
degrees of poppy planting and harvesting, and possession of opium gum, as well as
trafficking in that drug.

Those implicated in the case are Manuel Quinones Quinones. Bxiquio Quinones
Quinones, Teodoro Quinones Torres, Haximina Arteaga Villa, Oscar Villarreal
Angulo, Antonio Quinones Angulo, Guadalupe Ortega Ortega, Manuel Navarrete
Nevarez, Pilar Magdalene Torres, Alfredo Honsrrez Monarrez. Jose Roberto Quinones
Quinones, EIOy Osuna Vidana and Luis Vega Villa.

After the writ of official imprisonment had been issued. Federal Judge Ricardo
Rodriguez Villarreal demonstrated his lack of authority in the case; hence, it
will be turned over to the circuit court of Tanpico, because the incidents took

place in that jurisdiction.
Probe intensified
Nuevn Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 22 Dec 81 Sec 3 p 3
[Text] Today, Federal Judicial Police forces dealt a mysterious blow to the drug
traffic in the national territory by capturing 31 members of a well organized ring

that had been operating in the northern part of the country, at the height of
their illegal activity.

35
At the instruction of Gen Raul Hendiolea Cerecero. director of the PJP, an intense

Investigation was started in the port of Tampico, the town of Nuevo Laredo and
part of Huasteca in Veracruz, in order to locate the brains of that powerful ring.

The probe ended with the arrest of 13 drug traffickers who, at the time of their

capture, had in their possession a large amount of opium gum, heroin and recently
harvested poppies.

The centers of operation in these towns acted as distribution sites for hard
drugs which were sent mainly to the United States, while another portion was
allocated for consumption by the addicts in these areas.

Teodoro Quinones Torres, Antonio Quinones Angulo, Eloy Osuna Vidana and Luis
Vargas Villa were the main "ringleaders" who headed the organization of drug
traffickers in the northern part of the republic.

The Federal Judicial Police director ordered the immediate disposition of the drug
traffickers. and instructed a group of Federal Judicial Police forces to concentrate
in the town of Nuevo Laredo, Tanaulipas. in order to capture the possible accom-
plices of this ring who had managed to escape in the process of the arrests.

36

'ﬂxcse tun subierts Imm'd Luis Vargas Villa and Jose Guadalupe Ortega Ortega had been
engaged in gaming poppies since June, when they planted that crop on [a Cima hill.

Brought iron the state of Sinaloa, Exiquio Rito Quinones Q. and Manuel Navarrctc

Nevarez were engaged in growing poppies, which will be destroyed on their plantations
by National Army forces and Federal Judicial Police agents.
For their part in the growing of peppies in the municipality of Xicotencatl this
January, Alfredo Minarrez Mnnarrez and Pill: Magdalene 'lbn'es will be remanded to the

Federal Public Ministry where they will be confronted with their accomplices.

itiximlna Arteaga Villa was also captured by the Federal Police in the company of
the poppy growers. In the photo she appears with Teodoro Quinones Torres. Both
are members of the large ring of opium gum traffickers. 'Ihe authorities are
expected to capture the ringleaders within the next few days.

290‘)

(30: 5330 ()1
I 39
TRAFFICKERS SELLING DRUGS FOR WEAPONS SENTENCED
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 14 Dec 81 Sec C p 3

[Text] A few days ago, the third district judge, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal. handed
down a sentence against two individuals who had been captured in January by Federal
Judicial Police agents and were found with marihuana and high-powered weapons in
their possession.

For crimes against health in the degrees of possession and trafficking, and the
collection of weapons, the third district judge issued a sentence of 8 years in
prison and a fine of 1,500 pesos for an individual named Jose Maria Galvan Alejandrez,
a resident of 1826 Lucio Blanco Street; while sentencing Arturo Alvarado Martinez.

a resident of 2858 Iguala Street. to 3 years in jail and giving him a fine of 5,000
pesos for his guilt in committing crimes against health in the degrees of possession
and trafficking.

The aforementioned individuals were captured by Federal Judicial Police agents on
16 January of this year, after a series of investigations to capture those traffickers
who were known to have been engaged in this illegal business.

When the two subjects were questioned, the first-mentioned said that he had sold the
marihuana to Arturo Alvarado, so that he might resell it; and that it had been
supplied to him by a cousin of his named Ismael Sanchez Saucedo.

The drugs had been brought from the state of Michoacan, to be taken to the United
States. where they were exchanged for high-powered weapons, which they were bringing
Into the country illegally to be taken to the south.

In addition to the drugs which the federal authorities seized from Arturo Alvarado
and Jose Maria Galvan, two pistols and five rifles were confiscated from them.
These weapons were 380 and 22 caliber, and were placed at the disposal of the local
garrison.

2909
C80: 5330/61

40
TRAFFICKER KILLED 1N MONTERREY HOSPITAL
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LARBDO in Spanish 9 Dec 81 Sec 3 p 8

[Text] Monterrey. Nuevo Leon--At exactly 0200 hours on Monday, the fourth floor of
the Huguerza Hospital in this city was shaken by the repercussions from four gun-
shots which caused over 20 patients who had been resting to jump from their beds.

Unidentified individuals reached Room 507, where Hector Fernando Gonzalez Flores. aged
37,was confined. He had been adaitted at 1930 hours the previous night because of a
bullet wound in his right forearm.

At a press conference, the chief of the State Judicial Police, Capt Jesus Torres
Espejo. said that the one or more assassins had gained entry into the hospital
using a construction project being built beside this hospital; which is why no one
noticed their arrival or saw them leave.

The now deceased had a record as a drug trafficker, having served a sentence of 6
years and 3 months in the notorious Lacunberri prison in the Federal District. He
was incarcerated in 1972. at the time of the scandalous death of Gen Humberto hariles
Cortez, also for the same crime; and had changed his residence to £25 Rio Nava, in
the Del Valle housing development in this city.

The State Judicial Police found Hector's car abandoned, with several bullet holes;
and therefore it is presumed that his death was a Mafia-style execution by those
who had already attacked his in the morning. The car is a 1975 Ford with Ruevo
Leon license plates RHC-7h5.

Perla Gutierrez. Hector’s wife. a native of Acapulco, Guerrero. was miraculously
saved. because she was sleeping on a cot beside Hector's bed. However, the one or
more assassins disregarded her. proving that they were only interested in putting
an end to the deceased.

2909
650: 5330/61

41
DECLINE IN DRUG TRAP?IC REPORTED IN SINALOA
Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 15 Dec 81 pp 1, 2

[Text] There is currently a decline in the drug trafficking activity in the Sinaloa
mountain area and, thus far this month. only 210 poppy and 18 marihuana plantations
have been destroyed by fumigation, over areas measuring 25,630 and 1,800 square

meters, respectively. representing an insignificant volume in comparison with the
plantations 5 years ago.

The battle has become more difficult for the forces from the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic. because the plantations have been reduced to the maximum
possible extent, and this has caused the tracking effort to become more extensive,
successfully locating small plots which are destroyed immediately.

In making the foregoing statement. the coordinator for Zone 06 of the permanent
campaign against drug trafficking. Hector Aviles Castillo, explained that the pheno-
menon that is occurring at present may possibly be due to the ideology of Mexicans
who like to be near their families about this time of year, and who do not want to
give any cause for their arrest.

He added that, at the present time, there is less movement and. consequently, but
few drugs as well; but that this is no reason to stop seeking plantations. because
when the pressure is eased he is certain that the activities of those engaged in
planting drugs will become intensified.

Aviles Castillo said that. every day, reconnaissance flights are being made: while
in the areas where marihuana and poppy plantations have been detected. the helicop-
ters proceed to destroy them with the fungicides which have been improving. putting
an end to the plants without hurting the ecology.

In conclusion, the Zone 06 coordinator noted that, fortunately, the situation in the
state and in the mountain area adjoining the states of Chihuahua. Durango and Nayarit
has been extensively controlled; which represents assurance insofar as the activity
of the permanent battle against drug trafficking is concerned.

2909
080: 5330/61

42
BRIEFS

YOUTh ADDICTION thREASIRG—-Hexico City, 28 November (EXCELSIOR)--The drug addiction
in the country is on the rise, particularly among the youth. Therefore, the
Secretariat of Health and Assistance has requested that the Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic increase the action in the border zone where the highest
rates of drug dependence have been recorded. The foregoing report was made in the
medical department itself. where it was explained that recently about 200 tons of
drugs seized by the office of the Attorney General of the Republic were incinerated.
It was claimed that the drug-addicted adolescent population on the border with the

United States is becoming increasingly larger. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL HARANA in
Spanish 29 Nov 81 Sec A p 4] 2909

CRACKDOHN ON SECRET RUNWAYS-—The general directorate of civil aeronautics, which is
subordinate to the Secretariat of Communications and Transport, has issued orders to
its personnel operating in Sonora to redouble the surveillance, especially in the
coastal and mountain areas, to prevent all the landing strips which exist and which
are notregistercdfrom operating outside of the law. Stiff penalties will be imposed
on those violating these regulations, and they could even go to jail. however, the
small nunber of personnel available,aa well as equipment,has made a general tracking
of them difficult. The few clandestine landing strips detected have been discovered
by Federal Judicial Police forces in the campaign being conducted by that entity
against drug planting and trafficking. At the headquarters of the command at the
General Ignacio Peaqueira Airport it has been reiterated that, even though all the
landing strips are the only means of communication for some settlements in the high
sierra, it is recommended that those using then register them, so as thereby to
furnish a complete report on the number of then. Moreover, there will be continued
penalties for all those who use such strips for riding teams of horses, because they
leave them in very poor condition, with the resultant risk of accidents for the small
aircraft using them. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 29 Dec 81 See A p S]

HARIHUANA TRAFFICKBR RELEASED-Yesterday. Tomas Degollado Ramos obtained his provi-
sional release on bail after having been sentenced to 6 years and 10 months in prison
as an individual guilty of a crime against health, according to a report from the
third district judge. Degollado Ramos entered jail on 21 October 1980, his case
being connected with Simon Hariscal and Ramiro Pena Ayala. Hariacal was driving a
flatbed truck loaded with marihuana which they were attempting to take over to the
United States on communal farm land, when they were caught by Federal Judicial

Police forces. The aforementioned case was highly publicized at the time owing to
the large amount of grass that they were carrying in the vehicle. The Federal
Judicial Police made a roundup of individuals, in which connection there are some

63
awaiting sentencing who managed to escape, while others are still in jail serving
long terms. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 18 Dec 81 Sec B p 7] 2909

POPPY CROHERS CLAIM INNOCENCE--Yesterday, during the course of their statements in
the third district court, the 13 individuals arrested in connection with the opium
gum seized from them by the Federal Judicial Police flatly denied the charges.
Maximina Ortega Villa, from whom they seized 75 grams of opium that she was to use
as a sample for making a transaction, claimed that the Federal Police who captured
her as she was riding in a vehicle along Mante-Gomez Paris Highway. the captors
themselves, had given it to her, making her state, by means of threats, that it was
her property. The same claims were also made by the others, who said that they had
been subjected to severe torture and beatings to force them to confess their guilt
of possession of l kilogram and 100 grams of the aforementioned drug, but that they
are actually innocent. They are: Manuel Quinones Quinones, Antonio Quinones Angulo,
Eloy Osuna Vidana. Oscar Villarreal Angulo, Roberto Quinones Quinones, Luis Vargas
Villa, Jose Guadalupe Ortega Villa, Alfredo Monarrez Monarrez, Pilar Magdalena Torres,
Exiquio Rito Quiroz Quiroz. Manuel Navarrete Nevarez and Teodoro Quinones Torres.
[Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 17 Dec 81 Sec 8 p 11] 2909

ARMY ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN CONTINUED—-Nogalea, Sonora, 17 December (PH)--The commander
of the local military garrison, Cen Beriberto Bello Fernandez, announced that the
campaign undertaken by the Army to curb drug trafficking will continue on a permanent
basis. and has the necessary capacity to intervene directly when the situation so
requires. he said that, at the instruction of the Secretariat of National Defense,
both in Nogales and elsewhere in the country, our armed institution is being kept on
constant alert to check in an effective and timely manner any resurgence of this
activity. acting in coordination with the Office of the Attorney General of the
Republic, through the Federal Judicial Police. The main functions carried out for
this purpose are the timely detection of those trafficking in drugs, proceeding with
strict adherence to the law. he claimed. With regard to Nogales, Bello Fernandez
noted that there is relative calm in this area, and he does not foresee any major
resurgence of this activity. thanks to the vigilance exercised by the federal
authorities. Despite the foregoing. he said that both the Attorney General's Office
and the Army are keeping stringent control over the area, to prevent this from
happening, by detecting and immediately curbing any possible outbreak. [Text]
(Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 17 Dec 81 Sec D p l] 2909

HEROIN TRAFFICKER CAUGHT--The coordinating entity of the Office of the Attorney
General of Justice of the Nation in the northeast, residing in this port, announced
the arrest in Monterrey of an individual named Pedro Burgos Lugo, with 280 grams of
heroin and 270 grams of a brown-colored powder which, based on its features, would
appear to be a substance used to cut heroin. The capture of this individual took
place as he was about to deliver the drugs to some American drug traffickers who
managed to flee the scene. The Federal Judicial Police reported that Pedro Burgos
Lugo was captured outside a supermarket located on Ruiz Cortines Street in that
Monterrey settlement. He had the powder in a briefcase, and it was confiscated from
him along with a 38 caliber pistol which he was carrying at his belt. with six
usable cartridges. it was claimed that this subject is being questioned properly,
and assurance was given that new information would emerge from these probes, to put
an end to all the members of this ring of vicious criminals. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo
EL MANANA in Spanish 26 Nov 81 Sec 8 p 7] 2909

44
PRISON OFFICIALS ACCUSED-~Four guards and the secretary of the director of the
state penitentiarywere arrested as presumed responsible for drug traffic which
exists within that prisOn. The regional coordinator of the Campaign Against

Drug Traff1¢k1“8-Jose Domingo Martinez Riverol, announced the arrest of the
secretary of the prison's director, Jose Luis Bautista Serrano and of the guards
Antonio Lopez Ramos, Luis Lazaro Santiago Perez, Conrado Garcia and Joel Gonzalez.
Martinez Riverol said that they would continue the investigations to arrest the
other persons who are involved in drug traffic in the state penitentiary which

hzlgs 700 prisoners. [Text] [Mexico City EMCBLSIOR in Spanish 21 Nov 81 p 32-A]
9

TRAPPICKERS CAUGHT IN MONTERREY--Monterrey, Nuevo Ieon--Held in the custody of
State Judicial Police agents. at the disposal of the federal authorities, are Pedro
Lira Torres, aged 52, a former uniformed policeman and, until yesterday. a guard in
this city's prison; Gustavo Leal Cavazos, alias "El Borrado". a taxi-driver and
bartender; Ana Maria Rodriguez Lopez and Ramon Silva Ponce. all accused of engaging
in the illegal drug trafficking business. It was agents Raul Perez Macias, Mario
Segovia. Rodolfo Martinez and group chief Jorge Flores Enriquez, under orders from
Comdr Raul Reyna Rodriguez, who after a long, tedious investigation, managed to
capture the ring of drug traffickers who had taken up residence in this city. The
State Judicial Police members found in Gustavo Leal Cavazos' domicile three bags
containing grass which was apparently marihuana, as well as cocaine and pills,
worth over a million pesos on the drug black market. They also confiscated a pickup
truck. a 22 caliber revolver, and several boxes of 22.380..25.22 and 9 mm magnum
ammunition, and retrieved a check in the amount of 30,000 pesos. 33.000 in cash and
a switch used to steal any kind of car. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE MUEVO
LAREDO in Spanish 15 Dec 81 Sec C p 2] 2909

PILL SEIZURES REPORTED—-Mexico City. 21 December (OEM)—-The Office of the Attorney
General of the Republic announced that, during the current administration, since

the permanent campaign against the cultivation and distribution of drugs began, 35
million toxic pills worth over 500 million pesos have been confiscated. The PGR
statistics indicate that most of the toxic pills have been seized from international
drug trafficking rings. and a few national ones, which had their clandestine labora-
tories primarily in the states of Sinaloa and Jalisco. Included among the drugs
are LSD and metaqualone pills. as well as other stimulants sold clandestinely in
drug stores and among students at the various educational centers. The deputy
attorney general of the republic, Samuel Alba Leyva, for his part. explained that
during the permanent campaign against drugs 22,000 drug traffickers. both native

and foreign. were arrested. He explained that some of them were farmers, who were
released because. as a result of a socioeconomic study to which they were subjected,
it was discovered that they were victims of the drug traffickers. who took advantage
of their poverty and ignorance. The official noted that, this year, there has been
a considerable decline in drug trafficking in Mexico, owing to the fact that the
drug traffic has been combated at its roots. with 90 percent of the drug crops
destroyed. [Text] [Cullacan EL SOL DE SIMALOA in Spanish 22 Dec 81 p 2] 2909

DAR ASSOCIATION INQUIRY-.The 2-hour visit paid to the facilities of the Office of

the Attorney General of the Republic by the members of the Sinalos Bar Association,
AC.nffordedthcnembers of that entity an opportunity to observe the treatment given

55
(n (hr pvrsnnﬂ who have been arrested. and also to become familiar with the work
that is being done in the battle against drug trafficking. The foregoing was learned
from statements made in this regard by the president of the Bar Association. Jesus
Michel Jacobo, who remarked that they had been cordially received by Hector Aviles
Castillo, coordinator of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking in Zone 06.
The latter provided them with an extensive explanation of the action being carried
out by the PGR in the state. With regard to the jail quarters, Michel Jacobo said
that, at the time of their tour, those in custody indicated that they had not
received bad treatment during the 6 days of their confinement; however, they did
complain about the deplorable sanitary conditionswhicﬁiprevail in that place.

[Text] [Culiacan EL SOL DE SINALOA in Spanish 21 Dec 81 p 11] 2909

LARGE MARIHUANA SEIZURE--Mexico City, 27 November (ANPE)-—Over h million pesos'
worth of marihuana was seized by the Federal Judicial Police after a battle with
drug traffickers who had the drugs in their possession. The confiscation took place
at dawn today in the settlement of Caracoa, Michoacan, on the Curindalito farm,
where Andres Barajas and Octavio Diaz Barrera were captured. Reports issued by the
Judicial Police state that, yesterday, they arrested Leonardo Cruz Reyes, in Zasanda
de Morelia, as he was heading toward the settlement of Charro, Michoacan, carrying
with him 20 samples of marihuana which. according to the statements made, he claimed
to have intended to use in a purchase-sale transaction. Later. Cruz Reyes said that
in the settlement of Apatzingan de Romero. in the municipality of Tiquiche, Michoacan,
he met the chief, Francisco Ambriz Barajas, owner of the drugs and of several farms
on which the marihuana was grown. Several of the drug traffickers escaped during
the gun battle which took place, because they had various types of alert systems.
Found on the site were 180 plastic bags contained approximately 2 tons of marihuana,
covered with sesame seeds. Also discovered at that location were several weapons

of different calibers, and lists of "customers." The drugs and those arrested were
placed at the disposal of the Federal Public Ministry for remand. [Text] [Fiedras
Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 28 Nov 81 pp 1, 2] 2909

FORMER OFFICIAL DRUG SUSPECT--Francisco Bsquivel Gutierrez, who was a chauffeur and
aide of the former state governor, Mr Manuel Bernardo Aguirre, is either a trafficker
or an addict. Me was found yesterday between Mariscal and Mejia Streets and at the
time, according to the test of the report issued by agents Garza and Sifuentes, he
was applying powder to his nose which turned out to be cocaine. He was even in the
usual or typical stance of those who sniff that drug. And if that were not enough,
when he was searched they found on him a bag containing drugs. The police offices
do not know whether Esquivel is an addict or sells drugs. Insofar as is known,

he reportedly did not even drink liquor, but that was during the 6 years when he
served as an aide to the former governor. It is impossible that he could have
changed so much in such a short time, and even reach the point of becoming addicted
to drugs. As everyone knows, during the final months of Mr Aguirre's administration
Pancho Esquivei held several positions. he was even director of the municipal
prison. He soon became notorious for the harshness of his nature. [Text] [Ciudad
Juarez EL FRONTERIZO in Spanish 17 Dec 81 Sec B p 2] 2909

Pohlfﬁ, TRAFFICKERS IN SHOOTOUT--Uruupan. Mich. 25 Nov--The commander of the PJF,
Jorge Nunez Mora, said that the Judicial Federal Police seized 1,735 kilograms of
unrihuono after an encounter with narcotics traffickers at the Cuerandito ranch,
in [he municipalitv of Caracuaro. of some 15 persons who were looking after the
drug. and who opposed the police, six were captured and their pistols, rifles

and shotguns were seized. Apart from the drug which they had in sacks, the agents
lnrotcd four plantings which were destroyed this morning. Thoae arrested were
lurncd over to the Federal Public Ministry in Morales. [Text] [Mexico City
EXCELSIOR in Spanish 26 Nov 8| p 32-A]

46
BRIEFS

DRUG ARREST--The Central News Unit reports that following the investigations by the
antidrug headquarters during the past week, about 300 kg of opium together with 15
million rials cash and three 03 and Bernos were discovered belonging to a drug
smuggling gang. According to this report. during the past week, also discovered
was 7 kg of heroin from a heroin smuggling gang in Mashhad. [Text] [L02403lb

Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 23 Jan 82]

MASHHAD OPIUH SEIZURE--During the past week the Mashhad antidrug squad seized

300 kg of opium, 15 million rials and three 6-3 and Berna rifles from four persons.
The squad also seized 7 kg of heroin during the past week. The squad also seized
500 kg of opium and 25 million rials during the past month. [CF240551 Mashhad
Domestic Service in Persian 1630 CHI 23 Jan 82]

HEROIN SEIZURE IN RASHT--Thanks to the persistent efforts of the brothers of the
Islamic Revolution Guards and the cooperation of the Moslem and revolutionary
people of Area of Ashrifiyeh, 23.3 kilograms of heroin was seized from a smuggler.
According to a report of the Islamic Revolution News Agency from Rasht. this
quantity of heroin was seized after a search of the house of Ahmad Ma'sumi, a
well known smuggler in the Ashrifiyeh area, and he was arrested and turned over
to the Islamic Revolution Prosecutor's Office. [Text] [Tehran ETTELA'AT in
Persian 12 Jan 82 p 2]

C80: 5300/5354

57
DRUG TWJCKSRS, USERS ARRESTED IN PIRAEUS
Athem MV'I'HKRUHPIA in Greek 21; Dec 81 p 1, 8

[keel-mg The war on drugs waged by the General Security of Piraeus continued

on Christmas with the breakup of another gang. Nine persons were arrested, two
dens were closed down and several quantities of narcotics were seized before they
had a chance to reach the illegal market. More specifically, the following were
arrested: Giorgos Kourakos, 3?, drug trafficker; Zoumboula Panagiotou, 28 3

Kosmas Giannakos, 22;, also known as "Commas" Triandaiyllos Triandai‘yllidia,

37; Vagis Hake, 21; Khrysostonoe Mathesis, alias "Bahomis," 25; Vrenos )Ukoniatis,
alias "Fafoutia," 27; Giannis Nikolaou, 22; and Di-itra Khsritidou, 18.

The shove worked together with four others who are in the Korydauos prison for
drug trafficking. The two narcotics dens belonged to Kourakoa, at 38 Kypros
Street in Nikeie, and to Khr. Hathosis at 112: V. Konstandinou Aveme in Aghia
Varvsra. In the first don [the police) found 20 grams of heroin, 35 grams or
hashish, 25 grams of marijuana, 15 grams of hashish gum, several capsules or
"Romidon," 65,000 drachnss and instruments for drug packing. In the Bahoumis
den [the police] found 12 grave of heroin and 110 capsules of "Roaddon."

The initial investigation that followed the arrests] revealed that Konrakos
procured the heroin from Thai [fhaila . suppliers. He moved most of the drugs
to the illegal market of drug addicts but kept some quantities for his own den.

Kourakos also procured hashish from gypsies he refused to identity. He was also
getti ng marijuana fror transient "tourists” he met at disreputable night clubs.
In turn Kourakos supplied Bahoumis' den in Aghia Vsrvars.

All of then: have connections with the Korydallos prison where their colleagues

are: "Vaporakias," Gianni: Nasseris, alias “Papias,” Giannia Kondogiorgis, alias
"lines," nkis ﬂanges and Giorgos Panopoulos.

7520
050: 5300/5358

148
BRIE-‘8

HmOIN TRAFFICKm-Tuo more drug traffickers, carrying 75 gram of heroin, were
arrested in Salonice. They ere Ioemie Dinitriedie, 26, end latex-0e Teenauree,
117, residents or Seleniu, carrying 73 end 2 grams of heroin reepectively.
Dinitriedie had purchased 130 grams of heroin 2 months ago from a Peldeteni
merchant he net in Istanbul. Tamas m Wins the heroin fro. Dimitriedie and
selling it to on people in Salonice. They were both referred to the public
proeecutor. ﬁat? @thme TA ﬂat in Greek 28 Dec 81 p lg? 7520

csc: saw/531.8 3“”

49