FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10479

26 April 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 26/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFIGAL [SE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain infomtion primarily froa foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforlution was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was suIIIarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itass are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no vay represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPmIGlT LANS AND REGUIATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(FOOD 26/ 821

CONTENTS
TERRORISM
ITALY
Revelations by Neo-Pasciat 'llepentant ' Terrorist Tisai
(Antonio Carlucci; “mom, 1 Mar 82) ..................
POLITICAL
ITALY
List of Pro-Soviet Personalities in PC!
(Matteo Spina; PM. 1 Mar 82) ....
MILITARY
FRANCE

Radar , Attack Qualities of New Generation Alpha Jet Described
(Gerard Collin, Jacques Horisset; AIR 31' cosmos. 13 Her 82)

'Datex 82' Exercise Tests Attack, Defense, Detection Capacity
(Jean de Galsrd; AIR 81' cosms. 20 liar 82)

Training, Recruitment, Selection of Helicopter Pilots
(AMBS D'AUJOURD'HUI, Mar 82) ..........................

Training Methods. by Michel liege
Nev Selection Criteria. by Maurice do Vasselot de Regne

Colonel Urges Preparation for musical Harfare
(Claude Meyer; ”0388 D'AUJOURD'EUI. llar 82) . . . . . . . . . . . .

-a- [III-WB-ISOE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[VI VI‘C'ILIM 09". UNLI

GENRE“.
FRANCE

CNES Plane New Building. for Satellite Project.
(AIR ET COSNS, 6 Her 82) ...............................

NETHERLANDS

Minion, Problem of Security, Intelligence Services
(Indie van noun; van mm, 20 m:- 82)

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REVELATIONS BY neo-usctsr 'RBPMANT' 733303181? ‘I‘ISBI
Milan PANOIAHA in Italian 1 Her 82 p ‘9
[Article by Antonio (.srluc-zi: "What a Big. Dust Black Halal")

[Te-gt] ‘l'-=-e repentant 'l'issi's confessions open a new chapter
in the enquiry into the "state nassacre."]

The latest broadside against the carsbinieri has been fired. Aldo 'l'isei. 28.
the most important black terrorist of those who have collaborated with the
ngistrscy after their arrest. has made serious :rouble for two colonels, one
a najor. the other a former captain. For these twomembers of the armed

forces his accusations have been so exact that the ROIIII judges have signed
warrants of arrest against them. The major. Sergio Vscchioni. until his
arrest a liaison officer with Crisinalpol. and Sandro Spsgnoli. ear-captain
and businessmen since his discharge. have both ended up behind bars. As for
Salvatore Pspps and Luigi Caraco. both lieutenant colonele. the judges did
no nore than issue a judicial commique and cancel their passports.

Vecchioni. now confined in Fort boccea. Rome military prison. has had to
defend himself against grin charges: having for years favored the meters

of the black cell headed by Prof Paolo Signorslli. marked by the judges as one
of the top leaders of fascist terrorism. According to ‘l‘isei. an iron pact
between the fascists and the officer-for five years cousnder of the Tivoli
company, 30 kilometers fro. Romeo-celled for information in exhange for his
protection.

The first contact between Vecchioni and Tisei occurred in 1975. Pros
information furnished by the black terrorists. the carsbinieri discoverd

the cache of pistols and other weapons captured in an underworld armory. From
this initial contact between confidant and po! ice. the affiliation expanded

to other actions. "ﬁe turned over to Vecchiozi the infatuation we collected
during our investigations into the local reds. and [in return] he guaranteed
us adequate protection." ‘l‘isei told Judges Alberto hacchia and Roberto
hapolitano.

This cospact was functioning smoothly when the carsbinieri officer advised
Tissi and Sergio Calore. a fascist accused of mrder. to take a change of
air for a while: the carsbinieri in l'ivoli had recieved a fire request fron

FOROFHCIALIJSEONLY
I‘ll UI‘I‘ILIAL var. Ul‘l.‘

Rome for data on the black terrorists in the area. But the problem was
resolved within a few weeks with a watered-down report.

Much different in the Sandro Spagnoli story. Tisei maintains that this
ex-officer had always been a militant in the Ordine Nuovo. the extreme
rightist group which had gone underground after it was dissolved. although

it was responsible for acne of the goriest crimes cosmitted by fascist
terrorism. To provide better cover, Spagnoli decided to enlist in the
carabinieri. washe an infiltrator beyond suspicion? This is a question the
judges continued to ponder even when they read the list of black militants
commanded by the ex-officer. who is now accused of armed assault. Just when
he was on guard service with his unit at the Celio military hospital, the
escape of Nazi criminal herbert Kappler was being prepared and carried out.

These facts involving the carabinieri are the latest in a long series outlined
in hundreds of page: of interrogation. When Aldo Tisei went to prison in the
spring of 1981 for extortion against the businessmen of Tivoli. the judges
investigating black terrorism had no interest in him. But then he let it be
known that he had something to say and. within a few days, proved to be a
goldmine of information.

Lest it be thought that he was telling fables, he promptly confessed to
having conceived two murders--of Judge Vittorio Occorsio and Adel-o Cipriano,
one of whose relatives was a weapon collector and target of the neofascista.
Then came a robbery in which millions of lire were seized at the Ministry

of Labor and various bank holdups. This revelation Tisei followed by
reconstructing the history of Ordine Nuovo and other units of the terrorist
right.

He explained how professor Signorelli became head of the group in 1976.

first by maintaining close contacts with the unit's former leaders who had
fled abroad (Salvatore Francis and Elio Hasagrsnde). then abandoning them to
realize his own ideas in organizing the Autonomia Pascista move-ant on two
levels. one clean and public. the other clandestine. ready for "military
action“ and holdups for self-financing.

A position of outstanding importance now want to Aldo Tisei. particularly
after the arrest of Pierluigi Concutelli, who assassinated Judge Occorsio in
January 1977. Following that event. Tisei rose to the rank of the band's
military chief in tandem with Sergio Calore. Thus. the repentant was always
abreast of everything that happened; he also gathered information on the
black terrorists' past exploits. In fact, he offered the judges a hitherto
unpublished witness report on the role played by Stefano Dells Chiaie,
recognized leader of the Avanguardia Razionale, at the sane time full time
confidant for the Ministry of the Interior in the case of the Piazza Fontana
massacre and the complicity of all black terrorist units which helped Franco
Freda escape from obligatory confinement in Catanzaro.

But the repentant did more than clarify details of many episodes which the
magistracy had been probing for years. His revelations have been new and
highly disturbing. Incredible at first was his account of fascist espionage

2
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLV
in behalf of the Libyans in exchange for ares. drugs and money. And when
Tisei declared that the corpses of two youths killed by mistake could be
found in a snail artificial lake on the periphery of Rome, the investigators

obtained fire confirmation of the secrets he had up his sleeve.

Before opening the chapter on the carabinieri, Tiaei had told another tale,
one that landed Geruno Sangernano. Florentine lawyer and ever a defender of
fascist killers. in jail. "he was the liaison between our coeradee in jail

and the organisation."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Hondadori Editors, S.p.A. Hilano

9653
C50: 3104/158

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LIST OF PRO-SOVIET PERSONALITIBS IN PCI
Hilan PANORAHA in Italian 1 Mar 82 pp 35-38
[Article by Matteo Spina: "All Brezhnev's Hen"!

[Text] This is the list of the personalities who remain
faithful to the USSR. and their real political weight.

As Vadin Zagladin. CPSU vice deputy of international relations. confided to
Adalberto Minucci. nember of the PC! secretariat. the Soviets have no intention
of abetting or financing a rupture within the Italian cousunist party. And as
PANORAHA has been able to ascertain in Moscow. the CPSU only wants to stimu-
late the debate. and provoke censure against the present PCI leadership.
promote efforts to document and disseminate infornation on the socialist
countries. just as INTERSTAHPA. the review founded by Ambrogio Donini and

his feisty septuagenarian comrades. is doing.

The Soviets are counting on Armando Cossutta and his numerous friends all
over Italy. in sympathy with the old-time partisans. Hoping for active
Italian-USSR exchanges. they rely on the tough elenents in the unions.
detecting favorable prospects in the South. in the traditionally labor zones
of the North. the region of Veneto. and the red cities of Emilia and Tuscany.
After taking an extensive poll in nany regions of Italy. PANORAHA can now
trace a map of the PCI menbers who do not see ”the propulsive thrust of the
October Revolution" as exhausted by any means.

Paolo Robotti—-Communiat worker of the first generation. brother-in-law of

Togliatti. iron-bound Stalinist. even though he was imprisoned and tortured
in the USSR during Stalin's regime. In 1980 Roberto Bapoleone published his

book "ChosenPromlife." In his presentation he declared positively that had
the PCI summit broken off with Moscow. it would have been swept into oblivion.

Roberto Napoleone--Before undertaking INTERSTAMPA. among other publications he
issued the works of the Czechoslovak lusak. Always in difficulties. neverthe-

less he disdains charges that the East is financing his current project.
Aabrogio Donini--Por the nth tine. this octogenarian professor has thrown

himself into the pro-Soviet adventure with youthful confidence. After the
PCl'a protests on the Soviet takeover in Prague in 1968. he organized a

I!!!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ!(ﬂVLY
run vre sun-ea. sun. anus

"conservative" pressure group which. it was said. followed a program which
had much in couch with the Manifesto group.

Guido Cappellonim-Party administrator responsible for the Middle Classes

Section and typical apparatchik. he is known to be moderate in internal
politices but pro—Soviet in international affairs.

Mino Rash-Former NATO comander. senator of the independent Left. he was
among the first to spend full time i“. pro-Soviet agitations at the PCI base.
participating in dozens of asselblies in every part of Italy. He publishes a
review STRUGGLE FOR PEACE.

Luigi Cioffi Degli Atti—Vicepresident of the Central Control Comission. PCI
unit endorsed by nany old-time leaders. some of them once consigned to the
periphery by ‘l'ogliatti. Shy. unwavering in his loyalty to the party. he is
considered more a case of conscience than anything else.

Giulio Cerreti--78. collaborator of Sorel. Thorez and ‘l‘ogliatti. from 1932
to 1945 he was a member of the PC? Central Couittee. The USSR awarded him
the Victory medal. Elected to the Constituent Assembly. he served in four
parliamentary legislatures. He is on the board of directors of INTERSTAMPA.
and contributes to it an anti-Berlinguer column.

Giorgio Colorni--Partisan eat-commander and former chief editor of UNITA. He
resigned his post as secretary of the Milan ‘l‘ogliatti section because of
irreconciliable difference with the party's central co-ittee decisions.

Guido Valabrags--50 years old. expresident of the Italian Youth for Zionism.

ear-director of the Contemporary Hebrew Documentation Center, for years a
collaborator in the Mid« 1e Bast section of RINASCITA. today professor of Near

East history at the University of Bologna. lie is one of the drafters of a
document drawn up by the leaders of the Alliotta section rejecting the party
leadership's resolution and the decisions of the central conittee.

Alberto Maria CavallottinDeputy to the Constituent Assembly. he is an
adherent of the old guard in every respect. On Sunday. 1!. F’ebruary. in
Milan, with Nino Pasti he co-presided at the assedaly of the pro-Soviet peace
comittee. In his speech he declared. "He are such stronger than the 50.000
men recruited in the streets by the Solidarity union."

Giovanni Pesce--Gold medal Resistance winner. 61.. he headed the Milanese

armed partisan group. He was a 'l‘ogliatti bodyguard. later full time function-
ary in the Milanese federation. but abandoned the militia when Cossutta
stripped Alberganti of his post as secretary. Today he is president of the
City of Milan private vigilance police. His speech before the presidency

of the pro-Soviet assedly at Anpi. Milan. was greeted with enthusiastic

applause.

Serio Ricaldonea--0netime Alfa Romeo worker and director of FGCI in Milan
during the 1950's. Now somewhat estranged from the party. he works for the

Milan Irena-Vietnam association. Under his sponsorship. numerous telegrams
of solidarity were dispatched to Cossutta.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Antonio Costa. Leonardo Banfi. Alfredo Novarini. Gianfranco Rossinovich.
3110 Del Pizzo--After the state of siege was proclaimed in Poland these five
Milanese connunal councillors abstained from a motion passed at the Palazso
Marino denouncing "Soviet imperialism." signed by the coelunist group among
others.

Lauro Casadio--A partisan in his youth, today vice president of the Lombardy
region. In Milan he is considered a trusty ally of Coasuta. whon he has
followed since 1956. year of the clash between the old Stelinists and the young

party innovators led by Cossurra and supported by Amendola. He likes to
define himself as an "Amendola-Longhiist."

Bruno Cerasi--Former partisan and mesber of federation units since 1946. He
is now sports assessor for the province of Milan. More than a veteran
Stalinist. he is classified as a "pure-blooded Cossuttaite."

Arnaldo Bera--Hholly loyal to Giuseppe Alberganti. ex-melber of the secretariat.
Decidedly a Stalinist of the old guard, ex-senator. today a member of the
INTERSTAMPA board of directors.

Alessandro Vsia--73 years old. with an honorable record as commander of the
Garibaldi Battalion in Spain. After the war he was vice secretary of the
Milan federation in charge of the Office of Cadres. Highly regarded by all
in the Milan PCI branch, he is considered the "eminence grise" in its
relations with the USSR, the nan best fitted to lead the party's most
nostalgic current in the shadows.

Manlio Pirola--He is one of the worker cadres most esteemed in the party.
ex-president of the Pirelli internal com-dttee, for-er secretary of the
Bicocca Temolo section. when he was abruptly dismissed by Pirelli. he joined
Cossutta in the Milanese provincial secretariat. Since 1976 he has headed the

Milk Center and participated on the Milan PCI federal committee.

Anerigo Ciocchiatti-Bx«senator for Varese. 70, he wrote enthusiastic letters
to NE" TIMES, the Soviet weekly published in Italian. to endorse the 0888‘s

good motives.

Alfio Caponi--City councillor in Perugis. ex-senator. and historical figure
in the struggles of the Umbrian share croppers.

Bruno Donatelli--56. president of the Marni (Terni) Italia-USSR, with 300
members one of the strongest branches in Italy.

Dino Rebbio--Retired. $2, enormously popular secretary of PCI section 39 in
Turin.

Adelio Albarello--Forner deputy. president of Italia-USSR in Verona. He
organized an active nucleus of dissidents. deplored by the Veneto PCI as
"a thorn in its side."

FINICHHWCIAI.UBE¢NVLY
aue‘ 0a a eyeing -a-g. voiaal

Salvatore Gareth-55. eat-regional deputy. currently secretary of the Palermo
Noce section. He told PANORMA. "I do not think that the USSR has exhausted
its propulsive thrust toward socialise. Thanks to it. today there are free
peoples."

Carmelo Lupo--Of Palem. 39. formerly naval shipyard laborer. now neuter oi
the regional PIOH-CGIL secretariat. To PANORAHA he declared. "I was a pro-

Soviet when I joined the party many years ago, and I still consider Iyaelf
as such.”

Salvatore Rindone--A native of Catania. PCI deputy. 38. credited with an
extremely long series of party jobs on the local. regional and national level.

Luigi d'Auria-0ne of the PCI party founders in the province of Naples. At
75, he is a popular party figure in Caapania.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Hondedori Editors, S.p.A. Hilano

9652
(:80: 3104/158

POI OFFIGAL US ONLY
RADAR, ATTACK QUALITIES OF NEW GENERATION ALPHA JET DESCRIBED
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 13 Mar 82 pp 26-31

[Article by Gerard Collin and Jacques Horisset: "The 'New Generation' Alpha
Jet Trainer/Support Plane-—a Very Advanced Heapon System, Unparalleled for an
Airplane of This class"!

[Text] In about a month, a modified Alpha Jet will fly at Toulouse-Coloniers,
specially modified to receive a conduct-of-fire system designed for battlefield
attack, advanced in technology, and presenting operational characteristics far
superior to airplanes of its category. This plane's possibilities are such
that its promoters do not hesitate to speak of a new-generation Alpha Jet. Al-
though is official designation--at least as far as its first cunstoner, Egypt,
is concerned--is Alpha Jet HHZ,* we have therefore adopted, for the present ar-
ticle. the expression ﬂew-Generation Alpha Jet Trainer and Attack Plane, or
"Alpha Jet NCEA," which corresponds perfectly to the operation carried out by
the Dassault specialists with a view to developing this new fighter.

The Alpha Jet was originally, and renains, a tandem two-seater and twin-jet
plane, designed for carrying out basic-training nissions, advanced-training
missions and tactical-support missions. The advances achieved over the train-
ers of the preceding generationareconsidered remarkable by the users: its fly-
ing qualities are excellent, tailspins can be done without danger, its piloting
characteristics are very close to those of the most modern fighters, and its
firing-training or fire-support capacity is considerable, thanks to carrying
capacity rarely achieved on an airplane of this size. Added to this are siz-
able internal volume available for mounting supplementary equip-ent, the high
security offered by the twin-jet design, and considerable range due to the com-
bination of three factors: very carefully worked-out aerodynamics (reduced
drag). large internal fuel capacity. and low fuel consumption by the double—
flow Larzac Oh turbojets (developed by SNECHA [National Aircraft Engine Design
and Construction Col and Turboneca).

The Past, the Present...

The Alpha Jet program, launched by Dassault and Dornier at the request of the
French Air Force and the Luftwaffe, made it possible first of all for these

 

* The Hsl is one of the versions--of conventional type-opresently offered for
export.

lﬂ)!‘0lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂSllOBﬂUV
a was Us a avalaa s-uu VI‘A-l

air forces to modernize their fleet, but with the PRC favoring the fire-support
function and France the advanced-training function. Other air forces soon took
an interest in the Alpha Jet. and to date, some 10 countries have chosen the
Franco-PRC airplane (543 planes). The countries mentioned so far are Belgium
(33 planes), Abu Dhabi (6). Ivory Coast (6), T030 (5), Morocco (24), Nigeria
(12). Qatar (6). Egypt (45) and Cameroon (6). More than 330 have been deliv-
ered to date, including a little more than 100 to France and 150 to the PRC.

To fill these orders, two assembly lines were initially installed in the pro-
moting countries, but without duplicating the models made. The maximum output
of 13 planes per month was reached last year.

...and the Future

This. we are tempted to write, is the past and the present; as for the future,
it is marked by the development of the Alpha Jet NGEA, already ordered by

Egypt (two)*andCsmeroon. We note first of all that rational use of modern
combat planes such as the Mirage 2000 requires ongoing operational training in
conduct of fire. But simulators (which also happen to be very expensive) do
not entirely fill this need; whence the necessity of a trainer with advanced
equipment, of the same technological level as the reference airplane. Apart
from the new-generation Alpha Jet, such a plane does not exist, for a very
simple reason: its design requires experience with the combat plane that is
possessed only by the builders of airplanes of this type. And Dassault is the
only one offering a complete range: the Mirage III, Mirage Fl, Mirage 2000, Al-
pha Jet, etc. with its industrial logic thus combined with its experience,
Dassault was the builder in the best position to develop a plane such as the
Alpha Jet NGEA, with the synergy fully effective and making it possible to de-
velop, from the basic airplane, a machine capable of evolving over time and of
being fully valid at the end of this century.

As for Egypt, that country will be the first to use a panoply of airplanes as
formidable as that which joins the Mirage 5-32 with the Mirage 2000 and the Al-
pha Jet NGEA. Before going on to consideration of the Alpha Jet NCEA's avion-
ics and armament, we mention also that the Alpha Jet's airframe and engines
will also be capable of evolving. The engine currently mounted on the assembly
line is the Larzac 0406, characterized by its having an oil accumulator that
makes it possible to extend the range of reverse-thrust flight. But SNECMA,
Turbomeca. MTU [Motor and Turbine Company] and KHD [Klockner Humboldt Deutz]
are already developing a Larzac 04X that offers in particular the advantage of
furnishing. at low altitude and high temperature (ISA [International Standard
Atmosphere] + 15 °C), l3-percent more thrust. For a given mass and runway
length, the Alpha Jet equipped with this improved Larzac version will be able,
for example, to take off at outside temperature some 10 degrees higher.

In parallel, it would also be possible to envision an increase in carrying ca-
pacity, which is already 2.5 tons for outside loads, with the internal fuel
tanks (1.520 kg of fuel) full.

 

* Egypt has ordered 20 MSl's for training and conventional attack, and 15
MSZ's for "high-precision“ attack. It should be noted that the same country
is going to receive some Mirage 532's, equipped with an identical weapons
system.

9
FINIC”HH(JAI.USE(NWLY
The Alpha Jet NGEA

Practically since the Mirage IV, Dassault has progressively developed the weap-
ons-systems capacities of its combat planes. Since the first analog computers
for attack and bombing, the processing of information has been largely digital-
ized. There have been very important developments of the data-pickup devices
themselves, especially as regards the kinematic pickups--for altitude, bearing,
speed, position. The progress at this level has recently taken the form of
adoption of inertial power plants of the l-nauticalqaile-per-hour—or-better
class; as regards Dassault. this occurred first with the Super Btendard, but
now it is the case also with the Mirage 3, S and 50, the Mirage 2000, 4000,
etc, and now with the Alpha Jet.

By virtue of its weapons system. the Alpha Jet NGEA is a "mini-Mirage 2000,"
overall, except for the radar.

It carries:

~-a SAGEM [Company for General Application of Electronics and Mechanics] ULISS-
81 inertial power plant. This power plant is in the "80" series of ULISS's,
already adopted on Super Etendards ("80"), export versions of the Mirage Fl,
Mirage S and Alpha Jet ("81"), and the Indian Jaguars ("82"). In addition to
the inertial-power-plant function (bearing, course, speed, position), this
power plant also functions as a computer for attack, for management of the Di-
gibus multiplexed digital-bus line, for aerodynamic calculations and for elabo-
ration of the summary data presented in the heads-up sight;

--the Thomson-CS? [General Radio Co] VE-llO haeds-up sight adapted to the Alpha
Jet. with its symbol generator;

~-a Thomson'CSF TMV-630 laser telemeter;

--and therefore a Digibus multiplexed digital-bus connection analogous to that
of the Mirage 2000. The rest of the avionics is relatively more conventional:
radionavigation, conmmnications, IF? [information friend or foe), rsdiosltime-
ter. weapons-control housing, etc.

It should be noted that it has been easy to integratetheaenndern avionics into
the Alpha Jet: the space available in the electronic "holds" was sufficient;
the electric-power supply was also sufficient; only the boo-VA [volt-ampere]
converters (ATEI [Electronic Industrial Techniques Applications Col) had to be
replaced by 1,000-VA converters, also made by ATBI.

"Nav-Attaque" Family of Systems

One of the most interesting aspects of the Alpha Jet NGEA is that this airplane
fits in with a logic of avionics-systems development which, practically speak-
ing, has existed from the Mirage III's to the Mirage 2000/4000's, with the Mi-
rage 5, Super Etendard and Mirage PI and 50 inbetween, covering many types of
weapons: bombs, missiles, cannon, rockets.

The family of SNA's (Navigation and Attack Systems) is based essentially on the
principal elements consisting of: SAGEM's ULISS family of inertial power

10

it!!(lﬂﬂ(lAl.USli(ﬂVLY
I'UK UPIILIAI. Us: UNLY

Installation of the Alpha Jet's Inertial Navigation and Attack System

vuélaILaus anu=xﬁf arﬁrginuummm
(man-van .gztuwm(3) (mamm(a)

miss I ' was .9001 W III
A; W

(11) (
av

SYSTEMS NAV-ATTWI
SAGE“ “.55 ll

          
    
 
 
      

   
 

12)

(15)

Above, the installation sites of the essential elements of the Alpha Jet NGEA's
avionics. Below, a synoptic diagram of the system. The bold line represents
the Digibus multiplexed digital-bus connection. The two "Pan's," fore and aft,
are the inertial-pover-plant col-sand and visualization stations.

Key:
1. Laser telemeter (Thonson-CSF 7.
TIN-630) 8.
2. Emergency compass (SFIH IHeasuring- 9.
Instruments Manufacturing Co] 66-90) 10.
3. Heads-up collimator (Tho-son-CSF ll.
VE-llO) 12.
4. Navigation and attack housing (SAC!!! 13.
UNA-81 inertial power plant) lb.
5. Radioaltimeter (TR? [Radio and Tele-
phonic Telecommunications] ARV-9) IS.
6. Symbol-generator housing (Thomson-
CS?)
11

FORWUSEONLY

Radioaltineter indicator
Radioaltineter

Spherical indicator
Navigation indicator

Fore

Aft

[expansion unknovn]
Thomson-CS? VE-llo C symbol-
generator housing

SAGEH BLISS-81 "Nav-Attaque”
systen
plants, the heads-up cathode-tube sights (VI 110, 120 or 130) from Thomson-CS?
(and £80 [expansion unknownl), the radars (AGAVE [expansion unknown]. Cyrano IV
or RDH [Hultipurpose Doppler Radarl), for which can be substituted laser tele-
meters for particular mission purposes, even at the cost of the volumes avail-
able in the nose. The flexibility of installation of such systems on an air-
plane such as the Alpha Jet is greatly strengthened by the integration made
possible by the Digibus multiplexed digital connection, which in effect offers
greate ease of interconnection by comparison with point-to-point connections.
This bus line architectursslsooffers great self-testing and maintenance capac-
ity.

Finally, it appears that the avionics system of the Alpha Jet NGEA is the log-
ical result of the weapons sytema already developed for the Dasssult family of
combat planes. There are three consequences of this fact:

--the first is that the Alpha Jet NGEA's avionics system has, for practical
purposes, already flown; integration of it into the new carrier that the Alpha
Jet constitutes should therefore be only a simple routine matter in the last
analysis. Furthermore, integration has already been achieved without difficul-
ty on the Bretigny bench, with Dasssult‘s considerable experience with equival-
ent systems taken advantage of in this case too;

--the second is that a Dasssult customer can define, for two or three types of
weapons-carrying planes. avionics systems that offer a high degree of commonal-
ity, which has obvious advantages in the matter of logistics: spare parts,
bench-testing, training of maintenance personnel, etc. This is the case with
Egypt, for example, with the Mirage 2000, the Alpha Jet NGEA (called "n32" in
this case) and the Mirage 552's (modernized);

--the third consequence is that the pilots themselves will have, between one
plane and another, an avionics system from the same family, which also presents
several advantages, and training in the Alpha Jet then becomes a real prepara-
tion for an advanced system such as that of the Mirage 2000.

To our knowledge. Dasssult is the only builder in the world who can thus offer
this avionics-system "family" approach, which testifies to the effort made by

the airplane builder and its principal associates (SAGEH, Thomson-08F, BSD) to
obtain maximum synergy between a modern avionics and the airplanes carrying it.

The Advantage to the NGEA

What does the NGEA version of the Alpha Jet offer by comparison with the pre-
ceding versions? The answer to this question first calls for consideration of
some of the possibilities offered by the system:

--the inertial power plant offers great attitude precision (on the order of 1
minute of arc) and speed precision (on the order of 1 meter per second). This
overall precision gives high quality of kinematic reference for sighting and
triggering of fire. The navigation precision (better than 0.8 NH [nauticaluile
per hour CE?[circulsrerrorprobahle?[ is advantageous first of all in its
short-term potential (as in the CCPI/PI [continuous calculation of point of im-
pactllPl [initial point] attack mode; see below): the quality of navigation is
such that a localization precision of some 10 meters can be guaranteed after

12
FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
DUI WPILIAL U3!— UNLI

readjustment on a known point for several minutes, which is sufficient to en-
sure maximum effect of the weapons used.

Overall, thanks to the inertial power plant, the navigation and attack system
is higher performance characteristics than a conventional system with gyroscop-
ic power plant and Doppler: the precision of the inertial power plant is not
affected by accelerations (in close maneuvers, for example). Likewise, an in-
ertial power plant does not suffer from the fluctuations of the echoes encoun-
tered by the Doppler on the ground. or from the weakness of the Doppler echoes
in calm seas.

Navigation is fully autonomous, and the inertial power plant offers precision
bc'ter than 0.8 NH/hour CBP, readjusted from time to time in accordance with
the needs of the mission;

--the laser telemetry makes it possible to readjust the airplane's navigation
on a known point (a steeple, an accident of relief, etc) with precision to a
few meters; the telemeter also makes it possible, in attack modes, to measure
the distance to the objective, and therefore to trigger fire with great effec-
tiveness. of course, a laser telemeter, even if it is more precise in measure-
ment of distance to an objective on the ground, does not give all the possibil-
ities offered by a radar. But it does not cost what a radar does either, and
it is relatively easy to install in an airplane. In the case of the Alpha Jet
NGEA, the airplane is thus equipped with a "laser nose"; the optical window
cuts across the airplane's nose slantwise.

By comparison with a "telemetry" calculated by triangulation (distance + radio-
sonde altitutde), direct measurement by laser is, of course, distinctly more
precise, being free of the errors of distance evaluation and of altitude fluc-
tuation due to the accidents of the relief flown over.

Several Modes

The Alpha Jet NGEA has five modes of attack: CCPI, CCPI/PI, delayed CCPI, CCPL
[continuous calculation of point of drop], CCPL/PI.

--CCPI for braked bombs, cannon and rockets--thst is, principally for the weap-
ons fired with flat trajectory. A reference mark presented in the sight gives
continually the point of impact on the ground of the weapon chosen; the pilot
triggers fire when this reference mark coincides with the target.

--The CO?! mode exists also in the CCPI/PI version, which offers the possibili-
ty of designating a known point (called the initial point) in relation to the
target.

--The delayed-CCPI mode, used for braked or even superbraked bombs. In this
case. the high downgrade of the trajectory means that the target is out of the
sight's field of view before fire is triggered ("the rear sight is...too low").
In this case, a phantom target appears in the sight's field, and the pilot
triggers fire when the phantom target and the likewise fictitious point-of-im-
pact reference mark coincide.

--The CCPL mode. used for smooth bombs and certain braked bombs. The pilot
triggers his attack by means of a laser-telemetry designation of the target.

13
FOI!0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Key:

1. Illustration of the CCPL/PI attack mode: the telemetry designation on
the initial point (the bridge) launchea the attack paaa under cover of
the natural obetaclea (here, the hill), with dropping of the payload
commanded automatically by the attack computer compriaed in the iner-
tial power plant. 2. Deaignation 3. Point of automatic dropping
a. Trajectory of bomb 5. Initial point 6. Target

OWNAL‘moem

 

Illustration of the delayed-CC?! attack mode, in which the objective ia outside
the aight'e field; a phantom objective in created to provide for the firing of

braked or euperbraked bombs.
Key:
1. Firing 4. Bomb trajectory 6. Target
2. Dropping 5. Line of eight 7. Burat zone

3. Poeition at exploaion

 

The attack computer then takea charge of the eequence; it begina by giving the
pilot the pull-out order, ao ac to prepare for the pilot'e "diaengagenent." In

16
I‘llllﬂﬂC1A1.U§l(lVLY
IUK Ufl‘lLlAL UM URL!

doing so. the computer continually calculates the bomb's point of imbsct on the
basis of its behavior in ballistic flight. Firing is triggered automatically
when the calculated point of impact coincides with the objective designated at
the beginning of the sequence.

--The CCPL mode makes it possible to use a phantom target that is offset by a
quantity (geometric vector) that is known in relation to a real objective. The
pilot then designates the phantom target: an accident of relief that is known
very precisely in terms of longitude/latitude coordinates, or in terms of rela-
tive distance/bearing magnitude, in relation to the objective. This designa-
tion is associated with a laser telemetry that makes it possible to adjust the
Alpha Jet NGEA's navigation to within a few meters.

Navigation is then continued by means of the inertial power plant. Because of
a deviation of less than 0.8 NM/hour (02?), a simple calculation shows that ov-
er a distance of some 10 kilometers, this position retains a precision on the
order of some 15 meters--in other words, a precision more than consistent with
the zone of effect of the weapons used.

This mode, called CCPL/PI, then enables the airplane to engage its attack in
the best way, so that the plane can remain "covered" for as long as possible
under the protection of natural obstacles (hill, valley, cliff, etc). Thus the
entire initial approach from adjustment/designation on the phantom objective
can be done under cover, without possibility of direct detection by the enemy
attacked.

Because of the automatic pull-out and dropping commands, the mttack will have
the benefit of maximum surprise effect; for what is involved is an attack with-
out ever seeing the target--and thus, vice-versa, without ever being seen by
it.

The maximum distance between the initial point and the target is on the order
of some 10 kilometers; this distance is related to the short-term quality of
the inertial power plant's deviation.

The distance between the dropping point and the target is, of course, limited
by the range (ballistic) of the bomb--typically a maximum of 6 or 5 kilometers.
The resulting overall precision at impact (navigation precision + precision of
ballistic flight) is a few 10's of meters, which is still entirely consistent
with the radius of action of the bombs used.

The CCPL/Pl mode offers--it should be noted--the considerable advantage of en-
abling the pilot to prepare for his mission (before leaving on it) by offering
him the possibility of entering the coordinates of the adjustment point and en-
abling him subsequently to adjust his navigation, and thus to engage the attack
phase before reaching the front line--and therefore under the best calm condi-
tions. He is then freer in his movements, especially in order to see to his
own defense.

The total NGEA system thus offers a range of attack and firing nodes from di-
rect fire--target in the sight's field, with continuous calculation of point of
impact (CCPI)--to the "stand-off" firing modes (CCPI/PI). This latter mode of-

15
FOItOFilCLAl.USEloNlN
fers the least vulnerability, but presupposes a short-term kinematic reference
of very high quality--that is, position equivalent of less than 1 nautical mile
per hour, levels beyond the reach of the conventional combinations of Doppler
and gyroscopic power plants.

It has also been calculated in Dasseult that the Alpha Jet NGBA (wihout even

taking into account the laser telemetry, and on flat terrain) offers the fol-
lowing gains in firing precision by comparison with a "conventional" Doppler-
gyroscopic power plant version:

--CCPI (superbraked bomb) at #00 knots, 200 feet: 30 percent;
--68-mm rocket: at 1,500 m, 400 knots, 10° dive: 60 percent;
--cannon: 5° dive, 600 knots at 1,000 I! 20 percent.

The BGEA's advantage increases if the terrain overflown is irregular, for laser
telemetry adds lO-percent precision by comparison with use of the radioalti-
meter.

Soon to Be Flying

The NCEA program is under way. A mockup bench has already been in operation at
Dassault in Bretigny since last Fall. A complete bench for integration of the
navigation and attack system began functioning at Bretigny in February. The
first NGEA plane is to fly at the beginning of April. The first delivery (to
Egypt) is to be at the beginning of next year. Two other benches will be
built: one for the Toulouse plant and the other for Egypt.

The Alpha Jet NGEA is obviously a long way beyond the trainers transformed into
attack planes by the addition of external attachment points and conventional
avionics. The Alpha Jet NGEA is indeed unique, and comes as an extension and
natural complement of the Hirage 3 and SIHirage Fl/Hirage 2000 family. It will
be surprising if other buyers, after Egypt and Cameroon, do not come along.

Total Safety in Case of Ejection

Among the elements contributing to the ease of use of the Alpha Jet and the se-
curity of its use, we mention the landing gear, of Hessier-Hispano-Bugatti de-
sign. with low-pressure tires and of such dimensions that an increase in total
mass can be envisioned with few modifications (wheels and brake). and the ejec-
tion seat. The French Alpha Jets are equipped with type-Mk 4 ("zero-90") Mar-
tin Baker/SBHHB [expansion unknown] seats, and the PRC Alpha Jets with Stencel
8-!!! s "zero-zero" seats. The Belgian Alpha Jets also have Martin Baker seats
--BlON "zero-zero." The customer indeed has the choice: since the Martin Baker
Mk 10, for example, is also used on the Mirage 2000 (and the Pl), the customer
may be interested in choosing the same type of seat for a fleet composed of two
or three types of plane. This is the case with Egypt in particular.

We note finally that the Alpha Jet take the window-glass fragilisation system
equipped with a pyrotechnic sequence, developed by Dassault at Velizy and en-
suring absolute safety. This system. qualified up to 600 knots, is the last
word in fragilization; it eliminates the ejection-speed limits.

16
FT!!(”HH(1A1.USE(NﬂBV
COPYRIGHT: A.

[1267
C50: 3100/“73

I'UI 0"th 00‘ UNI-l

PHOTO CAPTIONS

Under an Alpha Jet wing, two exanplea of load-carriera developed
and produced by the Rafaut company: at left, a hi or tri adapter,
type AHlOOO/ZOOO, carrying two Beluga bonba from HATRA (Mechanics.
Aviation and Traction Col/Thonoon-Brandt, and at right, a 10600
releaaer-ejector (la-inch loada, naxinua of 1,450 pounds/650 kg)
carrying a drum.

Thia configuration--one of the very nany already flight-teated--
ahoua that in addition to the four nodular boo-kg boobs, the plane
can also carry a fifth boab by uaing the under-fuselage cannon-
container attachment point.

6 C. 1982

17
FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
'DATEX 82' EXERCISE TESTS ATTACK, DEFENSE, DETECTION CAPACITY
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 20 Mar 82 pp 26-28

[Article by Jean de Galard: "'Datex 82': Air Defense Put to the Test-This ha-
jor Exercise Is Integrated with a Vast Logistical Operation This Year"

[Text] It was in the heart of the Detection and Control Center of cinq-Hars-
la Pile, near Tours--the most modern of Europe‘s air-defense installations.
presented to the press for the first time--that Lt Gen Bernard Capillon of the
Air Force, air-defense commander and Air Force cmlnander of the air-defense
forces, chose to consent at length on "Date: 82."

This major exercise, which once a year enables the Air Force to train its air-
defense personnel-~in particular. the crews, the interception controllers and
the ground-to-air gunners--under conditions as close to reality as possible--
was held last Tuesday and Wednesday. It is a punishing and constraining opera-
tion--in our last issue we stressed the fortunate compromises that it occa-
sioned on the part of the civilians and the military--but a necessary one,
since it makes it possible to evaluate the capacities of the national airqde-
fense system. It put into action not only radar and sight surveillance organ-
isms, the air bases and all of the Air Force's active defense facilities (air-
planes with their air-to-air weaponry, ground-to-air missile batteries and
double-barreled antiaircraft cannon), but also elements of the Navy and of the
Army. Datex 82 therefore made it possible to put the coordination of all the
components of air defense to the test. Furthermore. this year like last year,
Datex was integrated into a vast logistical operation (exercise Ex Log) started
on 15 March, the purpose of which was to check the effectiveness and coherence
of the measures to put the Air Force on a war footing in the areas of backup
and technical support of the forces. The aim was also to check the ability of
the manufacturers and maintenance centers to increase their rates of delivery
or repair of materiel in a situation of sudden crisis.

The balance-sheet provided for at the end of the exercise involved 2,750 re-
sults: 1,200 defensive and 1,550 offensive, with the latter involving the par-
ticipation of airplanes of the Strategic Air Forces, the Tactical Air Force and
air forces of allied countries: the FRO, Spain, Great Britain, Italy, The Neth-
erlands, and American and Canadian forces in Europe. The air-space zones af-
fected by Datex 82 ranged from low altitude (500 to 4,000 feet, 150 to 1,200 m)
to high altitude (flying levels above 320-360). This exercise was to entail

18
POI‘DFFKJA1.U§!(INLY
s'vn va's'agana. was. unan

the closing of some 20 airports to traffic under IFR [Instrument Flight Rules]
conditions.

Datex 82, which was carried out in accordance with the usual safety norms and
with respect for the rules concerning nuisances, did not, of course, correspond
to any particular fictive political-military situation.

The CDC [Detection and Control Center] of Cinq-Hara-la-Pile

The CDC of Cinq-Hars-la-Pile was put into operational service on 27 October
1980. It is operated by 370 persons, including 200 controllers. It is one of
the 10 stations that support the Air Defense Command in the execution of its
missions. The CDC's and Satellite Detection Centers (CD8) that belong to the
air-defense chain of command are installed at Contrexeville, Drachenbronn,
Doullens, Hont-de-Harsan, Lyon Mont Verdun, Nice Hont Agel, Brest, Romilly and
Narbonne.

What characterizes this center, which is located 30 km downstream from Tours
and occupies a very central position, geographically, is that it is the most
recent and most modern station of the STRIDA (Air-Defense Data Processing and
Representation System) system, the automation of which began 20 years ago.

STRIDA, as we recall, is based on two essential principles: real-time process-
ing of radar data and linking of the stations, both among one another and be-
tween each of them and the Air-Defense Operations Center (CODA) located at Tav-
erny. This linked network offers multiple reconfiguration possibilities that
enable one to make up for the unavailability of one radar station or another.
STRIDA's chain of command involves three levels:

--the satellite detection centers, which may be either civilian or military and
which do not have any operational function; they normally have only facilities
for detection and for extraction of digital plots, linked to one or more CDC's;

--the detection and control centers, which constitute the basic units of the
system and provide for: establishment and transmission of the general air situ-
ation in the zone of responsibility of each of them; management and control of
the interceptor planes; control of military operational traffic and coordina-
tion with the other traffics, for the purpose of proper management of the air
space;

--the CODA. This main center, installed at Taverny, has an emergency center in-
stalled at Mont Verdun. As the organism for synthesis and command linked with
the CDC's and with the allied air-defense systems (NADGE [expansion unknown],
alz-L and Combat Grande), it has permanent responsibility for threat evalua-
tion, broadcasting of alert, and general conduct and coordination of opera—
tions.

The CDC's of Nice and of Tours are equipped with new-generation materiel (Visu
IV); the Drachenbronn station--the oldest--is still equipped with CAPAC [expan-
sion unknown] Visu II materiel; the CDC's of Deullens, Contrexeville, Lyon and
Hont-de-Harsan are equipped with standard CAPAC III Visu III materiel. Visu IV
is distinguished from Viau III by the independence of the consoles; each of
them constitutes. in fact, a minicomputer that provides for its own image-gen-

19
IIIICIHHCJA1.U8210NLY

21

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
erotion and its own management, by means of a microprogrmmmed computer block.
The improvements incorporated in the equipment of the Visu IV involve mainly
the typing of instructions, presentation of data (colored cards), and technical
organization.

The operations room of the CDC of Cinq-Hars-la-Pile has been built underground
at a depth of 25 m (at the level of the bed of the Loire), and connects with a
large group of underground galleries used by an Air Force depot.

The missions of the CDC have a triple character. Hhere air-defense missions
are involved, a distinction has to be made between aerial surveillance and in-
terception guidance. The former is done continually and makes it possible to
establish the general air situation in the national air space at any time. It
comprises the conventional phases of detection. identification, threat evalua-
tion and broadcast of alert. Guidance of the interceptors makes it possible to
carry out the sky-policing mission: guidance of the fighter planes on alert to-
ward any unknown or infringing aircraft; assistance to any aircraft in trouble;
control of fighter-pilot training missions.

The CDC of Cinq-Hars-la-Pile can also handle military operational traffic-con-
trol missions: offensive, liaison, reconnaissance, tactical-suuport and in-
flight refuelling missions and control of the flights of the trainers of the
Fighter School (CB 314) based at Tours.

The third type of mission--NBD (nuclear, bacteriological, chemical)--is the
preparation and broadcasting of radioactive alert: on the one hand, activation
of the BOA (General Alert Office). and on the other hand, activation of the
CEDAR (Center for Evaluation and Broadcasting of Fallout Alert). The alert is
broadcast both to the armed forces and to the population at large.

0n the surface, the radars (a Satrape radar plus a 23-cm 20 main radar, plus
three manual altimetry radars), the radio centers, the living area and the ra-
dio relays constitute four distinct blocks.

A number of IBM computers (360/30, 370/135, 3031) do the processing of all the
radar data received. Very advanced logical elements make it possible in par-
ticular to transmit air-defense data to Taverny and the other stations automat-
ically, to aid in decision-making and to control interceptions.

In the STRIDA stations of the first and second generations, using the VISU 11's
and 211's. a linear modeling has been adopted. In the Visu IV stations, such
as those of Nice and Tours, the performance characteristics of the computing
units and the new form adopted for the consoles, as is shown by the photos on
the preceding pages (the low consoles are for direction and the high ones are
for exploitation), have led to a new layout: the direction consoles are grouped
at the center of the room, while the exploitation consoles are attached to the
walls and are in the direct view of each section chief.

The visualization capacity of the CDC of Cinq-Hars-la-Pile represents a square

area of 4,800 km on each side. The center can provide 26 simultaneous data-
transmission connections and the central computer makes it possible to process

22
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USI(NVLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. USE. ONLY

1 million pieces of information per second. Thirty-two simultaneous intercep-
tions can be done.

An electric power plant installed underground ensures the center's autonomy in
case of need.

The COZ [Zone Operations Center] North

Air-defense operations at the national level are directed from the CODA of Tav-
erny, which, as we recall, has an emergency center installed at Lyon Nont Ver-
dun. The national territory is itself divided into four air-defense zones
whose limits coincide with the four air regions (but without strict superimpo-
sition of these limits). Under the authority of a general officer, each zone
has an operations center (602) that conducts the operations at the regional
level. The 002 North is installed at Cinq-Hars-la-Pile; it is geographically
"very close" to the detection and control room of the CDC of Cinq-Hars. The
C02 Northeast is installed at Contrexeville; the C02 Southeast, at Lyon; and
the coz Southwest. at Hont-de-Harsan.

The C02 North, responsible for instantaneous conduct of air-defense operations
in the north and west of the country, has at its disposal three Mirage Pl
wings, based at Creil, Cambrai and Reins; three CDC's (installed at Cinq-Hsrs-
la-Pile, Brest and Doullens); and connections, proper to each of these CDC's,
with the civilian, allied and neighboring organisms and, as the case may re-
quire, with the Navy's ships at sea.

The missions of the C02 North are carried out in six areas:

--identification surveillance of all aircraft penetrating into its zone;

--tactical direction of air-defense missions, in peacetime as well as in time
of crisis. war or exercises;

--diatribution of the training missions among the control centers;

--supervision of proper execution of military operational-traffic controlled
flights;

--dircction of search and rescue operations involving civilian and military
aircraft presumed to have suffered accidents;

--conduct of in-flight operations for aircraft in trouble (general-aviation
aircraft in particular).

lts facilities are, on the whole, those of the CDC for everything related to
detection. processing, exploitation and visualization of data, as well as to
communication transmissions. In the operations room of the CDC, it has a civ-
ilian coordination detachment (DCC) that participates in air-space management
by ensuring, with it, coordination of civilian and military air activities.

Responsible for activation of the Coordination and Rescue Center (CCS) around
the clock, it received 126 alerts last year, resulting in the initiation of
17 operations.

23

FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(HNLY
In case of tension, crisis, or exercise, such as Datex, the C02 North becomes
the "Q of the general ccaamnding the North air-defense zone. In the operation-
al-control chain that encompasses the operations rooas of the air bases, the
Crotale tiring sections, the control squadrons and the Military Coordination
Detachments (DHC's) installed with the civilian control organises, the coz is
the last link before the CODA, the Air-Defense Operations Center, at the heart
of the air-defense con-mud.

Exploitation of Datex

For every major air-defense exercise of the type held in the skies of France
last Tuesday and Wednesday. there is a very detailed expoitation of the re-
Sults. This exploitation involves a fine restitution of the operations of at-
tack, defense, detection and neutralization. It yields valuable information
about the rates of activity. the thresholds of saturation. In this regard, it
should not be concluded from the short duration of the exercise-~48 hours--that
it corresponds to what the national air defense vauld be capable of supporting
in time of crisis. The restitution of the operations also furnishes valuable
information on everything that has to do with logistics: availability and reac-
tion time, especially this year, in view of the fact that the Ex Log and Datex
exercises were simultaneous. It makes it possible to evaluate the capacities
and the deficiencies correctly.

The dates for Datex 83 have already been set. The exercise will take place at
the beginning of March next year.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

ll267
CSO: 3100/513

24

FOI¢0FFKJA1.USE|MVLY
I V“ \II C I‘ll‘b Vilm- Vl‘h‘

MILITARY mos

TRAINING. RECRUITMENT. SELECTION OF HELICOPTER PILOTS
Training Methods
Paris ARMBBS D‘AUJOUBD'HDI in French Mar 82 pp £142. 67

[Article by Colonel Michel Mage. French Army. co-andant of the Army Light

Aviation Tactical Training School; a Saint Cyr graduate. class of 1965. his
past assign-ants include: executive officer. lst Artillery Regiment. 6-6.

3d Military Region. and 0.0. 1st GALDIV [Division Light Aviation Group]; he
served in Indochina and Algeria, and holds a BB6 [certificate of advanced

military education]: "Instruction in ALA‘F']

[Text] ALA‘I' [Light Army Aviation] schools have the aission of forming
proficient pilots capable of serving in operational units. But these schools
must also train. with the assistance of other service schools. all support
personnel. nonspecialists. and other enlisted sen assigned to ALA‘I'.

Upon reading the title of this article. "Instruction in ALA‘l'." your first
reaction is undoubtedly: "Ah yes. pilot training."

Pilot training is. of course. the major training activity because. year in.
year out. some 120 officers and nonco-issioned officers must receive the
basic technical knowledge and skills required of a helicopter pilot. Yet this
training is but the initial phase of a lengthy apprenticeship and continuing
instruction and training designed to assign to units those operational pilots
capable of effectively holding their own in combat.

Pilots, however, constitute only 60 percent of all ALAT officers and 1000's.
Hence ALAT's specific training activities also encompass all those persons
who are either aircrew members or ground personnel who keep the aircraft
flying: mechanics. radio operators. air traffic controllers. meteorologists.
firemen. photographers. and simulator instructors.

This article's title covers. therefore. a broad subject area and my consents
cannot possibly cover all aspects.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Helicopter Pilot

ALAT's Specialization Training School at De: has the mission of providing
basic helicopter pilot training to officers and IOO‘s of the French Army.
Navy. Gendarmerie, and Customs Service, plus military personnel from a
certain number of foreign countries.

The course is 7 months for sco's and 9 months for officers, because the letter
also get an additional period of observer training. These courses may seen
long to the unitiated reader. but their objective is far different from simply
learning to fly solo. a skill that can be acquired in some 20 lessons taken

in a flying club. Course lengths in foreign armies are similar to ALAT's.

At Dex, the student pilot must learn to fly under all possible day~night
conditions: nap-of-the-earth as well as at 3,000 meters in mountainous
terrain. and in bad weather with horizontal visibility reduced to 800 meters.
A pilot must also know where he is at all tines and be able to employ all
methods of navigation. Lastly. he must be able to land his helicopter in a
small clearing. on a valley floor. or on a mountain peak with just enough
rose for his skids. He aunt do all this without neglecting his regular
military training and while keeping himself in good physical shape.

After the primary flight training phase. the school program. therefore.
includes cross-country flying, low-and very low-level navigation. night
contact training, mountain flying, and instrument training designed to teach
the young pilot to make instrument landings utilising radar or beacons and
markers. These activities total approximately 130 flying hours in Alouette 2
and Gazelle SA 341 helicopters.

Operational Pilot

After that. however, this "conventional" pilot has to be transformed into a
combat pilot, in other words, given the knowledge and skills required to
make maximum effective use of his helicopter in combat operations. affecting
this transformation is the role of the ALAT Tactical Training School at

Le Luc.

This additional training begins with the ”Voltac" or tactical flying course.
The school devised this special course and it now has been copied by all
foreign army aviation schools. Its purpose is to teach pilots how to perform
and survive on the battlefield by using terrain for cover while flying at
appropriate speed over and around obstacles.

Certain pilots are then trained as gunners and missile operators or
reassigned to transition training into the SA 330 [Puma tactical transport
helicopter]. After this. they all spend 3 years putting their training into
practice and acquiring their own experience in a unit with the guidance and
advice of their seniors.

The next course of instruction and training is for pilots having 1,000 flying
hours. In this course, they receive the additional knowledge and skills

26
FOR 0F31CIAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

required of an aircraft cosmander: particularly the special procedures for
flying as nember of a patrol. further training in flying by instruments.
and detailed instruction on identification of ground and airborne equip-eat
and weapons likely to he encountered on the battlefield. Upon graduating
fron this course. the nonco-issioned officer may be considered an
operational pilot.

Squadron Com-ander

The process described above for “00's is not easily applicable to commissioned
officers who are assigned to ALAT after having served as lieutenants in a
regisent. In their case. primary flight training is followed by more
intensive tactical training which rapidly qualifies them as patrol leaders.

But their nost important phase of instruction occurs vhen. after 3 years
service in a unit, they are about to be assigned as squadron leaders. This
phase is the ALAT "captains course" similar in length and general subject
matter to the conpany commander courses offered in other service schools.

In the ALAT course. hooever. emphasis is placed on the internal operation of a
squadron. the missions of the three types of regimental helicopter squadrons-
reconnaissance. antitank. and utility-tactical transport-and lastly on
thorough faniliarity with the organization. equipment. weapons. and tactics
of French Arsy divisions and corps. echelons which the squadron com-ander

is frequently called upon to support. This special instruction and training
is indispensable.

Support Personnel

A pilot is capable of flying. however. only because of the presence alongside
his of conrades in area who have received equally intensive technical
instruction and training.

1. Mechanics first of all. They are alaost as numerous as pilots in ALAT
units. They greatly outnumber them, however. if we include the mechanics in
third echelon maintenance activities.‘ All of these nechanics or repairaen--

airfraae. engine. avionics. and radio mechanics, plus flight controllers or
engineers-~receive nearly all of their instruction and training outside ALAI
at the Advanced Ordnance School in Bourges.

2. Air traffic controllers operating Spartiate radars. meteorologists, and
fire safety officers. all receive their basic instruction and training in
civilian or joint service schools.

3. Alan nonspecialists-18 percent of ALAT's total personnel strength-and
its 3,000 privates must not be forgotten because vithout vehicles. refueling
tankers. and ground-based radio facilities. the helicopter is but a lifeless
machine. All of these personnel have to be trained to perform the same
overall combat mission.

* Third edition: Major repairs that are an Ordnance responsibility.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hence instruction and training is a priority latter not only in ALA'l‘
schools but likewise in all ALA? units.

Training Coats and Facilities

What is the cost of this peacetins instruction and training? In personnel,
equip-eat. and helicopters or flying hours, this cost accounts for 20 percent
of ALA'r's total budget. At first glance. the bill seems quite high. Yet can
a student pilot fly for an hour without requiring an hour of an instructor
pilot's tins? And how can annual flying hours be expressed other then in

the hours of work perfornsd by a mechanic?

Adnittedly nodern technology is making it increasingly possible to use
simulators as training aids. For instance. there are flight simulators for
the SA 330 and Gazelle helicopters. plus a M [antitank missile] fire
simulator. But while these aids do facilitate the instructor's task. they
do not exclude his presence in the large najority of cases. For the tine
being. however, similators are capable of inparting only a certain knowledge
and not real know-how.

Sone 10 years ago, a aissile operator's training progras included the firing
of 10 live rounds. Today, a nor operator conpletes his training by firing
one real nissila after having "fired" about 500 with a sisulator.

Mountain Training

The pilot training progran at both the ALA? Tactical Training School and MT
Specialization Training School includes a mtain training phase. why?

The answer is simple. Except for those who live in than. nountains seen wild
and jagged terrain. an unusual ad hence hostile environment with surprising
reactions that are at times difficult to foresee. Yet all of our crews

nust be capable of operating in nomtainous terrain in support of our

Alpine troops. It is. therefore. altogether logical to teach our pilots to
fly in this environnent where they can sharpen their skills and becone nore
aware of the limits of their equip-ant. This training is progressive and
always includes a pro-mountain phase before flying above 2,000 neters. At
that altitude. the pilot will be confronted with a view altogether different
froa what he secs in flat open comtry. as will fly in thinner air and will
have to land in extrenely varied terrain such as ridge lines, slopes, and
valley floors. His chief ally—or enemy if he nisunderstands it—will be the
wind that may even prevent his fron asking sone landings. Consequently
nounteins are, as for the alpinist. a veritable training school. For that
reason, ALAT operates a permanent flight training center in Saillagouae. near
Hont Louis. All French pilots and nany foreign pilots train there.

The obvious conclusion is that instruction in ALA'I‘ represents a considerable
investnent. It is still a very nodest expenditure, however. if we

conpare it with the cost of the equip-ant trainees are being taught to use.
Furthermore. it is necessary if ALA‘r units are to perforn their assigned
nissions effectively.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CUR UI'I’ILII‘A- \IJL U-\I.I

New Selection Criteria
Paris AMES D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Her 82 pp 63-“

[Article by Captain Maurice de Vasselot de llegne. chief of the ALA'l' aircrew
personnel selection branch center; a 1966 graduate of Saint Cyr (EHIA). he
first served as a platoon conunder in the Armor; after earning his wings as
a helicopter pilot in 1972. he was assigned as instructor pilot at the

ALA? Specialization Training School in Dar and later as C.0. 3d Squadron,
5th Light Helicopter Group; he has logged a total of 3,000 flying hours:
"Recruit-cut and Selection of ALA‘r Personnel"]

[Text] In 1956, Headquarters ALA'l' approved the use of psychological-technical
tests in its aircrew personnel selection process. These tests were devised
by the Air Force Center for Applied Psychology Studies and Research (CSRPAIR)
in Le Bourget. For the past few nonths. these tests have been administered

to women candidates for helicopter pilot training.

Following the 1973 decision to transform ALA‘l‘ into exculsively a helicopter
force, the Directorate of Arnaaent Research, Studies, and Techniques (DIET)
directed the Center for Applied Psychology Research and Studies (CWA) in
Toulon to develop a new aircrew personnel selection systen.

After a feasibility study based on a survey of 165 instructor pilots and 800
student pilots throughout their training. an ALA'l' selection branch of the
let CS [Selection Center] was established on a trial basis on 10 Hay 1977.
Because of the results obtained. the ALA! aircrew personnel selection branch
center was officially activated in the Fort Neuf [New Port] at Vincennes on
13 April 1981.

Recruitment
ALA‘r officers and NOO's are drawn fron extremely diversified sources.
Officers

Cadets attending the Iilitary acadeaies at CoetquidanuESH-EHA [Special
Military Acadeny (former Saint tyr)-Interarns Military Acadeuylnwho opt for
service in ALA‘l‘ are required to take the flight physical and psychological-
technical tests for aircrew personnel during their first year after
graduation while attending the lieutenant's course at one of the service
schools. After 2 years of troop duty as a platoon conander, they are
required to confirm their option before being assigned to the Flight Training
School at Dex.

ApproinIately 150 officers in each graduating class at Coetquidan opt for
ALA‘l‘, but the latter's annual require-ant is only for 30 officer pilots.

29
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
Roncoanissioned Officers
There are several recruit-ant nethods:

1 . Direct Recruitnent

Young persons recruited by any information centers and nesting the "branch
09” eligibility requirenents prescribed for sdnission to the National
Nonco-iasioned Officers School (mam) at Saint laixant, are given a flight
physical and aircrev personnel paychological-tecluicsl tests. They are
selected by Headquarters ALAT.

2. Lateral Recruitnent

Regular [160's of the arIy'a ans and services who are under 30 years old and
have at least 5 years of service nay be adaitted into ALA! after having been

rated "aircrew qualified" upon conpletion of their flight physical and
psychological-technical tests.

3. Senidirect Recruitnent

EVSO's [volunteer student aco's] who have successfully conpleted the 3880A
course and who nest the sane eligibility requirenants as applicants for
direct recruit-ant are offered the opportunity of serving in ALA? upon
graduation fron that school.

Before being assigned to the Flight Training School at box they nuat have
served 2 years in a troop unit after having obtained the m l [Pirst Degree
Professional Military Certificate]. In addition, their "aircrew qualified"
status nuat be revalidsted.

'Branch 09' Eligibility Require-ants

SIGYCOP [physical profile]: 1 2 2 l l 2 2: NC [expansion unknown]: 12 or
higher; NS [expansion mknovn]: 3 or higher; general knowledge test;
score of 15 or higher; height: betwen 1.6 and 1.9 neters.

Certain air force and navy nonco-issioned officers nay apply for aircrew
duty in AMT. Eligibility requirenents are described in directives specific
to each of the two services.

Selection

The aircrew personnel selection branch center adninisters a better of tests
adapted to AMT require-dents: tests to asasure an applicant's aptitude for
helicopter pilot training and his adjustsbility to nilitary life.

The selection aysten's originality consists in introducing tests designed to
assess the applicant's ailitary and aeronautical notivation and study any
vulnerability nanifested during stressful situations.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ufl‘.\ll\l— be,» V-‘Ll

The battery of tests includes:

1. A neurophysiological examination designed to screen out applicants who
display certain traits liable to make them unfit for operational flying.

2. Psymochetric questionnaires that inquire into the applicant's antecedents.
his military and aeronautical motivation. and his psychometric and
temperamental characteristics.

3. Psychomoter tests or simulated flying tests. the results of which are
used to construct a perfectibility curve. The applicant's behavior during
these tests is also scrutinized.

An applicant's processing in the selection branch center ends with an
interview with the clinical psychologist attached to the center and an officer
observer-pilot. A synthesis of the results is prepared jointly by the
psychologist and the chief of the aircrew selection branch center. The
resultant classification of applicants cannot be considered to be a positive
index of success or failure but merely a statistical index expressed as a
percentage chance of success.

The ALAT selection branch also examines helicopter pilot training applicants
for the Gendarmerie. Ordnance Corps. Paris fire brigade. Civil Defense
Organization. and Customs Service. It processes approximately 1.000
applicants per year.

In 1980. 52 trainees were accepted for the ENSOA; #8 of them graduated and
were promoted to NCO rank; 67 of these NCOYs entered the Flight Training
School and 39 are now rated pilots.

Thus the success rate from admission to the ENSOA to graduation from the ALAT
Flight Training School is 75 percent.

Any selection system whose validity is not checked regularly is liable to
become ineffective quite rapidly. For that reason. parts of the test battery
Here validated during the trial phase. Such partial validation has continued
with regard to all applicants accepted for pilot training since July 1973.

The new selection system is based on modern methods of obtaining and
interpreting. in real time. a well-rounded picture of the applicant's
personality.

The system uses situational tests that place the applicant as closely as
possible in real-life situations faced by a pilot. These tests constitute the
first step in seeking an essential correlation between the selection of
personnel and their military and technical training.

The continuous effort to enhance efficiency and performance in the use of
complex and sophisticated equipment demands of aircrew personnel a high degree
of skill and military motivation.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“their processing at the AMT sircrev personnel selection branch center in
Vincennes is the first stage in the selection of this personnel.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces srsses frencsises "Ar-see d'Aujonrd'hui"

8061
080: 3100/ 500

32
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY
I’W UI'I'KJAL Lat. UNL!

MILITARY FRANCE

COLONEL URGES PRKPARATION FOR WICAL WARFARE
Paris AMES D'AUJOURD'EUI in French Her 82 pp 62-66

[Article by Colonel Claude Heyer, co-andent of the French Artsy NBC (Nuclear,
Biological, Chemical) Defense School. After graduating fron Saint Cyr (BSHIA),
class of 1955, Colonel Meyer served in artillery regiments and staffs. he
completed his advanced technical ailitary education (arms) in chemistry in
1965 and has since then had. various duty assignments in NBC unite and staffs:
"Gaenical Warfare. Past and Future"]

[Excerpts] The television viewer and even the least
informed reader cannot help but note the frequent references
to chanical warfare in all of the nedia these days. This
situation raises the following question: Have chemical
weaponsnintroduced onto the battlefields in 1915 but
absent therefrom durirg world war II--definitely fallen
into disuse or, on the contrary, sust indications of their
seeming resurgence be taken seriously? The following
article does not discuss the probles of protecting civilian
populations fron this threat. It examines chenical warfare
from the standpoint of forces conducting combat operations.
Nor does it deal with biological warfare which is
altogether different in nature froa chenical warfare.

The article expresses the author's personal views and does
not necessarily reflect official French Ministry of
Defense and Armed Forces policy.

Preparation for war implies extensive knowledge of the threat in all of its
forms an as to enable us to cope with it and turn the situation to our
advantage. If we were to ignore or overlook an entire najor category of
weapons possessed by a potential end-y, we would be under an insurmountable
handicap. The specificity of chemical weapons. with their background of
terror and the inhman aspect we attribute to than, would make the situation
even nore serious. That is why it is essential for us to examine with the
greatest possible care the chemical risks in the context of a European
conflict during the period 1980-2000 and be clear-sighted enough to draw

the necessary inferences from such study.

33
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
From a technical standpoint. the new toxins are extraordinarily more
effective than first-generation toxins. This qualitative "leap" is measured
by a factor of approximately 50 for nonpersiatant agents-«those called
gases for a long time-and reaches a factor of 500 for certain persistent
agents, i.e. those which enter into the body throagh the skin in the form of
undiscernible droplets. Consequently a man can be incapacitated by minute

quantities of such substances and their annoy-ant requires merely
reasonable logistical support.

Furthermore, recent advances have further increased the effectiveness of
modern chemical agents: thickened toxins that ilpede decent-ination
measures, mixtures that cosplicate protective measures.

We are, therefore, obliged to conclude that the nature of chemical warfare

has changed. If not a new type of warfare, it is at least one that met be
viewed in an entirely new light. Technical progress has radically changed
basic tactical considerations. (bemical warfare is now militarily "credible."
Hhat is known about the available means of waging chemical warfare? How
prepared are the arned forces of the world's major nations?

It is common knowledge that the Western world's chemical warfare capability
is that of the United States. In the 1950's that country ends a very great
effort and built itself a respectable arsenal of modern chemical weapons.
But failure to have replaced it in time has caused the arsenal to become
obsolescent. As a matter of fact. chemical a-lnition occasionally poses
serious storage and preservation problans and such of it has to be disposed
of for safety reasons.

The u.s. armed forces are currently believed to have a cheeical weapons
stockpile equivalent to 35,000 tons of toxins. In the U.S.A. there is a
certain noticeable desire to "upgrade and update" this arsenal by getting
back into chemical weapons production.

For while the American capability has eroded. such is not the case in Soviet
bloc countries where there has been a continuous massive investment in
chemical warfare. The ratio of chemical warfare forces is considered to be
10 to l in favor of the Best. Actually this figure is probably an
underestimation because of the geographical distribution of stocks. Moreover,
experts concure in acknowledging the excellent level of operational and
psychological readiness of the Harsaw Pact forces. Their troops train with
real chemical agents. Staffs take chenical warfare factors into consideration
in their planning. There are chemical warfare specialists assigned at all
col-and echelons. The Soviet Union reportedly has some 100,000 men in

its so-called "chanicsl" troops.

All of this has changed the tactical context and created conditions conducive
to an imbalance. All of this blurs the reasons for refraining from the
use of chemical agents, reasons that may formerly have prevailed.

34»
FOR Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY
I'UI ‘II‘I'ILIAL UDI’. Un‘lJ

Geneva Convention

All of this brings up a philosophical question. Uhat influential role could
international conventions play? wenever chemical weapons are at issue.

the teqtation is to take cover behind the Geneva Protocol of 1925 which
prohibits the use of "asphyxiating. toxic. or siailsr gases" and casts

"the civilized world's" discredit upon this type of weaponry.

To begin with. however, this protocol was a follow-up to several other
agreements—the nost important one having been signed at The hague in 1899-
all prior to World Var I. and all of which remained a dead letter in 1915.

Purthermre. the signatories actually agreed only not to use chenical weapons
first. vhile reserving the right to retaliate in kind. Thus the slightest
incident. the slighest provocation. would be enough to trigger a general
chemical var through a series of successive reactions.

Lastly. the actual validity of referring to world opinion is questionable.
Could the fear of international reprobation restrain nations fully prepared
for such disapproval from using a type of weapon capable of giving then a
najor advantage?

The great powers are. of course. quietly continuing chesical diurnal-ant
talks at the Geneva Disarmament Conference. Yet even though an agreenent
is theoretically not inossible in the long run—despite sone very slow
progress-due have every right to be skeptical about such an agreenent's
significance if it does not include a system of verification. But
inplenentation of such a systen on national territories does appear to be
utterly inprectical. and especially since certain nodern production nethods
would sake it possible to easily foil any inspection.

Consequently the deterrent character of international conventions is not
such as to reassure us when faced with the risk of chenical warfare.

The aforenentioned conditions—decisive technical developnents. acknowledged
absence of balanced forces. and skepticisn about the effectiveness of
agreesentsnnean that dodging the issue by referring to past conflicts

would now be tantaaomt to our essuning a suicidal attitude. In other words.
we cannot finesse our way out of this problen.

This necessitates preparing our arsed forces for chenical warfare. To naintain
our operational capability, such preparation nust render us capable of
withstanding. vithout excessive losses. any attacks liable to be launched

against us.

This problem has long been neglected. hiding behind the broad concept of
“special weapons." some persons placed chenical and nuclear weapons in the
sane category. This had the dual advantage of artificially moving the threat
away free the tr00ps by placing it in the unitary-political sphere. and of
conpletely handing the problen over to specialists.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Now. however, a new and contrary pattern seems to be commanding attention.
Literature on the subject indicates that cheaical warfare is being
conventionalired. Uhile nuclear weapons rennin capable of coepletely changing
the nature of a conflict, chenical weapons can strike anytine and anywhere

on the battlefield like conventional weapons.

Meeting the Threat

The threat thus having been defined and confirned, one vital question renaina:
Are we prepared to nest it?

These past few years. France. like its allies, has taken cognizance of its
current necessities. Our units are equipped with firstogeneration equipment.
Our personnel are receiving increasingly better instruction and training.
Above all. however. we have entered an inportent stage characterized by the
following measures: issuance of second-generation individual protective
clothing and equipnent plus detection and warning devices; activation of NBC
defense reginents at arly corps level, thereby enabling cow-anders to
concentrate their reconnaissance and decontanination efforts on a required
area: offering staff-officer courses at the Arwy NBC Defense School, courses
based entirely on operational considerations. Our progress is on a par

with that being nade by our allies. In general. there is no noticeable
difference between our standards and those of our allies. This is quite
normal in view of the present very active cooperation in chelical warfare
natters.

Does this mean then that everything is running snoothly in the best of chenical
worlds?

Unfortunately things are not that sinple. The truth is that chenical defense
will long renain cunbersonely restraining. Suitable protective neasurea can,
of course, save the lives of lost troops provided they are well-trained.
Defense against liquid toxins requires coeplete protection of the body. The
effectiveness of protective clothing has a severe counteraction, however,

in the form of physiological disco-fort, and the higher the tenperature the
greater the discomfort. hence a choice would have to be nade between
acceptance beforehand of losses due to cheaical agents, an intolerable
situation. and a reduction in the operational capacity of units through
physical and psychological attrition, a situation that is not such nore

satisfactory.

It is even less satisfactory when one realizes that the heavy odds are that
the eneny will not have sinilar handicaps inasnuch as he will seek to lake

maximum use of his advantage by attacking preferably those forces incapable
of retaliating in kind.

Is this problen therefore insolvable? Is there no appropriate response to
this challenge?

A larger and larger nunber of Hestern experts believe and write that there is
only one feasible solution which would consist in reducing the present

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Ul‘ Ufl'lt [AL 051’. VALI

imbalance so as to keep the enemy from yielding to temptation.

It is sound tactics to encunber the enemy by compelling him in turn to fight

suaddled in unwieldy and exhausting protective clothing and have the pace of
his maneuver slowed by the multiple precautions he would have to take.
Yet the risk of such tactics cannot be accepted without caution.

A drastic solution with the attendant dangers inherent in proliferation?
Certainly, and the problem is not a simple one. But it has to be faced
because, here as in other fields, military history shows us the deterrent
character of certain balances, even partial balances.

Thus, for nations desiring to have a coherent defense, the fact of arming
thenselves with a limited chemical arsenal could contribute to banishing
the specter of chemical warfare. Though paradoxical. would this not be the
most effective way of complying with the Geneva Convention?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces srmees francaises "Armees d'Aujourd'hui"

806 1
(:80: 3100/ 501

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CUES PLANS NEH BUILDINGS FOR SATELLITE PROJECTS
Paris AIR 81' COSIDS in French 6 Mar 82 pp 62, 68
[Article: "New CNES Space Installations in Toulouse")

[Text] The forthconing develop-ent at the Toulouse Space Center [CST],
which is operated by the (IRES [National Space Studies Center], of activities
for the operation of satellites, and in particular application satellites
(SPOT. 'l‘elecon 1, TD? 1, Sarsat-Sargos), will involve the construction.
beginning this year, of two new buildings (see AIR rr 0051108 140 867) with a
surface area of 7,600 I2, or one-tenth the existing area of the buildings of
the CST.

The first new building--provisionally given the name "Space Systems"
building-will house. in three stories, the Center for the Processing of
Space hessages (CRIS), the Mission Control Center (CO!) for "SPOT," the two
Specialized Control Centers (ccs) for TDF-kport, and the "Sarsat" project.
This building will have a surface area. spread out on three stories, of
2,855 n .

The necessary equipment for the management of the "SPOT" systan--at the
Aussaguel-Issus image-reception station. at the Center for the Processing of
Space Hessages (CRIS), and at the Mission Control Center (COO-will be very
substantial. There will be no fewer than 15 calculators of the Solar type,
with their accessories, which will take up 150 I2 of floorspace at
Aussaguel-Issus for the inage-reception station, and 1,100 n2 for

technical installations and about 35 offices at the CST. Two zones will be
provided for the operation of the "TD? 1" satellite.

One of then will be for the installation of the specialised control center for
the preoperational "TD? 1" satellite, whose principal nisaion is to provide
for the management of the plat'forl and of the payload, as well as for
maintenance on board the satellite. This control center will be connected to
two other stations (a switching station at Mrceney-en-Othe and specific
station) and to the center for operation of the payload.

The other zone for the "TD? 1" satellite will involve the installation of a
control center serving operational satellites, the responsibility for which
will be turned over to the OBS (particularly for the Swedish satellite

38
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR Ulllbm use WLI

"TELE-X"). This center will also be able to provide for the maintenance, on a
temporary hasis, of these satellites during "receiving" operations when they
are in flight, or in case of a failure of domestic systems for the maintenance
of the satellites. It will also be able to be used in the development and
preparation of particular operations.

For the "Sarsat" project, a station to receive and process signals from
American and Soviet satellites is presently being set up at the "Sarsat"
mission control center. where distress signals will be processed. This center
will be connected. on the one hand. to the other control centers of the
countries participating in the program and, on the other hand. to Trench and
foreign rescue centers which will direct rescue operations. The functioning
of the alarm service of the control center will be handled by a team from the
Directorate General of Civil Aviation assigned to the CST, while the initial
startup of the station is to be handled by the CNBS. The teams will provide
for a continuous watch, 24 hours out of 24.

The demonstration phase of the "Sersat-Cospas" project will last for at least
1 year. It will begin in 1982. 6 months after the launching of the first
satellites such as the "NCAA-B." The first few months will be reserved for
technical trials for systems evaluation. The experimental distress beacons
are now being developed.

The second building will have a surface area of 2,670 m2. It will be
assigned to the SPOT-Image Company, which is charged with the promotion and
commercial sale of imagery provided by the "SPOT" satellite throughout the
world.

At the time of the launching of the "SPOT" satellite. expected in Hay 1986, the
SPOT-Image Company will have need for: 500 m2 for a photographic lab.:atory.
300 m2 for information offices. 250 m2 for the reception of customers, and

250 m2 for files and office space for 39 people by 1985 (50 people in 1990).

As this building will be constructed for the SPOT-Image company out of the CUBS
budget. the SPOT-Image Company will pay the CUES annual rent for the building
and for services rendered.

FIAS Center

In addition, in response to the growing demands for training of foreign
engineers and technicians which have resulted from the interest shown by many
countries in space technology. the CUES has decided to join in the effort
undertaken by the French Aeronautical and Space Industries Group (GIPAS) to
establish a Center for International Aerospace Training (FIAS) in Toulouse.
The cuts is putting at the disposal of GIFAS 17,000 m2 of land adjoining the
National Civil Aviation School (ENAC) for the construction of the Toulouse
center of the PIAS. which will include: a classroom building (‘50 m2), a
conference room (with space for 250 people). and a residence for the students
(200 rooms, a restaurant. and a gymnasium).

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Construction of the“ projcctn, which will begin in February, will be
coupleted at the beginning of thc 1983-4986 university year.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

5170
$0: 31001431

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SISSION. PROBLDB 0? SECURITY. INTELLIGENCE SERVICES

Amsterdam VRIJ NEDERLAND in Dutch 20 Her 82 p 10
[Report by Rudie van Heursi "How Has That Again with the Intelligence Services?"]

[Text] Two years ago the Internal Security Service (DVD) had been in existence
for 35 years. In his congratulory speech, Hinister H. Hiegel (Internal Affairs)

took into account that the question about the "good faith“ of the service would
come up again and again. "He must not lament that or get irritated about it,” he

soothed those present. ”It is the democracy itself which puts this thorn in our
flesh, and it is good that it stings.”

The lumps and wounds this thorn leaves behind regularly become public. Just last
week it became known how the DVD misled a widow from The Hague in order to spy on
a former member of the Red Youth from her front room. That same day HST VRIJE
VOLK described the attempts of the BVD to increase drastically the ruamber of con-
fidential posts in the government -- while according to policy that number should
be decreased instead The Internal Security Service. during its 37 years of
existence. has become the most famous -- or the most infamous if you like -— es-
pionnage service in the Netherlands. An apparatus with 750 permanent civil ser-
vants. part of when operate from the headquarters at Stadhouderslaan in The

Hague and another part of whom work in the ”external service.“ Yet. the DVD is
only one of the intelligence- and security services of the Netherlands.

Last week the Foreign Intelligence Service (IDB) caused a controversy. The

AUGEFEEN DAGBMD reported an exit of civil servants who can no longer cope with
the tensions. Not because their work is so nerve-racking. but because the person-

nel policy is failing. It has been like that for years. Already in 1977 the
report of the permanent chamber commission on intelligence and security mentioned
problems within the TDD. "They were partly in the personnel area, and partly
they concerned the limitation which charges the co-workers of the service only
with the gathering of information and does not give them the opportunity to in-
volve themselves also to some extent with the judging and evaluating of that in-
formation for its possible significance in the forming of policy.” A change was
made in the organization. but the gentlemen remained dissatisfied. The Foreign
Intelligence Service falls directly under the prime minister (general affairs ).

The task of the IDS is ”the gathering of information on foreign countries which
can be of importance to the government.” Until recently the information gathered

61

’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
by the Foreign Intelligence Service has been 80 percent of a military nature,
while the remainder is in the political-economic area. For a long time already,
the ministers wanted the "political-economic area" to gain more importance. That
did not happen. The foreign espionnage service is led by officers of the ex-
ternal service who come primarily from the Marine Corps of the Royal Navy and
those people have their preferences. There are also military intelligence ser-
vices: the Naval Intelligence Service (HARID), the Land Forces Intelligence
Service (LANID), and the Airibrce Intelligence Service (LUID). Those three ser-
vices operate under the responsibility of the minister of defense. LANID, for
example, recently went after a former military man in Land van Heusden and Altena
who had founded a grassroots group of the Organization of Conscientious Objectors
in his hometown. The three military intelligence services have a grand task:
they must "gather information about the potential and the military forces of
other powers.which is necessary for a proper build up and effective utiliza-
tion of the military forces.“ Moreover they must gather information “necessary
for the protection of the army." One might say that the Foreign Intelligence
Service and the military intelligence services are involved in active espion-
nage for the Dutch Government. The five intelligence- and security services have
a coordinator who falls under the responsibility of the prime minister. That co-
ordinator is a powerful man. He is authorized to "invite other government
bodies, government services and civil servants to supply information considered
necessary by him to carry out his task.”

And the various intelligence services, in their turn, can reap advantage from
that. But the most powerful of all is the Internal Security Service of which
H. Beernink said on one occasion (but that was before he was minister of inter-
nal affairs and responsible man of the DVD): "In my opinion the DVD, as an in-
stitution. as a secret police. means a violation of the Dutch polity as desired
by the legislator. It is a shame that the government has preserved this insti-

tution after the war.”

The DVD. just like the other services, operates secretly. Its task is to "gather
information concerning organizations. groups and individuals with respect to whom
-- in view of their goals or actual activities -- there are serious suspicions
that they are a danger to the survival of the democratic legal order in the state.
or that damage to the security or other important interests of the state is to

be feared from them.” And the DVD further serves "the promotion of measures to
protect information whose secrecy, in the interest of those sectors of the govern-
ment service and of industry, is of vital importance for the keeping intact of

society.”

Which those organizations are that want to overthrow the democratic legal order
is determined primarily by the DVD itself. The secret services are controlled
by the permanent chamber commission for intelligence- and security services (the
parliamentary group chairmen of the big parties) which meets in secret. Thus

the democracy is being preserved.

The espionnage and counter-espionnage services are assisted in their work by the
Police Intelligence Service (PID) which is housed in any good-sized police bureau;
the protection officials of the departments, Second Chamber and other government
services; the military police and especially the border guard; the security of-
ficers of the larger Dutch companies such as Philips. Holland Signaal and DAY;

and officials in the tax service. And that is only a small handful. A complete
inventory of all secret operations would approximately furnish the picture of

one half of the Netherlands controlling the other half.

PHD

8700 42
C508 3105/lh7 FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY