FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10407

24 March 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
, (FOUO 14/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSBIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Dauss

(POUO 14/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
HONG KONG

laboratory Used Electronic Oven To DhnufaEture Heroin
(Tony Lewis; 80m CHINA mmmc POST, 2 hr 82).......... 1

Large Drug Cadre Found on Freighter From Singapore
(Tony Lewis; 800111 CHINA mmmc POST, 11‘ Feb 82)......... 2

Courts To Impose Stiffer Penalties on ‘Drug Traffickera
(scum GINA mmING PWT, 27 Feb 82)....000030000000000000 3

'mo Crew-en Jailed for Smuggling Opium From Singapore
(501311! mm mmmc POST, 27 hb 82)....IOOIOOOIOOIIOCOIID ‘

(blony Seen as Transit Point for No 4 Heroin
(Paul “Daley; SOU'ﬂl GINA MINING PST, 17 Feb 82)......... S

Heroin Packets Taken Prom Amrican Hm'a Stomach
(SOU'DI GINA MINING POST, 18 El) 82)...................... 6

Briefs
Morphine Trafficking (barge
'nIai-Baacd Drug Syndicate
Drug Fight Reversal
Drug Addiction Pill
Heroin Distributing Center
Opium Seizure

OQQNNN

MALAYSIA

Sarawak Police in Antinarcotia (mention
(BOWBO BULIETI“, 23 J“ 82)....000000ocooooooooooooooooooo 9

r a - [III - WW - 138 POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Welfare Ministry (bnpleting Study on Drug Problem
(m STRAITS “ms, 29 J“ alithOCCOIOOOOOI.OOOOODDOOO.

ASEAN legislators Study Drug matrol Dhasurss
(meess Tm. ‘ Rb a)soso.seossaoaassesses-oases...

Increase in Nutter of Malay Drug Ahmers
(m sTm'm TIES, ”an &)OIDOOOIII'OOOUOOOOOIOCOOOO

NEHZEALAND

Australian Drug Probe To 'lhke Evidence in New Zealand
(m1: EVENING Pos'r, 12 Feb 82)...........................

People Cultivating Cannabis in Ever-Increasing Nuﬁers
(m Pmss, 29 J“ &)OI00.000.000.00.0000IOOOOOOOOODDOO

Camouflaged Plots, by John ﬁrming
now me Content

PAKIS TAN

Briefs

Drug Peddlers in Graveyards
Narcotics Vendors Held
Narcotics Haul in Hyderabad
Aid Project Documnt Simed
mares Seized

Narcotic Peddlers Rounded Up
Glaras, Opium Seizure

Arrest of Charas Dealer
Baluchistan Heroin Seizure

PHILIPPINES

Stift'er Antidrug Law Siped
(PHILIPPINES MLY EXPRESS, 3 Mar 82)....eesoeaoeeossses

Stronger Drug Lav, Stiffer Penalties Annomced
(Bull-Em TODAY. 9 kb 82)...OOIOOOOOIODOODOOCIOUOO.I...

Harihuana Plants Seized at Mountain Plantation
(BULLETIN TODAY, 1 “at 82)seseoeoeeeeeoosssosesseeeeeeea

soum KOREA

Secret Transactions in Amphetaninea Reported
(al‘oe Yon‘m; SINMGA. Jan 82)....-successes-0000s....

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SRI LANKA

Briefs
Ganja Plants Seized

mAILAND

Status, Locations of KMT Villages Reported
(SIAM m, 13 Rb 82)O....0.00DD...0.0.0...GOODIOOOOOOIOOOOI

KHT Co-mder Says 93rd Division Harbors Khm SA hfugeea

(Lui B-‘lhien, Arun (hamenthangchmraya Interview;
$1M MI, 13 Feb 82)..00....OOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOO'OOOOCOOOOOI.

Kriangsak Interviewed on Relationship Hith m. Anti-SUA
Operations

(Kriengsak (humane Interview; SIAH HA1, 13 Feb 82)........

Editorial lbuhts Effectiveness of Anti-SUA Operations
(Editotial; PAmA’ 15 hb a)...‘0.00.00.00.00IOIOIIOIOOIC

Ban Hin Taek Raid Said To Benefit Non-Thai Interests
(PATINYA, 15 kb 82)........................................

Impact of Crop Substitution, Other Programs Noted
(ICHAO GATURAT, 15 Feb 82)..................................

VIE‘INAH

BAHAMAS

Briefs
Drug Addict Treatment

LATIN AMERICA

Briefs
Sentence in hrihuana Pace
Drug Detection Equipmt

BARBADOS

Drug Offenses Increase 20 Percent in 1981 Over 1980
(SWDAY SIN, 21 Feb 82)...................................

BERMUDA

Briefs
Cocaine Smuggling

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«‘04

105

49

53

59

61

68

7!.

75

75

76

77
NEAR EAST AND NOR‘IH AFRICA
ISRAEL

Briefs
Hashish Found in Sea

SUB-SAHARA“ AFRICA

BUISHANA

Health Minister on Regional Drug Coulittee '
(Larona Sedim; DAILY NEWS, 2 Mar 82).....................

SOUTH AFRIQ

'MAIL' Lifts Lid on 'Pink Death' Horror
((hris Olckem;RAND DAILY HAIL, 12. 15 Feb 82)...........

Addicts Get Dmg Pmn Doctors
Help Sought

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Ihssive Dagga Haul in Natal
Fewer Drug Reports to ED
Cape Drug Racket
Cocaine Dealer
Dagga Haul mstroyed

' WEST BURNS

[ENHARK/GRBHLAND
Number of Drugs Violations Almost Triples From 1930 to
1981 .
(GWIANNPGTBN, 210 Feb 82)...............................
Briefs
Bashish Snuggler's Sentence Increased
Taxi Driver Sold Hashish
FRANCE

French-mu Connection. Routes, mahods Examined
(Inger Holeindre; PARIS MICE, 22 Jan 82)..................

GREEG

Lebanese Drug Traffidcers Arrested in Piraeus
(BLEV'MBBOTYPIA, 23 Feb 82)................................

NO WAY

Auditors Find Drugs Enforeelunt Agency Funds lhspent
(m8r1duasen;Amem’ 22 kb ”)OOOOIOOCOOOOOOOIOOOOO

SWEDEN

Nordic Ministers Propose To Send Narcotics Police Overseas
(1hor1eif Andreassen; Ammm. 22 Rab 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

90
90
91
91
91

92

910
96

95

1010

106

108
IABORATORY USED ELECTRONIC OVEN T0 MANUFACTURE HEROIN

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 2 Mar 82 p 12

[Article by Tony Levis]

[Text]

Narcotics offieers
scored a major triumph at
the weekud when they
closed a laboratory to
Kwai Chan; using an elec-
tronic oven to manufacture
heroin.

.Thta in the ﬁrst time Cu-
toma Investigation Bureau
officers have come newer the
nee of an electronic oven to
nroeeta herein.

I! doing so the syndicate.
which has been endcr surveil-
lance for tome time. was able
to reﬁne the heroin hate four
timer faster than the conven-
tional heme-«tore method.

“Thin is the ﬁrst time we
have come actnea an electron-
ic oven bei need to process
heroin from 'n bate.’ the
chief of the CID. Senior
Superintendent K.S Term.

and rday.
laboratory is bel'trved
to have produced No 3 heroin

for Colony-wide distribution.
he said.
"Chemists. who examtned

the oven. claimed it could“

a heroin four times
aster than the keroae-ne
stoves normally used to toast
the drup.“ Sen Sept Tong
aid.

Three Chm Chow men.
ooeofwhomubettevedtobe
a chemist. were arrested in
connection ettl! the laborato-
ry tn Kwai Chen; on Sunday.

The are still being inter-
ropt by CIB ofﬁcers. Who
are also searching for another
chemist.

Cl! officers raided the

laboratory“ the 12th floor
of the Kin factory
hoitding in wet Chen. on
Senday ht.

The at surveil-
lance detyuevagantm
«nymphet: aa-
vare later found to contain
traceaofberoinheae.

The than later left the

and-aainteroepted

CID officer! when he re
terned to the faetory with
nonhuman.

r To”: 3%“
may a t rote at
weathendieeovered.

\boet 1.5 of No 3
herointh Monthe
retail martetaawellaaoom-
pteta ten of a returned
chantieeh urea y annotated
withthentanufacterenl’her-

oinverefoeed.
”The heroin. stored in nine

cm to h e
en {Mandated

and can rudy'for diatrihr

tton." to CI!
Superintendent 1.. Mat.
who directed the raid on the
factory.

Another man believed to
have been involved with the
laboratory was arrested in a
raid on a flat in Shantahuino

yesterday — one of five
a-oona conducted in the New

Territorier and Kowloon since
the Iahoratory't discovery.
Sept Mat said the syndi-
cate running the plant may he
the ante one tho-n to the
C13 averthenaat few yean.
_ The dimry of the elec-
tronic oren makes Clh off-

eerabetiavethe teetered
formersproducti'ggol‘xo)

three au
board a Sir
onetatnerve

That set.
no ofh

fetch 27 at
market.

Two toe
rented fotto

'Botharebe

here of e
internment
et.

- “32'
:a‘ued stare
riteby IO;
senior custom other is likely to leave for Singapore
My to make fmhet inquiries.

The dnt an as made dating a routine search of
the Zim New on its arrival from “real via
Steam.

A team otCIB olrtceta headed by Sealot Superin-
tendent KS. Toes. later found that a Chin Chow cook
had already gone ashore.

Ammoloﬂmmttohismaadmtd
him They toot him hack to the vuael foe further
inquiries.
The cook it believed to have unpacked packets of
heroinhoeaadnuahadthmdonatoiletwheuthe
calm emcee: handed the veaael.

About ﬁve tons of ate: and human waste was later
Wto‘theuakaumdﬁmm

a .

Two ptuuchepmhudmadeekem

wags gum: he moo-tam} tile 0!
an a t l' actual m '
with traces hemi- haae. puny

Cumolmmalaoaeiuda kiloolhashiahon
hoard a GM mi tee during a search tollowin; its
atrival from the M' But yesterday.

Noam-untested hmloamththeaeizute.
:rbilllld to he wrath 8200.000 on the local retail

1‘.
COURTS T0 IMPOSE STIFFER PENALTIES 0N DRUG TRAFFICKERS

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 27 Feb 82 p 6

[Text]

CSO:

Court: will soon be nble
to Impose ﬁesta penalties
on drug Mocha:

New legislation '5 hem
”"2“ at: m
an a l _
[at 5;. 1?!!! linu if:
my — In dung-routed 1c-
mum.

Aaodm Dill. thicj '
by iauoduad in the L031!
Inc Council. will p've plies
°‘"°"’ J3" "W '°
conduct ymrcba.

Th9 Comm for
Nam Mt Pm: Lu. aid
)qumhgkum lhc new In
wall an the com: no in.
not! heavy minis on ship-
onm thou m were
toga! tobomtdl m
d In the wiggling chtoin.

The one: Bill will extend
to police «germ the «In:
Wm 90:0 customs
ofﬁcials to chum” a “mi.
ca sea rc on suspected
trafﬁckers. ' __

Custom omen are a»
mud from being squad of
violating hum: nuns by

who had “demo“

y latches and who um
(mutant.

Mt Lee said hefdid u:
”minute opposition tom!
pub“: beam 1 drug offence
u in itself “a Violation of
ham tights.”

Mt Lee disclaed drug
mania indicated a worsen-
mg situation 1w yen.

From I914 and: every
category 0! dtu; addicts
an?“ a steady decline. he
a: .

Bot h: amibmcd the rise
to the bumper coo-mm
09mm Mm! m the Gwen

532059122

1' last yer. Tye amt
.mm'ﬁ upon“ “I! ”It

“This in mulled in n 10

cm incense in pro-ecu-

Z'é' w. WW.“

,, .

that)!“ oddus‘nndu in tho

mm
biannual.
Mr Lu said he tom“ 3
rum haul: have. m.
(a tad hv enforce-

ml am in the m
{had as tho Asian whet u
may! “I: m twining
In media the

momentum-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040063-4

TWO CREWMEN JAILED FOR SHUGGLING OPIUH FROM SINGAPORE

aong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 27 Feb 82 p

[Text]

th-
V"
.0:
No
I. I
I

I
)-

lot 031::

Mob-m
chm-l0
butzfil
”but“
in:
Luau-5a
wu«
acquit»
“but.

Sula Crown -
ohm
ml

rm"
L...

C

m
tool-Ibo
has...
I“

00km

on 3
MI-

Mtl’m
0“th
atom

m. 17.

d (h.

”matwm“

320/9122

‘
a

o
o

CSO

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500040053-4
COLONY SEEN AS TRANSIT POINT FOR NO I. HBROIN

ilong Kong SOUTH CHINA PORNINC POST in English 17 Feb 82 p 10

[Article by Paul Mosley]

Text]

DiscoverieainrhepastyearofNoa
heroin. in and bound for Hongl could see
the Colony once again being as a main
transit potnt to other countries in the world.

This was likely because No 4 would not be
primaril for local use. said Senior Superin-
tendent . S. Tong. who heads the Customs
Investigation ﬂareau.

Speaking at a Lions Club lunch meeting.
he said the re-emergence of large quantities
of No 4 heroin was not popular with local
addicts as it was 90 per cent re. much more
eapensive (than N. J heroin and was gener-
ally used for injeem not inhaling which is
the usual local met

He said Hongton was being used as a
transit point because t quantity of N04 was

toogreatforlucalconsum ion.

Depending on its availability and price.
Honghong could possibly turn into an export
centre once a ain. he said.

However. said. vigilance at the airport
had been stepped up.

Other main problems facing the bureau
include containing the rout: from the Gelden
Triangle and China.

And with another bumper harvest in the
Golden Triangle. customs officials are having
to contend with trafﬁckers trying more an
varied routes to smuggle hard drugs into the
Colony. he said.

Supt Tory. offering a broad outline on
llon‘kong's rugsituationAaidz

“ f we cannot overcome thit Golden
Triangle and China route we are likely to
have more problems because of the volume of
traffic from these two places.

"We also have l0 be extremely tight at the
land border (with China). but we h.tve not yet
diseoverul any cases oornin In directly from
China.“ although he said t ‘ll with so many
vehicles croesing every day. there was a great
dca'l‘ul eugecrn :tcrer this area. f d

egar tngt mam entr ‘nts or ru
traffickers. Mr Tong said ‘JiuTnlr airpor‘t
was under “fairly good control." as all pas-

cso: 5320/9122

sengera and cargo have to pass through

ettatorns.
But. he said. oeea vessels and fish.

i ' nlta a more ' realt ..
alt ’u m of a imate om
lining smuggled into eaghong were not
nown.

Bury via other routes such as Petting and
Japan were only isolated incidents. he said.
and added that tyaslmpoasible to searcher
hive equal attention to everyate entering

pro this reason he suggested that couriers
would feel tea conspicuous if they entered
Hongkong from non-established drug routes
such as Japan and Taiwan.

And he dispelled the possibility of another
”French Connection." even though the only
gal. European drug connection from Asia ta

us.

His reason for dismissing the Paris link is
that it simply provides a stopover for one-
signments of dru in transit to lldlaad.

Concerning t fall in prices because of
the bumper harvest. he said that with more
drugs becoming available. smaller dealers and
distributors could now afford to‘set ap shes.

And this has led to prices in the
Triangle falling by 18 per cent for raw opium
and up to 5d per cent in Roughing

With the fall to wholesale value. street
meet in Honglrong have subsequently drop-

To combat a ﬂoods?! of the Heagltoog
market. more customs were are being post-
ed to keep watch on the harbour and atrport.

He said the recent armed conﬂict on the
Thailand slde of the Golden Triangle with
o ium warlord. Khun Sa. was unlikely to
a eet the Honglmng market as it only ae-
counts for l0 per cent of the total production
in the area.

However. Mr Tong captained that as
much of the opium in this area is exported
through Chiang Mai. "the route from the
Golden ‘I’riangle to China will be disrupted."
Forty-three packets of pore herein were taken from the
stomach of an American shipyard worker at Queen ainhuh
Hoapital early on Sunday. police said yourday. .

One of the packets taken from Edwin White (46). from
San Diego. California. had ruptured.

Draught": said last night he was tacky to he still alive
aadil't rationhadnmheenpufamedintimother
packets mi; t have broken and he eoald have died of an

Last year. a drug courier died clan overdue when a
condom mated Ill hu rectum ham shortly after he
returned from Bon‘kot. .

Last night White was in fair «audition in the hospital's
ctntodial ward.

Police said the total acizure newsman. . . .

They said No 4 herein. almoat too per cent in partly. to
wall rated for injection by addicts. _

ice said White is expected to he charged today with
possessing dangerous drugs for unlawful trafﬁcking.

Although White is atill in hospital. the outgrow: will

he taltea hel'ore a magistrate at South Kowloon rt to have
him remanded in hoapital.

White arrived from Nepal via New Delhi last Thunday
on his way to boa Angela.

During the ill ht here. he told ﬂight ataﬂhe waa aawell.
When the jet nded. White was taken to Queen Ellnheth
"capital for a check up.

Three small pactets of hernia No 4 fell on the amend
when none: toolt ofl‘ his socks.

Doctors operated after his condition deteriorated.
BRIEFS

MORPHINE TWFICKIM MGE-thal proceedings against two men charged
with conspiracy to traffic in a dangerous drug was yesterday fixed for

May 11. by Mr M.H. Fung at Western Court. dun Tin-chat (42) and Chang
Sai-nun (38) are alleged to have between January 23 and February 3 conspired
together and with others unknown to traffic in approximately 72.73 kilos of
esters of morphine. They were renanded in jail custody. [Text] [hang Kong
sou'rn cam MORNING pass in English 19 Feb 82 p 12]

THAI-BASED DRUG SYNDICATBuCustom Investigation Bureau officers last night
released after questioning two Mil-'a Thai businessmn and a local resident.
They were questioned in connection with a Thai-based drug syndicate which

is sending drugs to Hongkong by couriers. The pair, released on $2,000
police bail each, were arrested early yesterday turning in the lobby of a
Yaunati hotel. Their detention followed the arrest on Wednesday of two Thai
nationals-woe at Kai Talc airport and the other in the same Yaunati hotel.
The two Thais arrested on Hednesday were taken to Queen Elizabeth Hospital
where eight condoms of heroin base were found in their rectum. The heroin
base weighed 570 grams and if converted to No 3 heroin could fetch a retail
price of $210,000. [Excerpt] [Hong Kong scum cum mums POST in English
26 be 82 p 10]

DRUG FIGHT REVERSAL--Laat year's sudden influx of drugs to liongkong resulted
in a sharp reversal of the success of the fight against drug abuse, said

the Commissioner for Narcotics, Mr Peter Lee yesterday. The info: led to

thc halving of the price of heroin which was "now freely available on the
streets of this territory." Mr Lee as addressing the Shamshuipo anti-
narcotics seminar organised by the Shamshuipo district anti-narcotics con-
nittee. He said: “The nunber of those charged with dnor drug offences

has risen by 37 percent." There had been a 19 percent increase in the nuts:
of people first reported to the Central Registry of Drug Abuse last year over
the previous year's figures. Mr Lee said: "The nulber of people aged between
15 and 19 years old who were first reported to the Central Registry last
year was 571 which was more than double those reported in the previous year."
He called for a redoubling of all efforts and mobilisation of all resources
to warn the community, especially the young, of the dangers of drug addic-
tion. He reminded his audience that a drug education liaison centre was run
by the Narcotics Division to help scho :ls organise talks and discussions

on the dangers of dru s. About 100 school admnistrators attended yester-
day's seminar. heat? [Hong Kong scum cane mamas POST in English

28 Feb 82 p 8]
DRIIC ADDICTION FILM-mi tough new film about drug addiction that has taken
Europe by storm is to be screened uncensored in liongkong. Based on a true
story, Christiane F is a starkly-realistic production about a 13-year-old
Germn girl who becomes a heroin addict. The film is powerful anti-drug
propaganda aimed at unveiling the mysteries surrounding heroin addiction.
The Government's chief film censor, Hr Pierre Lebrun, thought Christiane F
was a good film to illustrate the horror of drugs. A proportion of royal-
ties from Christiane P will be given for the treatment and rehabilitation
of drug addicts. Scenes from the film will be shown tonight on the Radio
Television liongkong prograllIe Here and Now which will be focusing on the

problem of drugs. [Excerpts] [Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA mmm POST in
English 26 Feb 82 p 17]

HEROIN DISTRIBUTING CENTER--Hong Kong, 1 Feb--Anti-narcotics detectives believe
they have smashed a heroin distribution centre after seizing 1.2 kilogrames

of suspected heroin with a street value of 250,000 dollars (45,000 US). it was
reported here today. A 27-year-old man, who arrived here from Guangzhou, China,
three years ago. was arrested. Police said he would be charged with possession
of dangerous drugs for illegal trafficking. The suspected herein was seized

in a downtown flat after a week-long investigation intoa retailing and distri-

bution centre in Hong Kong's red light district of Hanchsi.--NAB/APP [Text]
[Rangoon THE WORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 3 Feb 82 p 6]

OPIUH SEIZURE-A burglary investigation has helped police aziize also: 3:13:33;
grass of suspected prepared opium The suspeetwmcgrggz 23mm” ransacked in
to one
morning in a Kowloon city flat, next no! home had
lice on Thursday night to say
the burglary. A woman called the po aluablas w” '1“-
‘ d about $4,500 in cash and v
been burgled while she was out an £1 had also been tamered
. Police found a door of a flat on the same car 1-
:23». As no one was in the flat, policemen were szglize V3:1::.the;toccup
turn. Then at 9.30 up yesterday, a party erod-
3:21;: and found 15 packets of suspected prepared opiun inside“? ragexzta‘g
tor. They are still" looking for the occupant of the flat. [

SW?" CHINA MORNING POST in English 20 Feb 82 p 6]

C90: 5320/9120
SARAHAK POLICE IN ANTINARCOTICS OPERATION

Kuala Belait BORNEO BULLETIN in English 23 Jan 82 p 32

[Text]

C30:

KIJSHING. — The
bi ice o ration ag-
aigat drug adieu and
when in Sarawak it
continuing to pull in
wapectt, with the total
number detained ap-
proaching 300 by Wed-
netday at this week.
Operation Berlaa in a
nation-wide attack on
what has been described
at Malaysia‘s Enemy
Number One — the use
0‘ addictive drugs.
The operation was la-
unched in Sarawak on a
mauive teaie on January

ID, with ISO suspects
netted in the space ot a
lew early morning hourt
II more than 400 police
ollicert raided the haunts
and home: ot known
addicts.

Raids have continued
on a daily basia since,
and the operation is to
go on “indeﬁnitely," ac-
cordin to Cornmmioner
nl Po ice Datuk Seri
Yuen Yuet Leng.

Of the 293 tutpecta
detained by Tuesday

5300/8319

night. I“ bad been re-
leated alter urine teats
lailed to turn up trace:
0‘ drop. But l9 who had
punitive urine test: were

rent to drug rehabilitap
tion'eenuea.

Another 103 detaineea
were atill in custody at
detection centre: or her-
pltala awaiting the re-
aulta ol their urine teats.

The reminder 0! the
suspects were being held
in central ice atatiorta
in the n town and
included. 17 people al-

ly tnvolyed. tn ille-
ga pang aetmttea.

First Diviaion police
chief. Superintendent
Vincent Khoo, describ-
ed one goal at Operation
Berta: as being to cut
0" dm an er and to
eventua y ring down
the number 0! addict!

{about l.000 have been
identified in the ttate,

but the true number may
be rnuch higher).

It is dittiettlt to trace
the toureea oi drugi,
however, because addicts

are very reluctant unve-
vcal their contacts, he
"“3“ i.
along I nnpecta
rounded up were D an:-
peeted trattielters, but
none caught in
peace-ion ol any drug}.
The operation bat. tn
tact, uncovered only a
negligible arnoont ol

0
I‘§y“l'ueatlay n ht Po'

lice had mad I gram-
rner ot dried tan and
one litre ol lieu opi

at well at 29 tableta
druge ltnown aa ltnchee-
2 and DAF-lls.

Drug peddlera me a
variety 0‘ mean to

their dadly

pol' a into the ttatekaad

ice hope to the !
gleaned from detainee:
to catch them in the act.

“We are keeping a
clue watch on the air
and tea router," Mr
Khoo said.

Police also helieve that
Operation Berna can

help cut down on the

amount ol crime,
because mancuazdicta are

known to turn toillegal
mngto support the"

ammo habit.
crime acene thro-

W‘ Sarawak Ma ill-
deod. been quiet ainee
25:. ”was“? °"

icta n. eporu
of them and other crim-
ea have lallen by he".
Datuk Seri .Yuen MW
TAa 3;... police hope
they have struck a blow
at gang activity with the
arrest at 17 Mpected
gang rnetnbera who h..d
been on the wanted Inl-

Ollioera are now -
thering evidence to
suspect: can be proaeeut-
ed in court.

Police l’ rea ahow
that ot 03% after“:
M dam Operat
Berha. I“ were in Ku-

ching. 62 in Miri. 42 in
Sibu. 19 in Saritei and

ed 10 students. l4 gov-
ernrnent aervanta. 25 bu-

.ineaatnen. l39 rnanua
workera. and 93 unen-
oloved work-
Dana Paduia. Muhgh
and her minim wu pre-

mabl m“twang;
am am ‘

cut.
0‘ an Men.
1'» nun-u: u“!
than an M no at

10
Alonhum'ulor
Ale-n mus-muck.
unmet-«Imam»
Matt 1» auto o! pa»
no. Involvod In am

on 1 con-
no- hymn!" pro-‘
tulle on nmotlu.
m8 nbuu and- n-
nu minnow mn-
bon worhnlu on-
wto mm
mm which would pro-
vtdctocpnvcatlum-
than 0! «dub "Inch“,
mulumctwon and ﬂu.
melon '

I319

com that'thou In-
volved In «an unmet-
103 um rout“ llllctt

an. utlvttm ho dated
tun! m
Author luportnt
We. by tho
It M van tho In.

tro nation 0! l ro-
man- ot coup-1:017

Wmmv
“octet-MW
m

Inn-Ia lo upto-
n.“ tho It? .10:

“(Mann-bot study

{is report also
M CI. In

11

Anna an “port.

noting-ht mum
Anoon nntt-dndnl

'projoctu to uttltu n~'

shouldéla tantlz
M palm
mum-gm

meat at an nu
m outer at tho
Ann Bocutuut ud
mm that than
atop- bo tnplouuntod
tunodutoly. —
m ‘
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4

INCREASE IN NUMBER OF MALAY DRUG ABUSERS

Kuala Lunpur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 30 Jan 82 pp 1. 2

{Text}

KMNG. hi. — The number 0!
Malays involved in drug addic-
tion has been increasing since
me —— going u between one
and six per cent the lastthrec
years.

De uty Prime Minister Da-
tuk usa Hitam said this today
after being briefed by lice
oiiieiais at the Seiangor lice
Contingent Headquarters here.

in me. Malays formed 89.5
ﬁr cent oi drug abusers: in 1980

cy made up 45.1 per cent and
lastkycar they formed «.1 per
ccn

The number of Chinese drug
abusers. however. he said has
decreased in the same period.

In 1979. they made 89 per
cent. going down to 86 per cent
in 19 and 33.0 per cent last

CSO: 5300/8319

year. ,

Datuk Muse said the number
oi Indians involved in drug tak-
ing has been “erratic" - from
21 rcentinlmtol'iafer
can in 1980 and up again to 9.1

per cent in 1981.

One reason for the in-
volvement of Malaya in
was the rural-urban migration

Malays come to town hop

ing
to find riches. but being
disillusioned. theyumed to

drugs to relieve pressure. he
sai .

While lritual development
among t em must be em-

-phseieed. the police too must

pl“ its role to overcome the
pro lcms.

Datuh "use said an
sntldmg unit led by e
Eeiicc superintendent

ed been set up in all
Stews since last year.

Themltis aisostsﬂed
with two assistanlsweﬁ
intendents. nve inspec-
tors. one t. live
corporsls and six con-
stabiee.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0209: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4

......1 I

AUSTRALIAN DRUG PROBE TO TAKE EVIDENCE IN NEH ZPAIAND

Wellington THE EVENING POST in English 12 Feb 82 p 5

[Text]

CSO:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4

The Australian Rog;
Commission of In a
into but: Tn“

q
is
expected lo ""525...

arouhdthemlddleolthe
year.

mun MM -
Mumnuthehutrel-

tan.

At a press coo/m
gateway. alter a meet“

tween the Mt Get.
enl.hirhlch .800 “5‘
amino 1 count It.
Senator Peter Dot-och. -
oalists wen told that only

technical dli/icultles stood to
the way at the un-
precedented establishment
ol the .tustralieo com-
mission as a lull toyel com-
mission here.

Difficulties

The difficulties concern
era/tune the New Inland
term ot reletehce toe the
communion and edge iron:
the It: Court Judgment on
the 1‘ one: Commission.
and the Comte! Appeal
judyoenu In Dceemhet on

5320/9123

melanoma-loom
theltthehodm.
Then m no ltlal
amenities. mm
and “I don't thtd there?
uydiWoethedo-
mutual/outta"
The commission is ex-

todthenetoetwoot
m

“The Autumn our

ﬁve a i
ream." Senator Week
a .

Main object

M: may aid the main
object of appointing the
which under New Zea-
landle'unllmutoove
it the pore to subpoena wu-
om.

"Because drug dealing is
Niall, an totemtional
3.3. 'W' “Wm
' ' to a

with the problem More
we're eoahlln; the Mattel.
ten comm-loo to make to
New will! such thouiries
a on may to «not. it
to complete it: Australian
investigations.” he an

The whom to which

13

ES

. éi‘éqiﬁiié

3.
PWPLE CULTIVATIIS CANNABIS IN EVER-INCREASING mans

Camut'laqod Plots

Christchurch THE PRESS in English 29 Jan 82 p 13

(Article by John Burning]

[Text]

Cultivating grin-bl: tor
"3 WW WWI
other: carries a maximum
penalty of seven years in
pnwn.yet lecontinue to

marl nan in New Zea-
nd. and ever-Manna
nuntbem

Last year. more than 700
plants were seized by the

ice in Canterbury and the

est 00am. whereas this
reason. between September 9
and Jammy a. 1667 lantx
have been recovered n m
seizures. leading to 91 ar-

"l'be unber oi

n
n; cannabis is m
elf lncreadng and we are
realy only scratching the
aurtaca.‘ raid the bead at the
Winn-ad J
teetvas-noe' Sergeant . .
Muddimanl

we aeiu mushrooms eacb
rear and this doea not take
nto account plants that have
been discovered and da-

para and the like.
“Ole raceive excellent tip

"11? ‘3' "mm W“
en va a; ants to
rat lealtba to ratios".
1:; plus." he aald I
win; reason In
Canterbury anally starts in

ember lbtbe hating
:"uedsingallnntim

E .
g
3

25%?
5?;
gig;
if:
$3.3

5%
i
i
is

,3

3;
$2

g:
:2
“ 5
ga

i5 '
rig

m
E‘:
~3- i
g ‘9
g

as
25
5%
ﬁr
3%

5?
8
E
5
8
¥
E

i
S
3%
a;
5i:

'f'iéii; “
9.3-5 g 33..
ragga
“=2 5% 3
gig; 35

£5
£5
s§
g?

28

I

r
£5
§§

iii
3?:
a-

:25
3:3

:5;
if;
3

s3

3%

14

unberiaacbadoti byline-

Ei r
iii
33;

it
i
as:

iii“
i; ‘
i
ii E

:2:
s
sér
Caoubh molten an suf-
(er we 0mm r [m
unwind huh m
tempoun ﬂaunt; wood-
tng lo Dually. Cid
“new 8. P. Dun; at m

auoul Dru Intelligence

'Omlheyetnlhu‘hn
been cumulus rm“: on
“emotional“ oath.

body.

/9121
BRIEFS

DRUG PEDDLBRS IN GRAVEYARDSnCity's decaying graveyards have becone centres
of drug peddlers and anti-social eluents. The District Excise staff and

the Police on Friday seized huge quantity of narcotic from Lshore's two
premier graveyards at G.T. Road in Hoghalpura and graveyard shah abul Hoali
in Gomlnandi. Cheras weighing 735 gran and opium 50 gram as seized iron
the graveyard Bhuddo ka Ave at G.T. Road from a narcotic vendor, Ashraf
Keshniri, who 'uas arrested from the graveyard red-handed. Bron graveyard
shah Abul Moali in Gouelmndi, 1120 gran charas end 65 gran opiun aas seized
by the District Excise staff from nausea alias Jana, a worker of notorious
narcotic vendor, Akran, who is ebsconding. In yet another raid at Krishna
Gsli, Gowelmndi, W Yesin was arrested and 175 gran shares and 35 gran
opium seized from his possession. His accoIIplice shahid alias chattaki
snagged to escape. [Text] [Lahore TIIB PAKISTAN Inns in English 27 Peb 82
p 3 '

NARCOTICS VENDORS HELD--t-‘ive narcotic vendors were arrested fro. different
places in Lahore and charas and opium weighing four kilogrus seas seized
from their possession. The gang, operating at the Lahore Bailuay Station,
was slashed by the District Excise Staff and four persons including their
ring leader Allah Ditta alias Jetta, were arrested. About 3,130 kilograms
charas was also seized from then. Jatta used a railway cabin opposite
platform No 3 for the sale of charas, mostly among the railway esployees.
Three other arrested are Tafe shah, Yousuf and Perveiz. Opium weighing 895
grams and charas 940 grams was also seized from village Bhageli in Burki
area. One person, identified as ﬂidayat Ali was arrested. [Text] [Lahore
me PAKISTAN TIMES in English 2 liar 82 p 6]

NARCOIICS HAUL IN HYDERABAD-~Hyderabad, March 3--As a result of a camign
launched jointly by the Martial Law authorities and the police sizeeble
stocks of narcotics have been recovered from Hyderabad. During the course
of the operation the law enforcing agencies recovered 1,553 litres of
country-nade whisky, 2.8 kgs of chares, 15 Inga of hashish, 32 bottles of
whigky and 250 grams of opium. [Text] [Karachi mm in English lo Her 82
p 6

16
AID PROJECT DOCUMENT SIGNED-dumbed, “arch 3-The United nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control (UNPDAC) will attend to Pakistan 300,000 dollars for
activities aimed at strengthening Pakistan's capacity to dal with the grow-
ing drug abuse problem. A project docmaent to this effect as signed here
today by a representative of the Economic Affairs Division on behalf of the
Government of Pakistan and by Iii-laya Rana, 0110? Resident Representative on
behalf of the Fund. Financing of the project cones from the UNPDAC which
already finances projects in Pakistan dealing with rural develop-ant and
crop replacement for opium poppy and with the treatment and rehabilitation
of addicts. The newly-signed project of one-year duration will augment the
operational capacity of the Pakistan Narcotics Control Board (PNCB),
primrily in the law enforceaent field. The main focus will be the provi-
sion of adequate transport. This greater nobility is vital to the PIG in
dealing with the alarming appearance and spread of bid: grade heroin in
Pakistan. The support is being provided by unmac through the United Nations
Division of Narcotics Drugs, the min UN technical body in the narcotics
field. The project also contains a provision for the preparation of a
longer tern project for possible funding by UNPDAC upon cowletion of the
present one ear effort.--PPI [read .Kaaachi susmsss names in English
4 Mar 82 p 8

CIIARAS SEIZEDu-The Excise Police, as a part of drive launched by the uartial
Law Authorities, against the anti-social ale-ants, unearthed a four-nu gang
of snugglers of charas and seized from their possession 120 kilos of charas
near the Bagha Jinnah yesterday. According to the Excise Police sources

the contraband cargo, if snuggled abroad, would fetch the gang about one
crore of rupees in the foreign market. The reports said that three nei>ers
of the gang identified as “all men, Jill Gul and Mir Kashin were going in
a car No. 306-063 from Bara Harket of the Super Highway with the contraband
cargo, the noise police, after a tipoff, chased the suspected car and
intercepted it near Jinnah Park. a search of the car produced 40 kilos of
dams of the highest quality from the boot. The three, riding in the

car, were taken into custody. They later led the arresting officers to
their fourth colleague, Zahir Khan, in the Clifton area, were he ens waiting
for them with 80 kilos more. This too, was seized. The gang meters are
suspected to have links with international racketeers in drug snuggling.
Excise Police have taken the remnd of the accused persons from the Susan
Military Court till March 5 and were being intensely interrogated. The raid
is conducted under the supervision of Mr Saghir, Excise Taxation Officer,
the reports said. [Text] [Karachi WING NEWS in English 3 Her 82 p S]

NARCO‘I‘IC PEDDLBRS ROUNDBD UP--‘lhe local police rounded up sons narcotic
pedlars from different parts of the city on Hednesday. A raid was conducted
on the den of one Karin in the Helir area and two pedlars, Dad Hohamd and
Mobs-land Baneef were arrested. Ten bottles of whisky were seized from the
possession of Dad Mohamed while 500 grana charas from the possession of
Haneef. An alleged notorious narcotic pedlar, Masroof Khan was arrested

the CIA following recovery of 35 kilograms of charas from his possession.

In yet another case, one Nasser was hauled up by the police in the Keanari
area and 400 grams of charss was found on hill. In other cases or recoveries
Culberg police picked up one Khalid and a revolver was seized from his

17
possession. One Zulfiqar wanted in a case of arms ordinance by the Liaqua-
tabad police was arrested in the Preedy area during the patrol and one
licensed sten-gun and 104 rounds of cartridges were found on him. New Town
police arrested one Mohamd Akram, and recovered stolen property worth about
Rs. 22,000 from his possession. [Text] [Karachi MORNING IEHS in English

5 Mar 32 p 5}

CHARAS, OPIUH SBIZURE--Karachi, 7 Feb--A task force consisting of Crime Branch and
Narcotics Control personnel arrested a Mr Manzoor and recovered 410 kilograms of
charas worth 2 crore rupees. The suspect has also been identified by a German
Interpol agent currently in Pakistan. Reportedly, the task force was informed
that a certain individual was trying to smuggle charas to the United States and
Canada. Thus alerted, members of the task force began watching the airport. This
morning they stopped a car and seized two parcels containing undershirts. With
charas hidden underneath. The charas weighed 60 kilos. The parcels had the la-
bels of an export firm. After his arrest and interrogation, the suspect revealed
his residence in the Defense Society where an additional 350 kilograms of charas
and 4 kilograms of opium were recovered. It is reported that the suspect had
been arrested by customs in 1979 and in Denmark in 1980 for smuggling narcotics.
The task force and the Interpol agent are now investigating to determine if the
suspect has any connection with an international group. [Text] [Karachi JANG

in Urdu 8 Feb 82 p 1] 9484

ARREST 0F CHARAS DEALER--Karachi, 14 Peb-Excise Police (South Division) raided
a house in the Baghdadi area and seized 81 kilograms of charas worth 1 crore
rupees. A major charas dealer was arrested. According to reports. Hr hasim Sid-
diqi. director general of excise, was informed that a large quantity of charas
was being brought to the Baghdadi area. He instructed the head of the South Divi-
sion of Excise Police to take the proper action. A team was organized headed by
subinspector Shaukat Bukhari. It immediately put under surveillance the house of
one Abdul Hajid in Phul Pati where, it was suspected, the charas was to be de-
livered. This morning, four bags were unloaded at the house from a Suzuki van.
The police subsequently entered and searched the house and seized the four bags,
which contained 81 kilos of charas with an estimated value on foreign markets of
1 crore rupees. Mr Abdul Hajid is reportedly a member of the Sheru Dadal family,
of Liari, well-known dealers of narcotics. he is also said to be involved in
smuggling and supplying charas together with Hr Daojat, yet another notorious
smuggler and now a fugitive. It is also believed that in addition to smuggling
charas overseas, Abdul Majid was also supplying it to foreign sailors. He is
being further questioned by Excise Police. [Text] [Karachi JARG in Urdu 15 Feb
82 p 2] 9484

BALUCHISTAN HBROIN SEIZURB-Ielamabad, 24 Peb-Border police in Pakistan's
Baluchistan Province today seized a large quantity of heroin and foroign cur-
rency from smugglers disguised as Afghan nomads, official sources said. The
smugglers had concealed heroin worth 20 million rupees (two million dollars)
and Afghan currency valued at 10,000 dollars on camel backs under their own
belongings and household goods, they said. Border police, after blocking
mountainous terrain. arrested two smugglers armed with rnvolvere and impounded
four camels at Taftan on Pakistan's border with Iran. Meanwhile, customs
sources in the North-West Frontier Province. bordering Afghanistan. today an—
nounced the seizure of 433 kilos of opium and 315 kilos of hashiah in a raid
conducted by their mobile squad near the garrison town of Nowahera. [Rangoon
THE HORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 26 Feb 82 p 6]

18
C50: 5300/4927
:8 38.3 5335.0 3 83 i...
p 3:52... new vac—n3.

.38 3882: «5:2. :8 it
98268 saw“ .2: man-Emma
on Baa—x: on :5 9.5.6
33738 .532. 3‘ mun-row
9.25» 3:82.... 5.— 3:8
oSnm-w E. 3. F on? 3%. <.
3339.05

.33 so! 7! 13 .333. :5.
2.8: 8:3 2:. :34 3:8 3..
5.2.333 3386...... 3.1.5:.
.83.. 2.30:3 .2. 0253 .55.
2a 2.2. Rue—32. mama 2. :58

:5. .353 a “one.“ 38328....
I O O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4

from which plohlbltcd ditty ale'
extncted wlil be penallzed with ajan

term tanglng ftom 1‘ you: to life
imptlsonment and a ﬁne of "4,000

to P30.000.

IN THE CASE of landowners la who.
propanla Haul drug altlvation la fund.
they tould prove that they did not know
of tha activity duplta “cumin of due
dlboooo“ on tholr'pan to escape llabtllty
hon prosecution.

If the ptohlhited plants are found In
while 0! annulment owned ptopeny. tho
cultivatot could end up with a llfc

. sentence and a no: of ”0.000.

The new law also mom that lav:

attoacen oa muting omcaa who (ad to

acouunt fol selzed drug: could face
ahaolutc pctpctual dnuallﬂcallon flour
publlc omce. They could also face ”on
(can: of {mm clght to II years and ﬂat:
at from ”0.000 to ”0.000.

Under the law. prohibited dmp
lnclude op'aun and its active compomta
o! dcdvatheg: auch aa heroln and
mmphlno. coca lea! and lta dedvativea.
mttkulalty cocalnc. and Indian hemp oe
matiuana and its dctivatlvos

080: 5300/6925

20

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4

. b l

[Text]

(250:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600040063-4

MANILA (PNA) —
legislators have pluc-
god the loopholes in
the Dangerous Drugs
Act of 1972 to streng-
then its enforcement.

Dangerous drugs
board Director Manuel
Supnet says the new
law eases past law an-
forcement difficulties
and imposes stiffer
penalties for violator:

For possession of all
kinds of prohibited
drugs. the penalty now
is 12 to 20 years im-

ment and a ﬁne
of horn 912.000 to

-P20,000. Before. it was

six years to 12 years
imprisonment and
76.000 to 912.000 line.
' For marijuana. pos-
session is punishable
with six to 12 years
imprisonment and a
fine of P6.000 to
"2.000. The penalty
before was six months
to six years imprison-
ment and a fine rang-
ing from V600 to
"3.000.

For cultivation. of
plants which are
murces of prohibited

drugs. 14 years to life '

imprisonment rind a
fine of “4.000 to
"0.000.

To escape liability
from this provrsion. the
land's owner must

5300/4923

STRONGER DRUG LAN, STIFFER PENALTIES ANNOUNCED

Manila BULLETIN TODAY 1.11 English 9 Feb 82 p 8

that he did not

now of its cultivation

denim the exercise of

due diligence on his
part.

While the same
penalty was prescribed
for cultivation of these
plants. the new mea-
sure has added a provio
sion that if these
plants are planted on
public domain. the
penalty is life impris-
onment and a 930,000
ﬁne will be imposed on
the cultivator.

The old provision
allowing the govern-
ment to conﬁscate and
eschsat the land where

the plants grow has-

embraced even green-
houses in which drug
sources are cultured.
Law enforcers or
apprehending officers
who misappropriate or
fail to account for
eeiaed dangerous drugs
will now face absolute
perpetual disqualiﬁca-
tion from ofﬁce. in
addition to the pre-
vious penalties ofeight
to 12 years imprison-
ment and fine of
”0.000 to ”0.000.
He said marﬁuana.
remains the choice of
abusers. followed by
non-medical use of
cough preparations
and tranquilizers and

21
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0209: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500040053-4

MARIHL'ANA PLANTS $5130 A? MOLNTAIN PLANTATIW

Manila BULLETIN TODAY in English 1 Mar 82 pp 1, 11

[Text]

CSO:

Constabulary ooldiere
dieoovered laet weeha
two-hectare marijuan:
plantation in a noun-

tainoua terrain in haran:

gay Bugallion. lnfanta,

Marijuana plants
valued at "0 million
are" seized during the
raid.

According to the PC
raiders. the plantation la
concealed by thick forest.

The raidera also tound
ﬁvehutaandamptyahelh
of Gerand and carhina
riﬂeaoonhrmingmilitary
euapicion that Malta
wen engaged in mari-
juana production to rails
funm~

Col. Alfonso.

Cemayang, Pangaainan:

PC-INP commander. said
the two raiding toama
took three day: to uproot
346.000 marijuana plante
and haul thee to two
areas where they were
burned in the preeence of
the herangay captain and
a school principal.

lnhisreporttoGern'

5300/6925

Fidel Ramoa. PC cl
and Gen Victorinol
da. regional oomman
Camayang said the
oovery of the pin!
tion game after in!
aive aurveillanoe
searches of nape:
marijuana planta:

ulnanelataddeve
meat. Lt Col. Be
Joee.de|)\ltylﬂ")"“I
commander. 3
0mm city pol
men led by Maj. .
Bandung. oonﬂau
recently a la
amount ofdried n:
juana leaves fro:

compen comm
der. Wilner Panah
t o g e t h e r w
Urdaneta police 1
Tom Sullivan. co
wed marijuana le
contained in pl:
but (not PM:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500040053-4
SECRET TRANSACTIONS IN WHETAMINBS REPORTED
Seoul SINDONGA in Korean Jan 82 pp 272-287

[Article by Ch'oe Yon-an, a reporter of the First Local News Section, romp
NEWS SERVICE]

[Text] Horizontal and vertical organizations associated
with the manufacture, distribution, retail sale and
smuggling of amphetamines are more elaborate than those
for smuggling other merchandise. Since they are very
small organizations. the body and tail are missing if the
head is caught. and the top is missing if the tail is
caught.

Horror of White Powder

As materially oriented cultures develop further, a spiritual void grows in
man. and man tries simply to fill the void with something stinmlating. Thus,
wherever man lives, there are stimulants and hallucinogens.

Over the years, these stimlsnta have been studied and developed into new
and more convenient drugs. They were developed secretly in dark corners
because they were not desirable drugs.

Amphetamines followed narcotics after the Korean war, and marijuana cane in
the sixties. In the late seventies, amphetamines (scientific name--
methamphetamines), which are called the white horror, spread like a fire in
an oil tank. The drugs have infiltrated so deeply and widely that they are
everywhere within our reach. Hallucination, fantasy, and other psychological
disorders caused by illusion have led to murder, arson, rape. and other
crimes and have begun to be serious social problems. Just as there are many
pharmacological actions of amphetamines, there are many far-reaching and
serious effects of the powder.

Early this year [1981]. a woman in her twenties was surdered and dismembered
in Pusan. The murderer was Miss K [age 25], a pretty daughter of a decent
family, and the victim was her friend, Mrs P (age 25), who wasurried 6
months ago. They were classmates in high school and junior college and had

23
been close friends. The reason Miss K hated her friend was simple. She was
angry that Mrs P had left her alone to get married. and she hated to see Mrs P
show off expensive jewelry, including a diamond ring, from her husband. The

diamond ring and other jewelry did not mean much to Miss K, who grew up in a
rich family.

Miss K phoned her friend on the afternoon of 31 January [1981]. She urged
her friend to return to the happy days before her marriage by sharing some
hallucinogens. Mrs P readily accepted the offer. After their graduation from
junior college, they had occasion to use a stimulant while loitering about in
town. After the encounter, they centinued to indulge in stimlants and
became addicted. For a while, they participated in hallucination sessions
with many others, but gradually they enjoyed the drugs by themselves. When
their families became suspicious. they went from one hotel to another for the
drug trips, until they parted because of Mrs P's marriage.

Miss K was more seriously addicted than her friend. After Miss I talked her
friend into going out, she took Mrs P to her own isolated room. They took
what was supposed to be hallucinogen powder in order to enjoy life as before.

The powder, hawever, was not a hallucinogen but 22 crushed sleeping pills.
Mrs P became unconscious immediately.

With her scarf, Miss K choked her unconscious friend to death. She took 7.2
million won worth of jeVelryuthe diamond ring and a gold necklace. She
mved the victim to an adjacent bathroom, stripped her, and cut her up into
six pieces with a knife she had hidden earlier.

The Criminal Section of Pusan District Court sentenced her to 15 years'
imprisonment and declared that "she had used drugs excessively at the time
of the crime, and was mentally handicapped so that she could not properly
react under even a minor stimlation." The prosecutor asked for the death
penalty for the murder. Experts analyzed Miss K's psychological state at the
time of the crime and concluded that she acted out of delusions of jealousy
caused by her addiction to amphetamines.

The pharmacological action of amphetamines is roughly classified into two
categories: stimulation of the central nervous system and stimulation of the
peripheral nervous system. When amphetamines are taken, tiredness and
unpleasantness disappear, and alertness is lost in hallucinations and
fantasies, sometimes leading to bold crimes. After a person is addicted to
the drugs through frequent usage, he begins to exhibit psychopathic symptoms
such as delusions of persecution or of being followed, or suffering jealousy.
The crimes co-mitted by the drug addicts are classified according to the

type of delusions they suffer.

Psychopathic Symptoms Appear
Various types of incidents are caused by delusions of persecution.

Nu ki—man and his gang, who were arrested as drug dealers by the Pusan
District Prosecutor's Office, injected amphetamines into each other because

24
they were afraid that one of them might leave the gang and inform the police.
One of them, Kim (age 38), refused to take the drugs. So the gang forced a
large quantity of drugs on him for a week until he became unconscious. Kim is
known to have lost his ability to function for a long period because he could
not recover from the addiction.

Such incidents occur frequently. Youth gangs often use amphetamines to
maintain their organizations, and commit crimes utilizing the boldness gained
after taking the drugs. The drugs are also used to enjoy sexual orgies.

Addicts who have delusions of persecution do not want to be treated even
when they are sick. because they believe that the doctor is trying to kill
them by injecting poison. There are many addicts who carry dangerous weapons
to kill any family member of friend who shows interest in them because they
believe that these people are trying to report them to the authorities.

Miss 6 (age 26, from Pusan). who worked in a tea room, was taking care of her
widowed mother. She saved 5 million won in 5 years, and gave it to her
mother. Six months ago, she met a acoundrel who provided her with ampheta-
mines and she became an addict. Last month, she threatened her mother with a
deadly weapon, accusing her mother of trying to report her to the police.

The police arrested her.

Another addict, Miss Yi (age 27, from Pusan), went into a hotel room.
proclaiming that everyone in theworld was trying to kill her. She accused
the hotel owner of locking her up in the hotel room and watching her with a
video camera. She reported the owner to the police. When police came to the
hotel and found her hiding under a quilt, she brandished a fruit knife,
accusing them of trying to kill her.

The addicts who have delusions of jealousy commit horrible crimes such as
dismanbeting their victims. One addict came home and became suspicious or
his wife who was taking a bath. When he saw the bed was net neatly made,
he decided to kill her because he had the delusion that she was taking a
bath after having an affair with anothermsn. Be mercilessly beat her with
a club.

Another addict with a beautiful wife suspected that a business acquaintance
was trying to seduce her and he began to follow him with a hidden weapon. He
began to have the delusion after he was released from prison. His delusions
became worse as time passed, and he began to spy on his own house and the
ncqunintance's house every night to catch him in the act. His wife could not
stand his cruel demands that she confess and she left him. The acquaintance
asked the police to protect his life.

Those who have delusions of being followed commit acts based on fallacy. An
addict set fire to his own house when the windows rattled fromthe wind and
lights from passing cars shone on the windows, because he thought that
someone was coming to the house to kill him. He wanted to stay in prison or
at the police station, which he considered the safest place. Another addict
collided with a car while driving recklessly, seized by a delusion of being
chased.

25
There are examples of multiple delusions.

Pak (age 26), an addict arrested by the Pusan District Prosecutor's Office,
had multiple delusions. He avoided meeting friends because he thought they
would take away the 3,000 court ladies with whom he had dates, pointing to
the blue tatoos on his arm. He claimed that he talked with god through his
hair. Also, he accused his wife of having an affair and of trying to poison
him. Pak was a typical case of multiple delusions.

As these examples show, crimes related to amphetamines are diverse. In Korea,
the connection between amphetamine addiction and crime has been verified,
but no research or analysis has been carried out.

In Japan, which is the suzerain state of amphetamines, analyses are carried
out every year, according to cause and type of crimes. A total of 550
amphetamine-related crimes were comitted (by 569 persons) during 1976 in
Japan. Felonies occupied a substantial fraction of the crimes: there were
25 murders (by 26 persons). 11 cases of arson (by 10 persons), 8 cases of
robbery (by 11 persons), and 13 cases of rape (by 16 persons).

Desperate Escape

Kim T'ae-chin (age 28, from Yangjong b-tong, Tongnae-Ku, Pusan), who was a
crew member on a freighter that served the Japanese route, the No 9 Nanong-ho
(owned by the Sinhung Marine Transportation Co), tried to snuggle lo kg of
amphetamines (worth 400 million yen) into Japan. lie was intercepted by
Japanese customs. and escaped in a last-ditch effort.

Kim, who was the chef on the ship, decided to become an amphetamine smuggler
because he decided he could not make money without taking risks. In late June
of last year, he bought ’0 kg of powder (a nickname for amphetamines) while
the ship was anchored in P'ohang. He brought it aboard disguised as work
clothes and asked the chief engineer, Chong Eyong-chu (age 26, from Namhae,
Kyongsang-Namdo), to hide it. He thought that would be safer because Chong
had a single room, while he shared his roam with other crew members.

Kim promised to pay Chong 300,000 yen for hiding the drugs. They hid the
well—wrapped drugs between two walls by remving the nails from a 30 cm long
piece of plywood. They put the nails back in and restored the wall to it:-
original appearance.

The freighter arriVed at the port of Osaka around 9 am on 3 July. lbre than
10 Japanese customs officials came aboard and searched the ship thoroughly.
The officials saw something hidden in the well through a rat hole in Chang's
room and began to tear the wall apart. Chong became scared, began to worry
about getting caught, and told Kim that he was going to escape.

Chong innediately jumped ship. When he paused to catch his breath, he

looked back toward the port. He saw a familiar Korean ship among the many
berthed there. It was the Kuktong-ho, another freighter that served the

26
same route. He went to the ship and looked for the chief engineer. He hoped
that the chief engineer might be someone he knew professionally.

He explained his urgent situation, and begged for a hiding place to return
to Korea. He promised to pay 1 million was in Korea. He was stowed sway
under the anchor near the bow. The Kuktong-ho returned to Hukho 5 days
later, and Chong safely escaped from Japan.

The drugs were coafiscsted and the story of the escape of the Korean crew
member was reported in detail 2 days later, on 5 July, by the Japanese
newspaper YOMIURI SHINBUH. The paper reported that the amunt confiscated,
4 kg, was the largest confiscated in 1981, worth 1.2 billion yen (3.6
billion won) on the [Japanese] market. The paper also reported that a
recent murder in Koto-ku, Japan, was col-itted by an addict of stimlant
drugs, and it reported many stories about amphetamines in detail.

The crew of the Nameong-ho, along with Chang and Kim, were arrested by the
Pusan District Prosecutor's Office after they returned to Korea. They were
staff crew members of the freighter with more than 5 years of working
experience each, but were paid only a little over 170,000 won per month.

Toward the end of October 1979, a secret group of amphetamine dealers with
seven members led by [(11 T'ae-in (age 51, from Seoul) established contact

with the largest organized gang in Japan, Sumiyoshigumi of Tokyo. Son Yol
(age 51, from Hus-tong, Yongsan-ku, Seoul), who was in charge of drug sales,
met a neuter of the Japanese gang, Akidays (age 50), at the Adussedor

Hotel while Son was looking for foreign customers who wanted to buy ampheta-
mines. Son pretended that he was a tourist guide and that Akidays was staying
at the hotel as a tourist.

The deal was simple. The price per kilogram of amphetamines was set at 3.5
million yen. After his return to Japan, Akidaya would signal by placing an
international call to the address of a Hr Kobayashi, to whom the
amphetamines would be sent either by air of by surface mail. As soon as the
drugs were received, a newer of the gang would come to Korea as a tourist to
pay for the drugs.

The Japanese volunteered to pay 3.5 million yen in advance for the first
deal, to establish their credit. The first shipment was successfully sent
hidden in a stationery chest disguised as a tourist gift. The second deal
was made on 15 January 1980. The leader of the Sumiyoshigumi, Tanska, came to
the Ambassador Hotel, paid 3.5 million yen to Son, and asked for 1 kg of
amphetamines be sent by the same method.

Struggles Among Organized Gangs
Son passed the noney to ‘11 Chang-hyon (age 51, in charge of transporting the
drugs), and asked him to deliver the money to their leader, Kil. But Yi

spent it all. Kil insited that he could not deliver the drugs without advance
payment. More than 10 days passed while they argued among theseelves. Then

27
the leader of the Japanese gang, Tanaka, made an international phone call.
he threatened to "send someone to kill all of you unless the promise is
quickly fulfilled," and to "eliminate your organization by reporting you to
the Korean police."

Son was scared; he paid Kil 3 million won, and begged him to share LII. loss and
and to send 1 kg of the drugs to Japan because he was afraid of retaliation.
Kil agreed. and Pack Ch'ong-kil (age 51, from Seoul). who was in charge Lf
transportation, carried the drugs.

'No months later. Tanaka threatened again and demanded that more amphetamines
be send. Following instructions from Tanaka, Son met Akidaya—whom he had
met earlier--again in Seoul in March of the same year [1980]. Akidaya
demanded the price be reduced to 2 million yen per kilogram because "you
betrayed us," and ordered Son to innediately ship the drugs.

Son and other Korean drug dealers tried to terminate the business because
they did not want to continue under such conditions. The Japanese gang

were aware of the discontent and did not remain idle. On 23 April 1980,
Tanaka ordered Son by phone to meet Ichinoki (age 37. from 533 Nagashims-cho,
Edogawak-ku, Tokyo) at the Hotel H. Son could not talk back, and he just
listened. Ichinoki paid 2 million yen, and demanded lo kg of amphetamines br
sent to Japan right away.

The trouble multiplied. The Korean dealers decided to comply because they
feared for their lives. They hid asphetamines in two stationery chests and

a hollowed-out scroll rod; they were looking for a freighter to ship them
when they were arrested by the Pusan District Prosecutor's Office. Kil. who
was in charge of the dealers as wall as manufacturing the drugs, was seriOualy
addicted. He was administering the drugs to himself. '

Many Koreans in Japan are also victimized by organized Japanese gangs.

A typical case is Hrs Kim Pok-nam (age 56. from Hiroshima. Japan), a Korean
resident of Japan who was arrested when she tried to leave Korea from Kimhae
Airport on a JAL flight at 3 pm on 19 August 1980. She was arrested for
trying to smuggle 210 grams of amphetamines hidden under her corset. Her
husband was a master of another Japanese gang. Yamaguchigumi. He was sent
to Pusan as a tourist last June by the gang. He bought 1 kg of amphetamines,
but he was caught by a customs official in Osaka when he returned to Japan.

He was held responsible for the failure.

The organized gang threatened his wife, Kim because of the loss of drugs and
money. On 30 July, a month after her husband's arrest, three members of

the gang took Kim to a tea room in Batchobori, Hiroshima, and threatened

to harm the couple unless she smuggled amphetamines from Korea.

After agonizing for more than 10 days, she finally went to Pusan. As
directed by the gang, she contacted a man in his forties by phone, and met
him at the Kumth'ang Tea Room in Chung-kn, Pusan. She paid 700,000 yen
for 210 grams of amphetamines, which she hid under her corset, but she

28
was arrested when she tried to leave the country at Kimhee Airport. They
became victims of organized crime, each serving jail terms in Japan and Korea.

Addicted Users of Amphetamines

People usually get addicted to narcotics while they are using drugs to kill
pain caused by an illness. Amphetamines, however, are used more often by
people who are curious about hallucinations or by weakdminded people with a
feeling of emptiness. Also. there are recent examples of the drugs being
used to trap frequent customers or to control mistresses and spouses.

The underground ring of three drug dealers headed by Pat Tong-uh (age 72).
arrested by the Pusan District Prosecutor's Office last March were selling
drugs to hostesses in salons in the busy sections of Pusan. They sold drugs
to hostesses in more than 10 expensive salons, such as B Salon in lwangbok-
tong, Chung-Ru, A Salon in Ch'angson-tong, and P Salon in Somyon.

Miss K (age 23), who admitted that she received three injections from the
ring, stated that she took the drugs without knowing what they were after she
was persuaded to "have fun.because business is slow today." She felt dizzy
and her stomach was queasy in the beginning. but as time passed she felt
stronger as her senses became dull. Miss K danced all night with eight
other hostesses. She did not feel tired at all, thought it was a miracle
medicine, and wanted to try it again.

Injections of the drugs were available only through a strictly controlled,
tiny organization which was difficult to trace. She could arrange for an
injection only through another hostess. She paid only 8,000 won for the

first injection, but she had to pay 15,000 won for subsequent injections.

Mun Sang-Run and two others were arrested in April for supplying amphetamines
to prostitutes in the Hanwol-tong area of So-ku [Pusan]. The prostitutes
were attracted by curiousity to claims such as "makes you feel good,
tiredness disappears, and you can enjoy extrema sexual pleasure." They

took the drugs without hesitation. First-time users praised the effects of

the drugs and enticed their friends. Each injection cost only 5,000-20,000
won. not much of a burden on them.

The frank confessions of these prostitutes, who did not know how to control
their feelings. spread like a fire over oil. Among the many who wanted the
drugs, the drug dealers were careful to sustain the hallucinations of only
those who were likely to keep the dealers' identity secret.

when the authorities began investigating the widespread usage of amphetamines
among the prostitues, the prostitutes showed strong resistance. This was a
group for which all the necessary conditions for easy and deep infiltration of
the drug business were fulfilled.

Also, the investigators Suddenly raided the so-called Texas Village in
Ch'orynng-tong. Tong-Ru. and broke a secret drug ring involving over 200

29
waitresses. Here. the investigators arrested two groups led by Pal: Man-kun
and Kim Myong-kon, a total of six drug dealers.

Habitual gamblers use amphetamines as daily medicine. With 0.2-0.3 milligrams
of amphetamine injections. tiredness and unpleasantness disappear. Sleepi-
ness, which is the greatest enemy of those who gamble all night, disappears,
and reasoning and judgment are improved.

The 16 habitual gamblers who were arrested by the Tongbu Police District
Office in Pusan last May, during a game in which 300 million won was at
stake, used amphetamines while they played. The man who supplied the drugs
to the gamblers was the owner of the gambling casino, Yi Hon-ch'ol (age 37,
from Chungil-tong, Haeundse-ku, Pusan). Yi himself was an addict and he sold
only to gamblers. The arrested gamblers were likewise addicted through
numerous injections. Many of them had not or..y become addicts but they had
also lost heavily. Rang Chang-til (age 43, from Pusanjin-ku), who was
exhausted, lost 50 million won; Pak Chong-to (age 100, from Haeundsa-ku) lost
10 million won.

During the investigation, the police were shocked to find a 19-year-old girl
alanst ruined physically from her addiction to amphetamines. She was Miss Y,
who flunked the entrance examination to a professional school after her
graduation from a girl's high school last Pebruary. Miss Y did not want to
study any longer after she failed the entrance examination, and took a job at
an employmnt agency in Pujon-tong, Pusanjin-lm, at a monthly salary of 60.000
won.

At the agency, Miss Y met Mrs K, a mistress of Y1, who was the owner of the
garbling casino and an amphetamine addict. she met Yi through Mrs K, who
called him her brother. In early April, Yi met Miss Y when she was going
home after work, and suggested that she take an injection of vitamins because
she looked very tired. Miss Y recalled that in about 15 minutes "I felt
languid, my thinking was clouded, and when I tried to walk, I felt as if

the floor was rising to hit my forehead." She added that in 50 minutes
"everything was in color, as if I was watching color TV with oscillating
pictures, but I felt streng."

Miss Y took six injections during a period of over 40 days. until 10 May,
and participated in sexual acts with Y1 and Mrs K.

When the police rescued her, she was still in a daze and shamelessly
exposed her body. Miss Y said that Yi had been and because he was not
satisfied with his sexual performance, but he could prolong his sexual act
for mre than 5-6 hours after he began to inject the drugs into himself.

Miss Y, who is the eldest daughter of a transportation businessman, is
mild-mannered and shy and blushes often. She wrote of her sorrow in her
diary. "I am losing myself. Stupid girl. I am afraid of everything. I
wish I could return to my old self. I wish I could live with no concern for
love, truth. sorrow..."
Now Miss Y lives in tears; she says: "I am afraid of men. I hate society
and myself."

The members of the Yonghun group (led by Kim Song-ch'ol. age 35, from
Taegu) and the Hanch'ol grOup (led by Ban Ch'ol, age 50, from Pusan) widely
infiltrated amng young people 20 to 30 years old. They supplied drugs to
any customer. They sold drugs for 5,000 won or more per dose to gangsters,
factory workers, office workers, and waitresses. The eight members of the
networks also administered drugs to themselves and roamed sung the dregs
of society.

The prosecutor's office confirmed that there were more than 60 young addicts
who were customers of the arrested dealers. The victim were separated [from
other criminals] and treated as they were picked up. One of then, Pal: (age
20. from Soku, Pusan), was such a serious case that his eyeballs were

clouded and he talked deliriously.

The Kija group. consisting of three women (arrested last July), sold drugs
only to women such as rich housewives, private savings club masters, and
merchants. They trapped the victims by claiming: "You will become slim"
vigorous, and your pains will disappear." The victims were injected with
drugs, and they continued to visit the dealers for more.

Hrs Kin (use 45). owner of a dress shep, administered amphetamines to retain
rich customers who ordered many expensive dresses by telling them that she
had a "special medicine that is good for you." The six dealers of the
Namgangbyon group (arrested in June) of Chinju supplied drugs to rich and ill
people in western Kyongsrng-Nando and made then addicts. This confirms the
fact that drugs have even reach the countryside.

Big-Time Manufacturers of Amhetamines

Of those alive now, the most expert in manufacturing drugs was Sim Sang-ho
(age 53, alias Kkamsang [dark face], new under arrest). lie was the
originator, and his disciples were the leaders in the seventies. The five
big-time makers of drugs, Yi Huang-sun (age 46, from Pusan), O Pong-so (age
51, from Pusan). Kin Tok-chun (age 109, from Seoul), Ch'oe Chas-to (age 50,
from Pusan). and Kim Pyong-chik (age 50, from Pusan), were all students

of Sin. They all set up their own businesses after they learned the trade.

of these men, the most notorious was ‘11 Hwang-sun. In Septeder 1979, he
built a fabulous palace-like resort house on a hill in Minnak-tong,
Nam-kn. Pusan, overlooking Haeundae. The walls of the house were as high
as those of a prison, and electrified barbed wire was installed 1:: <91: of
them.

The outer gate and the inner gate $2.97! 4'“. meters apart, a three-dimensional
video surveilJm .ng'resusaa. unsta,‘2.ed, and the entire periphery of the
messy could be watched from inside a room. There was a secret passage from
a second-floor 80 p'yong [259 square meter] living room to the basement

31
B

where the drugs were. node. In the basement. 163 kg of amphetamines were
made in 3 years, between September 1976 and July 1979. These were worth
1.6 billion won in Korea or 16.3 billion yen in Japan ((09 billion won).

Yi was also addicted to drugs. He had almost become an invalid when he was
arrested by officers of the Special Section of the Pusan District
Prosecutor's Office in April 1980. He was a victim of delusions of
persecution and of being followed, a commn situation among addicts.

In his living room and bedroom. he kept a shotgun with 60 rounds of
ammunition. He also had two long Japanese swords. In the yard, he kept
three viciOus, well-trained dogs unleashed. When investigators tried to
arrest him, he kept them at bay with the shotgun and mercilessly shot two of
the dogs to death when the investigators closed in.

To avoid the investigators, he carried a forged resident registration card
and driver's license, and drove an imported Nova with the license plate
designation Seoul 0 Ka 3712. Before he was arrested, he spent a large sum of
money to bribe the police and drug control agents when he learned that his
past associates were being arrested.

After Yi was arrested in September 1980, the originator, Sin. and two big-time
manufacturers, 0 and Kim, were also arrested by the prosecutor's office.

As former teacher and students, they maintained close links through joint
manufacturing and sales, which led to the arrest of the three big fish
together.

Since they had mastered advanced skills. they chose to mass produce in one
place and supply drug networks in order to avoid the risk associated with
making drugs in small quantities. They may have been able to avoid the Jan
and control the market as long as they did because of this tactic.

Sim had been convicted only once before, in June 1973, )- wme Seoul
District Court for violating the law on habit-f0,“ $4.3 drugs. He was
sentenced to 2 years in prison and I. veazr 'Won. Sim claimed that he
owned only 300 million was ur-Jthwz-z wumerty; ' aheld eight responsible
positions, such if I" -Wsrﬁ‘b‘llmﬁf a village savings cooperative.

The ﬁtshim‘bf 3 office even boasted that it got rid of all the notable
wweaaaéne dealers of the seventies by arresting these people.

Powder Horth 100 Million Yen per Kilogram

The manufacturing centers of the drugs were concentrated in the Seoul and
Pusan areas until the mid-seventies, but then they spread to the ch' ungch' ong
provinces and Kyonggido. Recently. the entire cOuntry came under surveil-
lance, including Chejudo.

Among those who were exposed by the authorities, the Insong-ho group of

Ch'ungmu. which used fresh-fish exporting boats, turned out to have
developed the simplest but mst productive machines.

32
The grOup was arrested last July by the Pusan District Prosecutor's office.
Kang Tong-kyu (age 56), who was in charge of drug manufacture, succeeded in
mechanizing the amphetamine manufacturing process. Rang learned the
manufacturing trade from Japan 3 years ago. and decided to design a new
machine because he judged that the old method, with 18 to 20 manufacturing
steps, could easily be detected by the authorities.

Through Japanese literature and experiments, he designed two modern

machines, a hydrogen gas injector and a vacuum pump. Last April, he succeeded
in fabricating the machines on the basis of his design. The injector had
incredible efficiency, replacing over 20 devices used in the old method.

"heels were installed on the vacuum pump to move it around. The design was
adapted to disperse the smell from the manufacturing process. Rang made .Ja?
over 10 kg at his home in Pusan with the new machine. which reduced the

manufacturing process to seven or eight steps. He sold the product through
dealer networks.

. The dealer of hydrochloride ephedrine, whicbda izgmiﬁw material needed to
make amphetamines, is 400,000 to 5OQ~Q£Z—ecn ucr kilogram: It can be bought
for one-tenth the price, or Aktﬁgo to 60,000 won, in areas of Southeast Asia
such as Bong Ko d Taiwan. in other words, one can make a 10-fold profit
over the *eiﬁstmnt. For low-ranking crew menbers of trading ships.
the mesons); “ rth smuggling.

From 1 kg of raw material, 800 to 900 grams of amphetamines can be produced on
the average, while an experienced hand can recover the full amount, 1 kg. The
wholesale price of the finished product is 6-7 million won [per kilogram].

The price goes up by 1 million won with every step the product changes hands.
The market price, therefore, is normally quoted as 10 million won per kilo-
gram. The final retail price for a user snowballs to 20,000-30,000 won per
gram.

In Japan, the price for intermediate dealers is 10,000 to 15,000 yen per
gram, while the cost for the final user is 8,000 to 10,000 yen per 0.3 gram
dose. This amounts to over 100 million yen per kilogram. The estimated
annual profit of the Japanese gangs from amphetamines is over 10 billion
yen.

Almost all amphetamines leaving the country are smuggled into Japan. This is
because the manufacturing source moved to Korea from Japan, from which the
drugs originated. after Japan harshly cracked down. Large-volume smuggling
is carried out by sailors, and small-scale smuggling by travellers. rue
transportation cost is substantial because of the risks involved, although
the cost depends on volume. It can be more than 2 million won per kilogram.

Foreign Investors Are Involved, Too
A notable fact that stood out in the second half of the seventies was the
arrest of Japanese, Americans and Korean residents of Japan in connection with

the distribution and smuggling of drugs. Two secret distribution networks
exposed hy prosecutors, the Yosu group and the airport group, were both

33
financed by Japanese. Purchasing and transportation of the drugs in the two
grOups were also handled by Japanese and Korean residents cf Japan.

The financier of the Yosu group was Saito (age 40). He sent Katahara Kozo
(age 43, from Shizuko Prefecture, Japan). who was in charge of purchasing

and transportation. to Korea disguised as a tourist. and had him smuggle 3 kg
of amphetamines to “skate. In February 1980, Katahara bought the drugs from
Y1 Hyo-kwang (age 43, from Yosu, Cholla-Namdo) for 10.5 million won, and

put the drugs on an overseas freighter leaving from Hasan.

The chief of the airport group, also Japanese, was Nakshima (age 38, from
Fukuoka). A Korean resident of Japan, Sin ch'ang-hwan (age 34, from Fukuoka),
was in charge of purchasing and transportation. He carried a total of 6 kg of
amphetamines in four trips from 20 November 1980 through 20 February 1981.

The drug dealers carried out their business openly in tourist hotel rooms,
which were not closely watched by the authorities.

Seiji Yarata (age 28) and two other Japanese were arrested by the Pusan city
police last July. and Furuta Minoru (age 37, from Kumamoto, Japan) and three
Other Japanese were arrested by prosecutors. All of them came to Korea as
tourists, stayed at C Hotel in Pusan for extended periods, and sold ampheta-
mines in small quantities back to Koreans after they had bought the drugs from
Koreans. They shamelessly admitted that they paid for the hotel and
entertainment expenses from the huge profit they made through selling
amphetamines.

An American drug dealer was also arrested. Gold Barney (age 43. from Cali-
fornia), was arrested for supplying amphetamines to American soldiers
stationed in Korea. A Korean permanent resident of the United States, Kim
Kah-nip (age 46), set up a secret plant in Scryu-tong, Suwon, Kyonggido, to
manufacture amphetamines. He was in charge of a large organisation for
manufacturing and smuggling drugs.

From 1asr December until his arrest in July, Kim made 120 liters of liquid
amphetamines, worth 1.2 billion won, smuggled 90 liters into the United States
and other countries, and sold the rest in Korea through secret sales networks.
When his organization was exposed by prosecutors, Kim escaped to the United
States.

Treachery, Trickery, and Terror

The manufacture, smuggling, distribution, and sales of amphetamines are
carried out by well-protected, small organizations. It is true that these
organizations are bound more by mutual trust than any other criminal
organizations, but the horror of treachery, trickery, and error is seen
everywhere. They cheat and threaten each other to make more money; clubs
and deadly weapons are also used.

Here is a complicated story of amphetamine smugglers, based in the port of
Ch'ungmu, who were arrested last August by Prosecutor Yi Kang-chae of the
Special Section, Pusan District Prosecutor's Office, while they were using
freighters to export fresh fish.

First the story is abOut the failure to smuggle 5 kg of amphetamines into
Japan after taking them there. The failure led to rivalry and treachery in
the organization. Kim Su-ki (age 36, from Ch'ungmu, Kyongsang-Namdo) was
the owner of the Insong-ho (60 tons), a freighter for exporting fresh fish.
He was in charge of [drug] sales and transportation. He was asked last May
to deliver 5 kg of amphetamine powder to a Japanese in Uno, Japan, by Kim
(age 45) and Chong (age 46), both of whom lived at the Yongdong apartment
complex, Kangnam-ku, Seoul. The fee for the transportation service was to
be 1.5 million won per kilogram, or a total of 7.5 million won.

The ship owner, who thought he could make a fortune in a simple deal, embarked
for Uno with the amphetamines hidden inside 3 tons of fresh fish to be
exported to Japan. The freighter suited the purpose perfectly because the
ship made two or three round trips to Uno every month.

When he arrived at Uno, he could not locate his contact. Moreover. surveil-
lance was too severe and he could not bring the drugs ashore. He had to leave
Japan with the drugs undelivered. The crew members were split over what to
do. One group wanted to take the drugs hack to Korea and return them to the
original owners. The others wanted to bury the drugs near a lighthouse on
Tsushima because taking them back was too dangerous, and they wanted to
attempt a delivery on their next trip.

The two groups clashed over what to do and got into a fight on board ship
during their return trip. Those who wanted to buy the drugs won, and the ship
stopped at Tsushima. The sailor who was keeping the drugs was found to have
switched a bag of rice for the package, and he was beaten almost to death
with iron bars.

A few crew members representing those who wanted to bury the drugs went
to the lighthouse with the ship owner, Kim, but they agreed to hide the
drugs on board and bring them back to Korea without telling the others.
Eventually, they returned to Ch'ungmu with the 5 kg of amphetamines.

The ship owner lied to Kim and Chong, who had asked him to take the drugs to
Japan, and told them that the drugs were buried on Tsushims. Kim and Chong
demanded that the ship owner immediately bring back the drugs. The ship owner
asked for a 5 million won fee to bring them back. but he settled for 2

million won. Three days later, he returned the drugs, which had been hidden
in his house. The ship's crew beat up the owner when they found out that he
had cheated them and had made a secret deal by himself with the owners of the
drugs.

A second incident took place in Japan. The ship owner, Kim. decided to get
directly involved in the drug trade instead of just transporting the drugs.
he bought 3 kg from drug manufacturer Kang Sang-kyu (age 54. from Tong-kn.

Pusan) for 26 million won. Through Ha Yong-nak (age 54, from Ch'ungmu,

35
Kyongsang-Namdo), a broker, Kim was introduced to hishi Akamstsu. a Japanese
in Uno. Kim promised to pay 1.5 million won to the broker after the deal was
successfully consummated.

The ship owner met Nishi in Uno and made a deal to sell the drugs for 3.5
million yen per kilogram, a total of 10.5 million yen. The drugs were to be
handed over to Japanese recipients at Hiarikobu in Hiroshima Prefecture, a
6-dnur trip from Uno by ship. They met at the rendezvous point through a
prearranged signal. When the amphetamines were handed over to Nishi and his
gang, they insisted that they could pay only 4 million yen for 3 kg of the
drugs because the drugs were of low quality.

Kim and his crew, who were being cheated by the Nishi gang, decided to settle
the score by fighting them. The two sides separated and prepared for a fight.
Then the ship owner decided that he did not have such of a chance to win a
fight in a foreign country, and it was too dangerous to return to Korea with
the drugs. So he proposed to negotiate. The Nishi gang agreed to pay the
balance, 6.5 million yen, through a broker, Ha, provided that Kim would
continue to deliver drugs in the future.

After Kim returned to Korea, he and the broker accused each other of treachery
and had a big argument. Ma demanded immediate payment of his fee of 1.5
million son because he did not believe that Kim had received only a partial
payment for the drugs. On the other hand, Kim blamed Ha for introducing
unreliable Japanese, through whom he lost a large sum of money, and demanded
that Ma pay the balance of the drug payment that should have come from Japan.

A third conflict occurred between the crew of the Insong-ho led by Kim and the
crew of the Sinhae-ho financed by Ha chae-pong (age 27, from Ch'ungmu,
Kyongsang-Namdo). For the delivery of 3 kg of drugs to Japan by the crew

of the Insong—ho, Ha invested 10 million won in return for 30 percent of the
profit from the deal, but the deal did not succeed as planned. The Sinhae-ho
gang lost their investment and threatened to harm the crew of the Insong-ho,
causing the two groups, which had been friendly, to fight each other. In the
cruel struggle, the two gangs hurt themselves and caused their organizations
to crumble.

Networks have been known to be a strong as pig iron. The distributors are
most often caught because they must seek out customers or retailers.

When low-echelon members of the networks are caught, the upper-echelon members
take care of their families, hire lawyers, and provide full support. This

is why those who are caught do not reveal their higher connections in the
networks under any circumstances.

They don't open their mouths. no matter how they are appeased or physically
pressured. They even try to confuse investigators and help other members
of their network to escape.

They deny everything even when they are faced with proof. Even experienced
investigators often run into a dead end because of the stubborn refusal of
the network members to admit their connections.
The investigation of addicts is more difficult. When physical pressure is
applied to distinguish truth from lies, careful treatment is necessary because
of physical changes peculiar to addicts. Their bones are calcified and

break easily from the slightest external shock. These problem make it very

' difficult to expose all the members of a network even when some of them are
caught. '

However, when they are mistreated by their own network while in jail, they
seek revenge in a cold-blooded manner. They don't mind informing secretly
or aCCusing publicly to the authorities, or conniving with a rival drug
network out of revenge until their network is completely shattered.

Amphetamines as Stimulants

Amphetamines and methamphetamine form the main staple of stimlants. They
are similar in chemical structure and in composition to ephedrine and both are
compounds that stimulate the sympathetic nerves. Hethawhetamines have
strenger stimulating action on the central nervous system, are more addictive,
and inflict lore damage. The trade name for the more damaging
methamphetamines is Philopon, which is used as an alias for stimulants.

The main pharmacological actions of methamphetamines can be classified in

two categories: stimulation of the central nervous system and of the
peripheral nervous system. When a person takes amphetamines. the drugs act on
the cerebrum and cortex; he feels free of tiredness and unpleasantness. and
becomes talkative. He thinks and judges better and his efficiency increases.
The lack of tiredness is a subjective effect resulting from the loss of
self-awareness of physical fatigue. In reality, the user of the drugs suffers
from severe fatigue, lack of sleep, nervousness. and depression.

Amphetamines also shrink arteries and raise blood pressure. They increase the
heart beat and pulse rate, relax cramps in digestive organs such as the
stomach and intestines, and stop spasms in the urethra and gall bladder. The
motion of digestive organs is subdued, hunger is not felt, and appetite is
reduced. The activity of the body, however, is forced to increase, and the
body loses balance.

In the case of a healthy person who takes 3 mg of drugs, the effects become
apparent from 5 minutes to 2 hours later and last for 3 to 9 home. If the
drugs are injected into a vein, the effects take place quickly. If one
were to take 120 mg a day, it could be fatal.

Because of these effects, the drugs are used to treat internal disorders such
as hypotension, bronchial asthma, and fainting. and also to treat psychologi-
cal disorders such as nerv0us prostration, depression, and poisoning from
sleeping pills and similar drugs.

Ephedrine hydrochloride. which is the raw material for amphetamines, is used
as the raw material for drugs that treat asthma. The chemical can be

imported only for pharmaceutical purposes with the permission of the Ministry
of Health and Social Affairs. The ministry supervises usage of the chemical.

37
To manufacture amphetamines. ephedrine hydrochloride is melted in glacial
acetic acid, mixed with a catalyst and perchloric acid, and heated to 80-90'C.
Then. the liquid is filtered, more catalyst is added, condensing it in

several stages until it is crystallized, and then it is dissolved in water
again to make a strong basic solution. This is the first process. There are
10 to 12 steps in the first process. In these steps strong odors are
produced. The second process, in which the finished product is made, requires
special skill. Gaseous hydrochloric acid is passed over the crystals produced
in the first step,and the precipitate hydrochloride salt is recrystallized

with acetic acid. The quality of the finished product can only be verified
by actual use on people.

Terrible Symptoms of Addiction
Addiction to methamphetamines is classified as acute and chronic.

Chronic addiction results from continued usage of small doses of a drug. If
a user ingests or injects into a vein 2 to 3 mg [a day] for 2 to 3 months,
he becomes a chronic addict. The user becomes addicted because. after the
excessively excited condition is over as the drug wears off, he becomes
tired, depressed, lonely, bored, and wants to continue to use the drug.

As with narcotics and other antipsychotic drugs, the human body builds up
resisrance to amphetamines and the dosage has to be increased. Some addicts
use 20 to 30 times the dosage a beginner uses.

Symptoms of an addict are that he becomes talkative, moves his body
unnecessarily, and is easily irritated. His behavior is rough, he becomes
fearful and uneasy. He loses ambition, is distracted, and becomes forgetful.

Acute addiction results from a sudden increase in dosage, S to 10 times the
normal amount of 2 to 3 mg. An acute addict becomes ultrasensative, shows
curiosity about everything, and his interest keeps growing unnecessarily.
Thus, he is easily distracted and feels uneasy because he tends to be carried
away. This state is also called a "stimulated dream."

Excessive curiosity and interest develop to the point that an addict finds it
difficult to see reality, and his hallucination increases until he believes
his illusions actually exist. These illusions turn into hallucinations and
delusions. eventually leading to serious crimes. No matter what the nature
of addiction, chronic or acute, all addicts develop addictive psychoses.

Typical psychotic symptonm are divided into five categories. The first is
the obsession that someone is trying to hurt the addict. The second is the
worry that someone is following him. The third is a deep suspicion that his
wife or sweetheart is having an affair with someone else. The fourth is that
everyone is slandering him behind his back. The fifth is the suspicion that
he is being closely watched by someone.

These delusions change external stimulations into all kinds of distracted
visions. scunds and feelings. These groundless fears arouse hallucinations.

38
When amphetamine usage is interrupted, the addict is trapped by a strong

desire to use the drug again and continues to feel unhappy. The withdrawal ,
symptoms are different for each individual, but the addict may have headaches,
diarrhea, insomnia, thirst. diminished desires, and depression.

Some specialists consider these after effects comparable to the withdrawal
symptoms of narcotics addicts. When an amphetamine addict stops taking the
drug, psychological symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations are
drastically reduced with a week. But aftereffects such as irritability follow,
apprehension and a split personality remain, and sometimes the effects are
incurable.

Sometimes, the addict returns to normal physical health after he stops using
the drug. but the symptoms recur s few maths or a few years later.

Amphetamines Invade from Japan
The suzerain state of amphetamines that set its roots deep in Korea is Japan.

Hethamphetamines were introduced into Japan in 1938. They were used as
general stimulants because they eliminated tiredness and sleepiness, and
increased working efficiency. During World War 11, Japan recommended the
use of the drugs for nightshift workers in mnitions factories because the
government was desperate for increased production. Military personnel
mobilized for the war, and pilots for night flights were given these drugs.
Also, there are records of the drugs have been forced on suicide squads
toward the final phase of the war.

Amphetamines were part of military supplies in Japan. After the war. a
stockpile of the drugs became available to the public. The drugs reached
the civilian market uncontrolled. They became a convenience for those who
had to work late an night--laborers, soldiers, and entertainers, as well as
professionals who needed to concentrate.

Students who had to study late also loved the drugs. Gamblers and employees
of salons, nightclubs. and cabsrets enjoyed the drugs, which also infiltrated
deep into red-light districts.

Up to this point, the drugs were used simly as stimulants. However, the
horror of the drugs was revealed when members of organized gangs began to use
them regularly. Due to unstable mental states, the gang members routinely
used terror and destruction, and began to exhibit split personalities,
delusions, and hallucinations. Crimes co-itted by addicts also increased
rapidly.

In 1948, Japan belatedly classified methamphetamines as powerful drugs, and
2 years later passed a law to control stimulants. A law was enacted severly
punishing unauthorized makers of the drugs by death or life imprisonment.

But the government could not root out the drugs. A year after the law took
effect, 17,528 violators were arrested in 1951. This figure was eight times

39
the 2,208 violators of narcotics laws in the seme year. The number of
violators of the stimulant control law increased every year, peaking at
55.664 in 1956. The number of violators decreased after that. and remained
below 800 a year from 1957 to 1969. In 1970, however, those arrested for
violating the amphetamine control law increased to 1,618, and the number has
multiplied every year by almost a factor of two, reaching over 20,000 last
year. This number is more than 10 times the total number of those arrested
for violations related to narcotics, opium, and marijuana.

Experts on the Japanese usage of amphetamines refer to the rampant period
right after World War II as the first stimulant boom, and the present period
as the second boom.

The drugs spread to Korea after the first boom. when the Japanese authorities
began to impose capital punishment on the makers of the drugs, the Japanese
makers sneaked into Korea. All amphetamines made in the quiet countryside

or sparcely populated coastal areas of Korea were smuggled into Japan.

The manufacturing skills were passed on to Koreans at this time. They worked
very hard to make the drugs because they could sell everything they made to
Japan, and law enforcement in Korea was lax.

In the late sixties, with the cooperation of Korean law enforcement agencies,
Japan mobilized all of its enforcement authorities to intercept the drug
traffic from Korea, the main source of the drugs.

Then. the drug makers began to develop the domestic market because it was
difficult for them to smuggle the drugs out of Korea. The real threat posed
by amphetamines was revealed in Korea after 1976. Narcotics. which were
rampant after the Korean war, were followed by marijuana in the sixties.
which was in turn replaced by amphetamines. Amphetamines took over and
began to spread because they were easy to use, easy to hide, and effective.

Secret Language Used by Drug Dealers

Every secret organization or network has a secret language characteristic
of it. The secret language used by amphetamine dealers is novel.

They want to be called "professors." A "professor" commands the highest
respect among the drug network members; it is used to a drug manufacturer.
Only those who can make high-quality crystalline amphetamines are called
"professors." Many makers try to produce "crystals," but most of then end
up producing "porridge," even after 5 to 6 years of training. In the final
step of manufacturing amphetamines, the term "cooking porridge" is used when
the maker fails to produce clean white crystals. The drug makers who
merited the title "professor" in Korea were Sim Sang-ho-and Kim Tong-11.

Ephedrine hydrochloride, which is the raw material, is called "rice" or
"uncut rolls of cloth." The words were chosen because rice is our staple
food, and uncut rolls of cloth are the basic supply material for the clothing
industry. Palladium. an intermediate catalyst, is called “coffee." The

word comes from the color of the chemical as well as the popularity of coffee
in modern society.

60
The semifinished product in its liquid state is called "water," and amphe-
tamines are called "powder" or "dmgs." One unit or two units of merchandise
means 1 kg or 2 kg of the powder. and one cup or two cups of aoju [Korean
gin] means 1 doe [0.477 [1.8. gallon] or 2 doe of liquid aqahetamines. A
small sample package of 2 to 5 grams used before a drug deal is called a
"face" or ”kindling charcoal." The word "face" is used to represent
performance and complexion. and the phrase "kindling charcoal" seen to have
its root in the fact that small samples intercepted by the authorities often
lead to a large-scale exposure of the drug factory and dealer network.

The man in charge of transporting the drugs is called an "A-frame carrier,"
a ship used exclusively for smggling is called a "drugstore ship," and a
hypodermic needle for injecting the drug is called a "stick."

A frequent drug user is called "nonam highway" or "Super-highway," in tribute
to the many injection marks on his body. and an addict is called "crazy,"
slang for "mentally disturbed."

Although trust and loyalty are eel-Ion virtues in the drug network, fakes
exist.

Alum, which looks like amphetamines in color and texture, is often traded
instead. Pake amphetamines are called "mutes."

Other nicknames are also colorful. Since amphetamines originated fron Japan
and snuggling is frequently carried out with Japan. the drug dealers use
trading jargon such as "order," "line," and "buyer" as needed.

Urgent Need for Unified Law Enforcement

Amphetamines have earned nicknames such as "horror powder" and "white terror."
The names of the drugs were unfamiliar until 1973, but the drugs are new wide
spread and within easy reach. The nutter of drug users has increased
drastically since 1979.

The horizontal and vertical organisations for the mnufacture, distribution,
and smuggling of anphetamines are known to be stronger than the organizations
of those who snuggle non-drug merchandise. The drug-related organizations
are made up of small units; if the head is caught, then the body and tail
are invisible, and if the tail is exposed. then the body cannot be found.

The narcotics surveillance organizations responsible for the control of
amphetamines are understaffed and underequipped. Each district prosecutor's
office has one prosecutor who exclusively handles drug cases, and the Ministry
of Health and Social Affairs has 27 narcotics surveillance agents. These
agents handle drug-related surveillance for the entire country!

Although the total authorized manpower is 28 agents, there are only 27 now.

Of these, four work at the headquarters on administrative duties, and only
23 are involved in investigative work. Six of the 23 agents are assigned to

(01
Seoul, five to Pusan, and two each to Taegu, Taejon, Kwangju, Chonju,
Uijonbu, and Suwon, respectively.

Most of these agents are not experienced either. Only nine of them have
worked more than 10 years, 13 have worked 5 to 10 years, and 5 have worked
less than 2 years. Officials who are engaged in narcotics control claim that
they need at least 100 experienced agents for effective surveillance. The
prosecutors who exclusively handle drug cases are usually transferred in l or
2 years. Not only are the investigatdrs undertrained but their manpower is
also too low and ill-equipped. They don't even receive surveillance expenses.

We should highly appreciate the achievements of these agents under such
adverse conditions, because they have successfully exposed many amphetamine
plants, notorious drug dealers, and their networks in many areas.

The surveillance agents all agree that it is urgently necessary to set up a
new branch to exclusively handle drug cases in the Supreme Prosecutor's
Office. Such a branch could mobilize a nationwide investigation and
accurately analyze intelligence and investigative information.

Every time joint investigation of an amphetamine case is carried out by the
prosecutor's office,thepolice, and agents of the Ministry of Health and
Social Affairs, competition develops among them. Often, the investigators
from Pusan arrest drug dealers in Seoul, and agents from Seoul follow dealers
in Pusan. All agree that this type of archaic investigation must be
corrected. Although there have been cases where trips to other areas have
been justified, there are also examples in which complete exposure of a drug
network failed because of competition to gain the credit.

We must study the narcotics surveillance systems in Japan and the United
States. In the United States, there is an exclusive narcotics surveillance
agency under the Department of Justice. The agency has a sufficient number of
agents and equipment comparable to that of the FBI.

Japan has exclusive narcotics surveillance agencies in the public prosecutor's
office, the police, and the customs. The agents are competent, with highly
developed investigative capabilities, and are known to be very effective in
arresting drug dealers.

It is natural to believe that Korea must also unify its surveillance agencies
and substantially increase its manpower and equipment.

The volume of investigative material collected by the narcotics prosecutor of
the Pusan District Prosecutor's Office is enormous. His office is aware of
174 networks. If we assume five members to each network, the total comes to
over 800 drug dealers. There are 80 amphetamine law violators who have been
exposed, but their prosecution has been suspended because the authorities
have not arrested them yet.

Also, there are many drug-related ex-convicts and persons with criminal
tendencies who are likely to commit crimes. There are 867 persons in that

“2
category: 627 of then are asphetanine-relatsd criminals, 121 are marijuana-
related cases. and 19 are due to narcotics-related violations. These are all
data gathered after 1975. It is shocking to learn that 70 to 60 percent of
a1]. drug-related ear-convicts go back to the use routine again after they are
released fron prison.

Drug makers are imprisoned for a nediun to long period, 3 and 1/2 to 7 years;
distributors are imprisoned for 1 to 2 years,' and retailers for 8 mnths to

1 year. The Inst serious offenders are those who try to beat the surveillance
systen after they have served prison term.

Just as one gets addicted to anphetsnines after casual usage, these offenders
who cannot get out of their trap sake our environ-eat worse.

9829
CSO: 5300/10 597

«‘03
BRIEFS

GANJA PLANTS SBIZED-Jrinconalee—Uppuveli police raided a chena at Hahadiul-
wewa (outside the colonisation scheme) and uprooted 5000 ganja plants culti-
vated in the chene. The raid was conducted by Sub Inspector Lewis, Police
Constables Ramayske, Kahandavala and Bdirishinghe. One suspect was taken

into custody in this connection. The ganja plants were also seized. [Text]
[Colombo D'AILY NW5 in English 4 Feb 82 p 5]

C80: 5300/6923

46
STATUS, LOCATIONS 0F KMT VILLAGBS REPORTED
Bangkok SIAM MAI in Thai 13 Feb 82 pp 24-27
(Article: "The 93rd Division -- a Victim of Politics']

[Excerpt] I went and met with officials of Forward BKO4 in Chiang Rai Province
in order to obtain detailed information concerning the activities that they
are responsible for, especially concerning the Chinese nationalist forces,

who are known as the 93rd Division and who are living in the north along

the Thai-Burmese border.

The answer that I received from one official stationed there who is the
head of a center was that he could not disclose such information because
it is secret. ”People at my level have only one duty and that is to follow
orders and act in accord with the policies. It is not my duty to proVide
information. If you want to obtain information, you must go to the main
center of K304 in Chiang Mai Province."

This is the answer that we usually get from officials in the field who carry
out the work.

I did not wait but quickly rented a motorcycle and went up Doi Salong.
which is the home of the former Chinese nationalist soldiers, or 93rd Division,
in order to find out the facts. _

From Chiang Rai, I took the road that goes to Mae Sai District. After 13
kilometers, I came to Mae Chan District. At the junction at the hill Tribes
Development Center, which is subordinate to the Department of Public Welfare,
Ministry of Interior, I started climbing into the mountains. The road here
is hard laterite. At the beginning of the road up the mountain, I met a
pickup truck filled with local police officials, who were on guard duty.

0n the side of the road was the shell of a car that Thai soldiers had burned
last week. The police warned me to be careful.

The motorcycle I was riding wound up the side of the mountain, finally reaching
the summit and then continuing on. I had to get off and walk the motorcycle

in places where the road was too steep because the engine was too weak.

I passed a Yao village. In the wake of the Dan Hin Task affair, shan soldiers of

45
Khun Sa have been robbing village vehicles and so villagers are still afraid.
Some of them warned me that I should not risk travelling there.

After going 26 kilometers. 1 reached the Iko junction, which is at least

1,000 meters above sea level. From this junction, you can go either to Ban

Hin Taek or to Doi Mae Salong: the distance to both is the same, 13 kilometers.
Not far from the Iko junction. 1 met an old man whose face was black and

whose body was caked with dried blood He told me that he had been robbed

at Ban Iko Ban Klang. He had been hit in the head with the butt of a rifle

and his hand had been cut. This man told us all this haltingly using both

Thai and Iko before we took him to the head of the road.

Doi Mae Salong, the Last Secure Place

The 93rd Division and the l93rd Division are things of the past. Mae Salong
Village. or Santikhiri Village as government officials call it. is under
the control of forward Supreme Command Headquarters and National Security
Command Headquarters, which has a unit called BKOd that is responsible for
everything concerning these former nationalist Chinese soldiers and for
things in 13 other villages in Chiang Rai and Mae Hong Son provinces.

Suppressing (Xx-nunist Terrorists In Return for Thai Citizenship

Concerning allowing these former nationalist Chinese soldiers to live in
Thailand as stipulated by government officials through the activities of

BKOd, there was SOmething behind this. These forces were allowed to live

in areas that were under the influence of the communist terrorists, that

is, at Ban Phatang on Doi Phamon and at Ban Mae Ap on Doi Luang in Chiang Mai
Province. BK04 used these nationalist Chinese soldiers to fight the communist
terrorists. They were finally able to settle down in these villages on 27 March
1974.

The result of using these former KHT soldiers was the destruction of several
secure bases of the CPT. But at least 600 of these KMT soldiers were kille”
and many others were wounded. This was confirmed by General Kriangsak Chamanan
during an interview he gave to the newspaper SIAH MAI.

At present, these former KHT soldiers have been given permission to build
houses in 13 villages: Ban Pa Peak and Ban Hua Lang in Mae Hong Son Province;
Ban Huang Haeng, Ban Pieng Luang, Ban Kae H01 and Ban Huang Na in Chiang

Dao District and Ban Tham Ngop, Ban Sanmakckwan, Ban Luang and Ban Huang

Ngam in Fang District in Chiang Mai Province; Ban Doi Mae Salong in Mae

Chan District, Ban Chiang Seen in Chiang Saen District and Ban Phatang in
Chiang Khong District in Chiang Rai Province.

A policy of waging war by making use of minority people who want Thai citizenship
is a common matter for a few corrupt officials. Using these KHT soldiers

and hill tribesmen to guard road construction in the north and starting

the Hill 741 campaign in Phu Luang in Loei Province in January 1979 and,

most recently, the Phamuang Phadetsuk campaign at the beginning of 1981 at
Phaya in the Khao Kho area has resulted in the deaths of many of these men.

Those who were wounded had to be taken back and treated in accord with their
means at the places where government officials had given them permission

to live, that is, at Doi Nae Salong in Chiang Rai Province and at Them Ngop

in Chiang Hai Province.

These KHT soldiers had been disarmed and had not undergone combat training
for a long time. Concerning this matter, General Kriangsak stated in an
interview with SIAH MAI that ''in principle, I could not use these people
to fight. It was my duty to defuse the situation and allow them to lead

a normal and peaceful life. As for my policy, I never used the KIT forces
to fight anyone. I do not know why these people were allowed to settle down
at Doi Ya and Khao Kho last year.‘

As for granting Thai citizenship to these former KMT soldiers, this was
done in accord with regulations stipulated by the Ministry of Defense and
the Ministry of Interior.

Santikhiri and Doi Mae Salong

At present, [the place where] one element of the 93rd Division [is located]
has been transformed into a Thai village. Government officials have changed
its name and now call it Santikhiri village. It is located on 001 Nae Salong
on 90,000 rai of land. The village has electricity that is generated by
a power generator that the people in the village all contributed money for.
here is also a factory for curing tea leaves. The 314 households here all
work together in cultivating tea and cold-weather crops as National Security
Command Headquarters and BK04 have encouraged them to do.

Most of their houses are single story dwellings made either of wood or woven
bamboo. The houses are arranged in a line along both sides of the road,

which curves along following the mountain ridges. Above the village in the
mountains to the west is the cemetery where General Tuan Shih-Hen, the former
leader of these HKT soldiers who died only last year, is buried. A large
mausoleum is being built on the mountain ridge to the north. One area has

been improved and made into a large helocopter landing pad. There are sheds

for starting the tea cuttings provided by National Security Command Headquarters.
And there are the Kriangsak and Keng Chin houses. The Kriangsak house stands

out prominently.

Looking down, you can see the entire village. You can see the large soccer
field of the Santikhiri School, a private school whose curriculum has been
approved by the Ministry of Education. The school teaches mandarin Chinese.
Its inc0me is derived from the tuition it charges the young students who
come from all around. It collects a large sum of money each term and this
money is used to help support the village. The surrounding area has bunkers
and a military camp. although little training is conducted. You mostly see
[the men] sitting around smoking tobacco using Opium pipes. The weapons

and uniforms are old.

47
The students at the Santikhiri School study Chinese using Taiwanese curriculum.
Their textbooks are also from Taiwan. When they graduate they can continue their
studies in Taiwan by getting themselves arrested by the Chiang Rai police.

going to court and pretending to be illegal aliens and having themselves
deported to Taiwan.

Tb the south of the village is a settlement for disabled soldiers who are
being given training in handicraft work based on the handicraft manuals
that people in the village studied in Taiwan.

Not having Santikhiri become another Ban Hin Task seems to be the hope of
everyone there.

11943
C50: 5300/5647

68
KM? COMMANDER SAYS 93RD DIVISION HARBORS KHUN SA REPUGEES

Bangkok SIAM MAI in Thai 13 Feb 82 pp 28, 29

[Interview with General Lui B-Thien, or Mr Arun charoenthangchanraya, the
commander of the refugee KHT forces (93rd Division) at his home at Doi Mae
Salong] date not specified]

[Text] [Question] Are you aware that there have been stories about the refugee
KHT forces, or 93rd Division, in the newspapers recently?

[Answer] There have been unfavorable reports and what has been written is
wrong and not in accord with the facts. If the government echoes these newspaper
stories, it will show that this government is not good and that it cannot
distinugish between good and bad. What has been written [tries to] show

that the government's [attempt] to suppress Khun 5a was the wrong thing

to do. But I do not think that this is correct. The government is not stupid
as they have said. Before it began this operation, the government undoubtedly
analyzed things and implemented things carefully. If this is not the case.
the government will probably not be able to survive. We have lived here

for more than 20 years. We have lived at Del Mae Salong. The government

knows that we are here. It knows what we do. We have never done anything

that is illegal. Why should we be suppressed and driven out?

[Question] This suppression operation against the forces of Khun Sa at Ban
Hin Taek has scattered his forces. They may later join together again to
stagean attack on Ban Mae Salong to get supplies.

[Answer] Concerning this, we cannot say for sure whether such an event will
take place or not. We can only try to understand that this action by the
government to suppress Khun Sa is probably a correct policy. But we do not
know whether or not we will be the scapegoat and be attacked someday. We
have not received any orders from higher authorities about what to do. As
for the villagers who fled from Ben Hin Teak and who are living here, we
have given them permission [to stay here] but they are not soldiers. If
soldiers of Khun Sa come here. regardless of whether they come as friends or
as enemies, we will have them surrender their weapons first. Some of the
villagers from Ban Hin Taek who came here have already left.

49
[Question] At present, are you afraid that what happened to Khun 5a will
happen to you?

[Answer] We have never thought that because we are certain that, regardless
of the nationality, the government will not encourage or maintain anything
that is illegal or try to get rid of what is good. we do not believe that
this is the case. We believe that if a government drives out good people,
that government will not survive. He have never been worried. Everything
that we have doen has been in accord with what the government has stipulated.

[Question] Living here, are there any government policies that you must
follow?

[Answer] The government ordered us to cultivate tea and engage in agriculture.
We have done this with good results. You can walk around and see for yourself.
The government announced that Doi Mae Salong was to be a tourist spot and

we were very pleased with this. Besides this, we must grow cold-weather
fruits. These are the policies that we must follow. Previously, we destroyed
the forests to grow crops. when we can plant trees, we plant cold-weather
trees instead.

[Question] Is it true that the government has given the villagers of Use
Salong much money each year to help them?

[Answer] As for budgets, in 1973 the only thing we received from the government
was tea seed. The next year, the government saw that providing only tea

seed made thingstOOdifficult for us and so it sent some agricultural equipment
too. If we had had to live on the budget provided by the government, we

would have starved. we make an income from selling our agricultural produce.

As for BK04, which the government established in order to control us in
carrying on communist suppression activities, we have received only a limited
number of weapons from this unit. They have not given us any money. since

we were allowed to come and live here, we have helped preserve the peace

and helped to keep the communist terrorists out of the area. As for carrying
on communist terrorist suppression operations, each time we have received

an order to go engage in such operations, we have gone emtpy-handed. The
government has provided the weapons and then we have returned.

[Question] At present, do you still have troops and weapons and [if so]
where did your weapons come from?

[Answer] At present, we do not have any weapons. We do not have any personal
weapons. Personal weapons must be reported. If there was a real fight, we
have only enough to maintain peace. As for our soldiers, we have only a

few volunteers. He have not trained replacements. Soon, all of us here will
be Thais. As for having us serve as government soldiers, [the government]
will arrange things. We are constantly ready for orders. '

50
[Question] Would you please tell me about the government having you carry
on communist terrorist suppression activities?

[Answer] We began carrying on suppression operations against the communist
terrorists in 1970. This is a secret matter of the government; I cannot

tell you about this. In 1981, we were ordered to carry on suppression operations
at Khao Kho. He took a force of 600 men and finally won.

[Question] I would like to ask about that battle. How many men were lost?

[Answer] As for the number killed or wounded, losses were not that great.

But as for saying that casualities were light, I would like to invite you

to go visit our rehabilitation center for disabled soldiers. Those people
missing arms and legs were taken there for treatment. is provide treatment
within the limits of our capabilities; we do not receive money from anywhere.
You can visit there.

[Question] It is said that the 93rd Division is a private army that is supported
by General Kriangsak. Is there any truth to this?

[Answer] We trusted Prime Minister Kriangsak because he was the person who
came and implemented things. He was a government official. He made plans

to provide us with a place to live. He worked for the benefit of the nation
and not himself. As for ourbeing the private army of General Kriangsak.

that is the talk of the opposition and it has been harmful to all. As for

us engaging in communist terrorist suppression operations, we were not ordered
to do this by Prime Minister Kriangsak: we were ordered by Prime Minister
Prem. Why don't people say that we are the private force of Prime Minister
Prem? At Mae Salong. we have only one duty and that is to act in accord

with the wishes of the government. He obeyedbothPrime Minister Prem and

Prime Minister Kriangsak and will obey anyone who forms a government. Even
though General Kriangsak is no longer prime minister, regardless of nationality.
it is our private feeling that we must respect those who have seniority.

This is a common thing.

[Question] I would like to know whether or not you still have contact with
the Taiwan government now. Also, it has been said that Khun Se and you are
all part of the same group. Is this true?

[Answer] We have no contact with Taiwan. we are like Thais in general. Our
situation is not very different from yours. Almost all of us have received
Thai citizenship. He should forget about what is past. It is a very bitter
and painful past. That era has passed and should not be resurrected. As
for Khun Sa. we know only that he comes from the Shan states in Burma. As
for us, we have a saying that says that "people who have never lost their
country do not know how important the country is.“

[Question] I would like to know about your taking over as leader in place
of General Tuan Shih-wen.

51
[Answer] General lTuanl died at the end of 1980. I was his assistant and
so I was asked to take over his duties. Actually, I asked to be relieved
of this duty. I did not want to becoes involved. But the director of 8K04
came and talked with me for several days, asking me to take this position,

and so I agreed.

11943
CSO: 5300/5647

52
KRIANGSAK INTERVIEHED 0" RELATIONSHIP WITH m, ANTI-50A OPERATIONS
Bangkok SIAM MAI in Thai 13 Feb 82 pp 30-35

[Interview with General Kriangsak Chamanana; date and place not specified]
[Excerpt] [Question] why did the 93rd Division build you a house?

[Answer] They did this in remembrance of the things that I did to help them
have jobs and not have to starve: But that is not my house. If it was really
my house. why would I put up a crazy sign like that? They put up the sign
'Kriangsak house" in remembrance of the good things I did. I never told

them to build that house, and I have stayed there only once a long time

ago when I was a general. book! They wrote 'Kriangsak House," not 'Kriangsak's
house." They did this on their own out of affection for me. They wrote "Kriangsak
House'I without telling me. When I found out and asked them not to do this,
they insisted. Concerning the reports to the effect that I have had illegal.
dealings with this minority group, I don't understand how they have created
such a situation. They should not destroy those who have good intentions
toward the country. And I really don't understand why the people are trying

to find something to destroy me with.

[Question] In 1977, did Lester Holff meet with Khun 8a at Phathaya?

[Answer] He went to Burma on his own. I learned about this; I was not informed
beforehand. He came here through the embassy and Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and then went straight to Supreme Command Headquarters. I was the official

who received him and so we exchanged ideas. Concerning how he contacted

Khun 5a, I do not know if he did this by letter or directly. It was during
this period that newspaper stories to the effect that I was cooperating

with Khun 5a began to appear. This was during a period of great political
change and political turmoil. But why did they have to involve me too! Concerning
this mixing of politics with the preservation of security in order to attack
me, this was dangerous for the country; it was not good for society or the
country. People had better not use politics or private matters for their

own interests and then attack me and try to make me the scapegoat.

what is this? Why are people afraid of me? I took the political path in

order to help tuild things. I became involved in politics because I felt
I could still be of service to the country since I am still healthy. The

53
country is facing difficulties, people are poor and the people are having
problems; I understand all these things. Since I have the capabilities to

help the country, do you want me to sit by idly? I have entered politics
because I recognize my responsibility as a Thai. We must not involve politics
in the good acts that the military has been performing for a very long time.

I am not the only one who felt sad; others subordinate to me and even people

in the army felt sad. After we had half finished something according to

our orders, someone would criticize us. How could this help but make others
disappointed in national defense. We were constantly told that we were wrong
even though we were trying to carry out our duties as government officials
diligently and honestly. Should we allow others to destroy our morale? I

will not deny the things that have been said about me. The newspapers might

not dare to print such things again. But if they do dare to print that Kriangsak
cooperated with Khun Sa, I will beat them. Wait and see. I will put up a

fight. (Laughs) This has misled the people.

[Question] But the newspapers have only written stories based on information
provided them by government sources.

[Answer] That is exactly why I have said that personal political [matters]
must not be mixed up with intentions in performing duties concerning national
security. If this is used to make attacks, harm will be done. Don't you

feel that this will be bad for the country? If you create a situation and
then destroy things and use various political points to make attacks, this
is very dangerous. It leads to a loss of unity and divergence in thinking.

I am nowsick and tired of reporters befuddling the people. As a newspaper
reporter, you must go search for the truth and then tell the people the
truth. Do not just go and interview various people and print what they say.
You must go and see for yourself. I would like BK04, which is responsible,
or forward 8K04, to give the facts to the people instead of having you print
information obtained from various people who don't know everything and who
have been involved only 1 year or 6 months as compared with 20 years. I

do not think this benefits the people. The people will become confused.

One person says that they must be suppressed completely while another says
that there must be discussions and that a colonel should be sent to discuss
things. Some say that he [Khun Sa] should be allowed to return while others
say that he must be suppressed. There is great confusion.

[Question] In 1971, after the minority group matter was settled in various
places, there were reports that the king made a visit. Is this true?

[Answer] I do not know. You must find this out for yourself. That is, concerning
those who enter the country and ask for royal protection, generally, the

king shows great humanitarian kindness to all. Thus, our country has survived.
We cannot go and kill the children.

[Question] But this time very strong action was taken even though Ban Hin
Taek was a Thai village. Thai weapons were used to kill Thais at Ban Hin
Taek. What are your views about this?

45‘

54
[Answer] If Khun Sa lived there I do not think this action was too strong.

If khun Se and his soldiers die, things will quiet down. At the international
level it is said that Khun Sa has a price on his head of 500,000 baht. And

if Khun Se is, as the officials say, a great threat to the people of the
world, money should be found in a proper way. The fight is his fight.

[Question] Do you or do you not agree with this method of suppression?

[Answer] I agree if Khun Se and his forces were there. But I do not know
whether Khun 5a was there then or not. But if it is learned that children

were killed, it is up to those responsible to find out how many died. It

must be learned whether old people died by grenades, how the fighting took
place and how people died. I do not know the details. People died from grenades.
I think grenades were thrown on the school roof. Their villages have constantly
provided information about the communists and about narcotics trafficking.

And I myself have told the minister of foreign affairs.

Even though I am just a citizen, when I learn where opium is being produced

I inform [officials]. even Phao Sarasin. You can go and ask. I am constantly
trying to verify th information that I receive in order to control narcotics.
when I was in office, little was suppressed but now arrests are being made.

I wasthe first one to burn heroin and we used helocopters from the United
States to carry on suppression operations. I carried on suppression operations
because I felt that this was Thailand's duty to the people of the world

and for world justice. One unit was engaged in a suppression drive and mistakenly
entered Burma. Burma arrested them and we had to negotiate 3 or 4 days for
their release. I carried on suppression resolutely and so how could it be

that I was engaged in the trade myself! I will let the people be the judge.
But be fair. Do not involve politics and destroy people who take action.

This is not correct.

[Question] Do you think this is the plan of the opposition?

[Answer] I think so. Why did this take place just now? And why was I implicated?
My duties do not concern Khun Se at all. This matter is the responsibility

of the Ministry of Interior or Police Department officials who are in control

of things. So, take control!

[Question] what is the reason that they have created a major incident?
[Answer] I do not know who has created a political incident to malign me.
People who involve politics in security matters are not thinking about the
security of the nation.

[Question] In view of this attack, in the future, will the problem grow

even larger and become a border problem? That is, will this induce enemies
to enter the country like this?

55
[Answer] I do not think such will be the case. It is not a major problem.
The people should not become alarmed. We must look at their capabilities.

We must figure out what they will do and if they are making threats. You

can think about this yourself. How large are the Shan forces? What are their
capabilities. Do we have the capabilities to defend ourselves? We must solve
this problem in stages. If it cannot be solved in stage one, we must solve
it in stage two. But I do not want the operations to achieve only this.
Lives, property and people's taxes had to be spent. If they do not leave,
the police there must take action.

Now, things are exactly opposite the problem of opium suppression. We have
suppressed opium. Refugees have entered and requested royal protection and

we have people who are watching them. When they do something wrong, action
must be taken. If we do something in Order to achieve some goal and it is

not necessary to fight, we should wait before fighting. Our economy is in
trouble now. Rice and other things cannot be sold. The people do not have

food to eat and food prices are rising every day. If we can reach an agreement
peacefully, this is what should be done.

[Question] Some high-ranking military officers say that Khun Sa plans to
sieze state power. Is there any truth to this?

[Answer] This is absolute nonsense. That is all that can be said. What is

his strength? What weapons does he have? His ammunition would be gone in

2 or 3 days. What would he do then? We have many arsenals. As for state

power, we have 200,000 to 300,000 men. he has 3,000 with which to seize

power. (Laughs) Such talk has generated disbelief and confusion among the
people. [People] talk about things that cannot happen and then involve politics.
They use your group's radios and newspapers to make attacks and involve
politics. If this continues, no one will believe anything and things will

not seem important. I will tell you; if people continue to talk in an unprincipled
way and do not have any reasons to give, saying that this person will suppress
that person, this will destroy state power. This person wants to negotiate;

that one want to carry on suppression operations. What will the first one

do? They try to create an image and play politics. If this continues, later

on no one will believe anything the government or the mass media says. No

one will believe the radio reports. There will be trouble if the pople stop
believing what is said.

[Question] If politics and national security are mixed, what will the result
be?

[Answer] People will not want to work. When they do something, they get

blamed. Ten years later they get blamed again even though they followed

the policies. And using politics like this will lead to a lose of unity,

won't it? And won't the political problems be harmful to the interests of

the country and ruin people and assets? Won't these improperly destroy things?
If decisions are made in order to defend the c0untry and if we discuss political
matters and uphold the interests of the country, this is what it means to
preserve the nation's security and not use this and that in order to maintain
your own political interests.

56
[Question] You mean private political [interests] and not public political
[interests]?

[Answer] I do not know. This is a matter of the nation's interests. This
is a matter you can discuss. Do not make me criticize anyone. I would like
to make the country safe and relieve the people of their problems; these
are my intentions.

[Question] If such a situation continues, when do you think the limit will
be reached?

[Answer] I do not think people should be afraid. The stories about Khun

Sa have been blown up all out of proportion. Khun Sa has very little. How

strong are his forces? How many weapons does he have. How much ammunition

does he have? Never mind. We made him into a giant and this has frightened
the people. Why did we create a demon? Why did people do this?

[Question] When you were in office, what was the policy of the United States
toward the narcotics problem and the minority groups problem?

[Answer] We had to cooperate with the United States. We had to cooperate

with the entire 'world. We had to cooperate with the United Nations. I acted
resolutely during that period. This may have been because we were able to

make few arrests. This is like last year when we had the problem with priates;

we could not catch them. of 200 people, we arrested only two or three. This

is because we did not have the means [to catch] the pirates. And the opium
problem is even bigger. However, it is my basic belief that we must be independent
in our poicies. We do not have to be afraid of anything. If something goes

against the commnm interests of the state and [others] try to force Thailand

to take responsibility with its lives and property, this is not just.

You must understand that Thailand is not engaged in growing poppies. The

attempt to insist that we are an opium producing country is not correct.

The problem is in the Golden Triangle. What can a small country like Thailand
do? This is an international problem. Why don't we solve it together? Thailand
does not have to lose its reputation and be the scapegoat. They cannot do
anything either but they go around blaming others.

[Question] As the leader of the opposition party, what is your view on how
the government is doing in governing the country?

[Answer] The country is experiencing many problems. There is the problem

of the various refugee groups who wander around. This is a very dangerous
matter. The major problems must be solved first. They must not be allowed

to spread. This would endanger security. They must be controlled. There

are many problems of various sorts. Last year, we were unable to sell 3

million tons of rice. This year, there is another 4 million tons that cannot

be sold, for a total of 7 million tons. What can be done? When rice cannot

be sold, who has trouble? And who will solve this problem? As for matters abroad

57
we should not destroy our markets. We must quickly find a way to help the
people because they cannot wait much longer. Why does our rice have to be
sent to Singapore before it can be sold? Have other countries helped us

by not competing? They have other sources of income. Or have they flooded
the markets? And why have we been told that we do not have to grow a second

rice crop anymore? How can people sit by idly? People have to eat. What
will people do if they are not allowed to grow a second rice crop until

the 7 million tons is disposed of? I think this is very stupid.

11943
CSO: 5300/5647

58
EDITORIAL DOUBTS BFVECTIVBNBSS OP ANTI-SBA OPERATIONS
Bangkok PATINYA in Thai 15 Feb 92 p 1
[Editorial: "The Problem of Khun Sa and 'Taking the Bull by the Horns'"!

[Text] At a time when there were reports of fierce conflicts and splits

among the parties that supported the government, news of the suppression
operation against Khun 5a. which was a major story, drew the attention of

the people away from the conflicts mentioned above. But at the same time,

the news about Khun Sa has led people to ask: Since Khun Se is only a member
of a minority group that has come and settled down in Thailand, why has

he been able to gain such great influence and why has he been able to assemble
forces create a state within a state and engage in drug trafficking for
such a long time? -

This group begain to gain influence because of the [government's] policy

of using this group as a buffer to guard the Thai border in the north. This
benefited national defense somewhat as long as these people did not think

about becoming Thailand's enemy. But in return for this, we had to give

up something. He had to allow this group to engage in the illegal activities
mentioned above. And what is more, some influential people in our country

became involved in these great profits. This led to illegal activities increasing
even more. At the same time. this made it possible for the influential people
behind this to create a strong political base that could affect the position

of the government.

On one hand, it looks like this lightning-like strike against Khun Sa has
achieved good results, like 'bringing down a whole flock of birds with one
round." That is, it has allowed the government to reduce the influence of

a man who was shaking the government. The government has gained the confidence
of the people and of foreingers, who now believe that the government is
resolved to solve the narcotics problem and maintain its sovereignty. Besides
this, this has given those who were directly responsible for this suppression
operation an opportunity to display the results of their activities so that
they can step up into more important positions later on. But if we look

at this from another angle, we can see that this suppression operation against
Khun Sa has created the additional problem of a prolonged war along the
northern border in addition to the Kanpuchean border problem in the east and

59
the bandit terrorist and Malaysian communist guerrilla problems in the south.
This is because simply destroying Ban Hin Taek did not solve the problem
completely. Khun 5a can hide in Burma and return and cause more destruction.
We will thus be forced to spend money and lose men with no end in sight.
There is little hope that Burma will help suppress him since that area is
located far away from Burma's center of state power. This would make it
necessary for Burma to spend a lot on suppression operations. If Burma
remains indifferent in order to gain bargaining power with Thailand, it

will be even more difficult to solve this problem. This is something that we "111
have to weigh in order to achieve good results both in the short term and

in the long term. Or. this action against Khun Sa may have been so strong

that it will have a serious effect on the position of the influential people
and this may hasten the split.

"Taking the bull by the horns“ shows bravery but every time this is done,

the person “grabbing the horns" gets hurt. He believe that, concerning solving
problems that have been growing for a long time and that are no longer confined
to the border area. as in the case of Khun Sa. there should be another way

that is more cautious and less violent. We also believe that a commanding
general who can defeat the enemy or get them to withdraw without having

to fire a single shot or lose one drop of blood will have won a real victory.
Thus, problems such as the Khun Sa case must be considered in great detail

and very carefully.

11943
CSO: 5300/5647

60
BAN HIN TASK RAID SAID TO BENEFIT NON-THAI INTERESTS
Bangkok PATINYA in Thai 15 Feb 82 pp 7-12
[Article: "The Collapse of Khun Sa, Who Benefits?”l

[Text] Ever since the end of last month, it can be said that the news of
the lightning-like operation of the border patrol police, an operation in
which they attacked and forced the forces of Khun Sa, or Chang si Pu, out

of Thailand, which took place at Ban Hin Task in Mae Chan District. Chiang
Rai Province. on 21 January has generated great interest among the people

in general. As for the details of the operation, little needs to be added
here. However, one thing that is of interest and that few people know anything
about is why this clash took place. Hho- gained and who lost what this time?
And what will be the role of the minority groups who are living all along
the border? And how will this affect Thailand in the future? These are all
questions that are waiting to be answered and that are waiting to be solved
quickly.

The movement to TOpple Khun Se

Khun 5a, or Chang Si Pu, is generally known to the people of the world for
two things: As the leader of a national liberation force that is known

as the Shan United Army, or SUA. This is just one of many national liberation
groups in Burma. On another front, Khun 8a is known as an international
narcotics kingpin. "The Shan United Army, under the leadership of Chang

Si Pu, controls approximately 70 percent of the heroin refining in the Golden
Triangle." Joseph Linnaman, the 0.5. assistant secretary of state, made

this statement to a senate subcommittee last November. It seems that Khun

5a is better known throughout the world for his narcotics activities than

he is for his national liberation efforts. Even though Khun Sa once said

in an interview that the reason he engages in heroin trafficking is to earn
money with which to purchase weapons and war materials and support his men,
people around the world are skeptical of this.

The narcotics problem is a problem that has constantly caused worry for

the United States. General Prem showed a great awareness of this fact when

he said that showing our sincerity by suppressing the opium production points
and heroin traffickers in Thailand is a good factor that will help Thailand
receive much sympathy, financial support and weapons from the United States.
Thus, prior to General Pren's visit to the United States during the period

61
3-10 October last year, the news of a 500,000 baht reward for the capture

of the opium kingpin, or Khun Sa, was released at the beginning of August
for all the world to know. Then on 10 August 1981, two heroin production
points in Mae Chan District, Chiang Rai Province, that were near Ban Hin
Taek were attacked and destroyed by Region 3 border patrol police. It cannot
be denied that this played a part in helping General orem's visit to the
United States achieve very satisfactory results. And the outcome of these
talks made it necessary for Thailand to stipulate a policy cf taking even
more serious measures in narcotics suppression. This was one reason why
General Prem and his entourage, including Police Major General Phao Sarasin.
the secretary-general of the ONCB, later had to visit Burma. The major purpose
of this trip was to find a way to suppress narcotics in this region.

Thus, successive operations to topple Khun Sa took place both by Thai officials
directly and by others. On 7 October 1981. irregulars from the Pakthongchai
camp in Korat were sent to carry out an operation in Khun Sa's area of influence.
The objective was to wipe out an opium caravan and capture Khun Sa. But

this operation failed completelv. "There was an intelligence failure that
should not have happened. News of our operation was revealed to Khun Sa
beforehand," stated one news source at the Pakthongchai camp to PATINYA

after that debacle. Thus, the military, particularly Major General Chawalit
Yonqchaiyut. sought a new way to suppress Khun Sa's influence. They tried

to pressure forces of the border patrol police, which has direct responsibility
in this area, to carry on an operation to destroy the poppy fields in various
areas covering 10 villages. Fifteen December 1981 was set as the date to

begin the operation, but this border patrol police operation was cancelled.
“This could not be carried out. Four of these 10 villages were involved

in development promotion and crop cultivation programs in accord with a

royal decree. If we had carried on a suppression operation there, this would
have had an undesirable effect,‘ stated a high-ranking police official from
the Commissioner's Office of the Border Patrol Police to PATINYA. At the

same time, other minority groups and narcotics traffickers were also carrying
on operations to crush Khun 5a. At the beginning of December, a group of

Red Lahus under the leadership of Mr 8 Bi, a group which has very close

ties with the White Flag Burmese Communist Party (Chinese faction), carried
outan attack and destroyed two of Khun Sa's heroin refineries. Concerning

this clash, Khun Sa charged that Thailand was secretely involved in this

too. “We did not provide help to the Red Lahus. We only told Mr 8 Bi that

if he captured Khun Sa, we would help see to it that he was paid the reward.
He certainly did not provide any support as far as weapons or men are concerned,"
stated a news source close to these circles to PATINYA. However, news of

the impending attack by Red Lahus reached Khun Sa ahead of time and so the
plan to capture him failed again. Besides this, on 10 December, forces of

Khun Sa were attacked because of failing to pay the opium caravan transit

tax. They were attacked by a subordinate of Lao Su, or Siri sirikun, a person
who is well known a: the opium godfather who miraculously escaped from a

Thai prison, fled to Laos and cooperated with the Lao government in producing
narcotics and distributing them throughout the world. In this clash, a joint
force made up of soldiers from the 93rd Division and Lahus from Ja Eu's

62
group attacked Khun Sa too since RPG rounds had mysteriously fallen on a
village belonging to this Lahu group. Besides this, several days prior to
the border patrol police attack on Ban Hin Taek, a Thai intelligence unit
received information that Khun Sa had also had a fight with a Lawa group.

The Ban Hin Taek Operation

Following these continuous operations, there was pressure on Thailand from
abroad to finish the campaign against Khun Sa. This can be seen from the
recent visits to Thailand by 0.8. congressmen and the 18-23 January visit by
thedeputy secretary-general of the United Nations. This led to Thailand's
stipulating the Ban Hin Taek operation. On 14-16 January, Air Chief Marshal
Sitthi Sawetsila made a trip to Burma and requested their cooperation. At
the same time. Police Lieutenant General Pranet Ritthirucha, the deputy
director-general of the Police Department. was called in by General Prem
and informed of this plan by Major General Chawalit Yongchaiyut, the director
of the Directorate of Operations. Based on the past failures, this Ban Hin
Taek operation was kept top secret. Even the director-general of the Police
Department was informed of this operation only 24 hours in advance, and

the commissioner of the border patrol police learned of this operation only
after it was completed. "Border patrol police from Region 6 had to be used
because the forces of the Region 5 border patrol police, who are responsible
for this area, were insufficient because of having to go guard the king.”
This statement was issued by the Police Department. But it is well known
that this was done to prevent any leaks about this plan since there were
still close ties between the border patrol police in this area and Khun

Sa‘s forces. Besides the great pressure from abroad. another thing that

made government officials decide to carry out this operation at this time
was that ”beginning in the middle of January, the poppies begin to mature
and the opium can be extracted. If Khun Sa can be destroyed, opium extraction
and the amount of opium produced in the Golden Triangle will definitely

be affected,’ stated an ONCB official to PATINYA.

Why Khun So?

It is known that other minority group forces besides Khun Sa's forces have
entered Thailand and that he is not the only one involved in narcotics trafficking.
Thus, something that has caused great dismay is why khun Sa alone was targeted
for destruction. “Take the 93rd Division for example. We cannot do anyting

to them because of an agreement that Thailand made long ago with the United
States and the Taiwan government. It was agreed that any KHT soldier from

the 93rd Division who did not want to return to Taiwan would be allowed

to live in Thailand at 001 Mae Salong and at Ban Phangopngai. Furthermore.

all of them now hold Thai citizenship. Thai officials thus hold that the

93rd Division no longer exists," stated a military official to PATINYA.

But if this is looked at in greater detail, another reason why Thailand

has not taken action against the 93rd Division is because the benefits that
Thailand has gained from the 93rd Division are too great to be thrown away.
One task of the 93rd Division at present is to help construct and guard

63
the construction of various strategic roads that cut through areas infiltrated
by the communist terrorists. Besides this, the 93rd Division regularly makes
attacks on the secure bases of the communist terrorists. 'The 93rd Division
has provided much help in suppressing the communist terrorists. At first,
they (the 93rd Division) had a strength of 6,000 men. But more than 1.000
have been killed in action against the communist terrorists. Our government
has paid each of them 10,000 baht to help then," said General Kriangsak,

the former prime minister, to reporters recenniy: Another strategic matter
is that Thailand feels that the 93rd Division can greatly help control the
spread of communist influence in Thailand. At present, the 93rd Division

has stationed forces along the Thai border all the way north to where the
borders of Burma and China converge. But as for opium, the 93rd Division

is deeply inolved in this. “where do they get the money to supptrt themselves
if they are not involved in the opium trade? They earn around 10 million
baht a year just from collecting transit taxes from the opium caravans.“
said a news scurce who has long been involved with matters in this area

to PATINYA. Concerning the other minority groups, he added that 'as for

the group under General Bo Hiya, nothing needs to be said. It should already
be known when he has connections with. He knows many people with the rank

of director-general and higher. NO one would dare to touch him.” Besides
this, Khun Se is well known as a narcotics kingpin whom the United States
would very much like to destroy and he has recently begun to have increased
relations with the Red Flag Burmese Communist Party (the Soviet faction).

These are the things that have led to the attacks being focused on Khun
Sa.

Who Has Benefited?

The Ban Hin Taek operation has had a great effect on many sides. We now
want to discuss things generally. That is:

Burma: Burma is the one that has benefited directly from the operation

carried out by the border patrol police. Burma has benefited greatly because
the national liberation forces of the various minority groups have caused

great worry for Burma for many years. And Burma's suppression operations

have not achieved the results desired. This is a result of Burma's domestic
economic situation, which is not very secure. Thus, in throwing in forces

to suppress the national liberation forces, there have been problems can erning
support. Even though the Burmese government has tried to send out forces

to suppress them, it has encountered shortages of weapons and war materials.
""08! of the weapons now in use by Burmese [forces] are out-dated weapons

that the Soviet Union no longer uses and that it has therefore sent to Burma.
The little modern equipment that they do have consists of helocopters sent

by the united States to suppress narcotics. But Burma has used them for

combat. But they have very few." said an officer from Supreme Command Headquarters
to PATINYA. Besides this, another great problem is the terrain. Most of

the terrain here is thick forest and high mountains. And what is important,

the Salaween River is an obstacle. Thus, the operations conducted by - x

Burma» forces have been restricted to such a limited area that it is said

66
that the “Burmese government controls only the area up to the Salaween River.

The area from across the river to the border belongs to the national liberation
groups."

In short. this suppression operation carried out by Thailand amounts to
helping Burma suppress the minority groups that live along the border without
Burma having to exert any effort. Another thing that is important is that

the minority groups that are living along the border will no longer be certain
about Thailand's attitude. This will put a stop to minority groups fleeing
into Thailand, which is something that they have constantly done at critical

times. In addition, the aetions carried out against Burmese forces should
decrease greatly.

The United States: ”The amount of heroin on world markets will decrease

by at least 50 percent,” said Police Major General Phao Sarasin to reporters.
This should make the United States, which has been very worried about the
spread of narcotics there, feel much better. Thus, this suppression operation
carried out by Thailand is equivalent to helping the United States reduce

the size of its narcotics problem. But how great the results are depends

on whether or not there is continued interest in really suppressing [narcotics]
since Khun Sa's group is only one of the groups that is engaged in narcotics
trafficking. Also, there are al least four other narcotics transport routes
outside the area of influence of Khun Sa. These are:

From Tongchi and Chiang Tung to Tha Khi Lek.
Prom Mandalay, Tongyu and Halamaeng and Rangoon into Thailand at Ranong.

From Doi Laem, Mong Tuan and Mong Hang past Ban Mae Kaen and into Thailand
in the Chiang Dao area.

From Mong Pan across the Salaween River to Tham Ngop and into Thailand at
Chiang Dao or at Mae Taeng or has Rim.

In addition to the suppression of narcotics, another benefit to the United
States is that it has gained influence in Burma in order to reduce the influence
of the Soviet Union in this region. At present, Burma's economic situation is
such that it must wait for great economic help from abroad. The great powers

are trying to gain the advantage by providing help with the hope that Burma

will lean toward their side. One result of Thailand's suppression operation

that cannot be denied is that the United States can apply great pressure

and this has benefited Burma greatly. Thus. the fact that the United States

has now gained influence in Burma is very cheering.

The Red Flag BCP (Soviet faction): This suppression operation against Khun
5a will certainly force Khun Sa to have to strengthen his ties with the

Red Flag BCP, just as the 6 October 1976 event, in which there was heavy
suppression, forced many Thai youths to flee into the jungle and join the
Communist Party of Thailand (CPT).

65
The white Flag BCP (Chinese faction) and the CPT: Several minority groups
that have in the past been enemies of or that have never had relations with
the White Flag BCP will probably have to review their role. This is because.
while they are fighting the Burmese government, Thailand may use its forces

to suppress them just as it did in the case of Khun Sa and. therefore, being
an enemy of the BCP may endanger their own existence. Thus, the present

way in this situation is to find a way to compromise with the BCP as much

as possible in order to prevent battle fronts from opening up on all sides.
And for the same reasons. there may also be compromise between these minority
groups and the CPT. “The situation in the rural areas of Burma is the same

as that in Thailand. The suppression operations carried on by the officials
are all violent. The villagers cannot bear this. They feel that they can

live with anyone who is not a government soldier. Thus, when there are no
longer any national liberation forces to protect them, they will either

have to seek out another group to protect them or flee elsewhere,“ said

Sathan Phairoh, a talented cameraman who has lived and worked in this forbidding
area for more than 2 years.

The Effect 0n Thailand

In addition to the more than 10 tons of weapons and war materials seized

by Thai officials, it looks as though [the operation] has benefited Thailand
in many other ways too. For example, it is generally said that this will
improve Thailand's image in the eyes of the world since in the past, Thailand's
attitude toward the narcotics problems has constantly been questioned by

the world community. Besides this, Thailand greatly hopes that this decisive
operation will show the United States Thailand's sincerity and its readiness
to serve the United States, with the goal being the aid money that it will
receive from the United States.

In addition to the broad benefits that Thailand has gained, concerning Thai
politics specificially, this [operation] has greatly benefited the government.
This operation thus represents a major achievement by the government. an
achievement such as has never before been scored by the Prem government.
Furthermore. concerning the stability of the government, while the government
was once constantly on the verge of collapse, it has now been strengthened

to the point where it will be able to survive for a time. This is because
this operation has led people to again ask why Khun Sa had such great influence
in Thailand. And the person who is being pointed to as the person who was
greatly involved with Khun Sa is General Kriangsak. Regardless of whether
this is true or not, it will certainly be difficult for General Kriangsak

to escape being damaged by such reports. This is because more and more people
have turned their attention to General Kriangsak and his former ties with
Khun Sa. "With this, I think General Pram killed several birds with one

shot. Faced with this, General Kriangsak, who was toying with toppling the
government, has had to shut up. This is called eliminating your political
enemies,“ said one politician who wished to remain anonymous to PATINYA. And
it seems that General Krianqsak is well aware of the possible harmful effect
of this. He has told reporters harshly that ”if anyone prints anything bad

abOut me, I will sue them."

'66
At the same time, there are other people who will profit greatly from the

Ben Hin Task operation. It is well known that this area is rich in profits

to be made from collecting transit taxes from the caravans that transport
opium, jade and various smuggled goods. Once rid of Khun Sa. the other groups
that will replace him will be able to reap the profits. which is similar

to. what once happened in the Prachinburi border area. Besides this, viewed
from another angle, the Ban Hin Task operation is like a ladder that certain
people can use to climb to a higher position, particularly high-level military
positions, about which there is news that changes will be made this April.

As for the losses that Thailand will suffer as a result of this operation,
besides the loss of lives, the thing that can be seen clearly is that, with
respect to the minority groups, Thailand will be placed in the same position
as Burma. And things will become even worse if these minority groups turn
and establish ties with the CPT. The result would be violent clashes with

no end in sight.

Summary

Concerning this action taken by the government, we certainly feel that the
government had a right to take such action based on the fact that the nation's
independence is more important than anything else. Also, this will [help]
eliminate the narcotics problem that is affecting Thai society and societies
throughout the world, which are all encountering troubles and facing the
problem of crime. However, there are many other things that the government
should be aware of and it should use these lessons to solve [problems] so
that the same thing does not happen again. As for the first thing that is

a source of problems. why were these minority groups able to develop and
become so strong in Thailand and why did we have to solve the problem by
using force and violence? Solving the problem kthis way should have been
the method of last resort since this battle did not result in losses just

to the two opposing forces. Many innocent people, including children and

old people, were also punished. Also, this has forced people to rely on
other forces such as the CPT and this will be very damaging to Thailand

in the long term. Another thing that is important is that any action carried
out by Thailand should be based on caution and be in accord with the situation.
Heshould try nOt to let ourselves become the tool of any grtup or fall
under the influence of another country. Because, the benefits gained will

go to those in the background while the losses will fall to those who are
serving as tools, which is what Thailand is experiencing at present.

11943
C50: 5300/5647

67
IMPACT OF CROP SUBSTITUTION. OTHER PROGRAMS NOTED
Bangkok KHAO CHATURAT in Thai 15 Feb 82 pp 17-20
lArticle: "Destroying the Opium, a Mountain Play”]

[Text] In January, "Chaturat' and a group of people travelled to a mountain
area known as a "poppy free zone" in Chiang Mai Province.

The pictures on television of the hill tribesnen cutting down their own

poppy plants made me think of many things and finally Chaturat had to go
there -- an area that the office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE) has
announced as being a poppy free zone. This 3,200 rai zone is located at

Doi Sam Mun, Mae Thai, Khunwang, Ban Phui, Mae Samai, Phanok Kok and Ban
Bokchan in Chiang Mai Province. The reason for announcing this poppy free
zone is that, at present, the hill tribesmen in these areas earn a sufficient
income from the economic crops that they have cultivated in place of poppy.
This announcement took effect during the last poppy cultivation season,

that is, in October 1981.

Originally, this “poppy destruction” policy called for thousands of volunteers
from Chiang Mai Province to come and be the ones to cut down the poppies.

But because of the fear that this would affect [relations] between the lowlanders
and the hill tribes, in the end what happened was that the hill tribes took

their sickles and cut down the poppies that they had planted. A person who

was there at the time told Chaturat that "it was like a movie that Ne Win

made for the Americans. They looked happy but this was actually very painful.“

The destruction of the poppies has resulted in an estrangement between the
officials in the various development units that have been mobilized for
work and the hill tribes. "If we are to carry out the development work,

we have to associate with them. It took years to become friends with them.
But by destroying the poppies just this 1 year. they have lost their trust
in us,“ said one field official concerning this policy. Even Chaturat, who
was once received cordially when travelling in these mountains, is now looked
at in a hostile manner. Another development official stated that since the
poppies were cut down in this area, there will not be any poppies in this
area the next poppy season. But the matter goes deeper than this -- to a
point where the government officials cannot go.

68
“The development policy was starting to produce results. Why did they have
to get impatient and 'take the bulls by the horns,'" he said as if not able
to understand.

An official who has been involved with this problem for a long time once
told Chaturat that the people who are directly affected by the destruction
of the poppies are the poor tribesmen who earn their income from opium.
But the ones who have not been affected are the "ﬂaw," the middlemen who
come and purchase the opium from the tribesmen. In some areas, these 'Haw'
have staked out secure areas in the mountains by marrying hill tribe girls
and used their greater cleverness to gain a monopoly of the opium trade.

As I travelled from one mountain to the next, I sensed the truth. That official
pointed out the effects that this “poppy destruction" policy has had. The
good results can be summarized as follows:

1. The amount of raw opium has been reduced.

2. The hilll tribes have begun to understand the poppy cultivation intentions
of the officials.

3. This shows the results of Thailand's effort to suppress opium.
As for the bad effects, you can decide for yourself how bad they are:
l. The hill tribes have begun to form a bad opinion of Thai government officials.

2. They feel that it is unjust that they are not allowed to grow poppy while
others who live in distant villages can do so, villages that are too distant
for Thai government officials to reach but that the opium merchants can
reach.

3. The result of the second point is that the hill tribes are looking for
new places to grow poppy that are farther away.

4. This is a matter that opium merchants and those with bad intentions toward
the Thai government can use to attack [the 90vernmentl and generate hatred.

"Concerning the claim that the cultivation of alternative crops has helped

the hill tribe economy sufficiently, this is something that must be looked

at carefully," stated the development official. Looking at the fields of

the hill tribes, it can be seen that coffee is the main crop,. Besides this,
they plant catch crops of kidney beans and potatoes. As for the plums or
strawberries that are grown each year on an area equal in size to the poppy
area, they may bring a higher price than opium but few hill tribesmen grow
them. Another thing is that this produce must be packaged and sold in the
lowlands while, for opium, the merchants scramble up the mountains to purchase
it.

69
'Thus, developing their minds so that they think of themselves as Thais is

of greatest importance. When they feel that they too are Thais, the development
of other things can be discussed easily, even asking them to abandon poppy
cultivation.“ This is the way that one development official who has lived

there for more than 5 years would solve the problem.

lrawat Chantharaprasoet, the Head of the Hill Tribe Development and welfare
Center and Director of the Hihglands Economic and Social development Program

The hill tribesmen's ignorance is a great obstacle to development, It is

as if there is a century's difference between their knowledge and understanding
and ours. Thus, we must work hard and coordinate things with the various
government sectors concerned, particularly the Ministry of Agriculture and

the ONCB.

Another basic task of ours is to prepare house registration certificates

and identification cards for the hill tribesmen. This must be done in order

to get an exact population count and to prevent the hill tribes from crossing
back and forth across the borders. However, even though we have worked on

this several years, there are about 2,000 more hill tribe villages that

we have not been to since they are located far away and we do not have sufficient
manpower to establish units. we must try to get to these villages soon.

The problem now is that the United Nations will stop providing help in fiscal
year 1982 and we will probably experience difficulties in taking over this
program. And there is the matter of the officials. The thing that can be

seen clearly is that the wages paid by foreigners are much higher than those
earned by government officials. Where can we find knowledgeable people to
hire? But if we cannot hire them, we cannot carry on the program. Each of
our stations has only three people but the work requires more than 20 people.
what can we do to solve this problem so that we do not have to stop the
program? And if the government provides money to hire people, will these
people be willing to work for the much lower wages offered by the state?
These are the problems that the government must consider carefully.

Our budget for hill tribe development is presently 30-40 million baht. We

also receive money from the World Bank, Unicef and the United Nations. Besides
this, there are also units from private groups such as the various missionary
groups. We manage these groups so that they do not get off target. As for

us, we have our Thammacharik program [program in which monks accompany government
officials to the hill tribes}, which has achieved satisfactory results.

Thousands of hill tribesmen have entered the monkhood. As for the income

earned from the stores that sell hill tribe articles, in 1981 alone approximately
1 million baht was earned. we also export items to Europe and Japan. On

the average. our monthly income is around 70,000 to 80,000 baht. Thus, we

can create adequate work for the tribesmen outside farming.

As for what has been achieved in developing the minds of the hill tribesmen,
at present this is difficult to estimate in any detail. We can only say

that poppy cultivation is gradually being reduced and that approximately

30 percent of the tribesmen in 1,000 villages that are in the development

70
program have a feeling of being Thais just like we who are from the
plains do.

Chawalit thmani, the Deputy Secretary-General of the Office of the Narcotics
Control Board

Chaturat: would you please describe in detail the present activities of
the ONCB. -

Chawalit: People still hve misconceptions about the ONCE. We are responsible
for things but we do not carry out everything ourselves. We are only responsible
for finding areas in which to work in order to speed up things. Take solving

the drug addict problem in our country as an example. Narcotics are produced
here; this has not always been admitted. If we do not face the facts, we

will be deceiving ourselves.

Concerning solving the problem at its source, we cannot go and destroy the
poppies without having anything to replace them with since those who grow
poppies are not rich. They have only enough money to support themselves.

The opium they produce is used like money to exchange for goods. In some
places where they have received help and they have a good income, we have
implemented measures to completely suppress [poppy cultivation]. Concerning
this, we have asked for cooperation from the agricultural and public welfare
units.

[Question] But after we destroy their poppies, won't they simply move and
cultivate poppies in places inaccessible to us?

[Answer] At present, we are trying to control and register the hill tribes

as quickly as possible. But these hill tribes have lived here 30-40 years;

they do not have any intention of moving elsewhere. In such a case, we should
establish places for them to make a living. In the forests, they have forest
village projects. For example, the Department -of Land Development has received
funds from the World Bank for setting aside land for homes and making the

best use possible of the land.

[Question] Concerning the areas where poppy is grown, there are areas where
our officials have been and where they have not been, isn't that correct?

[Answer] In our country, the most poppy is grown in Chiang Mai and Chiang
Rai followed by Mae Bong Son and Nan provinces. Little is grown in Lampang
and there is almost none at all in Lamphun. Yearly [opium] yields range
between 15 to 50 tons, but not over this. In some dry years, the yield may
be only 11-15 tons. Last year, the weather was good and the yield was 30-

50 tons. No one knows the exact quantity, or figure. we cannot say for sure
how much narcotics was produced, just as no one knows how many addicts there
are. We can only make estimates.

[Question] Has there been any reaction from the hill tribes since their
poppies were destroyed?
[Answer] We first have to make them understand that growing poppies is illegal
before we go in and destroy the poppies. We have to use gentle methods.

For example, this year we let them cut down the poppies themselves. Next

year we must provide other crops for the villages. As for a reaction, up

to now there has not been any. All the villages that we carried this cut

in have been allotted rice. If they want cloth, we buy some for them. For
example, the weaving and embroidery work of the Liso is very beautiful.

We should promote this.

Concerning the cultivation of alternative crops, the aspect that we must
work hardest at is marketing. We have to find out how to sell the greatest
amount possible. The agricultural produce must be of good quality and must
be ready during periods when prices are high. Quality is a very important
matter. We must ship and pack the produce. I believe that growing"araphica“
coffee will earn a greater income than growing poppy.

[Question] Besides the cultivation of alternative crops, what else are we
doing to suppress narcotics?

[Answer] What we have talked about is only one aspect. In solving this problem
within the country, we are working on five fronts. The first front has already
been discussed. The second front is suppression. We must increase the number
of officials. Narcotics suppression is work in which [people] must be followed
and arrested and there must be cooperation with the police and customs
departments. The ONCB seeks information and tries to follow the results

of the cases. As for the third front, if we figure that there are 500.000

drug addicts, what quantity of drugs is needed every minute? When there

are addicts. there is drug trading. At present, we have opened more than

60 drug rehabilitation centers throughout the country. Fifteen centers have
been opened in Bangkok alone. People can go to these centers and get treatment
immediately without the officials taking action against them. If we do this

a lot, drug sales and drug addiction will decrease. The fourth aspect concerns
control. We have people, drugs and an environment. If we protect people.

we know that these people will be an important resource. They must be educated.
When they have [proper] habits, we will not have to worry about then becoming
addicted. Another thing is that we must help improve the environment. The

mass media must help too. We must take action beginning when people are

still young. Educating people correctly will give them protection. The fifth
aspect concerns research. This plays an important role. It allows us to

see the real situation, to see where the real problems lie and to determine
what should be done to solve the problems.

[Question] Did the ONCB issue the warrant for the arrest of Khun Sa by itself?
And what is used to determine for whom warrants should be issued? General
Li, for example.

[Answer] As for the warrant for the arrest of Khun Sa, the ONCE issued this

itself. As for whom warrants should be issued, this depends on which groups
are heavily involved in narcotics trafficking and which have many refineries. But

72
large quantities of drugs flow into our country. Considering the terrain
here, our country is a very convenient exit point. It is like a transit

point.

Khun Sa's group has many refineries and they have violated our sovereignty.
I agree with the prime minister when he said that they have violated our
sovereignty. But this major suppression operation did not concern the drug
problem alone. There were other problems involved too. As for carrying out
things resolutely, this is not easy to do. I do not want to comment on this.

I agree with the decision that was made and many countries have praised
us.

[Question] I would like to ask, what are the chances that we will purchase
the opium at a time when they are cultivating both poppies and alternative
crops?

[Answer] We could purchase the opium if, for example, they produced 100
tons this year, 80 tons next year and finally none. But we cannot be sure
that the 100 tons this year will not increase to 200 tons next year.
[Question] What do they do with the opium they produce?

[Answer] They exchange it for goods instead of using money. (Laughs)

11943
CSO: 5300/5647

73
BRIEFS

DRUG ADDIcr TREATMENT-4n 1981 the Ho Chi Hinh City Narcotics Center cured 1,585
men and mu. At present about 5,000 individuals ere being treated nt this center.
[Text] [Paris DOAR K3? in Vietnaleee 27 Feb 82 p 8]

080: 5300/ 5674

74
men on the grown! stacked them. The other men fled, leaving the two accueed.
When they were arrested two bales of Iarijuana remained in the aircxaft, while
66 bales were stacked on the many. The magistrate said that drug dealing
was a deliberate act on the part: at the person He cautioned Otem on the first
charge of possession. but fined him $40,000 or nine months for intent to

75
DRUG OFFENSES INCREASE 20 PERCENT H.198]. OVER 1980

Bridgetown SUNDAY SUN in English 21 Feb 82 p 3

[Text]

CFO:

DRUG of fences in Bar-
bados increased by almost
20 percent last year over
I980.

Some 264 persons were
charged in connection with
drug. related crimes during
I98I. compared with 226
the previous year.

According to ofﬁcial
police statistics, of these
264 persons charged tn
connection with drug of-
fences. some I36 were
found guilty by the law
courts. while a further eight
were found not guilty.

In compound the It mo. some
no can are still in. Of the
total number of eaeet hmught. 2“
involved possession of marijuana.
CI‘M for cultivation of the same
drug. In addltlott. there was one
case involvin. posaetsiotr of
($36". compared to no eases tn
l .

Whtle the various drug ease: for
l90l only Included three persons
under the age of l6 years. com-
pared to four In the previous yell.
some I79 penom hetween the ya
at thandloyeats weredt in
conneclim with thete rugs.
commit-din I915 and I9”.

The most siantfrtant incrase in
the «outrun statistics for drugs
I!“ in the over JO seetion. where

the inert-av: am over 2m percent.
stum- ‘Il tit-mutt athtwe the age ol

5300/7533

76

MI ymrs Irre- eharpml with tint;
offerwea.mmpaml to only 23 in
”Maud trtrin I979.

A wnior police ofﬁcial told the
SUNDAY SUN that the wort of
the unions department in recent
tunes have proved to he very
\wwuflll. causing would he drug
mm lets tothtnlt tvrlee.

The halt-c official added that
nurijuana trafficking in Barbados
was becoming more and more
proﬁtable every day. and whu was
even more disheartening about the
whole affair was that persons I
every ”scale of the ladder were
involved In the trade. and who
ever they wanted to clamp don
on a particular "opertlu' . there

was always aotne aeuior petxon in
aoctetytheretoeauaeprohletu.

Yhe official also went on to
point out some features attthe
points of entry. mainly the
Grantley Adams Internaional
Airport. amieh. If they were
charged by the authorities in
accordance wilt recommendations
made by the Police department.
would maltc It even more difficuh
for persons to slip through un-
detected with the illegal drugs.

In addition to this. it vu
rcpoﬂcd by soureu that the police.
in anoeiatiort with the Customs
Department. were keeping clue
lab! on passengers brought Into
the Island by two particular
airlines. from Jamaica and the
South American continent.
BRIEFS

COCAINB SHUGGLING-d 30-year-old Californian is now in jail awaiting trial for
allegedly bringing $140,000 worth of cocaine into Bermuda. Acting emissioner
Clive Donald said yesterday. Gregory Allan May of Hayward, California. was ar-
rested at the civil Air Terminal on January 14. Hay appeared in magistrate's
court on January 15 charged with importation and possession of tour ounces of
cocaine with intent to supply. He will appear in court again ﬁor mention on
January 29. He was rounded in custody. Also on the Police blotter was an-
other arrsst for alleged drug ilportation, this tine a nan arriving from Ja-
maica on a British Airways flight on January 18. Nine pounds of cannabis
valued at $22,500 was seized by Police. [Builton ma MYAI. GAZETTE in English
23 Jan 82 p 2]

C50: 5300/7532

77
BRIEFS

U.S. DRUG TRAFFICKERS KILLED-Ssnta Msrta-Two 0.8. drug traffickers were
killed today when their light aircraft carrying a cocaine ship-ant crashed
in a mountainous region in Fundacion Municipality. According to the police
reports, the plane had taken off free a clandestine runway near Cisnaga.
[PA152350 Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanish 2330 GMT 5 Mar 82 PA]

COCAINE CONFISCAIED IN BOGOTA-Bogota-The authorities confiscated tonight
about SO-nillion-pesos worth of cocaine in a house in northern Bogota.
They arrested (Alvaro Vargas), (Carlos Leal Pardo), (rernando Iguera
Santamaris). (Carlos Alsate Arcial) and (Alfonso Verges). They also found
a modern cocaine—processing laboratory. [PA152350 Bogota Radio Cadena
Nacional in Spanish 0000 GMT 13 Mar 82 PA]

MARIHUANA T0 HAMBURG INTERCEPTBD-- Santa Hhrta, 17 Feb 82-— Some 7,000 kilos
of packed narihuana which was to be sent to Hamburg through this port aboard
the ship "Atlantic Streran" was confiscated by the authorities. The narihuana
was coming from Bogota and was being transported in a tractor-trailer driven

by Felix Antonio Alarcon. who was arrested. [Text] [Bogota EL TIEHPO in
Spanish 18 Feb 82 p 3-A] 8614

C50: 5300/2202

78
BRIEFS

COCAINB POSSESSION FINE mom-A fine of $40,000, with the alternative of
three years imprison-ant st herd labour, was ilposed on Thursday by Mr Justice
Alexander (acting) on Geil Griffiths, 25-yearbold Englishvonnn who pleeded
guilty in the hone circuit court to illegal possession of 3 lb 2 ozs of coceine,
valued at some U.S.$3 million on the streets of Americe. The judge ordered that
Griffiths be deported at the end of the sentence which she will serve if the
fine is not peid. Griffiths use errested on NOW! 20 lest yeer at the
Noreen Henley international eirport after she errin on a flight tron Peru.
[Excerpt] [M51330 Kingston DAILY cm in hglish 27 Feb 82 p l]

cs0: 5300/2229

79
BRIEFS

HARIHUANA TRAFFICKERS SENTENCBD-—Seven years in prison and a fine of 10,000
pesos or. if in default thereof, 15 more days in jail, was the sentence
handed down by the third district judge, Ricardo Rodriguez Villarreal, to

two marihuana traffickers. Those sentenced are Cristobal Ortega, aged 24, and
his cannon-law wife, Hargarita Vazquez Andrade, who had been arrested by
agents from the Federal Security Office [DFS] on 20 Hatch 1980. The arrest
of the two aforementioned persons took place following several investigations
aimed at determining who was participating in the smuggling of weapons from
the United States bound for Central and South American countries. when the
DFS, responsible for these investigations, interrogated the two subjects under
arrest. it was found that they had not taken part in the smuggling of high—
powered weapons; however, at the same time it was disclosed that they were
engaged in selling marihuana among addicts in the red-light district. In
view of this situation, the evidence and those under arrest were turned over
to the agency of the Federal Public Ministry. where Cristobal Ortega and
Margarita Vazquez were interrogated. [Text] [Ruevo Laredo BL DIARIO DE NUEVO
LAREDO in Spanish 12 Feb 82 Sec C p 3] 2909

FEDERAL PRISONBRS‘ PBS-RELEASE “INSET-~51: federal prisoners could be pre-
released at any moment, according to an announcement made yesterday by the
deputy warden. Roberto Ruiz Benavides, who serves simultaneously as state
representative of the Social Crime Prevention Office of the Secretariat of
Government. Yesterday. that official went to Mexico City to submit a report

to his superiors regarding the current status of the jails in the various

towns of Tamaulipas; and he will also continue the negotiations for the pre—
release of six prisoners who have already completed two thirds of their sentence.
The prisoners soon to be pre-released are Manuel Hedrano Davila. Ricardo Serna
Lopez, alias "La Guiterra", Jose Herrera Vazquez. Antonio Velazquez Hancillas,
Jose Guadalupe Garza Rodriguez and Pedro Gonzalez Garcia. Roberto Ruiz Bens-
vides reported that the pertinent documentation on these six prisoners has been
in Mexico City for several months, and that their pre-release is being arranged.
The aforementioned official noted that the status of these prisoners will be
decided upon at any moment. adding that. as part of his functions, he would
attempt to speed up these pre-releases. It was reported that all the prisoners
whose pre-release is being negotiated have been arrested for federal crimes,
primarily drug trafficking. [Text] (H. Hatamoros EL BRAVO in Spanish 27 Jan

82 Sec A p 8] 2909
HASHISH SEIZURE REPORTED-The cosnunder of the Federal Judicial Police, Mario
Espinoza, succeeded in seizing hashish in the first case of this drug noted

in Piedras Negras, as well as in arresting the distributor in Ciudad Acuna

and the purchasers of the drug. The arrest took place in the dance establish-
ment known as Disco Bocaccio, in the neighboring town of Acuna where, after
intensive surveillance and investigation, Commander Espinoza himself made the
arrest of the American David Barge, as well as of the gringo youths Thomas
Earl Dawson and James Everett Bradley, the latter being residents of Del Rio,
Texas. and one being the son of a leading official in that sane town. It

was said that David Burge went to Mississippi, where he purchased the hashish
in order to sell it among the addicts in Del Rio, Texas; and that he also had
the aforementioned Disco Docaccio premises as a center of operations for the
distribution of this drug as well as marihuana. He had been selling the mari-
huana for $10.00 per container consisting of about 2 grams. It was explained
that hashish is a drug derived from hemp which is used by drug addicts who
burn it in small pipes for smoking. [Text] [Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIBDRAS
NEGRAS in Spanish 9 Feb 82 Sec D p l] 2909

MARIHUANA SBlZED—-Ciudad Juarez. Chihuahua, 12 February (NOTIMBx)—-Police offi—
cers from the United States Narcotics Department commanded by Officer David
Regela arrested five Mexicans with a marihuana shipment valued at 50 million
pesos on Thursday, at.a small farm located in Chaparral, New Mexico (30 kilo-
meters from here). The farm had been rented for a year by the Americans Paul
Hipps and Pamela Mayer. who, according to the police, were unaware of the
activities of the Mexican owner, Juan Gonzalez. Nevertheless, the unusual
activity on the site aroused the suspicion of the narcotics agents and, yester-
day, Thursday, they went to the site and seized 7,000 pounds of marihuana worth
$2 million. [Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 13 Feb 82

pp 1. 2) 2909

MARIHUANA INTERCEPTED AT SEA-A United States vessel, with a cargo of marihuana and
proceeding from Colombia, was intercepted by the Mexican Navy 12 miles off lsla
Mujerea. Its crew members, a Colombian and feur United States citizens, were
arrested. Eight tons of marihuana were found in the vessel. The marihuana is
valued at more than 80 million pesos on the United States drug market. Those
arrested are: the Colombian, Eleazar Echeverria Garcia; and the North Americans,
Mark L. Lee, Richard Arish H., Wendel Dosee, and Andrea Harnold Perez, who told the
authorities that they loaded the marihuana on in Colombia and that its final des-
tination was the United States. The vessel's name is "Tumble Weed II" and its
registration, ssonI-MY-RBSFLA. Both the vessel and the arrested persons were
pla‘ed at the disposition of the judicial authorities for investigation. In
anc;her anti-drug trafficking action, the Federal Judicial Police seized 3 tons of
marihuana at a farm located in the municipality of Ciudad del Carmen, Campeche,
where drug trafficker Tsloga Mario Castro was arrested. At the same place, the
federal authorities discovered and seized almost half a ton of marihuana seeds
which were to be sewn near the property of Taloga Mario. The marihuana, said the P63
[Attorney General of the Republic] had already been packed and was apparently ready
for shipment to the United States by ship. [Text by Rafael Medina c.] {Mexico City
EXCELSIOR in Spanish 13 Feb 82 p 29-A] 8255

680: 5300/2207
81
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAPPIthRS ARRESTEW-Tarapoto, 25 Jan—The Civil Guard captured three
drug traffickers who manufactured cocaine base at kilometer 110 on the
Tarapoto-Juanjui Road. They seized 600 kg of coca leaves in the process of
maceration, 1/2 kg of cocaine base, tvo machinegms. one revolver and amni-
tion. [Lima EL COHBRCIO in Spanish 26 Jan 82 p A] The Drug Traffic Control
Department of the Peruvian Investigative Police has arrested Felipe Horante
Moran for manufacturing cocaine base at his home. Also arrested was Rigoberto
Gutierrez Rios, a Cuban refugee, on charges of being involved in distributing
or packing the drug. [Lime EL WCIO in Spanish 27 Jan 82 p a 9] The

Drug Traffic Control Department of the Peruvian Investigative Polive [PIP]
has captured several drug traffickers in Ayacucho, Lima and Piurs. They are:
brothers Baldomero, 47, Ruperto, 34, and Beer Flores Ruiz, 27, and Benito
Atoche Zapata. Halter Castro Bgoavil and Esteban Lujan Zamora. The PIP
seized 11 kg of cocaine base and several million soles worth of inputs and
cash. [Lima BL COHERCIO in Spanish 5 Feb 82 p B 6]

C80: 5300/2216
BRIEFS

HASHISH FOUND IN SEA--Yesterday afternoon hashiah worth 2 million shekela
was discovered by an amateur diver under the sea at a depth of 10 meters
near Shave Ziyyon. [Text] [TA050713 Tel Aviv DAVAR in Hebrew 5 Mar 82 p lo]

CSO: 5300/4712

83
as ‘2‘: E cit-C.

:- 3.38 a... 52 2692
932.3 .235.3o§:o:
5a 323. o. 5. can. (I
583...... .8536: tic: .:
.8031: . 1.8.6: o. 5. .93.

22931833..

dig-tag...‘
gustalgiiozoao.
2838;133:3303.
Jag-iii;
o. 9.: 388:.) 853.8... :-
5.8.98... 1. =8 3: to.
2.3.83 3 5. 3.8.3 a.

289.3... 38.5 93.3. 26
9.5.3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00850R000600040053-4

CSO:

greet deal needed to be done.
Our lewe end reguietione. he
eald. ehouid be reveeled to our
pertlcuier clrcunetancee. to our
particular inetitutlone. "They
muet at the eeme time telte
cognizance oi the Intahetionel
prectice.“ he pointed out.

HeeddedthettheWondtieeith
Organisation (WHO). Md I
wealth ot expertiee end ex-
perience in the ileid oi drupe.
end thet in the iormulation oi
potlciee we ehould tep thle
expertlee.

Druge need in the countriee
ettendlng the conference muel
iuiiy metch internationelly
eccepted quality etandarde. He
added thet the maintenance oi
ti'ieeeouelityceiiedioretenderde
tor cooperation between the
Netionel Drug Committee. the
Regional Advieory Drug
Committee and WHO.

The Drug Committee oi the
reepectivecomirieelncoilebore-
tiothhtheﬁeglonelCommittee
ehouid initiate the National drug
llete with the guldence oi the
eadetingWHOiletoltheeeeentlei
Grim

talnieter Iieitgeitgonene totd
theperticipenlethetlnaotewene
there wee an active Netionei
Standard Committee on Oruge
which hee made e conelderehie
progreee in the dealing with
mettere oi the drug policy end
the reguietlone

He expreeeee hope that with
the arrival oi phermaciete.
recently irom Norwey.whohe1re
come to advice. train and
orgeniee thewortt oi Ooiewene'e
Drug Committee we would
proeper more end more. While
wcmnolecceptlnieriorouelity.
heeddeo.weehouidnotioeethe
fectihetweworitwlthlheiimitod
reeourcee.

He iunher diedoeed thet in
Bolewena dmge eccouht to:
about 12 per cent oi the tote!
health expendture. i-ie uld ii
wee important thoreiore. thet e
plen tor the optlmei uaeoi lheee
iunde be devieed. "Optimel uee
oitheeeiunoecenoniyoeonthe
ceele ci e cleeriy deilned drug

5300/5675

85

policy." he edoed.

Mr Meltgeitgenene he
elncethp repreeentedc
to e leme extent hed
probieme. they muet e:
information on all I
concerning druge.
coureged the outlet:
teechendieamiromone

Cooperetion ehoutd
reetricted to the exch
ideeeendiniormeiiont:
eemetimecooperetein
the important ouee
pereonnei treining.

He went on to eey
Bouwene e iew yeere
three yeere training cc
phennecyiechnicienwe
i-ieeeid thethebeiievet
iutierdetelieotthecour

be diecueeed Ming 1
terenceproceedlnge‘c
coune hee had prove
record. end oi counew
Imlteoiotmeeourceem
be happy to maize ave
our eieter countriee. ee
number of lheee count:
oiiered and continue
iecititieeioaotewene NI
he eteted.

Eeiiier when VIM
Mnieter. the Acting PI
Socretery in the Mi!
i-teeiih. tit mom"
eaid he wee partied-7‘1
heceuee the meetin
mmwlmbi

lumtomlhﬂﬂl

management oi the ee
tie however. eeid i
the appointment oi ti'
“Madmen”:
Wy.
WWW
minutheeooioctl
going to diecuee t
complex and Import
member etetee. Ho
expreeeed hope that i
tione wouid be peeei
ioiiow-up be mede wt
to Implement them.
"tt would he ueeieel
theite reeolutlone h
which would never i:

mien in anyway. It:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040053-4
EEEEiég, 3:15;? sE‘E
E EL ‘EEEE ’ r‘EiEEE
EEgEEEEE ﬁg; 2 tE-El
The Pink Death

Drug users call it "pinks," but the path it takes them on is not so rosy--

just a vicious circle of highs and rushes in the world gone mad.

Until that last spike. The
final rush. a slow ﬂoating feel-

in then death.

t's Wellconel. A no de-
rivative invented ori y as a
painkilieteimedspeci well at can-
cer 'euflerere. the drug being
abused and — instead of relieving
severe pain for some — it he:
brought death and datruction to
many South Africans.

In .he fest yeer, its abuse claimed et
least 11 we

”Pink" addicts crush the tablet into e
diluted loan end Inject it
directly into their veins.
last weet 25 year-old Ge-
rerd ven den Berg. hetlet
ham to drug envie- es
Gooty. had his test eplhe
Slumped end dying. he even
throw: out at e moving vehi-

cle outside the Johannesburg
hospital

I: dun: spotted e Reed
Daily Neil [mutilation Into
ouch police. doc

I- heve celled

emdma
eddlm

6001, III 0on one at
am He might have heen
coveted “mum but
then we: may no unmet
Norther! Suburb! "ﬁle!"
met who I” him we A

At ﬂeet they dld not
“epite' ot [eject drip into
their he‘ll

Mpmgwedtmmooe
ubmwthmt “hunt"

they met the ’ulthnete" ~—
WelleoonL

M the heed ot the ﬁerce!-
Ia Dame in 1W“.

mjmnymw
umom-anﬁw
untuhichﬂmm' eh

)1
them
tanned
them

 

TABLE?! 05 MAT" . . . In “dld. hotdo WW pills.

87
.--m.
m mmmmmmm:
“WWW“ .wmwuwwwhw .
mu»mm mwé mm m» mwmmm MMmmm.

mwa

Detection

new mu mmw

mwmm mmu mmwwwmwu meWam an a
m. “a w W a mum
WMMMMmmqumMJ mmmwm rm“. w. mmwmm
”mm“ mwmmmuﬁm mmm & mm“ W
3 Nu“ a b u w
mm» my” my WWW
u m“ .3; mu m ”a." m
Wmmmmf “mm mm 3%me E $an
mam m mm mm mm mm mm
mmwwmm mm 3 m Mm mwmm;
“mmmmwwmw WE mu mummy mmmm mmm
$3QO mm m m mmmhlmm

Help Sought

Johannesburg RAND DAILY HAIL in English 15 Feb 82 p 3

[Article by Chris olckers]

[Text]

mm mm
mww «MWN
mma mymm
mm“ ”Wm.
mm mm»
33%”.
mmw 1: m
Wham
AmwmmmMWmm

88
333‘s #5:?
Eng; gag:

:égiizé $55!; $52;
BRIEFS

MASSIVE DAGGA HAUL IN MTALnPolice have destroyed dagga worth more than
R300 000 in a massive raid in the Tugela Perry and Jobskop areas in the
Na.al Midlands. The area was raided between February 11 and 26 by a team
of 60 policemen headed by Colonel J Joubert of Pieteruritsburg. Police
destroyed 225 tons of green dagga, 328 bags of dried dagga and 42 kg of
dagga seed. More than 50 ha of green dagga plants were sprayed with poison
from a helicopter. Police seized nine illegal firearms and 100 rounds of
ammition and arrested 82 people.--Sapa [Text] [Johannesburg THE CITIZBR
in Bnglish 3 Mar 82 p 10] .

FEVER DRUG REPORTS TO TED-only 48 cases of drug abuse were referred to the
Transvaal Education Department's psychological services last year compared
to 92 in 1980 and 104 in 1979. This was revealed in the TED's response
yesterday to an accusation in the Provincial Council last week that it was
neglecting the problem. The Progressive Federal Party arc for Hillbrow,

Hr Simon Chilchik said the department seemed unaware that drug abuse in
schools was rampant. He quoted a recent survey of three schools which '
claimed that up to 70 percent of Standard 7 pupils had tried drugs, that
wome were already using "aminline" drugs and that children were eating
dagga with their school lunch. The TED statement said its official policy
on drug abuseudrevm up in 1972 and revised in l978--was "that prevention

is better than cure and that the best weapon against drug abuse is education
both at home and at school." The TED said it had: Formed a standing cos-it-
tee to investigate the drug problem; launched a "thorough investigation"
into the causes of drug abuse, the results of which were used in the teach-
ing of youth preparedness; distributed brochures on drugs to teachers;
cooperated with the Department of Social Welfare and the police. [Text]
[Johannesburg mm mm mm. in English 24 Feb 82 p 2]

90
CAN: DRUG RACKETuCape Town--Cape ‘Iown police have uncovered what they
believe to be a drugs-for-su racket and have appealed to parents to join
them in the fight against drug abuse in the Peninsula. Brigadier Dries van
den Heever, the city's CID chief, said yesterday there was evidence of an
increased usage of schedule 7 drugs, particularly the dangerous Wellconal.
Two doctors had been arrested in Cape Town and one, a 34-year-old Rondehosch
man, was due to appear in court soon charged with the possession of nore
than 400 Heliconal tablets. The other doctor, aged 62, had been taken to
Johannesburg in connection with an investigation there. Brig Van den lleever
said the police would be happy to give lectures to any interested group on
the dangers of drugs. "Also any drug addicts are urged to cone forward.

We are syupathetic to their problems and promise to handle then confiden-
tially."--Sapa [Tent] [Johannesburg um crnzzn in English 9 Mar 82 p 8]

COCAINE man-d man was charged in the Kemton Park Magistrate's Court yea-
terday with dualing in 2209 of cocaine-worth about M4 000--and 135 LSD tab-
lets. Mr Bruce Ernest Berry, 26. of Hagaliesberg Street, Van Riebeec): Park,
Kaspton Park, appeared before Mr J de Vries. he was charged with dealing in
the drugs on January 12 this year or, alternatively, with possessing cocaine,
LSD and daqqa. The case was postponed mtil April 20. [Text] [Johannesburg
mo mm! nut. in English 3 Mar 82 p 5]

DAGGA HAUL DBS'ﬂDYBD-Joliee in the Natal midlands destroyed dagqa worth more
than R300 000 last month in a raid in the ‘rugela Perry and Jobskop areas. A
team 0! 60 policemn destroyed 225 tons of green dagga, 328 bags 0! dried dag-
ga and 42kg of dagga seed, a spokesman said. A helicopter sprayed poison over
more than 50 hectares of green dagga plants. Police also seized illegal arms
and mition and arrested 82 people. [Text] [Johannesburg RAND DAILY HAIL
in English 3 Mar 82 p 5]

C802 5 300/ 5676

91
NUMBER 0? DRUGS VIOLATIONS ALMOST TRIPLBS FROM 1980 TO 1981
Godthaab GRONLANDSPOSTEN in Danish 24 Feb 82 p 20

[Text] In 1981 there was a sharp rise in the number of narcotics crimes,
according to the office of the police chief in Nuuk.

There were 166 violations of narcotics laws reported in Greenland compared
to only 60 in 1980. In 1978 the figure was as low as 17.

"The cases mainly involved hashish," said acting Police Chief Hans Henrik
Borg. "There are many indications that narcotics crimes are rising, even
though many of the cases are offshoots of larger cases. we view the problem
seriously, however, but we hope the extra funds Folketing has provided to
combat narcotics violations in Denmark will also have a positive effect in
Greenland."

Assiaat has by far the most narcotics crimes, accounting for 91 of the 166
reported in all. In Nuuk, the country's biggest city, there were only 18.

Fraud and embezzlement was another crime area that rose explosively in 1981.
There were 258 cases reported in this category compared to 166 the year be-
fore and only 95 in 1979. This means the figures almost tripled in 2 years.

Eleven Homicides

0n the other hand, the number of homicides was close to the average in re-
cent years, namely 11. Of these, seven were committed in Nuuk. The sta-
tistics from the police chief's office did not include the outlying dia-
tricts of Thule and Illoqqortoormiut.

The number of attempted homicides rose a little from 22 to 26 and reports
of assault rose from 358 to #05.

One of the bright points in the statistics was a slight decline in the num-
ber of burglaries from 1304 in 1980 to 1268 in 1981.

when it comes to total crimes committed, Nuuk is clearly in the lead with
1037 reported incidents. It is more noteworthy that Qaqortoq is in second

92
place with 468 and Paamiut is in third with 669, while the second largest
city in the country, Sisimiut, is down in fourth place with 633.

In ell, 5399 crimes were reported in 1981 compared to 0956 the year before.

That is an increase of just under 9 percent. A good 56 percent of the cases
were solved, exactly the sane percentage that were solved in 1980.

6578
CSO: 5300/2213

93
BRIEFS

HASHISH SHUGGLER'S SENTENCE INCREASID--The superior court in Nuuk increased
the sentence of a 27-year-old man last week who had been found guilty in
Sisimiut district court of importing and selling hashish. The first time
around he was sentenced to a suspended prison sentence, £000 kroner in fines
and the confiscation of 40,000 kroner earned from the sale of hashish. The
prosecuting authorities thought this was too light. Greenland's Superior
Court agreed and increased the confiscated sum to 70,000 kroner and also
sentencedthe27-year-old to serve 6 months in jail. [Text] [Godthaab
GRONLANDSPOSTBN in Danish 24 Feb 82 p 20] 6578

TAXI DRIVER SOLD HASHISH--A taxi driver from Nuuk was sentenced last week to
6 months in jail by the district court in Hunk. He was accused of dealing
in marijuana and of importing 1 kg of the drug from Denmark. The prosecu-
tlon had only asked for 6 months in jail. The taxi driver accepted the
sentence. He was also found guilty of giving false information because he
said in a foreclosure proceeding that he did not own anything. Actually he
had a speed boat which disappeared under unclear circumstances. An insur-
ance company paid him 85,000 kroner as a result. In an offshoot of the same
case, a 32-year-old teacher was released last week because the investigation
was completed. He is charged with dealing in hashish, alcohol, points and
cigarettes. There are also charges of illcit contacts with female students.
The final indictment is expected to be ready a month from now. [Text]
[Godthaab momsposnu in Danish 2:. Feb 82 p 20] 6578

C50: 5300/2213

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

FRENGI-THAI CONNECTION, RWI'ES, MEI'HODS EXAMINED
Paris PARIS MATCH in French-22 Jan 82 pp 5-11
[Article by Roger Holeindre: "Drugs, the Terrible Year of 1982"]

[Text] The poppy harvest has been plentiful in the Golden Triangle,
which is the pivot point of the world's opium and heroin traffic.
All police forces in charge of suppressing the traffic, the Thai po-
lice first of all, have been mobilized. How many pushers will they
arrest? How many big wheels will be arrested, and how many of the
increasingly tireless "ants," or street dealers, who are feeding a
hectic market and its dizzying prices? The punishments also tend
to be staggering: life in prison for less than 100 grams. For more
than that, the death sentence is most common. Our special corres-
pondent, Roger Holeindre, went to Bangkok and followed the drug net-
work. He saw prison doors slam shut on young French people who had
come there, often making a long journey, to seek an easy escape but
not suspecting that they might not come back.

Real panic has overtaken the American Narcotics Bureau and European drug agencies.

In 1982, more than 70 metric tons of pure heroin will flood the market from countries
in the Golden Triangle: Burma, Thailand, and Laos; it is more than 10 times the
amounts produced in previous years. The international network of drug dealers will
pour it into America and Europe. The year 1982 will be that of the big shoot-up,
with thousands of deaths by overdose.

It is an extraordinary disaster for the west. The truth is that overproduction does
not exist for the drug market, and the police cannot do much against the traffickers.
They will have to go to the source. What is a catastrophe for us is a blessing for
the mountain people of the Golden Triangle, who live solely by growing poppies. Opium
production in the Golden Triangle has risen from 200 to 700 metric tons in one year
because of unusual weather conditions. The mountaineers do not realize that their
harvest will spread death on the other side of the world. They are farmers, ard they
have just happened to have a good year. But their deadly harvest is already headed
for Bangkok.

Battle has been joined on all fronts with men doing their duty as policemen on one
side and men on the other side making millions of dollars, men who know all the

deals. all the tricks, and who have accomplices they can pay off handsomely.

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At present, U.S. agents are the most numerous in Thailand. With their Thai and
other foreign colleagues they are applying methods developed when they worked with
French agents in Marseilles or Paris in the struggle against the French connection.
Their chief is the Regional Director, U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement
Administration, Robert J. de Fauw, who worked on the Marseilles case from 1965 to

1969 and in Paris from 1969 to 1970 in collaboration with Commissioner Le Moel,
of the Central Narcotics Bureau.

Their biggest case was the discovery of 150 kg of heroin, which was seized on 20
March 1969 in a villa at 22 Chemin de Morgion, Marseilles. Three men were arrested:
Georges Clanet, Giuseppe Laudonio, and the group's "chemist," Albert Veran. After
6 years in jail at Baumettes, the three men were released and caught again 2 months
later in an identical situation. Robert J. de Fauw's sector of operations is quite
vast; it extends as far as Australia.

The international collaboration of narcotics services sometimes yields spectacular
results.

After 4 long years of investigation, the agents succeeded in following up all the
trails of the largest drug ring there ever was, called "Ah Kong" or the "Singapore
Chinese Triad."

its chief was a Chinese by the name of Njo, who was arrested in Bangkok in 1979,
and a Pak Yo Lan. The organization's leaders were also apprehended simultaneously
in Europe. It was a remarkable haul. But other traffickers ilmndiately took their
place.

Commissioner Le Moel's service led the operation for France. The organization's
funds were reckoned at $1 million annually and the traffic at a metric ton of pure
heroin a year, which makes the profits hard to calculate.

The case received a lot of publicity. and the heroin traffic from Asia stopped while
the dealers got reorganized. Meanwhile, they reestablished the Turkish circuit.

Thailand's geographical location gives it a role that many Thai do not appreciate,
that of the drug clearing house of Asia.

The two main opium-producing Burmese provinces are located on its borders: the Shan
and Kachin states. These two states alone, which are in open rebellion against the
Rangoon government, produce 450-500 metric tons of opium a year, which yields 45-50
metric tons of 98 percent pure, injectable herein, called Number 4. There is also
smoking herein. called Number 3. Thanks to the courage of agents who succeeded in
getting into Burma and scouting the entire Golden Triangle, the drug route is now
known. Caravans go through Mong-Hsu and Keng-Tung, in Burma, and arrive at Tachilek,
on the Thai border.

Most of the frontier in this area is under the control of the Shan rebel army, called
the "Shan United Army," which has its headquarters in Ban Hin Paek, less than a kilo,
meter inside Thailand. The S.U.A. [Shan United Army] warlords control a dozen labo-
ratories called "Chinese labs," because the chemists often come from Hong Kong and
they need only simple equipment to operate once they have the chemical formula.

The laboratories are always located astride the border so they can disappear on

the Burmese side when Thai troops come or towards Thailand when Burmese troops

appear.
96
Other rebel groups are also rife: the CURA, or Shan United Revolutionary Army; the
KIA, or Kachin Independent Army; and the CIF, or Chinese Irregular Force, made up of
survivors from a Chiang Kai-Shek division that held the region after Mao's troops
conquered China in 1949. This latter group was recently farther inside Burma. And
finally there is the SSRA, or Shan State Revolutionary Army. It is 3-4.000 men
strong and is trained and equipped with modern weapons. It has gained supremacy over
the other groups, collects taxes from them, and sells their opium harvests, which
come to 50-60 metric tons a year.

With Laos occupied by communists and rebellions taking place on all the Burmese bor-

ders, the drug empire also tends to seize rice crops in the delta regions when the

poppies are being harvested. The rice goes to feed combat troops, the opium to pro-
;its, the buying price to the tribes, and the selling price to the international traf-
ickers.

For those who take part in the drug traffic, there is no ideology. The Laotian com-
munists sell to whoever pays the best price. They know the result will be the same
anyway: the corruption of the Western world at its most vulnerable point--its youth.
As repression gains, the dealers do not sit still. They threaten the mountain people
or tell them it is in their best interest to move the poppy plantations in order to
escape detection by Thai military patrols.

Some plantations have moved from the Thai-Burmese border to the Thai-Malaysian.border

in the far south. This zone is under the very strong influence of the Malaysian Com-
munist Party.

A modern processing factory was recently discovered near Songkhula by agents who had
infiltrated a network of dealers at the risk of their lives.

The narcotics services think that some desert islands in the Gulf of Siam off the
coast of Satul province now shelter processing laboratories displaced as a result of
police actions, whereas these islands used to serve as relay stations and depots for
heroin No 4 intended for Amsterdam, the United States, Australia or Hong Kong.

Drug shipments are also made by sea. The hard part for Thai or European agents is
finding traffickers among the fishermen in their hundreds of junks on the Gulf of
Siam.

As soon as a man of the network is arrested, a member of his family immediately steps
into his place according to the law of the underworld, the strict law of silence that
the hoodlums. criminals and drug dealers of Asia do not trifle with.

The gangster chiefs, the ones who deal with the big wheels throughout the world, use
import-export companies, hotels, jewelry stores, etc. as a cover.

The "l4 K Group" organization has been pretty much dismantled in Singapore and Malay-
sia, but it is now in the process of being reconstituted, and its new bases have not
been located. This organization had succeeded in shipping abroad as many drugs as
have been seized in Thailand in the last 7 years, all because the group made its own
deliveries. The amounts were 400 kg of No 4 yearly from 1976 to 1979.

The narcotics agencies possess only one effective weapon against the "white tide"
that the 1981 miracle harvest will soon unleash upon the world and against the dis-
tributing networks that spring up again as soon as they are destroyed: that weapon is

In
to infiltrate courageous Asian agents into the gangs controlling the traffic. They
can thus detect the movements of caravans transporting opium across mountains and

jungles and destroy them with military action before they get to the underground
laboratories.

The master plan now being financed by the American government and supervised closely
by Senator Lester Wolff, who is a dogged enemy of the drug trade and who often visits
the area, is as follows:

(I) Stop the influx of opium from the North by any means.

(2) Destroy the leadership of the gangs in Burma, even if it takes a war.

(3) Destroy all clandestine laboratories.

But the only easy access to the Golden Triangle are roads through Thailand, built by
the Americans during the Vietnam war. On the Burmese side, the jungle is laced with
mule trails undetectable from the air. ln Laos, the dealers do not hesitate to trans-
port opium in ZOO-liter barrels on trucks.

The point now under closest surveillance in Thailand is Chiang Mai, which lies at the
end of all the drug routes. The town is bursting with agents, and it is the place

where almost all the arrests have been made of Frenchmen now languishing in Thai pri-
SOﬂS .

The United Nations is aware of the danger and has allotted $5 million, which has been
distributed to about 30 mountain villages to encourage the inhabitants to grow coffee,
tobacco and beans instead of poppies.

Since the beginning of 1980, $1 million a year has been put into this project that
few serious people believe in. The United States has been giving Thailand cansider-
able military aid--especially helicopters--and has been training Thai army and police
cadres in the United States.

The only reasonable solution is to relieve the mountain tribes of pressures from the
private armies occupying their region and also--but that is another story--from the
influence of the communist regimes that have come to power in recent years.

Meanwhile, in Bangkok, drugs are openly sold on the street: street 22, the pushers

are there. In the shantytown of Pratuman, near the port, hoodlums are also well known
dealers. "Soi 2," taxi drivers furtively sell heroin and marihuana on the sly near
the hotel Atlanta. "Soi 3," right at the end of the steet and over a little bridge,
is a shantytown. There, all whites who look a bit like "hippies" are accosted by
pushers offering all sorts of drugs. In all these places are sold plastic capsules,
sometimes with a green stopper, varying from 1 to 3 cm in size, and containing 1-4
grams of drug. For the smallest doses, plastic bar straws are often used; they are
cut and sealed by heat from a match or lighter.

The heroin sold in this manner is completely pure, and initiates say it is the best
in the world because it assays at 95 percent pure. Generally, its price is stable at
between 600 and 1,000 bats a dose, or Fr 130-220. It can be used either by injection
after mixing with distilled water or by sprinkling the heroin on cigarette tobacco,
or, as in most low-class hotels, by smoking the heroin in large bamboo pipes after
mixing it with marihuana.

Thailand has forbidden smoking dens anywhere in the country for the last 23 years,
but it is no longer only the supplier of the West. Two percent of its population of
48 million people, 5 million of whom live in Bangkok, are addicted to drugs, and the
agencies estimate the domestic consumption of heroin at 25 kg.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A 5-point program has been decided upon to try to keep Thais from taking drugs:
(1) Attempts are being made to induce the mountain people to diversify their crops
and abandon poppies. (2) An anti-drug education program is being introduced into
the schools. (3) The police forces have been beefed up. (4) A more effective
blockade is being instituted along the borders to seize the drugs at their source.
(S) A serious struggle is being carried on with the support of foreign agents to
keep drugs from leaving the country.

But the drug traffic has an international scope. The enormous problems of Southeast
Asia also exist in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Turkey. Everywhere there are special-
ized teams resuming the networks that were dismantled years ago, now that "old timers"
from the days of the French Connection are returning after being freed from prison.

The absence of these "old timers" enabled the Chinese to take ever part of the French
Connection monopoly, because the French underworld used to be the only supplier of
95-98 percent pure heroin, known on the market as "Marseilles [line of text missingl."
Bangkok is obviously the meeting place of people transporting drugs to France. As
long as the Western countries have not succeeded in stopping all opium harvests before
they reach the laboratories, the youth of Europe and America will be in danger. In
1976, U.S. addicts used more than 4 metric tons of pure heroin. A kilogram was worth
$85,000 in New York. Thanks to the narcotics agencies, consumption dropped a metric
ton in 1980, but the market had grown so much that the drug was cut to only 2.2 per-
cent and was worth $200,000 a kilogram.

In France, the coming years threaten to be tragic. The number of addicts keeps in-
creasing, and narcotics agency officials are all aware of what is coming.

The recent arrest of an important pusher responsible for bringing several kilograms
of pure heroin into France proves that the network leading to France has many avenues
and that big cargoes alternate with small shipments and the movement of "ants." Marc
Counil, age 44, an officer of the Legion of Honor, former member of the Resistance,

a person with an honorable reputation, and the proprietor of several night clubs, did
not hesitate to jump into the drug traffic for the money.

At the National Headquarters for Customs Inspections (DNED), agents are constantly on
the alert. Two special teams of 5 men each work only on narcotics cases. Their main
work is to seek out information to dismantle the networks. Their workplaces are
mostly airports and transport stations. They collaborate with the customs teams
already on the spot, which account for a permanent staff of 20,000 customs inspectors.
The results achieved in recent years have taught the customs men to distinguish be-
tween the ringleaders and the "pigeons," although it is not always easy to tell them
apart.

Some transporters are "pigeons" who often carry a suitcase loaded with drugs just for
the price of their ticket and a passport that is always false. At the airport, the
transporter carrying the suitcase, and he is often a refugee from a politically tota-
litarian regime, meets an "accomplice" whom he has never seen and will never see again.
But the man who collects the suitcase at Roissy is very often a pigeon too, and it
unfortunately serves no purpose to catch him.

The main job of the DNED in close cooperation with the Narcotics and Drug Addiction
Brigade is to trace the network back as far as possible. It now seems that French
justice no longer hesitates to crack down hard and almost always distinguishes between
the real traffickers and the minor accomplices.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Seizures made by customs officials are becoming increasingly numerous, but it appears
that the time of massize shipments is over: while they may make a fortune if they suc-
ceed, they are also likely to create a colossal financial loss if they fail.

Customs officers think it is necessary to act quickly to dismantle all the "ant"
trails. But the traffickers easily find new candidates. A kilogram of 95-percent
pure heroin, comparable to the best made in France at Marseilles, is worth about
$20,000 in Chiang Mai or Bangkok. By diluting the "raw product" 10 times with lac-
tose and selling it in France at Fr 800 a gram, the pusher can do Fr 8 million worth
of business.

Retailers who dilute the heroin a little more, and the) do this often, also make for-
tunes without taking the risk of traveling.

\

Such large profits attract a lot of amateurs. Since the beginning of 1980, many
French people have fallen into the not set for them by the narcotics brigades.

On 15 January, Mr Le Bozec was arrested as he was leaving for France with 1,650 kg of
pure heroin No 4 cached in hairspray bombs.

A young French girl who had been trafficking regularly for 6 months was arrested with
only 20 grams on her, though she had normally carried 100 grams on each trip; she had
bought a house in Normandy and a fashion shop in Paris with her profits.

She was put in jail but released on $40,000 bond. As soon as she was out and back
at ler residence in Bangkok, she fled with a false passport.

On 4 June 1980, Jean-Marc G. and Sylvie C. were arrested at the Bangkok airport, most
likely as the result of a tip-off. He was carrying 200 grams in his double—soled
shoes. He had obtained 500 grams of 95-percent pure, No 4 heroin in Chiang Mai for
$7,500, or a lower price than normal. His seller must have been counting on the bonus
he would get for turning him in, and thus made a profit both ways.

However, the French do not have the reputation of being "big pushers." This is a
rather relative estimation when one considers the quantities in transit through Thai-
land. Among them, a large number of addicts make the trip in order to make a little
easy money and keep part of the drugs for themselves.

All means are being used to bring heroin into France. A postal connection was re-
cently discovered. It had grown to incredible size. Some "pushers" were sending
10-20 envelopes with 2—3 grams of pure heroin each from various post offices in Thai~
land. They were sending the letters to themselves, to post office boxes, or to
"grandmothers." Some were even sending as much as 30 grams in a single envelope.

Ten or 20 envelopes with 2-3 grams each makes 40-60 grams after 10 mailings, which
yields 400-600 grams when cut with lactose; at Fr 800 a gram in Paris, that comes
to a staggering amount of money.

From all over the world, people of all races and nationalities hurry to Bangkok as
others, for different reasons, go to Mecca or some other holy place.

They know all the ins and outs, the way to go all over the world. They follow each
other and meet, leaving secret messages in all languages in all the "required" pas-
sageways to pass on the latest news and timely tips.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE GREY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At Bangkok, every hotel they stay at has a bulletin board. That alone would supply
enough material for a novel. Every pusher can find lodgings or help.

Before landing in Thailand, thousands of them have made the grand tour, what they
call the "Pot Trail" among themselves. Generally, their jobs or dealings make it
possible for them to leave Europe with $10,000 in their pockets for a trip of 2 years
or more. As for the pilgrims of yore, the route is almost always the same: Morocco,
Lebanon, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal, Malaysia, Indonesia and, their final
goal is always the 'ame, Thailand. Formerly, it might also have been Laos or Cam:
bodia.

They all know that after Nepal they can get to Bangkok for a modestly priced ticket.
From Malaysia, they can take the train; from Indonesia, the boat. Those who are not
able to leave the "civilized" countries with enough money work on the road, where
they can but always in "combines" outside of the labor market, because it is hard
for a white person to find an odd job in overpopulated countries with chronic unem-
ployment. The most sought-after jobs, which only Europeans can hold, are spare deck-
hand aboard a boat or cook or dishwasher aboard a large sailing vessel. For this
kind of job, Hong Kong seems to be the prime place for "maritime hiring." Waiting
for a boat is made easier by the possibility of finding heroin on the spot.

But the Pot Trail is also the route of counterfeit money printed in Europe and a big
traffic in travelers checks. This traffic is expertly organized and requires the pos-
session of two passports, which make it possible to buy travellers checks under a
false name from private check cashing agencies (outside of banks]. The present price
of a passport in Bangkok is $2,000. Some 15 percent of French youth who declare the
loss or theft of their passports to the French embassy in Bangkok have actually sold
them. There is also the possibility of buying travelers checks at a very low rate
from "indelicate" people who declare them lost or stolen and who often have them
refunded. Sometimes they are just travelers checks stolen by organized gangs that
resell them at a low price. Throughout all of Asia on the tourist trail there is

a flourishing traffic in counterfeit $20 bills that the "pilgrims" buy for $5 from
shops known only to them.

For all Thai, civilians or military, foreigners are called "farang," a word derived
from "farangset," from "francais," 'French,‘ since for a very long time most of the
white people seen in the kingdom of Siam came from French Indochina, next door. Not
all the "farangs" in Thailand arrive via the Pot Trail, of course; crowded charter
vessels from the four corners of the world unload authentic tourists, many of whom
are men attracted by the loud publicity for the famous masseuses of Bangkok.

Unfortunately, among these real tourists are young Europeans, and among them are an
increasing number of young French people of both sexes who are more in a hurry than
their fellows and come to get drugs for themselves by the most direct route.

As they trip lightfootedly ashore, the dreamers think they have arrived in a drug
paradise where everything goes and they can "shoot up" in complete freedom for the
price of a few francs or dollars. The Vietnam war is what made Bangkok the drug
clearinghouse of Asia and the required city of passage for all distribution networks.
As a rear base of the American army in Indochina, Thailand had on its soil for years
the greatest concentration of potential heroin users in the world. The new Thai law
of 22 April 1979, called "Narcotics Act 2522" says very clearly, "Any person arrested

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with ieroin in his possession--100 grams or less«-shall be imprisoned for life. Hith
more than 100 grams, the sentence shall be prison for life or death. With less than
20 grams, the sentence shall be from one to ten years in prison"! These penalties
should be made known in Europe and in France, and posted in travel agencies offering
young people "pleasure trips" to Thailand. In Chiang Mai, there are 24 Europeans in
prison: 4 Spaniards, including one woman, 2 Canadians, 7 Italians, 3 Americans, in-
cluding one woman, and 6 French.

Yves, age 23, from Paris, came to Thailand because drugs are cheap there. In Paris
he was a courier for various agencies. He has been in prison for 11 nonths awaiting
trial. He was arrested in his hotel room with 200 grams of heroin that he had bought
for his own use.

He had already come to Thailand several times to "use" drugs on the spot. He was
denounced by his landlady and was arrested as he was coming back from town with ano-
ther Frenchman he had met by chance. The one he had met was not an addict but a bril-
liant engineering student; he is still in prison, and his mother has already made
several trips from Paris to Bangkok to Chiang Mai and back to try to get him out.

Yves claims he new nothing about the severity of the Thai law. Now he risks life in-
prisonnent because he is a foreigner. But the real penalty is death, and from 1978
to 1979, a dozen Thai traffickers have been shot.

His Thai lawyer does not speak French, and he does not Speak English. That doesn't
help. He refuses to notify his elderly parents and is all alone.

"As for all European addicts in prison, the first nonths were awful, especially the
first 6 months," he told me. He managed to get 2 1/2 months in solitary confinement
with his feet in chains for insubordination.

"That made me think things over. I think l've adjusted. I'n through with drugs.
If I have the chance to get out some day, I'll never touch them again."

Christian is from Cannes, where he worked as an interior decorator. I find it hard

to believe he is 24, he is so young and athletic. He was arrested with only 7 grams,
turned in by the taxi driver who had sold it to him. He is another one who will never
be caught with it again-—so he tells me, at least.

Francois is from Lyons. He does not look 30 years old. He is a former sailing in-
structor and an addict for the last 10 years. It was the time when drugs were not
expensive in Marseilles, before the French Connection was broken up.

He has been in his cell for 2 months, his legs in chains, after his arrest with 10
grams of heroin. As with Christian, his dealer turned him in to collect the bounty.
'ﬂhere are those who come to shoot up and those who come to do business. But the

addicts always have more trouble getting out of trouble than the big shots.“ Just
mess up once and you're in solitary with l7-kg chains on your feet day and night!

In France, I was arrested 5 times for using drugs and eVery time I got a suspended'
sentence. Here I'm arrested once and I get the maximum. Ten years, 20 years, it's
too damn dumb to waste your life like that."

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When I left Chiang Mai prison, I couldn't help turning and looking at the high walls
and thinking of all the young fellows locked up inside thousands of kilometers from
home and sure to spend half their lives there. They had often come without knowing
what a chance they were taking, that in that part of the world governments reaCt
strongly. In Malaysia, heroin possession is punished by death if the amounts are

large. In Singapore, you risk your neck for 10 grams. In Taiwan, it's prison for
life, and in South Korea, the insane asylum.

Be they traffickers or street dealers, pushers or users, this inextricable network of
cynicism, naivete and slavery must be fought at all levels, for it is exporting this
poison that nature has created this year in an abundance never before attained.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

8782
C30: 5300/2203

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LBBANESE DRUG TRAFFICKEBS ARRESTED IN PIRAEUS
Athens BLEVTHEROTYPIA in Greek 23 Feb 82 p 2

[Text] Five Lebanese smugglers were arrested by the Piraeus police. They
were bringing hashish into the country hidden in boxes of bsklava sweets,

which they snuggled to various European capitals. Pour kilos of hashish and
82 Seiko watches were seized.

The five Lebanese are: Al-Nimr Tariq. 30. Abd-el-Kasbur [phonetic spelling].
no, llilel stsab, 18, Arshak Tusunian, 24, and Aghaurian Sarkis, 31.

The seized hashish was processed into 18 tablets. Tsriq and Kasbur were
first noticed by police when they cans to Trouaba [Piraeus district] and

attempted to sell the hashish to various underworld figures. However, among
the "prospective customers" was policemen Din. Vasileiou, who was ordered

by security director Han. Bosinaltis to purchase the hashish.

The two smugglers were then followed to the luxury hotel on Syngrou Avenue
where they were staying. Vasileiou accosted the two Lebanese and offered

them $20,000 for the 6 kilos of hashish. An appointnnt was made, but only
Kasbur appeared, while Tsriq kept et a distance with the drugs. At the
appropriate time the policemen came out of hiding and arrested Kasbur.

Teriq ran to a rented car and attempted to escape, but was blocked by police
patrol cars. He abandoned the vehicle and started waning, but was finally
caught in an abandoned building. He had gotten rid of the hashish, but was
unable to destroy it since it was in the form of tablets.

The other matters of the gang were then arrested. They had brought into

Greece large quantities of hashish in the past and had snuggled it to
Europe.

As a rule, they used to bring the drugs from Lebanon to Volos hidden under
innocent-looking baklave sweets which did not awaken the suspicion of custom
officials.

The head of the gang is Tsriq, who used to pose as a sea captain and had
resided in Greece for some time.

104
Al—Nimr Tariq 4. Arshak Tusumian
Abd-81~Kasbur 5. Aghazarian Sarkis

H1181 Qassab

5300/5376

105
AUDINRS FIND DRUGS ENFORCEMENT AGBNCY FUNDS 0:1st
Oslo APTBNPOSTBN in Norwegian 22 Feb 82 p 12
[Article by Ingrid Hagen]

[Text] Just under 24 million kroner for combatting narcotics has not been

' used, according to document 1 of the National Auditing Office which, among
other things, shows how the various ministries have used funds appropriated

to than. Parliament's supervisory comittee, established in 1981, is examining
reports from the National Auditing Office. Haber of parliament Anne-Lise
Bekken stated that this sum demonstrated a clear lack of initiative and
imagination in the battle against narcotics. Health director Hork said this
must be due to a misunderstanding of the budget.

"Millions of kroner have not been spent as planned," said member of parliament
Anne-Lise Bakken (Labor Party), chairman of the Crime Prevention Council.
"According to document 1 about 26 nillion honor is available for combatting
narcotics during the present fiscal year. How much of this was used in 1981
is unknown, but the money has accunulated from year to year since 1979. In
1980 only half of a 110 million kroner appropriation was used as planned."

That the funds are not used as appropriated indicates a clear lack of initia-
tive and imagination in the struggle against narcotics, according to Bakken.
"There are new programs that need money. Unorthodox approaches such as the
Hestoy boat project were denied funding at first. This project offers work
and rehabilitation for hard-core drug abusers. So far the Tyrili treatnent
collective in Hesnalia has been denied funding for social training. The Labor
a tunicipal Affairs Ministry pointed out that the program did not satisfy
existing provisions, although funds have been appropriated and never spent."

"If we do not have the proper provisions, we must make them, so that unorthodox
programs may be tested. He must dare to try then. If the Labor and Municipal
Affairs Ministry has no aoney in its budget, it should point out that the
Social Affairs Ministry has money for this purpose," Anne-Lise Bakken stated.

Health director Torbjorn Hork said that Anne-Lise Bakken's state-eats were

incorrect and a misunderstanding of the budget. Last fall parliament appro-
priated a total of 20 to 25 million kroner. Many programs are being planned

106
at preaent. prograne that take tine, but will begin during 1982. Only

6 million kroner has not been eamrked for particular prograna by parliament.
Thia 6 nillion will be "inaurance" to meet new aituationa that nay ariae in
1982. to initiate new programs in the battle against narcotics. Both cuatona
off iciala and police nay need extra funds, includin the foreign sections.
Some money will go to information work anon; youth and recreation clubs.
according to health director Mark.

9336
050: 5300/2205

1.07
NRDIC MINISTERS PNPOSE TO SEND NARCOTICS POLICE OVERSEAS
Oslo AHENPOSTEN in Norwegian 22 Feb 82 p 5

[Article by 'rhorleif Andreassen]

[Text] Stockholm, 21 Feb--‘l'he joint Nordic battle against narcotics will be
waged outside the Nordic countries. Sweden will station police officers in
“turkey and Greece, the Danes will have policaen in Germany and South America,
and Norwegian narcotics investigators will spend the summer in Turkey and
England. By placing police officers abroad, the Nordic countries will coordi-
nate their efforts against drug crimes.

At the Nordic Council of Ministers meeting on narcotics which ended in Stock-
holm yesterday, Justice and .Police Minister Mona Rokke advocated closer
cooperation between narcotics police and alien authorities. She believes this
is a prerequisite for conbatting drug abuse. "Our ability to conduct so—called
internal supervision of aliens must be improved. I would like to see more
intense observation, surveillance, and investigation at places where many
foreigners hang out. More customs personnel would make it possible to spend
more time checking individual travellers entering the country and she pointed
out that increased personnel would mean more frequent spot checks at border
crossings between Nordic countries. This is necessary, according to Justice
and Police Minister Rokke.

The Nordic governments agree that persons co-itting lesser narcotics crimes
in other Nordic countries should be returned to their homeland and punished
there. It was pointed out that there are a number of unfortunate aspects of
having different punisbents for the same crime in the Nordic countries.
Norwegians or foreign citizens intending to smuggle narcotics into Norway risk
milder punishent if they operate from Demark than if they operate in Norway.
The Norwegian representatives pointed out that Norwegian drug users choose to
live in Copenhagen because the risk of punishent there is lower.

It was determined at the Stockholm meeting that cannabis use in the Nordic
countries is increasing. The Nordic ministers stressed that false claims that
cannabis use is safe must be countered. For this reason. the ministers agreed
that all efforts to legalize the use and sale of cannabis must be opposed.

9336
cso: 5300/2205 3"”

108