FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10343
19 February 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL I'SF. ONLY

JPRS L/10342

19 February

WORLDWIDE REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(POUO 2/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA
JAPAN

Reprocessed Plutonium for Light Hater Reactor Power Generation
(HAINICHI “mu“, 31 we 81) 0.000COOOOOOO...OOOIOOOOCOOOOI

Strengthened Nuclear Fuel Cycle, Budget Exam‘ned
(DmKI SHWUN’ 9 Jan 82) 0.000.000.0000ooooleeeeeooceeoouoo

LATD‘AHHUEA
BRAZIL

Status of Nuclear Development Reported
(Bernardo Kucinski; THE GUARDIAN, 29 me 81) eooeovoooconooo

NEST EUROPE
ITALY

Minister of Industry Issues License for Caorso Plant
(ATOMO B INDUSTRIA, 15 Nov-l Dec 81) .......................
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

JAPAN

RBPROCESSED PLUTONIUM FOR LIGHT WATER REACTOR PWER GENERATION

Tokyo HAINICHI SﬂIMBUN in Japanese 31 Dec 81 p 1

[Articlcz "Plutonium Extracted Through Re-Processing To Be Used for Light-
Hater-Reactor-Type Nuclear Power Generation; As Early as First Half of Next
Year; Hill Seek US Consent on Occasion of Negotiations in March"]

[Text]

According to what was clarified by a nuclear energy policy official
on the 30th, Japan has decided to use the plutonium which is extracted
through the re-processing:3fspent nuclear fuel at nuclear power plants. as
fuel for light-water—reactor-type nuclear power generation now in operation,
as early as the first half of 1982, ahead of the rest of the world. for
this purpose, it will resume Japan-US nuclear energy negotiations as early as
March and obtain US agreement.to use plutonium. 0n the other hand, it will
obtain final confirmation on such problems as the construCtion of a second
re-processing plant in Japan. As a result, commercialization of the
Japanese nuclear energy industry will begin to move on a full scale toward
completion of the nuclear fuel cycle.

Two Committees for Commercialization: HITI's Policy

The fear is strong that use of plutonium as a fuel (pluthermal) in light-wate
reactors, which account for nearly 80 percent of the reactors at the nuclear
power plants in the-world at present, will make the manufacture of plutonium
atomic bombs easy. Therefore, it has been strictly restricted from the
standpoint of preventing nuclear proliferation. However, plutonium is
accumulated every day in nearly 270 reactors in the world, which are already
in operation. Even in the light of the economic feasibility inherent to
nuclear energy, to the effect that fuel once spent can be used again, the
necessity for pluthermal has been pointed out.

. .
In Japan, too, plutonium as a fuel for light-water reactors is in a
state where it can be used at two nuclear power plants -- the Hihama Nuclear

Power Plant of Kansai Electric Power and the Tsuruga Nuclear Power Plant
of the Japan Atomic Power Company -- and a go sign for impnrts from the US
is being awaited. It is said that an international political decision and
timing as to social environment are the only remaining problems.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)“ OH“ IAI. NSF. ONLY

In this situation, Japan has a bitter history of being the only A-bonb
vi:tim country, and therefore, both its control and surveillance structures
are relatively complete in the world, as to nuclear non-proliferation. I:
has accumulated actual records as generally the only advanced nation as to
nuclear energy, which has never been suspected of nuclear proliferation to
the Middle East and South America. On such occasions as the INFCB (Inter-
national Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation) Conference, which was held under
the CARTER Administration, Japan opposed the plan of the US, Britain and
france for international monopoly of nuclear energy in the commercial field.
Therefore, Japan has received the international evaluation that at present,
there is no other country except Japan that can start using plutonium-use
light-water reactors, with importance attached to economic feasibility.

Especially, Japan depends upon foreign countries for uranium resources.
too, and when plutonium created through re-processing of spent uranium fuel
is used again as a fuel for reactors, it can be regarded as a semi-home-produce:
fuel. Its meaning of security in the fields of economic feasibility and
energy is very big. Therefore, the Science and Technology Agency, HITS, and
electric power industry circles have been aiming at using plutonium as a
nuclear fuel for nuclear power generation, from early on. In the case
of "Fugen" (output: 165,000 KN), a prOtotype reaCtor for the new-type
converter reaCtor (ATR -- advanced thermal reactor), the first power generation
with :ne plutonium-uranium nixed fuel entered a demonstration stage this
fall, and it is being tentatively crerated at present. As to “Joye"
(not used for power generation), an experimental reactor for the fast breeder
reactor (FER). too, experiments will be started within 1352 to increase the
output from the 75,000 Kw at present to l00,000 Kw. Thus, preparations
for that purpose are being completed steadily.

Taking Such actual records into account, nuclear energy policy officials
are asserting that nuclear proliferation can be fully prevented.by attaching
the condition that "Only the c0untries having high-level technology on the
ATE, FBR, etc., can use plutonium as a fuel in limited, specific light-water
reactors." They are scheduled to obtain the final agreement of the REAGAN
Administration, which has already made a nearly lac-degree policy change

from the prohibition measures under the CARTER Administration to easing

MJSUI‘GS .
o

In pushing commercialization. on the Other hand, HITI will inaugurate,
early in January, two committees as advisory organs for the ITI Minister --
a "Plutonium Re-CycleCommittee”(Chairman: Japan Atomic Energy Research
Institute Adviser ﬂiroshi MURATA) and a "Fast Breeder Reactor Practical Use

Committee" (Chairman: Tokyo University Professor Yoshitsugu HISHIHA). Its

policy is to establish strategy for development and commercialization up till
the year 2000, at these Committees.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI". ONLY

These Committees will give long-term prospects for huge amounts of
investments and a plan for constructing nuclear energy-connected facilities.
which will require a period of more than 10 years each. The Ministry intends to
urge private capital to participate in a positive way in the nuclear energy
industry, which has already become a market amounting to 1'2 trillion annually.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shimbunsh81982

(250: 4106/ 39

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Vl'l'l\ IAL U3; \II‘LI

JAPAN

STRENGTHENED NUCLEAR FUEL CYCLE, BUDGET EXAMINED
Tokyo DENKI SBUHBUN in Japanese 9 Jan 82 p 1

(Article: "Momentum To Be Given to Strengthening of Nuclear Fuel Cycle;
Construction of 'Solidification Pilot Plant' Takes One Step Forward; Science
and Technology Agency's Nuclear Energy Budget; Location Heaeuree Office Also
To Be Eatabliahed"l

[Text]

The Science and Technology Agency on the 8th clarified the details of
its nuclear energy budget for fiscal 1982. According to this, the characteristic
feature of the budget is that emphasis was given to the improvement and
Strengthening of the nuclear fuel cycle which is reaching the stage of
demonstration, as well as to the continuation of large-scale projects for
nuclear fusion. multi-purpose high-temperature gas furnaces, etc. As to
downstream, in particular, detailed designing of a high-level waste liquid
solidification pilot plant was approved, and one step forward has been taken
as to the start of consrruction. In regard to low-level waste liquid, too,
new measures are to be developed. As to upstream, adjusted designing of
a uranium enrichment protorype plant and other matters were approved by the
Finance Ministry. and the start of construction is to be awaited. Also,
establishment of a Nuclear Energy LocationRegional Measures Office in the
Agency was approved. This is designed for comprehensive promotion of location
as to nuclear energy facilities from the standpoint of the State. It will
check into PA (public acceptance) astcllocation at the first stage and what
regional promotion should be, and put it into practice.

Efforts to Be Made for PA at First Stage and Regional Promotion, Too

The said Agency's nuclear energy appropriations amount to ¥l76,200
million (up 0.7 percent over fiscal 1981) in the general account, and to
¥66,900 million (up 12.2 percent over fiscal 1981) in the electric power
special account, totaling ¥2u3 billion (up 3.6 percent). The appropriations
in the general account exceeded the demanded amount by ¥l,100 million. This
means a slight increase in the amount of cash, because the limited amount of
liabilities on the Treasury was curtailed on a wide scale. The increase rate
of the demanded amount, including that in the electric power special account,

is 3.8 percent, and the amount of appropriations is somewhat smaller than
that.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The characteristic feature of the contents of the nuclear energy budget
is that new measures were worked out in the field of the nuclear fuel cycle,
which is reaching the stage of demonstration, in addition to the continuation
of medium- and long-range,large-scale projects for nuclear fusion. multi-

purpose high-temperaturegasfurnaces, FDR's (fast breeder reactors), etc., as
before.

In regard to downstream, detailed designing (Vl,SOO million) of the
high-level waste liquid solidification pilot plant by the Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation was approved, following the basic
designing. The policy of the Power ReaCtor and Nuclear Fuel Development
Corporation is to push detailed designing in fiscal 1982 and 1983, start the

construction of the plant in fiscal 198“. and start the operation thereof in
fiscal 1987.

_ The demonstration of glass solidification techniques will be carried out,
following the start of the operation of high-level radioactive materials
research facilities (CF?) in the spring of this year. Development of
techniques on the disposal of radioactive waste (V200 million) and research on
the standards fcrthe disposal of radioative waste (#70 million) are also new
measures. In the case of the former, development of new techniques for the
decrease of low-level waste, elimination of contamination, solidification, etc.,
will be publicly invited from private circles, and subsidies will be granted.
2: :he case of the latter, research on standards will be carried out so that
Forfennouce and so forth can be checked, in preparation for the practical use
of new solidified plastics, as well as research on the so-called "battcm cuts"
of low-level waste.

In the field of upStream, the uranium enrichment prototype plant is a
star item. An appropriation of ¥960 million, including an adjustment
expense (V500 million) to prepare for the construction, has been earmarked,
the sharing of funds between the Government and private circles has been
decided, and the early start of the construction will be awaited. Also, an
expense (V100 million) for publicity measures concerning the nuclear fuel cycle
to promote location as to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the second
re-processing plant for private circles, uranium enrichment, and the "honju"

FDR, has been newly budgeted. and PR activities will be embarked upon from
the standpoint of the State.

In the field of organization, on the other hand, it has been decided that
a Nuclear Energy Location Regional Measures Office will be established. This
Office will check cross-sectionally and comprehensively, from the standpoint
of the State, into the nuclear fuel cycle, PA as to first-stage location
of nuclear energy facilities including new-type reactors, regional promotion,
etc., and put them into practice. Nuclear energy liaison co-ordinators
(numbering 8) under the Office Chief will also be assigned to this Office,and
co-operation with local self-governing bodies also will be made close.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

CSO: 4106/39

5
FOR omcuu. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRAZIL

STATUS OF NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT REPORTED

PH291329 London THE GUARDIAN in English 29 Dec 81 p 6

[Dispatch by Bernardo Kucinski: "Argentine Boast Spurs Brazil Into Race for the
Bomb"]

[Text] Sao Paulo--In the agreeable, yatchtpacked Botafdgo Bay, in Rio de Janeiro,
stand the headquarters of Brazil's Nuclear Energy Commission (CHEN), where feverish
activity goes on these days. An Italian team has just arrived, under the nuclear
cooperation agreement recently signed with Italy. Similar agreements exist with
the United Kingdom, Argentina and Iraq.

The Italians will help Ivano Harchesi, a senior CHEN official and nuclear engineer.
to develop a breeder reactor, something very few countries are doing. This will
he only one of the tasks of a large new nuclear research centre CHEN is setting up
in Rio de Janeiro. The place is appropriately called Camp d1 Roma--it is the
ltalian connection, the newest of Brazil's multiple efforts to reduce Argentina's
lead in nuclear capability.

Five weeks ago, an airborne delivery of German-made equipment for the production
of nuclear grade uranium arrived in Sao Paulo at the Institute for Energy and
Nuclear Researches (IPEN), Brazil's largest atomic centre, employing about 1,500
people.

The new equipment, part of a much wider German connection, will substantially
increase IPEN's uranium purification capacity. This is the material-~not to be
confused with enriched uraniunr-that Brazil secretly supplied to Iraq early this
year. It can be used either to fuel natural uranium or breeder reactors where

a proportion is transformed into weapons grade plutonium by neutron irradiation.
Given a strong neutron source this transformation can be induced without a reactor.

Brazil's armed forces general staff is now convinced that Argentina is ready to
produce an atom bomb--depending only on a political decision to do so--if it hasn't
already produced it. The head of Argentina's Nuclear Authority, Admiral Castro
Madero, has recently confirmed this evaluation, but assured the world that a
decision to make a nuclear device will never be taken.

Brazil's generals are not satisfied with such assurances. They also feel deeply
frustrated with the failures of the German-sponsored nuclear power programme.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-T ()NI.\

nnly two plants, of eight proposed, are being built after construction faults
that tripled costs, and will not be ready before 1985 anyway.

A German system to enrich uranium, the jet nozzle system, on which the Brazilians
pinned their hopes, has also not yet proved to be effective. Horse, Brazil's
first. American-made, reactors is hampered by faults that may make it forever
nonoperational.

But in the shadow of these ventures, other projects were discreetly launched by
the National Security Council. Old ones were revived. all of them in accelerated
tempo. Physicists are being offered positions they cannot refuse; there are no
limits for the acquisition of equipment; and some PHD scholarships abroad are
being referred to as "missions."

Almost everywhere one finds a helpful German hand. Either they want to buy
indulgence from the fiasco of their power plants building, or for strategic reasons
of their own. One such sicreet project is IPEN's pilot plant for the reprocessing
of spent fuel. The equipment for radiation protection, wich allowed the plant

to operate with real plutonium, was provided by the Germans as a gift.

This plant is an example of Brazil's way of gaining time. This was a laboratory

set with near to zero capacity, which was expanded to produce a sizeable output,

if operated around the clock. it is ready now to reprocess 11 lb of plutonium

a year--half the amount needed for one bomb. There is no international safeguard
on the plant.

The problem remains of acquiring spent fuel to process if the basic power plants

are not operating. This is where the Italians come into the picture. The breeder
reactor they will help develop uses either plutonium or highly enriched uranium

as fuel. A breeder research project is the perfect smokescreen for military nuclear
research.

Brazil had French assistance at first, but neither the French nor the Americans
wished to provide the highly enriched uranium needed. Then the Brazilians discovered
that the Italians were actually partners to the French breeder project. After

Mr Mitterrand's victory in France, a final decision was taken to ask for Italian
help.

Campo di Roma was conceived to match IPEN in size and scope. But an even more
important nuclear research compound is in advanced stage of assembly, as part of
the air force technological centre in Sao Jose dos Campos, near Sao Paulo. It
was from this centre--the Laboratory for Advanced Studies (LBA)--that much of
Brazil's nuclear research was coordinated.

LEA is a large hexagonshaped, bomb-proof building, partially underground, which
already stores Brazil's largest scientific computer, costing nearly $5 million
and already loaded with nuclear data declassified by more advanced countries.

LEA was the life dream of the late Colonel Jose Albano Amarante, a senior member
of the military scientific community. One of his proejcts was the construction
of centrifuges for the enrichment of uranium. The parts are being built in the

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

air force facilities in Sao Jose dos Campos while nuclear studies continue at IPEN,
although uranium enrichment by laser is also under trial.

Another research centre is now being built under army authority, in the seaside
rocket-tracking base of Harambaia, Rio de Janeiro. The army hopes to produce a
replica of the comprehensive facilities at Sao Jose dos Campos.

The Brazilian approach appears to be one of shooting in all possible directions.
hoping that one shot will hit the target. The most intriguing piece of the puzzle
is the speeding up of purified uranium production—a fuel Brazil cannot possibly
use.

They may have plans to build a natural uranium reactor such as Argentina's. because
this is the reactor type most suited to the production of weapons grade plutonium.
It may. however, be a bargaining counter-fuel to be offered, if not to Iraq then
to some other country capable of having it irradiated. on a basis of sharing the
finished product.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 29 Decedaer 1981

650: 5100/2073

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MINISTER OF INDUSTRY ISSUES LICENSE FOR CAORSO PLANT

Rome A'l‘Ol‘D E INDUSTRIA in English 15 Nov-1 Dec 81 p 12

[Text]

The Technical Commission for
Nuclear Safety. meeting in Rome
on 26 November under the Presi-
dency oi Proi. Maurine Currie.
unanimously expressed a iavora-
ble opinion tor the issue oi the
provinces! operation license ior
the Caerso nuclear plant mm the
first reiuellrng which is expected
to take place in September 1902

The - proVisionsl - is not a syrup
tom oi persisting perplexitiea about
the ssiety oi the power station.
but is in accordance with the law
on nuclesr saieiy lDPR ills oi
1954). which lays down in art.
5i that the license should be gran.
ted . by successive phases 0! ope
IOUOII e.

The Minister of industry. there
lore. signed the decree for the
start oi commerciel operation oi
the plant on 28 November. The
opinion oi the Technical Commis-
sion was expressed on the basis
of the certiticate that the tests
had yielded a positive result drawn
up by the CNEN's Central Ssiety
and Protection Department (DIS?!
fm 30 October last. This last news
item had been given by the Mini-
ster himseii on is November on the
occasion oi the inauguration oi the
Iniormation Centre oi the Caorso
Power Station. set up by Enel es
had already been done tor the Men
tslto dl Castro Power Station.

To a Journalist who had asked.
on this occasion. for an expian.
etion oi the 69 shut-downs oi the
power station in these 4 years oi
tests. the Minister replied as fol.
lows: iCorbeliInl. present here. has
explained to me that oi the 69 aha:-
downa. 30 were due to human er-
rore. With regard to the others.
lot ii, remember _one thing: that

9

here we are at Ca'orso and eve-
rything Is blown up. A leaking
iange in any plant is a iiange to
be repaired. nothing more; here
it creates e ceee ._ The President
of Enel added to this reply of the
Minister: . Moreover all the break-
downs. all the shutdowns are do-
cumentsble And they are listed
at the iniorrnstion centre which
we are opening at Ceorso lust
today. accessible to everyone .,

Going on to examine a more ge-
neral aspect the Minister also said
that with the Caorso power station
the risks oi blackout are reduced
but not eliminated. -We need a
capacity oi 20.000 MWe to be
safe — he went on: now we have
26.500. So we lack 2.500. Becom-
ing operative. Caorso will give us
350 MWe. but we intend to put into
operation also one oi the two oli
iuel groups of the Porto Tolle

station at the cost oi bring-
lrig the iual with lighters. in view
of the diliicultlea to complete the
oil pipeline. That will make enother
640 MWe: altogether use MWe.
So we will still lack 1.000 and this
will be the risk 0. a Concern Is for
the iuture — Marcora then con-
cluded — because we are tremen-
dously late with the nuclear pro.
gram and the coal one. And we
are beginning to pay ior this delay
and will ”I tor it more and more
in terms 0 the lack of competiti-
veness at our industries -.

And now some words about the
Caorso iniormation Centre. set up
by Enel on the basis oi the re-

ueats oi the local authorities oi
t e Caorao Commune. the Provin-
ces oi Placenta and Crernona end
the EmiiIaJiornagna Region.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030052-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Centre Ia built on an area
bordering on the power station.
but separated from it to permit
tree and uncontrolled access for
ell the citizens. The building is a
- heavy - prelsbricetod construction
with a useful aree ot about 850
square metres. There is lecture
hall with over 220 seats. equipped
with 35 mm and is mm film pro-
iectore. a projector for slides. lu-
minous bieckboerd. and ampliﬁes-
tion plant. The exhibition makea|

use oi panels.-Ium|nous_aﬁde—s.
models. meniklns. stands with
questions and answers.

The centre gives lnlonnatlon not
only on the problems concerning
nuclear energy. but also on achie-
vements and studies on integrative
sources (solar. wind. biomasses)
and It dedicates particular space to
energy saving. which is also con-
sidered an indispensable source 0!
energy

An information Unit oi Enel'e
Press and Public Relations Oﬂice
will be present at the Centre at
the dispossl of all those. Authori-
ties end c tizens. who want to

know about W ec
power station and th
environmental impact
duction of electric en
nuclear source. The e
tslned in this period
Montalto dl Castro C
in fact. that these a
really become an m
the population and -
nlzatlons it sets up.
Here the citizens —
—- will be able to e.-
but also week and di.
only ebout problem
nuclear energy. but a
W Noblems ln gener.
The inauguration 0!
tion Centre was ecl:
another informational
Enel's: the publicatloi
issue of a periodicel
Iorrne -. to be publls
copies and distributed
go at the Centre at
iocei Agencies. Pa
Unions. the cultural
the schools. newspap
local organizations i.
life oi the coliectivity

COPYRIGHT: 1981 by Edizioni Atom e Industria
cso: 5100/2075 END
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOSOROOO600030062-6