FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRSIJ10437

5 Apﬂ|1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUC 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or (Excerpt! in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. khere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
Scxeuce Ann TECHNOLOGY

(2000 6/ 821
CONTESTS

SCIENCES POLICY

Research, Technology Minister on Moment Plans
(Jean-Pierre Chevenement Interview; Pm, Hinter 82).... 1

Reservations Voiced About Centralized, Planned Research
(mique Pignon; L'm, 12-18 Feb 82) oooooocooesooee 7

TRANSPORTATIG‘

New Propeller Technologies for Gaunter Aircraft
(AIR & ms, 28 “W 81) OOOOOODOOOOOOOOIO...OOOOOOOOOOOI... 9

Briefs
Airbus Orders 11
Airbus Flights Tests With AFT cs 11
RJ-SOO Bench Tests ‘ 12
Aerospstiale, Renault Technical Exchange 12

-a- [In—us-lusar
man-1m]. us: ONLY '
RESEARCH, mom HIMS'I'RR 0N 0mm PLANS
Paris PM in French Winter 82 pp 64-69

[Interview with Jean-Pierre Chsvenasent, minister of scientific research and tech-
nology, by Jacques Houbart; date and place not given]

[Text] Free: 13 to 16 January the National Wein- on Research and Technology,
preceded last fall by major regional meetings that brought together all laboratory
and industry partners, was held in Paris. ‘lhe chief organiser of this vast opera-
tion, Minister of State for Scientific Research and ‘nschnology Jean-Pierre
Chevenement, conceived it as the trigger for a renewal of research and development
in France. He plane to achieve an investment in research on the order of 2.5 per
cent of the GNP by 1985, But this massive investment in m matter provided by
the taxpayers will not be enough to fertilise the economy.

Will not the success of this laudable enterprise be threatened:

if the development of the class struggle prevents businesses, particularly the
small and medium-sized industries, from participating in the movement;

if the fanaticism of certain union members who stir up the antinuclear committees
is given free rein;

if the bureaucratisstion of researchers outs then off from economic reality and
the demands of growth?

Our colleague, Jacques Houbart, asked these questions of Jean-Pierre Cheyenenent.

[Question] At the tins of the regional meetings that paved the way for the Nation-
al Woeium on Research and reﬂexology, you stressed the fact that, while the
bench national research effort cans to 2.2 percent of the GNP in 1968, in the face
of the impact of oil [prices] the Valery Giaoard d'Estaing administration allowed
it to drop to 1.8 percent. Feeling that the best anticrieis therapy is the injec-
tion of gray matter [into the economy], you, Mr Minister, propose to achieve a

rate of 2.5 percent by 1985. but doesn‘t the ”change" therefore consist of a returr
to the first days of the Fifth Republic, indeed to that policy of “mat programs"
(nuclear, aeronmtics, computer) so disparaged by a Halthusian left that sees only
an activity of "Satan" in scientific and technoloaoal progress?

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

glam-yer] 0n 1 July the president and the governnent set an ambitious objective

n the national research and development effort: to go from the 1.8 percent of

the GNP of today to 2.5 percent by 1985. Whether in the 1990's hence is ahead of
or lags behind the big industrialised countries depends very largely on our ability
to achieve this objective.

In fact, the solution of nest of the problem that confront us today involves an
important scientific and technologcal component. 'me governnent feels that the
technological research and develOpnent offort constitutes one of the privileged

ways of getting out of the cultural, social and eccncuic crisis into which trance

The great technological program (nuclear, space, «mmtics, data processing)

you refer to have played an important role in the country's scientific and tech-
nclogicsl development. IRwy were and, mrthernore, still are an important element
in a policy of national independence. May our outlook is different. In parti-
cular, it is a question of sewing Pranoe's eocncnic and social development in

the 1990‘s. New mobilising programs will be the tool of this policy. Setting

then in motion should permit us to link major objectives of national interest
(national independence, ability to compete economically and recapture of the domes-
tic narket, full esplcynent of nanpower, national solidarity, etc.) with conpleted
basic research efforts, applied research and technological development. These pro-
grams will link laboratories, teams and businesses with pilot projects.

As you can see, it is not a matter of returning to the 1960's. It is a matter of
prolonging the'positive effort achieved then in certain key domains (space, nuclear
research, aeronslitios), of correcting jeopardized situations (electronics, data
processing) and aboVe all of extending this effort to new techniques (biotechnolo-
gies, Rational Institute for Energy), to neglected industrial sectors (food produc-
tion mechanics) or a few strateyc domino (materials, scientific instrusentaticn,
etca e

society and Wt the entire world.

The research and development technolog policy almld respond to the expectations
of the world of labor and of the opprest countries.

[Question] Inaugurating the mm [national Agency for the Valorisation of Re-
search] conference in Lyons last 15 October, you stressed tue major role business

able effort was made by businesses.“ But is this consider-able effort possible if,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bcundhandsndfoctfinmcisllymdbythemicnsandwiththeirstafforuahedby
the Internal Revenue Service, businesses cannot play their liberal role as in the
United states, for example?

[Answer] ‘lhe objective of a national outlay for research md development set at
2.5 percent of the Gil? by 1985 on only be achieved if a Joint effort is made by
the govemment, nationalized enterprises and private firms.

1. As far as the public sector is concerned, the budget of the ministry I an in
charge of bears witness to the effort the govenusent intends to make. It has in-
creased by 29.6 percent in comparison with 1981.

2. {me nationalization of a certain number of big companies is based on the obser-
vation that the country is faced with technological challenges (inc-son in elec-
tronics, Saint Gobain in data processing, Rhone Poulenc in biotechnoloaes) and
that private industry could no doubt not in fact raise the necessary funds. is a
result of these nationalization, the research and development effort should be

considerably strengthened.

5. After all, I has always insisted on the fact that a very broad private industry
sector should subsist and progress along with the nationalized sector.

You cite the snmple of the United States and the "liberal role" we Mt to allow
private businesses to play. In answer to your question, I would say two things:

3) "Bound hand and foot by the unions": Do you really have the impression that
for 8 months now union action has been clearly demonstrating a determination to
thwart economic development?

b) "Bound hand and foot financially“: Businesses complain of overly high interest
rates on loans. I can readily understand, but this is after all the object of the
policy the governnent is pursuing at the present time, to reduce the rate of in-
ﬂation and gradually lower the prime lending rate and the overall scale of rates.

I point out to you that interest rates have not risen for 8 months now,

Aside from the difficulties of financing investments that are real, but which
should not be exaggerated, we must overcome the reticence of French businessmen to
free their capital in order to increase their own funds and improve their firms'
ability to seam debts.

More generally speaking, government devices (mm grate, mobilizing programs,
etc.) should in the course of the next few years enable us to make a vigorous ef-
fort to renew industrial research.

meetion] Aside from businesses, in a big public organization like the CUBS
National Center for Scientific Research] they appear to be getting ready to grant
the dominant unions a bigger role. naturally, it is a good thing for the wane

to be able to effectively defend the workers and convey their own ideoloy. But '
if it is a question of basic research or technological orientation, particularly in
the field of artery, don't we mm the risk of seeing a veritable Lysenkciss come
into being?

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] After the last war, on the initiative of the me with Joliot, the issue
of a peaceful atom was a favorite topic of the Left. Since 1968 the letter, or at
least various parties and unions, has developed a real antinuclear fanaticism, going
as far as sabotage. Can't we reply to the pseudo-ecologists with real ecological
data, present the balance sheet on ener risks, coupare various sources? Plav up
the /dangers of using coal/ in italics , a teclmique that releases not only sul-
phur, dust, considerable oaotivity higher than that produced by nuclear power

[Answer] Indeed, during the 1950's the idea of a peaceml atom raised people's
spirits. Expected soon, control over nuclear energ even served as an argument
for protesters of the time. I an thinhng oi‘ the villagers oi‘ Mazes who used it
to oppose the construction or hydroelectric dam.

parative risk studies therefore constitute an indispensable prelinmary to any ef-
fective action to improve industrial safety, but they have little impact on indi-

:But, above all, the opposition to it does not stem from the risk; it has quite dif-
ferent roots. It isn't this or that industry that is ooncemed. It is an overall

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We are therefore dealing with a cultural problsn. lhe proper reply is that this
society ought to learn to know itself better in order to better take charge of
itself. In connection with this, I am convinced that development of the social
sciences ad the scientific approach to social problem will force the "antisoienee"
ideologies, which, moreover, through eons incomprehensible reaction today flourish,
to retreat.

We met reverse the attitude of the Ranch toward science, give then a taste for
lmowledge and action.

In connection with this, I don't feel it useful to terrorize then with a new myth

(carbon dioxide) before having the results of the studies I have requested on this
matter.

>9estion] Hr Minister, my I ask you one last question cm your thoughts about
regulation/ [in italics] of researchers?

Whether he be a university professor or an engineer or simply self-tenant, isn't

the researcher, by definition — like sportemn — a creature of adventure and whine
beyond regulation? mat one sear that it is certainly appropriate to solidly aid
him in his efforts and guide his later Imitation, but not to turn hin into a bureau»-
crat? how can you ensure the effectiveness of these teens? Was the last adminis-
tration's desire to facilitate nobility anong researchers so reprehensible?

[Answer] 'lhe researcher, a creature of adventure? Certainly!

But the researcher “on the fringe," as you describe him, a nan of whine; and in-
pulses, "beyond regulation,” is nmdansntally a reruns]. person. In reality, re-
search is a. profession that demnds an exceptional combination of qualities: cre-
ative imagination, enthusiasts and intellectual curiosity, but also perseverance,
method, rigor and a sense of responsibility.

Whether they are researchers, engineers, technicians or administrators, whether
they work in the administration, in public institutions or in private fins, all
those individuals who participate in the research effort are not on the fringe of
the society. 'nzey are at the vent heart of it, Just as it is true that the solu-
tion to none of the goat probleas of our tines health, employment, working con-
ditions, energy, oomnications, environment, will be found largely in research.

For 40 years now, the direction the whole society has been moving in has been in-
stitutionalization of research, considered to be a vital function of the society.
'lbday even more than yesterday, progress is going throud: a renewed effort to
search for knowledge, to experiment and to innovate. Researchere' Job is, to be
sure, to investigate, but also to improve their research through applications, to
teach in order to pass on their duty to inform and aid the nation in its choices
for the ﬁxture.

All this demands not mrginalisation but, quite ﬂue contrary, Job security, pros-
pects of clearly defined careers and good fringe benefits. Public charters and
collective agreements should in future recomise these 1'1th for them. 'mis con-
stitutes an indispmsable condition for effectiveness and true nobility, voluntary
and organised.

S
roe omcm. use onu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soon]. regreeeion hoe never meet! Gotham; manure, we hove eeen that
this is no. To create new dynenn, we have to set eoom mane and economic
propose to much in step.

common: We Meme «mum et mucouone Puiocuqueo, 120,
maps menu, 75008 Perle

11,466
cso: 3100/40.:

6
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

SCIENCE POLICY

RBEWATIOIB vonmn ”our WHEN), mm mm
Paris L'ms in French 12-18 Feb 82 p 80

[Article by Doainique Pignon. researcher at the theoretical . ice laboratory
of the Advanced Teacher Training School: "The new Alliance"

[Text] The colloquium on "Research and Technology“ concluded on a note of
success; but Jean-Pierre Cheveneaent. sinister of state, should listen to
(heveneaent, the initiator of this ”states general" of research. for the
lessons learned exceed the initial objectives of the organisers. Many leading
figures in the field of research indicated that they have reservations concern-
ing the plan for a union between science and the state that would be too close.

The systentic preference of the great scientific organisations for large-scale
progress of research and developaent cones increasingly in conflict with the
forms of innovation and discovery. Institutional inertias often hinder the
precise initiatives that go counter to the prevailing current. Moreover. the
attelcts to render the bureaucracies (even the scientific ones) less cusbereone
have. in the pest. often produced adverse effects and resulted instead in
strengthening their paralyzing control.

The fact is that these reservations of principle conceal deep-seated tensions.
The very nature of research demands creativity and innovation, that is to say.
risk-taking and the right to nake aistakes. whereas the institutions that are
in charge of research insist on guaranteed estilates and abhor uncertainties.
More and sore often. therefore. innovation has been the province of those
tea-s that labor on the periphery of the large-scale programs-«ease such as
that of Roger Guilleain. Nobel laureate in nedicine, who has had to oxile his-
self in the United States in order to carry out his research. These new tens
of "elite soldiers” (which are becoming the rule in the sector of the lost
advanced research) are opposed to the ponder-oneness of the French organisation-
al nodal.

The concluding report by Philippe Lazar. the new director of the National
Institute of Health and hedical Research (INSERH). used exotic words. favoring
ideas such as "networks." ‘interfaces' and "open systole“ and praising the
"aleatcry factor“ and risk-taking. It is indeed a new philceomy of science
and knowledge, enunciated umbashedly, and the traditional ”hud" world of

classical industry cannot fail to regard it as a provocation. This new concept
of the "soft” technological galaxy--enunciated by a biologist-~rubs the govern-
sental and technological power structures in France the wrong way. The great

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

governmental entities are lore inclined to continue to think in tern of
”hierarchy," ”authority." "con-an!“ an! "centralized planning." The aodels
associated with these designations have been successful in connection with the
freeway progress, the establishment of the nuclear industry, and the equipping
of armies: but they have also failed in comction with nodernisation of the
steel industry ani have been incapable of assisting in the process of builditg
a competitive colputer industry. Horeover, the fact that data. processing
(just as in the case of the biotechnologies) does not fit the pattern of
extremist centraliss is unquestionably a sign of the obsolescence of these
namgement models. The fact that the adverse effeots of these nodels is
multiplying is an increasirgly obvious synptos of this obsolescence.

The technological options can no longer be dealt with in the liner node. The
difficulty thtt the politicians have in aseiailatim. and taking into account.
the technological dilemion of the political option is another imi ion.

Here, too, the explosion of knowledge is rsulerim the old organisatioml
models obsolete. The pressnt-day holders of technological power are less and
less often the aristocrats of knowledge that they once were. For the most
part. they are today merely adninistrators who are far resoved from the real
problems. The "Iiddle class” of researchers and techniciam--the new "brain
workers"~-want in their turn to be recognized as a new tribunal for decision-
naking. For that reason. what is at stake is in fact a democratic-albeit
peaceﬁIl-wrevolution. to wit: ”Finalize the right to speak: grant it to all
those whose competence, whose responsibility. whose civic spirit. whose labor
and whose curiosity entitle the- to be legitinate actors in the process of
nakitu the cultural, scientific and technical choices for our future." As we
can see, the general reporter minces no words. The ambition of the "new
alliance" goes simularly beyond politics--the politics of the Left as well as
the politics of the Right. This erlieavor will have to attack law ispregmble
fortresses--both on the left and on the right--if the technological “new deal"
is to be carried throw to success.

COPYRIGHT: 19& s.a. Groupe Express

10992
(30. 3102/171

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEW PROPBLLBR TECHNOLOGIES FOR comm AIRCRAFT
Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 28 Nov 81 pp 23,48
[Article by J. 11.]

[Text] The recent RAM (formerly: CAAA) show at New Orleans (see AIR m COSMOS Nos
881 and 882) provided propeller manufacturers an opportunity to highlight the
evolution that characterizes their present production as well as their future one.

Putting aside the future "propfan' (see AIR ET cosmos No 863, 6 Jun 1981), which
the designers now think will hardly make its debut before the second half of this
decade (in the civil danain at least). the propeller still has a good future ahead
of it. owing to increased fuel costs: The turbojet, even of advanced design, is
still too much of a fuel guzzler for the regional transport plane. and'the pro-
peller remains the best generator of mass movement, at least in the soo-km/hr
range, a range that is amply sufficient for short runs.

But which propeller? After three decades of virtual stagnation, a 'new propeller"
has appeared, characterized by high efficiency, light weight, and a reduced noise
level. The use of blades made of composite materials and the advances that have
taken place in the domain of aerodynamics are to a great extent at the origin of
this revival. Three propeller makers are, from this standpoint, operational:
Bamilton Standard and Hartzell in the United States. and Dowty in Great Britain.
In continental Europe. the situation is much less encouraging but not hopeless,
thanks to Dornier and to Ratier-Pigeac, the first of when has recent cassenced
flight tests (9 October) on an experimental TNT [New Technology “in plane using
a high-efficiency 4-bladed propeller developed in cooperation with the hoffman
firm. the DPVLR [German Research and Experimental Institute for
Aeronautics and Astronautics] and the Technical University of Stuttgart.
and the second of whom has beefed Tap Its-Research and Development Department.
invested in computer facilities, and launched a program of design and development
of a broad line of propellers (see AIR B'r COSMOS No 866. 27 June) that is to
met the gamut from 150 to 1,500 kw.

The latter French firm has also obtained from the STPA [expansion unknown a
contract on which it is already at work to develop a glass-fibered, 3-bla ed,
variable-pits propeller suitable for the Epsilon. the Pigeac firm, which has re-
configured a 'propeller-design" department, reorganized its fabrication opera-
tions and opened a 'canposites" workshop, has set for itself a precise imediate

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

objective: That of cooperating with the propeller maker who will be chosen for
the Am 42, with a view to representing him in France. assemble the propellers,
and provide technical assistance.

Getting back to the American propellers: Hamilton Standard. a leader in the
'propfan" research effort, has developed its new li-RP (l,500-2,000 hp) propeller.
a 4-bladed one measuring 3.2-3.3 m in diameter and weighing less than 90 kg. cone
included. which has already been adopted by mbraer for its Brasilia, by CASA/
Nurtanio for its (ZN-235 and by De Havilland Canada for its Dash-8. This propeller
is available with a system of regulation (mounted on the reducer) that offers all
imaginable possibilities, plus, as options. electronic synchronization and de-
icing. It is to be noted that the blades of the 16 R? are of mixed fabrication.

Hartzell Propeller offers no less, with its an line, which will cover the gamut
between 1,400 and 2,200 hp, with diameters from 3.05 to 4.05 m and weights ranging
from 80 to 90 kg. The four supercritical-profile blades of this propeller are
made entirely of composite materials featuring extensive’use of Kevlar. The
resultant weight gain is between 15 and 28 percent. The other line (M 11073) in-
cludes 3-blade, 4-blade and 5-blade propellers (also made of Kevlar). designed
for the nun-45 and PTGA-GS; the weight of a 3-blade unit is 52 kg... (the S-blade
propellers will equip, for example. the Prakes improved N 262 and the Shorts
$03-30.

Dowty showed its 4-bladed. 3.20-diameter propeller that is to be mounted on the
SF 340's CT'l-S. It is the latest addition to a family of propellers that already
equip the Gulfstream, the Merlin, the Metro, the Jetstream, etc. The blades of
this propeller have a carbon-fiber spar.

Pending now is the choice to be made by AEROSPATIALE [(Prench) National Industrial
Aerospace Company] and ABRITALIA [expansion unknown] for the ATR 42. Competing
for this award are Dowty and Hamilton Standard.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1981

9399
C80: 3102/139

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIB?8

AIRBUS 0RDBRS--Hr Tony Hart, chairman of the Board of Directors of Air Jamaica,

Mr Horace Barber, secretary general of the Finance Ministry of Jamaica. and ur
Jean—Yves Richard, Airbus Industrie's director of sales for South America and the
Caribbean, signed a contract on 8 January providing for the delivery in October
1982 of two Airbus A-300 84-200 jetliners powered by General Electric CPS-50 C2
engines. These planes will be configured to carry 265 passengers, that is, 12 in
first class and 253 in tourist class. Air Jamaica, founded in 1966, is Jamaica's
national air transport company. Air Canada is a minor stockholder. Its current
fleet consists of four B—727-200's, six oc-s's (three of which are Series 60), and
One nc-9-3o. The two A-3oo 84's just ordered will be put into service in November
1982 on the heavily traveled routes linking Jamaica with New York and Miami, and
on the major touristic routes to Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas, Atlanta, etc. with
this order, Airbus Industrie's client airlines now number 43 and officially placed
orders for A-300/A-310's now total 505 planes, as follows: 327 Type A-300 (258
firm orders + 69 options) and 178 Type A-3lo (88 firm orders + 90 options). Air
Jamaica's decision is relatively significant, since it means that the European
consortium will henceforth have six clients in the Americas, the first five being
Eastern Airlines (34 Type A-3oo firm orders + 26 options); Cruzeiro do Sul (2 Type
A-300); Varig (2 Type A-300) vase (3 Type A-300) and Wardair (6 + 6 wpe A-310).
[Article by J. :4. [Text] Paris AIR s? cosmos in French 16 Jan 92 p is] [copy-
mom: A. r c. 19 2] 9399

AIRBUS FLIGHT TESTS WITH AFT CG--Airbus No 3 was used in a series of flight tests
to explore the behavior of the plane with aft CG at 42 to 45 percent of its mean
aerodynamic chord versus the 35 percent currently allowed on the A-300. The
aftmost limit of CG travel has already been determined by simulator to be 50
percent. Actually, a lO-percent CG setback would enable a 1.5-percent reduction
to be achieved in Airbus fuel burn, by reducing trim compensation drag (produced
by the tailplane). These figures apply only during cruising, of course, since for
takeoff and landing a CC displacement in excess of 33-35 percent is out of the
question-~despite the attractiveness of aft CG from the standpoint of performance
during takeoff and climbing, owing still to the reduction of drag-«because of the
geometry of the landing gear. One possible solution is that of in-flight fuel
transfer, a portion of it being transferred to tanks lodged in the tailplane. A
solution of this type is planned for certain of the long-range Airbuses. .We note
that the current Airbus mean cruising CG travel aft is around 25 percent. [ Text]
[Paris am 21- oosms in French 16 Jan 32 p 16] [connxcam A. a c. 1982] 9399

11
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR UI'I'LLLAL Dbl URL!

m-soo BENCH TESTS—Rolls-Royce disclosed on 30 Decedeer that bench tests have
started in Bristol on the high-pressure system of the future RJ-SOO turbojet it
has developed jointly with the Japanese engine-building industry, and that it has
already totaled 12 hours of operation in an altitude chamber. This systen includes
a 9-stage axial-flow compressor and a 2-stage HP (high-pressure) turbine. It is
heavily instrumented to enable measurement of its operating characteristics (ef-
ficiency, vibrations, turbine temperature). These tests were preceded by basic
tests run during the past several months on the blower, the shafts, the coatustion
chamber and the turbine. The first complete engine is due to return to the test
bench, still Bristol, next month. A second unit will return to In]: [Ishikawajima-
Harina heavy Industries] at Mizuho, Japan, near Tokyo, in March. The RJ-SOO in
question, the m-son-oi, is a "demonstrator" the building of which was begun less
than 2 years ago. A distant offspring of the R3401, the Its-183 and the 118-le
on the part of Rolls-Royce, and of the PJR-‘Ilo on the part of the Japanese, it was
designed and dimensioned as the demonstration model of an engine of 9 tons of
static thrust, capable of delivering a cruising thrust of 2.25 tone at Mach 0.0/

30,000 feet, with an attractive 0.65-kg/kg p-h specific consumption, its intake
diameter being 1.5 meters. 'mis 123-500 was in fact optimized for a lZO/lSO-seat
twin-engine jetliner weighing some 60 tons at takeoff: In effect, the Fokker P29
(see AIR ET cosms No 817). Then, the projects of the principal builders having
begun to show some headway, Rolls-Royce felt it must press forward with its pro-
ject and published, at the recent Bourges Exposition the basic characteristics of
its two proposed engines: The m-soo-zs (diameter: 1.55 n: thrust: 9.5 tons at
takeoff, 2.5 tons cruising; SPC [specific fuel consullption] lowered to 0.627), and
the RJ-SOO-as (diameter: 1.71 m: thrust 11.3 tons at takeoff, 2.95 tons cruising;
SPC 0.601). The latter is one of the engines being considered by Airbus and Delta
Airlines to equip the future A-320-200. In any case, the RJ-SOO will keep its
main features, namely, its simplicity and its mll number of cosponents, both of
which will moderate its production cost. however, the needed increase in thrust
will nevertheless require the use of a lo-stage RP compressor and a t-stage LP
[low-pressure] turbine. The planned bypass ratio is 6, the pressure ratio 22.4,
and the flow rate 302 kg/sec (see AIR m cosmos No 355). [Article by J.M.]
[Text] [Paris AIR 3‘: scenes in French 16 Jan 82 p 16] [COPYRIGll'h A. a C. 1982]
9399

AERt‘BPATIALE, RENAULT 'I'EGWICAL HOMES-Jacques Hitterrand, president and
general manger of mosmmxs [rationu Industrial Aerospace Oonpamy'l, and
Bernard Hemn, president of RNU-Remult [Natioml Administration of Reinult
FactoriesT, on 1 February signed an agreement establishing the framework for
collaboration between Renault and Amosmmm. This agreementuof indetermi-
nate duration-~18 intended to permit a mutual exchange of intonation and
expertise and is oriented particularly toward transfers of technology.
AmOSPATIALE will bring to Renault its knowledge concernim the new laterials
(composite materials, new fibers, refractory asterials) and their application
in connection with the reduction of the weight of structures. The utilization
of lightweight materials in the design of the vehicles is one of the orienta-
tions that will make it possible to reduce the fuel consunption of the vehi-

cles. Remult will bring to ANPATIAIE its special skills, particularly in
the domain of automation and robotics. both at the design level and at the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
._—__—.‘

nente that will cover rot only Joint research and develop-est but work done
by either company in behalf of the other. When luncsted, assistance on be
requested from govermental sources. A ooozdimtion conittee consisting of
six members (three for each oolpew) W111 sonitor ilpleuentation of the
agreement and prescribe the objectives of the research. [Text] [Paris am a:

oosuos in much 6 Feb 82 p 91 10992

680: 3102/171 END

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY