I‘UK UI'I'K'IAI. “5r. UNLV

JPRS L/10335
18 February 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOT!

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
nevspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGUIATIONS ”EWING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(Pouo 5/82)

CouTeurs
NATIONAL

Recent Works on Social Modeling Reviewed
(N. I. Iapin; VDPROSY mcsmr, Nov 81) .....................

Nev Tasks for Ethnographers Outlined at Conference on Ethnocultural
Processes
(somsnn MOWIYA, Nov-Dec 81)

REGIONAL

Solomentsev Discusses RSFSR Socio-Economic Development
(14. s. Solonentsev; Isronm sssn, Nov-Dec 81)

Nationality, Social Factors in Ethnically Mixed Marriages Discussed
(A. A. Susokolov, A. P. Novitsknyn; SOVBTSMYA EPNOGRAFHA.

NOV-Dec 81) no.0.00.00.00.30.0-0.coco-0.0.00.loooelloootiotooo

- a - [III - USSR -- 35 PC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

Recsu'r worms on SOCIAL MODELING mm:-
Moscow vornosr 911080er in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 168-172

[Review by .‘i. I. Lapin of book "Sistelnost' i obshchestvo" [Systeaicity and Socie-
ty] by v. c. Afanas'yev, lolitisdat. Moscow. 1980. 368 pages (I); and book "Obsh-
chestvo: sistennost', poznaniye i upravleniye" [Societya Systemicity, Cognition.
and Control] by V. G. Afanas'yev. Politisdat. Moscow. 1981. 1532 pages (11)]

[Excerpts] The author sum; up the latest develop-ents in the field of modeling
social systems and processes, as carried out at the VNII [All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute] of Systems Analysis of the CKNT ﬁtate Commi ttee for Science and
Technology] and the USSR Academy of Sciences, at the TleI [Central Economics and
liatheaatics Institute] . the Computer Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences and
several other scientific organizations. These are aodels of global processes. au-
nicipal systems. culture, budgets of free time, etc. Moreover. the basic attention
has been devoted to imitation models. probleas of their typology. correlations be-
tween formalized and non-formalised elements in aodeling. classification of non-
foraalised elelents and so forth. Hhat has been provided is the characterization
of a normative model for an organizational system.

hnrther on in the second book problems of systemicity in aanageaent are examined.
At the present-day stage. the author emphasises. inter-sectorial and inter-regional
problems have aoved to the foreground; their solution requires that consideration
be given to the great diversity of internal and external factors. the forecasting
not only of direct but also of ancillary results and long-term consequences, as
well as the overcoming of an excessively bureaucratic attitude and an over-emphasis
on the order of seniority. mese requirements are met most effectively by program-
target planning. which signifies intensification of the integrated. centralized
principle in economics. and it constitutes a means for concentrating enormous na-
terial, labor and financial resources in the name of achieving an entire society's

(goals. This is one of the specific manifestations of the comprehensive. systeas
approach to management.

V. C. Afanas'yev analyses in detail the requirements for a goal as a point of de-
parture for a comprehensive program. t1 e types and stages of developing progress,
questions of the correlation between programs and plans, and vital problems of con-
trol in implementing the pragms. He provides the characteristics of the multi-
plication approach as one of the variants of the prograI-target approach to plan-
ning and control. as developed and applied in Bulgaria. But the basic attention

is accorded to conceptualizing the specific experience of program-target planning
and controls in the USSR.

1
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FUR (ll-Hill“. Uhl'. UhlJ

in examining certain problems of optimizing management. the author considers that
the essence of optimization consists in economizing on time. Lying at the founda~
tion of this thesis is an aggregate of ideas about the specifics of social time:
"Social matter and the systems pertaining to it have their own rhythms and tempos.
time sequences, and coordination of events.... Time is a /powerful social factor/.
and economising on time. both working and leisure time. is an important indicator
of production efficiency. the vital capacity of an entire social system. an /indi-
cator of the society's and the individual's progress."/ the author emphasizes (II.
pp 332--333). And since under socialism management's goal is to ensure such pro-
gress, to satisfy people's needs to an ever-increasing degree. and to create the
conditions for the individual's multi-faceted development. "it is. therefore. in-
disputable that the /optimization of management censtitutes a process directed at
economizing on time"/ [material spaced for emphasis] (II. p 33“).

The monograph concludes with an examination of the urgent problems of perfecting
management within a developed socialist society. These are primarily problems of
improving the economic mechanism; in the analysis of these problems the author has
made a substantial contribution to the very concept of the economic mechanism.
around which in recent times animated discussions have been conducted among eco-
nomists and representatives of closely allied sciences.

V. C. Afanas'yev proceeds from the position that an entire aggregate of social-
control mechanisms are functioning in society: the economic mechanism. the mecha-
nism of political regulation. the value-normative mechanism. and the mechanism of
moral regulation. Control mechanisms comprise those practical measures. means.
levers and incentives by means of which the party and the state translate the lan:
guage of objective laws into the language of management practice and policy. cre-
ate the economic. socio-political and ideological conditions opening up the scope
for the action of these laws so that pe0ple can take them into consideration and
implement them in their own practical matters. This is. so to speak. a "social
technology." objective in its derivation and subjective in its embodhment, or a
"specific intermediary between the objectively flowing social processes and the
subjective activity of persons“ (II. p 370).

The most important place within the aggregate of social-control mechanisms is occu—
pied by the economic mechanism. But what exactly is this? In the author‘s opini-
on. the mechanism of socialist economic management is a complex, multi-level pheno-
menon, includinu such components as the following: the system for forecasting and
planning the economy; the aggregate of plan and accounting indicators. criteria for
evaluating the work of enterprises. associations and ministries; the system of le-
gal acts and negotiated agreements, norms and standards which regulate production
activity, the relations of producers with each other. as well as those between pro-
ducars and consumers; the system of providing incentives for production. including
wages. prices and rates. finance and credit; the system of measures for creating
and introducing new equipment and technology. implementing inventions and discove-
ries; the system of economic. scientific and technical. socio-political information
being utilized in production. as well as the scientific organisation of labor and
management. The mechanism of economic management ”places the human being and labor

groups within a specific framework and conditions so that they may function with
the greatest possible yield" (II. p 37“).

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Proceeding from the decisions of the 25th CPGU Congress. the author has formulated
an aggregate of measures for improving the economic mechanism. They are aimed at
perfecting planning. developing incentives and cost accounting, as well as increas-
ing the efficiency of the organizational structure, the style and methods of manage-
ment. Also examined in this book are problems of developing the material-technical

and scientific basis of management. improving work with management staffs and fur-
ther democratiaing management.

In both books there is an imprecise characterization of the correlation between the
functions of a system and its components. The author is justified in insisting on
the fact that functions have bearers. are "attached' to a system as a whole or to
its individual components. But remaining obscure herein is the circumstance that
the presence of such an inter-relationship does not signify the complete isomors
phiem of a system's functions and components inasmuch as one component can perform
several functions. whereas one function can be performed by several components:

this also allows a system to maintain its own functions when its component make-up
is changed.

While emphasizing that the socio-economic formation remains the most common type of
social systemicity, V. C. Afanas'yev notes at the same time that. as human society
progresses. there is a growth in the degree of its systemicity, and that in our pe-
riod a process of mankind‘s integration may be observed. transforming it into an

integrated system (I. pp 2?2--273). Herein arise questions about the characteris-
tics of mankind as a social system, about the essence and structure of the still

broader. global system, as components of which the following appear: nature--man--
society (formation)--humanity. These are the socio-philosophical problems connec-

ted with them require further research.
COPYRIGHP: Izdatel'stvo TsK KPGS "Pravda", 'Voprosy filosofii" No 11. 1931

233“
IJL'O: 1800/176

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY

NATIONAL

NEH TASKS FOR ETHNOGRAPHERS OUTLINED AT CONFERENCE ON ETHNOCULTURAL PROCESSES
Moscow SOVBTSKAYA EIROGRAPIYA in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 pp 141-148

[Artic‘-: "The All-Union Conference on 'Ethnoculturel Processes in the Con-
temporiry World'"!

[Excerpt 1 An all-union conference on "Ethnocultural Processes in the Con-
temporary World" was held on 12-14 May 1981 in Elista, the capital of the
Kaluykskaya ASSR. The conference was organized by the Institute of Ethnography
ineni N. N. Hiklukho-Haklay of the USSR Acadeuy of Sciences and the Ksl-yk
Scientific Research Institute of History, Philosophy and Economics of the
Council of Ministers of the Kalnykskaya ASSR. It was noteworthy that the con-
ference coincided with an important event in the cultural and scientific life
of the republic, the 60th anniversary of the Kalnyk institute. The establish-
ment of a scientific institution in the Kalnyk region, which had practically no
specialists with higher education before the October Revolution, and the suc-
cesses of Kalnyk scientists in various fields of knowledge are vivid testinony
to the triumph of the Leninist nationality policy.

Hore than 150 persons took part in the work of the conference, including spe-
cialists from various social science fields whose fields of interests covered

the history, language, and culture of the peoples of the USSR and foreign
countries. They represented 39 cities from 11 Union and 17 autonomous republics,
including associates of academy and other scientific research institutes, repre-

sentatives of higher educational institutions. and scientific associates at
ethnographic and regional museums. Representatives of the Kaluykskaya Oblast
conudttee of the CPSU also took part in the work of the conference.

Seven reports were presented at the two plenary sessions of the conference, and
100 reports and communications were given at 15 section meetings.1

1 See "Vsesoyuznaya Konferentsiya 'Etnokul'turnyye Protsessy v Sovrenennon Mire'.
Hay, 1981 God. Kratkiye Tezisy Dokladov i Soobshcheniy" [The All-Union Confer-
ence on "Bthnocultursl Processes in the Contemporary World". May, 1981.

Short Abstracts of Reports and Communications], Blista, 1981.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l-SE ONLY

Academician Yu. V. Bromley of Moscow, director of the Institute of Ethnography
of the USSR Academy of Sciences, opened the conference, which began its work
in the meeting hall of the Supreme Soviet of the Kalmykskaya ASSR. He empha-

sized the timeliness of studying ethnocultural processes in the contemporary
world.

V. I. Nikulin (Blista), first secretary of the Kalmykskaya Oblast cormdttee of
the CPSU, gave an introductory talk to participants at the conference. He told
of the achievements of Kalmyk scientists and wished the participants success

in their work.

The first report presented at the plenary session was the report "Tasks of
Soviet Ethnographic Science in Light of the Resolutions of the 26th Congress of
the CPSU" by Yu. V. Bromley. Pointing to the considerable attention given to
problems of the development of science by the 26th CPSU Congress, the speaker
emphasized that some of the challenges advanced by the 26th CPSU Congress for
Soviet scientists are closely related to the prospects for development of
domestic ethnographic science. In connection with studying the peoples of the
USSR, Yu. V. Bromley noted first of all the timeliness of investigating
national processes in the USSR and studying the shaping and development of the
new historic community. the Soviet people, and cultural-domestic aspects of the
Soviet way of life. It is especially important here, the speaker noted, to
thoroughly study the ethnic and social aspects of nationality processes and to
study the ethnography of the cities more intensively. Yu. V. Bromley called at-
tention to the importance of studying the specific features of the ethnographic
development of groups of nonindigenous population living in an alien ethnic en-
vironment and investigating the paths of ethnic development of small peoples.
work on all of the issues, he stressed, becomes especially significant in con-

nection with the 60th anniversary of the formation of the USSR, which takes
place in 1982.

The report also mentioned the great practical significance of studying the family
as the most important element of society, as well as the need to investigate
ethnodemographic aspects of the reproduction of labor resources.

In light of the tasks advanced at the congress related to shaping the new type
of human being, the speaker said, it becomes very important to study and work
out the Soviet ritunl structure, which fulfills important ethnic functions and
demands consideration of ethnic traditions.

From the standpoint of timeliness and practical importance, investigation of the
primary trends in contemporary ethnic and cultural-domestic processes occurring
in foreign countries is particularly interesting. A special section was de-
voted to these problems at the conference.

In connection with the growing role of the religious factor in national libera-
tion movements and the life of certain developing countries in recent years. the

report pointed out the need for ethnographers to give greater attention to study-
ing world religions and their role under contemporary conditions.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The congress noted the timeliness of criticism of bourgeois ideas of social

development. Yu. V. Bronley observed that ethnographers should step up work
on topics linked to the problem of the ideological struggle and devote more
attention to exposing the theory and practice of conteworary racism and to

critical analysis of foreign ethnographic schools.

In conclusion the speaker enphasized that raising the theoretical level of re-
search, working out nethodological problems, and creative discussions on
timely problems of ethnography are essential conditions for the further develop-

ment of Soviet ethnographic science and successfully nesting the scientific
challenges outlined by the 26th Congress of the CPSU.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Sovetskaya stoografiya", 1981

11,176
CSO: 1800/206

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REIGN“.

50W DISCUSSES RSFSR SOCIO-ECONOHIC WEIDPHENT
Moscow ISIORIXA $881! in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 pp 3-25

[Article by H. s. Solomentsev, candidate member of the cm: cc Politburo, chairman
of the RSF‘SB Council of Ministers: "Socio-Econonic Development of the Russian Fe~
deration at the Present-Day Stage"/

[Text] The present-day stage-~the stage of developed socielialnis marked by the
further economic and social progress of all the fraternal republics within the body
of the great Soviet Union. including the Russian Federation. New, broad horizons
have been opened up for the republic by the decisions of the 26th party congress.
It was a very important political event in the life of the party and the Soviet
people, as well as in the international conunist Iovsnent. All the work of our
party's highest forum, the report of the general secretary of the CPSU CC. Comrade
L. I. Brezhnev. and the materials of the congress constitute a nodel of the crea-
tive Harxist-Leninist approach to the solution of world proolsns and the questions
of further improving a developed socialist society.

The working people of the Russian Federation, as well as all Soviet people. ardent-
ly support the Leninist course which was approved by the 26th party congress and
the fruitful. practical activity of the CPSU CC; they note with great satisfaction
the enormous mobilizing importance of L. I. Brenhnev's report--a document of great
historical inportance, a genuine manifesto of the struggle for peace and conmunism.
It demonstrated with exceptional clarity the path traveled by the party and the
country during the 1970's. it provided a profound, Leninistically exhaustive ana-
lysis of the present-day situation, and it disclosed the splendid prospects for in-
ninent accomplisments and measures to further inprove the nation's well-being.

The 26th CPSU Congress set great and responsible tasks for our country‘s working
people. This pertains to all the sectors of building communism and, above all, to
the economy, the nanagement of which is the core of all the activity of the party
and the state. The congress‘s decisions in the economic field are permeated with
the following humanistic idea: "Everything for nan, in the nane of man." The par-

ty thereby fimly continues to follow the course adopted by the 216th and 25th CPSU
Congresses.

The results of the development of the U$R's national economy during the 1970's
have convincingly affirmed the correctness of the party's scononic strategy. In

the 1970's the country moved substantially forward along all the lines of creating
the naterial and technical base of connunisn. There was a significant growth in
the national wealth. extensive growth was achieved in econonic. scientific, and
technical potential, the defensive capability of our Motherland was strengthened,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the further rise in the material and cultural level of the people's life has
been ensured.

The Soviet economy is developing as an integrated, national-econonic complex. An
integrated system of managatent on the principles of democratic centralism, hand-
ling the economy in accordance with a unified plan.» and an integrated. state sci-
entific and technical policy in conjunction with the local initiative of the masses
ensure the country as a whole and each Union republic in particular of a dynamic
and proportional growth. All this has been visibly confined in the example of the
Russian Federation. In 1980. as compared with 1970. the gross social product rose
by 65 5, the national income produced--by 63 5. industrial output--by 74 S. and
agricultural output (on a yearly average for 1971-4980. as a percentage of the pe-
riod 1961--19?0)--by 22 5. Freight turnover of all types of transport increased
by 68 5. There is a constant increase in fixed production capital: in industry it
increased by a factor of 2.2. in agriculture--by a factor of 2.3, and in construc-
tion--by a factor of 2.7.

The economies of the autonomous republics are developing at a rapid pace. Thus,
the volume of industrial production in 1980. as compared to 1970, increased in the
Udnurtskaya ASSR by a factor of 2.0. in the Chuvashskaya ASSR--by a factor of 2.3.
in the Mariyskaya and Tatarskaya ASSR'suby a. factor of 2.2. Industrial production
in the Hordovskaya and Bashkirskaya ASSR's has more than doubled.

The average annual gross production output in agriculture during the last 10 years
(1971-4980). as compared with the previous decade (1961-—19?0) has increased by
25 % in the autonomous republics. The greatest growth of agricultural output took
place in the Hariyskaya and Dagestanskaya ASSR's. where it increased by 168 S. in
the Kalmytskaya ASSR--by #3 1.. and the Kabardino-Balkarekaya ASSR -~by 39 S.

The growth of the Soviet Union's economic night enabled us to fulfill in the 1970's
a broad program of upsurge in the nation's well-being. Thus. in the Russian Fede-
ration over this 10-year period the average monthly monetary wages of workers and
office employees increased by #1 S and i." 1980 amounted to 178 rubles. Labor pay-
ments of kolkhos members during this period increased by 57 5. Payments and bene-
fits from public consumer funds, as calculated on a per capita basis. grew from 288
rubles in 1970 to #90 rubles in 1980, or by 70 5. Per capita real incones in-
creased by a factor of 1.5.

"Within the constellation of the republics enjoying equal rights," Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev noted. "the RSFSR occupies the foremost p1aoe--with regard to its popula-*
tion. territory, natural resources. economic , scientific and technical potential."
At the present time the population of the Russian Federation amounts to almost 1110
million persons (52.2 f of the country's total population), while its territory
comprises more than 17 million sq km (76.2 S of the country's entire territory).
The republic's natural resources are also enormous. Concentrated within the
depths of Russia are considerable reserves of petroleum and natural gas. also lo-
cated "here are almost all the country's nickel and apat te. reserves, three-fouths
of the known reserves of bauxite, hard coal [anthracite and brown coal ﬁignite],
as well as more than half of the resources of iron ores and potassium salts.

* L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom. Rechi i stat'i" [The Leninist Courses
Speeches and Articles], Vol 3, Moscow, 1972. P 381‘.

8
row OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reserves of fresh water, peat, hydroelectric power, and valuable lumber are
coimsal. The areas of fertile lands are considerable.

Now produced in the Russian Federation are the following: 62 S of all electric po‘
wer. 58 S of finished rolled steel, 75 x of steel pipes. 86 % of motor vehicles.

72 S of the fabrics; 91 S of the petroleum is extracted here (including gas conden-
sate). as well as 55 X of the coal. More than half of all the grain in the countr:
is grown on the fields of Russia. All this imposes a great responsibility on this
republic's working people to fulfill the plans for economic and social development
and to successfully implement the historic decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

I.

The Russian Federation has entered upon the 1980's with a mighty economic and sci-
entific-technical potential at its disposal. Its fuller and better utilization

will allow us to more successfully solve the diverse socio—economic problems which
confront the republic. This is why raising the effectiveness of social production

In his report to the 26th party congress Comrade L. I. Brezhnev emphasized the fol-
lowing: "Intensifying the economy and raising its effectiveness, if this formula
is translated into practical matters, consists primarily in the fact that the re-
sults of production should increase more rapidly than the expenditures on it. so
than“?! drawing comparitively less resources into production, we can achieve

The intensive nature of the economy's development manifests itself, above all, in
the accelerated growth of labor productivity. The importance of this factor in
the development of material production at the present time has abruptly increased
in connection with the decrease in the growth of labor resources. Hence the tasks
of improving their utilisation, of raising the effectiveness of labor, of intensi-
fying its mechanization and automation assume top-priority importance.

Sp.- eding up the growth of labor productivity at the present stage of building com—
munism emerges as the principal condition for an upsurge in the economy and the
well-being of the people. The universal raising of labor productivity is the main
factor in building a communist society. V. I. Lenin wrote as follows: "In the
final analysis. labor productivity is the most important and chief thing for the
victory of the new social system. Capitalism created a labor productivity which
was unknown under the serf~owning system. Capitalism can be finally overcome and
will be finally overcome by socialism creating a new and much higher degree of .La-
bor productivity."*"

** "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [ﬁaterials of the 26th CPSU Congress] . Moscow,
Politizdat. 1981, p 150.

*H v. 1. Lenin ""1253 [Complete Collected works], Vol 39, p 21.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the past 10 years the productivity of social labor in the republic has in-
creased by 4&8 5. including that in industry-~by 58 X. in construction--by #3 5.
and in agriculture (on a yearly average for the period 1971--1980 in 5 relative to
the years 1961--19?0)--Ly 1:8 5. The growth in labor productivity accounted for
80 76 of the increase in the national income. 86 5 of the industrial output. 76 S
of construction and installation operations. and the entire increase in the volune
of agricultural output. The labor of almost 20 million persons was scone-iced.

Nevertheless, enterprises and associations have at their disposal even greater re-
serves for increasing labor productivity. Moreover, the possibilities for its
growth, as distinct from the possibilities of increasing labor resources are 11-
mitless. as well as the unlimited improve-ant of equipment, technology. production
and labor organization. The republic has quite a few enterprises where this work

ing on a broad scale organisational-technical measures with respect to replacing
obsolete equipment. introducing progressive technology, and the brigade methods of
labor organization. the personnel requirements were reduced by 5,200 persons or by
16 %. The entire increase in output was obtained by loans of increasing labor pro-
ductivity. At the Moscow Association of the Hashim-Building Plant ineni S. Ord-
zhonikidze in 1980 an automated line system was made for processing cylinder
blocks for the KamAZ motor vehicles; it allowed them to increase labor productivity
13-fold and free up more than 1300 workers. Our machine builders. creating new
vehicles using progressive technology, should constantly bear in mind this chief
requirement--ensuring the greatest possible growth in labor productivity.

Effective utilization of labor resources assures the creation at each work place of
conditions for highly productive labor, when. with the increase of production out-
put, a stabilization of reduction in the number of workers is ensured. As a re- ~
sult of implementing scientific and technical progress. a considerable portion of
the labor resources is freed up, which is then used in other sectors and in the
non-production field. During the 10th Five-Year Plan alone in the republic’s in-
dustry by means of speeding up technical progress an amual savings of the labor of
350,000 persons was effected.

A major reserve for improving the utilization of labor resources is the reduction
of labor-consuming and manual processes. At many enterprises. however. there are
still significant outlays of manual labor for finishing operations, for heavy '
loading and unloading, transport. and warehouse operations. It is often the case
that even the plans do not provide for the mechanization and automation of termi-
nal operations. Thus. at the Tyrnyauzskiy Mining and Metallurgical Combine, due
to the use of underground dump-trucks. labor productivity in loading and transport
operations has been increased by a factor of 1.7.

Under present-day conditions the role played by social factors in the increase of
labor productivity has increased particularly: the level of personnel skills, the
stability of the production groups, the standards of production and labor. the ma—
terial and moral incentives for increasing labor efficiency and work qualit , im-
provenent of working conditions, etc. In accordance with the decisions of the
26th party congress and the decree of the CPSU cc and the USSR Council of Minis-
ters. entitled "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Eco-
nomic Mechanism on Increasing Production Efficiency and Hark Quality." dated 12

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

July 1979. a targeted, comprehensive program is being implemented for reducing ma-
nual labor. Also being implemented are measures aimed at strengthening the plan—
ned quality in the distribution and redistribution of manpower, at reducing tum-
over and stabilizing personnel, and at improving the controls over the effective
utilization of labor resources in the national economy.

Moreover, it is important to pay greater attention to the problems of retaining
young people on the production line. According to the data of sociological re-
search studies conducted by scientific institutions in Moscow and Siberia, the
turnover of this portion of personnel (under 30 years of age) at industrial enter-
prises and construction projects in the RSFSR is double the analogous indicator for
the older age groups, and it reaches 60 S of the total turnover. It has also been
established that the period of adjustment for young people on the production line
lasts for approadmately two or three years. ’Iherefore, enterprise managers, party,
Komsomol, and trade-union organizations must pay serious attention to working with
young people, especially those who are entering upon the production line for the
first time. For this purpose we must lake broad use of the positive experience of
the Volga Motor-vehicle Plant ineni 50 Years of the USSR and other leading enter—

prises with regard to vocational-skills advancement of young people on the produc-
tion line.

In order to increase the economic effectiveness of production and the further
growth of labor productivity, we must constantly improve its organization and wa-
ges. In the decisions of the 26th party congress and .the decree of the CPSU CC,
the USSR Council of Hinisters, and the AUCC'IU, entitled "0n Further Stengthening
Labor Discipline and Reducing Personnel Turnover in the National Economy," great
significance is attached to the progressive forms of organization and wages for
strengthening labor discipline and increasing labor productivity. An extensive in-
troduction of group forms of organization and wages, including the brigade-contract
system, comprehensive and nixed-type brigades with wages based on the end results
of a job, assembly-transport complexes, detachnents and brigades with period 1ca1
(non-order) wages, etc. will facilitate a more rational utilization of working
time, a strengthening of the material and moral self-interests of all members of a

brigade, and inculcate a sense of responsibility among the groups for the tasks
which have been entrusted to them.

Of great importance in the matter of the rational utilization of labor resources
and the upswing of labor productivity is the improvement of setting labor norms
and. its wages. However, a number of enterprises have been using outmoded norms
for production and evaluation for a long time, and they have been reducing the
differences in the wages of workers with various skills. All this has a negative
effect on the growth of skills and intensifies the personnel turnover. In accor-
dance with the requirements of the Basic Directions we must continue working to
improve the setting of labor norms, as well as the system of material incentives,
taking into consideration the specific contribution of every labor group and indi-
vidual worker to the results achieved. It is necessary to develop effective forms
of encouraging groups to fulfill and over-fulfill their plan tasks with less num-
bers of workers and office employees, utilizing savings in the wage fund to sti-
mulate the growth of labor productivity and improve work quality.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DH-K IAI. US}. ONLY

At the 26th CPSU Congress it was noted that our further forward progress will de-
pend to an increasing degree on the skillful and effective utilization of all the
resources we have-~fixed capital, fuel and raw materials, as well as the output of
fields and farms. Therefore, the complete utilization of the created production
potential, as emphasized in the Basic Directions, is the most important condition
for the successful fulfillment of the principal task of the 11th Five-Year Plan.

In proportion to the growth in the scale of production more and more importance at-
taches to improving the utilization of fixed production capital. For this purpose
it is extremely important to guarantee the most progressive correlation between
the renewal and the accumulation of fixed capital, as well as improvement in plan-
ning capital investments in existing production and new construction as an inte-
grated whole. This will facilitate speeding up the pace of retooling and moderni-
sing existing production lines and, on this basis, the achievement of a balance be-
tween the existing work places and those being created with labor resources, along
with the reduction of expenditures on developing production capacities, improving
their utilization. and increasing the yield on capital.

One of the key tasks of the 11th Five-Year Plan is raising the coefficient of re-
placing operational equipment. Testifying to the possibilities existing in this
regard is the experience of advanced enterprises. At the Second Moscow Hatch Plant
in 1980 production capacities were utilized by practically 100 5. and the coeffici-
ent of replacing operational equipment amount to 1.85, as a result of which the le-
vel of yield on capital was 20 % higher than the average for the watch industry.

At the Vichugskaya Garment Factory the coefficient of replacing operational equip—
ment increased to 1.9, and this facilitated a substantial increase in the yield on
capital as well as a growth in labor productivity.

Hany enterprises have significantly renewed their production potential. by means of
installing new and highly producti've equiment. However, this equiment is uti-
lized with insufficient effectiveness at some of them. Thus, the planned capacity
of a set of equipment for the moist-heat processing, finishing, and packing of
men's shirts is utilized at the Pobeda Vladimir Ganent Production Association by
100 %, while at the Sverdlovsk Ganent Production Association this figure is only
55 %. At the Korablinsk Silk Fabric Combine the productivity of the STB [shuttle-
less looms] is 51 5 higher than at the Kemerovo Silk Fabric Combine.

Increasing the effectiveness of the fixed capital, as was noted at the 26th party
congress, is directly linked with improving and strengthening the "upper storeys"
of the corresponding sectors: in metallurgy--the fourth reprocessing, in construc-
tion-—the finishing operations, in light industry--the culminating production.
Thus, the rate of replacing the dyeing and finishing types of equipment in the tex-
tile industry is 2--3 times lower than for other types of equipment, and this has

a negative effect on the quality of output produced as well as production
efficiency.

The Russian Federation possesses extremely abundant material and raw-material re-
sources, the total volume of minerals being extracted is constantly growing, and
the production volumes of metals, cement, and other materials have increased. In
order to better provide for the national economy's requirements for raw-material,
fuel, and energy resources, we must go into the regions of the North and East
which are sparsely inhabited and difficult to reach. All this requires that

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particular attention he paid to the economical and rational utilization of raw-mate-
rial, fuel, and energy resources. On this level a great deal has been accomplished
in the republic. During the period of the 10th Five-Year Plan alone in the RSFSR's
national economy, by means of improving technology and equipment, using progressive
types of materials, lowering the specific norms for the expenditure of raw materials
other materials, fuel, and energy resources, and curtailing their losses, savings
were effected of h.2 million t of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, 2.5 million t of
gasoline and diesel fuel, 2h million t of boiler~furnace fuel, “2 billion kH-hrs of
electric power, h.? million cu. m of lumber. and 2.5 million t of cement. The total

savings in raw materials, fuel, energy, and other objects of labor amounted to 10
billion rubles.

Nevertheless. as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev pointed out at the 26th party congress. our
economy is still expending more raw material and energy per unit of national income
than the best world indicators. Therefore, possibilities do exist for satisfying

the requirements of the national economy with a relative reduction in the volume of

materials. This may be achieved by means of enriching and increasing the concentra-
tion of the raw materials being extracted, by making their processing more thorough,
by the comprehensive utilization of all useful components, by means of raising the
quality of the materials and reducing their specific expenditure. improving machine
design, and utilizing cheaper materials.

sources at enterprises where obsolete technology is in use and where physically
worn~out equipment is being utilized. At individual plants an over-expenditure of
rolled ferrous metals is allowed because of the fact that in forging production a
large portion of the items being made by the forge hammurs have a great possibility
for mechanical processing. Hence at such enterprises we must intensify the moderni—
zation of production, providing genuine savings in raw materials, other materials,
and energy, directing technical progress at ensuring resource-conserving, economi-
cal growth.

be ensured by means of improving the structure of the fuel-energy balance and by in-
creasing the scope of utilizing renewable energy sources (hydro, solar, wind, geo—

Scientific and technical progress is the basis for the growth of production, labor
productivity, quality of output being produced, reducing material consumption, and
other indicators. Moreover, its acceleration depends in large measure on the use
of the mighty scientific and technical potential which has been created in this re-
public. The scientific-research organizations and major territorial scientific com-
plexes located within the RSFSR employ approximately 70 S of all the country's sci-
entists; they carry out approximately two-thirds of the basic and applied research
and experimental~design work. In the RSFSR's industry three-fourths of all the
funds laid out for developing science and technology have been directed at introduc-
ing progressive technology, mechanization and automation of production. The annual
economic effect from promulgating these measures has increased from 1.? billion ru-
bles in 1970 to 2.9 billion rubles in 1980. Every year sees the creation of 2,000--
2,500 new types of machines, equipment, apparatus, instruments, and means of

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FF“ 1“. USE ONLY

automation. At the same time about a thousand types of machines, equipment, instru-
ments and other items of obsolete design are taken out of production every year.

with the introduction of new equipment and technology into production the technical
extent of equipment on the production line has increased. At the beginning of 1981
the republic's industry had 53.000 comprehensively mechanized and automated work-
shops, sections, and production lines. as well as 102,000 mechanized assembly- and
automated lines. In 1980, as compared with 1970. the number of comprehensively
mechanized and automated workshops. sections, and production lines grew by a fac-
tor of 2.1 and automated lines--by a factor of 1.8.

Technical progress is inextricably tied up with improvement in output quality, with
the renewal of the assortment and the production of new and more improved items. At
the beginning of 1981 more than ‘$8,000 items had earned the State Badge of Quality
in the RSFSR's industry. The production of such output grew during the years of
the 10th Five-Year Plan by a factor of 3.1. There was an increase in the reliabili-
ty of machines and equipment, and a considerable expansion occurred in the produc-
tion of new output. Thus. at enterprises of the Ministry of Instrument Making. Au-
tomation Equipment, and Control Systems. the Ministry of Power Machine Building.

and the Ministry of tH Machine Tool and Tool Building Industry located on the ter-
ritory of the RSFSR. output developed during the 10th Five-Year Plan amounts to 155--
158 %, while in that of the Ministry of Chaical and Petroleum Machine Building the
corresponding figure is more than half. There has been a speed-up in the renewal

of output at enterprises turning out goods for the people. For example, in the
light and textile industry the proportion of newly developed output in 1980 amount-
ed to 35 S. as contrasted with 21} S in 1971. Included no the newly developed
output were items of improved quality (with an index of "N" amounting to 26 73.

Nevertheless, science could facilitate the development of the republic's economy to
a greater degree. In order to do this. it is important to improve its connections
with the production line, to sharply reduce the time periods required for implement-
ing scientific developments, make more extensive use of such organizational forms
as scientific-production associations allowing a 2--3-fold reduction in the time pe-
riods required for creating new equipment, substantially raise the quality and im-
prove the technical-economic indicators of the output being produced. Great possi-
bilities are opening up in connection with the extensive introduction into practice
of planning program-targeted methods which will allow us to conduct an integrated
scientific and technical policy. as well as to combine and concentrate the resour—

ces and efforts of scientific-research, planning and design. and production
organizations.

The importance of scientific and technical progress will grow even more during the
11th Five-Year Plan in connection with the great tasks of developing material pro-
duction and the non-production sphere. the accelerated growth of the economic po-
tential of the republic's eastern regions, along with the necessity for the econo-
mical utilization of material. labor. and financial resources.

In the decree adopted in 1979 by the CPSU CC and the USSR Council of Ministers on
improving the economic mechanism considerable space is devoted to the questions of

improving the planning and strengthening the influence of economic levers and in-
centives on raising the effectiveness of production and work quality. At the

1’:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm Ul-l-‘IHAI. USE ONLY

present time the organizational and methodological work has been basically com-
pleted. and the main task consists in activating the introduction of the measures

tional economy and raise the level of administration. The transition is being made
to a two- and three-unit system of administration. based on the creation of indust-
rial and production associations. Functioning at the present time in the republic
are more than 2,000 production and scientific-production associations. The rights
and functions of ministries have been expanded. Practice has shown. however. that
sufficient work is not being carried out in all sectors on completing the formation
of production associations as the cost-accounting units of industry. Hence, the
Basic Directions for the 11th Five-Year Plan have set forth the task of improving
the organizational structures and increasing the operational efficiency of the
production and industrial associations. based on further concentration. specializa—
tion, and cooperation. In construction we need to complete the development and im~
plementation of general schemes of administration. develop a network of production
construction and installation associations comprehensively carrying out construc-
tion and putting into operation capacities and projects. In agriculture we must
continue working to improve state-cooperative. interbkolkhoz. inter-sovkhoz. and
kolkhoz-sovkhoz associations and agro-industrial organizations.

II.

The emphasis on the intensive factors of economic growth allowed great successes to
be achieved in the 1970's in developing the sectors of material production. During
the decade Just past there was a considerable growth in the republic's economic
might. Some 1,650 major state enterprises were put into operation as well as a
large number of workshops and sections. The volume of industrial output during
this period increased by 7h.2 5. Sectors determining technical progress in the na-
tional economy developed at an outstripping pace: the production of electrical en-
gineering output increased by a factor of 1.8, that of the chemical and petro-
chemical industry by a factor of 2.1, machine building and metal-working--by a fac-
tor of 2.5.

Further development was achieved in the production of the most important types of
output of the basic sectors of indust . The extraction of petroleum on the terri-
tory of the RSFSR during the last 10 years has increased by a factor of 1.9, that
of natural gas--by a factor of 2.1. that of mineral fertilizers--1.8. including
the phosphorus fertilizers which are in the shortest supply-~2.h. Calcined and
caustic soda were produced at a rate of almost 1.5 times as much, as well as che-
mical fibers and threads; plastics and synthetic resins were increased by a fac-
tor of 1.9. There has been a considerable increase in the production of motor
vehicles. electric-power and electrical-engineering equipment,'instruments, means

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UPI-ItlAl. U30. "Nb!

of automation and computer equip-ant, “tel-cutting machine tools with numerical
program control, tractors and far- vehicles.

In accordance with the party's social progra- sectors turning out consumer goods
have undergone particularly rapid development in this republic. The production of
consumer goods grew by 58 5 during the years 1971--1980. There was a signifith
increase in the production of fabrics, gar-eats, hosiery and knitted-wear itens,
meat. sausage products, whole-silk output. canned goods, confectionery items, etc.
A substantial contribution to satisfying the public'e demand for goods is being
lads by heavy industry, which accounts for three-fourths of the everyday items of
econonic necessity being produced in the republic. During the last decade alone
production of these itens increased by a factor of 2.2.

An important characteristic of the present-day stage of industry is the extensive
utilization in production of the achievements of the scientific and technical revo-
lution. There has been a great deal of expansion in the use of highly mechanized
complexes for extracting coal and other solid minerals, including heavy-duty equip-
ment for working deposits by the open-pit ne . In electric-power engineering,
ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy, chemical, petro-chenical, and other branches of
industry a significant increase in the unit capacity of machines and units has been
achieved; this ensures a considerable increase in labor productivity, as well as a
reduction in specific capital investments and Istal consumption. Thus, in order to
produce amonia. units 541th a capacity of £60,000 t per year have been and are be.-
ing put into operation. and to produce sulfuric acid-wunits with a capacity of
360-450,000 t per year. These units allow us, in comparison with those now in
operation. to increase labor productivity by a factor of n.5, to significantly 10-
wer production costs and specific capital investments. -

In the light and textile industries re-tooling of enterprises is being carried out
on the basis of introducing highly productive, pneumo-Iechanical, rotary and self-
twisting spinning nachines. shuttle-less looms, comprehensively mechanized and au-
tomated lines, as well as continuous technological processes for finishing fabrics
and knitted goods and for laking non-woven naterials.

A great deal of work has been conducted on the further geological study of inter-
nal resources, especially in the northern and northeastern regions. A significant
increase has been ensured in the known reserves of practically all types of mine.—
rals. and a ranarkable contribution has been lads to strengthening the country's
mineral and raw-material base.

The 1970's witnessed the consistent implementation of the program planned by the
party for creating large-scale territorial-production complexes, prinarily in Si-
beria and the Far East. These complexes organically combine the tasks of ratio-
nally distributing production forces, the lost feasible utilization of natural re-
sources, and the creation of favorable conditions for people's work and everyday
life. During the 10th Five-Year Plan the territorial complexes provided all the

Also successfully carried out were the decisions of the thh and 25th party con~
gresses on forming in western Siberia an extranely large oil and gas complex--the
country's principal base for extracting oil and gas. During the decade just past

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plex, based on the coals of the Kansko-Achinsk Basin. Development is continuirg on
the Sayansk Territorial-Production Complex, and construction is nearing completion
on the Ust'-Ilinsk Lunbering Couplex. work has begun on developing the natural re-
sources in the zone of the Baykal-Anur Railroad Main Line, including the Yuzhno-
Yakutsk Coal Basin.

gineering, especially in the republic's European section. Capacities will be intro-
duced at the Balakovskaya. Kalininskaya, Kurs‘aya, and Snolenskaya AES's, while con-
struction will begin on stations operating on nuclear ﬂzel for supplying heat. The

order to maximize savings on metal within the national economy. It is planned to
develop the out 1. of approximately 500 new shapes of rolled metal and more than
200 new types brands] of steels and alloys. The production structure of steel
will be changed. The proportion of its smelting in converters will grow from 31 to
36 S. and in electric furnaces-~from 10 to 15 %.

try's needs. In tho lumbering, pulp-and-paper, and wood~processing industry provi-
sions have been made for the intensive development of production involving the che-
mical and mechanical processing of wood, as well as increasing the utilization of
deciduous and low-grade coniferous timber and waste products for producing finished
goods.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The volume of output of machine building and metalworking will grow by 37 5 during
the 11th Five-Year Plan. There will be a substantial increase in the production of
electrical engineering equipment, including that for nuclear electric power sta-
tions, equipment for metallurgical. chemical and petrochemical. and mining sectors
of industry, hidily productive machinery for the over-all mechanization of opera-
tions in construction, lumbering, and the peat industry, the building-materials in-
dustry, and municipal services. In order to cut down on the use of manual labor,
provisions are being made to develop new capacities for manufacturing means of me-
chanizing hoisting-and-transport, loading-and-unloading [freight-handling]. and
warehouse operations.

There will be an increase by a factor of 1.3--1.6 in the productivity of metal--
cutting machine tools, forging and pressing machinery, casting and wood-processing
equipment. The production of sets of metal-working equiplent supplied with automa-
tic manipulators will be developed at an accelerated pace, and there will be a
significant increase in the output of metal-working machine tools with numerical-
ly programmed control.

Enterprises engaged in making farm machinery must set up the production of more pro-
ductive grain-harvesting combines, including those with increased vehicle mobility
for the needs of the RSFSR's Non—Chernozem Zone. The manufacture of many types of

new hachirnery and equipment is being organized for sheep raising. livestock breed-
ing, and fodder production.

The decisions of the 26th party congress empimsize particularly that increasing the
production and improving the quality of goods for the population must be considered
a. top-priority task for all sectors of industry, enterprises, and organizations, as
well as an object for particular care by party. Soviet. economic organs, and trade
unions. In connection with this, provisions have been made in the 11th Five-Year

Plan for a more rapid pace in the growth of output by the industrial sectors of
Group B, as compared with those of Group A.

Particular attention will be paid to increasing the output of high-quality goods
which are in greater dazand, primarily various types of cotton. woolen, and silk
fabrics and the clothing made out of them. underwear, and outer knitted-wear, ho-
siery items, footwear, fur headgear, and children's items.

The volume of output by the food~industry sectors is intended to be increased by a
factor of more than 1.2. Emphasis will be laid on speeding up the output of semi-
finished goods, culinary items, potato products, fresh-frozen fruits and vegeta'»
bles, children's and dietetic products. Increasing the output of food. meat, and
dairy products must be achieved by means of considerably increasing comprehensive

processing and improving the use of agricultural raw materials. the introduction of
wastelcss technology, and the reduction of the expenditure of food products for
technical purposes.

A substantial reserve for increasing nutritional products, moreover, those of a
high quality, is further development of the fishing industry. In accordance with

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

lining production wastes and local mineral, vegetable, and livestock material. There
are possibilities for this in every oblast, kray, and autonomous republic, but they
are not being used to a sufficient extent. Taking into consideration the importance

Ministers of the autonomous republics and the ispolkoms of the local Councils with
regard to producing consumer goods, building materials, and other items made of lo-
cal raw materials and production waste products, bringing the volume of their out-
put up to 750 million rubles by the end of the five-year plan.

He must also significantly increase the output of everyday and household goods in the
heavy industrial sectors. The reserves here are peat. At a number of heavy indus-

62 S, as set by the plan. Nor is sufficient attention being paid to the manufacture
of complex househon equipment in greater demand now, equipment being manufactured
at a number of large-scale, technically well-outfitted plants.

its development. The intensification of agricultural production is being carried
out consistently, and its material-technical base is being strengthened. During
the 1970's some 1151 billion rubles of capital investments were allocated for these
purposes, or 2.h times more than in the previous decade. Fixed production capital
in agriculture during 1980. as compared with 1970, had more than doubled and now
amounts to 109 billion rubles. Land reclamation is being conducted on a large-
scale basis, every year sees an increase in the use of mineral fertilizers along
with plant chemical protection materials; agro-industrial integration is being de-
veloped, forms of inter-farm cooperation are being perfected, and production spo-
cialization is being made more thorough.

This has allowed us to increase labor productivity on kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and.
with a reduction in the number of workers, to steadily increase the production out-
put of agriculture and livestock breeding. During the years 19?1--1980 the average
annual production of grain in the republic amounted to 108.1: million t, and it grew
in comparison with its average annual production in 1961--1970 by 22 S. The res-
pective figures for vegetables were 10.3 million t and 1? S, for meat-~11 million t

and 30 7%, for milk-1&7 million t and 18 :6, for eggs--33 billion units and 79 76. and
for wool-~220,000 t and 18 %.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR (ll-1"“ ‘Ml. USE ONLY

There are often droughts on considerable amounts of the republic's territory, while
in other regions agriculture frequently suffers from excessive moisture. The years

1972. 1975. 1979. and 1980 were especially unfavorable for rural areas.

However, due to the self-sacrificing labor of farm workers, the constant attention
of the CPSU CC and the Soviet government, as well as the great organisational work
of the local party. soviet. and economic organs. the difficulties which arose in
the republic in connection with the unfavorable weather conditions were basically
overcome. During the 10th Five-Year Plan 570 million t of grain were produced,
which was 55 million t more than in the 9th Five-Year Plan. Such a quantity of
grain was grown for the first time throughout the entire history of agriculture in
Russia. Poured into the state granaries were 13 billion poods of grain. which

sured growth in the production and requisition of sugar beets, meat, milk, and other
products.

The 10th Five-Year Plan constituted a beginning for the implalentation of the com-
prehensive progm for the upsurge in the agriculture of the RSFSR's Non-Chernosea
Zone which was adopted upon 1.. I. Breshnev's initiative. Carried out during these
years was a considerable amount of work on strengthening the material and technical
base of kolkhozes and sovkhozes, increasing soil fertility. developing enterprises
of the construction industry and building-materials industry, creating a network of
large-scale, well-equipped. land-reclamation organizations. training skilled staffs
of rural builders. laid-reclamation specialists. and machine operators. as well as
solving social problems. All this has facilitated the increase of labor activity
on the part of workers and kolkhoz sombers. specialists, and fan managers in the
struggle to implement as rapidly as possible the plans outlined by the party. As a
result, the zone's kolkhozes and sovkhozes have achieved an increase in the produc-
tion of grain, meat, milk, and eggs. ' .

The Basic Directions of economic and social development, as adopted by the 26th
party congress, provide for an increase within the republic in the volume of gross
agricultural output during the 11th Five-Year Plan by 12--1h S, a guaranteed aver-
age annual grain production amounting to 13b~-136 million 1:, sugar beets to 33-61;
sillion t, grapes to at least 1 million t. meat (in slaughtered weight) to 8.h--8.7
million t, milk to 50--52 million t, wool to 235--2h0,000 t, a 1.3-fold increase in
the production of sunflower seeds, a 1.2-fold increase in vegetables. and a 10--12
% increase in potatoes. Some 1, 550,000--1,650.000 hectares of irrigated lands will
be put into operation, and 1,?20.000--1.820,000 hectares of swampy and excessively
moist lands will be dried out.

In the R‘SF'SH'S Non-Chemozem Zone work will be continued on implementing the com-
prehensive program for converting it into a region of highly productive agriculture
and livestock breeding and for developing the sectors of industry connected with
them. An outstripping pace will be used here to carry out the construction of
apartment houses. roads, socio-cultural, muncipal. and everyday types of projects.

A decree was adopted by the CPSU CC and the USSR Council of Hinisters on further

developing the agriculture of the RSFSR's Central-Chernozem region; measures have
been worked out to strengthen the material and technical base and improve the ef-
ficiency of agricultural production in the Far East, in Siberia. and in Kurganska-
ya. Oblast. The fulfillment of the measures which have been outlined will allow us

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to significantly increase the pmduction of agricultural and livestock-breeding
products in these regions, as well as to solve many social and economic problems
in rural areas.

One urgent problea remains that of increasing gain production. The decisions of
the July 1978 Plenum of the CPSU cc set the task of bringing the average harvest
yield of gain crops up to 20 quintals per hectare and to obtain at least one ton
of gain per capita. If we take into account the fact that the average harvest
yield for gains on the BSF‘SR's kolkhozes and sovkhozes during the 10th Five-Year
Plan was 1h.8 quintals per hectare, then in order to achieve the levels outlined
above, the agriculturalists of the Russian Federation must conduct a great deal of
work on introducing a scientifically based agricultural systea into every kolkhoz
and sovkhoz, increase soil fertility, improve the seed production of gain crops,
perfect the structure of sown areas, and introduce the achievements of science and
advanced experience. Particular emphasis must be laid on increasing the production
of fodder gain. the proportion of which within the total grain harvest should be
significantly raised. Many kolkhozes and sovkhoses have at their disposal geat
possibilities for expanding the sown areas of seed corn, as well as those of soy-
beans, peas, barley, and oats. Taking into consideration the natural and economic
conditions, we must make the transition more actively to a rational structure of
the gain sector.

Livestock breeding is now the shock front in the rural areas. During the 1980's
much remains to be done in this republic to increase the production of meat and
milk. since the demand for them is still not being fully met. In order to do this,
large-scale measures will be carried out on intensifying the raising and feeding
of large-horned cattle, as well as the develop-ant of pig farming and poultry
raising for meat. Industrial-type. specialized enterprises engaged in producing
meat will also have their capacities developed further. Along with this, we must
make better use of the possibilities of producing beef and pork on non-specialized
fans, as well as on the private fans of citizens, and to increase our attention
on the development of sheep breeding. horse breeding. and other branches of aniaal
husbandry. we must achieve a significant increase in the production output from
each head of cattle, raise the level of breeding work. improve the herd reproduc-
tivity along with the maintenance of the proper number of head.

An urgent task and extremely important prerequisite for the successful developnent
of animal husbandry was the radical improvement of fodder production and meeting
the needs for fodder of publicly run animal husbandry as well as the cattle and
.poultry located on citizens' private property. At the recently held expanded ses-
sion of the RSF‘SR Council of Ministers a comprehensive program for creating in the
republic a reliable and balanced fodder base for animal husbandry was examined and
approved. During the next few years it is intended to bring the production of
high-grade and diverse fodders up to an amount of at least 35-40 quintals of fod-
der units per conventional head of livestock. Measures were specified for the eco-
nomical expenditure of gain on feeding livestock by means of increasing the pro—
duction of high-quality coarse and succulent fodders, as well as expanding the sow-
ing areas of high-protein fodder crops and feeds. By 1985 it is intended that all
grain fodders will be utilized in the form of high-grade. balanced mixed feeds.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K'Ml. “SI-I ONLY

As L. I. Brezhnev emphasized at the 26th CPSU Congress, in the matter of increasing
the production output of animal husbandry, it is necessary to manifest the maximum
persistence. initiative, and flexibility. to utilize all reserves and possibilities
in order not only to fulfill but to substantially over-mlfill the intended plans.
The achievement of this goal is possible by means of further intensifying agricula

ture and animal husbandry, as well as upgrading the general standards of agricultu-
ral production.

The implementation of the complex of measures for speeding up the upsurge of the
RSFSR's agriculture at present depends to a large extent on the presence in each
kolkhoz and sovkhoa of permanent staffs. In turn, the creation of stable production
groupsjs linked in the most direct manner with how social problems are solved in ru-
ral areas; In order to do this, it is already necessary in the current five-year
plan to carry out the construction of well-laid-out housing. children's and other so-
cial-type institutions in such amounts as to basically ensure every kolkhoa and sov-
khoz with skilled personnel.

For the purpose of performing this task as rapidly as possible, the Russian Federa-
tion's agriculture has had allocated to it the appropriate capital investments and
material-technical resources. It is important to utilize them skillfully and with
maximum rationality. as well as to seek out additional means by using local possibi-
lities and sources. As the 26th CPSU Congress emphasized, the outstanding characte-
ristic of the party's agrarian policy during the 1980's is the fact that the center
of gravity is now shifting to the yield from capital investments, the growth of agri-

culture‘s productivity, to deepening and perfecting its links with all the branches
of the agro-industrial complex.

At the present time the preparation of a foodstuff program in actively underway in
the republic; it is being worked out in the country in accordance with the decisions
of the 26th party congress. In order to carry out this program. party, soviet, and
economic organs of the republic will have to conduct a great deal of work on improv-
ing planning, increasing the output of agricultural produce, improving its storage,
transport, processing, and bringing it to consumers.

Ensuring the harmonious develorment of all sectors of the national economy and more
fully satisfying the needs of the population require the improvement and develoment
of transport and communications. A technically well-supplied transport system with
a high capacity has now been formed within the republic. The leading place in it is
occupied by railroad transport, which accounts for more than 1/2 of the freight turn-
over. At the beginning of 1981 the o erational lengths of the railroads exceeded
82,000 km. Construction of the BAH aykal-Amur Mainline] has been unleashed on a
wide front. Large-scale operations have been conducted on electrifying the rail-
roads. The locomotive pool has been supplemented by electric and diesel locomo-
tives with increased capacities. During the ten-year period just past the freight
turnover of railroad transport increased by 39 %. There has been a considerable in-
crease in the volumes of the hauls of very important freight for the national econo-
my, particularly mineral fertilizers, ferrous metals, and ores.

Nevertheless, railroad transport still continues to operate under a strain. Certain
enterprises and associations, ministries, and departments are allowing extensive
idle times for cars being loaded and unloaded. In the 11th Five-Year Plan a broad-
based program has been outlined for improving the work and comprehensive develop-
ment of this type of transport.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

River transport occupies an important place in the transportation system. During the
decade Just past the river fleet was supplanented by new diesel-powered cargo ships
and passenger vessels. New ports and dry-docks were built and put into operation.

the Far North. During the 11th Five-Year Plan the cargo turnover of river trans-
port will be increased by 19--20 5. including that in the ports of Siberia and the
Far East--by 28--30 S. The material and technical base of the transport enterpri—
ses will be substantially strengthened. He must build and modernise 1h large ports,
19 very important dry-dock and ship-building enterprises. He must also carry out a
great deal of work on reducing non-productive idle times of the transport fleet and
empty runs. increase its operating efficiency, develOp such forms of transporting
cargoes as "river-sea," improving the inter-action between river and rail transport.
further developing river transport in Eastern Siberia and the guaranteeing of hauls
for this important region of the country.

General-purpose motor-vehicle transport was further developed in the 9th and 10th
Five-Year Plans. According to the RSFSR Ministry of Motor Transport. the volume of
freight turnover and passenger turnover increased by a factor of 2.2 during this pe-
riod. Automotive enterprises have been supplemented with improved and reliable mo-
tor vehicles. by heavy-duty KamAZ truck trains and comfortable buses. A large
number of motor—vehicle transport and motor-vehicle repair enterprises have been
built and/or modernized. along with passenger-car service stations and other faci-
lities. The proportion of centralized hauls exceeded 80 %. freight—turnover in in-
ter-urban transport increased by a factor of 3.15, while the volume of containerized
freight hauls grew almost 20-fold.

Inter-actions are improving between motor-vehicle transport, railroad, and other
forms of transport. In order to make more effective use of automotive transport,
free enterprises and organizations from functions which do not pertain to them, to
free a specific number of drivers, freight-handlers. and expeditors of industrial
enterprises, beginning in 1980 general-purpose auto'aotive transport has been en-
trusted with the transport-expedi ti ng servicing of the republic's national econo-
my. At the present time shipping out and shipping in freight by general-pur-
pose motor-vehicle transport with transport-expediting service is being carried out
from more than 1100 railroad stations and ports. Every year there is an increase in
the volume of freight hauls being switched over from railroad transport. In 1980
some 14.? million tons of such freight were switched over.

In the 11th Five-Year Plan provisions have been made to increase the freight tum-
over of the republic’s motor-vehicle transport by more than #2 % and passenger
turnover by 18 x. In order to successfully carry out these assignments, we must
substantially increase the effectiveness of using motor-vehicle transport. More-
over. it is important to ensure the further development of centralized, inter-ur~
ban. and containorized freight hauls. to make more intensive use of truck-trailer
trains, and to increase the concentration of transport funds in large-scale motor-
vehicle enterprises.

The rapid growth of motor-vehicle hauls has been facilitated by a great deal of
work on building, modernizing. and maintaining highways. New lain highways have
appeared on the nap of Russia. The length of roads with hard-paved surfaces in-
creased by 101,000 km; more than 86 S of the rayon centers today are connected by
well-laid-out roads with the oblast centers, and 7‘} f of the kolkhos and sovkhoz
centers are connected by roads with the rayon centers.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0’0“ "0"“ U‘l. 03". UNIJ

However, the development of the highway network still lags behind the requirements
of the national economy. The 11th Five-Year Plan has provided for the building of
a large number of general-purpose roads, and by 1990--the coapletion basically of
the connection of the central areas of kolkhozes and sovkhoses with the rayon cen-
ters. Serious attention will be paid to improving the quality of the roads and in-
proving the service of everybody using them. For this purpose it is intended to

build roadside hotels, camp-sites, garages, commercial and public-dining
enterprises.

The role played by air transport in the development of the Russian Federation's

economy has grown significantly. Aviation's contribution has been substantial to
the further upswing of agriculture, to the exploration and exploitation of natural
resources, and to the development of regions difficult of access. During the 11th

will be continued, especially in the regions of the North, Siberia. and the Far
East. Passenger turnover will be increased by a factor of approxinately 1.3.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan we must significantly improve service to the popula—
tion in motor-vehicle, river, and air transport. It is necessary, as L. I. Brezh-
nev emphasized at the 26th party congress, to reduce schedule violations to a mini-
mum, to make waiting-rooms and airports more comfortable, and to raise the over—all
standards of service.

During the 10 years just past almost 5,000 km of main petroleum pipelines were '
built, and this has allowed us to reduce the proportion of patrolman hauls by rail-
road from 78 to 68 S. In the 11th Five-Year Plan it is intended to construct

38, 500 km of main petroleum pipelines and secondary pipelines from them to petrole-
um bases, and this will make it possible to free up about 10.000 railroad tank-cars.
Such a progressive type of transport as pipeline, containerised pneumatic transport
will be further developed.

Enormous changes have occurred within the republic in providing the national econo-
my and the population with all the means of communications. During the 11th Five-
Year Plan it is intended to eamark 2 billion rubles of capital investaents into

the further development of this sector. which will allow us to increase the length
of inter-urban telephone channels by a factor of approximately 1.6, the number of

telephones in cities and rural localities by a factor of 1.3, and to raise the le-
vel of the mechanization and automation of production processes at postal—communi-

cations enterprises. Color television and stereophonic radio broadcasting will be
developed further.

Implementation of an extensive program of comprehensive economic and social develop-
ment in the republic has brought about a high rate of capital construction. Its vo-
lumes are increasing every year. During the period 19?1-—1980 capital investments
in the RSFSR's national economy from all sources of financing amounted to approxi-
mately 690 billion rubles and were almost doubling. During the 10th Five—Year Plan
alone electric-power capacities increased by 35 million kH. Construction was com-
pleted on the Ust'-Ilimskaya and Zeyskaya 683's and the Reftinskaya GEES, new units
were put into Operation at the Sayano-Shushenskaya 688, the Leningradskaya and Kur.
skaya AES's, and the Kostmmskaya and Stampol'skaya GRES's. Gas-reprocessing
plants came on line in Western Siberia, and this ensured a more complete utiliza-
tion of secondary petroleum gas. Capacities were created for producing 20 million

2h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tons of mineral fertilizers per year. New plants. workshops, and production lines
were put into operation at the Hinusinskiy Electrical Engineering Complex, the To-
1'yattinskiy NitrOgen Plant. the Kamskiy Complex of Plants for producing heavy-duty
trucks, the Atommash Volga-Don Plant, and the Abakanskiy Railroad-Car Construction
Plant. Also put into operation were livestock-breeding areas with places for 29

million ‘livestock, : poultry plants for 29 million laying-hens and 250 broilers a

year, as well as a considerable number of granaries, hothouses, and other
facilities.

A great number of social and cultural-everyday projects have been built. During
the last 10 years the following were put into operation in the republic by means of
all sources of financing: apartment houses with a total space of 600 million sq m,
general-education schools-~with places for 6.8 million pupils, pro-school institu-
tions--with 2.8 Iillion places, and hospitals--with 366,000 beds. During the pee"
riod 19?1--1980 almost as many pre-school institutions and hospitals were built as
during the first seven five-year plans.

must ensure the increase of fixed capital in all sectors of the national economy.
build a large amount of housing. as well as projects for communal-everyday and so-
cio-cultural purposes. For the development of agriculture with regard to the en-
tire complex of operations more than 90 billion rubles of state capital investments
and kolkhoz funds will be allocated, of which more than 39 billion rubles will go
into the further transformation of the RSFSR's Non-Chernozem Zone. It is intended
to spend major funds for building apartment houses, children's institutions,

schools. health-care facilities. and community-service enterprises in rural
localities.

Increasing the effectiveness of funds being invested is now one of the most im-
portant tasks for all the construction organizations of the republic, as well as
for the clients, manufacturers, and suppliers of equipment. A decisive role in the
growth of production capacities and in improving the technical-economic indicators
must be played by the modernization and re-tooling of existing enterprises. Ad-
vanced enterprises have achieved great results along these lines. For example, 39

tor of 1.7 and that of high-quality dishware made of crystal by almost double. The
total volume of output increased by 86 %, and the entire growth was obtained by
means of increasing labor productivity.

More rational utilization of capital investments will allow us to reduce the amount
of unfinished construction. In 1980 its further growth was halted, and in a number
of ministries a reduction in the scope of "non-completions" was achieved. However,
the proportion of unfinished construction projects remains still great. During the
next few years it is planned to bring these in line with established norms. In or-
der to do this, the plans provide for a reduction in the number of enterprises

and projects under construction at the same time, as well as the maximum concentra-
tion of resources on the most important construction projects underway.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increasing scope of capital construction in the republic. the need for turning
it onto the intensive path of development.require increased attention to be paid to
the development of the branch itself. The construction industry now has at its dis-
posal large-scale construction and installation organizations, a large pool of con-
struction equipment. and skilled personnel. The capacities of enterprises for turn-
ing out precast reinforced concrete structural components today amount to 75 million
cu m a year, and there are 320 home-building combines operating on the republic's
territory. The proportion of completely pro-fabricated construction comprises 39 S

of the total amount of construction and installation work and 56 S of that in home
building.

Major funds are being invested in the development of the construction industry's ma-
terial-technical base during the 11th Five-Year Plan. Their amount solely for such
contracting ministries as the USSR Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Building,
the USSR Ministry of Industrial Construction, the USSR Ministry of Construction, the
USSR Ministry of Construction in the Far East a Transbaykal Regions, and the USSR
Ministry of Rural Construction on the republic's territory consists of more than

6 billion rubles. By the end of the new five-year plan the production of non—ore
materials is supposed to reach 620 million cu m; as compared with 1980, its growth
amounts to 9.5 5, including an 11.9 5 increase in the production of crushed rock

and gravel.

The construction program of the five-year plan is strained. The success of its im-
plementation will be determined by the precise. smooth operation of all units of
the construction conveyor-belt--from the ministry. the main board. the administra-
tion to the workers' brigade, as well as the high responsibility for fulfilling the
plan tasks.

III.

The dynamic development of the republic's economy is the reliable basis for solving
the party's program tasks in the field of social relations and culture. In the Rus-
sian Federation, as also throughout the entire country. there is a continuous stea-
dy growth of the people's well-being and in the level of education and culture of

the working people. The advantages of the socialist way of life are being revealed
more and more profoundly.

At the stage of developed socialism the principal trends in the social sphere are
detenmined to a great extent by the process of the draxing closer together of all
classes and social groups of Soviet society. In accordance with the decree of the
26th CPSU Congress, social policy has been called upon to consider more fully the
interests of each of these groups and, in the first place, to create all the condi-
tions for strengthening the leading role of the working class. It is a matter of
facilitating the raising of the material and cultural level of the life of the
workers and office employees, their broad-based participation in state and public
activities, the growth of their ideological and political maturity, education, and
occupational skills.

During the 1970's large-scale measures were carried out in the country for further
raising the level of wages paid to workers and office employees. The minimum wage
was increased with a simultaneous increase in the wage rates and salaries of the
middle-level pay categories of workers in the national economy's production and

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

non-production sectors, regional coefficients and percentage supplements to wages
were introduced, etc. As a result. more than 50 nillion workers and office emplo-
yees of the Russian Federation received supple-ants to their wages.

An important program goal of the party is to overcome the essential differences be-
tween the city and the countryside. In recent years quite a bit has been aces-p.
lished to improve social and everyday living conditions in rural areas, their re-
structuring, renewal, and prosperity. 0f principal importance is the establishment
of a guaranteed minimul wage and pensions for kolkhoz mabers. There is an in-
crease in their public activities, which is facilitated by the activity of a multi-
million—member trade union.

The drawing together of various social groups. the leveling out of the differences
between the city and the countryside is taking place against the background of a
steady rise in the real incomes of the population. Over the last 10 years they in-
creased by 50 S on a per capita basis; moreover. among kolkhoz lembers they in-
creased at a higher rate than among workers and office employees.

There was considerable iaprovement in the trade. everyday. and community services
to the population. Retail commodity turnover of state and cooperative trade in
1980 reached 155.1 billion rubles-—65 5 acre than in 1970. During this period ‘
there was a substantial increase in the sales of a number of valuable food and non-
food items. Thus, the sale of meat and neat products grew by 53 5, fish and fish
products--by 1+9 %. animal oil--by 35 7‘, milk and dairy products--by 30 %. eggs--by
a factor of 2.“, confectionery itens--by 1&5 S, fabrics--by 51 S. clothing and tan-’-
derwearuby 6h 96. knitted goods--by 65 5. leather footwearn-by 61 S. furniture--by
85 %. refrigeratorsnby 36 %, motorcycles and notor-scooters--by 39 %, tape—record-
ers-«by a factor of 2.8, etc.

There has been a notable leveling out in the structure of expenditures by individu-
al groups on the acquisition of food and non-food items. During the 9th and 10th
Five-Year Plans the consumption of basic agricultural products by kolkhoz members
increased at higher rates than it did among workers and office employees. The pro-
vision of kolkhoz families with items of prolonged use was close to the level at-
tained in the families of workers and office employees. As the latest surveys have
shown, for every 100 worker and office—employee families there are 70 radios, while
for every 100 kolkhos family there are 62 radios; the respective figures for tele-
vizion as; are 92 and 82. for washing nachines--?6 and 76, and for sewing machines
“' 3 a-nd c

There has been a substantial reduction in the gap and level between the everyday
services to the urban and rural populations. In 1970 the rural inhabitant re-
ceived an average of 2.? tines less services than the urban dweller, while in 1980
such services were less by only 1&3 %.

In accordance with the line adopted by the 26th party congress, during the next few
years in the Russian Federation, as well as throughout the entire country. a. grat
deal of work will be conducted on further closing the gap in prosperity and reduc-
ing the social, everyday. and cultural differences between separate groups of the
population.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the course of developing new regions in Siberia and the Far East a certain
gap was formed in the level of providing social and cultural services to these re-
gions as compared to those which were settled long ago. In order to overcome such
differences, measures are being adopted to Speed up the rate of construction of so-
cio-cultural complexes in Siberia, the Far East, and in the northern regions. In
many of the republic‘s ministries and departments this work is being conducted on
the basis of special targeted programs. Aid in developing these regions is being

rendered by the soviet and economic organs of many RSFSR oblasts, as well as by the
fraternal Union republics.

The party's social policy provides for the implementation of large-scale measures
to improve the demographic situation and to intensify the concern for the family,
young married persons, and, above all, for women. He still must do a great deal in
order to lighten women's housework, to create conditions allowing them to combine
the duties of a mother with an active participation in productive and social life.

Housing construction is at the center of attention by the party and the state. Dur-
ing the period 19?1--1980 housing conditions improved for 62 million persons, of
whom an million obtained apartments in new apartment houses. The extensive scope
of housing construction far from decreases the importance of the question of the
distribution and utilization of housing. The party requires the guarantee of an at-
tentive, objective approach to this matter, as well as the mandatory participation
and rigorous monitoring controls on the part of public organizations. Republican
and local organs are conducting a great deal of work on the careﬂal utilisation and
preservation of the housing stock. '

Also deserving of no less attention are the problals of urban construction. It must
be admitted that during the course the the mass housing construction which was un-
leashed at times less concern was manifested about the external appearance of the
cities. the creation of memorable. noteworthy buildings and structures, or beautiful
architectural ensembles. Here is something to be worked on by the construction or-
ganizations. Gosstroy, the republic's Union of Architects, and the local Soviets.

An important function in the republic's socio-cultural life, educating new genera-
tions of Soviet people, is being performed by a well-developed system of public edu-
cation. In the Russian Federation. as is also the case throughout the entire coun-
try, the transition has been successfully completed to a mandatory, universal. se-
condary education. At present 99.6 S of the graduates of the eight-year schools
continue their education in secondary general or specialized educational institu-
tions. During the last 10 years more than 13,000 schools were put into operation
in this republic. The material base of the schools has been improved; they have
been outfitted with more up-to-date equipment and various technical instructional
media. A great deal of attention is being paid to the labor instruction of the
pupils. At the present time in schools, inter-scholastic educational-production
combines. educational workshops, and enterprise sections labor instruction is being
conducted for about 2.3 million persons, or 98 5 of all the pupils in the senior
grades.

At the present stage, in accordance with the requirements of the 26th CPSU Cong-
ress, we are confronted with the tasks of improving the quality of instruction,
labor and moral upbringing in school, rooting out formalism in evaluating the re-
sults of the work of teachers and pupils, strengthening the ties between school

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instruction and life, and improving the training of schoolchildren for socially
useful labor. The organs of public education are stepping up their attention to
the work, everyday life. and increased skills of the teacher. whose role in the con-
tenporary school is increasing. The entire system of school instruction has been
called upon to facilitate the multi-faceted development of aesthetic education. the
development anoung the youth of a lofty general culture, the formation of profound
feelings of patriotism and internationalism, a vital participation in public af—
fairs. and a preparedness for labor and defense of the Motherland.

The system of higher and secondary specialized education has also been directed at
improving the quality of instruction and strengthening the ties with production.
During the last 10 years 37 universities and other types of VUZ's were opened in
the RSFSR, while in toto at the beginning of 1981 there were h9h higher educational
institutions with an enrollment of more than 3 million students. A search is being
conducted for ways to improve the training of staffs in the VUZ's, to expand the
possibilities for instructing specialists directly in those regions where they are
scheduled to work. Great importance is being accorded to more effective utilisa-

tion of the VUZ's great scientific potential for the needs of the national
economy.

During the 1970's the health~care system was significantly expanded; the work of po-
lyclinics. dispensaries, out-patient clinics, and hospitals was improved. From 1971
to 1980 the number of beds in the republic's permanent hospitals was increased by
33h,000. The guaranteed supply of hospital beds per 10,000 population grew from 112
in 1970 to 129 in 1980. physicians in all fields of specialization--from 29 to ho,
and para-medical personne1--from 93 to 112.

The reliable path to further improve the health-care system is the universal intro-
duction of effective treatment methods. the expansion of dispensary work. and the
application of advanced organizational forms. As before, a great deal of.attention
will be paid to the problems of capital construction, the on-schedule putting on
line of new hospitals and health-care Centers, and supplying treatment facilities
with up-to-dato apparatus and in°trunents. Health-care workers must e”Kasai-11,, im-
prove the quality of medical service to the public and manifest the maximum of con-
cern and sensitivity to patients.

Also directed at strengthening the people's health is activity with regard to devel-
oping physical education and sports, drawing broad strata of the population and es-
pecially children into participating in these activities. During the 11th Five-Year
Plan we are confronted with the task of more energetically spreading new forms of
organizing physical—education classes. including those at the place of residence,
seeking out possibilities for expanding and. most importantly. rationally utilizing
the material base of sports and decisively smashing the bureaucratic obstacles
which are hindering this.

Intellectual life in the republic. as is the case throughout the country, is devel-
oping under the aegis of substantially improving ideological work. perfecting and
renewing its forms and methods. persistently implementing the decree of the CPSU

CC, which was adopted in 1979 and entitled “On Further Improving Ideological and
Political-Educational work."

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the 1970's much was done for the multi-faceted development of the cultural
sphere, satisfying more completely the citizens' growing intellectual demands. In
particular, effective measures have been undertaken to upgrade the theatrical arts,
to expand the network of theaters, which have traditionally enjoyed great populari-
ty in this republic. Today the Russian Federation has 32“ professional theaters.
of which 22 are academic; there are a great many folk theaters and amateur groups.
In cooperation with the local Soviet and economic organs. cultural workers have
been called upon to ensure the further development of the theater business. It is
also important to substantially improve the organisation of concert activity. to
eliminate the shortcoaings which have been manifested here, as well as to solve the

problems of improving the activities of museuas. libraries, and other cultural in-
stitutions.

An important link in the further upswing in the cultural level of the republic‘s
population is the improvement of the activity of cultural institutions in rural
areas. This is primarily a matter of. based on accumulated experience. improving
the work of clubs and houses of culture, developing patronage ties. and ensuring
that the needs of the rural areas are set with regard to permanent staffs of cultu-

ral and educational workers. More attention must be paid to building new clubs and
expanding their network.

During the last few years literary and artistic figures have created quite a few
significant works. which have received the widest recognition and have enriched the
intellectual life of society. It should be noted with satisfaction that there has
been a remarkable increase in the number of profound and interesting works by Rus-

sian writers. artists. and composers, devoted to contemporary life.

Nevertheless, we cannot fail to note that the level of certain artistic works is
still not very high. Their main weakness is a departure from the basic problems of
the present day, a pettiness of themes. The party has pointed out the need to im-
prove the ideological training of workers in literature and art. to strengthen
their connection with life. This is a subject of constant concern for the repub-
lic’s creative unions and for their party organisations.

***

An important source of the further upswing in the economy and culture is the uni—
versal deveJOpment of socialist competition. An enormous political and labor up—
surge among the workers, kolkhos members. and intelligentsia has been brought
about by the decisions of the 26th party congress and the report of the General Se-
cretary of the CPSU CC. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. Of great importance is the decree
of the CPSU CC. the USSR Council of Ministers. the AUOCTU. and the Komsomol CC. en-
titled " 0n the All-Union Socialist Competition for the Successful Fulfillment and
Over-Fulfillment of the Tasks of the 11th Five~Year Plan."

In response to the party's call the labor groups have unleashed a socialist compe-
tition to increase production efficiency and work quality, to successfully fulfill
and over-fulfill the tasks of the 11th Five-Year Plan. As throughout the entire
country. in the Russian Federation support and dissemination have been received
for the initiatives of the working people of Moscow and Leningrad on completing
their individual and brigade assignments for the first year of the five-year plan
by 7 November. those of Yaroslavskaya Oblast--on achieving during the 11th Five-

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Year Plan a growth in industrial production without an increase in the number of
workers, Rostovskaya 0b1ast--on developing the plan capacities ahead of schedule,
the initiative of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes of Krasnodarskiy Kray and Dneprope-
trovskaya Oblast on improving the quality of agricultural output. the work experi-
ence of labor groups in the Urals and Kuzbass on economizing on metal, fuel and
energy resources, etc.

The Russian Federation's working people. closely consolidated around the Leninist
party. are applying all their efforts in order to successfully ilplenent the his-

toric decisions of the 26th party congress, to fulfill the socialist pledges and
plans, and to achieve new victories in building connunisn.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvc "Nauka". "Istoriya SSSR", 1981

2384+
cs0: 1800/155

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIN!(MHN(]A1.[EH§(MNLY

BGIONAL

NATIONALITY, SOCIAL FACTORS In ETHNICALLY MIXED MAaniaoas DISCUSSED
Moscow SOVETSKAYA BTMOGRAFIYA in Russian Mo 6, Novbnec 81 pp lb-26

[Article by A. A. Susokolov and A. P. Novitshaya: "The Ethnic and Social-
Vocational Homogeneity of Marriages (Based on Data from the Kishinev Civil

[Excerpts] In recent years sociology has given increasing attention to study-
ing the mechanism of reproduction of the ethnic and social structure of
society, in particular to the role of the family as one or the nest important
elements of this mechanism. Despite the growing importance of such factors in
socialization of the individual as the educational system, the mass iniormation
media, and direct interpersonal relations in the production sphere, the family

A number of interesting studies in our domestic science have considered the
dependence of the class, social-vocational, and ethnic affiliation and the cul-

.________________________

‘ For example, see P. R. Pilippov and In. K. Chetyrkin, "Marriage as a Form of

Social Movement in Soviet Society," in "Problemy Marksistskoy Filosofii"
[Problems of Marxist Philosophy], Sverdlovsk, 1970 (Learned Works of the
Sverdlovsk Pedagogical Institute. No 110); Yu. V. Arutyunyan, "Sotsial'naya
Struktura Sel'skogo Naseleniya SSS!" [Social Structure of the Rural Population
of the USSR], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mysl'", 1970; B. K. Vssil‘yeva,
"Sotsial'no—Bkonomicheskaya Struktura Naseleniya sssx. Statistiko—
Demograficheskiy Ansliz" [The Socioeconomic Structure of the USSR Population.
Statistical-Demographic Analysis], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", 1978 pp 80ft;
G. A. Slesarev, "Demograficheskiye Protsessy i Sotsial'naya Struktura
Sotsialisticheskogo Ohshchestva“ [Demographic Processes and the Social Struc-
ture of Socialist Society], Moscow, Tzdatel'stvo "hanks", 1978, pp 188—207.

2 For a survey of research on problems of the role of the family in the reproduc-
tion of ethnic structure see L. h. Terent'yeva and M. Ya. Ustinova, "Mixed
ﬂationality Marriages and Their Role in Ethnic Processes in the USSR: A His—
torical Study," in "Osnovnyye Mapravleniya Trucheniya Natsionsl'nykh
Otnosheniy v SSSR" [Basic Lines of Study of Nationality Relations in the USSR],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mauka", 1979, pp 216—2b5.

32
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NHLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USE ONLY

A number of works, in particular E. K. Vasil'yeva's book "Socioeconomic Struc-
ture of the USSR Population," pose the problem of studying the interrelation-
ship and interaction of the processes of reproduction of ethnic and social
structures.

Research has established that both ethnic and social-vocational groups are rela-
tively endogenous, because people generally are inclined to marry within their
own ethnic group and their own social sphere. What social or ethnic factors ex-
ert the greatest influence on choice of a spouse at the present time? Can we
say that the processes of change in the social and ethnic composition of mar-
riages are interrelated? These are not questions of purely scientific interest.

Answering then will allow a deeper understanding of the patterns of development
of social structure in a multinational state.

Table l. Nationality Composition of Marriages Concluded in
KishineV in 1950-1980, in percentage

Marriages 1950 1959* 1971 __ 1980
One Nationality:

Moldavians 21.2 24.2 25.5 34.2
Russians 19.9 15.6 15.4 14.1
Ukrainians 4.2 4.1 4.0 3.1
Jews 16.2 12.4 12.0 5.8
Others 1.3 1.1 0.6 0.5
Total 62.8 57.4 57.5 57.7
Mixed: 37.2 42.6 42.5 42.3
Theoretical Probability of Mixed- 73.9 73.0 72.5 66.5

Nationality Marriages
Ratio of Percentage of Mixed Marriages 0.50 0.58 0.58 0.62

To Their Theoretical Probability

* Figures for 1959 were worked cut only in general form and thus are included
only in this table.

 

Now let us move on to an analysis of the concrete enpiric1l data. In order to
have comparable figures for differentyears. all data will be given in relative,
not absolute form, as percentages and proportions.

The general trends in change in the nationality composition of marriages can be
seen from Table 1 above. In all probability, the proportion of mixed-nationality
marriages increased until the start of the 1960's. Then the 1960's saw a stabili-
zation of this indicator. and in the 1970's it even declined slightly. There is
no question that one of the fundamental factors that caused the change in the
proportion of mixed-nationality marriages was change in the ethnic composition

of the city's population. But this could not have been the only factor. Indeed,
as Table 1 shows, the theoretical probability of single-nationality marriages

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has risen steadily while the probability of mixed marriages has declined. This
is confirmed by analysis of census figures on the population of Kishinev (see
Table 2 below). The decline in the ethnic diversity of the city's

Table 2. Nationality Conposition of the Population of
Kishinev Based on All-Union Census Data, in precentagss

Nationality 1959 1970 1979
Holdavians 32.3 37.2 62.0
Russians 32.2 30.7 30.1
Ukrainians 12.0 14.2 15.0
Jews 19.9 16.0 8.5
Other 3.6 3.9 5.6
Level of Ethnic 0.735 0.727 0.701

Diversity*

* Concerning the methodology for calculating the in-
dex of ethnic diversity see 8. H. Bkkel', "Determin-
ing the Index of Diversity of the Nationality
Composition of the USSR Republics, Krays, and Oblast'
SOV. BTNOGRAFIYA. 1976, No 2, pp 33-42.

n

 

population was chiefly the result of growth in the proportion of Moldavians.
which was also seen in the significant increase in the proportion of single-
nationality marriages in this group. But the proportion of single-nationality
marriages rose in the 1950's despite a decline in their probability, and only

in the 1960's and 1970's did growth in this proportion stabilize. Nonetheless,
the ratio of the proportion of mixed-nationality marriages to their probability
is steadily rising. which testifies to continuation of the trend toward stronger
interaction among ethnic groups.

Figuring Ptukha indexes for particular nationalities shows the role of each of
them in overall change in the absolute and relative indicators of mixed mar-
riages (see Table 3 below). A comparison of the indicators for different years
shows clearly that the general picture of interaction among the largest national-
ities of Kishinev is relatively stable. The Russian and Ukrainian groups are
least endogenous, and the level of endogamousness of the Ukrainian population

is steadily declining. The indicators of single-nationality marriages along the
Jewish population are very stable. The level of endoganousness of the Moldavian
population, which was lower in 1971 than in 1950, not only stabilized but rose
slightly after that year. The proportion of single-nationality marriages among
representatives of the small groups covered by the category "Other" declined
significantly compared to the theoretical probability.

At least three important conclusions can be drawn from this.
(1) The Russians and Ukrainians in Kishinev are, for all practical purposes, one group,

not two. The positive values of indexes testifying to a very high tendency toward
mixed marriages between Ukrainians and Russians are in all probability related to

the fact that the representatives of both nationalities have a high percentage of

3b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Indexes of Mixed-Nationality Marriages in Kishinev

 

Rationality Nationality of Groom
of Bride Year Moldavian Russian Ukrainian Jew Other
Moldavian 1950 +0.56 -0.62 -0.51 -0.96 -0.06
1971 +0.47 -0.41 -0.20 -0.96 -0.19
1980 +0.50 -0.60 -0.32 -o.97 "-0.50
Russian 1950 -0.43 +0.38 +0.19 -0.78 -0.06
1971 -0.41 +0.35 +0.09 -0.74 +0.03
1980 -0.53 +0.35 +0.05 -0.81 -0.30
Ukrainian 1950 -0.40 +0.19 +0.21 -0.96 -0.29
1971 -0.28 +0.09 +0.18 -0.80 0.00
1980 -0.34 +0.05 +0.06 -0.87 -0.30
Jew 1950 -0.96 -0.93 . -0.87 +0.88 -0.99
1971 -O.92 -0.84 -0.99 +0.90 -0.83
1980 -0.93 -0.83 -0.89 +0.87 -0.99
Other 1950 -0.46 -0.25 +0.03 -0.83 +0.33
1971 -0.12 -0.08 0.00 -0.67 +0.13
1980 -O.17 +0.06 +0.06 -0.86 +0.06

children from mixed-nationality marriages; moreover, a large number of the persons
of these nationalities came to Kishinev from regions of intensive interaction
among ethnic groups. The cultural similarity of the tvo fraternal peoples also
plays an important part.

(2) The behavior of the Moldavian population exercises an ever-growing influence
on change in figures for mixed-nationality marriages. Specifically, the stabiliza-
tion of the proportion of mixed-nationality marriages for the city as a uhole is
linked to the growing endogenousneas of the Moldavian group.

(3) The disproportion in male-female composition of particular ethnic groups has
no practical effect on the frequency of mixed marriages. The proportions of per-
sons of each nationality among brides and grooms for all the years are very
similar (see Table 4 below). Therefore, changes in the ratios of the sizes of

nationality populations and in their social-vocational structure are the main
place to search for causes of changes in the marriage indexes.

Studying the social-vocational composition of Iarriages is a very pronising line
of sociological research. In the opinion of most Soviet specialists in sociology,
the nature of the labor activity is one of the key factors determining popula-

tion structure. Different occupations are classified depending on the nature of
the labor. The factors to be considered include whether it is physical or mental

labor and management or functional labor; what level of education is necessarv

35
ron OFFICIAL use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4. Nationality Composition of brides and Grooms,
in percentage.

______._________________.______________________________________________
1950 1971 1980
Nationality Grooms Brides Grooms Brides Grooms Brides
.__________________________________________._______________________________

Moldavians 30.4 30.9 38.4 38.2 46.8 49.1
Russians 33.2 35.0 28.6 30.4 27.5 27.5
Ukrainians 13.2 13.3 14.7 13.7 14.0 13.0
Jess 18.0 17.2 14.1 13.3 7.4 6.5
Other 5.1 3.6 4.2 4.4 4.2 3.9
_________________________

to perform the duties of the given occupation; what is the level of mechaniza-
tion and industrialization of physical labor. and so on. Using these criteria
researchers identify the principal categories of the working population. It
is assumed that persons engaged in similar types of labor follow similar cul-
tural norms, are more inclined to interact with one another. and also possess
common cultural and social interests. A key problem of contemporary Soviet
sociology is to prove that the elements of the social-vocational structure
identified by researchers are in fact social groups, that is, communities that
possess internal unity and integrity, not simply arbitrarily identified cate-
gories.8 One of the arguments in favor of the real existence of social-
vocational groups is the tendency of people to marry primarily people is similar
occupations associated with the same social-vocational group. Unfortunately.
most of the researchers who have studied the statistics of socially hetero-
geneous marriages have limited the-selves to a general assessment of the dis-
tribution of this phenomenon, and have not compared the proportion of such
marriages against their theoretical probability. But when such analysis is
done, the results confirm the fact of "marital homogeneity" of social-
vocational groups (see the work of L. V. Chuyko, E. K. Vasil'yeva, and V. 0.
Rukavishnikov).

Study of social-vocational structure is made much more difficult by the fact

that the different researchers still do not agree on many methodological
issues. We will begin from the principles of identifying the main social—
vocational groups worked out by Yu. V. Arutyunyan, 9and now used by most

M

3 For a discussion of whether social-vocational groups really exist see the
journal SOISIOIDGICHESKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA, 1980, No 4.

9 Yu. V. Arutyunyan, "Sotsial'naya Struktura..." op. cit.. fn l. Arutyunyan

also singles out groups of upper and middle level managers; we were forced
to disregard these groups because the data from the Civil Registry Office

did not permit an adequately precise determination of their boundaries.

36
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ethnosociologista. The following categories were identified by processing the
data for Kishenev:

specialists in highly skilled mental labor;

specialists in medium-skilled mental labor;

clerical workers in positions not requiring special education;
skilled industrial workers;

low-skilled and unskilled industrial workers;

nonindustrial skilled workers;

nonindustrial lowhskilled and unskilled workers.

>
N
I l I I

c>¢51<
Nt-N
l I I

Military servicemen were singled out as an independent category because their
skill levels cannot be determined from the entries in civil status documents;
this was also done for pensioners and persons not employed in public production
(who are, for the most part, temporarily unemployed and housewives). Identi-
fying the letter as a special category does not mean, of course, that they form
an independent social group, but civil registry data do not generally provide
grounds for assigning them to a particular social-vocational group.

When studying the social-vocational composition of persons entering marriage

a number of distinctive features of these groups must be taken into account.

In the first place, there is the significant disproportion in the male-female
ratio; in the second place, their boundaries are more "diffuse" than for ethnic,
settlement, and other social communities; in the third place, the clearly mani-
fested "hierarchical" character of social-vocational groups, all the way to
classes, the principal large groups of Soviet society, must be remembered. Be-
fore undertaking our discussion of the question of the interrelationship be-
tween the ethnic and social composition of marriages, we must at least briefly
review each of these special features and the general trends toward change in
the social-vocational composition of marriages.

The disproportion in the male-female ration of social-vocational groups in-
creases the probability of socially heterogeneous marriages. As can be seen
from Table 5 below, this proportion is stable, related to the psychophysical
characteristics of labor (the predominance of men in group V1), and more dy—
namic. For example, the quantitative predominance of women among medium-
skilled specialists in mental labor did not come about until the 1960's, and
there were more men in the nonindustrial skilled worker group in 1950, but
more women in 1971 and 1980. These changes are related to the intensive in-
flux of women into the spheres of education, medical care, everyday services.
office work and construction.

A calculation of the indexes of the marriage rate according to Ptukha (see
Table 6 below) shows that if brides and grooms are in "short supply" in some
social-vocational group, they are inclined to marry members of their own
group; on the other hand, if there is a "surplus" of them, they prefer, in
addition to their own group, spouses from groups that are similar by nature
of labor. Thus, according to 1980 figures women in group V1 (skilled indus-
trial labor) entered marriage more often than presupposed by the theoretical
probability only with men of the same group; men in this group, who far exceed
the women in numbers, "demonstrated a tendency" to marry brides from five

37
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. Social-Vocational Composition of Brides and Grooms
in Kishenev, in percentage

 

Social-
Vocational 1950 1971 1980
Groups Grooms Brides Grooms Brides Grooms Brides
A, 16.4 12.9 22.2 21.2 26.2 24.3
A: 15.1 13.6 11.6 20.3 12.3 26.6
B 8.4 18.6 5.1 19.2 6.9 18.3
V; 19.8 3.9 35.9 7.5 39.6 11.7
V2 6.5 3.3 8.0 3.1 3.9 3.7
c, 17.0 8.2 10.3 15.9 5.8 9.2
(:2 11.1 18.10 2.6 7.6 1.10 2.9
Military 9.3 0.9 3.7 0.2 6.6 0.3

Personnel
Pensioners 0.1. 20.2 0.6 5.0 1.5 0.5

and house—
wives

social-vocational groups. Thus, disproportions in the male-female ratio seem
to "reveal" both the diffuseness of the boundaries of social-vocational groups
and the hierarchical character of their internal structure.

The hierarchical phenomenon has also been noted with respect to ethnic consu-
nities,m but in a large modern city it undoubtedly plays a more distinctive
role in the social-vocational structure than in the ethnic structure. An ex-
tremely important conclusion for our study follows from these features of the
social-vocational groups. When we speak of the size of a particular social-
vocational group and the proportion of homogeneous and nixed marriages, we
must always remember that these figures are no more than rough estimations
that can reflect general trends in the process. Indeed, had we adopted a
slightly different typology of social-vocational groups (for exasple. forming
groups that are similar by nature of labor), we would have to classify as
homogeneous those marriages which with a more detailed classification would be
counted as mixed. With a synchronous and diachronous comparison, therefore,

it is necessary to use the very sane methodology for identifying social-
vocational groups.

The figures from Civil Registry office divisions show-that during the Egg;
time period the theoretical probability of concluding homogeneous (in the
social-vocational sense) marriages was rising. This trend is a result of
growth, both in the population as a whole and among those entering marriage, in
the proportion of representatives of the most typical groups for the large
modern city, skilled industrial workers and specialists in highly skilled and

1° cheboksarov, N. N., and Cheboksarova, I. A., "Narody, Rasy, Kul'tury"
[Peoples, Races, Cultures], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1971, pp 32-37.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. Indexes of Marriage Rate by Social-vocational
Composition

 
  
    
   

1.00 0.01 —’
A. 1% g 0.00 0.01 -
1000 0 1.00 —0.04. -.-0.69
0.10 0.05 —
A’ Iﬁ :3 0.12 0.01 —
‘m —0 o.” 0.08 "0086
I950 _o 0.57 J0 —
B m: —0. 0.02 -00 —
1980 -0 on” _00 —
1050 -0 0'79 “”3 -
v1 197: —o 0.35 —o.32 —
mo —0 0-90 4"”
v2 I 4050 —1 0.89 —0.51
ms —0 — - ‘
mo —0 - —°-°°
. _ 0.50 —o.u —.
“1 {:32 _3 1.00 —0.« —
mo _, 0.01 4.29
o.“ —0.50
(:2 1% :3 0.72 —o.ao —
mo _, 0.50 —o.ao —
72
. x 1050 —0 0.05 0.00 0.
111114) 1911 —0 o.“ 3.2: 3.5131;
, Im ‘0 — _ 0 I

Key: (1) Military Servicemen;
(2) Pensioners. Housewives.

* The dashes indicate conbinations vhose proportion and probability are so
low that indexes of the marriage rate cannot be calculated.

 

medium-skilled mental labor. And the proportion of homogeneous marriages,
which was SJ: percent lower in 1971 than in 1950, rose somewhat by 1980 (see

Table 7 below). It is important to stress, however, that in the social aspect,
just as in the ethnic, there has been a convergence of the proportion in

theoretical probability of marriages, in other words there has been a trend
toward intensified intergroup interaction.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NIN

Table 7. Ratio of the Proportion and Probability of
Homogeneous, in the Social-Vocational Sense, Harrisges*

Marriages 1950 1971 1980
Proportion 45.7 b0.3 61.8
Theoretical Probability 9.9 12.8 15.7
Ratio of Proportion and 4.6 3.1 2.7

Probability

* Marriages in which at least one of the spouses was a nilitary servicemen,
pensioner, or temporarily or permanently unenployed person were not counted.

 

This tendency has manifested itself differently,-however, in different social-
vocational groups. Thus, over the 30 years the level of marital homogeneity
for the group of highly skilled specialists has declined. The nest likely
cause of this is the expansion of the system of higher education and the re-
lated broadening of the social conposition of college students. Young spe-
cialists and college students who come from worker and peasant families nore

frequently choose spouses from a different social-vocational group than persons
who come from the families of clerical workers.

But the nain increase in the indicators of mixed narriages occurs for the groups
engaged in physical labor. The level of honogeneity of marriages is declining
especially notably in group 61, nonindustrial skilled workers. As can be seen
from Table 5 above, the proportion of nenbers of this group along persons
entering marriage is declining at the sane time. In our opinion this is an
indicator of the disappearance of this group as an independent social commu-
nity. This is related not only to decrease in its numbers but also to a
gradual "erosion" of its boundaries and a merging of this group with the groups
of industrial workers. At the same tine, the level of honogenity of marriages
in the group of industrial workers has risen significantly, chiefly because

a growing percentage of brides from this group marry nan of the sane group.

He believe that these are the fundanental processes that have caused changes in
the social-vocational composition of marriages.

Having traced the trends toward change in the rate of marriages that are nixed
with respect to ethnic and social-vocational composition, we can formulate a
few hypotheses on how they are interrelated.

We have already noted that similar trends are observed in change in the ethnic
and social conposition of persons entering marriage. In the first place, for
the entire 30 years in both cases the probability of concluding homogeneous
marriages has risen. In the second place, during the 1950's and 1960's despite
this trend the proportion of mixed narriages concluded each year rose. In the
1970's this rise stopped and a tendency toward increase in the proportion of
homogeneous marriages was observed. In the third place, finally, the ratio

of the proportion of homogeneous, in both the ethnic and social-vocational
senses, marriages to their theoretical probability continues to decline, which
is evidence that the tendency toward an increase in marital homogeneity in the

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

social-vocational and ethnic communities is not a dominant trend. Are these
common features accidental, or do they reflect a profound social pattern? It

is difficult here, of course, to claim to resolve this issue, but a few thoughts
can be expressed. These comma»: factors probably stem from the beginning of
the general process of stabilization of the population of Kishinev and the for-
mation of a more consistent social-ethnic structure in the city. Between 1939
and 1980 the population of Kishinev increased 4.6 times, and in the 60 years its
ethnic composition changed fundamentally. Moreover, in just the postwar years
Kishinev has been transformed from a provincial administrative city to a large
modern industrial and cultural center. This fundamental change in the functional
characteristics of the city has affected both the social-vocational and ethnic
structure. The extraordinarily high rate of this change inevitably led to some
destabilization of social-vocational and ethnic groups, which found specific ex-
pression in the severe ”erosion" of their boundaries. The disappearance of
intergroup boundaries is one of the general trends in development of the social-
ethnic structure of the contemporary socialist city, but in this particular case
the rate of change was significantly greater than the "natural" course of events.
In the 1970's the structure of the new type of urban population took shape,
characterized by the numerical superiority of the main indigenous nationality

on the ethnic plane and the groups of intelligentsia and industrial workers on the
social-vocational plane. A decline in the growth rate of the population of
Kishinev is also typical: growth averaged 5.9 percent a year in 1959-1970. but
only b.9 percent in 1970-1979. Although the absolute number of new arrivals each
year has risen slightly, their proportion in the population has declined. More-
over, the newcomers of the 1970's entered a qualitatively new social-ethnic
situation than that encountered by their predecessors 20-25 years earlier. The
process of stabilization, of course, is also accompanied by a certain rise in

the level of consolidation of the social communities that form the structure of
the city.

It is equally important to discover the concrete mechanism of the process of
stabilization of the social structure, the "microlevel" factors that influence
the composition of marriages being concluded. One of these factors is the rise
in the theoretical probability of homogeneous marriages, which has been men-
tioned earlier. This factor does not, however, explain why growth in the pro-
portion of mixed marriages stopped in the 1970's, for the theoretical probability
of homogeneous marriages was also increasing in earlier years. One of the ele-
ments of this mechanism may be the degree of distribution of social competitive

situations, which often rises during a period of rapid growth in large cities.
The influence of this factor on interaction among ethnic groups has already been

noted in the domestic literature.l‘

Thus far we have assumed that traits of similarity in changes in the social and
ethnic composition of marriages may stem from the fact that both of‘thesc—

1!See, for example. “Sotaial'noye i Natsional'noye. Opyt Etnosotsiologicheskikh
Issledovaniy po Haterialam Tatarskoy ASSR: [The Social and Nationality Aspects.

Bthnosociological Research Using Data on the Tatarskaya ASSR], Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1973, p 299.

hl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EINI(NWW(JAI.LERECNNLY

processes are a manifestation of general developmental trends in the social
structure of the city's population. But the question may be asked: Is this
sinilarity a result of direct interaction between the ethnic and social-
vocational structures? Such nutual influence is possible if there are sub-
stantial difference: in social—vocational composition among ethnic groups in
contact with one another. In this case the rise in the level of homogeneity of
the social—vocational group will inevitably be linked with an analogous process
in the ethnic community whose representatives are a majority in the group. But
the convergence of the social-vocational structure of nationalities that natur-
ally occurs under conditions of a socialist city has led to a situation where
differences that existed earlier do not play any noteworthy role today and
steadily continue to diminish. Thus, within the group of singleanationality
marriages the ratio of marriages that are homogeneous and nixed in the social-
vocational sense is the same as for mixed—nationality marriages. In other words.
there is no statistical relationship between the ethnic and social homogeneity
of marriages. and this pattern is recorded in the data for all three years (see
Table 8 below).

Table 8. Ratio of Social-Vocational and Nationality Compo-
sition of Marriages

 

Social-Vocational Composition of Marriages

 

Nationality 1950 1971 1980
Composition

of Homo- Hetero- Homo- Hetero- Romo- Hetero-
Marriages geneous geneous geneous geneous geneous geneous
homogeneous 46.0 54.0 42.0 58.0 61.2 58.8
Heterogeneous 45.5 54.5 37.9 62.1 42.8 57.2

 

After reviewing the statistics on marriages separately for ethnic and social
parameters. it is natural to wonder how ethnosocial categories that form at the
intersection, so to speak, of the ethnic and social-vocational structures "behave
themselves" in this respect? We can only consider the most numerous social-
vocational and ethnic groups here. He selected six ethnosocial groups (see
Table 9 below). It is interesting to determine which factor, the ethnic or the
social, has a stronger influence on the composition of marriages concluded. In
other words, who are people more inclined to narry: persons of their own na-
tionality but a different social-vocational group, or the opposite? A calcula-

tion of the indexes of marriage rate according to Ptukha also permits us to
answer this question.

As can be seen from Table 9. among specialists with higher education Moldavians,
Russians, and Ukrainians are more inclined to marry representatives of the

same social-vocational groups. Among industrial workers social-vocational af-
filiation played the decisive role for Moldavian women in entering marriage. In
the remaining cases the ethnic affiliation of the partner was more important.

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR OFVWCJAL USEICNNLY

Table 9. Indexes of the Rate of mixed Marriages for Certain
Bthnosocial Categories

___—______________—-—-—————-——

Sane Social-Vocational Sane Nationality but

Bthnosocial Group but Different Different Social-
Categories Nationality Vocational Group
Groons Brides
Holdavians A1 0.02 -0.30
Russians and Ukrainians A1 0.01 -0.30
Jews A1 -0.16 0.11
Holdavians V* -0.16 0.37
Russians and Ukrainians V 0.06 0.26
Jens v -o.73 0.65
Brides _ I Groons
Holdavians A1 0.03 -0.30
Russians and Ukrainians A1 0.00 -0.28
Jews A1 -0.56 0.17
Holdavians V* 0.06 -0.22
Russians and Ukrainians V -0.19 —O.l9
Jews V —0.77 -0.28

* The categories V1 and V2 are combined.

 

Thus, the conposition of narriages differs significantly depending on the
social-vocational and ethnic affiliation of the partners. The greater tendency
of nen who are industrial vorkers to narry wonen of their own nationality can
be partially explained. it appears. by the snall nunber of women in this group.
It is interesting to note the "vocational homogeneity" of marriages among the
intelligentsia, which is traditionally considered the nost active carrier of
ethnic self-awareness.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", "Sovetsksya etnografiya", 1981

11,176
680: 1800/205 END

1:3
IN)! OFTWCJA1.USIZ(MVLY