FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10693

28 July 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 46/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/.

28 July

NEST EUROPE REPORT

(P000 46/82)

CONTENTS

THEATER NUCLEAR FORCES
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Ape]. on NATO Strategy, Nonfirst Use of Nuclear Arms
(“3“. AFC)»: 10 Jun 82) sosssoosoresoasseeseoesessees

ECO‘NWIC
[TA LY

Failure of Systems Against Tax Evasion
(Giorgio Gadoria, Roberto Ippolito; 11. mo,

1 Jun 82) so...Ia000000.000aaOOOOOOOOOOOUOOIOOOIOIOO

Economists' Report on State of Economy
(Paola De Benedetti, et a1; IL MONDO,

1 Jun 82) .0.COOOOOOOO0.0000COOOOCOOOOUOQ0.0.0....‘O

Problem of Absenteeism, Mobility in Industry Discussed
(CORRIERE DELIA SE“, 6 May 82) ossosoossoeseooeseso

Absenteeism, Nobility Decrease

Reeuploynent "Fiasco' in Piedmont, by Giuseppe
d'Adda and Renzo Ruffielli

'Prensentisn' Becomes a Problem

Rage Supplement Sanctions Advocated, by Sergio
Pininfarina

Productivity as Bargaining Counter, by Giuseppe
Medusa

Productivity in “age Bargaining, by Giuseppe
Medusa

~a- [III-WE-l!

on..- Am~.. can. a." n:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POL! TICAI.

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OI" GERMANY

GREECE

I TALY

SPAIN

FRANCE

FRANCE

Brandt on SPD/FDP Coalition Prospects, SPD Future
(will, Br.ndt IntCrvtw; STERN, 1 Jul 82) eeeeeeeeeee

Prospects for Papandreou Bra Surveyed in Detail
(Stew!!! “11118.“; THE BCONG‘IST, 3'9 Jul 82) eeseeeo

Outcome of League of Cooperatives Congress
(Vittorio Borelli, et el; ll. HONDO, 8 Jun 82) .......

Defections from "CD Expected as Center Will Not Hold
(Mitten s‘n.quet.; “BIO, 7 Jun 82) seeeeeeeeeoeese

National Elections would Confirm Results in Andalucis
(Jose Manuel Arija; CABIO, 7 Jun 82) ...............

Pilar Bravo Explains Resignation from PC!
(“1" BnVO; “”10, 28 Jun 82) oesoee.e.0..e..eo.o.

Sentences Seen as Having Unsettled Some in Military
(MIC) 28‘1““ 82) 00.0.00.00000..000.0000.0....0...

Center Parties To Lose Independence in wake of Polarisation
(Antxon Seresqueta; CAMBIO, 28 Jun 82) ..............

HI LI TARY

Official Questions Hernu on Aircraft Carriers, Nuclear
Submrines

(AIR ET COSMOS, 29 my 82) ooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoee

Xingu Aircraft Delivered fro- Brazil
(AIR ET COSMOS, 29 My 82) eeeeeeeeeeeeee...0.0.0.0.

GENERAL

Arienespece Announces Revised Launch Calender. 6 in 1983
(Pierre Lengereux; AIR E‘r cosmos, 29 Hey 82)

eeeeeeeeeee

~8-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

38

62

68

75

78

92

91¢

96
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI20NLY

THEATER FORCES FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

APEL 0N NATO STRATEGY, NONFIRST USE OF NUCLEAR ARES
Bonn EUROPA-ARCNIV in German 10 Jun 82 pp 353-356

[Article by Dr Hans Apel. PRO Minister of Defense: "The NATO Strategy
Discussion-Comments on the Article 'Nuclear Arms and the Atlantic
Alliance'"1]

[Text] The debate about the validity of the NATO strategy is starting up
again. I am not sorry about that-on the contrary. This is the only way

in which we can clarify the basis of our security policy in a critical
dialogue and, if necessary, modify it. This debate must place the conditions
for securing the peace in Europe within the framework of a global point of
view. We are dependent upon the export of our manufactured goods. It
provides us with jobs and prosperity. We are thoroughly dependent upon

the import of energy and raw materials. Together, the two result in world-
wide economic dependencies which make it incumbent upon us to take diplomatic
and development policy initiatives. They are of course also a part of our
overall security policy. The issue here must not be to drag the East-Nest
conflict into the Third Horld. Rather, unrestricted recognition of all
peoples' rights of self-determination must remain the basis of our policies.

There is an increasing danger that conflicts within the Third Horld could
have an indirect impact on European peace and security through concomitant
economic effects, as well as direct impact through the spread of military
tensions. Preservation of peace and limitation of conflict worldwide
therefore constitute decisive tasks for our policies outside of Europe as
well. Population explosion, raw materials and energy shortages. progressive
militarization in many Third World countriea--all that confronts us with
new challenges. But we can successfully contribute to the solution of these
problems only if we can secure peace in Europe. While our continent and
peace policy for Europe cannot serve as a model for worldwide peacekeeping,

I Editor's Note: The article by NcGeorge Bundy, George F. Ksnnan, Robert S.
McNamara and Gerard Smith was published simultaneously in the journals FOREIGN
AFFAIRS (Spring 1982) and EUROPA-ARCH“ (No 7/1982). A detailed critique by
a group of German authors (Karl Kaiser, Georg Leber, Alois Hertes and Franz-
Joseph Schulze) will be published under the title "Nuclear Arms and the
Maintenance of Peace" in No 12 of EUROPA-ARCNIV (25 June 1982) and
simultaneously in FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Summer 1982).

l

FOI¢OFFIJAI.UBI(NNLY
I!!! €Hﬂﬂ£1al.lﬁﬂi(ﬂﬂl¥

the principles of renouncing violence, establishing trust and arms control are
applicable everywhere. But an exacerbation of tensions between East and

west in Europe would necessarily have grave consequences, be it only because
we would then have to use greater resources for defense which would otherwise
be available for tasks benefiting the Third World. Maintenance of peace and
detente in Europe are therefore at the same time also important contributions
to peace worldwide. Our security policy must be based on those facts. The
impleaentation of securing the peace in Europe leads of necessity to the
qeustion of nuclear deterrence: I an fully convinced that the existence of
nuclear arms has been primarily responsible for preventing acts of war in
Europe since 1955. The unpredictability of the progress of armed conflict,
once it has started, and the consequent unacceptable risks for all partici-
pants have prevented clashes of arms even on those occasions which could

have been solved militarily under "prenuclear" conditions. Devastating wars
have broken out in Europe's history for much less weighty reasons than the
construction of the Berlin Wall or the suppression of the "Prague Spring.”
This points up the probleaatic nature of nuclear arms: they have, until new,
preserved peace in Europe. Should deterrence fail however, the use of nuclear
arms could spell the end of humanity. Even the most recent statement by the
German Evangelical Church did not come up with a solution for this dilemma
and therefore it envisions a "reprieve" during which the preservation of peace
by way of nuclear deterrence can still be justified. It has, in addition,
endorsed a central element of our security policy: that preservation of
peace on the basis of military balance increasingly requires mutual trust in
all areas, including arms liaitation. To attain the latter, especially in
nuclear arms, must be our objective.

0n the other hand, we should not labor under the illusion that the atom can
be banished from our lives. Even if all nuclear arms in East and Heat were
to be verifiably destroyed, the knowledge of their manufacture and effects
would persist. Humanity will never return to the state of its prenuclear
"innocence." we must learn to preserve peace despite this. A nuclear war
could be the end of humanity--just as certainly, a large-scale conventional
war in Europe could signify the end of our civilization. That is why our
strategy must in any case remain one of prevention of war. Not even the
first shot must be fired.

From that standpoint we must give critical consideration to the article
"Nuclear Arms and the Atlantic Alliance" by HcGeorge Bundy, George Kennan,
Robert McNamara and Gerard Smith concerning the question of renouncing first
use of nuclear weapons. The article was published simultaneously in the
journals FOREIGN AFFAIRS and EUROPAPARCRIV. I am in complete agreement with
several points:

--It is uncertain at best whether a limitation of nuclear warfare would
succeed in the manner necessary to control and end the conflict. That is so
because Soviet strategy includes the use of nuclear arms as an integral
component of possible military operations.

--It is correct also that the debate about the NATO dual-track decision has

long since acquired a character which goes beyond its purely military
significance. The quality of the implementation of its two parts will prove

2
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whether or not RATO, if confronted with an unequivocal Soviet challenge, will
have the strength to take those measures for preserving the military balance
which it considers appropriate. Apart from questions of military strategy,

each of which is of great significance, this question especially addresses
the integrity of the alliance.

-1 further share the opinion that only our conventional defense capability
and it continuous improvement lends credibility to our strategy of deterrence.

Our conventional forces must under no circumstances be permitted to lose their
effectiveness. thus lowering the nuclear threshold.

That has of course some concomitant consequences. The authors hint at them.
Even the 3 percent annual increase in actual national defense expenditures to
which we agreed in 1979 and which progressively fewer NATO partners attain in
view of their economic and social problems, will not be sufficient. A
considerable manpower increase in NATO forces in Europe would be imperative.
Are our allies ready for this? Can our country commit itself to it? Can

the neogtiations about the limitation of forces and arms in Europe and the
proposed conference on disarmament in Europe result in greater conventional
equilibrium at a lower level of armament? These questions remain unanswered.
Nevertheless the four authors state that a positive reply on their part

would have to be a condition for even thinking about renunciation of the
first use of the nuclear arms option.

Another consideration appears of importance to me: even if the Heat were
ceremoniously and officially to renounce any first use of its nuclear weapons
in Europe, if in addition it were to conclude an appropriate treaty on this
with the USSR and if it were, as a precondition for this, to make its
conventional force equal to that of the Warsaw Pact, nuclear arms would still
remain in the arsenal of the USSR and the Warsaw Pact. Even a nuclear-free
zone in Europe would not eliminate the threat in view of the range of the
85-208. Therefore, both sides would have to maintain nuclear arsenals
covering the entire military spectrum as a potential for a survivable second
strike and to modernize them as required. Only agreements for the qualitative
and quantitative limitation of the respective potentials, which are verifiable
at any time, could reduce the mutual massive distrust to such an extent that
an actual and meaningful reduction of systems could be feasible. He Germans
should in addition urge the alliance that the number and kind of nuclear
warheads in Europe be verified, with the objective of reducing them
significantly. RAID is presently reconsidering this matter.

Any use of a nuclear warhead has the additional effect of crossing the
threshold between conventional and nuclear warfare. It becomes thus evident
that the orders to use nuclear weapons of any kind, including tactical ones,
must always be issued from Washington and thus shift the risk to their point
of origin. The Soviets have always understood it that way. They never gave
any consideration to a nuclear "disengagement" by the United States, which

is feared by many Europeans, as far as their own military strategic situation
is concerned. This would of course change, if NATO were to renounce, in a
binding and convincing manner, any first use of its nuclear forces. The
assumption made in the above cited article that "an effective policy of

3

FOIiNﬂﬂCIAl.USI(NVLY
ROI‘OFT1CIAI.USE1(HNLY

renouncing first use would also reduce the threat of a conventional attack

in Europe" (EUROPA-ARCBIV 7/1982, p 195), is therefore astonishing, especially
since this statement is made in the section dealing with military reasons for
renouncing first use. The statement is not adequately substantiated.

Political reasons could perhaps explain this statement. The question must

of course be permitted whether we may still maintain our defense strategy of
credible deterrence even if it would threaten the loss of the political
cohesion of the alliance. And it is true of course that the cohesion of the
alliance and the basic consensus of the people as well as their defense
readiness are of much greater importance to preserving peace than any NATO
strategy. But then this is true also for every single member country of the
alliance. NATO is an alliance of sovereign states with an indissoluble share
of the cost and the risk. Obviously, the strategic situation of treaty
members varies as a function of their geographic location. Even France and
Great Britain-~nuclear powers, as well--are in a better situation then we are.
The presence of their troops on our soil changes this situation only to the
extent that it directly involves them in any case of aggression. This is
even more true for the United States. Obviously. it is directly involved in
the defense of Europe through the presence of its troops. But our country
would be the battlefield.

For us, a aeaningful defense strategy must be oriented toward the avoidance
of conventional armed conflict in Central Europe. Anything else would not
constitute a fair distribution of risks as provided by the alliance--risks
which are unavoidable if there is to be successful deterrence and avoidance
of war. Anyone considering "no first use" must realize that he is advancing
the cause of regionalizing armed confrontation in Europe and that he is
permitting the approach of a separation of the United States from Europe.

And this situation would not even change fundamentally if it were possible to
establish a conventional military balance in Europe.

The strategy of NATO is first and foremost a strategy of avoiding war. It

is therefore a strategy of "no first use" of any arms at all. Our strategy
at a flexible response is not a doctrine of nuclear first use either. True,
it does not exclude first use of nuclear arms as a means of deterrence. But
it primarily provides for a defense with those arms with which the alliance

is attacked--even against superior conventional forces. This specifically
excludes the substitution of lacking conventional forces with nuclear means.
Thus the alliance must under no circumstances neglect its conventional forces.
He must be able in the future to arrest a possible conventional aggression by
means of a conventional forward area defense.

For us the decisive present and future factor remains that we must continue
our policy of detente despite criticism at home and setbacks in our relations
with the East. We hope that this will result. among other things. in an
approximate military balance at the lowest possible level. The PRC must
remain the driving force for a realistic European security policy. Our
country would be particularly vulnerable to the consequences of the wrong

NHCJAI.UBI(N‘lY
security policy. For this reason. an aninated debate about the prerequisites
for securing the peace in Europe is mandatory. This includes NATO strategy
as well. To ne, there is no question that we lust look out for our own
interests, apart fro. the solidarity of the alliance and despite all the
good neighbor policy toward East Europe.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik Gabi, Bonn

9273
C50: 3103/527

momentum“
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

EWI'OHIC IT‘LY

”mm or arm acmsr wt msmu
Milan IL mm in Italian 1 Jun 82 pp i2-l7
[Article by Giorgio Gedoria and Roberto Ippoliton "rax Mere. Inc']

[Text] can registers: audits at the banks: handcuffs
for those who do not pay. ‘lhere are aany proposals for
cosbatim tax fraud. but they are invariably blocked.
by? “no is ”shelving“ than?

Oomemtive estinates by the hinistry of Pimnce indicate that one Italian in
10 does not file a declaration of per-soul incone. A survey based on a sasple
of 600.000 taxpayers. however. has disclosed that 20 percent of all taxpayers
are tax eveders. In the sane conservative vein. it is adaitted at the sinis-
try that evasions of the In [value-added tax] esount to 6 or 7 trillion lire
per year. In an interview granted to IL mum in August 1981-4. sonths after
relinguishing direction of the ainistryuh-anco Rsviglio declared that the
total of taxes evaded can be calculated at around 28 trillion lire. Ihe
situation has in fact. not isproved since them-despite an increase in the
yield of Revenue Service auditse-forr these results are still snail by conpari-
son with estinates which indicate that the total of taxes evaded has already
broken ”trough the ”ceiling“ of 30 trillion lire.

To judge by their words. however. the goverment an! the political parties»
saJority an opposition alike--have undo the fiat saint tax evasion a Iain
plank in their respective platter-s and manna. It has asounted to a slogan
that has been reitersted for years without any substantial dishes in the
situation. How can this be? Is the fiat against tax evasion hopeless? Who
is opposing it? Hhat. specifically. is thwartim it? II. homo has analysed
the factors that have fmstrated every attespt to cospel those who do not pay
their taxes to pay then. and reconstructs step by step the ways in which the
tax evader is enabled to go narrily on his way.

The boycotting of the iniividual initiatives 0cm. of come. in a context
of problems of a sore genera naturm ”To isprove the level of cospliance
with the tax laws,” for-er Minister of Fiance Filippo Maria Pauloli’i told IL
"Ohm. "laws and adsinietrative actions are needed that are persuasive am
tough. In order for persuasion to be effective the taspayer lust be able to
function in an atsoephere of certainty and therefore of trust. Il'his seans

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that people should not have to believe they are the only ones who pay their
taxes. ‘lhe regulations should be coherent and stable: the rules of the sale
should be eninring. Govern-ante! discontinuity. for emple. is hateful.

I've been a neaber of the cabinet for 5 years but sinister of fiance for lees
than 2 years: it would have been better if I had held the ease post for my
entire tenure in the cabinet.”

Today, however. not only has the irdividual citizen's faith in the internal
revenue syste- been shaken but certain actiom can in fact even be construed
as an invitation to tax evasion. “hr sonths." says M10 Vissini. assistant
secretary of the Social Denocratio Party. "there have been runore that an
amnesty was possible. As they wait to see what will happen. those who have
been successful in not paying their taxes are accordimly resorting to litiga-
tion in the hope that they will never have to pay. me question as to whether
the asmsty should or should not be granted aust therefore be resolved.”

Harricuffe for Tax Mere

his is the has given to the bill whidi. if approved by the parlialent. will
sake it possible to arrest tax evaders. At the present tine. thanks to the
regulation prescribing the so-called ”pro-Judicial tax procedure." the courts
can institute a criminal action only after a definitive audit has been nde

by the financial offices: another dozen years could pass before this occure.
In other words. the citizen who defraude the internal revenue eyeten lmowe
there is every likelihood that he will not wind up in prison. On 13 March
Peviglio introduced a bill to eliainate the pro-judicial procedtn'e. but after
the bill had been allowed to repoee in a desk drawer of the finance coswittee
of the Giasber of Deputies it subsequently becale the center of violent debate
and renains a "dead letter." "Opposition to the bill is very strong on the
part of the DC [Giristian Delocratic Party]. which is attespting to emculate
it," said Columnist Deputy Giuseppe D'Alesa. ‘lhere is constant wrangling in
connittee over the text of the bill.

"It is essential to make a distinction between culpable conduct and fraudulent
conduct. and to allow criminal prosecution only in the case of fruwiulent
conduct." said Qirietian Denocratic entrepreneur Luigi Rossi di hontelera.
Hie fellow party sesber. Mario Usellini. also an entrepreneur. went so far as
to introduce an aneudnent (in contrast to the goverr-ent's position) whereby
the failure to issue invoices could not constitute a arise.

D'Alena is also critical of the current ainieter of finance. the socialist
Rino Foreica. "Faced with the opposition of the Dc." he said. "the FBI
[Italian Socialist Party] initially gave ground. in that son-ice sublitted a
new text which fro- our point of view was less stringent in nature. all this
resulted in delays. He subsequemly introduced new elendunts which will have
the effect of creating a loomole in any appropriate solution to the problem"

Formica rejects this criticise. claiaing instead that the text he had origi-
nally proposed was an atteapt to reconcile the variom for-ulas which had
surfaced in the initial phase of the debate. Within the cosaittee, however.
there was no dearth of waves to prevent the arrest of the tax evaders. to
rcdiseneion the penalties. and to sake the courts subject to the decisions of
the tax offices.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sone of the reservations node are quite explicit. "Nothing is sore sacro-
sanot," Viceini declared. "than the principle of 'handcuﬂ‘e for the tax
cvsders.‘ 'me new regulations. however, cone into conﬂict with reality: I
worry about what a ugistrate could do usim the new law as a weapon." Hear
while. the dispute over the elem-eats emblee the tax eveder to renin at
liberty.

Banking Secrecy

The objective was to bring Italy into line with the other Heetern countries
(ercept for Switzerland. which is virtmlly the only country that We
credit imtitutiom as absolutely inviolable). The legislation would have
been Dede substantially sililar to that omently in effect in the United
States. In practice. provision was Dede in certain restricted cases to allow
violation of banking secrecy in the interest of the fight against tax evasion
(and also against those kinds of cr‘ae which are increasingly concealed behind
bold entrepreneurial ventures). The ninieterial decree conceived by Ponies.
however. appears to be irrensdiably buried. Prime Minister Giovanni Spedolini.
a republican. initially supported the decree but subsequently blocked it by
requesting the opinion or the other sinister-e. whereupon Minister of the Trees-
ury ."ino Andreatta. a Christian Denocrat. adopted the criticisn of Silvio
Golzio. president of the Banking Association. who had advised a resounding
rejection of the idea of granting discretionary powers over the interml audit-
ing function of the banks: Hinister of the Budget Giorgio la Malta. a repub-
lican. expressed uncertainty with regard to procedml utters: and Minister
of Justice Olelio Darida. a Christian Desocrat. opposed giving the revenue
service access to professional offices on grounds that profeseional confiden-
tiality should not be sacrificed “to the need for ensurim equity and open-
ness in m ntters'(dhllsr ideas had already been expressed by u» 3.:
Association).

There are even doubts uong the social delocrate. "I do not believe.” Viesini
declared, "that it is proper to allow the edainistrstion to violate bankirg
confidentiality even when it is a mrty in a legal proceeding currently in
progress: only the courts should have the power to do so.” The ”land line" in
the path of the decree was laid there by the atristian Delocrat Giuseppe
Azzaro. for-er undersecretary of finance. and by Usellini. Azsaro (who pre-
sented the couittee report on the decree to parliaaent) has never concealed
his own reservations. Usellini. for his part. devised the strategea that hes
obstructed the parlianentary process. that is to say. the request that a con-
sensus be reached among the ninietere before a study or the seaeure was under-
taken by the parlianentary Connittee of the Thirty. The ensuing negative
opinion rendered by the ministers served to lake passage of the legislation
virtually iepoesible. Formica will now attenpt to obtain a clarification of
the viewpoint of the Iajority. but his only support so far has cone fro- the
rsnks of the opposition. "The decree." D'alena says. ”is a positive Ieasure.
because tax evasion has found the banks to he a "safe harbor“ for avoiding
audits. I hope the Christian Denocrete will rethink their position. at least
in consideration of the inperatives of the fight against organised urine.”

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK I“. USE: ONLY

Cash Registers

It was 2 years ago next 16 July that Reviglio introduced the bill providing
for the installation-ﬁn busineu establishsentsnof equiplent that will Ike
it possible for the internal revenue systea to audit gross receipts: special
cash registers would Inks it possible to issue sales receipts that would also
be valuable for tax purposes. These 2 years have seen absolutely no novesent
in this direction, however. No one on the finance conittee of the (lumber
of Deputies has yet come forward to push for a study of the bill or to love
for its inclusion on the ageina. Governsent and opposition alike found thes-
selves in agree-ant that there would be no further discussion of the bill.
'ias it laziness? Raor organisation of the work of the parlialeut? Or was it
obstructionisa which-~by concentntim attention on a single bill-~nnages to
iapede the nor-ml activity of the daasber? These are all possible reason.
It is an irony of fate that the peaceful sluaher of the bill was interrupted
by the coasittee on only one occasion: when a request was lads that the
measure be studied in legislative session. that is to say. without the need
for a vote being taken on the floor. The corresponding authorisation was
given. for studying a bill in legislative session should in fact speed up its
approval. but in these past 3 aonths there has been no action on the bill.

Litigation

For years there has been talk of reforaing the system for handlitg appeals.

It would constitute an additioml weapon for use against tax evadersnone that
could be brought into play were rapidly and effectively. Concrete proposals
to accomplish this was are hard to find. however. Reviglio had proposed a
couplets revision of the system but left the goverment before he was able to
coaplete the draft of the bill he had in aim. Several bills were introduced
in the chalber and the senate. priaarily by social deaocrats and liberals and
subsequently by individual deputies. These do not yet constitute the basis
for an in-depth coaparative study. however.

Every year. as a result. hundreds of thousands of tax evasion cases are added
to the millions of unresolved cases. "It's also a problea of decentralisa-
tion." says Undersecretary of Finance Francesco Oolucci (a socialist). "that
must be dealt with decisively. The bill for restructm-ation of the financial
administration provides (and certainly not by dance) for the creation of
regional internal revenue offices. These offices would be empowered to func-
tion autonomously vis-a-vis the central adainistrationuunlike the existing
departnents. which do not decide on a great nny questions and instead sorely
"pass the buck.”

The tax evaders (and those who help then to take refuge in the unification
of administrative inefficiency) find it easy to profit fro- this situation.
After a certain number of years the audit reports are outlawed by the statute
of limitations and the correspondirg files wind up in the shredder-an! with
then not only any possibility for Internal Revenue to recover trillion of

This leans that basically Internal Revenue lust in every iratance begin
again-dro- scratch-«n unequal fight against profitsers who are increasingly
battle-hardened and increasingly protected.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. The Mountain of Tu amnion (in union: of 1m)

"TI/7. "TI/ID "II/ll mm:

 

Table 2. Taxes Ended but Recovered (u Mbliahod by the Revenue Smico;
in millions of_ 1m)

 

Key:
1. Violations of the IVA 2. Other Minoan tutu 3. Direct tutu

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Adninietrstion

The bill for restructmtion of the fimncisl edlinistrstion wee elso intro-
duced by Revi 110. but to dste it has been pessed only in the senste (on 11
November 1981 . even thougt it is regarded es s unsure of enorlous isportsnoe.
kilio Rabbi, e Christies Denocrst. dairies! of the finance conittes of the
chamber. who hopes to be sble st leest to get it on the sands this elm-er.
declsresn ”It's self-deception to consider edoptiu instnmentelities thst
sre sore somisticsted then those sheedy in force. unless eudite Mv. first
been intensified to the greeteet possible extent.”

'dhst sust therefore be done? Should sore personnel be hired? But won‘t it
then be ssid thet the econonic situation does not pernit ell thet hiring?
”It's very shorteiynted.‘ Rabbi ssid. 'becsule it overlooks the fact thst the
noneythuespentcenbeoffsetbytheemrecoveredmlthetsxevndenend
the isproved rspport thst would be eetsbliehed with the tuna/ere. The
problen. however. lies with the preveilim sttitude in the civil service. If
diligence on the port of iniividusl civil semnte is not solicited st the
highest level. there is little inclinstion in psrliuent to hire sore people.
”Re are smious.“ Psndolfi sdded. "not to lessen the notivetion of the person-
nel who are necesssrily the sole protagonists in the struggle millet tsx
evasion.” Something hss in feet been done with respect to hirimu 13.000
new employees heve been edded to the renks since the first of the yesr. These
are sctuelly forner tenporsry esployeee. however, who hsve hed no treininga
in practice. they represent sn sdditioml obstacle to efficiency in the work
0f the W10...

”And the offices.” D'Alels added. ”lust slso cooperste sore effectively with
the revenue service. At present. if they receive s neno they will soletiles
'toss' it end eosetines nske use of it: no one ever known whet its fete will
be." This is en obetscle of no little import in the fidlt squint ts:
evasion: it is en unexpected help for those who do not psy their tsxee. The
rivalry between two different officisl bodies is nost intone st the custom-
houses. where the revenue service end fimncisl offices content etch other
directly.

Oolucci (who- Poreics personslly assigned to the revenue service) spesks of

"e lsck of coordinstion between the 'yellow flslee' all the finsncisl offices.”
and of "irregularities in connection with the intervention csrrisd out both in
the suditim end in the evslustion of tax evssion'a he also speaks of “policies
thst are too discretiomry.” The iepreesion. now those who head hie. wee
thst he was choosing his words csrefully.

Revenue Service

Still quotilg colucci: ”The revenue service should revise certsin of its

methods of operetion with a. view to s sore rstionsl utilizetion of personnel.
acting in close conjunction with the fimnciel sdninistrstionJ' The role of
the revenue officers in trsckiru down tsx evsdere is iuiispemeble eni deci-

sive. For this reason so well. steps heve been token to bring the stuff
of the service (which has for yesrs been shorthsnded) up to full strength by

[1

FOR OPE-1C IAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

remiting 2,000 guards. l5006 nomouissioned officers end 200 officers. ihe
bill to strewthen the service, however. was introduced by “01:1 in lets
1978 end cemot be acted on until i985--thet is if everything goes well.

Is this one sore indicetion of protection for m eveders. who resend the
'yellow fie-es" es s redoubteble sdversery even unise- the "discretionary
policies“ to which Oolucci ads reference? It is difficult to give e defini-
tive smwer, but it is necessary to esphssise once sore how fer behiui we era
in the fight easinst tew evssion, even in respect to routine edsinistretive
ection. met ere the consequences? In this cese the enswer is essy. I-ersed
in e thousend tssks. burdemd with s mind of laws end reguletions to enforce.
the revenue officers fin! it incressimly difficult to operete with say degree
of selectivity. Only their dedicetion en! skill heve ensbled then to saxieve
results thet ere st tiles even exceptioml. considering the seens thet ere
evsilsble to thee.

Fiscel Receipt

Teke for eats-pie the cese of one of the few lews thet for better or worse heve
been inplanented during the pest 5 yen-s: the lsw sexing the fiscel receipt
conpulsory. Audits ere the exclusive responsibility of the revenue service.
which cennot enploy sore then s certein nunber of sen for the purpose. lbw
fines ere esseesed for violetions of the fiscel receipt lsw. end propoeels heve
elreedy been lsde for the telporery closure of business estsblishnente thet
have connitted nultiple violstiom: but the evssions outmber the fines.
Above ell. one is desling with a. type of evasion thst leeves no treoe: proof
must be obteined ”on the spot” or nothing further can be done. At the Ministry
of Finance they point out thet it is like traffic violstions: st leest e
nillion e dsy ere col-titted. eccording to estinstes. but no sore then 10.000
citations ere ever issued in say zit-hour period.

In the csse of the fiscsl receipt lsw. the retio of fines to violstions is of
course not ss low as 1 percent. but it is not e greet desl more then thet.
This situation gives rise to still enother diesdvsntsgen while the fiscel
receipts sske it possible to srrive st s sore precise deternimtion of e busi-
nessmen's i one for other tax purposes end especielly for the IRPI!‘ [expen-
sion unknown . achievement of this objective is still fer in the future end the
incidence of tsx evesion in the sercentile sector continues to be one of the
highest. At the ninistry they are seyirg. disconsolstelyn "With the IVA
[value-added and being psssed on to the custoeer. the principsl effect of the
fiscsl receipt to date has been en increese in hotel end restmlrsnt prices:
one lust continue to use it, however. becsuse there is no eesier some to
follow.”

Along other things, an stsosphere of connivence is to s certein extent being
reestablished between businessmen end custoneruen steosphere thst initislly
appeared to hsve been dispelled when the custoser wee cest in the role of
"adversary end auditor” of the businessman. "Defam your interests-uni
everyone's interestsuso thst the testes will be peid.” say the sinisterisl
leaflets that ecoompsny presentation of the fiscel receipt. Esther then pey
20,000 lire for e dinner with the IVA added. new choose to psy 15.000 lire
without the IVA.

12

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Loomoles in the Lane

Could the fiscal receipt also becoas a spectacular loophole in a amber-sons
and confused piece of legislation? For-ice contends that ”there are already
too sany badly written laws-olaws that go me:- little things rather than what
is isportant." His predecessors at the Hinistry of unanceuReviglio. Parriolfi
and Bruno Visentini h’.nself--havs always argued that it is necessary to avoid
engagirg in a bogus ”fiscal terrorists.” i.e., proclaiaing aessmes that later
have basically cone to nauQIt because of an insufficiency of technician capa-
ble of enforcing then.

It is also essential, however. to prevent the contain-neonatal comolidation-o
of tax evasion precisely as a. result of the gaps left open in a succession of
inadequate leasm'es. Consider for euasple the possibility of deductim expen-
ditures for gasoline from certain types of incoae. list happens. in a asst
many cases? You buy a decrepit autoaobile for a few 10.000-lire notes and
register it under your firs nane as a Work-related inplessnt." ‘me car then
simply sits in the garage or even in the street. but to Judge by the tax
mturn filed with the Internal Revenue it is as if the car loge 30.000 kilo-
Petm ”r ”tithe

What about audits. anduabove all-~the possibility of asking then? As things
are today. it is useless even to talk about it. Has not Inter-ml Revenue
itself. .noraover. publicly adsitted its own seai-ilpotsnce by resorting to the
notorious ”tax lotteries“? ‘ihess were supposed to serve as a scare tactic.
but have produced results so disconcerting as to sunset it would be advisable
to drop the whole idea once and for all.

These fiscal nessuras would therefore be quite benefiaial-wtros everyone’s
standpoint but above all fro- the standpoint of Internal Revenue-d: they were
completely revised or even abolished. In the case of certain taxes an! fees--
as for exasple those relating to govern-ant concessiomuths state perhaps
spams nore than it collects: in the case of certain other taxes. the yield

is so ninisal that it does not even begin to justify the enorlous expslrliture
of resources required for collection. especially in view of the traditional
scarcity am inadequacy of these resouces.

The problem is not nerely one of rationality but also one of image. An
internal revenue service that is iapotentnor in any event, cluuy and always
harried-will never be taken seriously. “The iapression prevails.” says
Colucci, "that any of the weapons of Internal Revenue are blunted. because--

among other thimsnpeople are certainly not convinced that they are dealing
with an efficient adsinistration."

Laws. regulations and other measures filter down fro- the parlissent. or at
least Pros the sinietriee. It is precissl in the "filtration ‘tags. however
(and especially at the parlialentary level that there is ormused resistance.
that pressure groups are active. and that corporate and partisan interests
prevail. A law. a regulation or other neasure arr-generally speakimb-initi-
ated with the best of intentions but frequently will! up weakened or debssed by

a series of cosprosises. The results produced are often the opposite of what
was origimlly intended.

l3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fiscal Register

the "fiscal register'uwhich was supposed to be the keystone of the Italian tax
systesm-hsd a lost difficult gestation period and subsequently, for so many
years. has had a user-able existence. It. too. has had the sisfortune to
suffer free a essence of publicity whid: was disproportiomte to the results
that could objectively be expected-«mt least in the initial phase. The super
ficial enthusiass for “pushing a button and nailing the tax evader" certainly
did it a disservice. 0n the other haul. the resistance (sore or less organ-
ized) to its introduction has unquestiombly retriered an incredibly great
service to tax evaders. so such so as to create the rather well-founded isprwes-
sion that the register was being boycotted in an effort to ensure a delay that
could conceivably stable the tax evsders to clais i-unity fro- persecution in
the Mine.

Whether or not that is the case. there can be no doubt that the fiscal regis-
ter in any event case too late for a tax systes that sust increasingly-4nd
inediatelyo-deal with the energency sitmtions attendant on the econosic
crisis as well as with the urgent need for fairness in taxation. Hany of the
distortions of the tax systes (and of course the lost egg-essively ruthless
"distortion" of all. tax evasion itself) can be ascribed to this delay.

Now. however, the nechanisn has been set in action. and the tax register
appears at last to be assusirg a substantial role on the tax scene. ‘lhe
systes is already in a position to supply a great any of the elelsnts neces-
sary for the so-called ”cross checks" to verify that declared insole corres-
ponds to actual inoose. It is now possible to have audit results with a .
nrgin of error of around 20 percent. which is already quite good by 00.1111“
son with the audits--bssed on inductive reasoniw-that have for sore than 30
years detersinsd the legality or illegality of tax return. ‘Ihese cross
checks. for their part. can theoretically "cats: up with" 90 percent of the
taxpayers or preemptive taxpayers. They would deal s blow to at least a
large segsent of the tax evaders. It will nonetheless take ; long tiles there
are insufficient personnel. and not all persoml are fully qmlifisd. After
all, data system-mo matter how flexible-are certainly incapable of trinity
order out of the chaos that exists anorg taxes, fees. tribunals and custom
because of the lasentable lack of coordination “018 the various services.

It is therefore essential that the tax register be Isnsged by a reorganised
financial adsinistration. In the reorganization bill. for exaspls. two inno-
vations are contenplated that can no lower be postponed-measly. a single
general directorate and a single persomel directorate-with the goal of

eliminatim absurd partitions that presently exist along idiwidml services
and even along individual offices of the ease service.

It is therefore necessary to close an enorsous gap. as for example in the case
of real estate. both inprcved an! unisproved. Only in a few pilot provinces
has a. start been aade on recording data that refer cosprehensively to the
tramactiom (purchases an! transfers) that took place in 1981 (and in am
event. none that took place any earlier than 1980). Even in these pilot
provinces. noreover. you have an infmution void that goes back for decades
and has been aggravated by the chronic crisis of the real estate register.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increase in the umber of mu declantiom (for-e 7‘00 or 101) filed by
workere and peneionere hes elowed down the etoreee of dsta thet are euentiel
(especially in the cane of the 101's) to the "mac checks.” In the greet
njority of cases. only incone tron necuritiee ie put into Ienory.

Provision]. Aunt Reunite

Flore years lust cccordingly pass More the tax register in fully operetive.

end heron the flout ageinst tea: evasion can uke coneiOtent m. In the
leentine. one lust continue to rely on the goodwill of finenciel Inga-e. on
the efficiency of the revenue eeuice, end on the traditional political coro-

almdy
paying their texee. more in talk-openistent telk-nof mining the IVA with
a view to memim the eecond~etage tax reduction echeduled for this you-s
there is always eoneone who will ehow eolicitude for the eo-celled "legalized”
tax evasion end thereby nourish the magma government deficit. ‘nae 1e91-
iced tea: evasion. in this imtence, would relate to the nor mion
unknown] m can [confederation of sun hum]. which t then no longer
enjoy the privilege of the tax «caption.

Iihat is certain. neawhile. ie that the provisioml We will contime to
he in effect. The only anti-tax evasion neasm-e, mover. in precisely the
one established by preeidcntiel decree concerning the provisioml eudit
reeulte. The decree hecane necessary when the tiecel regieter eupplied the
initial deta on the i977 crcce checke. Irregulcritiee eppeared in appmxi-
nately 600,000 cues, cone of which were poeeible canon of couplete tax eve-
eion (by rewho appearintheIVAornIPSfilee hut notinthoee for
direct texee . The tinenciel officee do have the poeeihility of

the tax owed fairly rapidly on the basic of e. provisional Audit, without

nrejudicitg the subsequent final eudit. It ien't mch. but for now-Mortu-
mtely--it'e ell thet can he done.

(DWIGHT: IL mm 19%.

10992
(30: nob/223

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roomc ITALY

ECDNOKISRS' REPORT OII STATE O! W!
Milan IL norm in Itelisn 1 Jun 82 pp Iii-b7

[Article by hols n. Benedetti. Ifisio bps m1 mimic Vslentinin "Devel-
usticn in the 1980's will Not Help the hport Trsde']

[rexﬁ Sum-y of u» Report

The ceuses cf the weeJmeee of the lire ere not sorely situstionsl but derive
in large assure fro- the structtn-sl problem of intermticml trede. Our
enslysis of the report will comentrste on five points: 1) evolution of the
Itelien eccnosy: 2) exports! 3) isportm h) prospects: sad 5) proposels.

The decision in fsvor of econosic integrsticn into the luropun orbit endo-
sore generell speskinguthe western orbit (hrshsll Plen. custom union.
(Jonson Market hse had a. profound effect on the cosposition of Itely's foreign
trade. The industrial systes becsse specialised in the technologically estate
sectors precisely becsuse they are free fros cospetition fros the United
States. uhich dosinsted the western econoriee during the postwer period.

The systes has also suffered frcs llc pmtectioniss, which is directed prim-
ily toward protecting the production of colsodities sud: es groin end sect--
arses where Itely is treditionslly st s dissdvsntsge. This hes forced Itsly
to buy on the world's highest-priced mksts without being sble to oontrect
for the export of its mufsctured goods on equslly feversble terse.

The hiya incidence of lsbor disputes. end the high labor costs. of the 1970's
cospelied the induetnsl systes to decentralise in an effort to increese lsbor
productivity. Alec in relsticn to this process. essll end sedius-scsle Itslisn
producers entered the intermtionsl nrket by epecislising in various of the
sc-cslled ”nture" sectors--I.ture. thet is. in terns of the sesns of produc-
ticn or in terse of quslity. These exports succeeded in defectim the cospeti-
ticn of the developed. end the developing. countries by virtue of law lsbor
costs. In nuserous instsncss Italy hes obtsined on increasing shsre of the
world nrket: in the mufscturiw sector. Itelisn exports inmeseduduring
the 19705-41». 6.8 percent to 7.16 percent of the totsl exports of the other
industrislised countries.

The nusber one its. on the debit side of the trsde belsnce consists of petro-
leus products. It poses s probles thst is indieputsble end difficult to
resolve. st least in the opinion of sons of the perticipsnte in the discussion!

16

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but it is now being aatched by the outflow in the chesical sector resulting
fro- the failure of the attespt lads throuaxout the 1970's to create an indus-
trial pole of attraction concentrated in the South. The third largest itea on
the debit side is the deficit in agricultural food production, which developed
not only because BBC policy has penalised Mediterranean agricultural produc-
tion but also because of the charges that have occurred in cor-user tastes
during the past 30 yearenchangee that have revealed Italian agricultural
enterprises to be lacking in adaptability.

The Italian cysts: is in a state of continuing evolution: throughout the
1950‘s and 1960's it set intermtioml cospetition successfully thanks to the
low cost of labor and raw sateriale. In the 1970's. however, the picture
charged cospletely. The aodel began to salfunction as a comequence of the
wage increases and rising energy prices. An econoaic policy was adopted that
atteapted to sustain production by increasing tramfer pay-ante to the coun-
ity and to private weineeses. These expenditures created a deficit in the
public sector which in turn has resulted in a oontiming adjust-out of the
rate of exchange-4 circuastance that for ease ties had the effect of revivi-
fyim the imiuetrial system.

At the outset of the 1980's this seohanies. too, entered a crisis stage. ihe
positive effects of the devaluations have been disinishing substantially, and
the impact of the inflationary differential is war-kit; increasingly to Italy's
disadvantage. A structural policy mt be established, in addition to control-
lim the deficit.

In certain strategic sectors the saJor decisions aust be do by public m-
sent (energy. electronics and tele-tice seotore)--decisions which will even
take the fore of the organisation of public desand-While in the ”nture"
sectors industrial productivity out be increased further and be adapted to
the new dimensions of the sarket. All this. however. aust be eubordimted to
the necessity for supportirg technological innovation art research that will
sake it possible to expand the scope of technologically advanced production
even in the nture sectors.

Analysis of the Report

Trade balances in the red. as the first signs of an econoaic revival appear!
foreign exchange reserves dangerously depleted. so lud'l so as to pose the
threat of a devaluation of the lira in the fall. Once again the foreign
”link"--that is to say. the complex of intermtional factors that coalition
the Italian econoayuis exerting its influence on eoonoaic policy. In the
coming nonthe the monetary authorities will be facim a difficult choice. a
choice that is sore political than technical: maely. whether (us how such)
to throttle down the econoaic revival in order to save the exchame rate.

But is there a way to avoid the foreign "link“? In it possible to sodify the
structural factors that restrict econoaic policy to a very tar-row track
between successive devaluations and econoaic etagmtion? iheee questions were

put to the group of econosiste that Ieete every 6 sonths at the invitation of
IL NONI!) to put the finishing touches on a report on topics of Iajor iapor~
tancec Hario Baldassarri. instructor in econoaics at Bologna: Innocenso

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cipolletta. director of Isa) [Institute for the Study of Boone-1c henna];
Marcello De Oecco. instructor at Sienna and the luropean University of Florence;
Lucio Isso. professor of eoonosics at Rose: hrio honti. instructor in aonstary
theory and policy at Bccconi University in Milan: Franco neviglio. professor
of the science of finance at the University of Turin; and Luigi Spaventa.
professor of econosics at Rose and deputy of the independent left. Because of
his specific expertise in the field of world trade. hbrisio Onida. professor
of international econosice at Bocconi University in Hilan. was also invited to
take part in the discussion. Angelo Tantaasi. instructor in econosice at
Bologna and secretary of the Pro-stale. research center. was custosarily also
included in the group that drafted these reports.

The Hunger for Innovation

The latest data concerning the balance of trade have served to confirs that as
of the end of "arch the deficit had already exceeded 5 trillion lire. ‘l'o pro-
tect the lira the Rank of Italy has recently drawn down the foreign exchange
reserves. to the extent of expending as such as several hundreds of billions of
lirs per day. This was done. loreover. at a tile when the industrial “aachine'
was Just beginning to move fmard again and the inflationary spiral was show-
ing sons signs of slackening. So once again the perverse train of events is
set in notion: alnost as soon as the econosy has begun to aove toward.
Italy‘s accounts with foreign countries tend dangerously toward the debit

side. One of the reason? is that conpaniee are rebuilding their inventories.
in the belief that an intends in doseetic deund is i-inent. The greater
part of the deficit in this period--a deficit already awavated by the
strengthened position of the dollar-is caused by the increasing importation
of petroleus and raw lateriale for the unmfacturing sector of industry. An
ites-by-itea analysis of the trade data. on the other hand. shoots a favorable
overall balance in the case of iteas other than pstroleun products. In con-
trast to the positive results in traditionally active sectors such as clothing.
textiles and Iachinery and the good perfomnce of sectors such as astalsork-
ing and transportation equipsent. the accounts for the chesical. food. paper
and leather sectors are sinking into the red.

According to the participants in the discussion. the exceptional disemions of
the deficit are also to be attributed to the international situation. Indeed.
the Italian econony has actually been loving forward at a sore rapid rate than
the economies of its own trade partners; but under these conditions the dennd
for Italian products abroad increases sore slowly than the dosestio demnd for

inported goods.

Ihe balance of payments represents still another "question sark." Here. the
deficit for the first 3 aonths of this year renined at the level of the pre-
vioue year (3.1533 trillion lire in 1982 conpared to 3.1008 trillion in 1981).
but the high degree of vulnerability of the Italian ecomay to foreign in-
fluences is a source of concern. In 1981 the scarcity of credit available to
domestic fine (because of isport deposits and the credit crunch) induced

many Italian firas to contract indebtedness on foreign financial sarkets. This
has helped to provide "breathing space” for the balance of payaents. but has
also raised serious questions with respect to shat will happen when these debts
must be repaid.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
was
! :

d“.’

g

 

h v. -
2'2:
.

v4“;

 

.~
30
3

0.0mm. Moo. oto

 

Wood uxl cork products
Windham
Robin-n

00000

-..

00000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors of the report, however, indicate that the probless of foreign
trade are not exclusively of a situational nature. If amthing. the oscilla-
tions of certain key variables (emchmge rate. level of world (island. the
intentional situation) have accentuated the iabalances of a foreign trade
structure that has developed over the years.

i. Eyelution of the Italian lconoay

into certain specialisation with respect to products and to carport larketa
that leduin the late i950'e-~to Italy's Isabsnhip first in the Gusto-s Union
and subsequently in the (lo-on hrket. 1his produced a trend tmrd speciali-
zation by Italy in the ”nture" sectors aui toward a gradual doe-Mia of the
advanced sectors--a trend that was reinforced during the years that followed.
The situation was further complicated. in a secolli mass. by the agricultural

Italy was accordingly unsuccessful (unlike Ger-any an! Japan. in the sale
period) in Iakirg the transition iron the production of counter goods to the
production of goods requiring an inveetaent in advanced technology. in attespt
use in fact lads by introduce advanced technology selectively into sectors
such as petrodrelicals, nuclear engineering and electronics. heed with the
response of foreign conpetition. however. am because of the credit crunch in
1963-6“. even the lost courageous atteapts at this type of invest-em were
umuccessful. round the end of the 1960‘s. the charge in the relationship
between unions and Ianageaent led Italian big and middle-scale business to
react by deosntralizixc production-«hat is to w. by hirirg fron outside the
ranks of its mm work force. With the exception of the steel, petrochemical
and autonobile industries. this mono-tench characterised Italian industry
throughout the decade of the 1970's and led to significant charges in the
very structure of foreign trade.

Durimg the past 12 years we have witnessed an increasim specialization by
Italy in the products of light irliustries that are relatively laborintemive.

It is a phenomenon vhichuasong the ao-called developed countries-~appears to
apply only to the Italian economy (see Table 2).

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m1. 2. Iterby-Itel Oolposition of the hports of mm Goods (1979)
(vsluos in percentages)

. ..
N 9 90°00
{2.5%.}. 2.3.2.2.!

. 0 0°”
gztgbz’i‘ubagu

ezezaezzzsze
32222255222!

93:222.-

 

Keys -
1. Unitod Kiwloe 8. Piml producer goods
2. Pine]. oonsuler goods . 9. u follow: Mine tools
3. he follows: Textiles 10. Agriculture]. mi textile until.”
1... Clothing 11. nectriosl Miner:
5. Footweu' 12. Office “into
6. Furniture 13. Non-fin). goods
7. Motor vehicles 1“. Source: OIGD ehbontion

Crew; 1. How Competitive Is Italy?

Ms mm Mull II We!!!
GOA

' (2) Comm—3 "t" '
WWUMW: ,V
”DIM/tilt '

I,“

(3)

Owen eomuao u. M
alum-em! mm
s emu '07. eel need ham-u-

lhn': GNU)

9|

 

' "’0 H 72 I) 10 1! 1| 1) ,0 10 N O!
Keys
1. Italy's shame of (mi conpstitive position in) the world Irket for
exports of eenufsctuzed goods
2. Gospetitive position. \moleeele prices for ludsotured goods: Inim-
trisl countries visa-vie Its]: (sou-cos IFS expsmion MD
3. Italy's share of the values of exports of and goods (in 1975
prices) by the industrislised countries (some: UN)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite the present difficult situation. the picture that esergee tron e.
detailed smlysis of the sector-bructor oosposition or the Italian helance
of pay-eats is still relatively reassuring. me Italian share of the export

countries increased-«trim tho i9?0's--to 7.“ percent fro- 6.8 percent. and
this appears to have been due basically to factors relating to oospetitiveness:
there is. in fact. a positive correlation between the Italian share of this
trade. on the one hand. and the iniex of colpetitivensee (stated in terse of

tries (low wages. low prices ) or by the edvmed countries (Ions efficient
technologies and the resultsnt low prices, or qualitative improve-cuts): 1))
nature techmlogies, that is to say. those which are quickly transferable to
the emergent countries (petrochemicals. in the me of the one countries):
and c) nature companies present in those sectors where there is an obvious

internatioml levels. If one uses this clasnification. it does not seen thst
the balance sheet for the structural evolution of Italian specialization osn

First of all, it is important to mine the situation with respect to commer
goods. for the fact is that Italian exports are substantially oriented toward
these goods. u in the case of certain so-cslled traditional sectors (teat-

ces of specialisation am coepetitivensse thst were either stable or actually
high and continui to rise. in a meter of sectors linked to the Mine-
building industr/"aee Graph 2). 'Ihese were sectors associated with the
production or those consuler goods the carport of which produced superior
results for Italy. se for maple textile. woodworking and lestherworkim
“Chirp".

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that is more closely linked to applied research and experimentation at the
engineering level than to laboratory research. A distinction thus becoses
apparent between products that are linked to innovations derived tron basic
research. on the one hand. and goods associated with engineering I'ltnow how”
and applied research-areas in which Italy still denomtrates a capacity for
Me

In the area of technologically advanced products. Italy deeomtrates consider
able lay-a circuastance which lay perhaps stea fro- several different canes:
1) Some of these sectors are eta-rounded by barriers calculated to preclude the
entry of new competitors; this is certainly true in the case of electronic
components. 2. 'lhe policy of a progressive devslmtion of the lira-~a policy
which Italy has followed for 12 years--has produced adverse effects on the
structure of production. by favoring the protection of traditioml products
and serving as a disincentive to innovation. 3. The imufficiency of titan-
cial resources for use in research and develop-eat has slowed technological
reconversiom indeed. it lust be renenbered that the structure of Italian
coapanies is sore dependent on external borrowim than is the case in other
EEC countries. It. The lack of explicit intervention in the for: of an
adequate iniustrial policy has ends it difficult to movide incentives for
investment in research.

These considerations raise sole questiom concerniw the tutu-e prospects of
the Italian export trade. particularly in those sectors where the cospetition
cones tron efficient and highly tested industries such as the Goran. Japanese
and u.s. industries. Indeed. it was the "advanced" countries that in the
decade of the 1970's caused Italian exports to decline significantly in tens
of percentages (10 points in electrical household appliances. 3.5 points in
ofﬁce Iachines. 3 points in motor vehicles). As for the celpetition fros
countries of relatively recent industrialisation (Brazil. hectico. Taiwan.

Hong Kong). it should he noted that the "energeut" countries of the 1970's
have concentrated on only a few sectors that could pose a specific threat to
Italian production. This is the case in the textile. clothing. footwear.
leather and hides sectors. In other sectors. the penetration of the elergent
countries has entered into cospetition with Japamee. Anerican and Goran
industry (civilian electronics. assembly processes. cull homehold electric
appliances. optical instruments and precision equipsent)--products. in other
words. that do not have a significant iapact on the Italian econoq. In
other sectors (furniture. ceramics. Jewelry. sports equip-ant). the experience
and specialization of the concerned Italian conpanies serve to restrict the
capacity for penetration by the eaergent countries. Anon; other thim, we
are talking about exports of goods that have a lisited elasticity with respect
to price. or that serve to limit the danger that Italy's trade position will
be threatened by the price war of the energent countries. It is in the inter-
Iediate sectors. on the other hand. that the cospetition relates to price
(steel. internediate textiles) rather than to clothing and netalworkitg in
general. Overall. the "price sensitivity" of the goods that Italy exports is
therefore no greater than is the case in other countries.

23
FOR OFFICIAL IiSl-I ONLY

Market but also by factors relatim to Chang” in consumer tas- ee~-d:azges in
response to which the Italian food production syste- has not denomtrated
sufficient capacity for adaptation. On the other hand. one can point to a
positive factor-the currently favorable position of a sector that tradition~
ally shows a deficit, muly, the tramportation equip-eat sector.

a. hoepecte

panics in the industrial triangle to one that is widely distributed throughout
extensive geommical areas.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Graph 2. Mina-y In on the Upovim, Homvor (in billion at lira.)

L——

13” ‘

 

107‘ 1m "N an 1.7. 1m 1m 1m ‘6:
m -

Key:

1. Mina: lb. (helical mi amm pmducu
2. Clothing 5. bod product;
3 . Toxtiloo 6 . Jumu-y-Augunt

Graph 3. mo Differentials for may (1m {oi-£78 = 100)

  

121 Inﬂalﬂl-IN

lnfhtbm MUM (Illh - O.)

GFIAIBLASOIDBFIAIOLAIOIO
1. Rohtivo inflation Elm: viva-vie ac)

Key:

2. Lin Vn-l-Vil ECU buxom 0mm: Unit]

25

)R OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the trade hisnce on the internstioml finsncisl lsrkets. In feet, the
sharp decline in the eta-plus of the petrolewproducim countries (even ifnin
the Jung-ant of 0.11 the participants-we no dosing with s cyclic mew-snail)
is reflected both in term of s decreased shsorption of goods by these coun-
tries an! in terns of s demssed svsilsbility of funds onthe Moll”
Isrket and. in general. on the internstioml finsneisl lsrket. This trend

as the Itelisn syste- in which fimnciai protection“. her-by ilpeding the
competition of foreign colpsnieeugrestly linited the ospscity for acquit-ix;

liquid assets on the intentions]. harlot. In this connection. sons of the
economists esﬂneised thst this policy hsd hroudzt shout. en increasingly

with the rest of the world in terns of sssets and cspital, acquiring the
foreign exchange which enables the Itslisn suthorities to replenish their
reserves by means of operations on the foreign exdtsnge nrkets. In addition.

In conclusion. the picture that elerge: m: the smlysis of the principsl
specielizstions of Italy's foreign trade is not one of the rosiest. but neither
is it one of the glooniest. There are undoubtedly week spots-weak spots that

Rather then speak in terns of generic industrial “conversion, whet is needed
ocmzcm: H. mm 1982.

10992
(30. axon/223

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OF1NC1Al.tEﬂE(l“LV

Bummlc ITALY

PROBLEH 0F ABSENTEBISH. MOBILITY IN INDUSTRY DISCUSSED
Absenteeism, Mobility Decrease

Hilan CORRIERB DELLA SERA in Italian 6 May 82 p 15

[Article: "Absenteeism and Mobility: Is It True That Someone in Italy is Norking
Like a Japanese?"]

[Text] We are attempting to make an initial estimate of
two phenomena that are at the center of new industrial rela-
tionships.

The data show that despite some people‘s optimise the problems
are very far from being solved. Some results have occurred
sore because of the econonic situation and the weakness of
the union than because a change has taken place in relations
between business and labor.

The unions and business management now seen to be in agreement on at least two
points: absenteeism in factories is on the downswing, and the initial experiment
of loving fron one cospany to another is proving to be a failure. However. the
agreement goes no further; it stops there. Both the causes that have produced
these two trends and the possible werits and responsibility involved are assessed
in different ways. '

CORRIERE DELL'ECONOMIA has made a co-parison of the various positions, as it often
does, by gathering a series of state-ents "directly-fro: the source." We are re-
porting the- along with other supporting inforlation and two statements aade to

us by the president of the Turin Industrial Union, Sergio Pininfarina. and by

the central director for personnel and organization at Alfa Rosco, Giuseppe Medusa.

What do these signs wean? Are we witnessing a change in behavior? A change in
industrial relations? Can it be true that Italians are now working like Japanese?

Before giving the floor to the parties involved, it will be helpful to take a
quick look at the figures on these new trends in order to put then into perspective.

Let's begin with absenteeism.

27

JAI.U§E1HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Official data show absenteeism in quite a new light: from 1979 to 1981,
absences fro: work in the Milan area (a significant benchmark for national
comparison) have fallen by 2 percent in general manufacturing. This decrease
is a bit too slight to indicate that the problem is behind us. There has been
a change, maybe even a turnaround, but it is too soon to call it a definite
downturn.

If we take a look at the reasons most frequently given for not coming to the
factory or office (see the two pertinent graphs on following pages), we see
that absences have been reduced mainly because of less conflict. In other
words, there have been fewer strikes. Absences because of illness (the cate-

gory where the most significant abuses are found) have stayed at the same level
as in the past.

What weight, then. can be given to statements (which industrialists have been
making, too) that absenteeism is being greatly reduced?

There probably are individual companies where this trend has taken on exceptional
proportions. This is just an affirmation that cannot be supported by precise
statistical data, but it is confirmed indirectly by what has been happening at
Fiat. where absences have fallen off so much that it would seem that workers

are coming in even though they are ill.

Why is all this happening?

One answer is obvious : concern about keeping jobs and massive. widespread
recourse to the Wage Supplement Fund have induced lesser qualified workers to
be more careful (we should remember that some companies have hastened to add
even habitual absentees to the Wage Supplement list). The union's attitude
has changed; it is no longer ready to protect excessive absenteeism. The judi-
ciary's att.tude has also changed; it has descended into the arena of public
employment to combat compiiaui doctors and has offrn upheld provisions for
dismissal adopted by private business.

Now we come to mobility.

The figures supplied by the Piedmont Labor Office (this is the only region
where an "official" experiment has been done on intercompany mobility) leave

no room for doubt: workers are rejecting job offers and the companies are rejec—
ting workers. In short, it is a complete fiasco, despite the proof of availa-
bility provided by the union.

The reasons for failure are obvious: businesses are reluctant to hire trans-
fer workers because they think the least trustworthy show up on "the list."
Those who work in a big business look askance at a job in a smaller business
because there is less union "protection," less job security and, generally,

lower wages. Finally. there is the tendency to put off quitting till the last
minute in order to take advantage of the Rage Supplement Fund (even with a
second job without loss of seniority and, therefore, less of "step" raises and
severance pay).

28

l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USB(HVLY
FOR 0FT1C1AI.US£JONLV

Hhut conclusions can be drawn?

Abuse of absenteeism and low worker mo.ility rennin problems to be solved.

In the first case, the new trend's departure from figures reached in the past
is to be attributed more to the econonic situation. to prudence. or fear than
to a greater sense of responsibility or a different attitude.

No one has thought of introducing stricter rules against abuse. because—-it
has been said--the workers have learned their lesson. In some cases. existing
guarantees have even gotten worse, as in the case of supervision where the 08L
[Office of Studies and Legislation] have certainly not shown any greater effi-
ciency than the IRAN [National Health Insurance Institute].

The sane can be said for the other problem under discussion. It is symptosr
atic that Confindustria [General Confederation of Italian Industry] has now
forgotten, or nearly forgotten. the eaploynent and nobility provisions that
were once at the top of its list of demands. One night almost get the ispres-
sion that business prefers to scout on the union's weakness as long as there
are no precise norms. One indication of this is that what has been accepted
in Turin has not happened in other regions. where labor representatives may
not have been as weak or as worried as the Piedmontese. In other words, the
threat of layoffs has forced the union to make a virtue of necessity.

Does business not want to take advantage of the situation to retake ground
lost in the past or use it to "destroy" the union for good? But what would
happen if power relations changed?

One thing is certain: no better industrial relations than presently exist can
be built on a changeable economic situation and on fear.

29

JAI.USE(IULY
Rate in percent

Total causes

Non-job related illness
Maternity

Strikes

 

3 construction)

lost and hours worked (9) leaves 1.00-1.50 pct
(10) Job-related illness and
lO 22-ll.95 t°rcent accidents 1.07-0.71 pct
S 49- 6.75 " (ll) Honeymoon leave 0.15-0.08 ct
1.28- 1.07 " (l2) Other causes 0 l7-0.0S ct
l.06~ 1.80 ” (13) Source: our interpretation of
data from Confindustria
30

IVJIIOFI1CIAL USIICHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(2) to ruin» Gell’nsomels'ro hc'J 9-00 m: Men“
"ff".

(5)

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(ll)

 

[1) Sharp Drop in Strikes in Lombardy
(2) Causes of absenteeisa in the Milan area (manufacturing excluding construction)
Ratio of hours lost and hours worked; the data are taken from a sample of

manufacturing companies, including all those with more than 500 employees)
(3) Rate in percent
(4) Total of causes of absenteeism 12.61-10.76 percent
(5) Non-job related-illness 6.98- 6.47 "
(6) Maternity 1.69- 1.31 "
(7) Strikes 1.64- 0.72 "
(8) Leave of absence 1.19- 1.71 "
(9) Job-related illness and accidents 0.43- 0.41 "
(In) Other causes 0-57- 0-05 "

(HI Honeymoons 0.11- 0.09 "
(12) Source: our interpretation of data from Assolombarda

31

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reemploynent "Fiasco' in Piedmont
Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 6 May 82 p 15

[Article by Giuseppe d'Adda and Renzo Ruffielli: ”The Reemployment Mechanism
Has Been a 'Piaaco' in Piedmont"]

[Text] with the passing months the "list" has gotten a little shorter. The
7,500 workers put on the mobility list by Fiat now number 6,550. However.

the "reemployment" plan agreed to by the company and the unions after the
sharpest dispute in the last 10 years has not been of any help here. The 950
employees who have dropped off of the list have found new jobs "on their own."
They have therefore been "spontaneously" cut from the list. All the others
are waiting for a "labor-market management" instrument to work when it has

so far practically not gotten off the ground.

Labor nobility was started experimentally in Turin and Piedmont on 15 February.
The workers on the list were offered 198 jobs over a 2-month period. To fill
these jobs the labor office called 651 laid-off workers; 71 of these did not
show up and 556 turned them down. Only 24 took the jobs offered. But not

all of these worked out either: 12 were not hired because they failed either
the medical exam or the probationary period.

The end of the first 2 months of the testing period has been marked by a series
of arguments over the "refusals.“

For business. the workers' saying "no" means the experiment has failed, but for
the unions it is a much more serious matter that other companies have refused
to hire the workers laid off by Fiat.

Franco Lotito, national secretary of the FLM [Federation of Metalworkers], says,
"In many cases the jobs offered in no way matched the duties and qualifications
of the jobs the workers had at Fiat."

Sergio Puppo, the other national secretary of the FLM, says, "Management must
explain why the workers on the mobility list never succeed in finding a job
while thousands of other former Fiat employees have already changed jobs. At

this point you have to wonder whether it may not be a disadvantage to be on
the list."

Fur the purposes of worker coordination on the Wage Supplement Fund, the jobs

offered by the reemployment office were refused for quite valid reasons. "Most

of the new jobs were in companies with fewer than 15 workers, and they could be
fired without cause.

"Many of the refusals were due to errors made by Fiat in drawing up the list.

"In one case. a machinist was offered a job as an electrician, and he just
could not do it."

32

liDl‘OlﬂﬂC]Al.lﬂ5£!OhﬂJV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Turin Industrial Union feels that job mobility has not worked mainly because
there are no sanctions against those who turn down new jobs. Such sanctions,
which even some unions agree with, would include cutting off payments from the
Nage Supplement Fund (which comes to more than 90 percent of net wages). This
"corrective" should therefore be introduced as soon as possible into the present
system.

But even businessmen do not deny that it will take a long time for all the laid-
off workers on the list to find a job, even if sanctions are introduced. Still,
the experiment does have great value, especially for the future.

"when we set up the job nobility system," said Cesare Annibaldi. a Fiat indus-
trial relations official, "we knew it could not work perfectly overnight. In

a situation like this, with a very weak labor market, the difficulties we are
having should be considered normal. But when the labor market recovers somewhat.
job mobility will prove to be an instrument well adapted to its needs. We can
avoid repeating what happened in 1977-78 when companies that needed personnel
could not find anybody even though there were thousands of workers on Wage Sup-
plcment. For this reason, the union, too, should work hard to make job nobility
succeed."

'Preeentiam' Becomes a Problem
Milan CORRIERE DELLA SBRA in Italian 6 Hay 82 p 15

(Article: "And Now There la the Problem of 'Preaentiem'"]

[Text] The winds of crisis have blown away many things. Both myths and cer-
tainties have crumbled, and habits and style have changed, even and especially
in the factories. The myth of the secure corporation has been buried by the
Wage Supplement Fund and layoffs. The union's militant image has faded, but
management's image has been "freshened up." Power relationships have visibly
changed over a decade.

Nobody is writing about the problems of "disaffection" or "refusal to work"

any more. Nobody seems to remember the hundreds of young people back in 1978-79
who quit Fiat after barely 2-3 months on the "line" at Mirafiori because "you
can earn 500,000 lire a month anywhere." -

Absenteeism is among the more )r less illustrious victims of the crisis. Three
years ago, on 1 February in Naples (or, rather, in Pomigliano d'Arco), the strike
called by the union over the murder of Guido Rossa turned into a long weekend.
Almost 50 percent of the Alfasud workers, about 7,500 people, "stretched" the
protest closing (which came on a Nedne:day) with 2 days of sick leave (Thursday
and Friday).

The company bewailed a loss of 3 billion lire. The union condemned the episode.
But the long weekend did not stir up too much of a fuss. For Pomig ieno, people

said, it was not all that "abnormal." In fact, Alfasud has remained, rightly or
wrongly, the symbol of the ungovernable, unmanageable factory.

33

FOItOOIIClAI.lﬂIECIULN
INDI OIWHCJAI.IISEZ(HVLV

ln 3 years a lot of things have changed in the automobile industry on the out-
skirts of Naples. In recent days. Ettore Massacesi, president of Alfa Romeo,
said, 'ﬁhe rate of absenteeism for all of 1981 came to nearly 16.5 percent;

in the first 2 months of this year it has fallen to 11.9 percent." And even
this record has been surpassed. In March, when the company was deciding on

the "lists" of workers to be laid off for 12 months, an all-time low of 6-7 per-
cent was reached. In April, when the most critical moment had passed, things
got a little worse. But absenteeism still stood at about 8-9 percent, an average
that would have been considered unattainable only a few months before. Every-
thing seems to indicate that even in "settling-down" phases absenteeism will
increase only slightly ever present rates.

Pomigliano d'Arco is thus no longer a negative symbol but is becoming a "normal"
plant. But the outcome of the "case" of Alfasud is only the most visible aspect
of a more general trend: absenteeism has been declining almost everywhere. In
companies of all sizes, the "medically certified binge"--as it was called in
former years--has been dwindling. This is true not only in industry; in pub-
lic administration, too, the figure of the Grand Absentee, as Walter Tobagi
dubbed him, is disappearing.

Gaetano, the Catania postman who managed to stay home 4 years out of 5 on the
job, has been turned in and sent to jail. In Turin, people who moonlighted by
being absent more than 100 days a year are down to one job.

In 1968 before the autumn heat wave, absenteeism in Italy went up on an average
of 8-9 percent. Then at the beginning of the 1970‘s the trend was noticeably
higher because--it is unanimously felt--the practice of not paying the worker
for the first 3 days leave was eliminated and company doctors' eXaminations were
abolished.

In 1974, Confindustria noted an average absenteeism quite close to 14 percent.
It was calculated that "abusive absenteeism" exceeded 4 percent. This came to
a trillion lire a year wasted for the national economy.

In this same period, companies found themselves obliged to increase staff per-
sonnel to account for a rather high average of absences, one that had come to
be considered a structural phenomenon.

Alfa Romeo even "structured“ its staffing to deal automatically with a 24 percent
rate of absenteeism.

Since 1974 the averages have been gradually diminishing, but the most noticeable
drop has been shown since 1980. In the last 2 years it has fallen almost 10 per-
cent at Fiat. At Mirafiori, absentees now average 5-6 percent of the work force.
'niis is a record that is hard to beat in Italy.

To a lesser extent, the same thing has happened in the other companies of Italy.
Pro-1969 rates have not yet returned, but they are coming close. All that does

not take into account the effects "induced" by the fall in absenteeism. Micro-
conflicts. for example, have almost disappeared (at Alfasud the average was 1,000

36

FOIIOIIICIAI.USllelN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ministrikes a year; at-Fiat individual episodes took more than 3 typewritten pages
a day to record). Tardiness diminished noticeably.

"Absenteeism is not a problem for business at this time," admits. Felice Mor-
tillaro, director of Federmeccanica. "Presentism" is caused by fear of losing
one's job, the end of a kind of "condoning" attitude on the part of the union.

the judiciary and public opinion and by less conflict in the plant; yet another
phenomenon is at least partly the cause of it: supernumerary personnel. As
absences have diminished, companies have essentially found themselves overstaffed.

Fiat has "counted" in its plant more than 12,000 people more than in the '70's.
Alfa Romeo has at least 3,000 more. That has happend while, on paper, the labor
force has stayed the same. "Presentism" (which was once limited to paid days)
is therefore one of the causes of the increase in applications to the Wage Sup-
plement Fund and in layoffs.

It now remains to be seen whether the new rates of absenteeism will stabilize
at present levels even if the crisis takes a positive turn. Various business-
men are optimistic on this subject. However, Confindustria recalls that "absen-

ces are closely linked to the econOmic situation: they increase when the economy
gets better."

Wage Supplement Sanctions Advocated
Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 6 May 82 p 15

[Article by Sergio Pininfarina, president of the Turin Industrial Union:
"whoever Turns Down a Job Change Should Lose Hage Supplement Benefit-"I

[Text] The problem of worker mobility is not only a technical, union problem.
Assuming a greater area of agreement among the various parties in their quest
for common objectives in union matters, the problem is closely linked to the
maturation process of the industrial culture in Italy. It must be patterned
on the models of more advanced Western countries, even in terms of labor
flexibility.

It is certainly due to this process that-this principle became a part of the
metalworkers' contract in 1979,but at 3 years remove it has not yet taken
practical effect. In Turin, where its application was sorely contested in
the notoriously difficult autumn of 1980, the first real experiment in worker
mobility was launched a couple of months ago on the basis of what we think is
a very significant agreement among the parties involved.

unfortunately, however, the concrete implementation of the principle of worker
mobility still lacks an essential element that was conceived as a key to rein-
vigornting the labor market and protecting the unemployed. I mean loss of bene-
fits from the Wage Supplement Fund for those workers who have been called in by
the employment office and who turn down the new jobs because they prefer to stay
"on the Fund."

35

lNJl‘OIIﬂCIAI.llIII(IVLY
POI OFFKJAI. USE ONLY

This explains why the Turin experiment has had such a hard time getting started.
In 2 months 200 jobs were offered, which rebuts any scepticism that the worker
mobility mechanism can work even in times of great employment crisis; but of
the 650 workers called in, 625 either did not show up or rejected the jobs
offered.

Mobility on an exclusively voluntary basis is not working. It is time parliament
realized this and drew the conclusions that businessmen and unionists reached at
the end of 1979. Otherwise it is a waste of time to deplore the unemployment

benefit system of the Wage Supplement Fund and decry the serious deficit of the
:NPS [National Social Security Institute]. which at this rate is fated to worsen
urther.

Productivity as Bargaining Counter
Milan CORRIERB DELLA SERA in Italian 6 May 82 p 15

[Article by Giuseppe Medusa, central personnel and organization director of
Alfa Romeo Auto SpA [Limited]: "A Possible Currency in Exchange for "age
Raises"; words in alantlinea are emphasized in the text]

[Text] Few people are aware that large Italian companies pay for a working day
of about 13 hours while the effective labor performed amounts to barely 5 hours

a day.
Productivity in "age Bargaining

Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 6 Hay 82 p 15

[Article by Giuseppe Medusa, central director of personnel and organization,
Alfa Romeo Auto SpA [Limited]: "A Possible Bargaining Counter for Pay Raises";
words in slantlines are emphasized in the text]

[Text] Few people are aware that large industrial companies in Italy pay for
a 13-hour work day while the actual work performed barely amounts to 5 hours

a day.

[Actual/ working hours have plummeted; the unions have rigidly defended jobs
for all these years while business has invested in labor-saving machinery;
mobility within and among mass—production industries has been negotiated at
a possible production loss of 10-15 percent a year: all this is behind the
gradual deterioration of production levels, especially in heavy industry.

It is understandable. then. that productivity has become a central issue

in the most recent union negotiations.

1his is the climate in which the recent agreement was reached between Alfa
Romeo and the FLM [Federation of Metalworkers]. It is a truly productive pact
not unlike the "productivity bargaining" of traditional British collective bar-
gaining. Beyond the inevitable rhetoric, the model of productivity bargaining
has inspired the parties to the negotiations to restore productivity at Alfa
Romeo; the negotiations have been exhausting and protracted, lasting almost

36

FOI‘OFIICLAL.USEGIVLY
FOR OFVHCJAI.USE{DNLV

2 years, but they have made it possible to renew sone labor-management proce-
dures that have caused a jump in productivity of over 40 percent in the space
of a few weeks.

This recovery has affected actual working hours only marginally, and it is the
result of action by management, but it is also and especially due to a change
in the workers' behavior. Absenteeism fell from about 20-25 percent for all
the 1970's to about l0-lS percent 2 years ago; it is now under 10 percent and
still declining. Mobility between departments has gone back up.

The process of clearing collective bargaining agendas (automatic wage adjust-
ments tend to cancel out any negotiating margin) and the gradual penetration

of a "crisis mentality" into the rank and file of the union open up concrete
possibilities of linkage between wages and productivity in the in-ediate future.

It may be concluded, then, that the problens of [nobility/ and [absenteeisn/
can become objective areas of contract negotiations. especially as bargaining
counters to obtain wage benefits.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Editorialc dcl "Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.

8782
C50: 3l04/199

37

IIIICNNﬂCJA1.USE(lULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLB'ICAL mu. W0 0’ Gm

monsm/mooumwmspm.smm
aseburgmmoerm1Ju182p149-150

[interview with srn Guinea um: Brandt by um 3.11 and Peter
heal: "I Would Sooner Have men atop off Both W Hands"

[Fug @uetioﬂ n: Brandt, the am no loose: no». to work together
withthe mum ooete.mtheoontru'y—there ieemingdeeireto
can-y out unadulterated SPD policies. Would thie go no fer no to rink a
break with the coalition pu'ther 1’

M Vemnot inoludimahneeknpinmplanedlebelieveweehould
contmmtomtillthenndetethevoteremeueinIM. ifthetoenre-
eponeiblybedone. 1m iewhywearehoneetly tryingtoputthe1983hud¢et
together.

[Quoting In there still a point to reaching mine with a partner
onehaltotwhoeenenbereheweelnutdeoidedtooeetinﬂaeirlotwith
tinconeemtivee?

[A'neweg] Oioomethereereeooialdenomtewhoeekuetheeedm:whet
youpeopleinnonnaredoinenow, does it etillnheenee?iren'tyeu
mkineoonoeeeione andintheendgettinenothinginreturn ‘73“: Itone
wants toeovemenddoeenothaveeneaority, onemetnhe We.
The SP1) leadership believes that we should not—it at all poeeible—let
direct participation in govemnent policy slip out of our hende in theee
difficult tinee noet or all.

[analog But the risk you take is that the sen will run iteel! into the
ground. Doee the party really want to riek elippine below the 30 percent

voter preference mark or isn't it tine to go into the opposition volunte-
rily and no gain in new ettractiveneee ?

M The opposition role is no guarantec that one will fare better. I
would rather eay the point ie to get one'e po .itioel ideee eoroae—ee a
government or u an oppoeition. an it we were forced to go into the oppo-
eition sooner or later. we would hm to build up our etrength anew etert-
inglrouthe oitiee. htyoumbe sure thetthieSl’Dolndnenwould
rather have then chop off both hie hand: than to have the party leewe its
own chancellor in the lurch.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁnestiog How can you work together with e pertner in good faith, it one
must seems he is Just waiting for an opportune nceont to M ship ?

my I admit I have round it difficult to understend ec-o of the recent
statementsbythsPDPchaim—udleenottheonlyonsinthemm
feels this veg. But let no odd this: more is not e single indication thet I
could see, even during the difficult budget negotieticns, for Hens-Dietrich
Genscher hoving set his sidats on e chmge of coeliticn. Poo: that setter.

it would be quite seaothing to tum cne's hook on the voter uendate.

[ﬁnestioﬂ that is the mooning of the coalition stetenont in the cum tam-
node in noses at Gensoher'e behest ?

[inmg 1 don't think that e penchant for experimtetion wee behind it.
ihewevtheymsthsve figured it invioehedenend inbounmthist‘l‘hesPD
sndtheFDPtogetherwillnotnskoit.mt\d1ethortho!'nPMsnowessursd
its own swivel—I en inclined to doubt that. We social donocrsts on that
anyone who wants to see the successes of the sooielist-liberel ooeliticn—
which even the PD? in Reese eaneizes-ocntinus should vote for the 8?!)
this tinearound. Iheveeteelingwowilldohotterthmveoeosuodherore
the PDP switched sides.

[iueetiog Isn't there good reeson to believe thet this switch in Hesse
will be followed by 8 switch in Bonn ?

[inner-7 I m not really looking for it-whioh, however, does not seen that
it could not Mppen. Still. I have the inmssion that tho reaotiw. tn the
mmtsdt decision by m lee-here end synpethisere nay hove duptaned the
sntlmsiesn for further Wt. of switching. The Bmdeeteg freoticn of. the
PDP, which would have to approve such a decision, is voicing greets: reser-
vations out!» sthect thanit didJustetewwoeks orncnths ego. the
second factor or uncerteinty is we»: the cm/csu reelly wants to have the
FDPssnpertnerat thistine. It isn't Justnerrlohlvhewouldliketooee
Herr Gensoher witch. more are also the crown princes—ilbrecht, Stolten-
berg, Spseth and Hoismcloor—end the ash-crown prince Strauss who ere all
doing their best to prevent it become they went to protect their con ohenoee
for the chencellorehip. 131s FDP con see all thet, too.

@eetiog that is not such of a ccnsoletion. It sounds so though the Bonn
coalition was being kept alive by nothing more then the will to stoy in
power.

[Ensweg a: all naJor issues in years pest, we did manage to achieve e mat
measure of sensible cooperation between the SP!) ad the FDP. In principle,

we should be able to continue. we could do even sore. we have now reeohed e
point at which we could start revitalizing socialist-libero. uforn policies.
The coalition mt regain a perspective so that people don't Just have the
feeling that there is a hole being plugged here end there Just so the botto-
line comes out right.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

@ueotlog Wouldn't it be better under the circustmces for the sm to
direct more or its attention to the Greens end the Altematives instead of
putting its money on the PDP which is gradually losing its role as a third
force in parliusnt ?

[A'nsweg is e. theoretical question. I can understand that very well. hit
as far as practical politics is concerned, it is very difficult to tehe it
W mrther. It is obvious that some of those belonung to the Green/Alter-
native cup ere abiding by periionentary rules end eschew violence. when-
everthatisthecase,wecensitdownendtalktogether.mtthenorein-
portsnt thin is for the SP1) to links up for issues it has neglected and
deal with issues such as the protection or the environ-mt. To be sure, we
have put alot of sensible things onpsperendhaveachieved thisendthat.
But for sons reason we have not been able to get our policies across with
sufficient clarity. while I my be doing then an injustice, I do think
these new groups are a passing—though perhaps not really a short-ten—
phenomenon.

@ueetlog? not 1: the chancellor has only a half-hearted collitunt to
these policies, we cannot be too sure.

[inner] Ecological issues are difficult, of course. But it is not the
chancellor who is the adversary in this field. he dispute Wing
the as issues is difficult above all because there are new people right
now in industry who are afraid of losing their Jobs. It is a painsteﬂng
process of mutual understanding.

[caution] The young people who have tuned their book. on the 3m did
not do so solely because they are disappointed about the lack of en en-
vironmental policy. More than anything else. they have their doubts about
whether the Schnidt government is willing and able to carry out a serious-
ninded peace policy.

[Inswel] Anyone who is capable of listening knows how deeply concerned
the chancellor is about the peace issue—end the concrete results of his
commitment to it ore quite substsntial. Let me remind you of what he and
I said last fall on the subject of the peace aoveasnt. 'l'hat looked as
though we were drifting apart. And if you look at what we sew today, you
can see we are close together. A lot has happened. Belnut Scimidt now
perceives Inch more strongly the profound. hogging and tortuous concern
and unrest that has been aowing up aromd us.

[Q-uesticg But there are members of the SP1) Rmdestag fraction who one
less about the substantive disputes and sore about ways of nipping the

Greens—and by extension the FDP—in the parlisssntary bud by inuoducing
the British wimer-take-all election systes.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M57 1: then m such mean being united shout. I would an that
spurious. L1 practice. this would load to certain axiom—I an anal:
thinking of Damn—doing amounted in a Winn-Al m politi-
cally. In 8 politically and mummy polatud camtry like the
MauohamvmldhmuutMmasnmmmuolm.
Bat m min objoction 10 this: If it 1. Mp1“ of omnibus tint
moundmtthu—ﬂntthmndlyumtothoum
GAL'I, thmitwuldudimmuntompthamthobudbynummto
suchamokﬂmatvouldnotdoonrmautotmd.

COPYRIGIH 1982 Gran": + thr AG 6: 00.

9478
cso: 3105/569

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROSPECTS FOR PAPAIDRBOU ERA SURVEYED I'll DETAIL

London m mm in English 3-9 Jul 82 pp 3-18

[Article by Stephen Hilligan]

[Text]

ln country lanes all over Greece.
whitewashed walls are still daubed with
the Socialists election insignia. a green
rising sun. Everywhere Item the loneliest
islanth to the crowded citiea 0! Athens
and Salonica. the enthusiasm lor the
alkyd—the great change—promised by
Mr Andreas Papandreou seems undimirr
ished A recent opinion poll’ lound that
only one Greek in I0 thinks that their
newprimentinister isdotngabadjob.

This is pretty surprising in view ol the
laet that Mr Papsndreou has pushed up
tax revenue byoverSMaandhascom-
pletely changed his loreiyt policy. It now
looks almt certain that Greece will stay
in the European community and Nato
and that the United States will be allowed
to retain its loot lanes in Greece. But [or
most Greeks. who are more interested in
style than policy. this matters little. They
have been thrilled by Mr Papandreou‘s
abilitytoberudetoloreignersﬂhelact
that he hintsell was a [winner lot many
years as a naturalised Amerian citizen
does not -eem to matter). And they have
been itnpr assed by the gusto the new
govemmet. has shown in embarking on
its programme ol social reform.

Mr Papandreou is probably the most
brilliant public speaker in European poli-

 

‘Optnntn polls inGreeeearenotoriouslyunre-
liable became Greet» aeldom tel pollsters die
truth. But man pttusconductedby lapand
the Centre lot Political Reacarchand Inlormn-
Into (KN-2f.) Molly predicted the Ono
her election rewlt hy a new method. They
.nttca their interviewees to tail in a mod: balot
lnrtn and put it unto a “haunt hm" to that the
mllster did not know how they had “".voted
The teens to work well.

tin today: to h
rhythm ol his rt‘
is spellbinding.
stand Greek. H
and thoae who
by his civility. E
habit ol promit
precisely the 0|
leagues who I
father's centrist
later deaerted II
double-dealing:
Mr Papandret
ic Sociala mow
poodle He set.
at democracy in
lated it ever ti
accurately call:

tnent all mlniate
to the whim cl
ofﬁcially nu. t
unoll'tcially the
ministries too. C
Mr Asimahis Ft
nontout contmt
demning martia
consulting his b:

The only co
dreou‘s power it
vative president
manlis. The |
parliament and
reletendums. M
not interlered in
domestic policy
sensibly. with h
policy. He recen
dati coming to
accept a return i:
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080067-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although Pasolt‘s nationalistic loreign
policyhasanalartningtoneﬁtlootslihe
turning out in practice to be much like
that ol the lorrner New Democracy gov.
err-neat. thanks in part to the president.
The moct constructive aspect ol the new
government's policy is its programme tor
domectie retorrn. which includes the cre-
ation at a national health service. the
legalisation or civil marriage and the
breaking-up ol the dictatorial rule-by-
notaareh in the teo‘ons.

The long-term hope—and it isstil only
a hope—is that Pasoh‘s victory may have
marked the emergence ot a more stable
and a more Europeen pattern ol party
politia. Although Greece is the world's
oldest democracy. modern Greece ltas
shuttled between liberal and authoritar-
ianrule ever since the country won ind:-
pendence lrotn Ottoman rule. In the
preterit mutiny. there have been five
ntilitary (the most recent junta
ruled item 1967 to 1974) and political
parties have proved notoriously unstable.
Only one party in the preacnt Greek
parliament is more than eight years old—
the Communists—and they split in hallin
I968. ’

Two lorcee have hindered the develop-
ment ol a normal European democracy:
tings and Communists. The Greet mon-
arehy deterves much at the blame lorthe
country‘s past troubles. During the lint
world war. King Constantine I openly
oppoaed the policy ol his prime minister.
Veniuloa (one ol Greece's greatest liber’
al statesmen). who wanted to lake
Greece into the Franco-British-Rtnsian
alliance. The ltinglorced himtoreelgnin
WM and than opemd up a schism be
tween liberals and royal-sh that was to
pinion Greolt polities lor years alter-
wards and to encourage utilitiry interven-
tion in goverunent.

Again. in the 196th. a hawhtnded
ling caused trouble. When Mr George
Papandreou (Andrea's lather) as prime
minister tried to replace his delcnce min-
ister—because the minister would not
melt right-wing plotters in the array—the
young King Constantine ll reluaed to let
him do to. He then manoeuvred Mr
Papandreou into resigning. This triggered
oil a crisis that led to the colonels' coup in
April. I967. WComrnunists. in turn.by
their opposition to democracy—and by
their attempts to talte power by lorce in

l9“ and in the "46-49 civil war—en-
couraged thoae who believed that the
only alternative to lelt-wing authoritar-
ianism was right-wing authoritarianism.

43

Thus. in I967. thecolo
use the spurious but at
theyweteactingtolorer

i

When Mr Constantin
turned lrom Pam in
demoeraeydtetettledtl

byholdingal
in wlach‘ $5 ol Ora

more extreme lelt-wing
his manilesto; and ther
Visible in the armed tort
The Greek army was
collapie or the junta i
even in 1973 plots

dreou.8usineccmen.in
be'lsetotakoacautlo
inginSoclahctGrcece.
rtsktinthenoatlouryo
O AwarwithMeyl
ish airwatt violatewha

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-00860R000500080067-5
Turkey’s shadow

1he Gteeh ete still ohcected by the
Tutu'l‘his'nhmlymtptiﬂnginthe
light 0/ the histoty 0/ .he Balkans since
the loll cl Byzantium. Foe 400 yeus.
GnecemmledbytheOttonunentpite
and. elthoudt it became independent in
1832. thetension with Tuthey continued
heamethetewetenodeutnotunlhot-
den between the two counties; and
become tuhetcnticl nunhets ot Gteekt
still lived in Turkey and my Tum still
Iivcdittheece.

Foe yeen Gteecemeneepensiom‘v
poveewhichuied.endtoccoeextm
unneeded. in extending its hovden to
incotpome the Gteeh population living
in Turkey. This inedentiun (known as
the“0tut|dee”)centetocncndinl922
Meomwwmtpnd
Asia Minor led to e hut-lining Gteeh
deteetudtheevecuetionctthotunad
GteekmttotnSmyrne (now I:-
tnit). Altet thi. Itn Gteeks living in
Turkey wete “eechemd” Ice doom:
Mulentshvinincteece.

Tothy. the botden between Gtcece
and Tuthey ate deuty deﬁned and the
tntnotitieeoneithetsidedthehotdetm

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080067-5

i

.t *5 8 :°
éﬁgégg
§§§agzégasi

Maulletwthou‘htheteueeﬂl edonwoniecneett
ovetinTutbheot-thunGteece). nothptetted.
Butelltttemlhmdintetecthetm Inoppccition.M1
the two counttiee have not yet been tough the W
received.1'heecceptenceintheUttited sumac/1976..
Nationtthetcoetuleutesdndudingb- Siva/ktuenedtc
lent. have mm tights on theit Aegean. in ma
continental the! has encouraged the were-hoveththe
Gteekttolnydeimtomuchotthe Mthoendueoupul
AegeanSeaJotheinevnuhlehnyo/lhe Gteehpvemntentl
Tum. And in Cypnn the continuing In mm. In
l-‘OIOFFIGALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500080067-5
.0893... .338. 8 .55 Zn :3.
930:.- ..8830 53 9» too: In: :8
E1989...
>~§o§29¢2§§.2~€.
a§§E{§.f>i:§.o
8303 vs .1882 (833 .3... :8.-
anw 788. .35 col-3.818»! .o
793003.723... >xgﬁog
.83 3a.. a.» «88 2a ESQ 898°:
.2 33 :33 432 o: .9 83.. «no?
.532 :5 3283 using? .. 3t
.35. e958: :5 :5 988 1... 22 7a
«.82..
ztpto31ﬁ0€52088u$=§
2-3. we. :8 9.233.. 956. .9 :3
>38: .- as. . Folio? (’3 0988
32.8.. 2-8.. its 8853.. 5
33 a. 3...»; 9: E 3: 52. 5a

Avis-r rip-5! .L 5.33.: I II.
olNeIo. Misseenescnmneriun-
doom alliance). Mr Pepenrlreoo has
lot the Imus:
GreccejoinedtbeEECineMny Mr
Contamine Kenn-nits believed that

neobenhip ol the many would
helptoprotecIGreekdeInccncymIdbe
W iIesoneclltiseentnlobjec-
tives espritne Ininisur alter 197‘. But
moltheGIeek negotiatoranduding

Mr Greacris Verlis who reﬁned.
thought that in Ilse rush Greece Ives
ectllinﬂormcmbeuliponbedlctlts.Mr
Valli hes not returned to run Puck‘s
EECpolicy.

In lect EEC membership hes been
prettygooalorGrecceJuinlybecemeit
ismkiyclsugeﬁmncielproﬁthomtbe
community. ‘l'bisyccr. Greece isexpea-
edloreceiveﬂbiliiondreclunumﬂmn)
netlrotntheEEC.eliveloldriseonits
receipts in lﬂl. This is equivalent to
LOSolGreekgdpendisexpcctedIo
[hence lull the lorecut lull it public
borrowin‘thieyeer.

These ﬁgures are elittle enbsmssln;
lorcgovetnrnentwhicliuysthetﬁraece
isgettingebeddesllromtbeesc.
"ovum, it on point oet out EEC
mbershiphesbeduudveneeﬂecton
Ilse country's cede belence in the ﬁrst
yearollullne-bersbip.

In I”! exports Iran the EC to
Greeceroeeby38‘l».wniieecpomlm
GreccetotheEEClelbyzii—ineyeer
whenGreece'sIndebelencevitlrtbereet
oldievorldectuellyiltproved Thedete
nomioninthebelenceoltndewithm-
EEC has been particularly merited in
euiculturel goods. In 1900. Greece en.
yoyed e surplus ol 6.8 bilion (inclines
(Simmin lenIIInde vithtne EECzin
IWI. this turned into e deﬁa‘t ol l.l
billion dredunes (Stan).

The first year cl membership lus
shown just law protected the Greek
Inertetwesbeloretbecoumyjoinedtbe
EEC. Although unllsliedbeenledoced
eblIJreelolnon-tarmbeniersﬂndudo
in; reelsolredtspenedcudeitberdlor

compenies to export to
Greece. Now these berrlers ere being
slowly removed—although Greece still
meintsins li‘lily «scent-inﬂow Ines
epinst so-celed “hurry" goods (- lux-
urypodisenythingtbet Greececennot
rnnnulecture itsel.wchesetypewriter).

‘l'betmeeﬂeaolEECInenIbershipon
Greece‘s trade is turd to measure be
cause the EEC removed its own mills
epinu imports lm Greece come Itrne
ago; so the beneﬁts lot Greek exports
rather endearing but it ‘- hopeleuly
inefﬁcient ltersstsresthatdecieionsare

widonsutenaldthetthecivilserviceis
Myoverstaﬂed. It ahoencounaes
conoption-nottoinducecivileervaats
tobreaktheruleehuttoindocetheuto
oheenethern
Mineﬂ‘iciencycanbeeatrenietycost
IylorheeineesuenJ'lmsJIargeindtrs»
trialcoatpenyreanttydecidedtohuﬂda
nevtactoryvorthzsthndrachnasolrn)
in the Peioponaeae. It applied tor a
boiling pet-nit. Six nsonthsotbtriate
harming wererequiredtoge tit‘lhat
delayeddeleﬁtothehiildingcoets.

The unhappyentrepreneornstotdto
counthishteasinp: “Othershavehadtn
witrtiieyeonloreodtadeciion" A
mum-temple: theYelIatvPagea
directorydueootlestyeahaenotyet
been pritted.bccattsetherelevont huo
rower-thunotdaredtotakeadecieion

t the
o reptacepmbequlpuent t was

I! .

One oi the central problems that al-
ﬂicts the bureaucracy is the traditional
Greeksyrrerhotrcrssled.byvhidtw
hereolpertilnenttseethehoreatscncyto
grant ﬂavours to their cortstituenta. 11tis
has been the traditional way by which
MPs have maintained their poinicalwp-
port. Voters loot: to their MP to sort out
thei penal-l problems and. olten. to
findjohelor theirlriends and children. It
issaidJoreuntpleJhatanty-ipie
Airwaysreosterttpioyeescontelrornthe
cause WW region. their hone
(preewhlyenderpreaeunlrornlriend
Iy MPs) 'lhesyuenthepniathenine
teenthcesttury.when

votersapeacdthcaelorwhoudieyhed
votedtohdthoeee-reeaploynteet.
toirttercedevhereoeceaaaryvithaairaher.
cone. Wuuww
racyaedgerterelytod‘opernelavows..
MMctpiece-eeehmraeantthat
thehenuereeyrmrhtschler'erthen-as
strictly-unreal
Andeaitliescontinnedeversince. Mr
Christopher Tugendhat. the EECs per-
sonnelconicirsioner.wasansaaedtvhen
he went to Athens two years ago.to
discus Greek appointments tothe EEC
W.totindthatntinistersexpe¢-
edtogiveallthejohsinamseelstotheir
duneltvaswiththeyeeteetdiﬂiusky

‘OeotcdirtEpiteetrainMay. tﬂl. mm
by the Centre for Poitieal Raaeereh cad
Inter-lotion.

sShortﬂistory otModereGreace" hym-
ardCtou(Carnhndp Univenityl’reaa. I97!)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080067-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

diatheesplalnedthatjobaintheecntntb Mozart arrived
stonaregtventothemostableapplicann. thatwhenEinaa
not to party-political hacks. am; and that
Paach pronn'aed that it would return he ' a to
the Greek bureaucracy and end “parti- hell are they?”
Mandcorruptioninpublicarhninisr "Ah. yes I see
traticn". It has already committed incl errpert. Doootne
bthM‘ﬂ-ﬁlﬂJlﬂl' ltirtooearl
tendstoalterthepreaentelectorallitt systemwlllworh
systent by which votersean chooaetvhiclr undermined the
. 0! a nurnber oi canﬁdater lrorn each aensnson pow:
.' partythonldbeelected.Thatsystenr itgotnanm
encourages rota/ed becanae candidates purge. In its an
tront the sarne parry vie with one another wing appointees.
to means more lavotrrs. In future. Pa- rnen. at everyle
sckwillobhpenchpartytodeddethe todoctors.Thr
orderotprelerenceinwhidtitrcandi- ctnalliownolVr
dates should be elected—rather than nla. a veterinary
leavingit tothe voter. in darling I
Second. the government has already Konitu. aural
the rule that all government Wuhan“:
decisionsntustbesigtedbysevensepa- critnewastoht
rate bureaucrats (the title was invented New bemoan-y
alterthecivilwartossopconmnist Mr Papandre
sympathisersinthecivilaervicetaking introrhicerealn
decisions 0“ their own bat). ln lutute aervice and the
only twosignaturea will be needed. Instead. by givi
MJhegovemtllisetnblttit‘tgoa own supporters
a program at decentralisation which it developed a he
hopes will transler power (and corrup- intend oi encr
lion?) lrorn the bureaucracyin Athens to take more initir
local councils. seent likely to n
Fourth. the government has sacked andcautionstha
- some Ill "general directors" in the civil
service because. it say. they were right-
uiag .lnateadithnsappointed Sunny 5
hundredsolrtewpoliticnladﬁserstonct Ttrelomyears
like members 0/ French cabinets. These Greece have let
new advisers have all been patty-politial social condition:
appointments. hut Puck believes that Papanrkeou pot
the ne‘ system will be tairer because the the lield at an:
distinction between civil servants and government’s ti
partyappointeeswillbeclearar.Theae civilraarriage.
advisers will be expected toreaiotwhen beenallowedto
the government changer. The governor
The advisers have already been nick- series at chang
narned the “Green Guards“ and they are latnilies. The n
rnoch in evidence in every minister's abolition of the
oﬂice.Mostoithentweatopenaﬁrtsand Greek lathersa
yeansandseern to havebeenedticated daughtersager
eitheratdielpndonSehoolotEmm- getnrarrled.Tl
id or Harvard. Their enthusiasm is plain: determined by tl
but lew oi thorn have any experience. social standing
Many have been plucked straight lrorn middle-class don
acedetnia.Theoppoaitionrnahesntech istoosrnall.th
out at the narrowness at their expertise. lather. Amazing
Atypicaliohentakingtherotndain begtutrtmme
Athens goes as lollows: A Peach expert bestow dowrieat
arrives ll the gates d heaven and is Thegovernmr
greeted by St Peter. St Peter explains to providing social
hint that he Illtlﬂ do something to prove mothers (non-e
his identity. 8! Peter I“ um when a“: dvogccu
48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080067-5
the Ouch medial men.

Woman-ouch

Like Mt Mitten-If; $061M in
chejutheekSodal‘samu-yin‘to
Muhammnisiumoveto
mm.o~amuoabm
non combed than the Napoleonic
noddinl-‘m.

In ptovincial Gm. 55 much:
(like reﬂects) WIMAM pv.
cnuueul udmadwwulmtmlmt
dbcnlmJlnmyotdam
mmbuyatypc‘rrherhcmdyhu
no at the much (at yam. lo
InﬂioohCntc threw-mm
Myanmvteotheloalomndl
co dung: seven] meet
mwmww.
mm»mmm;m
themﬂmoolybyilcplym
mwwm‘l‘mmmm
mmmluhuokvynmotm:
all that income ‘- W on by the

i.

i}

town councib. (amen. «nun nod cm-
MmuﬂummmM’
coauolovcrthetmcmuﬂtlthumo
“antenatal-ammonium»
tmcoudb. lumen-dugout-
mumm'm).amum
up thou! 10 dualy eluted nﬂoul
mthwlSOpmhd-IM
$.Mmmodbvllhveum~
“with" mmmw
”Rwandan”.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080067-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eaictedinGreeceravisittotheugly
sprawlit. suburbs ol polluted Athenswill
quicklyconﬂrtn. Asthecostolabuildng
licence i usually rnore than the ﬁne“ tor
unliceoed building. it is no

the Greets live llouted the miss
that doeaist.

One oi the tnost inteligent and inagi-
native ministers in the now
Mr Antonis Tritsis. the airister lot the
environaient. Mr Tritais. aged ‘5. is a
proleadonal city planner (and incidental-
ly a talented athlete who. tor years. was
the Greek nationaldecathloachantpion).
He In act at! at a W.

He '3 now workingon legislation to try
to control new ’ in Greece. nora-
bly in Athens and on the coastline. He
intends to introduce tougher rules lor
hotel builtingbythesea—tostopthe
construction ol ugly ntarnraoth hotelsand
to stop the hotels taking over beaches. In
hnurenohoce‘tncarthecoastwilbe
allowedtoputuplenceaﬂheaeproposals
are. however. nrnning into strongopposi
tion lrotn the national tourist board.

He isalsotryingtodispersethe rte/os-
the cloud 0/ smog that hangover Athens
lor ntrdtoltheyear.Theng/osisa
chemical soup oi srnolte. dust. sulphur
dioxide. carbon monoxide and nitrogen
oxides prodtrced by industrial discharges
and car eahaut gases. The city’s geogra-
phy. with its ringol mountains. makesit
as vulnerable to pollution as Los An-
geles:andthesntoghasbeengerting
worse as the concentration ol people and
industry tn Athens has increased. Athen-
iarts say the sntog gives thetn headaches
andnausea. andwhenttratnsthe sulphur
dioxide tum into sulphuric add which
dinolves the tnarble oi the city' s andent
ntonurnenta. notably the Parthenon.

The previous government brought in
regulations to lirnit the use 0! heavy oil
(which has a high sulphur content) in
central heatirg and to control polluting
industries—but with little ellect. When
pollution got really bad. cars with odd
and even umber-plates were banned on
alternate hys. Mr Tritais intends to be
tougher. He plans stricter ruleson indus
trial Iiltersand luels. tobe backed upby a
new tearn ol inspectors (the previous
government relied on eahortations which
were ignored). He is considering a per-
rnanent ban on cars treat a series oi
rrallic- lree cells in central Athens (see
map). Since June IhI all private cars have
been banned trnrn the city centre [or a
mat period 0! a month. other. that is
than lash—which cannot cope with the

SO

eatra business.
However. it

trout “it to 20
real value oi its
each year.

This rairacle l
sloweddown tor
the country's gn
OECD report pt
cry. Greece is s
country Irons tl
even it there in
trade in the arid
to grow taster II
The prospeas It
the eoortolty are

The links
importance lort
year it earned
than tourisrn in
jobs lor tttmt
that one Greet
directly or intir
livelihood In I
Greet: ﬂeet issti
(althoualt in “It
the Liberian Ile
“.ngs trorn shippir
to run a perrnar
trade.

But shipping

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080067-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

       

mﬁmﬁ‘ No-go zones for cars '1: Athens

51

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
Initiating“: automoti-

lam. themuiheroltouriasgoiiglo
Oteeceinmlikeiytoincnaeulutin
thehextdeadeuithudooeinmt

minutetndewameislikelyto
declina—pumhdy since incoming
mam putoﬂbyhighptice:
mmmalminmkm
www.mmumtheivholidaytio

wmmmmuamm
mhenotCmeh have momedhone
Imam Mktofmdjobu.
Neteagmioaot Mnymhetweeo
lMudlmhumtunedintonet
mmazsoooayw.
MM iodi-tty i also in
M.Modiottheyumhinthe19ﬂh
nod IWWcooceotmedin medium-
teehtlologyiodtutliet like textiles. ship-
Rm. cement and meal ptoduas.
Minamtietvn'lﬁndithudtom
pete with competition tmeountriuin
meFuButtowhictheeeeismm
exponedimidethelowet-miﬂEEC.
Gmkwniauenillmymaﬂ:
haloithemcutpioywwottenmlmt
(W195 in the EEC). Ptotit: m
low—otlemilthepublishedtignmue
tobebeiieved.Aceovdimtoumyby
the leap muluochhenvenpmui-n
on capital in 1”“:me 2.2% end the
avenge pmﬂt mtgin on mice 2.1%.
Won: ailmmostcoatpcniesue heavily
indebttothebenkuninlyheumeot
theabsenoeotnneﬂectiveewitymw
ket) and the even debt utio has in-
matedintheput iveyan. Accotding
tolap. the avenge Greekcompooym
telies on bulk Malice lot 77% of its
apitﬂ. Such high gearing unites Greek
industry any valuable to 0 W» in
growth and In high intemt mes.
Diegtowtholmootputhu
aheadymdovntmmobimynvu-
.30 .o _u$ .5 .87 5:38... :2. 88..
2-8.. 8 88 .2. :3 2:3. .89....
.89 928 «N; 253 .58 a.“ 3a a. 32.

do a. 28: =5 :2. 3.6332: :
=1... 8 39.8 9.2.8 gal...
38 1 26 :5 «nu-Iran .o .83 :3
.33.. 2503323369928?
.39 1933... .8 12. .o n: 9.2:
0036!!“ 3 so. 783 on 95 5 use?”
33%.... 9.: o: a 1:318 .9238 5
3.8.8:. .9 .3 :3. 9.83 .a 2—29. :8
«93353. .3380... 8 3.8 Bu 3...
3.8 an 32 38 (it .9991... 32.8
326.3 3 :86: 8*. 4.3 .9628 w
:Ernfsgoﬂog-ugﬂﬁa
33332.. 8683 5.. 9.2x 839...
(=— vagf 3228 3 :83. mo :8
Easing..rogo.9o§.
union leadet. to one at aeveral Eutopean
union bigwigs who have written to Mt
Papandteoo to complain. It is paniculatly
exmoedinary as. betote the election.
Paaolt pmniaed to me the onions not:
atate lntetletence.
lnthepaatththeekttadettnlon

beeohebedbythelacttlnttlyhtalapn
atecoopatativelyattoqintheuiotua
lepeyottheantl-contnuiatntooddtet

thedvilwat).
Paaoltlntendato theunionstaote
independenceby thentota'ne

cotmtottytooveatntntheteonltaotthe
eloctionlotthegovetningcouncilotthe
G$E£(whlchhodheenheldalotuim
belotethegenetaleloction).

Although. the election mum to the
0558 is ﬁnally diatotted (since tnany
tiny unions areovet-tepteaented).thete
isllttle doubt thatthentleaweteob-
aetvedintheOctobetelectlon.1‘hePa-
sohﬁveobiectedtotheelectionmulu
on trivial-sounding mods. They alao
submittedatecondooutt applicationaalt-
«(wannpenaionotth'emlingGSEE
councilatleastumilthejodpentonthe
lint application was given. A mag'uttate
ptontptlyaoceptedthisteqoeotandmled
that a new “Weaponry council should
be appointed Whetua the old council
had been dominated by attppotten ot
New Democtacyandnon-politicolunion-
538.35 metnbenolthelS—atrongnew
councilwetel’asoltauppotteandaeven
weteConlnunista. Only tlttee Inetnben
oltheoldcouncilweteteappointed

Mmlittledouhtthatthisdeci-
aion was politically inlhtenced.

Ml’ Papandreou hinlaell was aid to be
extteately an‘ty aboot it. (Curiously, the
depoaed ptealdent ot the 0588. M:
Chtlstos Kankitaoe. is an old chant at
his.) The sacked council ptontptly ac-
coaedthe mlnisttyollabootol“labticat-
in." the coun decision in league with
Pasolt‘s ttadeunionaectionandthatol
thetwoCoIntnunia pattiea.’l'heconncll
added:
ltlaaell-evid-ntthatawelloapnitedpl-t

wuearrlodcuthmtheplpcocadauatot
the takeove- otthcheekContoduationot

Laboubypwnnentalovmandkrthe
violation ot the tundamentsl trade union
nphtsoltheGreekworlers.

Although the new sdminstration ol the
GSEEismeanttohetemporsry.itis
expected toholdol’ﬁceloratleastthree
years and the ousted leaders believe that
their successors wil then be able to
organise their own rte-election. In late
May.theoustedlesdersdeddedtosetup
ancwtradeuniongroupimﬂ'hesceneis
set lot rich contusion.

misstrangestoryisnottheonlyin-
stance in which hook has tried to etrtend
its corporate power. A sustained am-
patgn has been mounted to "puokily"
individual unions. ptolessional associ-
ations and agricultural co-operat'rves. Pa-
solt is currently trying to change the rules
(or elections in the agicultural co-opera-
tives to give all larrners an equal vote (at
presentlarrnerswhoownmorelandhave
more votes)—co that more Socialists will
be elected

The goventment is. however. planning
to make three changes to trade union law
which could make the unions more inde-
pendent and more democratic in the long
run. First. it is going to allow the unions
to collect their linance directly lrom their
members (although it will be diﬂicult lot
workers to “opt out" 0! union member-
ship). Second. it is going to make it
harder lor the so-called “rubber-stamp"
unions. the tiny groups which sometimes
havenomembersatalJovoteinCtSEE
elections. M. it is going to introduce
proportional representation into union
elections (this will be lairer. but it will
strengthen the power 0! the Communists
in the union movement).

More worryingly [or husineutr-en. the
government is also planning to mate
stakes easier. It intends to eliminate
certain restrictions on striking. such as
cooling-o" periods. W to allow workers
Ill small non-unionised lactories to call
strikes. It is also going to make it much
more dill-cult lot employers to use the
lockout. However. the government has
recently modified its original proposals
which would have gtvcrt tannins even
greater Inner and would have leuahsed
most political and sympathy strtltes
Some comlort lor industry.

Doubts galore

Whatever his laults. Mr Papondreou is no
communist. Unite President Mitterrand.
How Pasok wan

to Greece. But when he decided Io
become resident in IQ”. he was we.
ended a puny leaﬂet by M! Gear
Ms. 0 dub mum. 0
Ounce. penoaelicies on not: unw-
Iam than policies. end the uninspiring
Mt Rayis oevet caught enyone‘s
000.

In in sewed new in oﬂice. New
Demuecy heme a many men
“minim-anion. ll mam bed been
a meiosis economic [)0ch and m
bettedoaemvespeoduspteeco
buyvotes. AMilbeameuimedvuh
mice: at levowhisn. My
and mine. This dtove may busi-
muwmelotheotiatbehooe

Age counted more than
mm voting inﬂation. (S

  
   

PM 20-”
as-u
FOI1lHHKJAl.US£(N‘LY

Greece beyond Greece '

(inwln have new: New um u- any
in Gm Sam the Mummy BC.
Nanchmmmopmlminio
nunh Attica. Manila and Sit-Hy.
Gmh have mow Ihc'u tonne
shawl. ﬁll-y «In then M Oink:
Man-Immumwmw
Gucci my in Chicago. «may mm
by Wham.

Mm the loll M Byzantium in “5.1.
Ihtwnds oi Ouch sailed acu- Em-
opc and away all then and: a min
«mm-um m m.- Ewpua Rent.
um. mum than the my El
(30cm. 13: lint Greek hulls: out the
“N Gteck v we M nut-
sidc Greece (in Vienna mi Venice).
And the hmlim «I a m ultiﬂy «l
Gvcclu in Odcw but the Milk!“ [0'
the Ouch inky-cadence mm.

In this ccmuy. "on: have In. two
my» um u! cannula—inch: Unil-
«1 Sum. that me! la (incl-Auti-
can an live. nod (ill the IRA) to
menu Gum-c. alm- mm M "I:
(Sm-In who went in wine did not
mum: manually. The Ova-t am-

and: indie United Smuhuheéa
n munch-smu-
“Mlmunmkaum
minute

gm at: u and any; ’
R. we an even
holidays. ~
march wwlivulmodmdm
led the! they are (mica in AM.
Plaid”! Kan-milk lived lot in
Petty“. MI

The Economist Newspaper Ltd. London 1982.*

523

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

OUTCOME OF LEAGUE 0F COOPERATIVES CONGRESS
Milan IL MONO, in Italian 8 Jun 82 pp 22-26

[Article by Vittorio Borelli with Massian Bianchi and Roberto lppolito: "A Time
for Carnations"]

[Text] The communists have lost an absolute majority in

the ﬂed cooperatives. The way is now open for the Socialists
to take a greater slice of political power. But something
more important is at stake.

'ﬂhis is the last communist president we'll elect," exclaimed a socialist dele-
gate at the end of the Slst congress of the National League of Cooperatives [LNC],
which was held in Rome ls-ZZ'May. Has this a case, like so many others. of par-
tisan feeling? Not exactly. The same conviction appears, although not in so
many words, in the way in which many PSI leaders evaluated the results of the
congress. The congress was marked from its opening minutes by a socialist battle
against communist hegemony. The confrontation between the two historic parties
of the Left eventually pushed into the background both the brilliant results
achieved by the League in the last 4 years (see graph ‘ﬂhe Parties' Share,"
following) and the complex problems facing the cooperative movement in the 1980's.

What is the'basis for the socialists' conviction that they have won? What does
it mean that the PC] has lost its absolute majority in the national council?
what might the consequences be of a struggle between the two parties in such

a delicate phase in the life of the League? And. especially, is it realistic
to speculate that the 32nd congress. 4 years from now, might elect a socialist
president for the first time?

There are basically three arguments supporting the socialist thesis. The PCI
has definitely lost its absolute majority in the leadership bureaus. Bettino
Crnxi's party line has objectively proved to be closer to the needs and problems
of the cooperative movement than Enrico Berlinguer's party line. The socialist
ministers (Rino Fornica. Gianni Dc Michelis and Claudio Signorile) stood out in
the congress as the most authoritative and forward-looking speakers from outside
the movement.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I 1) Connie «“9000 lo companion"

    

WHO «Him
(I) The Parties’ Share (2) National Council (290 members)
(3) Presidential Council (10 members)
[General Council] [Presidential Council]
PSI [Italian Socialist Party) 37 pct P51 4 members
PRI [Italian Republican Party] 9 pct PRI l member
nP-PDUP [Proletarian Democratic Party- a ct DP-PDUP [0 members]
Proletarian Unity Party] p
PEI {Italian Communist Party] 50 pct PCI 5 members

The pre-congress phase was marked entirely by a battle of words. In the judgment
of various impartial observers, the socialist offensive actually resulted in a
mixed victory. True. in the National Council, the communists lost the absolute
majority, going from 50 percent plus one of the members to a flat 50 percent;

but the PSI also went down, from 40 to 37 percent of the membership. 0n the
other hand, the proportions on the Presidential Council remain unchanged: 5 mem-
bers for the PCI, 4 for the PSI and l for the FRI (see graphs above). But that
is not the only consideration: any reasonable speculation about the figures must
take into account the fact that the makeup of the leadership councils is the
result of agreements negotiated among the various member groups without regard

to the actual relationship of political powers. The very complicated rules of
the congress actually tend to keep the delegates from voting on the basis of
party affiliation or union card. Otherwise, the PCI would have an overwhelming
majority of about 70 percent of both the membership and the businesses the-selves.

who Won
In what sense can one speak of a socialist semi-victory? Sergio Careddu, age 42.
vice-president of the League in Sardinia, says, "This congress has shown that

the socialist strategy can offer concrete goals to the cooperative movement.
The same cannot be said for the PCI; despite the comeback attempts it has made

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in recent months, its party line has still shown elements of centralized planning
and statism that lead it to downplay the role of self-management. This purely
political factor carries more weight than any consideration of numerical strength.
Also, we can look more closely at the matter of numbers. I personally think the
PSI has grown more than its representation in the National Council may indicate."
Paolo Babbini, an official for cooperatives in the PSI national leadership, adds,
"1 think a certain conception of the cooperative movement is wearing thin. The
cooperative movement used to belong primarily to Emilia province, but it is be-
coming a national movement and is penetrating the industrial and advanced tertiary
sectors. To meet these objectives, though, two conditions will have to be met:

it will have to free itself from encumbering and anachronistic political control,
and it will have to abandon a contradictory position concerning political insti-
tutions. That is why the PSI, which is an autonomous party but not hostile to

the institutions, holds the trump card. As for the numbers coming out of the
congress, it is true that the PCI 3 s lost only one member on the National Council,
but that one less is of great political value, because it confirms the end of com-
munist hegemony."

How does the PCI answer these arguments? Apparently with a lot of self-control
and by turning the arguments around. For example, Valerio Veltroni, age 33,

the president of the cultural cooperatives, says, "It is curious that the social-
ist comrades are trying to claim as a victory what was made as a unitary choice.
Our giving up an absolute majority shows that we are more concerned with the auto-
nomy and puralism of the League than with party interests. Everybody knows that
if we had counted membership cards we would have had an overwhelming lead."

For Guido Cappelloni, an official in the communist leadership for cooperatives
and the middle classes, the PCl-PSI contest for supremacy is just a false issue.
"So far we have all underestimated the role of the cooperative movement. It is
not only wrong but utterly ridiculous to extol merit and primogeniture with even-
tual wisdom. We all know now that the League must free itself from political
control if it is to aspire to a more important role in the economy and society
of Italy. And this is what the communist leaders in the League, in accord with
the party, have done. The option bf internal democracy, which in concrete terms
means the free choice of the men who are to direct the movement honestly and
professionally, is an option that the PC! has vigorously supported, even at

the risk of some internal strife.“

A Third Possibility

which side is right? In a word, who really won the Slst congress, the followers
of Crnxi or Berlinguer? Observers outside the historical Left give us another
key for interpretation: the PCI gave up the majority not so much because of
problems of relations with the other members but because of image problems.

In other words, at a time when the League is putting itself forward as a fulcrum
for forming the much-discussed third sector of the economy, it needs to present
an image of full party autonomy to those it will be dealing with on the outside:
unions. government, banks, etc. (As for economic sectors, the first and second
are obviously the private and public sectors, while the third sector would com-
prise cooperatives, small business, and craftsmen.)

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mario Coco, age 43, for example, is of this opinion. He is a l-ader of the

new Left group. "Anyway," says Coco, “the real decision-making power in the
League does not go through the two major parties of the Left but vertically,
through all the component members. There is today a whole area of communist.
socialist and republican cooperativists whose aim is to depoliticize the move-
ment by gradually reducing it to a kind of business organization. But there

is also an area in the new Left made up of socialist and communist comrades

who see the cooperative movement as an instrument of political cohesion. This

is the real problem today. Similarly, at other levels, there is a problem
because technicians and independents are deeply offended at partisan maneuvering."

The independents

Costanza Fanelli, age 37, a Catholic and communist sympathizer and a woman of-
ficial of the League, is preoccupied with this latter aspect of the situation:
"Rather than wonder who won," says Fanelli. “I worry about who lost. And I think
the independents have lost; in some regional congresses they accounted for up to
IS percent of the votes, yet they were sparsely represented in Rome. lhat is
good, however, is the affirmation of women, who, along with youth and indepen-
dents, make up what is new in the movement. There are now 37 women out of 290
members on the National Council, while the preceding council had 10. Of course,
we are still far from reflecting the actual presence of women in the businesses,
but we cannot accuse anyone of anything on that score. We are the ones who will
have to work hard at getting organized."

One confirmation of the fact that the main problems do not consist in the PCI
and PS! competing with one another comes from an uproar that occurred at noon
on Saturday 22 May. The presidency of the congress decided against the elec-
toral committee in proposing to enlarge the National Council from 200 to 290
members. After a rather heated discussion, the motion passed with only 65-70
percent of the Vote. The opposition (a fact of life in a movement governed by
political parties) stated that they voted against the motion because they were
fed up with the outworn system of component parties and, from a practical stand-
point. every meeting of the full new National Council would cost the League
something like 290 million lire.

A socialist leader admitted, "it is true that the League is changing very
rapidly, perhaps even more rapidly than we can tell at present. And within

the traditional components things are not as they used to be. In the PCI,

for example, they were themselves out getting the vote through, and in the

PSI there were more battles between the Craxists and the Left than there were
against communist hegemonism." The Lombardian Left, whose front man is vice-
prcsident Umberto Dragone. has always controlled the socialist component.

Many think that it has been the scene of struggles that have not been completely
disinterested.

61

FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Graxists

But the Craxists shrug off these accusations. "They are gratuitous provoca-
tions," says Luigi Rosafio, age 39, a member of the League presidency and an
official of the organization. "If we had really wanted to fight we would have
gotten an overwhelming majority: 75 of the IIS leadership seats won by the PSI
at the national level support Craxi. Rather we liuited ourselves to a battle
of ideas because we were not enthusiastic about the policy Dragone was pushing,
as is shown by the fact that we did not vote for the president's report. It is
easy to tell why: it downplayed the problem of the South and also the problen
of Europe in terms of both power blocs and trade relations; nor did the report
solve the problem of a certain ambiguity in relations with the institutions but
continued along the dangerous route of urging a mechanical reproduction of the
Emilian model."

The conclusions to Rosafio's arguments are drawn by another Craxist: "Maybe we
won't succeed in electing a socialist president at the 32nd congress, but we
will certainly succeed in electing a vice-president who is closer to our own
ideas." At this point one must wonder how the League will achieve its objec-
tives for the 1980's when it has so much internal contention: youth, women and
independents inveigh against bureaucratic encrustation, the movementists oppose
the supporters of business, the communists are against the socialists, the new
Left is against the republicans, Emilia is against the rest of Italy. and even
Craxi's followers are against Signorile's. This is all the more true because
elements of conflict are appearing outside the League; for example, between
the CISL [Italian Confederation of Labor Unions] and Confindustria [General
Confederation of Italian Industry].

The Outsiders '

The CISL has supported a policy of self-management for some time, and it has
taken note of the League's high level of support for the 0.5 percent wage fund
deduction issue; it has shared its efforts on the issue of the South and sup-
ported the arguments made concerning the so-called third sector. "Even so,"
explains Mario Colombo, CISL confederal secretary. "we think the cooperative
movement is continuing to make a mistake in undervaluing the potential of self-
manngement. The aid of concrete experience in self-management is often rebut-
ted by adducing managerial-type considerations. How many workers in recent
years have been told that the League is not the GEPI [Industrial Participations
and Managowent Company]? That is the kind of argument that management usually
makes."

while the CISL is concerned that purely economic arguments are prevailing in
the cooperative movement, Confindustria has very different concerns. In an
extreme case, it fears that all the talk about the third sector will end up

in shifting the focus to a new form of public assistance. Alfredo Solustri,
general director of Confindustria, explains, "Let's be clear about it: in a
pluralistic system like Italy's, there has to be room for everybody, but every-
body has to follow the rules of the game. The actions of the 315t congress
explicitly accept the rules of the game. but now and then they tend to confer
upon cooperatives an artificially preeminent role. Not only that, but the
congress takes for granted things that aren't necessarily so, such as partici-
pation. support for big business and international cooperation. In short,
uvorcmphnsis on the formula can lead to a privileged tax, credit and union system.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 did not see any such dangers in Harcors's proposal to allocate 100 billion

lire to Wage-Supplement workers who want to go back to work, but I thought

they should be put under the Formica proposal, which would raise the members'
capital quota more definitely and directly. At this point you have to wonder

how far they would go toward ending the original characteristics of cooperatives."

The League's Answer

In the face of rising debate and criticism, however, the League leaders are
maintaining an Olympian calm (see the interview with Prandini and Dragone).
They are strengthened by past achievements and aware of enormous potential

(no union troubles, absenteeism at 1 percent, member involvement in both pro-
duction and management); they reply to the ClSL that the movement cannot take
on overtones of public assistance and that the only thing really prejudicial
to starting up new business is a serious possibility of controlling the market
and competition. Some even turn the accusation around, saying that the CISL
is altering its own role as a union by taking on the direct management of a
part of the cooperative movement.

Business's answer to critics is just as sharp. Costanza Fanelli, for example,
says, "It is hard to find grounds for this argument. As I recall, the only
national law that in any way pushes the cooperative movement down the road to

a new kind of public assistance is law No 285, the law on youth unemployment.
Otherwise I would say that the state has taken a completely hands-off policy

in our regard." Even sharper is the answer from Alberto Zevi, age 36, a con-
munist and vice-director of finances for the League. "Whoever talks about
public assistance either doesn't know what they're talking about or they're
hluffing. The truth is that now that we've gotten to this stage of development,
with dozens and dozens of troubled businesses asking to be let in, the League
must somehow undo the financial slipknot. In order to go massively into the
industrial sector (where we now have only 18,000 members), we'll need big capital.
Well, let the gentlemen from Confindustria tell us how it's possible if, by law,
every member can carry up to 4 million lire in capital and if the annual return
stays fixed at a gross 5 percent maximum. The Formica proposal takes this fact
into account but doesn't deform anything, because it tends silply to raise the
quota of capital by allowing small remuneration to members. We must not forget
either that in many cases it is not now possible to remunerate members to the
extent that obligatory reserves have been accumulated."

An authoritative confirmation comes from Adriano Antolini, age h3, an
engineer and director of one of the largest cooperative businesses, the

CMC [Masonry and Cement Cooperative} of Revenue, which had 230 billion lire
worth of production last year (more than 20 percent over 1980), 600 full-
time employees and 3,000 workers. "Tax and credit facilities in the medium-
to-large sector are tight," says Antolini, "certainly not comparable to
those in the public and part of the private areas. In compensation, the
strings on business capital tend to strangle companies. Just think: we
manufacture more than 200 billion lire worth with 4 billion in company

capital."

63

INJR OFT1CJAI.US£i0NLV
INJIIDFF1C1AL USEZCNHLV

The I980's

But the arguments over a supposed or real new public assistance will not go
away so soon. The third-sector project. which has only begun, will actually
change many things in the Italian economic picture. In this connection Solustri
observes. 'Where is still confusion of roles in Italy. The cooperative nove-
ment is contradictory in itself because it contains both very small businesses

and real giants; just imagine what would happen if they add craftsmen and small
businesses."

Maybe this is the point: in the 1980's will the league succeed in controlling
the latent contradictions in a development that throws together small and large
businesses, newly constituted cooperatives and cooperatives that have little to
envy in large public and private corporations? Can it at the same time enlarge
its sphere of influence among craftspeople and in small industry with all the
contradictions that this sector. too, contains? The challenge is there.

Prandini and Dragone Interviewed

[Interview with Onelio Prandini, president of the LNC, and Umberto Dragone.
vice-president of the LNC: "Prandini and Dragone: Here's How It went"; inter-
viewer, date and place of interview not specified]

[Text] Rec0nfirned as president and vice-president respectively
of the National League of Cooperatives, Onelio Prandini, age 45.
a communist from Modena, and Umberto Dragone. age 48, a socialist

from Milan, agreed to answer questions from IL MONDO on the re-
sults of the recent congress.

Question: In the Nationa' Council, the APCI no longer has an absolute majority
and the PSI has fallen from 40 to 37 percent. In a word, who won this congress?

Prandini: This may sound like a platitude, but I say the League won. The
congress went well from every point of view. In any case, the PCI has tended
historically to lead the other coaponents beyond their actual strength. This
has also :hanged. The PCI and PSI have decided to support the new, emerging
trends (youth, women, technicians) without worrying about supremacy.

Dragone: I agree. But in a certain sense we have won a moral victory. It is
not a matter of numbers and chairs (if an actual count were made, the PCI would
probably get 70 percent); rather the principle was accepted that the movement
shall no longer be run like a country club. That is, with a component group
that always has one more man, one more vote in reserve to impose its own point
of View.

[Question] As it happens, though, some communists in some regions asked for
a secret ballot.

64

FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prundini: Some mistakes were made both at the center and on the outskirts.

In the end, however, the public vote passed with a large majority. That's
what counts.

[Question] Does it often happen in the League that votes follow party lines?

Prandini: Almost never on questions directly concerning the cooperative movement.
Usually the vote splits the parties vertically.

[Question] Then why did the PSI champ at the bit so much before the congress?

Dragone: Since we are not competing for seats, I would say that the main dif-
ferences between the communists and us concern the role to be assigned to self-
managenent. At the congress I deplored the lack of discussion of the third sec-
tor not merely as an econOmic factor but as a laboratory fpr experimentation
with new labor relations and a new organization of labor. In short. by utilizing
the European socialist experience we can see in the cooperative movement and in
self-management one of the cardinal points for reform of the system.

[Question] Is this an argument from the movement or from business? It is an
old problem for the cooperatives.

Prandini: It is an inescapable dialectic. One apsect or another tends to
prevail according to the state of development in which the businesses happen
to be. But it would mean the end of the movement if one or the other took
the upper hand.

[Question] In view of the massive participation of ministers at your congress,
some people fear that a future of nee-public assistance is in store for you.

Prandini: Not quite. Let's look at the figures: since the cooperatives have
been in existence the state has spent 153 billion lire all told, in other words
practically nothing. He don't want a feast, we just want to be able to develop
according to our potential. That's in everybody's interest, not just ours.

[Question] What is the outlook for the League in the 1980's?

Dragone: 'nie l970's were the years of the unions; the '80's will be the years
of the cooperatives. The secret of our success is the workers' participation
and involvement in business. The demand for participation is new higher than
ever, and everybody can draw their own conclusions.

Statistics on Cooperatives

'lbere are I31.568 cooperatives in Italy on file with the ministry of Labor as
of the end of 1981. However, only 88,383 were listed on the general index of
cooperatives. 0f the c00peratives registered. almost 55 percent do not belong
to any central organization, while the remaining 45 percent (about 40,000 busi-
nesses) are subdivided as follows: more than 20,000 are associated with the

65
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE10NLN

Confederation of Italian Cooperatives (with a gross annual production of about

26 trillion lire); about 6,000 belong to the AGCI (General Association of Italian
Cooperatives, with a gross business volume of 1.4 trillion lire in 1981), and
about 15,000 belong to the National League of Cooperatives (with a volume of
l2.405 trillion lire in l98l).

In the 4-year period between the 30th and Slst congresses, the League showed
an increase in terms of both associated businesses (up 2,000 units) and members
(up 500,000; the total now largely exceeds 3 million),

This increase parallels a quantitative expansion in the organized cooperative
movement, which increased its size by almost 45 percent in 5 years (on 31 Decem-
ber 1976 there were a little more than 28,000 coops in the 3 main organizations.
This increase is especially significant in light of the fact that only 30 per-
cent of the companies belonging to the League operate in the construction indus-
try (this sector has a higher percentage of cooperatives belonging to Confcoopera-
tive [Confederation of Italian Cooperatives] or AGCl or not belonging to any
national organization).

Here is an x-ray of the structure of organized cooperatives.

Residences: There are 4,600 cooperatives organized under ANCAB [expansion unknown]
(the industry-wide association) with a total of more than 400,000 members (260,000
in 1974) and a production estimated at 28,000 dwellings in 1981.

Production and Labor: ANCPL [National Association of Cooperatives for Production
and Labor] holds almost 3,000 coops, which are largely concentrrted in the North.
They provide work for about 100,000 people (70 percent of whom are members).

The increase in the number of people employed since the beginning of 1977 has
been about 30,000 units.

Agriculture: More than 2,900 agricultural cooperatives belong to ANCA [National
Association of Agricultural Cooperatives], and the number of members exceeds
450,000. Three-fourths of the gross product of the sector (2.] trillion lire
excluding national consortiums) are made by businesses in the Center-North,
although 45 percent of the agricultural cooperatives are located in the South.

Distribution and Consumption: The 650 consumer cooperatives have about 1 mil-
lion city dwellers as members and a production that reached 1.7 trillion in 1981.
Sales cooperatives number a little less than 2,000.

Services: The ANCS [National Association of Service Cooperatives] numbers about
I.:nn cooperatives with more than 50,000 members, 20,000 of which are in automo-
tive transportation and 5,000 are taxi drivers.

Fishing: At present the Association of Fishing Cooperatives (ANCP) has 195
cooperatives with a total of almost 20,000 fishermen.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the cooperatives operating in these industries there are 528
cultural cooperatives; 1,500 business organizations belonging to the Italian
Federation of Health Insurance [FIN]; [62 tourist cooperatives (including the
Italturist travel agency); the Publishers' Cooperative and the advertising
concession cooperative, Socop.

The League also operates in the areas of credit and insurance (with Fincooper,
the national financial consortium, to which 1,300 companies belong, and Unipol,
which serves the League, unions and some manufacturing companies); it also
operates in the export-import trade (mainly through intercoop).

X-Ray of the Fed Giant

Number of Number of 1981 Volume

[Association of Coops| Coops Members (Trillions of Lire) Egnlozees
ANCPL (production 6 labor) 2,524 122.000 3.167 124,800
ANCS (services) 1,200 61.000 1.200 28,000
ANCAB (housing) 4,600 400,000

ANCA (agriculture) 2,824 413,492 4.000 45,000
ANCC (consumers) 650 951,000 1.628 '10,500
ANACC (culture) 528 130,000 0.100 2,000
ANCP (fishing) 200 20,000 0.387 1,000
ANCD (retailing) 257 20,000 ' 0.678 2,000
ANCT (tourism) 180 6,450 . 0.100 2,000
FIM (insurance) 1,500 800,000

N.B. Unavailable for this table are data relative to consortiuns and the busi-
ness volume of housing and health insurance cooperatives.

(1) Formula.“- do". "on.

(2) India ISIII I”

(3) I I

Andununodeﬂceauurnhn

di consume negli ultimi anni

 

um
(ll The Flagship of the Fleet

(2) Index 1977 = 100 (3) Progress of consumer cooperatives in recent years
(4) Sales in current values (5) Sales in real values
to) Volume of sales (7) Number of stores

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1982
8782
C80: 3104/228

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O‘FlCIAI. USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

DEFECTIONS ?ROH UCD EXPECTEP AS CENTER WILL NOT HOLD
Madrid CAMIIO 16 in Spanish 7 Jun 82 pp 26-31
[Article by Antxon Sarasqueta: ”The Shadow of the Duke")

[Text] Hhen Vice President Rodolfo Martin Villa asked his former chief, with
a question that in fact was more of a plea, "Adolfo, why don't you come back?”
Suarez dryly answered him, "And why don't you leave? I went away and paid

for sy mistakes, nany of which were made by you "barons"--but I took the
responsibility. Now it's your turn."

The conversation took place in the midst of a lot of extremely diverse maneuver-
ing and negotiations, which have been going on since last week, after the crash-
ing defeat of the Center occurred in Andalusia, in order to save the UCD
[Delocratic Center Union] or at least the political options of the Center with
respect to the Popular Alliance and the P803 [Spanish Socialist workers Party].

Suarez said "no" to Martin Villa, and he had said the sane thing earlier to
President Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo.

The Duke, who asserted that no one was authorized to speak for him but
himself, does not want any sore solutions or connitnents with the "batons"

or clans, who first destroyed him and later Calvo Sotelo. with his diagrams.
drawn up on various papers in the silence of his study in Antonio Maura Street
in Madrid, Suarez was completing his final plans in his move to regain the
leadership of the Center.

The Blues

In the Moncloa Calvo Sotelo was receiving general support from within and
outside the UCD for continuing as the leader of the government as an element
for political stability. But his power within the party was beginning to
decline. This was partly because he has not been able to exercise that power,
as he himself is apt to admit in private, because he has been tied down by

the internal struggles among the various political groups and families.

The strategy of remaining passive so as to be able to govern, if even with a
low profile. has ended in the payment of a personal price. "What a great

president Denmark has lost," commented one of the people who knows Calvo
Sotelo well.

68

FOIIMHNCIAI.USI(IHBY
ms OFFICIAI. USE ONIX

Martin Villa was the one who, through his influence on the DOD executive
committee, tipped the scales in favor of Calvo Sotelo when he "came abroad"

as president of his party, replacing the Suarez "apparatus", headed by Agustin
Rodriguez Sahagun and Rafael Calvo.

Seven months later, on Hednesday, 26 May, in a room in the INIA building of
the Moncloa complex, where the centrist executive board was meeting to take
stock of the extent of the Andalusia defeat and the situation in the 060,
Martin Villa was attacking President Calvo Sotelo.

One of those present at the meeting would recall later to CAMBIO 16 that the
”blues,“ Vice President Martin Villa, Minister Juan Jose Roson, and former
Minister Jesus Sancho Rof, were the only ones who used a precise and coordinated
strategy. Their accusations were directed against the liberals-especially
close to Calvo Sotelo--and against the director general of Radiotelevision
Espanola, Carlos Robles Piquer, who was appointed by the chief executive.

If during recent months Martin Villa had privately criticized Calvo Sotelo's
way of doing things, and had felt that he had been shunted aside because of

the lack of responsibilities given his department, there is now no doubt that
he is gambling on him being replaced in the leadership by a successor who would
emerge out of what is known as the "founding board" or the ”barons' group"

of the party. In the end Martin Villa and Pie Cabanillas are getting closer

to Suarez.

In the meeting of the "brains commuttee" which Martin Villa presicts over in
the Moncloa, and in which there participate. as well as the Secretary General
of the UCD, Inigo Cavero, the Secretary of State for Information, Ignacio
Aguirre, the UCD secretary of information, Javier Ruperez, the secretary
general of the Moncloa Palace, Luis Sanchez Merlo, and advisers Jose Ramon
Case. Daniel Busturia and Jose Ignacio Hert, they are studying Calvo Sotelo's
chances, and those of the 0CD.

Almost everyone who was present at the summit meeting which the members of
this committee held in the Moncloa on Thursday 27 May was in favor of replac-
ing Calvo Sotalo as leader of the party, even though they stated that he
should remain at the head of the government.

In the midst of the confusion which is pervading all sectors of the 060 it

can be seen that there is not only a desire to change the direction of the
party, but to put an end to its system of functioning through clans and groups
of barons. Martin Villa himself seems to have been ruined by the role of
liaison he has played with the employers' organization CEOE [Spanish Confed-
eration of Business Organizations] and the Andalusian CRA [Andalusian Business
Confederation], which was totally detrimental to the UCD, as Calvo Sotelo
himself did not hesitate to admit.

With the general elections only a few months away, the UCD is hovering between
life and death, while a great many of its leaders and cadres are looking for
some ideological signs of identity to make their decisions consistent. Others
are only making explorations aimed at coming to an accomodation with the
Center or with Fraga for a spot on the slate which would guarantee them a
deputy's seat.

69

FORGOFFKJAL.UBE¢NNLY
IN)! 0I1WC1AI.U351MNLV

Among the former, two clear groups can be observed: the Christian democrats,
who are more conservative. who are proposing a Portuguese-type coalition made
up of each one of the groups and parties of the Right; and those who support
the validity of the Center as a progressive option as opposed to Praga's
authoritarian Right and the left of the P508. Men like Jose Luis Alvarez,
Marcelino Oreja, Oscar Alzaga...are in favor of putting an end to that inven-
tion called the UCD and forming their own indpendent political force, allied
with Frags and all the rightist groups in a broad electoral front.

This idea is not shared by Landelino Lavilla, Fernando Alvarez de Miranda,
Juan Antonio Ortega and Die: Ambrona and that aiscsllany of Christain democrat
politicians who belong to the more reformpmindsd wing, and who strongly criti-
cize Fraga's rightist group.

"It must be remembered," one of its ideologues who, along with Lavilla, is
working on the revitalization of the Center told this magazine, "that both
Frags and his vice president, Fernando Suarez, and a large number of their
men are neo—Prancoists, as is their background. Many of them are not for

democracy; they are for something else."

Deputy and member of the executive committee Joaquin Satrustegui, a liberal,
took a harsher line: "Frags says that there must be more deaths from the ETA
[Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] than from the others. Since we have a
Constitution which has abolished the dealth penalty, is the leader of a party
calling for assassinations?" And Satrustegui added, referring to the AP
[Popular Alliance], "A party does not cease to be authoritarian and fascist
when it stops calling itself conservative." Satrustegui recalled that while
Frags had been thought to have been defeated in the 1977 elections-along with
the "magnificent seven" Franco ministers--and had to be dragged along by the
constituent policy of the change which the Alliance leader rejected, it was
the UCD who directed and carried out the change leading to liberty and the
building up of the democratic system.

The plans of Lavilla, who is also not in favor of a historic agreement with

the P808, but rather for setting in motion a new message of hope for revitaliz-
lng the Center--as he himself has expressed it--have various points in con-on
with Suarez.

Both politicians have a good understanding on the personal level. Both stand
firm in their decision to continue in the forefront of the political center.
And the two may need each other mutually. The men closest to Lavilla and the
political supporters who are gathering around him insist that the two individu-
als present the best alternative for the leadership of a "new center."

The social democrats who are gathering around Vice President Juan Antonio
Garcia Diez and Minister Luis Gamir are taking up their stand beside Suarez.
Meanwhile Antonio Garrigues' liberals are leaning toward a party of their own
which would arise from the liberal clubs to occupy a part of the Center. The
"hinge," with no alliance either with Fernandez Ordonez or with Frags.

All of them. curiously enough, are seeking that essential center which up until
now has been occupied by a UCD which was born out of the power to carry out
the change of regime without a breakdown, with theleast possible tension, but

70

IN)! OFFICJAl.lEHE(HULY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(M‘LY

with the clear goal of a systes of liberties. The sajority which suppcrted
the UCD in the two elections which the government won (1977 and 1979) arose
from the votes of a conservative Right. dragged along by the change, and from
a progressive sector which envisioned the Spain of modernity and populism
symbolized by Adolfo Suarez. These groups were irreconcilable, to the right
and the left of the UCD, which they supported. attracted by its power and
glory.

Until the interests and strategies of the P502 on the left came up against
the Popular Alliance and theaoreconservative sectors of the Church, money
and the military.

Thus began the harassment and defeat of the Center/0CD, with its prime objective
its creator and leader: Adolfo Suarez.

The socialists know that in order to achieve a majority they need that
progressive vote which has gone to the UCD and which snatched victory away
from then in the last election. Fraga, with the inner coaplicity of important
men of the UCD and logistical and financial support from abroad. is beginning
the process of turning toward the right which would reverse the arrangement
of forces in that political sector.

That is, the Right would be dominated by the more conservative groups instead
of by the more progressive ones. This action has its corresponding result

in the street. where a neo-Francoist Right, which took refuge in the UCD in
the elder of the whirlpool of the democratic transition, no longer has any
compunction in coming out in support of Popular Alliance and the image of
authority displayed by Frags. Various characteristics of the centrist govern-
ment contribute to this: not only the obligation which they feel to retain

a consensus with the P803. but also the weakening of the Executive, which is
causing predictions that he will fall from power.

"He Has Eaten Him Up"

At the sane time, Frags is beginning his upward trend. receiving a majority
in the Galicia regional elections and confirming it overwhelmingly in the
Andalusia ones; which makes the AP into the main opposition party in the new
Andalusian parliament. after having come out of nowhere.

From his position as president of the government Calvo Sotelo accepts the
theory of the "natural aajority" which Praga puts forward in order to align
hinself with the UCD, but rejects it as ill-timed. However. four factors
work together to position him in the same sector as Frags. First. what has
been called the "turn to the right," which according to Calvo Sotelo's
colleagues is more an image than a reality. The departure of Fernandez
Ordonez and 16 other members of parliament who were located on the left of
the UCD. Suarez’ repeated accusations of "rightism." thus placing himself
as head of the Center-Left. And the absence of a clear and firm position
against Frags being taken on the right. while the Alliance slogan was "A vote
for Frags is a vote for Calvo Sotelo." and therefore for power.

71

INN! OFFICJAI.UBIICIULY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

Hhat Center?

Finally, the stunning rise of Frags coincides with the decline of Calvo Sotelo.
"He has eaten him up," reflected a centrist.

The Left has been interested in helping along the concept of a "turn to the
right." because such a shift by the UCD would allow the P802 to take over the
center-left area with its policy of moderation.

In Andalusia this resulted in a flood of 180,000 centrist votes to the P808,
which gave them an absolute majority.

Little by little, the Center has been being watered down. and the UCD has lost
its ideological identity. The prolonged internal struggles, which have nainly
involved outside political strategy interests and personal confrontations,
have ended by confusing the voting public and Spanish society in general.

with this situation as a background, a new political setup is now being
planned, where the conservative Right would have note power and represents-
tion-~which is perhaps note in accordance with social reality. The PSOE,
which is collecting useful votes at the expense of the PCB [Spanish Communist
Party] and other parties of the Left, is on the verge of power, and has the
expectation of capturing it in the next general election. Thus the P803 is
obtaining not only the responsibility for moderation which power entails.

but for keeping it once a majority is achieved with the support of a broad
radical sector.

And the Center? what is the Center?

At the moment, for its own survival, whether under the name of the 060 or sone
other, an independent centrist option needs to recover the credibility which
it has lost over the last 2 years.

"From my point of view-noted Juan Antonio Ortega, one of the ideologues of
the new centrist project--it is a natter of bringing about a profound regners-
tion. In terms of words, moderation is already taken for granted in our
country; we lust define our ideological differences with the conservative right
and with the P502."

There are predictions that this split between the Center and the Right and the
astounding rise of the P503 could give the victory to the socialists in the
next general elections. This hypothesis even foresees the Center disappearing,
and the formation of the "big right." In that case, political instability
would reach truly dangerous heights. With 2 million unemployed, with the
autononies' process under way, social conflicts, terrorist attacks...a Left-
Right confrontation presents a prospect which is unattractive and very
frightening.

There is a segment of the population in Spanish society which does not identify
itself with that conservative or neo-Francoist right which revolves around

Frags, that does place its bets on the option of a right which is nodern,
progressive, liberal and profoundly democratic. It can be compared with the

72

IIIICHWNCJAI.USE(NVLY
FORiOFFKJAI.USE(MﬂLV

most advanced rightist groups of Hestern Europe. It is a right which, if
there is no centrist option. could either stay at home or vote. even for the
9503. in order to bring about change.

”The Center to which the new UCD alternatives are addressing themselves lies
among the progressive, modern and young bourgeoisie." one of its leaders who
has great ideological integrity told CAHBIO 16.

The Leader

it is really a Center which has two alternatives: to line up with the Right
or with the Left. depending on the circumstances. To fill the role of a
buffer when it is a einority. and therefore what is known as a "hinge"; or

of a never of the Spanish light if the ballot boxes grant it a role of leader-
ship on the right. The key and the unknown factor is that that center may
have 1. 3 or 5 million votes; 40, 80 or 100 deputies; which will not only
depend on the social and political spectrum of the country. but on their
capacity to organize an attractive. consistent and united political campaign
with credible and skilled leadership.

Because the center is now not'only searching for its identity. but for a leader
who can take on Frogs and Felipe Gonzalez. This is the unknown factor. How-
ever. the neerness of the general elections does not allow for further delay.
The centrists are looking for someone-they are not shuffling around any

other nanes than those or Lavilla and Suarez--whoee image is identified with
the center. who keeps a distance from Fraga's conservetisu and Felipe‘s
socialise. Something which reflects a complete ideological formula with its
image and its expressions.

This internal convulsion of the center has finished off a new leader of the
party. Calvo Sotelo. as well as the authority of the “barone"-where is
Jose Pedro Perez Llorca?--and it appears that it could finish off the DOD
itself. The secretary general. Inigo Cavero. who places the ultinate
responsibility for the Andalusian debacle on the president, Martin Villa.
and on hinself. is holding on to his letter of resignation waiting for an
opportune soment. Sale of the most important members of the centrist
"apparatus" will leave with him.

The breakdown process is at the same time dragging along with it aeebers of
parliament and executives of the Administration who. in view of the turn

that events are taking in the UCD are hesitating to take their seats again

in the centrist ranks. and are fleeing to take up other positions near Frags.
The Alliance leader is waiting for the stampede “with open arms.” Calvo
Sotelo. when he is asked about it. has no other alternative but to say that
"today. or at this time. I have no reason to believe these defections will
take place." Right now in the lobby of the Congress of Deputies a half

dozen deputies are talking about going over to the AP. Another. a member of
the executive board. who was speaking in favor of a centrist party with a
"majority vocation" denies that he believes in that. although they had decided
it that very sorning. "In my province--says the deputy--I have nothing to do.
alone with the UCD. For me. allying myself with Frags is the thing." At

the same tine. nany think that the only way to strengthen and give isportsnce
to the center is to throw out the deadwood on the Right.

73

F0.‘0FUKJA1.UBI(IULV
INJR‘051N(JAI.IISEZCHNLV

Hui whu In utaylng In the 0CD? The green-orange "donuts" of the Democratic
Cvutcr Union st111 have some assets. depending on the outcole of the crisis.
Those who are betting on the center want to stay with the party, but those who
cannot get along with Landelino. liberals. social democrats,. Suarez...want

to put an end to the invention. The continuation of the internal "war" at

the time of the political council, which indeed is going to make it an extra-
ordinary congress, would mean the death of the 0CD from natural causes. This

is the last service which certain accomplices who are remaining in the UCD
can do for Frags.

At this stage of the game voices are being heard calling for the historic
role of a moderate center, which of necessity has to be reconstructed. 0n the
socialist executive board they are costing out in favor of the need for that

political center to exist. Santiago Carrillo is going to the Honcloa to plead
for the Center.

The destruction of the UCD has been like a benchmark for reflection on the
historic importance of the center and the role which this political sector

plays in a modern society with structures and complex situations which only
produce minority majorities.

So we are witnessing the aoaent of truth for judging the capabilities and
talents of our political leaders from a historical perspective.

The real verdict will in the end come at the ballot boxes. a time which could
be moved up to very shortly after the end of summer, according to sources in
the government and on the socialist executive board.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacion y Reviataa, S. A.

8131
C80: 3110/160

74

FOI1DFFIJAI.USE(MNLY
IN)R‘0FINC1AI.IJSIZ(NVLV

POLITICAL SPAIN

NATIONAL ELECTIONS UOULD CONFIRM RBSULTS IN ANDALDCIA
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 7 Jun 82 pp 34-35
[Article by Jose Manuel Arija: "The Centrists Are Fleeing")

[Text] If general elections were to take place right now, the socialists
would win hands down. Aleost a fourth of the voting public has already
decided over the course of thepsst year to vote for the P808 [Spanish Socialist
workers Party]. Decisions to vote for the UCD [Denocratic Center Union]

anount to 7 percent; for AP [Popular Alliance] 5 percent. and for the PCB
[Spanish Columnist Party] 3 percent.

This inforlation cones fron the latest poll carried out by the ALE! office

of econonic and social studies. A large number of undecided voters. alounting
to 37 percent, will as always hold in their hands the possibility of surprises
occurring when the day for voting cones.

Citizens’ plans to vote renained relatively stable throughout the last lb
Ionths, fron February 1981 to March 1982. Then cane the Andalusian elections.
whose influence will undoubtedly be reflected in coming polls. But weeks
before the Andalusian balloting the people polled already were showing a solid
vote of three to one in favor of the P808 and against the UCD. Throughout

the different polls. another factor keeps repeating itself: Popular Alliance
is gaining lore votes than the coenunists.

If we conpare the average data iron the four polls nentioned with the results
of the March 1979 general elections (on the total of voters) we find out that
intentions to vote for the UCD decline by 66 percent, for the P803 increase
by 20 percent, that of the AP keeps rising. and thatofthe PC! is reduced by
half.

This is a real revolution on the election scene, in the event that it is
finally confirmed by the data. Andalusia already set the tone, enphasieing
even sore the differences caused by the rise of the AP. That is. the "undecid-
ed" people. who do not answer the polls, finally case to show where their
preferences lay when the votes for the socialists and Alliance people were
added up.

75

FOI‘OIINCIAI.INII¢IULY
F08‘0FFKJAI.USE¢MNLY

UCD Bloodbath

From the data it can be affirmed that somewhat more than one out of every
three voters, the majority of whom were former supporters of the UCD, do not
know whom to vote for right now. This percentage constitutes a sufficiently
important group to upset an election.

But what do we know about these men and women who do not know whom to vote for?
Certain things can be discovered from the polls, apart from what has already
been said that in 1979 many of them were centrist voters and some were
communists. Another question reveals that 70 percent of the "undecideds"

have no politicalopinionsand are not interested; that there are more women
than men; more older people than younger ones; that they belong to the lower
social classes and tnat they live in small towns. This could be the typical
makeup of the undecideds.

Age and social class are two important variables because of the different way
that people behave. In general, persons of more advanced age are less apt

to sympathise with the Left. On the other hand, 35 percent of youths of 18

to 24 years would vote for the P808. and 5 percent for the UCD (30 points
difference in favor of the socialists); while 18 percent of those older than
55 years would vote for the P503, and 11 percent for the UCD [the difference
falls to 7 point).

Social status also is an important factor in determining the response at the
ballot boxes. Thus-—if we leave out those who abstain so as to obtain closer
figures-—there turn out to be double the number of socialist votes in the
lower classes compared with the supper, whereas for the UCD the exact opposite
is true.

In the ALE? poll the people interviewed were asked to assign a number from
zero to ten to the top politicalleaders, and it was pointed out to them that
the zero indicated "total antipathy" and the ten "complete approval."

The result was that in all the polls taken over the course of a year,
Pleipe Gonzalez has always been the preferred leader. The ratings of Praga,
Suarez and Calvo Sotelo have stayed every even.

Failed Leaders

The most recent poll reveals a general decline in relation to the same month a
year ago: the leaders, in March 1982, had lost leadership. “hat is the
reason for this? Of course. changes in the sample can have an influence. but
the general fall in scores indicates that that was not the Iain cause. What
could it be? One central factor could explain the decline in points: the
trial for 23 February. The very moments of greatest tension and suspense

In the trial chambers took place at the same time as the interviews with the
people polled--from the middle of February to March.

Another two additional reasons could be a certain disenchantment with
politicians: that the disillusionment about the centrist government which the
poll rurlccts has extended indirectly to the whole governing class like a vote

76

INJI.CIHH(JA1.Iliiiflﬂlﬁ!
FOR‘OFIHC]AI.[E§Z(MNLV

of condemnation. And, in the second place, that the new policy regarding
television, which was followed up until February-March 1982, where the politi-
cal directors and leaders were practically banished from the little screen,
has produced those results.

Hith lesssppearsnceson television, lower scores, because explanations to the
citizens were reduced.

All these reasons could have had a influence on the slight tendency to decline
of Felipe Gonzalez. The sharp drop of Calvo Sotelo in October-November 1981
(which also coincides at that time with a sharp decline in intentions to vote
for the DOD) could be explained if we remember that that was the time when

the whole internal crisis of the centrist party occurred, with the departure
of Fernandez Ordonez and the resignations of Rodriquez Sahagun and of Calvo
Ortega from the leadership of the government party. The poll reflected that
crisis in a negative way.

Technical Record

Type of Investigation: Probablity Sample Poll

Population Polled: Individuals of 15 years of age and over; men and women from
the Peninsula and the Balearics.

Sample Size: 3,000 interviews

Sample Error: 2 percent, with reliability of 95 percent

Date Carried Out: February-March 1982

Carried Out By: ALEP, Office of Social and Economic Studies, S.A.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacion y Revistas, S. A.

8131
cso: 3110/160

77

maomaatussmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

PILAR BRAVO EXPLAINS RESIGNATION PRO“ PCB
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Jun 82 p 47
[Article by Pilar Bravo: "why I Am Leaving PCB"]

[Text] I have taken the step of leaving the Communist Parliamentary Group [CGP] and
joining the Mixed Group, because the last meeting of the PCB [Spanish Communist
Party] Central Committee (at which Marcelino Camacho resigned from the Executive
Committee and Nicolas Sartorius resigned as first vice-secretary) convinced me
that the renovation of PCB is impossible so long as Santiago Carrillo continues

to serve as secretary general. And he will continue to do so because his removal
will never be proposed by a Central Committee created in his image and likeness.

As I explained in my letter of resignation to Jordi Sole Tura, I had virtually
decided to remain in the GPC until the end of the legislature, despite my expulsion
from the Central Committee, This was due, partially, to my desire not to increase
further the number of deserting deputies in a political situation that is confused
and difficult in itself. Partially, it was also meant to be a gesture that would
not impede the renovation of PCB further still. There was also the circumstance
that there were among my deputy comrades some of the individuals who could most
contribute to that renovation.

But, after the Central Committee meeting that I have mentioned, I could not remain
in a Parliamentary Group which offered on its top level such a display of dissocia-
tion from society. In my view, the last victory of Santiago Carrillo and his old
and young guard was the end of the party for and in which I have struggled since
1965. To me, being a communist meant, during all these years, being able to
transform the reality. Today, in order to continue transforming the reality I have
had to leave the Communist Party and Parliamentary Group.

I could not continue to accept a PCB and GPC leadership which, after having lost
over 60 percent of the votes in the Andalucian elections, refused to analyze the
reasons for it. They have chosen to become established in the S or 6 percent of
the votes that they themselves anticipate in the forthcoming general elections,
rather than proceed to make a stringent analysis that might lead to a loss of
positions for many members of the leadership.

I could not contribute, even passively from my seat as a marginal Communist deputy
(a position that was excluded from the November expulsions and sanctions) to the

78

INJI‘OFFICJAI.I£SIi(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

process of destruction of a party which, if it had pursued its course of the 1960's
and 1970's, might today be a strong bulwark of a left which is faced with new,
major responsibilities.

I believe that Santiago Carrillo is destroying that party which he helped to form
at a different time. During the past 3 years, he has systematically taken over
an entire part, the most active and vital part of PCB. when PCB was legalized,

it was a party with two fundamental components. One consisted of us militants
who joined the PC at the end of the 1960's. we were people who were fighting on
behalf of democracy for our country, who wanted to put an end to every type of
exploitation and oppression, and advocates of a democratic socialism. He rejected
Yankee imperialism with all our might. but we never felt that we were especially
linked with, or admirers of the Soviet bloc. we operated democratically, and
shared very few dogmas. He felt free in the party, even when we were serving
terms in the Prancoist jails. He achieved a considerable impact on Spanish
society, of which we felt that we were an inseparable part. He read with pleasure
the books and writings of Carrillo, and considered him intelligent and daring, one
of us, but probably with more experience and wisdom. We were Buroco-Iunists.
even "avant 1a lettre" [ahead of the letter].

But Carrillo landed here, surrounded by a sect, consisting of individuals with
hidebound dogmas and an undecipherable code. They viewed us with suspicion.

He Commists on the inside were not pure. Us discussed, we differed, we thought;
we were glib talkers. They dispersed us. They were a closed, organized sect
heading a disorganized group of militants. They were undermining a party which
had attained precisely what was most difficult for the other European Commist
Parties: being attractive to their people, transparent, close and entwined in

the deepest recesses of the social body.

I am not resigned to burying everything that the men and women of my generation
and experience can contribute to the left in this country. Eurocomnism, which
represented for all of us the most serious attempt to renew the left, is now
about to perish, if it has not already perished, under the PCB apparatus. But
its key issues still stand; and they are essentially: independence from the two
superpowers, democracy as something inseparable from aocilaism, the strengthening
of the citizens' political participation and, in particular. the ability to
exanine all problems without dogmas. and with an open, critical view, including
reflection on the party and on the leftist parties in general.

I feel associated with this project, which is more extensive now, converging in
the Euroleft. I shall continue to devote all my political energy to it.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informscion y Revistas, S.A.

2909
(.50: 3! 10/176

79

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

SENTENCES SEEN AS HAVING UNSETTLED SM I“ MILITARY

Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Jun 82 pp 29, 31

lArticle: "Meetings Hith Stars"]

[Text] On 17 June, a group of military from the three branches met in a private
club in Madrid. The attendees, nearly all individuals well along in years, with
gray hair and very receding hairlines at the forehead, after harshly criticizing
the government and the political parties. reached agreement on the need for removing
from the government's control matters of military policy, particularly the appoint-
ments and dismissals of the comanders-in-chief and those holding high-ranking
posts in the military administration.

Despite the fact that the collective petitions have been severely punished within
the Army. the military who met decided to prepare a document for release among
their colleagues and later have it accepted by the civil authorities. The document
was their "terms" for the Armed Forces acceptance of the established political
system.

Included among them was an expression of the approval by the authors of the document,
who claimed to be voicing the majority view of the entity, for having the Army obey
only the king, as supreme chief of the Armed Forces. They also deemed it feasible
to create a Higher Council of the Armed Forces, a kind of military parliament which,
together with the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JUJEH), would be the entity responsible

for deciding on military policy and the time when Article 8 of the Constitution.
whereby the military are called upon to intervene in politics when the integrity

or stability of the nation is jeopardized, would go into effect.

The clandestine meeting of this minority group of military. who favor the Army's
being set up as an autonomous, untouchable authority in the country. coincided
with one of the most serious confrontations between civilians and military. On

16 June, 26 hours earlier, the government had, through two royal decrees. dismissed
Cons Alberto Barrio Galan and Manuel Gonzalez Puster as members of the Supreme

Council of Military Justice.

While the government, in an official note, was stating that the two medaers of the
military had been dismissed "because they were named council members exclusively
for the 23-1? trial, owing to the incompatibility of two other council members,"

80

‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sources close to the coup plotters‘ lawyers expressed the view that it was all a
maneuver to preclude the application of "extenuated imprisonment" to the 10 chiefs
and officers sentenced in the 23-? trial to terms of under 3 years and 1 day,
something which allows the military to serve sentences in their residences.

The first confrontation took place a few hours later, at the weekly meeting of
the Supreme Council of Military Justice. when the dismissed generals attempted to
attend it, claiming that their dismissal did not have executive status because it
had not been published in the "Official Bulletin of the Army."

The president of the Court. Gen Federico Gomez de Salazar, had to use all his
forcefulness to have the "Official State Bulletin" in which the dismissals of
Barrio Calan and Come: Fuster had appeared, respected.

Widespread Unrest

Shortly thereafter, in a very tense atmosphere, there began the meeting of the
high military court, one of the points on its agenda being the petition for
"extenuated imprisonment" for several coup plotters. Seven council members,
including Jose hernandez Ballesteros, Jose Contreras Franco, Jose Barcina Rodri-
guez and Justo Carrera Ramos. voted in favor of the extenuated imprisonment, and
seven others expressed radical opposition to it.

To break the tie, the president of the Court, Gomez de Salazar, then made use of
his "deciding vote" and settled the matter. denying the coup plotters a "condition-
al release."

It was as if the devil had been named. Adm Justo Carrero Ramos and Gen Jose
Barcina Rodriguez, enraged, scolded the president of the Court, and accused him

of "having sold out to the government." and of betraying the Army, "by allowing
comrades-in—arms to remain in prison while the terrorists are going about free."

Gomez de Salazar strenuously rejected the charges and, in a firm, determined tone,
asked Barcina Rodriguez and Carrero Ramos to retract their remarks, to spare him
the painful duty of having to apply the regulations and arrest them.

These comments by no means calmed spirits, but aroused them even more. One of the
council members lunged at the president of the Court, with an aggressive attitude.
when he was led back to his seat by his companions, Gen Gomez de Salazar had no
recourse other than to impose house arrest for 7 days upon narcina Rodriguez and
Carrero Ramos. Since the latter refused to accept the penalty, it was increased
to 14 days for him.

The incident at the Supreme Council of Military Justice occurred in an atmosphere
of widespread unrest resulting from the minimal sentences imposed on 22 of the
coup plotters who. 14 months earlier, had intimidated the country with their
weapons and uniforms, and had held the government and the Congress in captivity

for 18 hours.

The president of the government was the first one to enter the fray a few minutes
after the sentences were announced, rejecting them forcefully.

8]

FOR OFFICIAL US“ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The pressure from the military was not long in arriving. Shortly after the radio
broadcast of the dissenting text of President Calvo Sotelo, high-ranking members
of the military called Honcloa, suggesting that the Calvo Sotelo statement not

continue to be repeated on the radio. Spanish Television, which had intended to

broadcast it on its "Isle-Newspaper" program at 2100 hours, had to eliminate it
from its news program.

Similar suggestions were received by the opposition leader, Felipe Gonzalez who, on
the day after the publication of the verdict, used very harsh terms in describing
it, noting that "no member of the military who has violated the Constitution and
refused to obey the government should return to the Army."

In this atmosphere of criticism toward the high‘ﬂilitary Court, the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, the top-ranking organ in the military chain of command, had its first
confrontation with the government, 6 months after having been elected, when it
made public a note describing any comment that might involve "contempt for the
action of the Supreme Court of Military Justice" as "unbecoming."

The confrontation had occurred even before the dissemination of the note, when
Calvo Sotelo refused to approve a previous note written in terms far more harsh
toward the civil society and the government. In spite of everything, the JUJEH
did not have to dilute the content of its second note sufficiently. when it was
made public, Calvo Sotelo remarked: "This is not the same note that they showed
me."

The most severe criticism of the verdict had come from the Council of Ministers,
when it rejected the extenuating circumstance of owed obedience mentioned by the
high Military Court.

In an official note, the Council of Hinisters stated: "According to the Constitu-
tion and the legislation in force, the PAS and the Civil Guard owe obedience to
the government of the nation and to its president, who were unheeded in the
course of events."

This tense atmosphere between the government and the Army has been used by the
involutionist sectors of the PAS and the civil coup plotters to their own advan-
tage.

What is clear is that, between 12 and 13 June, members of the Higher Center of
Defense Intelligence [CESID] involutionary area and police officials exposed
another involutionary attempt, and reported it to the chiefs of the military
implicated, so that they might adopt the necessary disciplinary measures.

The reaction from the military coup sector was not long in coming. During the

early hours of the morning between 13 and 14 June, four powerful bombs exploded
at an educational center, an electronics laboratory, a materials warehouse and

a shop in Madrid.

These four innocent facilities were actually an equal number of other camouflaged
centers of the Special Missions Operational Group, the CESID's investigations
group. Therefore. the individuals who set the bombs in the electronics laboratory

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or the materials varehouse were aware that they were attacking the infrastructure
of the nilitary secret services.

Consequently, the attack was nerely a reprisal from the coup plotting sectors,
including former members of the Central Documentation Services of the Presidency
of the Government. which were headed by Col Jose Ignacio San Martin, currently
sentenced to 3 years and 1 day in prison for the anti-involutionist activities
carried out by 03810 among the members of the Armed Forces.

The police investigations are aimed at the National Labor Union Action associa-
tion of Jose Antonio Assiego, at a sector of the Palange under orders from retired
Col Ricardo Garchitorena 2alba and at violent extreme right-wing groups which are
in the habit of meeting with Comdr Ricardo Ynestrillas, one of those convicted

for the so-called "Operation Galaxie,"

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Infornacion y Revistas, S.A.

2909
C80: 3110/176

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC1l1.USElDNLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

CENTER PABIIES TO LOSE INDEPENDENCE IN "ARE 0? POLAEIZATION
Madrid mm 16 in Spanish 28 Jun 82 pp 24-27
[Article by Antxon Sarasqueta: “The Move of the Right"]

[Text] After a preliainary interval of incredulity. shock and despair following
its serious defeat in Andalucia. UCD [Democratic Center Union] is now attempting
to shape its future. while still in power. For a month. the lack of ideas and the
tendency to let the situation deteriorate coincided with maneuvers and reactions

of the lost diversified types.

Judging from his actions. Adolfo Suarez was the only one who had planned his future
in detail. starting with a state of death throes in UCD: former President Suarez.

a bold poker player who has wagered heavily on his return. Outside of UCD, the
only one to have done so was the Alliance leader. Manuel Pragt.

Amid a fluid, uncontrolled state of affairs. with the most varied statements coming
from the different Centrist leaders and a tissue of rumors and slanted news reports
in progress. Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo felt harassed and disheartened in Honcloa Palace.
The president of the government had on his desk a devastating study of UCD's status
throughout the national territory. Calvo Sotslo responded with a laconic. "yes.

all right." to the report given him on the departure of more deputies from the
Centrist group, and evinced a "mute" silence regarding his secret negotiations

with Suarez and Landelino Laville. president of the Cortes. to extricate the

party fro- the tunnel.

Political experts and leaders. faced with the prospect of an unsupportable govern-
ment. weakened to the maximum extent, are making studies and devising strategies
with a view toward a possible calling of early general elections. Suarez and
Felipe Gonzalez are neeting both publicly and secretly. Pbr the absolute majority.
there are but three options in sight, and only the ones leading to a left-center
coalition government are certain. Hence. the process of the "move" of the right

has appeared.

The overwhelming reality of a poll taken of 25.000 Spaniards which had just been
submitted to the sinister of the presidency. Matias Rodriguez Inciarte. introduced

a disturbing new element into the dilemss faced a few months ago by the president
of the government and of UCD. Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo: a dilemma between the reason

for equilibrium and the fiendish complexity of a Spanish society involved in a
process of transition. possibly for generations.

84

INJIiofiWCJAl.U§£I(NﬂLV
INIR‘OIIICJAI.thE2(MﬂLY

His brief experience heading the government, wherein he has not yet spent a year
and a half, and his activity in the UCD leadership, especially in the Andalucian
campaign, coincide with his personal belief that Spain needs the moderation of a
center. however, Calvo Sotelo is faced with the reality of the vote in Calicia
and Andalucia, with the national trend confirmed by the largest government poll
of recent times. Calvo Sotelo has reacted with an impenetrable silence, which he

has not broken even with those who have been his closest collaborators during the
past few years.

According to the data procured in the aforementioned poll, UCD is virtually at the
zero point. Only in three provinces (Asturias, Teruel and Cuenca) does UCD retain
the same percentage of acceptance that it did in 1979, when it won the elections
for the second consecutive time. Elsewhere in Spain, in the majority of the

country, the Centrist levels have dropped to less than 10 or 15 percent. In Madrid,
popular support for UCD has declined to 7 percent.

In view of this reality, Calvo Sotelo had no option other than to offer a desperate
type of solution, attempting a pact with Suarez and Lavilla; while the interior
minister, Juan Jose Roson, elbowed his own way in as a "third course of action."

At the same time, on the right, there has been an acceleration of the most crucia‘
process in a long-standing operation backed by the economic and financial powers
to regroup a "Portuguese style" or "French style" coalition around the personage
of the Alliance leader Manuel Frags. The purpose of the action, for which over

5 billion pesetas has been made available, is to reverse the areas of power in the
right-center toward more conservative positions.

Former President Suarez, with a lengthy tactical silence, and pulling strings behind
the scenes. made a final strike this week to regain control of the party. Suarez
went so far as to interrupt a pleasant weekend at the estate of a publisher friend
of his in Burgos to go to Honcloa; something which those who know him denied that

he intended to do the day before. This move fromthe 50100. mansion and the
countryside to the prolonged negotiations in Honcloa clearly reveals the Duke's
interest in playing and winning the game.

Suarez' Humiliation

Concurrently with his secret talks with Calvo Sotelo and the president of the Cortes,
Lanoelino Lavilla, the individuals who are closest to Suarez politically within

UCD launched an offensive as logistical backup for their chief. Agustin Rodriguez
Sshagun and Rafael Calvo were the most active.

Lavilla is currently the leader with prestige and credibility that UCD could hold
in reserve to assume a high-ranking leadership role, without becoming spent. His
decision to support a center dissociated from Frags has attracted the most modern-
istic sector of the Christian Democrats, in an attempt to retain the image of a
compact party and to put Oscar Alzaga and those accompanying his in the Frags
coalition into a role as "deserters."

Suarez is willing to have the Christian Democratic leader, Oscar Alzaga, a vital
member of the CEOE [Spanish Confederation of Business Organizations] management

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIKOFF1C1AL.USEIDNLV

entity, and Frags leave the party, so as to bring UCD closer to destruction or to
the new coalition. The Duke also wants to put an end to the "baron system" as a
method for running the party and the government itself.

Suarez has not forgotten the humiliation to which they subjected him at the "house
on the Prairie." There, during the summer of 1980, at a disgraceful summit meeting
held near the Hansanares el Real marsh north of Madrid, the "barons" asked him to
leave the room so that they might freely discuss his replacement: the replacement
for him, who was fully president of the government and who had won the elections

and the power for UCD on two occasions, with 7 million votes backing him; him, to
whom they owed nearly everything.

Suarez' downfall was hastened in a deteriorating situation which was used for the
coupist purposes that were to conclude with the rash attempt of 23-P.

with Adolfo Suarez replaced by Calvo Sotelo, a crisis with similar features is
evident on the national scene today: a president of the government harassed both
inside and outside of his party, and a weakened cabinet which must cope with a

he! :oup-oriented offensive from the extreme right, even relying on the opposition
1J order to avoid its collapse and the early calling of elections; and suspicious
intrigues and plots to foster a "caretaker" government in which "independents"
would enter and there would be no dearth of military.

There are charges of military pressure against the president of the government, for

his reaction against the 23-? sentences, which coincided with the general sentiment
gleaned by the news media.

Two new deputies contributed to the moral discreditation of the Chamber of Repre-
sentatives: the Centrists Modesto Praile and Carlos Gila who, dissatisfied because
the autonomy of Segovia was not achieved, stopped voting in favor of the government
and left their group to vote against it, with the opposition, the following day.

In the Basque Country, another nationalist campaign against the government and
Parliament, which had decided to pass the LOAPA [Organic Law for Harmonization

of the Autonomous Process}. with the impetus and backing of UCD and P803 [Spanish
Socialist Workers Party], was intensifying.

The occasion coincided with further terrorist action by ETA [Basque Fatherland and
Liberty Group] and demonstrations by Herri Batasuna [Popular Unity]. The use of
nationalism, separatism, Marxism and terrorism found its inciting echo in the
extreme right circles.

Hence it was not unusual, under these circumstances, that there should be a reite-
ration of the rumors of a coup d'etat, nurtured partially by the biased news lines
in collusion with coupism.

Concurrently, and as the best refutation of these rumors (embodied in a flat,
simultaneous denial from Manuel Frega and Alfonso Guerra). the Alliance party and

PSOE are assiduously planning for the holding of general elections. Since his
splendid rise in Andalucia, the AP [Popular Alliance] leader has toured Spain

86

F0l.0FF1C1Al.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

several times, from one end to the other, in an effort to expand his organization
and strengthen the "natural majority" at the bases. The outpouring of Centrists
to AP is now estimated in the thousands.

In PSOB, fate played a bad trick on its "star," Felipe Gonzalez, who suffered a

sprain getting out of his car. And what if Calvo Sotelo calls for elections now.
and forces him to conduct a campaign on crutches?

while he leaned on the crutch, and the photographers' cameras took pleasure in the
image. Gonzalez replied with a smile: “They say that these pictures of a lame
person with a crutch and of a pregnant woman produce more votes."

But what is being bandied about currently in the circles responsible for the
Centrist leadership's foreign policy, and not without suspicion, are the names

of two persons to hold the portfolio of that ministry in a potential government of
a Socialist type. They are: Adolfo Suarez and Francisco Fernandez Ordonez.

200 Seats

The Duke's name has come up in the Socialist ranks in view of the suspicion of a
high-level pact with Felipe Gonzalez to govern in a left-center coalition, with a
majority in the Chamber. In fact, before both politicians met in an airplane flying

from Madrid to Barcelona. they had met in the private residence of Felipe Gonzalez.
although the location was kept secret.

Nevertheless. it is no secret that certain Centrists around Suarez advocate the
formation of a left-center majority, if the foreseeable Socialist victory in the
elections is confirmed.

At the present time. the most reliable sources give the P802 160 seats, while
indicating an individual capacity of SO-odd deputies for Suarez, with the backing
of the Social Democratic group, several of varied origin and "familial" acquisition,
and others. This is the main opportunity for procuring an absolute majority in
Parliament that would exceed 200 seats.

Those who know Suarez well, however, claim that he would not join a government
headed by the Socialists. One of those sources told this magazine: "He would pay
a high political price. which could end up destroying his chances in the future."

Actually. it would be the price paid by any right-wing leader who helps to conso-
lidate the power of the left. This is perhaps why Landelino Lavilla has hastened
to state that he is unwilling to sponsor an historic commitment of this type.
Some give a reminder that. in Italy, Aldo Moro was assassinated when he attempted
the same operation.

Suarez. along with Lavilla. and Calvo Sotelo in the government appear determined
to relaunch the center option against F80! and Fraga. with a party renewed in both
structure and message. The Duke, with a few political collaborators, has devised
a plan for rapprochement with the de facto powers, with whom he had virtually
burned all bridges after the harassment and overthrow to which he was subjected at
the initiative of these sectors.

87

FOR 0FFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFTWCJAI.USEiDNLY

The leaking from the Suarist areas of reports containing political and social
justification for the legalization of the Spanish Communist Party [PCB], based
upon studies of public opinion, which have been kept secret up until now, has
been interpreted by observers as confirmation of those plans of Suarez. In this
connection, it should be remembered that the military uneasiness against Suarez

started to become a challenge when PC! was legalized by surprise, contrary to the
expectations of the militia'a high come“.

A long-standing leader of the Centrist "apparatus," close to the Duke, told CAHBIO
16 that, upon his return to the top leadership of the Center, Suarez must also

recover confidence in the relations with the economic authorities and with the
Church.

For that, he needs not only willingness, but also time. And "gaining time" has

been one of the first slogans emerging from the Landelino-Suarez—Calvo Sotelo
"troika" at its meetings in Honcloa, the Cortes and the Hotel Ritz.

In an attempt to show that the government would not call for general elections
before the end of the year, President Calvo Sotelo ordered the preparation of the
General State Budgets for debate in Parliament, despite his minority status.

In addition to the remodeling of the cabinet planned with the resolving of the
Centrist crisis, the backing of the Basque and Catalonian nationalists, the members
of the Democratic Coalition and the right-wing politicians will be negotiated.
Frags has reiterated his goal, coinciding with that of the government, to extend
the legislature until its natural conclusion.

P805 is inclined toward early elections which would not occur beyond October.
Pressed by its ascending line, PSOE also wants to go to the polls with a divided
right. The D'hont election system, which is in effect in Spain, favors the majori-
ties; and, in this instance, PSOE benefits from the useful vote of the Communists
and, to a lesser extent, that of the center.

if the Socialists are confronted with a center diversified in its options, with UCD,
the liberals, the nationalists and a rightdwing coalition headed by Frags, their
chances will be increased considerably, according to the studies analyzed b” the
PSOE leadership.

This would not be the case if the right-center bloc goes to the polls as two
different options.

The Socialists' electoral interests are inclined toward introducing a new element
of distortion in the center bloc with the autonomous alternative of the Democratic
Action Party (PAD) of the former Centrist minister, Francisco Fernandez Ordonez;
but the latter has the expectation of running on the P803 tickets with some of

his followers.

The Majority on the Left

The electoral forecasts make it so difficult to discern the possibility of one
group's obtaining the absolute majority in the Chamber by itself that the national-
ists' support could prove to be decisive. Frags and the Socialists are going in

Ffﬂl(lﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

search of it. Thus far, the Catalonians have backed Calvo Sotelo; but the LOAPA

and the proximity of the elections have created a breach between the nationalists
and the center,awaiting more stable situations.

Despite everything, the current data indicate that, even when all the right-
center efforts are pooled, before or after the elections, the majority may lie
with the left. 80, the initiative for pacts would lie with the Socialists.

If PSOE should win, it will seek a pact with the sectors to the right of it.
The arrival in power itself would curb the pressure from the left, and also
because the most radical sectors of P803 would have a piece of the pie.

The historic compromise that the Socialists seek entails an understanding with the
de facto powers. A majority at the polls would benefit their contacts in that

direction, but the use of more common channels of the right and center would
represent a greater guaranteee for them.

This is why the strategy of alliances is one of the crucial topics to be debated
by the forthcoming meeting of the 9803 Federal Committee, planned within a month.
At present, all the political forces are waiting for the consummation of the
operation of change in UCD at the meeting of its Political Council, the supreme
organ between Congresses, announced for early July.

The gradual control of the party that Suarez has been assuming recently coincides
with the hastening of the preparations of the Christian Democrat, Oscar Alzaga,

to organize his Popular Democratic Party (PPD) which was created (according to its
promoters) for the purpose of forming a coalition with Frags.

The inevitable break-off is a matter of political timing. probably involving days
or weeks. If Minister Pio Cabanillas describes Spain as a country of anarchistic
individuals and Christians, the political option of the Christian Democrats. all
by itself, has always met with the most complete failure.

The Spain of the 80's

Essentially, this entire ploy attempting to save CD for the next electoral contest
is a lost battle if it fails to contrive a really new and attractive offer.
Everything that smacks of continuity, power for power's sake, mediocrity or
corruption no longer has an electorate in the Spain of the 80's. Andalucia has
been the best example of this, and these symptoms are appearing more clearly than
ever in the streets of Spain.

Not even the civil rulers are of any use now as an electoral influence. One
prominent Centrist leader commented: "Since the vote is secret. what good are the
civil rLlers?" This is a sign of how democracy has been penetrating our country's
society. despite the obstacles. The electorate's attitude also;shows that the
vote based on fear is no longer of any use. Now, the vote based on change is what
counts.

PSOE has depicted the change as being synonymous with democracy and socialism. It
has retrieved the cause which was traditionally associated with the progressive

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFFNJAL.US£IDNLY

bourgoisie. in a different time and place. The right has facilitated the opera-

tion for the Socialists, devoting part of its effort to debating the manifestations
of its egotism and the rest to retrogressing in history.

The center's important role in the execution of the change and the consolidation
of the system has been dimmed by its internal tensions and personal ambitions.

It has also lacked a plan that would combine forces and maintain social backing.
UCD ceased to be the hegemonic factor of the right. despite the fact that it had
benefited the latter's econonic and business interests. Never before did the
banks earn so much as they did with "CD in power. Never before did business
owners find more favorable conditions; and palpable proof of this lies in the
Worker's Statute. with free layoffs and partial hiring. Of course, under condi-
tions marked by such a severe crisis that the figure on unemployed has risen above
2 million. such a responsible social peace would never have been expected.

The influence of the external models (which conceals the influence of external
conser\ 'sm) has been cleverly mingled with the wood of an authoritarian right
which pe: 'Rts in letting history go by and refuses to project its own political

alternati; to an essentially young Spanish society in a process of European
integration.

It was Frags who offered an option of change for the right. As opposed to the
progressive center, the Alliance leader proposes the right-center, a conservative
bloc which has some nostalgic memories for many.

The one that led the change from the government is now lagging and moribund. UCD
would have to demarcate its area of action very well and offer an attractive plan
in order to penetrate a public that has been witnessing its final convulsions for
2 years. Its top-ranking leaders and associated groups reiterate that the cow is
virtually dead and will have to be burivd, but no one. or only a few have decided
to leave the stable. The instinct for preservation has restrained many. Others
still think internally that, with the new shift, UCD could again be the center
party that it was, or at least could regain part of the support that it has lost.

With the Cortes closed. the government no longer has to undergo the blackmail of
members of Parliament from its own ranks and the attacks of the opposition;
although the ploy of putting the government on the ropes so as later to save it
by the bell has been an agony for the Centrist executive branch. as part of the
Sucialists' strategy of attrition.

15 Crucial Days

The 15 most crucial days in the history of UCD and of the right as a whole have
begun. 0n the decisions that are made space with the shouting at San Fermin and
the cry of "champions. champions!" at the World Soccer games will depend such an
important feature of the country's political existence as the redefinition of

its political offer from right to left, although it will obviously have particular
influence on the right.

From there will emerge a new government. the date of the general elections, the
programs and strategies of the political parties and countless measures that could

90

lWJR OFVWCIAI.USII(MVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have effects on matters ranging from the curbing of price hikes to an increment

of billions in the public deficit, an improvement in services, increases in
pensions, etc.; and general elections, which will be accompanied by the autonomous
and municipal ones, which means establishing a new political map in Spain for 1983.

By then, and far earlier, there will also be a new general director of Spanish
Radio and Television.

The position has again served to elucidate the internal battles in the party, as
was the case, in part, with the one who previously held it, Fernando Castedo.
And this week Carlos Robles' stay in the ranks of 060 per se was not given more
time than a few days.

Suarez and Roson, directly and through their associates, have led the offensive
against Praga's brother-in-law, accusing him of seemingly favoring the image of
the Alliance leader and his party.

This is, in essence, another attack on Calvo Sotelo, who was responsible for the
appointment of Carlos Robles, and with whose work the president was relatively
satisfied, according to his collaborators. The operation to dismantle Suarez and
his associations in the party is being repeated with Calvo Sotelo, in its various
phases.

Calvo Sotelo has had to remake his plans quickly, and now expects to remain at
the head of the government only until the end of the legislature. That statement
of his claiming that he would be "number one for Madrid on my party's tickets" is
now viewed as rather "rash."

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

2909
C80: 3110/176

91

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lillCMﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂﬂLY

MILITARY FRANCE

OFFICIAL QUESTIONS HERNU ON AIRCRAFT CARRIERS, NUCLEAR SUBHARINBS
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 29 May 82 p 66

[Article: "A Subject of Current Interest: the Replacement of the "Foch" and of
the "Clemenceau"]

[Text] Charles Hiossec, RPR deputy for Finiatere, posed to the minister of de-
fense a three-point question on the operational capacity of the Navy:

l) Naval component of tactical armament: The government seems to show a cer-
tain propensity for putting off the choices relative to national-defense poli-
cy, and as regards the aircraft carriers "Foch" and “Clemenceau“ in particular
--they constitute the main part of the naval component of tactical armament and
are in principle to be retired from service in 1991 and 1996. respectively--
"it is still not known whether they will be replaced by nuclear-powered air-
craft carriers in conformity with the decision taken in 1980." Does the pres-
ent government intend to confirm this decision and translate it into action,
and in what time frame?

2) Strategic Naval Force: The slowdown in the rate of entry into service of
the new missile‘launching nuclear submarines is becoming preoccupying, Hr Nios-
sec considers. Of course, he adds, the decision taken by the Defense Council
on 30 October 1981 to build one more SNLE [Missile-Launching Nuclear Submarine]
was a good one, but since that unit will not go into service until 1996, which
amounts to saying that that entry into service will coincide with the retire-
ment of the "Redoutable" from service, one cannot really speak, Hr Miossec con-
siders, ofseven nuclear submarines. In 199$. the POST [Strategic Naval Force]
will actually have only six SNLE's in operational service, which constitutes a
sufficient number to keep three units of this type continually on patrol, in
view of the uncertainties and constraints connected with haulouts, overhauls
and possible refittings. notably as regards armament. “when, therefore," the
drputy asked. "will the decision be taken to go beyond this threshold of six
SNLE's--a threshold below which. despite the refinements of the weapons systems
nu hoard. there is no effective deterrence...?"

1) Nuclear attack submarines: Great Britain. Hr Niossec recalled, has 12 of
:hrm; France has planned to have 5, the first of which is to be operational
next summer. "But what will be the rate of building of these vessels, their
number for the new decade. the rate of their entry into service and their fire-
pnwor‘“

92

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To this oral question without debate, the minister of defense had the minister
of national education give the following reply. on the occasion of the National
Assembly session of Friday 16 Hay 1982:

l) "Foch" and "Clemenceau": These two units will remain in service throughout
the current decade. "As for the nuclear aircraft carriers, for which, in any
case, the 1982 budget includes Fr 30 million in program authorization and Fr ll
million in payment credits. devoted to the first studies for the propulsion
unit, the Parliament will be dealing with them on the occasion of the debates
on the planning law." (Editor's Note: The corresponding bill will be submit-
ted to the Parliament in 1983.) '

2) POST: "No date has yet been set for retirement of the 'Redoutable' from
service, and there is nothing today that makes it necessary to take a decision
on this subject," considers the minister of defense, who adds that Mr Hiossec's
assertions about the number of SNLE's in service in the 1990's are consequently
unfounded. In addition, the minister declares, six missile-launching nuclear
submarines constitute an entirely sufficient number for keeping three units at
sea continually. This result will even be reached soon with the five missile-
launching nuclear submarines currently in service.

3) Nuclear Attack Submarines: At the end of the next planning law, our forces
will have four submarines of this type available. On 15 Hay 1982, the minister
of defense signed (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 908, p S) the decision to start con;
struction of the fifth nuclear-powered attack submarine. (Editor's Note: The
"Rubia," the first submarine of this type, capable of launching not only tor-
pcdos but also SN-39 missiles of the Exocet family, will be operational next
July in the Mediterranean squadron. The fifth should go into active service in
1988-1989.)

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

11267
cso: 3100/733

93

.USE(NVLY
INJR1DINWC1AL.UEI2(NNLY

MILITARY FRANCE

XINGU AIRCRAFT DELIVERED FRO“ BRAZIL
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 29 May 82 p 47
[Article by J.c.: “The Air Force and the havy Receive Their First Xingus"l

[Text] Last Tuesday, 25 Hay 1982, at the Le Bourget airport, the Air Force and
the Navy took official delivery of the first 0 of the kl Xingu twin-turbojets
that the French government ordered in 1980 from the Brazilian builder EMBRAER--
Empress Brasileira de Aeronautica--for the instruction and training of their
transport pilots and to supplement or renew their fleets of liaison planes.

The ceremony of the symbolic handing-over of the keys, organized by the EMBRABR
company and its representative in France, the Compagnie Generale d'Aeronau-
tique (CGA), took place in the presence of numerous personalities, most promi-
nent among ahoa were Engineer General Cauchy, director of international affairs
in the General Delegation for Armament (DOA), representing the French minister
of defense, Charles uernu. Subsequently, Hr Ozilio Carlos da Silva, counercial
director of BHBRAER, handed over the keys of the first two Xingu airplanes with
the French colors to Colonel Daube, technical director of the Air Force Schools
Command, and to Con-ander Abautret, of the general staff of the Maritime Patrol
Air Forces. Hr Pierre Jorelle represented the CGA; Lieutenant General Roland
Glavany, the French Office for Exportation of Aeronautical Materiel; and engin-
eer Lamy, the STPA [expansion unknown]. The ceremony was conducted in the at-
mosphere of the very warm cordiality and already long friendship that link Bra-
zil and France, and we take leave to regret all the more, in these conditions,
the fact that circumstances did not permit the Air Force or the Navy to be re-
presented by a general officer in this ceremony, at which Brazil's ambassador
to France was, for his part, represented by his Naval and Air Force attaches.

Hr Ozilio, in his short speech, recalled that EHBRAER had presented its two
products. Bandeirante and Xingu--in service in 22 countries today--for the
first time at the [977 Aviation Show in this very same place, and Mr Jorelle
stressed, for his part, the extraordinary vitality of the Brazilian aeronautic-
al industry, at the origin of which are the three men who "built" EMBRAER:
Colonel Ozires da Silva and Messrs Ozilio and Guido Pessotti.

Two of the four Xingus present at Le Bourget had already been “received" by the
official French services (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 901). The four airplanes will

95

ms OFFICIAL its: on“
INDR10FF1CIA1.IISE1(HNLY

proceed to Nont-de-Harsan, where the CEAH [Nilitary Air-Experimentation Center]
will conduct joint experimentation with then for the next 2 months. The Navy's
first two Xingus will then be sent to Saint-Raphael, where the CAPA (Naval Aer-
onautics Practical-Experinentation Center) will do an evaluation for Navy pur-
poses. Eleven Xingus will have been delivered to the Navy by the end of this
year. During the summer of 1983, eight planes will arrive at the BAN [Naval
Air Base] of Lann-Bihoue to be assigned to the Nultiengine Specialization
School. Three Navy pilots qualified for this type of plane are presently at
Hont-de-Nsrsan; two of then were previously Atlantic pilots, and the third was
a Falcon 10 pilot. '

It will be the summer of 1983 before the Air Force, for its part. begins to
make this type of plane operational in the Nultiengine Airplane Specialization
School based at Avord (Training Group 68 0319), which will then have 10 Xingus

at its disposal.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

11267
CSO: 3100/733

95

FOI'OFFKJAI.U§B¢HNLY
FIIICINWCJAI.US£10NLY

GENERAL FRANCE

ARIANESPACE ANNOUNCES REVISED LAUNCH CALENDAR, 6 IN 1983
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 29 May 82 pp #8, 56

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Thirty-two Launchings of Ariane Rockets Planned
between Now and the End of 1986"]

[Text] The Arianespace company has just published the new calendar for launch-

ings of Ariane rockets, as well as the state of orders and reservations as of
mid-Hay 1982.

The Ariane calendar now provides for 32 launchings (including two open) between
now and the end of l986--i.e., in 4.5 years. Still, there will be only two
launchings this year, because of the delay of the European HARECS [expansion
unknown] 2 satellite. In effect, the modifications to be made in the HARECS 2
satellite have caused a halt in the preparation of the launcher in Guyane since
23 March 1982. Arianespace announces that the program will resume on 2 August,
with launching now postponed to 10 September 1982 (cf AIR ET COSMOS, R0 908).
This fifth launching (LS) of the European rocket will also be the first opera-
tional launching of Ariane. The rockets for the following two launchings (L6
and L7). planned for end-November 1982 and end-January 1983, respectively, are
about to be received at Aerospatialeﬂs integration site (SIL) at Les Mureaux,
near Paris, before they are sent on to Guyene.

Six Launchings in 1983

Arianespace specifies that the new calendar should make it possible to catch up
on the delay caused by the HARECS 2 satellite. Thus it has been decided to in-
crease the launching rate in 1983 to six firings instead of five. In addition,
it is also planned to combine the launchings of the three satellites Bcs [ex-
pansion unknown] 2, Telecom 1A and Hestar 6 into two launchings with Ariane 3
rockets, which would make it possible, if necessary, to gainalaunching slot in
1983. By virtue of these measures, the Ariane launching calendar would make up
the delay as of the end of next year.
\

The sii launchings planned for 1983 would be done partly with the rocket in'its
present version (Ariane 1) and partly with the new improved versions (Ariane 2
and 3), which will be available an of mid-I983. From that date on, the new
versions will completely replace the present rocket, thus raising launching
capacity while reducing costs.

96

F0!‘0FIHJA1.USI(NVLY
Amy nmxo uquouBH

coco

Amy N gnome: + Adv N mac
Amy «axe uc-Aouau

any A acumen uo any anonoa
any a yoga

Axv Ahxo nun—ouun

Amy A mm: + Adv 9A0

any h<mIA

c: A 25.5

 

any n xmc< + Amy u H<mm=<
AugusocscA

unuuuv vnoAaaa A ocomu<

numx<n ado—cucu no A man
n¥ ﬂaw A H<mm=< + N whom
any A chm o cuuomo

A may no n~mx<n u-oAruaa
A h<mu>k

«Ah\<n u-uAOuBA

any n nocoooam + A mama nno~ unashAOh

 

Agnes-Ava uov auao
unusm> . A uoam

vao_»-m

 

 

 

uan.¢oogu>oz an A
uonno>ozuuuo an A
nonouoouaom an A
u.=u:<-».=n «n A
aAanuocan An A
onaﬁlhlt on A
a-:.Amua< a~ A
Amua<.guuq: on A
sou-xuaom nu A
omoA gonna-n cu A
HOD-louun— nu .—
uoaouoo an A
nonﬁ0unom nu A
unswa< N“ A
aAsn AN A
oasu cu A
5.: a" A
gun-z «A A
“A A

uonlooon In
.oaouuo on A
ou-a .noaaoA

a uocoornm o a uqumo unau=< nA A
A unonuud no

 

 

an aoovoa + A unumu ac: «A A
n— Housman no

A anon-u< + A uonoonam eaaA unusuaom n— A
is won ho

<A Boos—0h + o ucuooa nonabuon NA A
t<A Ibquoh uo\vc-

«mom no .omxm ud.u0u:A Managua AA A
«amxn uovouua

no <A IoooAOH no N mum unaua<I>A55 oA A

amxn uoaAougu an: me A

nmxn unuAOucA sand: ac A

o. use-ouuq.a< o A non noo~ anusc-n so A

uaoonm nonlo>oz oo A

N amumm o N «noun: waaA nonaouaom no A
”nwcmsucsuA Accomuuuoao

3.0333 A «00.3: 53 non-Boon .5 A
Aoooooaov

N uqoo»uox + o~am< AwoA onus no A
Ava—Anny o hoooo

nucal< o Aooasaumu oqu an: «o A

Adam-cocoaov ucnoz anou uonﬂouoa Ac A

awcmzunanA camuooAuAAqao

 

 

vquNom can: sons-A

«aa_ no can o» .ocwgucaqa ocqmu< mo AumoA ».:-owa no ..V uqvcoAuu
m 0mm“. use ONLY

Arianespace next plans five launchings in 1984, including an open slot for a
new payload or for a relaunching. He note that Arianespace will take over the

exploitation of the Ariane rockets completely as of the end of l983-beginning
of 198A.

Nine firings are planned for 1985, including the first flight test of the new,

improved Ariane 6, which will be twice as powerful as the present rocket. This
first launching of Ariane 4 will also be used for launching a payload composed

of one or two satellites, the choice of which has not yet been made. A compe-

tition will be opened among the French and European projects for this launch-
ing (free of charge) with Ariane 4.

The very great increase in the rate of launching of Ariane rockets at Kourou
will be made possible by the placing in service, planned for the beginning of
1985, of the ELA 2 second launch pad at Kourou. It will thus be possible to do
up to 10 launches per year, at the rate of one launch per month, either in
single launchings with the Ariane 2, 3 or 4 rockets or in double launches with
the Ariane 3 and 4 versions. The new Ariane é version is to be operationally
available as of the beginning of 1986. Furthermore, the rate of 10 launches
per year is expected to be reached in 1986, according to the calendar as pres-
ently established by Arianespace. In order to keep pace with this inreased
launching rate, it is obviously planned to increase the rate of fabrication, so
as to reach eight rockets per year as of 1985 (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 908).

Forty-two Satellites

The state of orders and reservations for Ariane launchings currently enables
the ESA [European Space Administration] and Arianespace to plan 21 firings (15
to L25) between now and the end of 1985, with an open slot also available.
This will be for launching 31 satellites, including 26 on firm order, 5 re-
served, and 1 under negotiation (not counting the payload for the first Ari-
ane a). These launchings are planned on behalf of 10 customers, including a
European (BSA, CNES [National Center for Space Studies], Swedish Space Corp,
PRC) and 6 foreign (Intelsat, United States, Canada, Australia, Brazil, Arab
League). Firm orders have already been placed by four American customers: GTE
Satellite Corp, Southern Pacific Communications Corp, Western Union and Satel-
lite Television Corp (subsidiary of CONSAT). This demonstrates clearly the ex-
port success of the European launcher.

In addition to this, 10 launchings are planned in 1986 (L26 to L35), to place
in orbit ll satellites for which there are presently reservations with Ariane-
space. These launchings are planned for seven customers, including two foreign
ones (Intelsat and the United States) and five European (ESA, ONES, Swedish
Space Corp, Luxembourg and Great Britain).

A total of 32 launchings are planned to the end of 1986, to place in orbit #2
satellites, 26 of them on firm order and 15 on reservation--not taking into ac-
count the results of the negotiations in progress, which involve more than 10
satellites for the United States (Spacenet 3, GStar 3, USSAT, etc), Great Brit-
ain (Skynet a), NATO (NATO 0), France (SAHRO), and the future meteorological
organization Eumetsat (operational Heteosats), etc. Also not taking account of

98

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂC]Al.lﬁli(ﬂVLY
FIIICINﬂCJAl.UBElDNL¥

the future European missions decided on but not yet planned for, with the lat-
ellites zcs 3 and 4 (between now and 1990), Hipparcoa (1987) and [RS 1 (end of
1987), or of the new satellites that will emerge in the coniug yeara.

Indeed, Araineapace expecta to capture 25 to 30 percent of the 250-aatellite

market foreseen in the 7 yeara 1985 through l99l--i.e., 60 to 70 aatellitea,
calpooed 85-parcent of geostationary aatellitea, for which Ariana haa been op-

tiuized.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

11267
080: 3100/733 END

99

IIMRCHHNCIAI.USIGDNLY