FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10027
5 October 1981

Near East/ North Africa Report

(FOUO 34/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 34/81)

CONTENTS
IRAN
Italian Magazine Interviews Mojahedin's Rajavi
(Mss'ud Rajavi Interview; EUROPEO, 14 Sep 81) ........
Milan Paper Interviews Bani-Sadr on Iran's Future
(Abolhasan Bani-Sadr Interview; CORRIERE DELLA SERA,
18 Sep 81) ...........................................
LIBYA
Briefs
Municipal Sewage Systems
New Supermarkets
Economic Ties with PRC
SUDAN

New Budget Discussed; Surplus Predicted
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS, 14 Aug 81) .....

Petroleum Outlook Reviewed
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS, 21 Aug 81) .....

Briefs
Investment Projects Planned
Peanut Processing Plant
New Fertilizer Plant
Record Sorghum Harvest
Cotton for Medical Purposes

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Latest Five-Year Plan Discussed
(AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI, 17-23 Jul 81) ...................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

ITALIAN MAGAZINE INTERVIENS HOJAHEDIN'S RAJAVI
PH210841 Milan EUROPEO in Italian 14 Sep 81 pp 30-31

[Interview with Iranian Mojahedin Leader Mas'ud Rajavi by Langranco Vaccari:
"Until Last Mullah Falls"-date and place not specified]

[Excerpts] "We are not terrorists. Terrorism is practised by Khomeyni, that
bloodthirsty old man who believes that he is God on earth and who has suppressed
all freedoms in Iran. Our activity is resistance: If you know of any other way
of opposing a dictatorship let us know; we will be very grateful to you."

"For the first 2 and 1/2 years of the revolution," Rajavi said, "we acted like
Jesus Christ and turned the other cheek. Now, however, the time has come to resist
the dictatorship with every available means." The resistance has a date of birth;
20 June this year. On that date the Mojahedin organized a major demonstration in
Tehran in support of President Bani—Sadr, who was being subjected to heavy attacks
by the ayatollahs and threatened with trial by parliament. The first (and last)
democratically elected president of the Iranian Islamic Republic lost his post

48 hours later. But that very meeting laid the foundations for the only credible
alternative to the Shi'ite clergy's power.

The alliance between Bani-Sadr and Rajavi is ratified in a letter. "The unity

of action between ourselves and the president is not within the framework of a
single party, but within an alignment headed by the National Resistance Council,"
the Mojahedin leader explained. The front has also been joined by Adolrahman
Qasemlu, leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party. which controls Iranian territory
along the border with Turkey and Iraq. The Kurds have a radio transmitter from
which the Hojahedin broadcast, too.

Another group close to the Mojahedin is a sector of the Shi'ite clergy, the one
which followed Ayatollah Taleqani, who died of a heart attack in September 1979

a few months after the victory of the revolution. After Khomeyni. Taleqani
enjoyed the greatest popularity among the Iranian masses. A strong opponent of
Beheshti and of the mullahs who wanted to monopolize power, he was the Mojahedin's
great protector.

The ayatollah's death marked the progressive ostracization of Rajavi's organization
which, together with the Feda'iyan-3 Khalq (Marxists-Leninists), had been the major
protagonist of armed opposition to Reza Pahlsvi. The "Hezbollahs" (extremists)

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

began to attack their headquarters until in June 1980 the Hojahedin's political
activity was banned and their newspaper closed down. It was not difficult to
repress than. Rajavi admitted: "He had no working mass organization and our
following was relatively small.“

The Hojahedin also paid for the absence of any major political leader. This also
explains the alliance with Bani-Sadr, the only popular reference point for the
opposition to the Khomeyni regime. The ideological outlook invoked by both Rajavi
and Bani-Sadr is rather vague, so as not to prompt conflicts: A mixture of Islam.
socialism and thrid worldism. The only clear objective is that they both want to
establish in Iran "a regime that will observe democracy and human rights."

"The agreements between us and the president are clear," Rajavi said. He holds
the post of prime minister in the National Resistance Council while Bani-Sadr has
maintained the title conferred on him in February 1980 by 11 million Iranians.
"We do not want to govern on our own and believe that whoever has opposed the
Khomeyni dictatorship will no. tomorrow refuse the will of the majority. “hen we
signed our agreement we said to each other: 'Neither you nor I is the guide.

Neither you nor 1 is innocent. Neither you nor I is above all criticism'."

COPYRIGHT: [1981] Rizzoli Editoriale.

C50: 6628/4

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

MILAN PAPER INTERVIEWS BANl-SADR 0N IRAN'S FUTURE
”1220843 Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 18 Sep 81 p 3

[Interview with former Iranian President Abolhasan Bani-Sadr by Renato Ferraro
at Auvers-sur-oise; undated: "Khomeyni Will Fall; I will Return To Iran"]

[Mmmﬂ hdrwmemmwmrqmeumusnuu1m&"hm4wrum,%m
it is difficult to specify when it will collapse."

[Question] Some 6 weeks ago, just after your arrival in Paris, you told CORRIERE
DELLA SERA that you could not yet explain the real reasons for your flight from
Iran. "You will understand soon," you said. Can you reveal these reasons to us
now?

[Answer] No, it is too early.

[Question] When do you expect to return home, or at least at what stage in the
struggle?

[Answer] I do not yet know: I will return when my presence in Persia will be
most useful.

[Question] What control do you exercise over the current guerrilla fighting and
over the terrorist attacks that hit the regime every day?

[Answer] First, it is not terrorism, but a liberation struggle and second, 1

exert absolutely no control. It is Khomeyni who controls the guerrilla campaign:
it originated as a reaction against repression, the summary trials and the execu-
tion of children guilty only of distributing leaflets. The ayatollah can arrest
the guerrilla fighters, just as he prompted their action, as long as he observes
the_democratic rules that he himself declared during his weeks in exile in Paris.

[Question] will further killings of religious leaders suffice to defeat the
extremists or can Khomeyni replace the casualties?

[Answer] The members of the government already killed were incompetents and have
been replaced by individuals equally incapable of governing the nation. Khomeyni
will find no shortage of impostors: There are plenty of them among his clergy.
However, the attacks show the people that the opposition is strong and well

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organized and that it has infiltrated everywhere. This is sufficient to dissuade
many people from embracing Khomeyni's cause and to give courage to our sympathizers.
The demonstrations against the new dictatorship are multiplying throughout Iran

and it is not only the Mojahedin that are taking part in them.

[Question] If the attacks are not enough to bring Khomeyni down what will cause
his collapse?

[Answer] He are counting on the spread of popular protests and the collapse of

the economy. Inflation has topped 50 percent, unemployment is effectively total,
because Persia produces nothing, and the state's coffers are empty. Hitherto the
extremists stifled dissatisfaction through a policy of subsidies, salaries paid to
idle workers and useless bureaucrats and vast recuritment into the public administra-
tion. Thus the state deficit has grown: when the shah was overthrown the deficit
had reached $4 billion; this year it is $18 billion.

The government has had to spend its currency reserves. but they are running out.

To deal with the situation the extremists planned to export 2.5 million barrels

of oil a day, but instead in the first 4 months of 1981 they sold only 700,000-
800,000 [a day], while the present figure is only barely 1 million. When the people
no longer have enough to satisfy their hunger Khomeyni will fall.

[Question] The economic picture which you draw seems to doom the clerical dictator-
ship to an imminent end, but this analysis and these forecasts have already been
made and events have disproved than. The extremists have managed to create a
"hidden" economy and policy, thus surviving the economic, social and institutional
decay, not to mention the uprisings in Kordestan and other provinces and the war
with Iraq. Despite all this, they can still mobilize the crowds.

[Answer] Lebanon too still exists after so many years of civil war. It is a
matter of seeing whether the Persian people will accept a future of poverty,
bloodshed and repression. I do not believe so: Khomeyni can no longer bring
millions of people into the streets of Tehran. He can only mobilize a few hundred
thousand of them. Only about 15 percent of the Persian population still obey the
ayatollah.

[Question] Could the outcome of the war with Iraq be decisive?

[Answer] Neither country can win the conflict or end it with a negotiated solution.
Both Saddam Huaayn and Khomeyni need a success and both have motives for keeping
the troops on the border, far from their capitals.

[Question] According to some reports Iran is receiving military aid from Israel.
Are you in a position to confirm or deny this?

[Answer] It is true, but this aid is not decisive: it is sufficient only to
prolong the war of attrition, in accordance with U.S. plans.

[Question] U.S. plans?

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Sure. Reagan nurtures foreign and domestic conflicts in expectation that
the extremists and leftwing forces will eliminate each other. When Persia is
exhausted the Americans will intervene to facilitate a Bonapartist solution, so

as to impose on us an Islamic dictatorship like Pakistan's or a military one like
Turkey's, but in any case a pro-western one. Washington cannot tolerate democracy
in any country bordering on the USSR. It maintains that only dependent, and
therefore illiberal, countries can guarantee the West's strategic interests.

[Question] Is there not a danger of the USSR taking advantage of the anarchy
in Iran to occupy its northern regions?

[Answer] I do not believe so. A world war would break out.
[Question] Might the Persian military attempt a coup?

[Answer] They are hostile toward the regime, but as long as they are delayed at
the front they can do nothing.

[Question] Is the entire clergy with Khomeyni?

[Answer] No, the iman has many opponents even among the major ayatollahs. the
ones with the largest popular following, but they lack the courage and perhaps

the ability to oppose the repression.

[Question] That shows that Khomeyni is strong. What are liberals such as Bazargan
and Qotbzadeh doing?

[Answer] They remain silent; they can do nothing else. They would be eliminated
at the first protest.

[Question] What about the powerful traders of the bazaar?

[Answer] They are becoming wealthy because they control foreign trade in a
country that must import everything.

[Question] In other words, for the time being virtually only the Mojahedin belong
to the National Resistance Council which you head. How do you define the ideology
and plans of this movement. which you have condemned in the past]

[Answer] I have publicly admitted that I misinterpreted their ideology. I was
afraid that they were tainted by Marxist materialism. Instead they reject the
dialectical method and are real Muslims inspired by the unitary Towhidi philosophy.
which does not recognize the classes and the class struggle. Their program, like
mine, can be summed up as follows: National independence. nonalignment, democracy
based on the "councils" (the Islamic grassroots organizations), a self-managed
economy at the workers' service. the liberation of the oppressed in Iran and through-
out the world, the struggle against the westernization of Persian culture and the

creation of the Muslim "new man."

5
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] It is clear that the Islamic left, on its own, cannot guarantee a
stable government alternative. What other forces and interests can rally round

the Mojahed in. not only during the anti-Khomeyni struggle but also subsequently.
during the reconstruction phase? It does not seem that the Bazargan—style liberal

conservatives or the Marxists or the technocrats could follow you.

[Answer] We Muslims do not reason in terms of class and interests or in exclu-
sively political terms. but rather in terms of the fundamental unity of society
as a reflection of the oneness of God. We are counting on the support of all

democrats, whether Muslims or nonbelievers, of clerics and laymen, to save the

country from disaster.

COPYRIGHT: [1981] Editoriale "Corriere della Sers" s.s.s.

C50: I0628/5

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

BRIEFS

MUNICIPAL SERAGE SYSTmS-Jrripoli's secretariat for light industry will be accept-
ing bids up to 15 October 1981 for the construction of sewer mains in several muni-
cipalities. Specifications can be obtained in Paris through the CFCB [Council of
Connercial Federations of Europe] (Te. 505-37-86). [Text] [Paris Willis TROPICAUX
ET KBDITERBMEEES in French No 1865 7 Aug 81 p 2047] [COPYRIGth Rene Horeux et

Cie Paris 1981] 9516

NE" SUPBmAﬂmS-mew retail marketing establishments are continuing to open in
Libya, in accordance with the distribution policy of the authorities. For ample,
on 30 June, at Ain Zara. the "First Flash" supermarket was officially opened, in
the presence of the Tunisian sinister for economic affairs, Hr Bl Arram, who was
visiting Libya. This supermarket covers a total of 2,050 square neters and carries-
the most diverse products, frua food products to household electrical appliances.
Also, the sane day, a new market was opened in Agedebia, in the Nrada region,

where the National Market Company has recently built eight of then. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICMIX ET HEITERRANBENS in French No 1866 31 Jul 81 p 1990] (COPYRIGHT:
Dene Moraux et Cie Paris 1981] 9516

acoumtc TIES WITH PEG—Libya has asked West Germany to contribute to the training
of specialists in all fields of econonics. The question was discussed 7 July in
Bonn by a Libyan Goverunent delegation received at the West German econaaic affairs
ministry. The "umber two" of the Libyan regime, ‘Abd-al-Salan Jallud, had arrived
the previous day for a two-day private visit to bonn. The two sides also studied
the possibility of increased cooperation between the industries of the two countries.
0n the other hand, no progress was made concerning a new convocation of the Ger-an—
Libyan joint economic emission, which should have been held last March. It was
postponed at Libya's request. Libya is the M's second largest oil supplier.
Trade between the two countries favors Libya to the tune of about $2 billion. Haj
Jallud, who had two long talks with the West German minister of foreign affairs,
hams—Dietrich Genscher, during his stay in Bonn, had been in the German capital in
1972 on an official visit. [Text] [Paris WES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBBNS in
French No 1865 7 Aug 81 p 2076] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 9516

CSO: 4519/45

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

NEH BUDGET DISCUSSI; SURPLUS PRDICTED
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1866, 14 Aug 81 p 2103
[Article: "Sudan's 1981-1982 Budget Is In Surplus"]

[Text] The Republic of Sudan's projected 1981-1982 budget has been set at 1.731
million Sudanese pounds in estimated receipts (operating funds) and 1.568 million
in estimated expenditures which includes 1.042 million in operating expenditures.
676 million in development expenditures and 50 million in acquisitions of holdings
and investments. This budget compares with the two previous ones as follows:
(figures in millions of Sudanese pounds)

1979-1980 1980-1981 1981-1982

 

Operating Funds 21; 1,005.6 1,731
Operating expenditures 820.3 942.6 1,062
Development budget 285 329.9 ‘76
Acquisitions of holdings 20 75 5°
and investments

Total Expenditures 1,125.3 1,347.5 1.5

Gross budget surplus or deficit -213.3 -342 +163
Borrowing from the banking 120 132 -
system

External financing 93.3 210 -

Operating funds show a marked increase by comparison to the previous period (up 72
percent in current money). This situation is due to new receipts being created.

Total expenditures are growing at a much more modest rate (16 percent in current
money), and that total represents, taking in account inflation on the order of
50 percent, a reduction of 22 percent.

For the first time in many years the budget projects a gross surplus. This policy
fits in with the government's anti-inflation concerns and the IHF's [International

Monetary Fund's] recommendations.

8
FOR OFFICIAL usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSI-Z ONLY

Except for some new measures, the 1981-1982 budget is a logical follow-on to the
preceding year's budget. The basic concerns of the Sudanese Goverment indeed

still remain the determination to curb inflation and the continuation of the pro-
gram of economic stabilization and financial reform instituted in Sept-bet 1979.

The struggle against inflation is being carried out via: a reduction in govern-
ment expenditures; a budget with an outstanding balance on the plus side; a reduc-
tion in customs duties on certain ordinary consumer goods; honest pricing in order
to check an expanding black market; an increase in direct taxation; the elimination
of public sector monopolies in production and importation; and the encouragement

of savings by the establishment of Treasury bills.

On the c :r hand, the government. has "deregulated" credit for small producers to
a certain extent. Through specialized banks (the Industrial Bank. the Real Estate
Bank, and the Cooperative Bank) the Public Revenue Department vill guarantee up to
80 percent of loans requested by small producers.

The continuation of the program of economic stabilization and financial reform is
being carried out by consolidating the unofficial exchange market. liberalizing
external comerce, and reviving large projects before launching new ones.

Regarding the development budget, the breakdown of that item is a good illustra-

ti on of the govermnent'a priorities: 22 percent is going to agriculture, 25 per-
cent to energy, 17 percent to transportation infrastructure, 1!. percent to regional
development. 9 percent to social services, and only 7 percent to the industrial
sector (6 percent does not have a finalized allocation).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9631
C50: 4519/67

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSI-I ONLY

SUDAN

PETROLE'M OUTIDOK REVIEWED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX rr M-ITEIRANEENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2157

[Text] Sudan's Ministry of Energy has let it be known that the country will reach
011 self-sufficiency in 1983. But this forecast is not unanimously agreed with in
Khartoum.

The Chevron company, for which the development of the Unity field still poses
numerous technical and financial problems, refuses to make any forecasts, but to a
certain extent so does the Sudanese Goverment which is anxious not to hamper the
painstaking efforts undertaken towards establishing agriculture.

In actual fact, different contradictory assesments are circulating in Khartoun,
differing according to where they originate. To simplify matters extraaely one can
accept on the one hand an estimated production figure of 15.000 barrels/day--ha1f
of current consumption-ms the most realistic figure for 1983, but also an anti-
cipated amount of 150,000 barrels/day of reserves as the hypothetical profit basis
which motivated the recent rushing in of oil companies.

The World Bank, Chevron--a subsidiary of Standard Oil of California--, and the
Sudanese Government will be financing the main part of the Kosti refinery the
estimated cost of which, including the 550 km of oil pipeline, will be $300
million. These financial negotiations should rapidly be coming now to a success-
ful conclusion which will permit the refinery—25,000 barrels/day--to be linked up
to the three Abu Jabirah, Unity and Sharif fields which are some 550 km away and
are being worked by Chevron.

Chevron discovered the fields located around Unity and should rapidly be' activating
th- while continuing exploration over areas which exceed 277,000 square km in the
south’central part of the country. Chevron will also be active in transportation
and refining. A number of other American and international companies (Texas
Eastern, Union Texas, Phillips, Agip. Transpacific. Eastern Petroleum and Burma
Oil) have obtained permits and started up operations over nearly the entire terri-
tory of Sudan, including the Red Sea.

Regarding French companies let us recall that the CF? [French Petroleum Company]
Group is involved in certain transport and distribution sector activities (renova-
tion of the Port Sudan-Khartoum oil pipeline and Total service station network)
and since 1980 has started off on a prospecting program in Sudan on land and sea

0
FOR OFHCIALIUSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE; ONLY

in association with International Energy Development Corporation and its official
Sudanese partner, the Public Petroleum Corporation. Under permit A Total is
carrying out operations; a first well has been drilled in the Red Sea and a second
drilling operation is anticipated for autumn 1981. The drilling will be done 130
meters deep from the Pelican. a dynamic positioning ship. Under permits 8 and C,
210,000 square km covered by permit which are located in the southern part of
Sudan (interior basin) are to be blanketed by seismic, gravity. and magnetic

field measurement operations; Total is carrying out operations under permits B and
C as well.

Elf Aquitaine, a late arrival. will probably negotiate an association contract
with an American group.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

9631
C50: 4519/47

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

BRIEFS

INVESTMENT PROJECTS PLANNED-~In Khartoum people recall that last year following a
change of managing director the Ehirates and Sudan Investment Company (BSIC)

broke off previously embarked on negotiations by mutual agreement for two sizable
projects and it called for international tender offers last October. The con-
sideration of proposals for the first project, setting up a poultry farm in Jebel
Aulia near Khartoum, permitted two unspecified but non—French firms to be kept in
the running. 0n the other hand, as of the beginning of May the second project.
the construction of a 2SO-room hotel in Port Sudan, had not been opened up for
bids. The £816 is pursuing two other projects, setting up a bank in Khartoum and
forming a company for air transport between Sudan and the Gulf. It seems that the
ESIC has obtained an authorization from the Sudanese Ministry of Finance to
establish a bank locally and put in only half of the $20 million capital which is
ordinarily required. Talks with the Bank of India are under way to let the

latter have ‘0 percent of the shares in return for paying in $5 million of the new
bank's capital. In addition, the ESIC and Sudan Airways are studying a plan to
set up a joint venture for air transport between Sudan, the Gulf, and Saudi Arabia.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81

p 2047] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9631

Sudan. This contract amounts to about $4.2 million. The British firm had al-
ready supplied similar equipment to the Sudan Oil Seeds Company. [Text] [Paris
MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81 p 2067] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9631

NEW FERTILIZER PLANT--In El Shajarah the construction of a fertilizer plant, the
total cost of which will be $120 million, has begun. Production should be starting
up next year and reach 100,000 tons of urea fairly soon and 200,000 tons later on.
At that time Stdanese needs will be met completely. [Text] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81 p 2067] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9631

RECORD SORGHUH HARVEST-~The Sudanese sorghum harvest for 1981 should reach a
record level of 2.8 million tons. which is an increase of 55 percent compared to

last year. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1865,
7 Aug 81 p 2047] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9631

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I’SE ONLY

COTTON FOR MEDICAL PURPOSES--The French economic expansion offices in Khartoum
have informed the CFCE (Council of Commercial Federations of Europe! of a request
coming from a Sudanese investor Doctor Gabbani, who wants to set up a factory to
make cotton for medical purposes and sanitary napkins, to consist of: 1) a
facility for absorbent cotton ready to begin production with a production capacity
of 400 kilograms of cc'ton an hour (3000 tons a year), and 2) a unit for producing
sanitary napkins and compress pads for hospitals. (Initial capital: 2 million
Saudi riyals). The plants would be financed by a Saudi group and a Sudanese
group. French companies interested in these projects can obtain any additional
information at CFCE/SIPF/l/4175; telephone 505-33-33. [Text] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2157] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9631

(:50: 4519/47

FOR OFFlClAiBUSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

LATEST FIVE-YEAR PLAN DISCUSSED
Paris AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 231, 17-23 Jul 81 pp 52, 53

[Krticle: "Economic Growth Continues But Problems of Inflation, Foreign Labor,
and Duplication of Projects Cause Concern; United Arab Emirates: $50 Billion To
Finance Development Planﬂl

[Texg/ As the movement toward unification and merger in the UAR gains momentum,
the burdens imposed on the general budget and the new 5-year plan (1980-1981) are
increasing. The goal is to eliminate the chaotic planning and duplication of
projects which marked the 1970's and check inflation and the influx of foreign
labor in the 1980's.

The UAR looks toward its future with a mixture of hope and wariness~-hope in the
ability to sustain its economic expansion and growth and anxiety over an influx
of foreign labor which has been so sizeable that UAR citizens now make up only
one-quarter of the population.

Hope in the ability to control the economy and strengthen the process of merger
and coordination among the emirates had revived after Abu Dhabi and Dubai--the
foremost and wealthiest of the emirates--agreed to allocate half of their incomes
to the federal budget. This development is helping considerably to steer the UAE
away from the chaotic planning and duplication of projects which characterized
the economic expansion of the 1970's.

Cmnnenting on this optimism, reports of the Central Bank point to the potential
for increasing oil revenues and expanding industrial investment. However, they
also warn against growth in imports and rising inflation rates resulting from
instability in world markets.

At this point, it might be helpful to record some general impressions about the
future foreseen for the lmE's economy:

--It is a certainty that the (ME will continue to rely on oil as a source of
income and economic growth. For this reason, there is a clear movement in the
state toward gaining control over oil operations. The state presently owns

60 percent of the domestic production companies and the foreign production com-
panies (American, Dutch, British, and Japanese). It suspects that the foreign
companies are seeking to exploit the oil fields to the greatest extent possible
without directing much attention to oil exploration operations.

..'1

FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Economic growth is expected to continue in the first half of the 1980's. The
growth rate reached 7 percent in the period from 1976 to 1980.

In the judgment of officials, this growth is based on two factors. These are
continued economic stability and the continued influx of oil revenues. Oil
revenues are estimated at $18 billion for this year as opposed to around $20
billion last year and $12.5 billion in 1979.

--The growth of imports is causing concern. The figures indicate that this
growth is not so much in the volume of goods, materials, and equipment as in
the prices of these items, with inflation playing its tragic role.

The value of imports rose from $7.22 billion in 1979 to $8.71 billion in 1980.
This figure is expected to reach $10 billion this year.

--There is a movement toward diversification of income sources through the
establishment of a tremendous industrial base. The fact is that industry is
seen as a problem. On the one hand, it reduces dependence on importation and
provides opportunities to invest oil revenues domestically. However, it also
creates problems and difficulties such as the labor crunch, which requires that
tremendous numbers of foreign workers be accepted along with the serious negative
effects of this immigration on the Arab identity of the society.

In addition, the UAE does not own any industrial raw materials with the exception
of oil and gas. Moreover, domestic markets are not available. This raises the
question, What will be the future of, for example, the petrochemical industries
after the depletion of these two raw materials?

Based on this consideration, some individuals call for the reduction of oil
production and the continued investment of the surplus from past revenues in
foreign countries rather than in domestic industrial expansion.

In spite of these objections, industry continues to grow, attracting more of the
private sector day by day. The volume of loans from commercial banks to the
private industrial sector rose from 4.8 percent in 1978 to 6.7 percent in 1980.

The 5-year plan (l981~l985) aims at raising industry's share of the national
income. This share was 5.5 percent under the previOus plan (1976-1980).

Abu Dhabi is building itself a huge industrial base in the area of al-Ruways,
which is gradually being transformed into a true industrial city. The industries
there include a new oil refinery whose refining capacity will soon be increased
from 120,000 to 300,000 barrels per day, a $2-billion gas liquefaction complex,
and a $200-million fertilizer complex.

As for the Emirate of Dubai, it has established a tremendous industrial base in
the Jabal 'Ali area, including a $1.4-billion aluminum complex. The emirate has
also constructed a huge port and a dry dock which is not yet in use. It is
expected that the dry dock will be turned over to OAPBC.

15
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, the industrial projects in the emirates suffer from duplication and
lack of coordination. Thus, identical or nonprofitable industries have been
established in some cases. The steel plant is the best recent example of this.

The private sector is showing increasing interest in industrial projects. However,
the greatest interest is still directed toward the commercial field due to a quick
return on investments and easier work in this area.

--Greater attention will be focused on the control of financial and investment
policies. This has been demonstrated by the establishment of the Central Bank
and the reorganization of the banking sector. Other indications are the curb on
the opening of foreign bank branches, the efforts to stabilize the dirham, and
the attempts to fight inflation, which is running at an estimated 20 percent per
year.

--The inflation in the budget figures reflects the coordination of the move

toward federation. The budget reached the $7-billion mark in the current fiscal
year, which represents a 60 percent increase over the 1980 level. Some $500
million has been allocated to subsidize basic provisions and consumer goods for

the benefit of low-income citizens. The country has witnessed strikes by employees
protesting the rising cost of living.

--The expansion of the public industrial sector and the intensification of the
trend toward federalism impose additional burdens on the government administration
sector, demanding that this sector exhibit greater efficiency. However, the chief
obstacle remains the powers wielded by the local administrative organizations
within each emirate.

Features of the New 5-Year Development Plan

The negative effects of the lack of planning or the chaotic nature of planning in
the past have now begun to emerge through the duplication or multiplicity of pro-
jects, which far exceed the need. Such projects include airports, ports, hotels,
banks, and even radio and television stations.

The aim of the new 5-year plan (1981-1985) is to endeavor to achieve the greatest
possible coordination among the similar industrial projects that have been estab-
lished in the emirates while allowing for continued economic growth but without
any increase in foreign manpower.

The manpower problem deserves individual attention in view of its magnitude and
the multiplicity of views surrounding it. Here it can be said in short that
officials and planning experts attach great importance to programs aimed at
training and qualifying citizens in order to limit the importation of foreign
labor. They also favor putting pressure on the sectors that require large
numbers of foreign workers, such as the construction sector.

However, powerful businessmen have in the past opposed and continue to oppose any
move to limit the importation of labor because they feel that such a move would

limit future economic expansion and growth.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The allocations of the new 5-year plan--which has not yet been announced official-
ly--are estimated at $50 billion in contrast to the $38 billion allocated in the
previous plan. The private sector will bear about one-fifth of the costs of the
plan, with expected private-sector investments of $8 billion.

It is expected that h tulun $10 and 14 billion will be spent on oil exploration
operations, gas liquefaction and exploitation, and expansion of the petrochemical
industry. Non-petroleum industries are expected to grow at an annual rate of

18 percent.

Industrial manpower will increase since plants will add 25,000 new workers.

0n the other hand, the number of workers in the construction sector will decrease
by around 50,000 workers. Host of these will be Asian workers who will return to
their countries.

Particular importance will be given to agriculture and food security. Huge food
depositories will be built to meet the country's needs during unexpected inter-
national crises.

Attention will continue to be focused on the services sector. Health care
allocations will increase at a rate of 50 percent as will education services.
Some 36,000 housing units will be constructed and each citizen will be entitled
to one or two dwellings.

The plan will address the urgent need to narrow the differences in wealth and
income between rich citizens and poor citizens in the emirates. It will attempt
to do this by working to raise the efficiency and technical and productive
competence of the citizens of the northern emirates and by endeavoring to redis-
tribute investments and establish factories in the non-oil emirates.

Planning at the level of the Emirate of Abu Dhabi in particular aims at meeting
the demands imposed by the expansion of the capital during the coming 2 decades.
The population of the capital is expected to reach 1 million by the end of the
century.

Local officials in Abu Dhabi intend to continue with landfill operations along
the ocean in order to confront the demands_of building expansion. The city
includes 400,000 dwellings, of which 300,000 are located on the main island.
Population and building expansion will also be encouraged on the islands of
al-Sa'diyat and al-Hadriyat.

In addition. the extension of the island at the beginning of the highway to the
emirate of Dubai will be transformed into a beautiful suburb characterized by
distinctive streets, villas, gardens, and hotels.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

8591
cso: 4304/90 END

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY