FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10681
23 July 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES
(FOUO 7/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

J?Is publications contain information primarily from foreign
ne'spapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Hum Resouacss

(3000 7/82)

Cou'reurs

WIN

Country's Dcuusphic Policics Bxsninsd
(Vsrious sources, various dstcs) .............................

anhic Policy Dsscxibcd, by G. I. Litvinovs.
3. “ts. Urlsnis
Higrscion. Reproduction Anslyscd. by 1.. nybskovskiy,

ll. Tsrssovs

- s - [III - 088R - 38c 1'0!

ma 0W" INF ONIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DIMOGRAPHY

COL'NTRY'S DEMOGRAPRIC POLICIES mm

Demographic Policy Described
Moscow SOVEI‘SKOYE GOSUDARS‘I'VO I PRAVO in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 38-156

ﬁrticle by 6.1. Litvinova, candidate of juridical sciences, senior research

officer at the Institute of the State and Law of the USSR Acad of Sciences,
-and 3. Ta. Urlanis: The Demographic _Policy of the Soviet Wig;

['l-‘exg7 Papulation problems have taken their place among the global problems of

the present day. Jurisprudence faces great tasks in this regard. It is becoming
more and more obvious that there is a need for legal regulation of social processes,
including demographic ones; only yesterday it seemed that many of these processes
could develop spontaneously. The management of demographic processes consists

of the conscious, goal-oriented and systematic influencing of population on the
basis of awareness and use of the objective patterns and progressive tendencies
characteristic of socialism in the interests of ensuring optimal movement of

The multi-faceted nature of demographic processes presumes a comprehensive

analysis of these processes by economists, legal and medical specialists,
sociologists and representatives of other sciences; the discovery of various
factors which influence population movement and opportunities for managing

these factors. The 25th CPSU congress directed representatives of the natural

and social sciences to undertake comprehensive study of demogr ic problems

for the purpose of developing an effective demographic policy 37. In the

cc CPSU report to the 26th party congress L.I. Brezhenv said: “In accordance

with the directives of the 25th party congress, the Central Coenittee has devoted
serious attention to the development and implementation of an effective demgraphic

policy and to the population problems, which have become exacerbated in recent
times 0' pp p 5&70

The demographic policy of the Soviet state is aimed at ensuring a natural increase
in population, at strengthening health, at increasing the life span and labor
activity of every person and at rationalizing territorial mobility. It is

also oriented toward the development of qualitative population features, inasmuch
as the progress of society depends not so much on the mnbers as on the quality

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the population. In the achievement of demographic policy goals a large role
is assigned to the family. a most important (motion of which is the
reproduction of the population. It is within the family that the reproductive
aims of citizens are realized and the original socialization of the child takes
place: his emotional world, his moral and ethical positions are formed here. The
USSR Constitution declares that the family is under the protection of the state.
The state manifests concern for the family through the establishment and
development of a broad network of children's institutions, the organization

and improvement of household and public catering services, the payment of
benefits when a child is born. the payment of allowances and benefits to

large famil ies. as well as other types of allowances and assistance for the family
(Article 53). ‘

At the 26th CPSU Congress LJ. Brezhnev emphasized that the main way to resolxe
population problems was to manifest "increased concern for the family. for
newly-married couples and especially for women" 13'. p 537. without the assistance
of the state it would be difficult for a woman to combine the functions of
motherhood with production and societal activities. At the congress it was
pointed out that although a series of measures were taken in the 10th Five-

Year Plan to improve the labor conditions of working women, as well as conditions
for family recreation, domestic and cultural services, no appreciable change had
yet taken place [3. p 527. There is still a large proportion of women

who work night shifts and who are engaged in work which requires manual labor

and few skills. The predominant practice of using female labor for low-skilled
work is the reason why the average wage of women is two-thirds that

of men, although the total labor load at home and at work is 15-20 percent

greater than the load of men _/37.

k'hile consolidating the Success achieved in the improvement of women's position.
and confirming the principle of equality between women and men. the 1977 USSR
Constitution, in comparison with the 1936 constitution. contains a series of
supplemental measures, including program measures aimed at ensuring the actual
equality of women and men, and at improving the conditions for combining mother-
hood and production activities by women, and specifically at reducing gradually
the working time of women who have young children (Article 35).

Broad and effective measures to improve the working and living conditions of
working women, and especially of working mothers, are set out in the Basic
Trends in the Economic and Social Development of the USSR in the years 1981-1985
and for the Period up to 1990. It calls for the introduction of partially

paid leave to care for a child up to one year, the extension of child allowances,
especially for the birth of second and third children, repeal of the tax on
childlessness for young couples in the first year of marriage, a reduced working
day for mot \ers of young children, expansion of the network and improvement in
the operations of preschool facilities at! schools with after school day care
groups, and improvement in the entire sphere of household services. Plans

call for improved housing benefits for young couples and for families which

have children [5, p 55. 1737.

The city of Naberezlnyye Chelny conducted an experiment in which young families
with children were given top priority in obtaining livirg accommodation with

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

modern conveniences. The results showed that this measure is capable of
significantly influencing the birthrate. In this regard, it is advisable to
establish legislatively the right of young families in a first marriage who
have twoor three children to receive maximum housing benefits. The priority
introduction of such benefits in the republics and regions with a low birthrate
will contribute not only to an increase in the birthrate, but also to the
strengthening of marriages because the areas which have low birthrates are also
characterized by a high percentage of marriage breakdowns.

The increase in divorces is a kind of shadow of progress with regard to the
position of womem the increased economic independence of women has raised
the level of their demands on the marital union and has become one of the
reasons for the reduction in marriage stability. In resolving these complex
issues consideration should be taken of changim attitudes toward marriage. the
goals of marriage, its material foundation, the nature of the emotional and
sexual relations of the spouses and their reproductive aims. It is clear that
improvements in the marriage and family legislation should be carried out not
so much along the lines of increased legal prohibitions concerning divorce
and abortion (legal prohibitions which regulate the reproductive behavior of
citizens should be applied with particular caution). as along the lines of
granting increased allowances and benefits to families with children. It is
this kind of solution of the problem that lawyers have been directed toward by
materials of the 26th CPSU Congress, which point directly to the need for
increased benefits and allowances, ”especially with regard to the birth of a
second or third child...." It is further reconnended that the "features of the
situation in the various republics and regions be taken into careful account”
[5. p 557. The differences in the level of the birthrate and natural increase
in the various republics and regions are extremely significant. The Soviet people
are growing in numbers mainly as a result of the high natural increase of
certain national groups at a time when there is a low level of natural increase
or even a reduction in the numbers among other groups.

It is appropriate to recall that before the revolution depopulation was com
among many of the peoples in the Asian part of the country: the nuaber of
Kazakhs, Khirgiz, Turkmenians, Buryats, etc. was falling. The Soviet federal
state, having concentrated all material resources in its on hands. redistributed
them to the backward regions. succeeded within historically unprecedented periods
of time in raising sharply the level of material well-heirs. health care and
culture of the peoples who were in danger of dying out. The rates of socio-
economic development which were established for these peoples were acceleaated

in comparison with the all-union indicators. In this way the problem of real

as well as legal equality amng national groups was solved. As a result there
was success in preventing the physical extinction of these peoples and in
ensuring a high rate of natural increase for them. LJ. Breztmev noted
correctly that the growth of population in the Central Asian republics "reﬂects
primarily the dramatic improvement in the economic level of our republics,
including enormous growth in the well-being of the population in the former
outlying districts of tsarist Russia...." __/17 Although the demographic situ-
ation in the USSR has now changed sharply. the existing system for the distribu-
tion of budget resources, the policy of purchase prices, which influences the
level of material supply for the rural population and other factors remain as

3
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

before, beneficial for the outlying republics and regions, although at present

the central regions, and especially the Non Black Earth Zone, are in more need
of such benefits.

The legislation, which was adopted in 1944 and is still in effect today, is aimed
at providing the maximum encouragement for large families; this is no longer

in line with the requirements of the demographic situation which has become
established in the country. At a time when there is nearly full employment

of women in public production and there are growing demands for the comprehensive
development and education of children, families with many children camot be
either the standard or the norm encouraged by the state.

The pol icy proposed by the 26th CPSU Congress, which provides maximum encouragement
for families to have two or three children, will help to bring closer together
the birthrates of the various republics and national groups, to strengthen

the community of their demographic characteristics, and to strengthen the unity
of the Soviet people. The realization of this policy requires a re-exmination
not only of the magnitude but also of the principles of providing incentives to
increase the birthrate, as stipulated by the 8 July 1941. ukase of the Presidium
of the USSR Supreme Soviet. The ukase provided for a monthly allowance which

is paid to a family, but only beginning with the fourth child; further, the
maxiwm allowance is paid for the llth and subsequent children £57. This same
policy of encouraging large families is the basis for the procedure stipulated
by the ukase, for awarding the orders of ”Maternal Gory" and 'liother Heroine"
to women who have given birth and raised 7-10 or more children 5.

The mother with many children is deserving of honor inasmuch as the raising of
children requires enormous labor and self sacrifice from her. However, from
the viewpoint of stimulating the birthrate, the existing norms for encouraging
women to have more than one child are not sufficiently effective. One can
hardly think that women have more children because they are hoping to receive

a medal, an order or the corresponding title. At the same time it must be noted
that having many children, even under the most favorable circumstances, consti-
tutes a large burden for a woman. A large number of children reduces her
opportunities for cultural and occupational growth, and at times it deprives
her completely of her leisure and affects her health. Raising children in a
large family is more difficult because the parents are not in a position to
devote sufficient attention to each one. For this reason the interests of
both the mother and the offspring dictate an orientation towards an optimal number
of children, which will correspond to the rational need for children on the part
of both the family and society. Under present conditions three children
represents this Optimum size family. However, at the present time, given the
still existing housing difficulties for the urban population, one can talk

about the miversal acceptance of a two-child family as a realistic goal

because it is well known that a significant nmber of married couples limit
themselves to one child. This can be seen in the fact that the nmber of
second children in 1977 was significantly less than the number of first-born
children. Consequently, when the number of second children approaches the
number of first children, it signifies a substantial increase in the birthrate.
0n the other hand, the legal norms must contribute to a reduction in the number
of one-child families. It is generally known that it is difficult to create

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the best possible conditions for raising a child in one-child families. The
child in these families frequently turns out to be a ”luminary" around which

Childless families prove to be in a special position. Voluntary childlessness
extends to only 1 or 2 percent of married couples, while actual childlessness
is greater and approaches 10 percent. These are married couples who suffer
from infertility because of either the husband or the wife. Infertility fre-

Among the social measures. set out by the 26th CPSU Congress, there is great
demographic significance to the decisions concerning the expansion of the network
of preschool institutions for children and the improvement of their operations
15. p 55, 1737. In this connection it would be wise to standardize the legal
position of kindergarten and day care centers, which come under the jurisdiction
of various organs. As is well known. departmental day cares and kindergartens
are in a better position in comparison with day care centers and kindergardens
which come under the budget of the local soviets (fewer children per care giver.
larger norms for food expenditures, higher wages for personnel. ete.). Hatters
with regard to kindergartens and day care centers which come under kolkhoz
budgets are even more complex. For example, in the 'ermen 858. where kolkhoz 's
are economically strong, every kolkhoz has one or two kindergartens and day

care centers (the number of these institutions is l.5-fold greater than the
number of kolkhoz's in the republic). while by no means every kolkhoz in the

Non Black Earth Zone has its own kindergarten or day care center. The sovkhoz
kindergartens which exist in rural regions do not always accept the children of
kolkhoz members living nearby. Now, at a time when school programs are based on
the assumption that children have received preschool education. the children of
kolkhoz members who have not not attended kindergarten start school at a dis-
advantage. Kolkhoz kindergartens experience not only financial difficulties, but
also problems obtaining equipment and staff. The care giver is often a woman
who has been transferred here because her health no longer permits her to perfron
heavy labor. All kindergartens and day care centers should be put under the

should be improved.

Particular mention should be made of the legal position of unmarried mothers.1

A significant amount of attention was devoted to the improvement of their

position in the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress. The unmarried mother is
surrounded by the attention and concern of the state. In accordance with

the January 1981 decree of the CC CPS!) and the IBSR Council of Ministers
"Concerning Measures to Strengthen State Assistance to Families Having Children"
E7, the monthly allowance for the maintenance of a child of such a mother

was increased from S to 20 rubles; moreover, it will be paid until the child reaches

I. I la tﬁ t i t cm ”3 le anther" is ill icals how can a sin-
"gmwou Maggi: a fang)? cashing incompliut'g, be called a lgsor solit It
3%"; "gao‘tﬁetter to i about an Immarr ed mother. in con rest with a d vorcee

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16, or until 18 if he continues his studies. An allowance of this size com-
pensates to a definite degree for the expenses of raising a child: this is
especially important as the mother does not receive alimony.

The measures stipulated by the decisions of the 26th 6250 Congress and a decree
of the cc CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers ”Concerning Heasures to
Strengthen State Assistance to Families Having Children" are of great significance
for the formation of optimal families. These measures include: additional
benefits for working mothers such as partially paid leave to care for a child
under the age of one year; unpaid leave until the child reaches a year and a
half. and in the future to two years; an increase in regular leave: the right
to work a shortened working day or week; the right to work at hometan increase
in the amunt of paid leave to care for a sick child between the ages of 7 and
1!: years, etc. The realization of these measures will contribute to the
optimalization of the birthrate.

It goes without saying that no family can be obliged to have any specific

number of children by any legal act. However, the legislator can specify

a system of benefits and allowances under which all or the overwhelming
majority of families will prefer to have the number of children which can be
considered optimal for the normal development of the state and society. In
working to improve the legislation which influences the reproductive behavior
of our citizens. the positive experience accumulated in the area of demographic
policy by the European socialist states should be used to good advantage. In
recent decades this policy has developed along the line of expanded benefits

and allowances for working mothers with two or three children. It would seem
that the experience of granting housing benefits to newly-married couples

and families with children is particularly significant given the conditions

in our country. For example, in the 603, young couples entering a first marriage
are granted an eight-year loan of 5,000 marks, as long as the newly-weds

are no older than 26. This interest-free loan has the following payment
conditions: when the first child is born, 1.000 marks is deducted from the debt,
when the second is born, another 1,500 marks is cleared. and when the third
child is born the remaining 2,500 marks are cleared. The young couples willingly
take the loan because nearly all of them want the first child. Having taken
5,000 marks, they only have to return 4,000. However, with the birth of a

child the family's financial position, as a rule, becomes more difficult, and
the remaining 4,000 are frequently ”paid off by the children," whose

births (the second and third) were not always planned before the loan was
obtained. During the first five years the law was in effect (it was introduced
in 1972), 398.000 credits worth a total of 2.2 billion marks were granted.
During this period of time married-couples returned 323 million marks in

payment of the loans L77.

The numerical population of a state and its rate of increase depends not only
on the birthrate but also on the average life span. The Soviet state was the

first in the world to create a Hinistry of Health and to take full responsibility
for improving the health of its citizens, especially its children; this has
resulted in a two-fold increase in life span and a sharp (lo-fold) reduction

in infant mortality. However, in recent years there has been a stabilization,
and in certain age groups even an increase in mortality. This is one aspect

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the exacerbation of the population problems and is an aspect which was noted
in the materials of the 25th CPSU Congress—m.

In the 0553 health care is considered to be a top-priority issue. Evidence of this
can be found in the special article of the USSR Constitution which stipulates the
right of citizens to health protection. This right is ensured by the system

of free medical care, the implementation of widespread preventive measures,
environmental improvement schemes and ”particular concern for the health of the
coming generation, including the prohibition of child labor, not connected

with instruction or labor education...” (Article (.2). Huch attention in the

has been devoted to the spiritual and physical development of young people

in the Constitution (article 25). The protection of citizens' health is also
guaranteed by other constitutional norms, for example, the right to live in

a healthy environment (Article 18), the right to recreation (Article 41),

the right to material provision in old age, in the case of illness, or work
disability (partial or complete) and also in case of loss of the breadwinner
(Article 43).

The 26th CPSU Congress, having declared the right to life to be the most important
human right, stipulated a system of measures to strengthen the health of citizens
to improve the level and quality of medical care, to expand the network of

health care institutions. to improve their structure and rational distribution

[5, pp 182-1837. The measures taken by the congress to improve social and work
conditions for the population will contribute to the increase in the life span.
The congress decreed that there should be increased mechanization of labor-intensive
processes, and a reduction in the use of manual labor. It is thought that

these measures will be carried out first in the production spheres which use
primarily female labor: it would be good to establish this in the legal norms which
regulate socio-economic planning.

Among the measures aimed at the protection of health, an important role is
assigned to measures to combat the abuse of alcohol, which has a pernicious effect
not only on the health of the people involved, but also on their offspring.
According to the data of sociological studies, 65 percent of the fathers 0f
mentally retarded children suffered from chronic alcoholism. There is an even
greater probability that a defective child will be born if the mother is drinking
[37. In this regard there are grounds for proposing limitations on marriages

b-y chronic neglected alcoholics, as well as by feeble-minded people and drug
addicts [97. The issue of voluntary sterilization of such persons as a condition
of marriEe should be discussed.

Migration policy is an important element of demographic policy and one of its
important constitumts. The size of the population, and especially the
magnitude of the available labor resources within a given republic or region
is determined not only by the level of natural population increase but also by
the trends and intensity of migratory processes. A significant amount of
today's territorial mobility of the population is not in the interests of the

national economy. Given the worsening of the problem of labor resources in
most of the country, a well grounded migration policy is acquiring particular

significance. Although the interests of economic and social development require

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an influx of labor resources into labor-short regions, the migratory streams

are frequently directed to the regions of labor excess. At the 26th CPSU Congress.
LJ. brezhmv noted that up to now people have frequently preferred to move

from the north to the south and from the east to the west. although the rational
distribution of productive forces requires movement in the opposite direct ions

,3, p 5&7. The republics of Central Asia, which are characterized by the
highest-rate of natural population increase and a surplus of labor resources,

have a positive balance of migration, i.e., more peOpls come to this area than
leave it. .

The management of migratory processes presupposes an analysis and consideration
of factors which influence the intensity and directional trends of the migration.
Hany of these factors were pointed out in the materials of the 26th party congress.
They include first of all the developmental level of the infrastructure and

the degree of material provision. For example, a person most often leaves
Siberia because it is more difficult to obtain housim there or to find a place
for his child in a kindergarten and there are are few cultural centers. Taking
this into account, the congress aimed at an accelerated rate of socio-domestic
and cultural construction in regions of priority economic development, which,

as a rule, are regions which are short of labor (Siberia, the MM zone, the

Non Black Earth Zone) _/_'3', pp 54-537.

The success of the migration policy is closely linked to the budget and tax
policy and the policy of purchase prices. Serious measures which are aimed at
improving conditions in the Non Black Earth area will yield great results if
they are supplemented by amendments to the tax and budget policy, as well as to
the policy of purchase prices, which over a period of decades have developed

to the disadvantage of certain regions. For example, in the fifties, the
gross crop yield for l work-day according to the fixed prices for state
purchases in the Non Black Earth Zone of the RSI-‘33 was judged to be one-tenth
of what it was in the Uzbek SSR and one-fifteenth the figure in the Georgian
SSR £127. In 1970 there were 11.5 hectares of arable land for every kolkhoz
member in the RSFSR: in the Uzbek SSR the corresponding figure was 1.6 hectares
but the income here for one kolkhoz member was 33 percent higher than in

the nsrsa ﬁg]. A comparison with the Non Black Earth Zone of the [(5:53

shows that these differences were even greater. The comparatively low purchase
prices for basic agricultural products which come from the Non Black Earth
Zone (potatoes, flax, etc.), have a negative effect on the profitability of
kolkhoz's and the incomes of kolkhoz mbers, and they are not completely in
line with the principle of payment according to labor. Suffice it to say
that the purchase prices for potatoes frequently do not justify the expenditures
for their production. for example, the cost to produce a quintal of potatoes
on a farm of the Non black Earth Zone today amounts to 9 rubles 61 kopecks,
and it is sold to the state for 6 rubles 6 kopecks per quintal (taking into
account a reduction for starch, irregularity, etc.) [127. The negative total
profitability of agriculture in the RSFSR is explained primarily by the policy
of purchase prices, through which we implement the basic redistribution of
national wealth created by the agriculture of this republic and this region.

Over the decades the tax policy has also been constructed in such a way that
the greatest tax benefits are granted to the outlying regions of the country.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An lor budget policy, during the years that the Soviet state has existed, the
RSFSR has not only never enjoyed a subsidy from the union-wide budget, as
certain other republics, but it has also obtained for the republic's budget
one of the lowest percentages of allotments from the turnover tax, the basic
item of budget income. In accordance with the general rule, the RSFSR receives

only half of the money derived from the income tax on its population, at a time
when certain other republics receive all of this income for their republics'

budgets. The influence of these factors, as well as the lower (lower than the
union average) rate of socio-economic develomment of rural regions of the
country's center, are the reason for the excess emigration from here, especially

the emigration of young people, which has led to an aging of the rural population
and a reduction in its numbers.

At the 26th CPSU Congress mention was made of the substantial differences in the
cultural and everyday living conditions in the various regions of the country:

it was emphasized that it is necessary "to even out the social differences, in

a so-to-speak territorial regard“ [5, p 5&7. In this regard it would be wise to in-
troduce a differentiated ground rent which takes into account fully the soil,

republics' demand for higher allotments from the union-wide state taxes and
incomes, as well as take into account the demographers' proposal to develop
territorial indices for the standard of living and indices for the population's
living conditions. These indiees, which should be calculated regularly for
various areas, should be taken into account when legal acts concerning benefits
for people working in certain regions are adopted. In this way there can be
scientifically substantiated criteria for the establishment of certain wage
supplements which should be made with consideration for the concrete conditions
of life in a specific locality rather than over large territories and in

an unscientific manner. These indiees should include not only the cost of living
in the given regions, but also the need to provide an adequate level of food

and expenditures for clothing, footwear, and heating which arise from the climatic
conditions of the locality. In addition, special indices of comfort and the
satisfaction of the population's cultural requirements should be developed.

Migration policy, especially migration between republics, is related to national
policy. The strictest possible observation of the principle of equal rights
among nationalities, and Provisions for actual equality and equal opportunities
for social growth (job advancement, access to education, skill improvement, etc.)
for representatives of eVery national group, regardless of which Soviet republic

The all-union population censuses of 1970 and 1979 showed an increase in the
proportion of people of indigenous nationality in the majority of union and
autonomous republics, as well as a reduction in the proportion of people
residing outside their own republic. One of the reasons for this is that

the advantages for social advancement by representatives of the indigenous
nationalities, in the republics have been retained. Hhile this was justified in

the first years after the Great October Revolution, it requires change under
present conditions.

2-Sociolo ieal studies have shown that when young people born of mixed marriages
choose Eheir nationality, they prefer the indigenous one, linking it to oppor-
tunities to obtain benefits, enter a VUZ or advance in a job, etc. 1137

9
FKHICHWNCJAI.IEEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

having emphuized the strengthening of unity among Soviet national groups, the
26th CPSU Congress at the same time pointed to the existence of unresoIVed problems
in the sphere of nationality relations, noting especially that citizens of non-
indigenous nationality living in the union republics have the right to the
necessary representation in the party and state organs of the republics, as well

as their own specific needs in the area of language, culture and daily life. The
CC CPSU report to the party congress says: ”The central comittees of the
comunist parties in the union republics, as well as the kraykoms and obkoms,
rust delve more dee ly into such issues, and met suggest in good time ways

to resolve them" _ , pp 56-517.

The management of migration is linked to the resolution of problems concerning
resettlement, in particular with the organic growth of major cities. Here
there are quite a few unresolved issues of an ecological, economic, legal,
social and medical nature, as well as others.

The successful implementation of a demographic policy, which is a part of the
state’s socio-economic policy, depends on the resolution of the complex of
socio-economic problems. An effective demographic policy presumes the achievement--
within an historically short period of time and with minimal economic ex-
penses—of a goal while observing society's existing social norms, including

legal ones Illa-I. The legal provision for implementing demographic policy requires:
determination-of the role of the law in a system of other, nonlegal measures,
which influence the demgraphic behavior of citizens: preparation of a legal act
of the highest legal force, which would determine the foundations of the demogra-
phic legislation of the USSR and the union republics, the goals and tasks of
demographic policy, the ways and methods to achieve them; the elimination

of gaps in the legal effect on any given demographic processes: adequate legal
reflection of the demands of optimal demographic development; the attributi ~-

as far as possible-~0f a demographic nature to nondemographic legal norms.

The establishing in law of the basic principles and trends of demographic policy
presume the inter-relationship of all of its elements, their scientific foundation
and balanc, as well as consideration for the hierarchy of goals. However, the
realization of these requirements mder today's conditions is held up due to a
lack of clear criteria and indicators of deangraphic development, especially
qualitative ones. The abundance of differing, sometimes diametrically opposed
viewpoints of economists, sociologists and psychologists on the fundamental
issues of how to influence demographic processes complicates the development
and improvement of legal norms, and puts the law-maker in a difficult position
inasmuch as the adoption of legal acts, especially laws, excludes any such
rapid change in viewpoint as can sometimes be observed in science.

Because i is an effective regulator of societal relations, the law

along with other means of managing the demographic processes of society,

is capable of ensuring the meet rational possible behavior of people, and

of creating conditions for population reproduction which will guarantee the
well-being of society in a demgraphic regard. But in order to fulfill this func-
tion, the law must express with the necessary completmess and in its character-
istic forms the requirements of Soviet demographic science with consideration

for the effect of objective patterns of demographic development, as well as of

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the social, economic and political needs of the state, the republic, the region
the specific national group, or the entire Soviet people and country as a whole.

BIBLIOGRAPIIY

l. Brezhnev, L.I., "Leninskim kursom. Rechi i stat'i" ﬁhe Leninist Course.
Speeches and Articlg7, Moscow, 1978, Vol 6. p 431.

2. "Materialy XXV s"yezde KPSS" Liateriale of the 25th CPSU Congresg7, Hoscow, 1976
p 73.

3. "Haterialy XXVI 3"yezda KPSS” Ester-isle of the 26th CPSU Congresg7, Moscow, 1981.

4. Ryurikov, Yu.B. "Children and Society," VOPROSY FMGPII, No 4. 1977. p 119.
S. MOST! VERKHOVNOGO SOVETA $558, No 37, 1944, p 1.

60 PRAVDA, 31 “arch 1981.

7. Gizi, 1.. Shpaynger, V. "Stimulating the Birthrate in the GDR," SOTSIMICBESKIYE
ISSLEDOVANIYA. no 4, 1980, p 75.

8. Lupandin, VJI. "Alcoholism and Posterity," SOTSIOIDGICHI-ZSKIYE ISSLDOVANIYA,
no 1. 1980, p 100.

9. Korolev, Yu.A. "The Effectiveness of Marriage and Family Legislation,"
SOTSIOLOGICIIESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, No 1, 1981, p 75.

10. Volkov, I.H. ”The Kolkhoz Peasantry of the USSR in the First Postwar Years,”
VOPROSY ISNRII, no 6' 1970' pp 13-16,

11. "Narodnoye khozyastvo SSSR an 60 let” [Sixty Years of the USSR Economz7
Mdscov, 1977' pp 356-357.

12. Nozhayev, B. ”Byt' khozyaninom! " LIT. GAZ.,1 July 1981.

13. Khomich, L.v., "Concerning the Preservation of the Idea of Etmic Processes,”
50V. ETIIOGRAPHIYA, No S, 1969, p 84.

14. Kvasha, A. Ya. 'hemsraficheskaya politika v SSSR" ﬁenosraphic Policy in
the 115531, Moscow, 1981, p 176.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1982

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY

Migration, Reproduction Analyzed
Moscow VESTNII STAIISTIRI in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 21-30

ﬂrticle by L. Rybakovskiy and N. Tarasovaa ”Evaluating the Influence of Migra-
tion on the Reproduction of the Population‘ﬂ

ﬁext7 The influence of migration processes on population reproduction is the
Teas-t studied aspect of the theory of migration. This applies in full measure
both to the contemporary level of sociological studies of the mechanism by
which migration inﬂuences the intensity of the birthrate and the mortality
rate of the permanent population and of the migrants, and to the development
of methodological problems related to the work of evaluating the results of
migratory redistribution of the natural increase in the population among
territories and settled areas of the country. The latter is especially important
because in the places to which people have moved the inigrants themselves
becomes direct participants in natural reproductio . And, on the other hand,
areas which have a constant migratory outflow of residents at the same time
give to other regions a pcrtion of their natural increase.

The literature contains several proposals for possible approaches to evaluating
the results of the effect of migration on the reproduction of population. These
are primarily statements of a general nature, which are not accompanied.

as a rule, by any corresponding calculations. For example, Ye. Gladyshev
and T. Daganyev. while emphasizing that on the basis of data from current
statistics ”it is not possible to discover the direct influence of mechanical
movement on the nature and dynamics of the birthrate. death rate and, conse-
quently. the rate of natural increase,“ consider that a concept of this
influence may yield an malysis of the differences in the course of natural
movement processes for cities with different types of migration.1

However, this approach is applicable if no great differences exist in the
indicators for the natural reproduction of residents in settlement points

in the period under study. In any other circumstances the corresponding
comparisons for the level of migration will be unfunded. V. Dzhaoshvili
proposes adherence to the same kind of methodological arrangement in
determining the influence of migration processes on the natural increase in
the population. In his opinion "it is necessary to compare rayons which

are identical in all other aspects and differ only in the given factor"2

in order to discover the influence of the migration factor on the natural
movement of the population. This approach, which is suitable for comparisons.
nonetheless, does not make it possible to evaluate the specific

scale of change in natural population increase in a region as a result of
migration. In addition. opportunities to apply it are limited by the fact
that it is relatively complicated to select identical objects for analysis.
Moreover, it is incorrect to correlate the results of the effect of migration
processes on the features of the natural movement of population exclusively
with the magnitude of migratory increase characteristic for any given territory.
The mechanism by which migration inﬂuences population reproduction is much
more complicated.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U's‘E ONLY

A. Kvasha and G. Kiseleva proceed from the assumption that "the influence of
migration on population reproduction is manifested both through change in the
age structure, as well as through the arrival in the city of a population

which has standards of reproductive behavior which differ from those of the
indigenous citizens; they consider that one possible solution to the problem

of accounting for the influence of migration on reproduction is to be found

in the development of a system of standard models for the intensity of the
transition from one state to another. These models make it possible to propose
amendments varying in magnitude to the prediction of the number of births

in any given part of the country. For this purpose use can be made of a system
of standard combined tables of mortality rates and migration in which a 3
differing level of mortality is combined with a given intensity of age migration.

This kind of method is of undoubted interest since it is based on the use of
the most substantial factors influencing natural reproduction (the age-sex
composition and the reproductive rates of the hnnigrants). But without special
preliminary research, the use of this method is made more difficult due to

the determination of the reproductive rates of the immigrants and the intensity
of change in the rates over time and the establishment of a period in which
there will be a levelling off of the differences in the standards for the

reproductive behavior of the immigrants and the indigenous population at the
point of settlement.

Those works which contain concrete calculations of the natural movement of the
population and migrants are of the greatest interest. These are mainly calculations
of the level of the birthrate and the proposed number of births as a result of
change‘ in the age-sex structure of the population in the regions participating

in the migration exchange. For example, A. Topilin calculated the birthrate
factor and the number of babies who were born into families of immigrants

in 1969: he arrived at his figures by weighing age indicators for the population
on the age structure of the migrants and by making corrections to the ratio
between men and women among the immigrants and among the entire population of

the RSFSR.“ Ye.Bol'shakova applied similar calculations. In order to clarify the
influence of the migration level of women of fertile age on the birthrate a
determination was made of the proposed number of births if the age structure of
the population changed only as a result of natural processes, i.e.. by death.

The calculation was based on actual distribution of those born in 1969 according
to age of the mother.5

“iKrasnoshchek proposed the use of a method of demographic modeling to analyze

the effect of migration on the features of the natural movement of the population.6
In his models the change in the number of births is viewed as a function of

the dynamics of the number of women as a result of migration. This method was
approved using as an example the rural population of the Ukrainian SSR (i.e.,
women, 1969-1970) and the population of the city of Kiev daa.men, 1958-1959).

This approach to evaluating the influence of migration on the features of natural
population movement, like any other method of demographic modeling, requires
special information and is extremely labor-intensive. It can be applied only

to large population entities. because it proposes the use of indicators from

actuarial tables on life span which apply to the population of the area under study.

13
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is obvious that one of the examined methods of evaluating the results of

the effect of migration on the dynamics of the indicators for natural population
noVement makes it possil 1e to carry out the corresponding calculations for the
territorial redistributitn of the natural increase on a nationwide scale.
Nonetheless, calculations of this kind are, in our opinion, possible although
extremely difficult. This is related first of all to the inadequate level of
study devoted to the mechanism of the influence of the migration processes

on the intensity of the birthrate and death rate of the population in regions

of migration, as well as of the new settlers themselves. The data of numerous
special studies are fragmented and contradictory and cannot yield an unambiguous
answer to this question because the investigations concern various territories,
were conducted at various times and according to various programs. In other
words, the current level of sociological investigation under favorable circum-
stances makes it possible to enumerate the factors which in one way or another
must be connected with the influence of migration on natural reproduction,

as well as to point out the possible direction of the effect of every factor
taken separately.

In addition, evaluating the influence of migration on the redistribution of
natural population increase among the territories and settled areas of the
country requires comparable information on the birttrrate and death rate for
permanent residents and immigrants, and the information must relate to

all the territories under study. The information available in the literature
concerning the conditions of natural reproduction among migrants and the permanent
population are extremely contradictory. For example, the results of a study of
women on birthrate issues conducted in 1966-1967 by staff members of the
Latvian Branch of the Scientific Research Institute of the USSR Central Statisti-
cal ministration and the Ministry of Health of the Latvian 381! provides
evidence that the new arrivals have on average no more children than the

old time residents. and have hardly any influence on the level of the republic's
birthratc. 0n the contrary, materials from an investigation of Leningrad
families in 1974-1975 and of the population in the city of Kazan' in 1974 show
that the indigenous residents of the cities have fewer ch ldren than the
immigrants. and a higher proportion of childless couples. The question

which was introduced in 1979 into the civil status acts, ”How many years have
you lived in your place of permanent residence”. provides an opportunity ‘30
evaluate the real differences in the level of the birthrate among permanent
residents and migrants. At the same time, however, analagous information
concaning the level of mortality is lacking; for this reason it is essential
when determining its hypothetical level to orient oneself toward the particular
(in comparison with the entire population) age and sat structure of the imigrants.
In addition, the available statistical information on the birthrate first

of all provides evidence of the natural reproduction levels of the new settlers
in the region of imigration, and it does not make it possible to characterize
the actual losses in the birthrate for various territories as a result

of the exodus of pogolation, because migration, as a number of special

studies have shown, may result in changed reproductive patterns among the
newcomers. In this regard, differences only in the age-sex structure of
permanmt residents and migrants must be taken into account in the estimated
calculations regarding the role of illigrants in the natural population increase
in regions with a negative or positive migration increase during a given period.

1!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hith a few clarifications this method for evaluating the role of migrants in the
natural population reproduction in the regions of intensive economic development,
which is based on the age-sex composition of the permanent residents and migrants10
can be used for all the territories of the country. regardless of whether they
have a negative or positive migration increase.

The formulae proposed for calculating the scale of redistribution of the
natural population increase resulting from migration with consideration for
structural differences are based on the application of complex percentages.

The essence of the calculations consists in the following. In aﬁegion of migration
the natural increase which applies to the entire population (2) is made.

up of the natural increase of the population (5.) and 0f the Mammal)! 3

EuE.+ E... (1)

In this case we are talking about an algebraic sum because the territories
with a positive migration increase will have a value for E. which is greater
than zero, and the regions which are losing population will have a value

for 5- which will be negative.

The natural increase for the entire population of the region under study (B)
cannot be divided into two equal parts because in the first place. the

values for the migration increase and the original population figure do not
coincide either absolutely or in time and, in the second place, the indicators

of natural increase for the population which resides in the region of migration

and for the migrants are not the same. The particular age structure of the
immigrants, which is characterized by a predominance of relatively young age
groups in the migratory streams, influences the general indicators of natural
increase among the migrants, which are greater than among the permanent population.

Taking into account the features of the age structure, and, consequently.
the differences in the indicators for natural reproduction among the permanent

population residing in the migration region and among the migrants, the
total natural increase in residents in the given territory (8) can be
divided into its component parts in the following manner:

5,_3<(1+_§ﬁ)'_s. (2)

where _S is the average population, residing in the given region. without
migration or natural increase, for the entire period under study.
Its value is essentially equal to the original figure
for population of a given region (S. ), i.e.. '§-s. . In this

case it is hypothetically excluded that some of the local residents
might die or leave the region;

., is the average indicator of increase in the population which
resided in the region at the start of the period under study:

( is the number of years in the period.

15
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
POI WI. [BE ONLY

The nagnitude of the natural increase which arises from the newcomers. is
determined according to the formula:

s.—M?(i+T-%)‘-MI (3)

where F is the average value of’ the migration increase for the entire period
under study:

-e:n is the average indicator for the natural increase of migrants.

The use of r as an independent variable for calculating En results mainly
from the fact that we are talking about an estimate of the scale of migratory
redistribution or natural increase. Despite the fact that not only i-igrants
but also emigrants .take part in the natural movement of the regions'
population. nonetheless. from the viewpoint of an estimation of nigration
consequences in the area of natural reproduction, the magnitude of the

natural increase in migrants (8..) will be determined by the results of
migration during any giVen period.

The magnitude of r should be calculated according to the formula for the grand
mean from the sample meme for equal intervals of time: this makes it possible

to take into account the erratic nature of migration processes within the
framework of the period under examination:

M_ 5.33%-; +am..,+...+(2.—’l)., .

,2. (0

where mcis the entire migrational increase in the i period of migration

(l-l.'2.'3. . . .. n; years).

Also, while the results of migration in the first half of the period under study
will be decisive when using this mettnd co calculate E', the lack of births

among migrants during a certain period after migration will be taken into
account to a certain degree in El. .

with regard to individual territories the ratio of actual and average
migration increases is not identical and depends on the distribution in time
and the sign of the actual migration increase. while r ions with a stable
migration growth (whether positive or negative) have an (according to the
modulus) wI ich does not go beyond the actual migration increase for any given
period. while the areas which originally received population as a result of
migration but subsequently had negative migration growth, have an H. which

may be greater than its actual value (for example, 1959-1978 in iazhhstan,
Moldavia, and Rhinitis).

16
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

In order to determine the values of the indicators £3 and 5., :3 and ‘3...-
it is essential to know the average actual level of natural increase of

all the residents of a given territory for the entire period. For this we
use the formula:

I ‘ ‘ — -
(s.+m(nq-T%) -s.-(M-M» (5)

after the transfomation of which we will obtain:

 

, ____
- —u
s,—IW(V S's-+z’“ —l). (6)

where H is the total nigration increase of population in the region during the
period under examination;

5k is the figure for the population residing in the region by the
end of the period under study:

e; is the mean actual indicator of natural growth in the entire
population of the given region for the entire period.

On the basis of equations (1). (2), (3) and (5), it is not difficult to
determine the average indicators of natural increase in pemanent residents

('58) and of migrants (3.) and the fomla for their relationship
with indicator ef.

In the right hand part of equation (5), Sk (the size of the population at
the end of the period under study) will be equal to;

s.-s.+e+1w_or s.-§+£+M. (1)

because it was presumed that the average size of the population residing in the
region (without taking into account the natural and aigrational increases)
is essentially equal to its original size (so -3)“ .

By making the corresponding changes in the indicators Sk and ."s . in fort-ula
(S). we will obtain: .

.(§+M7(l+%)‘ LEA-5+1!

Hence the natural increase which applies to the entire population for the
entire period (B) will be equal to:

7 ‘ I
~E—(3'+M)(I+T§; «mm (a)

17
MWW‘ONLY
MWLUSEONLY

In equation (1) let us substitute the values for indicators 2, B. and P. derived
fro- forulae (2). (3) and (8). As a remit we obtain:

 

1

Having divided both parts of equation (9) by (§ + i), we shall obtain the
following foraula for the dependence of the indicators of natural increase

Of. es and?“

— ....._-_ _.__...

(n + Tgem-)1. v.0 +--l%-i]' + v.(1 + 7;?) . (i0;

where V, is the proportion of the average population residing in the given
region before migration:
V. is the proportion of average nisration increase.

From the last equation it is not difficult_to extract the indicstgrs of
national increaseiar pennant residents (as) andﬁr migrants (6.):

32-10000] (5% -vv-(H,%)‘ . ")" “"

«Tu-loco” '6i1'27)“"'('+7% —l). (12)

V-

 

 

 

A majority of the indicators used in the fomlae (53,-.- s... H, F. V3: v.50,

can be obtained either directly or they can be calculated relatively unalbisuously
on the basis of statistical data. The main methodological. difficulties lie

in the determination of the values for the coefficients e, and er No approaches
are possible here: they differ from each other in which unknom indicator

(5, or 3') is chosen as the initial one for substitution in equation (10).

The first approach. The coefficient of the natural increase in migrants
(9’) is taken as the independent variable. The essence of this approach
lies in the determination of the coefficients of the birthrate. the mortality
rate and the rate of natural increase by converting the respective age
indicators for the entire population to the age structure of the i-isrants.
But, because of the ambiguity of the influence of the migration processes on
population reproduction for regions with positive or negative migration
increase, the aethods for calculating '3. cannot be the sale.

18
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bomusc the imigration stream going into regions of settlements is formlated
on the basis of the population in nearly all of the territories of the

Soviet Union, the value of E can be calculated hypothetically on the basis of
the average. union-wide indicators for the birthrate and death rate by age.

This is justified since the average indicator does not reflect individual
differences in the population's reproduction habits. In addition. although the
value of the nationwide average indicators for the natural movement are

also determined by their level in territories with high birthrates and compara-
tively low migration mobility of residents (the republics of Central Asia and
Trans Cascasia), the differences in the territorial structures of the population
and of the immigrants can be ignored in estimated calculations, and recourse
does not have to be made to the relatively labor-intensiVe two-fold standardization
(i.e.. according to age and area of departure) of birthrate and death rates

to the territorial structure of the new arrivals (according to the 1970 population
census), the coefficient of natural increase for the 0831! population amounts

to 86-92 percent of its actual magnitude for the years 1970-1978.12 In cases
where the indicators of natural population increase for the iamigration area
differ insignificantly from the average union-wide level. we completely allow
the conVersion of the birth rate and death rate indicators by age for the local
population to the age structure of the new arrivals. In other words. for
regions which have close to average levels of natural population movement

there is no fundamental differences as to which reproduction conditions (in
regions _of departure or settlement) are taken as the foundation for calculation
of the eIn coefficients. At the same time, the use of indicators for natural
reproduction of population in places of settlement is hardly justified for areas
with reduced or elevated indicators of reproduction. Thus. it is hardly likely
that the imigrants coming from regions with a low birthrate to a region with a
high one will shift to the new reproduction conditions. For this reason it is

possible to use here only those indicators of natural population movement which
are average for the country.

For regions with a negative migration increase it is essential to determine
indicator eIn on the basis of the coefficients by age of the birthrate and
death rate of the population in a given area. This is the result primarily of
the fact that the migration processes here reduce the size of the population
not only as a consequence of its outflow but also as a consequence of the
losses in natural increase (people in the most active reproductive ages are
excluded). This method of calculating the natural increase coefficient for
innigrants is applicable for all regions which have a negative migration
increase, regardless of what the rate of reproduction is there. In a parallel
manner it is possible to use average union-wide indicators for natural
population mement, but exclusively for territories which haVe natural
increase coefficients which come close to the average level for the country.

Second approach. The coefficient of natural increase for the permanent population
(35) is viewed as the initial indicator. First of all it can be asst-ed that

.05 approximately corresponds to the average value for the natural increase
coefficient of the USSR population. The possibility of using average indicators
was already discussed. What has been said above relates to a certain degree

to the regions of intensive settlement. where migration over an extended

19
we OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

period of time functions as a very important source of population growth. In these
areas the permanent population is made up of emigrants from all regions of the coun-
try. and for this reason the reproduction rate is close to the average level for

the country. At the same time the uses of the national average coefficient of nat-
ural population increase as e3 is possible not only for territories which have ex-
perienced intensive settlement in the past, but also for all other regions which have
natural reproduction indicators which are close to the average.

If . however, the rate of population reproduction in an area differs from the average
level. then the average union-wide indicators cannot be used. In that case the re-
production rate of the permanmt population can be hypothetically equated with its
level amng residents of the given area at the start of the period under examination.
The difficulty in the application of this calculation is the result of the fact
that the rate of population reproduction in a region builds up under the influence
not only of migration processes but also as a result of changes in the birthrate
and death rate (by age) of the permmmt population. For this reason the most ra-
tional path is to take as the initial indicator not simply the coefficient of nat-
ural increase for the starting year of the period under study but its average
actual value over a number of initial years.

The method exained above was tested and officially approved using a number of areas
in the country as examples. The calculations showed that migration processes are
an important factor in the natural population reproduction in regions with intensive
migration. For example. in the Kazakh 853 the total increase in population amounted
to 7.1 million people during 1951-1973; this included an immigration increase of
1.5 million and a natural increase of 5.6 million people. horeover, the natural
increase in the incoming population amomted to 1.1 million people, or one-fifth

of the total f ure. Thus, migration resulted in a 2.6 million increase in the size
of the republic s population during 23 years: this represents 37 percent of the
total population increase during this period. In other words, every third or fourth
resident who is part of the total population increase is either himself a newcomer
or the offspring of one.1

Migration is of particular significance in the populatim reproduction of those areas
where population has grown intensively over a period of decades. For example, in

the general population increase of the Far East during the period from 1920 through
1970 newcomers and their offspring amounted for two-thirds of the growth, although

the migration increase during thize years hardly amounted to one-fourth of the
entire population of the region.

we calculated the scale for the redistribution of the natural increase resulting
from the migration effect on the population reproduction for the tmion republics
and for the economic rayons of the RSFSR during the years 1959-1978. In the last
20 years (1959-1978). about 5.7 million people of the natural increase, or one-
tenth of the total figure. were redistributed throughout the union republics and
economic ra; ans of the RSFSR as a result of total migration. Moreover, the role of
the newcomers in reproduction was most active in the rayons with relatively low
intensity of natural movement. For example. the highest proportion of offspring of
i-igrants in the natural increase--30 out of 100 people (in the Central Asian repub-
lics this figure was 6-5)--is observed in the Baltic republics. At the same time
the size of the natural increase proved to be one-seventh less in rqions with a
negative migration increase resulting from the exclusion of a significant number
of people in the child-bearing years from reproduction.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Ilu: years 1959-1978 migration processes resulted in the redistribution of

the natural increase, mainly from regions with a reduced birthrate to a larger
degree in favor of the territories which have a high birthrate and to a

somewhat lesser degree in favor of the regions with relatively low reproduction
indicators. If the entire natural increase of newcomers in 1959-1978, which was
concentrated in regions with positive migration increase, is taken as 100 percent.
its proportion innegions with lower than average intensity of natural reproduction
(the North-western and Central rayons. the Ukraine, the Baltic republics) totals
36.6 percent, while in the regions with an elevated intensity of natural movement
(the Far East, Central Asia, Kazakhstan, Moldavia, Amenia) it was 43.1 percent.

At the same time, out of 100 percent of the losses in natural increase resulting
from emigration outflow, areas with a low birthrate (the Volgo-Vyatskiy, Central-
Non Black Earth, Povolzhskiy and Ural'skiy rayons) accotmt for 63.6 percent.

and territories with a relatively high birthrate (Eastern Siberia, Georgia,
Azerbaijan) accounted for only 9 percent. This kind of migration distribution
of the natural increase is a direct reflection of the trends and intensity of
the migratory streams and especially of the intense outflow of residents from
the central rayons of the RSFSR. Under these conditions the optimalization of

migration also means an improvanent in the processes of natural reproduction
of the population.

FOOTNOTE

1. Ye.N. Gladysheva, T.K. Dagayeva, ”Certain Aspects of the Influence of
Higration on the Formation of the Population of Cities in Northern Kazakhstan,"
in the book ”Voprosy demografii" [issues of Demography], Kiev, 1968, p 180.

2. V. Sh. Dzhaoshvili, "Featu:es of the Regional Differences in the Reproduction
of the Population" in the book "Rayonnyye osobennosti vosproizvodstva .
naseleniya SSSR. Haterialy Vsesoyuz. mezhvuz. nauch. simposiuma (g. Cheboksary
May 1968 3)" [Regional Features of USSR Population. Materials of the All-Union

Inter-W2 Sci-éntific Symposium (city of Cheboksay, Kay 1968)], Cheooksary,
1972, p lad.

3. A. Kvasha, G. Kiseleva, "Trends in the Reproduction of the USSR Population"

in the book "Vozobnovleniya pokoleniy nashey strany" [Renewal of the Generations
in Our Country-7, Moscow, 1978, p 11.

a. A.V. Topilin, ”Territorial'noye pereraspredeleniye trudo h resursov g R"
[Territorial Redistribution of Labor Resources in the ussg , Moscow. 19 5, pp 28-29.

5. Yo. Bol'shakova, "Improving the Methods for Regional Demogr hic Analysis"

in the collection "Demgraficheskiy analiz rozhdayemosti” _Demographic
Analysis of the Birthrath, Moscow, 1974, pp 27-28.

6. Yu.‘l‘. Kramoshchek, ”Migration and the Aging of the Population” in the

collection "Voprosy demograficheskoy teorii, Tenatich. sbornik" ﬁssues of
Demographic Theory. A Thematic CollectiogT, Kiev, 1975, pp 118-130.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. 3. Ya. Hozhaaylis, "Current Issues of Population in the Latvian 55!!" in

9.

the collection "Voprosy denografii" ﬁssues of DemgraphXT, Moscow, 1970, p 233.

3.1:. Vasil'yeva, "The Family and Migration," in the book "Desaograficheskiye
probleny sen'yi" _/_5enographic Problems of the Familz7, Noscow 1978, pp 169-163.

L.H. Davtyan, ”Concerning Features of Population Migration in the Armian

551:" in the book ”Problemy ligratsii naseleniya 1 trudovykh resursoy” from”
of Population Higration and Labor Resourceg'f, Moscow, 1970, p 99: 6.“. Korostelev,
”Style Change and Demographic Behavior” in the book ”Dinanika izmeneniya
polozheniya zhenshchiny i sen'ya" [Dynamics of Change in the Position of

"open and the Familz7, Moscow, 1977, pp 60-67: and others.

10.See L.L. Rybakovskiy, "Regional'nyy analiz migratsiy” Eegional Analysis

of Migration], Moscou, 1973, pp 23-29.

11. The permanent population arbitrarily includes residents living in the region

at the start of the period under study and their offspring.

12. It has been calculated. See: "Itogi Vsesoyuzno perepisi naseleniya 1970

gods" ﬁesulcs of the All-Union Census of 197g , Vol VII, Hoscou, 1974, pp 6-7;
"Namdnoye hhozyastvo 5531! v 1978 godu. Stat. zhegodnik" The [BS]!
National Economy in 1978. Statistical Yearbook , Moscow, 197 , p 27.

13. ”Sotsial‘wye faktory i osobennosti migratsii naseleniya (558” I§ocial Factors

and Features of USSR Papulation Migration], hoscow, 1978, p 1'53.

la. L.L. Rybakovskiy, "Regional'nyy analiz migratsiy" Ziegional Analysis of

ﬂigration7, Moscow, 1973, p 29.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika”, 1982

8543
0803 1828/85 8ND

22
'FOIOFI'ICIALUSBONLY