FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10231
31 DecOmber 1981

Latin America Report

(FOUO 29/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the origins]. phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the

last line of a brief, indicate how the original informt ion was

processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Govetunent.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OP mrs PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN AMERICA REPORT
(rouo 29/81)

CONTENTS

COUNTRY SECTION
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Tirado Lopez Addresses Agrarian Leaders' Meeting
(mm, 5 we 81) 000.0000...aoosooooloaoeoloooa000.000....

CUBA

Castro MeSSage to UN Support Palestinians
(PRELA, 29 NOV 81) .OOOOOIOOOOIOOIIOOIOOOIOOOOOC0.0.00.0...

U.S. Aggressive Policies Denounced
(PRELA, 21‘ NOV 51) 0.0.0.000...0..I...OIOOOIOIOOOOOIOOOOOOO

EL SALVADOR

Morales Ehrlich Bonn Statement Reported
(RELA, 28 Nov 81‘ 5......OOIOOOOIOOICOOOIOIOOCOIOOOI00....

GUATHOUA
Briefs ,
More Bodies Pound
Argentine Nevsman Reportedly Arrested
Peoples Front Delegation Visits Mexico
NICARAGUA

Ortega Sends Condolence Letter to Fidel Castro
(mam, 6mc 81) OOOOOIIOOOCOO...0......OOODCOIOOIOOOOOOOO

VENEZUELA

Police Dismantle Subversive Group, Seize Arsenal
(mm, 28 NOV 81) ICODOOIIOIODOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOICOI.0......
FOR OFFICIAL [SB ONLY

Armed Hen Captured Near Palo Negro Air Base
(mm, 16 me 81) 0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOIQCOO0.0.0.000...

Briefs

Cuba Not Against Hijacking Agreement
Student-Police Clashes

CUTV Labor Congress
Government Answers Iraqi Protest Note

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TIRADO IDPEZ ADDRESSES ACRARIAN LEADBS' “BRING
PA061705 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0215 (MT 5 Dec 81

[Text] Managua, 10 Dec (PL)--Victor Tirado Lopez, conmander of the revolution, today
urged all agrarian leaders of Latin America and the Caribbean to strengthen their
unity and solidarity with Nicaragua and Cuba.

In a speech delivered at the opening session of the third meeting of Latin American
and Caribbean rural workers organizations, Tirade pointed out the importance of
joining forces in facing the threat of U. S. aggression.

At the opening session, Julio Ber-idea, a Panasanian who is president of the (2co-
ordinating couission), said that the meeting provided a good opportunity to analyze
the agricultural sector's experience, the workers' difficult conditions particularly.

The peasant leaders held prior meetings in San Jose, Costa Rica and in Havana, Cuba.

Rene Penalver, secretary general of the Cuban Agricultural and Livestock Workers
Union, was among the speakers at the first meeting.

The representative of 362,000 (Ymembers) of this organization said that the nesting
is being held at a time of tension, when the deafening sounds of imperialist
language" are threatening the peoples of Latin Anerica and the Caribbean.

Penslver said that Nicaragua and Cuba have been the target of a continuous campaign
of lies, orchestrated by the United States "to justify a possible military aggres-
sion and intervention in El Salvador."

After stating that the Cuban revolution has ridiculed all of the "baseless and
fictional statements" regarding the alleged deployment of troops to El Salvador,
he said that his country's people do not fear any threat and are prepared to defend
themelves.

Analyzing the critical situation of the peasants in the area, he said that "only

a few of the agrarian reforms applied in the major part of our America have definite-
ly solved the agrarian problems."

C90: 3010/6530

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CASTRO MESSAGE TO UN SUPPORT PALESTINIANS
PA291864 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1726 GMT 29 Nov 81
["Pool" item]

[Text] Havana, 29 Nov (PL)--Preaident Fidel Castro sent a message to UN
Secretary General Kurt Waldheim on the occasion of the International Day of
Solidarity With the Palestinian People.

The text of the message is as follows:

"In the name of the Cuban Government and people, I wish to express our warm
greetings to the people of Palestine and to their sole legitimate representa-
tive, the PLO, on the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity With
the Palestinian People. '

'bn this memorable day, I want to reiterate that the Cuban people, together
with all of the world's progressive forces, continue to offer their support
to and full solidarity with the just struggle of the heroic Palestinian people.

'Thc celebration cf 29 November as the International Day of Solidarity With
the Palestinian People responds to the wish of the UN General Assembly,
expressed in its resoluticn No 23/b0, and proves that the international
community is convinced that oppression has been perpetrated against the people
of Palestine since [947, with the division of Palestinian territory into two
states, established in Resolution No 181 (II), and the dispersion imposed on
the Palestinian people since that division.

"Since its foundation, the nonaligned movement, together with the United Nations
and other international organizations and forums, the cause of the long-suffering
people of PaleStine. [sentence as received]

"Repeated declarations and resolutions insist that the Palestine issue is the
cause of conflict in the Middle East, establish the outlines for a just and last-
ing peace in that explosive region and denounce and strongly condemn the
aggressive and expansionist nature of Zionism, unconditionally supported by
imperialism, and a permanent threat to international peace and security.

"In this context, the agreements of the sixth summit of the nonaligned movement,
held in Havana in September 1979, as well as subsequent nonaligned declarations
issued at the New Delhi minis.ers conference and at the recent ninisters plenum

2
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in New York, daily gain more impact in their condemnation of the Camp David
agreements and the Egyptian-Israeli treaty as reflecting a policy designed

to further reinforce the positions of the Zionist regime and to protect the
U.S. interests in the area, directly attacking the most fundamental rights

of Arab peoples, particularly those of the Palestinian Arab people.

"Cuba, along with the world's progressive forces and nations. believes that an
end should be put to the war of extermination against the Palestinian people
and that greater respect for and fulfillment of the decisions contained in the
resolutions of the United Nations, the DAB and the nonaligned movement should
be demanded, to stop the continuous acts of aggression by which Israel, with
U.S. economic, political and military support, attempts to smash the just
struggle of the Palestinian people to achieve the return of their lands occupied
by the Zionists after three successive wars, between 1948 and 1956 and in 1967.

'The people and government of the Republic of Cuba join the international
condemnation of the savage Israeli bombings of peaceful Iraqi and Lebanese
nuclear research centers, which again emphasize the high degree of aggressive-
ness that Zionist policy has impressed upon the attacks against both the
heroic Palestinian people and other Arab peoples as well.

"In order to carry out its imperialist plans in the Middle East, the United
States counts upon Israel and is looking for new allies, faithful servants
and guardians of its economic, strategic and military interests in the area,
and instruments through which it can attack the peoples' aspirations, without"
apparent consideration for the fact that the situation there is becoming
increasingly dangerous for the region and for the entire world.

"Imperialist policy--which is hegemonist, racist and Zionist--is unjust to the
Arab peoples and, with even greater aggressiveness, to the Arab people of
Palestine, heedless of the thousands of voices that have been raised at various
international forums in support of the concept that a just and lasting peace

in the Middle East can only be achieved with the recognition oz and full
respect for the right of the Palestian people to establish their own definite

homeland and with the recognition of the PLO as the sole legitimate representa-
tive of the Palestinian people.

'Khnthis important occasion we wish to say once again that the just cause of
the Palestinian people may always depend upon our people's unending support
and full solidarity in the persevering struggle they are waging against
imperialism and Zionism to achieve the right to ::lf-determination, the right

of refugees to return home and the right to create an independsnt state of
Palestine on Palestinian land."

C80: 3010/666

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
U.S. AGGRESSIVE POLICIES DENOUNCED
PA250334 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2241 GMT 26 Nov 81

[Excerpt] Panama City, 24 Nov (PL)--Cuba today denounced the aggressive policy
of U.S. governments for the past 20 years against that country, during a meeting
held here of the Latin American Economic System (SELA).

In the face of the current hostile attitude of the government of President
Ronald Reagan, the people and government of Cuba reiterate their determination
to defend their country's sovereignty to the ultimate consequences, states a
report submitted by the Cuban delegation to SELA plenary session.

The meeting, underway at the technican level, will draft the document setting
the Latin American strategy for the United States.

These documents will be analyzed over the weekend by the foreign ministers of
SELA member nations, many of which have voiced a critical stance toward
Washington's pol icy.

In submitting its document, Cuba enumerates a number of U.S. actions against
the Cuban economy, mentioning the following:

The trade ban between the two countries; trade limitations on U.S. subsidiaries
in other countries; pressure applied against those countries trading with Cuba:
the ban on U.S. citizens importing merchandise containing Cuban products from
other countries; the unilateral annulment of treatment as a most favored nation;
and the restrictive provisions in the 1975 trade law, among others.

CSO: 3010/446

h
F0I10FFKJAI.USEI0NLY
MORALES EHRLICH BONN STATEMENT REPORTED
PA281932 Havana PRELA in English 1826 GMT 28 Nov 81

[Text] Bonn, Nov 29 (PL)--Antonio Morales Ehrlich, member of the Salvadorean
christian Democrat Military Junta, declared here that his regime will not agree
to a dialogue with the Revolutionary Democratic Front (FDR). that is proposing
a political solution to the conflict in El Salvador.

In statements to the press, Morales admitted that there are strong. insistent
demands from abroad that the Salvadorean military junta negotiate with the
opposition forces of the FDR and the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front
(FMLN).

He alleged that the denunciations and protests throughout the world owing to the
genocide that the Salvadorean junta is commiting are due to supposed misinforma-
tion.

In spite of international press circles of the most varied trends having denounced
repeatedly the violations of human rights in El Salvador, Morales argued that it
is merely "a publicity campaign."

As regards the assassinations of the bishop of San Salvador, Oscar Arnulfo Romero,
four ".8. nuns and several members of the FDR leadership, Morales pointed out
that "no one has been able to prove who committed these crimes."

There is, however, a large amount of evidence, including that of an ex-U.S.
ambassador. which pins the murders on the junta without a shadow o£ a doubt.

A spokesman of the Ministry of Economic Cooperation of the Federal Republic of
Germany (PRC) declared Thursday that the aid for development to El Salvador

will be suspended while the present situation should last. This was communicated
to the juntn's foreign minister, Fidel Chavez Mena, who visited Bonn last week.

However, Morales said that it was unaware of this statement, that was published
in the West German press, and he claimed that in his country "there is a climate
of peace."

Although in recent days countries like Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Ecuador, Peru
and Panama have given their support to the French-Mexican initiative that the

5
roe omen]. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Salvadorcnn regime negotiate a political solution with the FDR. Morales said
that the military junta will not do this.

Neither does it accept the demand of the socialist international and the West
German Social Democracy Party reiterated Monday this week by Hans Uischneski,

for political solutions to the Salvadorean problem.

In the press conference. Morales avoided replying to questions on the recent
report published by the United Nations on the massacres that the Salvadorean

junta is committing.

cso: 3010/406

6
INDR OFIWCIAL USII(HULY
BRIEFS

MORE BODIES POUND—-San Jose, 17 Dee (PL)-At least 21 bodies were found in the past
few hours in various parts of Guatemala where repression has intensified. Ten bodies
were found on the "Alaska" Peak and near the town of San Lorenzo, Suchitepequer.

A woman and an approximately ll year-old boy were among those found. The other
bodies were found in the southern sector of Guatemala City end the towns of Santa
Cruz del Quiche, Valle Muevo, San Marcos Jacopilae, Agua Escondida and Montserrat.

So far, only the bodies of Juan Lopez, Isabel narillas, Alfredo Lopez, Leon Bat,
Diego Mendoza, Julian Paecual Ramos and Antonio Palopo have been identified. The
macabre discovery occurred a few days after 32 other bodies were found in the region
of Glimaltenango. [Text] [PA172106 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1627 GMT 17 Dec 81]

ARGENTINE NBHSMAN REPORTEDLY ARRESTED-Maxico City, 10 Dec (PL)-Ba1domero Alvarez
Rios, executive secretary of the Latin American Journalists Federation [PELAP], to-
day confirmed that Valentin Deigo Ferret, an Argentine newsman who was visiting
Guatemala on a professional mission, was arrested by the police of that country.

The FELAP stressed that Perrat, international coordinator for the System for Editor-
ial Information and Promotion [Sisteme de Informacion y Promosion Editorial-SIPE]
is being tortured and demanded his immediate release. For this reason, it demanded
the solidarity of national organizations of jOurnalists in Latin American and the
Caribbean. Alvarez Rios recalled that Ferret is also a distinguished member of the
International Organization of Journalists and the Association of Foreign Correspond-
ents in Mexico [Asociacion de Corresponsales Extranjeros en Mexico-ACEM]. [Text]
[PA120234 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0235 (HT 11 Dec 81)

PEOPLES FRONT DELEGATION VISITS MEXICOh-Mexico City, 26 Nov (PL)-The Guatemala
people will struggle until they achieve the overthrow of the nilitary regime of Gen
Romeo Lucas Garcia and the establishment of a revolutionary government in Guatemala,
a delegation of the 31 January Peoples Front (PP-31) has said here. The PP-31
delegation, which arrived in Mexico City to meet with leaders of various Mexican
political, union and student organizations, indicated that the regimes of Argentina,
Chile and Israel are "responsible for the fratricidal massacre in Guatemala because
they supply military advice and modern weapons, including herbicides and napalm, to
the Lucas Garcia dictatorship." Alba Maria Esteves. Carlos Humberto Rojas, Antonio
Calel and Francisco Rodriguez, members of the delegation, told the local press that
they are on an international tour to make the public aware of and to obtain soli-

darity for the insurrectional struggle of the Guatemala people. [Text] [PAZSOééZ
HavanaPRENSA in Spanish 1507 GMT 24 Nov 81]

650: 3010/430

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ORTEGA SENDS CONDOLENCE LETTER TO PIDEI. CASTRO
PA061533 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0159 GMT 6 Dec 81

[Text] Managua, 5 Dec (PL)-Commander Danile Ortega, coordinator of the Junta of
the Government of National Reconstruction, today sent a message to Cuban President,
'Fidel Castro, condemning the murder of internationalist teacher, Aguedo Morales
Reina.

The text of the letter sent by Ortega to Fidel Castro is as follows:
Comander in Chief, Fidel Castro Ruz, Havana
Dear Comander:

Once again a brave and unselfish Cuban patriot has been murdered on Nicaraguan soil.
The blood of our brother, teacher Aguedo Morales Reina, has bathed our soil and we
soak up that blood with sorrow but above all with hope. The Cuban teachers are
helping us, with tenacity and at great risk, to overcome the state of cultural
prostration that we inherited from the dictatorship and the many decades of imper-
ialist domination in Nicaragua.

Those who carried out this crime and those who support their actions surely be-
l‘eve that they are one step closer to their objective of making us abandon our
principles and forcing the Cuban teachers who are assigned all over our country to
leave. There is nothing farther from reality because they will never accomplish this.
The teachers. the goverment and the people of Cuba have shown their determination
to continue this fraternal and historic cooperation with our revolution, and for

our part, we once again reiterate our unyielding will to continue welcoming the-

to our territory.

This new crime. like the past crime in which two Cuban teachers were mrdered by a
counterrevolutionary group. will not remain unpuniahed. We make a vow to the peo-
ple of Nicaragua and the people of Cuba.

Dear Commander. please accept from the Junta of the Government of National Reconstruc-
tion and from our people, our most sincere repudiation of this criminal act and our

profound solidarity.
[Signed] Daniel Ortega Saavedra

680: 3010/1050

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010029-4
STATINTEL