POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10515

13 May 1982

Japan Report

‘(FOUO 30/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmission: and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is Sivan, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfaniliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

JPRS

13M:

JAPAN REPORT

(.9000 30/821

Coutws

murmur

Changes in Defense Bureaucracy Analyzed
(mime KaWJi; m, m 82) oooeooeooseeoeoeeeeseoee

800N010

Structure of Nippon Telegraph, Telephone Analysed
(CM “0“, ”It'll" 61) .OODOOOCOOOCOOODIICO00.0.0.0...

Business Structure, by Hitoshi Hirmteu

Closely Related Private Companies, by Kenichiro Hirots
Interview With NT‘I‘ President Shinto

Interview With Vice. President Kitahara

SCIENCE AND WWI

PHS Using Super High Performance Laser Project Discussed
(RIM “10mm, 21‘ Fab 82) OIOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOQ

-a- [III-ASIA-l:
ME IN DEFENSE minnow mm

Tokyo SEMI in Japaneee Rey 82 pp 193-196

[Article by najine leweji: "harhulence in the Defenee Agency."]
[Text] Modification of Secret Plane

When the new director-general of the Defenee Agency aeemed hie poet, the
chairman of the Joint Staff Council, who etande at the head of uniforned eelf-
defenee officiele, ehowed the new director-general into the war council roo-
and ehowed hin two-part top eecret docunente. It ie eeid that the docueente
reapectfully ehown to the director-general. after it wee confined that every-
one had left the roon and the door wee tightly cloeed, looked old and the
edgee of the pagee were worn and turned up.

Theee eecret docuente are an analyeie of the Iilitary eituation conpleted

by the Joint Staff Council. that ie, the "joint long range defence aeeeeenent"
end the "Joint eediun range defense eeeeeeunt." The long range defense ee-
eeeeaent enalyeee the nilitary eituation over a period of up to 8 to 10 yeere;
the medium range aeeeeenent, for a period up to 2 to 5 years. Based on thie.
they are the baeic doctnenta deecribing what condition end ecale of aggree-
eion in poeeihle and in such a ceee to what degree would the defenee forces
have the ability to leet the aggreeeion.

In particular. the Joint eediun range defenae aeeeeenent is closely involved
with the defenee plan. in the eenee that the chiefe of the Ground, Maritime
and Air Self-Defeuee Porcee drew up the "nediul range operations aeeeeenent"
based on thia. The "median range operatione eeseeenent" ie a five year plan
for improving the defenee capability. Furthermore, the nechenien ie that if
the joint nediun range defenee aeeeeenent ie eubetantially nodified. the di-
rector-general of the Defenee Agency is euppoeed to propose to the national
Defenee Council Iodification of the "fundamtal principlee of the defenee
plan," and in the event the fondanentel principlee of defenee are re-exanined,
revision of the joint nediun range defenee aeeeeenent will be the trigger for
it.

Both the long range and nediul range defenee eeeeeenente were drawn up in
1978 but both were partially revieed at the end of leet year. The reaeon

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Defense Agency for-ally recognized theaereviaions was because they were
bounded to do so by the. Diet‘ The content of the revisions is secret, of
course, and the only cou'ent nade was, "it is nothing but a routine re-exsm-
ination undertaken every three years."

However, revision of the joint long range and medium renge defense assessments
deserves attention inasnuch as the opinion. "is should take a second look at
the fundamental principles of defense in response to the buildup of the Soviet
threat," has becone prominent withing the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) end
the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP). This will at least probably have some
kind of effect on the "711981 medium range operations assessment” presently
being drawn up (the period covered by the 1981 nedium range operations assess-
sent is from 1982 to 1986).

1981 Medium Range Operations Assessment races Rough Going

Prime Minister Suzuki has repeatedly asserted in the Diet that he directed
the Defense Agency to include the concept of Japan's own defense in the 1981
mediun range operations assessment. However. things have not progressed that
simply. The Defense Agency's work on setting it up has reached a deadlock

at the stage of what will be the philosophy permeating the 1981 medium range
operations assess-eat.

One confrontation is between the Maritime and Air Self-Defense Forces, which
aim at the capability to taking over in part the 0.8. military's strategy
toward the Soviet Union in the western Pacific Ocean. planning the strengthen-
ing of the sealanes and air defesne set-up, by highlighting the "importance

of naritine and air defense in the prime minister's directives," and the
Ground Self-Defense Force, which bases the nation's defense on preparing for
decisive action within the country itself, planning the development of self-
propelled artillery and arnorqd divisions, citing the prine sinister's stra-
tegic concept of "defense of the beaches; hedgehog defense."

There is another confrontation between the prise minister's residence, which
will not allow any major changes in the framework of "the standard of the
defense plan's fundamental principles" nor "defense expenditures of less than
one percent of GNP," and the Self-Defense Forces and Defense Agency, for
which maintaining a defense capability in response to u.s. expectations is
very difficult in this framework.

Because the 1981 medium range operations assessment is a five year plan with
FY1983 as its initial year, its character is such that it must be concluded
and presented to the Diet by this sulmer when the PYl983 budget ceiling will
be decided and rough estimate requests will be completed. But within the
Defense Agency. the situation is such that it will not be ready on time.

But it is possible it will have taken shape since it can be decided at the
ease time as the FYI983 draft budget if it is ready by the end of this year
when the FY1983 draft budget will be decided in its final form.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the other hand, the following pessimistic view has hegun to appear. "It
scene a decision on the 1981.”an range operations asseaasnt will take un-
til next yeah- If'so, it willsiss the 721933 badger, but since the .1981
nedius range operations aseessssnt is an extension of the 1978 mediun range
operations assessment, it will not he a contradiction if, for the tine being,
FYI983 goes with the 1978'madiun range operations assessment and the start of
the plan is formally postponed until F11983 after the 1981 medium range opera-
tions assessment has been decided.

The fact that the formation of the 1981 medium range operations assessment
has been having rough going even though the prime minister personally issued
directions to the Defense Agency is evidence that there is very strong pres-
sure and resistance on the part of the faction which wants to build up the
defense capability and take a second look at the fundamental principles of de-
fense.

Significance of Intra-agency Personnel Changes

Defense Agency related personnel changes which will he the key to divining

the direction of the 1981 mediun range operations assess-ant will begin at the
end of the Diet session from May through July. Depending on the results, it
is possible for formation work on the 1981 medius range operations assessment
to advance.

The voluntary resignation of Toru ﬂare, permanent deputy director, and accos-
panying changes at the director level, such as the succeeding permanent depu-
ty director and Defense Bureau director, are expected in May. The view is
strongly held that Defense Bureau Director Shioda, who is the person respons-
ible for the 1981 nedium range operations assessment, will move to the direc-
torship of the Defense Facilities Adninistration Agency.

As for Defense Agency bureau directors level personnel, since no Defense Agen-
cy bureaucrats elployed in the Defense Agency have been trained, the reserved
positions are as follows: director of the Equipment Bureau, someone fro: the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry; the director of the Health and
Medical Bureau, free the Ministry of Health and Welfare; and the director of
the Finance Bureau, sosnone from the Ministry of Finance. And those who have
cone from the police forces are the councilors. The deputy director-general
post, in particular, has been a post monopolized by those connected with the
former Ministry of Home Affairs (Nainusho) and the police force since the
Self-Defense Forces started in the past as a police force. however, with
Deputy Director-general Hare, who was assistant director of the Financial
Bureau of the Ministry of Finance, a Ministry of Finance bureaucrat has held
the post of Defense Agency deputy director-general for two consecutive terns.
It is said that the reason why the deputy director-general post was consecu-
tively held by someone from the Ministry of Finance is because there was a
change from an era when the focus was on apolosising in the Diet that the
defense adsinistration is "not unconstitutional" to an era when it is on how
such defense expenditures can he grabbed; and so naturally there is a roll-
back of the forner Ministry of Bone Affairs and those caning from the police.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pundasental Principles Faction versus rundan-ntel Principles Re-eranination
Faction.

The first on the list is Akita Shi‘oda, director of the Defense mreau, who

is free the Ministry of he Affairs Oichisho) and who is connected with

the for-er Ministry of Home Affairs (Naimsho), and it was reported that at
the ties Shioda saved to the Defense Agency he was promised he cauld follow
Deputy Director-general here. however, with his Ianagement of the I"; Phantom
isprovenent problen, his "lost points” are conspicuous. So, Minoru Yoshino,
director of the Defense facilities Adminstration Agency, who was director of
the Mint Bureau of the Ministry of Finance. suddenly surfaced as the nest
deputy director-general, and it is highly probable that Baruu Matsune, chief
secretary, will assume the office of Defense Bureau director after Shioda
eaves up to director of the Defense facilities Administration Agency. 0n the
other. hand, in order for those from the police to recapture the post of de-
puty director-general after Yoshino, it is necessary that Junko Sasa, direc-
tor of Personnel and Education Bureau, who cans from the National Police Agen-
cy. move into the position of director of the Defense Bureau, the top direc-
torship.

The opinion that Natsune will assume the position of Defense Bureau director
is understood to have more significance than a ministerial or agency level
territorial dispute over the deptuy director-general post. Natsme was en-
ployed in the Defense Facilities Administration Agency, but early on he be-
came a ne‘er of the Defense Agency (a bureau administrator) and is actually
the first among the career defense bureaucrats in the Defense Agency. Not
only does this assuption of office announce the arrival of the era in which
the Defense Agency bread defense bureaucrats operate 'the Defense Agency,
Natsune himself possesses a career of having participated deeply in the poli-
cy decisions on the defense plan’s fundamental principles and the "basic de-
fense capability concept" which is its philosophy fro. the time he was de‘
fense section chief and general affairs section chief in the secretariat.

The 1977 edition of the defense white paper which comprehensively developed
the basic defense capability concept was popularly known with the Defense
Agency as the "Matsume white paper." At the conference of councilors (the
Defense Agency's highest level conference) when the Defense Agency was shaken
over whether to disniss Kurisu, it is said that Matsume was critical of Kurisu
and Sasa argued Kurisu's defense. Naturally, it was leaked by an official
source in the defense fundamental principles faction that they wanted and
hoped Natsune would becone Defense Bureau director. but conversely speaking,
the resistance from the fundamental principles re-eranination faction can be
ieagined. At any rate, if the new Defense Bureau director concludes the 1981
medium range operations assessnent in parallel with Prime Minister Suzuki's
directions and appropriate to Japan's compact state of affairs, he may have
to reduce the ramifications by being prepared to he resented by the Ground,
Haritine and Air Self-Defense Forces and to be looked at disapprovingly by
the hawk faction of the LDP.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"he Hill he Chairman of the Joint Staff Council

There will be substantial personnel changes'in the Self-Defense Forces in July,
following the personnel changes in the bureaus. The focus is the personnel
change in the chairmanship of the Joint Staff Council. If Tu Haeda, chief

of staff of the Hartine Self-Defense force, 73rd naval class. retires volun-
tarily. it is certain that Tsugio fads, chair-an of the Joint Staff Council,
71st naval class, chronologically speaking, would retire voluntarily. The
chairman of the Joint Staff Council has generally been decided by rotation

among the vairous chiefs of staff of the Ground, Maritime and Air Self-De-
fense Forces.

Consequently. since Chairmen Yada was the maritime chief of staff and before
him, it was Chairman Takeda, chief of staff of the Air Self-Defense Force.
the Ground Self-Defense Force is insisting that naturally the next chairman
should be Sumio Hurai, chief of staff of the Ground Self-Defense Force. 0n
the one hand, it is seen that Osaau natame, chief of staff of the Air Self-
Defense Force, will voluntarily retire at the seas time, and there is the
deeply rooted opinion that "there m ay possibly be an example where the order
was altered. rnd in terns of talent. Hatane should be nade chairman of the
Joint Staff Council. Inasmuch as the Ground Self-Defense Force would not
escapte a loss of ground if the concept of Japan's defense, including the
1981 medium range operations assessment, shifts to that of placing importance
on maritiae and air defense, the Ground Self-Defense force's posture, even
though it says "the chairman of the Joint Staff Council is like a chairman
with no representation," is that. right or wrong, they want the next chair-
manship and they continue to feud with the Air Self-Defense Force.

At the tine when the improve-ant of the Pb Phantom with bombing devices be-
came an issue in the Diet, Eatame. chief of staff of the Air Self-Defense
Force. declared at a press conference, "one of the objectives of the F4 inr
provenent is to make it the successor of the ground support fighter. the

F1 (fighter-bomber)," and disappointed intra-agency officials who tried to

be evasive by answering, "the objective of the F6 improvement is strictly

the improvement of its interceptor capability and it is not in order to use
it as a ground support fighter." Even in the opposition parties, there were
those who requested "Hatane's disposal." There was resentment toward this

in the Air Self-Defense staff who said that it is strange that the defense
bureaucracy which pointlessly hides the actual facts from the public is not
criticized and the chief of staff of the Air Self-Defense Force, who spoke
accurately about the Air Self-Defense Force's concept, based on military ra-
tionality, receives criticism. But the Ground Self-Defense Force staff holds
the view that "the line about Hatame's chairmanship has disappeared complete-
1’."

With the regular changes in July, there will not only be changes at the chief

of staff level. but for the first tine, graduates of the first class of the
Defense Academy will be promoted to general officers. This will gradually
and indirectly change the character of the Defense Agency and the Self-Defense

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Forces. The appearance of general officereof the purely postwar generation
who grew up under the [1.8; military's education system ranks with the coming
to the forefront of Defense Agency bred'hureaucrate and indicates that the
Defense Agency and Self-Defense Forces have 'reached' a turning point.

Uniformed Yersonnel and LI)? Hawk faction

within the confrontation of various opinions about the 1981 medium range oper-
ations assessment, there is a movement which must be given attention. There

is the inclination here and there for some of ' the uniformed personnel to go
over the heads of the intre-agency bureaucracy and link themselves directly
with some of the influential LDP Diet members. That pipeline is being ac-

complished by high level uniformed personnel. such as former chiefs of staff
who have retired.

For example, the names include Shigeto hagano (former chief of staff of the
Ground Self-Defense Force), Ryohei Oga (former chief of staff of the Maritime
Self-Defense Force) and Motoharu Shirakawa (former chief of staff of the Air
Self-Defense Force) at the "Japan Strategic Research Center" where Shin Xana-
maru, former director-general of the Defense Agency, is enployed as director.
They made a proposal on defense capability increase entitled, "Proposal con-
cerning defense capability preparations," in february last year. however,

in May of last year, just before Prime Minister Suzuki's visit to the 0.8.,
America‘s Heritage Foundation, which is called President Reagan's think tank.
made a report concerning shortcomings in Japan's defense capability and that
the defense capability should be increased. It may be said that the content
of these two is exactly the same. The Japan Strategic Research Center's pro-
posals. such as an increase in the P36 sub-spotting aircraft, building small
scale carriers which can carry vertical take-off and landing aircraft. pos-
session of a mine-sweeping helicopter force and paratroops both for land and
sea operations (sea mobile land brigade and air mobile land brigade) almost
coincide with the Heritage report. Since the heritage report is a 0.8. re-
port, it quite directly enumerates the following as "a re-examination of
meaningless taboosz" l) the cabinet decision on expenditures of less than
one percent of GNP; 2) non-possession of offensive weapons; 3) three princi-
ples of non-nuclearization; and ’0) three principles of weapons exports.

In the midst of the drama of the Dist's handling of the F4 Phantom, the LDP
National Defense Group and officials of the Policy Research Omittee pro-
posed the m? opinion that "accompanying the international state of affairs
and advances in military technology. aircraft and naval vessels which Japan
cannot possess will change." Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiyarawa shelved the
proposal. The naval vessels which this 1.1)? proposal pointed out and tried
to open the way of having at the time of the uproar over the F6 issue are
clearly aircraft carriers which are considered offensive weapons in the pre-
sent government view. It has often been said that "the defense question is
and echo between Japan and the 11.8.," but what if the origination of the u.s.
proposed request was decided in Japan and these data were decided by former
Self-Defense Porce officials?

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE GIL!

Considering that the. Japan Strategic Research Cantor‘a propoaal cloaoly re-
“.th tha unitary propoaal oi ‘ tha‘ .1981 hadn- range operations mull-at.
it «as attention not ha 3m to tha'rol'attonship hotvun the LDP hawk ‘
faction and toner Sou-Daren“ 702cc ofﬁcials.

comma: Mani Shoten 1982

9600
080: ‘105/ 96

7
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mane

STRUCTURE OF NIPPON TERM, TELEPHONE ANALYZED
Business Structure
Tokyo CHUO town in Japanese Autumn 81 pp 166-157
[Article by ﬂitoshi Hiramatsu, journalist]
[Text] NTT Buffeted by "Third Wave”-

Ite rigid structure is being questioned in the nidet of
an international information and commications battle.
Can this giant survive? '

Three Urgent Issues

As we enter the 1980's, which has been called the age of technology. NTT's
mode of operation has been called into question. As we approach the 21st
century, the central core of technological innovation will be a hybrid
advanced technology cosposed of machinery, computers, and electronic
cousunicatione. "hen we think about the information and co-unicationa
infrastructure that will be created by means of this data co-unications
technology and its spreading impact. the role to be taken by MT, the
monopolistic enterprise which has thus far led the way in the. develop-ent
of data conunications technology in Japan, and the kind of technology that
will be used take on an importance that we cannot ignore.

On 5 August. NTT held a public lecture meeting at the Keidanren Ball in

Tokyo concerning "technology for achieving a high-level data communication
system" as a "proposal for a high-level intonation society.“ A high-level
infatuation society, according to Toffler, will be characterised by expanded
office automation and electroniration of the home and "will change the course
of history in just 20 or 30 years with a shock that will revolutionize society
from its foundations." It will be "the third wave," following the agricultural
revolution and the industrial revolution.

In preparation for the high-level infatuation society to cone. MT is planning
to build a high-level intonation communications system (the information

network syst-n of INS). It will be based on telephones. data terninals,
facsimile. and image terminals. It will be built as a canon network unified

8
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
IIHICNWﬂCJAI.USEiDNL¥

by digital technology so that voice, image, and data information can be
freely exchanged between the different types of terminals. Experiments are
scheduled to begin in the Musashino and Hitaka areas in 1983.

This 21st century communications system is made possible by digital, optical,
and satellite couunicstions technology which has been made possible by

rapid progress in electronic technology items such as 16 and microprocessors.
This campaign is unusual for a public corporation. NIT is trying to
demonstrate the advanced technology it has accumulated and promote understanding
of its new electronic communications system. NTT has achieved its two major
objectives, pursued since it was organized in 1950, of completely satisfying
the national demand for telephone service and providing completely automatic

dial service for the entire country. now it is pursuing this new objective
for the era ahead.

however, the impact of the technological revolution leading to a high-level
information system. and the high-level information society which it will
create, will necessitate great changes in NTT itself. Indeed, there are
indications in the form of real pressures that require specific responses
from NTT. One of these signs is the issue of liberalization of materials
procurement which became a focus of concern in adjusting U.S.-Japanese
relations in 1979 and 1980. Second is the issue of opening communication
lines, and this has become an urgent issue in revising electronic communica-
tions policies in the 1980's. Third is the slackening in growth of NTT's
business income due to the achievement of balance in supply and demand and
the exposure of financial weakness due to increased capital expenditures
through huge investments.

Pressure To Liberalize the System

The issue of liberalizing materials procurement goes back to an international
agreement made at the Tokyo round of GATT (General Agreement of Tariff and
Trade). As one way of abolishing nontariff barriers for the expansion of
world trade, material purchases by governments and government organizations
must, in principle, be made through competitive contracts by public or private
bidding, and an opportunity for equal participation in the bidding must be
given to foreign enterprises. This became the greatest unsettled problem
between the United States and Japan because the United States was frustrated
at becoming "a weaker America" (BUSINESS "38!) as the relative strength
relationship of Japan and America underwent a change. America reacted
against the growing threat of being overtaken by late-developing Japan in

the strategic areas of high-level electronics and data communications.

Furthermore, NTT's procurement system, which accounts for $3 billion annually,
half the total procurement by government and government-related agencies,

has used a private contracting system by which it made planned orders from
special partner enterprises which have accumulated knowhow through joint
development with NTT. By this system, NTT, which does not have a manufacturing
capability, was able to apply its research results. All equipment and parts
were standardized on the basis of NTT specifications and a high level of
quality was maintained by a strict inspection system. Also, the companies

9
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were guaranteed a stable market for special-order products for arr and were
able to 91:... production and cut costs through mass production.

However, this was a totally closed system of development, production, and
procurement between NTT and its special partners. Japan's intonation and
communications industries formed an "MT family" organized around the large
general manufacturers of computers, semiconductors, robots, and co-unications
equipment. In comaunications equipment alone, in 1979 the purchases by Il'l'T
were 60 percent of the total. Even though this was down from 57 percent in
1965, it shows that these companies have had a huge profit base in the art
market. The influence of “TI has extended to achieve-ants in information and
communications knowhow and quality control obtained through joint development
as well as in the aspect of market volume. These achievements have improved
Japan's international competitiveness in data co-unicatinns. The Jones
Report indicated that "in order to make progress in comications technology,
the technology of the future. Japan has rapidly advanced in the open U.S.
Market, while holding on to its domestic market." Since this report 'was
made, art has been know as the "symbol of the closed Japanese market" in

the United States.

The liberalization of procurement, which has obstructed U.S.-Japanese relations
and has become a political problem, was finally brought about as the GATT
regulations took effect in January 1981. Purchases of peripheral equipment
were completely opened up to competitive bidding. Also, N11 has opened up
the path to participation of foreign enterprises in private centracts through
the Track III program. Under this system, both domestic and foreign enter-
prises which apply for participation can be selected as partners for joint
development and production of prototypes of central equipment. Continuous
purchases are made of items which pass operating tests. This Track III
system is causing apprehension among the friendly companies which have carried
out research and development for N11? and become used to carrying out joint
development as special partners. however, this liberalization of the
development and purchase syst- is inevitable for m. This is because

the increased need for high-level, more diversified data commications
technology has naturally increased the number of different research and
development areas to be dealth with by art. And it has made it necessary to
use more domestic and foreign companies as partners in joint development and
as sources of supply. In fact, even before adoption of the new liberalized
system, Matsushita Denso participated in development of facsimile equipment
and Hororola of the United States helped 'with the pocket bell.

Liberalization of procurement is also a result of Japan's success in reaching
world standards in data con-unications technology, beginning with technology
imports from the advanced countries, and then rapidly developing beyond world
standards in such areas of advanced technology as optical communications

and VLSI. Data comaunications technology is central to future technological
innovation and it will have a tremendous ripple effect. Therefore, pressure
to liberalize will continue to mount.

In particular, the United States under the Reagan administration is trying
to fully bring out the great technical strength of the largest 0.3.

10
. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cos-unications enterprise. ANT. which had been curbed for a long time

under the antitrust act. in order to maintain relative superiority in this
strategic area and increase the competitiveness of 0.5. industry. Last year,
the FCC (Federal (Do-mications Co-ission) nade a final decision on its
second computer survey and approved the provision of unregulated high-level
communications service if carried out through a subsidiary which had separated
from “61‘. The 1981 bill concerning competition and deregulation of ' -
electrical communications proposed in the Senate to revise the 1936 - =
cor-unications act now in effect is also intended to remove the handcuffs

and shackles fron new.

Looked at in this way, liberalisation of the development and procurmaent
system is a natural development in terns of improvuent and diversification
of information and co-unications technology. It could be seen as one
international adjustment in the intensifying battle over technology.

Problem of Liberalising the Use of the hetwork

The problem of liberalization of the data communication network also arose
from the demand for improvement and diversification of data col-unications,

a result of a technological revolution which has shaken ll'l'r's nonopolistic
system. In data conunications systems, computers and terminals are connected
in a unified data-processing and electronic co-unications syst- which

makes it possible to use computers from a distance. Beginning with the
"green window" seat reservation systen for the National Railways in 1966

and upanding to the on-line bank systaa and the Social Insurance Agency
pension system, these systems have supported ever more complicated social
activities and penetrated every corner of our lives.

MT entered the data communications field, a third major form of conunica-
tion following the telegraph and telephone. in 1968 with the nationwide
regional bank system, the first Joint-use system in Japan. Because of
industry's growing desire for on-line systaas, private industries were
permitted to connect computers and terminals to special lines (special
col-unications network lines) under a revision of the Public Electrical
Cmication Law, and N‘f'r's data co-unications business was officially
approved.

However, because private enterprises had their own independently nanaged
data conunications systems, an and DD imposed stiff conditions on than
when they borrowed the special co-micstion lines. An arrangement by
which two or more companies may borrow the lines for joint use, or allow
another party to use them as a part of business, will only be allowed when
certain conditions are met. In cases of joint use, an investigation must
be carried out by m and KDD to determine whether there is a substantial
relationship between the coapanies and whether there will be obstruction
of other co-Iunications. Then special approval must be received fron the
minister of posts and teleco-unicetions. For use by another party, the
method of special approval is not even available. no will not even nake
the regulations for this public. Under the present cos-unications systu,
electronic communications are entrusted to the monopolistic management of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"11‘ and DD. Exchange of messages without changing the form of data is
completely forbidden. That is why data transactions are limited to one
computer and one terminal, and transactions between multiple computers and
terminals are forbidden.

This is all very well in an era of single-function systems with central
processing by a large mainframe computer. However, under these regulations,
it is not possible to make efficient use of decentralized processing through
intelligent terminals and networks and joint use of comprehensive networks,
computers, data, and software by different enterprises and different types
of business. It is impossible to use distribution systems connecting trading
companies, manufacturing companies, warehouses and freight companies; joint
research systems which join government and private universities; dispersal
of the processing load to an affiliated company‘s computer when a company's
own computer is overloaded or out of order; or the stratified processing
method in which ordinary daily work is done on micropressors and intelligent
- terminals on the premises and large volumes of data are processed in a large
computer at a center.

The industry duand for liberalization finally resulted in action by the
Ministry of Posts and Teleco-unicetion and NTT to nake changes in policy
this year. Message exchange and mutual connections to public lines and
special comication lines have become matters subject to approval.

With the exception of some negative listings, there will be general
liberalization. however, with the coming of a high-level information society,
technological innovation and the increasing need for diverse data
connunications systems will require free use of information enchanges. in the
form of voice. data, and images, using multiple computer and terminals with
the comunications network and making joint use of files and software. This
will lead to the organic integration of separate systems into a general
system. Also, diverse services will be sought which make full use of the
vitality of the private sector. Therefore a reform of the present cat-unice-
tions system with its one-dimensional operation of comnications will be
necessary. And it probably will not stop with the use of data conunication
lines alone.

weakness of Financial Base

One big problem faced by RT! as it comes under pressure '.0 change the present
system is the uncertain financial base with which it must support the
technological development necessary for high-level information systems.

Hith an annual income of 3.8 trillion yen, NTT has the highest sales of any
Japanese enterprise, excluding some trading companies. With construction
expenditures of 1.7 trillion yen and total assets of 8.9 trillion yen, it is
the largest enterprise in Japan. The difference between income and
expenditures, the figure which corresponds to profit in private enterprises,
is 650 billion yen, making it a superior business organization. However,
NTT has long-term liabilities of 5.5 trillion yen and its financing expenses
amount to 1.1 billion yen per day (as of the 1979 accounting settlement).

12
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIDFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

If it continues to make large investments, increasing capital expenditures
required to finance those investments will put pressure on income. There

is a danger that the resulting increase in borrowings will then cause a
further increase in capital expenses, creating a vicious circle. President
Shinto, who was recruited from private industry, is known as "Dr Rationaliza-
tion." He ways: "If this were a private enterprise, it would go bankrupt."
Also, "It is exactly like the National Railways when it began the Shinkansen."

The problem is that the growth of telephone income, which makes up 90 percent
of NTT revenues, has reached a ceiling because of a balance in the supply
and demand for telephones. Furthermore, the nontelephone services which
should take up the slack are very insignificant at present. Hhile the
company continued to expand under the pressure of an aver-growing demand
during the period of high growth, scrap-and-build investment led directly

to increased income. Now there is a greater percentage of investments which
do not create income, such as equipment replacement projects for remodeling
of obsolete facilities. Because the market for new services and products is
still undeveloped. NTT is facing competition with private industry and there
are continual cancellations and shifts of business even though. on the
surface, sales appear to be rising.

In addition, the major method used to raise outside funds for NTT's investments
for rapid development was the system of making the purchase of bonds
obligatory for new subscribers. This was a system harldy used anywhere else
in the world. Also, the term of the Telegraph and Telephone Pacilities .
Expansion Temporary Measures Act will expire in 1982. If an extension of this
system cannot be justified now that there is a balance in telephone supply

and demand, NTT must diversify its scurces of funds in the general bond market.
And the market is likely to see problems in NTT's financial condition.

NTT‘s research and development projects, for example, VLSI, electronic
exchange systems, and computers used for data communications, are getting
larger and spreading to more advanced fields. The so-called "incubation
period," from the start of research to testing, used to be 2 or 3 years.

It has now grown to 7 or 8 years. There are a large number of examples of
basic research which are put in the freezer with no prospects of application.
Each year, 70-80 billion yen, 2 percent of business income, is used for
research and development. President Shinto has stated explicitly that for

the sake of future generations, this percentage will not be reduced. however,
the technological prospects for data communications are not entirely clear.

In allocating limited resources to the growing number of research and
development areas. NTT faces the problem of how to make its research and
development more efficient at a time when more originality is required for
advanced technology.

Thus, the issue for NTT management is how to get through the transition froa
its traditional telegraph and telephone services to more diverse nontelephone
services, such as high-level information services, while maintaining financial
health and carrying out forward-looking investments and development of
advanced technology. However, this will require a management revolution in

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the business structure of NTT, which has, until now, raced forward with
priority to technology and new facilities.

Going Beyond the Issues of the "Period of Transition"

As we enter a period of great change, the three problems faced by NTT
demonstrate that a reassessment of the existing system of the company is
beginning to take place.

However, as we approach the 21st century, looking ahead to a high-level
information society. the questioning of the present system will not stop
simply with reforms in business management during the transition period,
such as liberalization of NTT's development and procurement system, improve-
ments in the system for use of data communications circuits, and financial
reforms. This is because data communications in the high-level information
society and the process of technological innovation necessary to make it a
reality, will have a wide enough impact to shake the foundations not only of
NIT but the entire framework of Japan's telecommunications policies and
systems.

The need for improved data communications aiming at a high-level information
society will shift information processing by computer from single functions
to multiple functions and from centralized processing to decentralized
processing as the interdependent relationships of society grow and become more
complicated. There will be a demand for communications networks in which
voice, data, and image information can be exchanged efficiently through
multiple computers and terminals, a system in which computers are fused with
electronic communications. It is certain that the rapid progress of 1c,
which has increased by 10 orders of magnitude in level of integration and
decreased by one half in price in 6 years time, and other technological
innovations such as optical communications, satellite communications, and
pattern recognition, will meet these needs and revolutionize data
communications.

It is already common knowledge that this compound technological revolutioa,
through robotronics, office automation, and an information communication
system with a global network, has made possible the rationalization of
industry and dramatically increased international competitiveness.

The hybrid technology of data communications has produced a highly integrated,
high-growth data communications industry. But through the formation of an
organic data communications system, going beyond the boundaries of single
enterprises or business fields, it has led to the joining of enterprises,

the reorganization of industry, and a greater refinement of the industrial
structure. Also, the growth of the network of business communications and

the introduction of data communications into the home, known as home
electronics or media technology, will probably change the structure of regional
connections and the city. A big change in the manner of life is another

part of the scenario of the high-level information society.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This technological revolution will create pressure for change in the content
of telecommunications service in private industry as well as in NTT. At the
same time. the data co-unications of the future will be an intricate
combination of business communications which connect many corporate activities
with a variety of types of data comnication, personal conunications in

the home. and mass communications using new media. If.a variety of services
are not allowed under the freedom of the private sector. there is a definite
danger of unification and control of the media. The development of high-
level information systems in itself will require reforms in systems and policy.

A Competitor for Both Giants.

The international aspect of the high-level information business will also
require a new response from NTT which until now has concentrated on domestic
business. The liberalization of procurement, as previously mentioned,
resulted from one form of outside pressure which broke down the wall of the
closed system of procurement and NTT technology development (which reached
world standards). However, the international battle over data communications
technology has shown signs of intensifying to the point of being called a
"technology war." As the technological gap narrows and the relative
relationship of economic power changes, a readjustment is taking place among
the advanced countries.

NTT concluded acrossiicensing agreement with IBM, the company which controls
60 percent of the world computer market. Then it proposed modifications

in the long-standing unequal patent licenseagreenentwith Western Electric.
the company with control over-Bell System patents. NTT has been trying to
catch up with these two giants in information and communications. Now it

is gaining attention for attempting to exchange technology from an equal
position.

IBM entered the field of satellite communications, foreseeing the combination
of computers and comaunications. It noticed the communications technology

of NTT, which had grown to the point of leading the world, and it approached
NTT on a cross-licensing agreement. IBM has carried on a continuous "battle
of the titans" with A18? over the field of data communications. Some believe
that IBM approached NTT, which has a close relationship with ATdT, as a new
strategy to recover its leadership in the data communications field. In any
case, IBM proposed a bilateral agreement which recognizes all rights,
including the granting and sale of licenses and the right to commission
production. Also, although the applicability to the world market is limited
to computers (including electronic switching systems). an exchange of
technology will actually take place in the global areas between the multi-
national IBM and NTT.

The agreement with Hestern Electric was an unequal contract in which Hestern
Electric was able to use NTT's patents for production and sales while NTT,
which was not allowed to commission production and does not have its own
manufacturing division, was only able to obtain technological information.
and was forced to pay $200 to 700 million annually in patent use fees for
manufacturers in the NT? family. The NTT proposal for revision of the

15
ron omcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agreement asked to extend the applicable region beyond Japan and the United
States, the region desired by western Electric. It will recognize the
existing right of western Electric with respect to patents which hhve
already been developed but aims for reciprocal rights for newly developed
technology.

In the past, Hestern Electric transferred overseas assets to ITT because of
the antitrust act end limited itself to domestic production end sales and
overseas sale of licenses. however, because of the recent 0.8. strategy,
seeking global develop-eat of data communications and strengthening its
international competitiveness. and to advance into nonregulated fields, it
established an international company, ATST International, to consolidate the
Bell System's overseas operations and advance more aggressively overseas.

Previously NTT was like a younger brother, taking instruction from western
Electric. Now it has emerged as a competitor. There is no telling how
Hestern Electric will receive this NIT proposal. However, it is certain

that an adjustment of the world market is beginning with a new arrangement
with the Bell System.

If we think of cross-licensing as a tool frequently used to readjust the
market at a stage where the gap in technology has narrowed, for NTT the
patent exchanges to be made with IBM and Hestern Electric are the beginning
of technological exchange with leading enterprises amid serious international
battles over technology. Along with Joint development with foreign
enterprises under the new liberalization of procurement. there will be an
acceleration of NTT's research and development and greater international
application of results.

The International Politics of Information Distribution

High-level information systems naturally go beyond the boundaries of single
countries. In satellite cousnnnications, for example, a satellite launched
by the United States at the request of Indonesia is being jointly used by
ASEAN countries such as Thailand and the Philippines. France is developing
satellites as strategic export technology. when the space shuttle becomes,
practical, the aboveground exchange network of each country may become a
subsystem of a global network enveloping the earth which is controlled from
satellites. Hhet role would Japan and NIT play in such an international
network? At present, this question has hardly been examined at all.

There is a rapidly increasing flow of information across national boundaries
through the international network formed by the technological revolution in
data communications. This distribution of international information is
showing a tendency to depend increasingly on the United States, the country
with overwhelming control over the network and the data base. Excessive
dependence on overseas data processing leads to increased weakness and is

an inevitable threat to privacy and the security of a country's politics,

economics, and social activities. Therefore, there are growing regulation
campaigns in the countries of Europe and the Third World.

16
FOR*0FEKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In response. the United States advanced the idea of international rules for

data co-unication services in the Reagan loud. In order to adjust policies

to maintain a free flow of data, the 0.8. Senate and House of Representatives
are considering three related bills with the aim of unifying domestic ‘
policies and systems. This problem of transnational data flow (or international
infatuation flow) will surface sooner or later in aultilataral or bilateral
negotiations between OECD countries or in the can talks.

ﬂow will an respond to this trend of internationalisation? It has the
disadvantage of being unable to make a full effort because of obstacles in
the systu created by its avowed couitment to domestic operations.

Factors That Have hade the System Rigid

‘hrenty years have passed since the founding of m. Aiming at a prosperous
society, its objective was "i-ediate telephone installation" and "i-ediate
telephone connection." The achievaent of these co-on social goals was
entrusted to an. m actively imported the results of technological
innovations and rationalised and expanded its operations. Its data
co-Iunications technology was 20 years behind, but it obtained technology
for cross-bar switching equip-ant from Kellog of the United States, for
parabola antennas for microwave comnnications from no of Great Britain,
and for coaxial cable from 183 of the United States and SE of Rest Germany.
It imported Pm's created in France and transistors invented in the United
States. In the process of absorbing and digesting these technologies to
produce a domestic technology, m technology became much more sophisticated.

Rationalization of operations with the use of these technological advances
led to rapid expansion and made economical service possible. If the second
and third 5-year plans had been carried out with the technology of the first
plan, they would have cost an additional 1.1 trillion yen. If the fifth
plan had been carried out with the technology of 10 years ago, it would have
cost an extra 700 billion yen. Stated differently, during the 25-year period
of the five 5-year plane, there was a savings of 13 percent in the amount of
investment. Also, N'l'r was able to spend more time and money than would have
been possible for private industry in gathering data on details such as each
solder joint and finding the causes of breakdowns. It improved reliability
by a strict inspection system for quality control that would not allow a
speck of dust in the factory. It achieved the worldYs highest rate of
reliability-only one telephone malfunction per subscriber in lb years.

Furthermore. in applying the results of development, total uniformity of
parts and equipment ordered from a number of different companies was
maintained. and the level of standardization achieved was regarded as a
systery overseas. It then aligned these standards with those of the Comite
Consultatif International Telegraphique et Telephonique (com) and made that.
internationally applicable. The search for this technical perfection and
standardization has undeniably raised the data conunications technology of
Japan to world levels in a short period of time.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, m's sense of niasion and pride, which provided leadership for
Japan's data co-unications, also created a closed and rigid systen within the
walls of that technological expertise. There have been any examples which
denonstrate this. For example. m was late in developing and applying
high-speed facsinile technology. This was partly because its guide, mar, had
little interest in it. However, it was also because Bicoh, a co-pany outside
the m fanily, was able to use its position of freedon from m to inport
advanced technology fro. the United States quickly and dominate the narltet.

In electronic switching systus. the time-sharing system was not in favor for
a time at Bell Laboratories, so an stuck to the space-sharing systll and was
unable to shift to the tine—sharing systen. Because of this, it was forced to
unite a double investment, for both systens, by co-unications equipment
nanufacturers under pressure to do business overseas. Its video telephone.
following in the footsteps of Bell Laboratories and star, failed because of
inadequate study of users' psychology and human engineering rather than for
economic reasons.

Throughout, N'l'l‘ followed Bell Laboratories and concentrated on racing straight
ahead to catch up and overtake Bell, so it did not have the flexibility to
accurately pinpoint new needs and deternine the direction of new systens by
itself. As denonstrated by the lack of researchers in hunan engineering and
the social sciences in its laboratories. it failed to make an assessment of
the inpact of technology on hmn beings and society. Bore than anything.
the rigid posture of m bound up within the strictures of the present systen
has nade it impossible for it to respond flexibly to a variety of data
comunications technology developments and services. Therefore, we cannot
overlook the fact of the overall negative effects on data co-unications.

For example. the restrictions on connecting terminals to the communications
network have been a cause of delaying the developnent of terninal aquipnent
in Japan.

Questioning of the Existing Systee

Previously, I wrote that m had a remote existence. This is partly because
electronic communications is a highly sophisticated technology system and is
difficult for us to understand. But more than that, the electronic
conunications business, entrusted to the monopoly of MT and KDD, is hidden
behind the walls of technological expertise and has becone a "black box."

It has becone a sacred precinct. inaccessible to the outside. which was created
by the hands of politicians, bureaucrats, and technical specialists.

Telephones have become a very intimate forn of nedia. As the technical
revolution in high-level information systems is about to unfold, an will
have a central role and a great effect on the state of the teleco-unications
of the future and the high-level information society that it will bring about.
So it will becone an enterprise that is nore and note impossible to ignore.
Its technological develop-eat will be directed toward the solution of such
social issues as energy conservation and nore efficient nedical treatnent,
education, distribution, and governnent administration. In addition. it will
be called upon to deal with international issues such as the technological

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assistance desired by the developing countries and an international division
of labor with the advanced countries. Are the things about to be done
desirable for us? An open forum for discussion should be sought and the public
function of MT, including the business structure of the company now being
studied by the Temporary Administration Study Co-ittee. should be exasined.

common: Chuo Koronshs 1981
Closely Related Private Companies
Tokyo (2300 KORON in Japanese Autlmln 81 pp 158-169
[Article by Kenichiro Hirota, Future Technology Institute
(Text! Discussion of m Technology Based on Experience

The author, a previous director of the Electrical
Comnications Laboratory, a major position in 811', the
mecca of technological development, tells about NTT and
its tamily.

Electronic Mecca

The word electronic is a daily co-onplace. however, telecommications
technology. a major field, perhaps the central field of electronics technology,
is not very familiar to ordinary people. This is mainly because the terminal
equipment for telecomunications seen by most people is usually limited to the
telephone. Compared to radio. television, and desk calculators, it seems very
ordinary. Pew people are aware of the tremendous amount of social capital in
the telecomunication network that lies behind the telephone, costing more than
8 trillion yen and spanning the entire country, or of the fact that this
network can carry data comunicstions and television signals as well as tele-
phone messages, unless there is a break in communications due to an accident.
In this sense. teleco-unications has an existence in people's einde similar
to air.

This network is sustained by telecomunications technology. And in the history
of technology, the major portion of present-day electronics technology
developed as a branching off from either wire or wireless communications
technology. Today as well, telecoamnications technology, along with computers,
is performing a "locomotive" role for overall electronics technology.

I have placed telecommunications in opposition to computers here, but techni-
cally speaking, the borderline between these two technologies is becoming more
and more obscure, and it is getting difficult to separate them. historically,
of course, one application of computers has been clerical processing. However,
the first digital logic circuits used were built with parts and tecl'mology

for telephone switching equipment during world Her 11 in the United States.
Present electronic switching systems and computers are essentially identical
with the exception of some items that I will explain later.

19
FOB OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY

This situation is symbolized by the changes in the name of the Institute of
Electronics and Co-unications Engineers of Japan (incorporated) which is made
up of 28,000 Japanese electronics researchers. Beginning in the heiji era,

it changed from the Telegraph and Telephone Institute to the Electrical
Co-mications Institute and then again to the Institute of Electronic and
Communication Engineers. If the present English name of the association were .
retranslated into Japanese, it would be the "Institute of Optoelectronics and

Conunication Engineers." This probably expresses the true nature of the
association.

Traditionally. the central role in this institute has been played by engineers
from the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation, and among them, by
the 3,000 researchers of NTT's Electronic Cmiutions Laboratory (known as
"Tsulren"). NTT hires about 300 university graduates from scientific or
technical departments every year. This is a gathering of the best students
fro. the variOus universities, and NTT is seen by people in the field as a
mecca for electronics research.

The aim of this article is to examine the type of teleco-Iunication technology
held by MT. how it ranks internationally. the background of its development,
and some issues for the future.

Technology at the Top International Level

1 would like to begin with the issue of the international standing of
Japanese telecomnications technology. _

Recently, articles dealing with telecommmication itself, rather than the
general topic of electronics, have begun to appear in the popular nedia. This
includes the problaa of the isolationisn of NTT technology in relation to GATT,
which was hotly discussed for about 2 years until last fall, and nore recently,
the issue of a patent agreement with HTT which is reported to have been
requested by IBM. More specifically, the internationally important research
results of NTT's Electrical Communications Laboratory (Tsuken) in optical
fiber co-unications and VLSI are frequently reported. It seems that even the
ordinary citizen who has no direct contact with coununications technology is
somehow increasingly gaining the impression that N‘l'r's technical level is
rather high and that it has been drawing international attention.

Amid voices calling for a nation founded on science and techology and a growth
beyond secondhand development, how can we rank Japanese electronic co-unication
technology internationally? It is difficult to express quantitatively, but

if we sun-arise the opinions of people in the field, we can say that we are
leading the world in development along with the United States. In research,
there are some areas, though not all, where we are beginning to surpass the
United States. Overall we are evaluated as being close to the top level.

Here are a few examples that do not extend into specialized areas. First, in
the area of developnent, there is the 0-400)! multiples transmission system
which NTT opened to co-ercial ,use about 3 years ago. This system can transmit
1.00 million bits of signal data per second (5,760 simultaneous telephone calls)

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on a single coaxial cable. The Anerican counterpart to this can handle only
270 million bits. In 1976. the Govern-ant of France stated that it wanted to

use our standard electronic switching systen, the n-1o. and a deal was almost
nade. Unfortunately, the domestic industry protection policy of President
Giscard d‘Estaing took priority, and the negotiations were ultinstely
unsuccessful. However, the technology itself received high praise from French
engineers. Although this is not a domestic example, 127 of the world total of
397 earth stations for satellite conunicstions are products of Nippon Electric
Conpany. If the stations using NBC parts are included, this nunber grows to
296 stations or 75 percent of the total. As a basis for this success, the
technology developed jointly with an played a great part.

Next I will give two or three staples of results of basic research at the
Electrical Comications Laboratory. In VLSI research. we developed the
world's first M-kilobit NOS memory (in 1977). Since then we have continued to
produce similar top-level data. and in June of this year we produced the world's
first 256-kilobit memory. In optical fiber commications, as I will explain
later, we pioneered in long-wave, long-donain technology. Since then we have
continuously been in a position of leadership in international scientific
organizations. In another example, the basic principle of Texas Instrments’
"Speak and Spell," which is also narheted in Japan, is said to be identical to
the "Par Call" invented at ‘l'suken.

With the reader's indulgence, I am going to discuss sonething a little off the
subject. Bell Laboratories of the United States has held the top position in
the world of telecommunications both in uses and in fact. It has 16,000
researchers and has produced a nunber of Nobel Prize winners. In postwar
Japan, a "pilgrinage to Bell Laboratories" was the ardent desire of people
free m and related manufacturers for a long time. Furthermore, the gate of
Bell Laboratories was kept tightly shut. In 1958, three engineers were able
to receive "training" there for 2 weeks. A similar situation persisted for a
number of years after that.

However. as Japanese ability increased, the situation slowly changed. In 1966.
a mutual technological assistance agrealent between an and Bell Laboratories,
undertaken at N'r‘r's requent. took effect. when Vice President Fish of Bell
Laboratories visited Tsuhen for the first tine the previous year, he saw that
the work going on in our laboratory was unexpectedly advanced. His new
awareness was one factor that led to the agreement. After that, in contrast
to the one-way relationship of the past, a nmber of people fro. Bell began

to visit our laboratory. Then in 1976 a remarkable event occurred. There
were lore people fron Bell visiting Tsuken than the other way aromd. It could
be said that Bell had reached the point of clearly recognising ‘l‘suken as an
equal.

Previously, I nentioned the recent cross-licensing agreement between IBM, the
computer king, and N11. This agreement was proposed by the other party and
is reportedly noving toward realisation.

I have given a nunber of examples and, in brief. it seem fair to say that m's
telecomunications technology is first-rate internationally. Of course, as we

21
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can see from the relationship with Bell Laboratories mentioned above, this

status was arrived at only recently. There is a long history behind it which
I will explain here.

History of Autonomous Development of Technology

Before World Her ll, Japanese teleco-hnications was under the Jurisdiction
of the Commications Ministry along with mail, shipping, and aircraft. After
the war, it was under the Electrical Cos-unications Ministry according to the
orders of GHQ. In 1952, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation
became independent and has remained in the same form up to the present.

Recently. there were several changes in the technology development system.
During the Cor-unications Ministry period, in terms of the present concept of
R 6 D, research was carried out by the Electrical Laboratory and development
was carried out be the Engineering Bureau of the ministry, chiefly in the
Research Section.

In the Meiji era, telegraph and telephone systems were introduced a little
behind those of the United States and Europe. We were especially behind in
automatic telephone switching. This was finally introduced with equipment
imported fron Britain and Germany when telephone service was restored in Tokyo
and Yokohama after the great Kanto earthquake. However, domestic production
began as soon as 1935. The leadership for this domestic production was
provided by the Engineering Bureau.

The technocrats in the Engineering Bureau of the Conunications Ministry at

the time were extremely earnest about moving from domestic production to
autonomous development of technology. It is not difficult to imagine that
this attitude was encouraged by a sense of responsibility for electrical
communications as the nation's central nervous system. and at the time there
was a strong feeling of impending troubles. The main flagbearers for this
movement were the director of the Engineering Bureau, Tsuyoshi Kajii (later the
first president of NTT), and the manager of the Research Section of the
Engineering works Bureau, Shigeyoshi Hatsmae (later the president of the
Co-mications Academy, now the president of Tokai University).

Hatsme developed the world's first unloaded carrier system in 1932. With
Kajii's support, he overcame fierce opposition and was able to complete the
Japan-Hanchuria long-distance communications line based on this principle. Be
strongly advocated the importance of autonomy in electrical comnications
technology to his subordinates. Under Hatsumae's leadership. for example. in
1940, an engineer named Yonezawa (later the third president of MT) succeeded
in developing the world's first very-high-frequency wireless telephone. This
can be seen as one result of that leadership.

At the same time. some results were obtained in basic research in the Electrical
Laboratory. but unfortunately, there were few cases which were linked directly
to develop-eat. For example, in 1936. Engineer Takeo Seki (later joined
Hitachi Electronics) applied ior a patent which is considered the basic

22
FOR Ol-TlClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

principle for today's optical fiber conunications. Unfortunately, the
surrounding technology was not developed to the point where this idea could
be further nurtured.

Horld War II destroyed the Japanese commications network. The largest

number of telephones before the war, 1 million sets, was cut in half, and the
people connected with the Commicationa linistry worked feverishly to restore
the system. During this period, GHQ interfered quite oppressively in Japanese
communications operations. As a result, the Electrical Communications Ministry
was born. In 1952, domestic operations became separate under the Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation. As far as electrical comaunicetions
was concerned, this interference by GHQ had several fortunate results.

Many of the officials of the GHQ Civil Comication Section were from the
Bell System. and through the Civil Commication Section. we were able to
obtain many advanced elements of both technology and management from the
United States.

As a result, in the area of a research and development system, the Light
Electrical Division of the Electrical Laboratory was separated with the
creation of the Electrical Communications Ministry, and the Electrical
Communications Laboratory was organized as an organ of the new ministry.
This is today's Tux-ken, and it was clearly set up after the model of Bell
Laboratories.

Probably with some guidance from GHQ, the first head of the Electrical
Comunications Laboratory, Goro Yoshida, set "jitsuyoka" (development), as

the highest objective of the laboratory, a revolutionary concept at that

time. This was the principle that there is little significance in simply
carrying out research and reporting it at meetings of professional associations.
The important thing is to make direct use of the results in the real world.
This is the significance of development.

One important function of the Technology Bureau is to consolidate the demands
from all the divisions and bureaus, such as sales, facilities, and maintenance,
and make a summary of the requirenents of the entire company for techmlogy.
Then these requirements are received at Tsuken, and development is carried out
to meet them. The results are then sent to the Technology Bureau as "technology
reference materials." The contents are extremely detailed and include
specifications and operating instructions for syst-s and equipment. The
Technology Bureau draws up the specifications for procurement of materials and
the methods for applying standards necessary for design, construction, and
maintenance.

Research and development takes place according to this general system. However.
a specific "Technology Research and Development Plan" is proposed jointly each
year for this purpose by the Technology Bureau and the Electrical Communications
Laboratory (technically, by the Research and Development Group representing the
three Electrical Comunications Laboratories). This report must then be
deliberated in the head office Executive Council and be approved by the
president. A progress report is made quarterly to the Executive Council. Under

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this system, the items to be researched at Tsuken are recorded and are managed
by the policy of the organization rather than by the predilection of individual
researchers. Even in basic research, no research is allowed which is not
related to electrical comnications, at least in its aim.

Thus, the research and development system of m is marvelously well-organised.
There is probably no other laboratory with the same strictnees in its organized
research activities as Tsuken. established, as it was, under the slogan of
"development." However. not all the activities of researchers are controlled
by the "Research and Development Plan" mentioned above. In some areas a great
deal of freedom is allowed. Research itas at a stage where S years-:or more is
required before results can be sent out in the for- of the technical documents
mentioned above are not listed in the all-company plan. They are left to the
discretion of the general manager of the Research and Development Group.

In any case, the organized research activities mentioned here have functioned
as a great motive force for the business operations of m. Looking back on
1611's achievements since its establisbent in 1952, without listing each
example of research results. we find that during this 28~yesr period the
number of subscribers grew by 60 times. to 39 million, while the number of
employees only doubled, from 160,000 to 320,000 people. Furthermore, while
there has been a small increase in the basic charge for telephone service,
the unit charge for telephone calls has only risen slightly, from the 7 yen
charged 28 years ago to the 10 yen of today. The najor force behind these
achievements was the modernization of facilities using new technology and the
large savings in equipment invest-ant itself made possible by technological
progress. In this connection, although these figures are a little old, the
equipment investment for In": fifth 5-year expansion plan for the period
from 1973 to 1977 showed a saving of 700 billion yen when compared with what
it would have cost with the technology used 10 years before.

At the beginning of this article, I gave a number of specific examples of
NTT's technology. The contribution which the technology made to company
operations was its greatest achievement.

I may have spent too much time discussing the research and development system
together with historical reflections. Here I would like to consider the
special features of electrical communications technology in some detail.

The Electrical Conunications System

At the beginning of this article, I stated that teleconunicstions was the
primary source for electronics technology. However, while telecomunications
is a major part of electronics, it is not the whole. In that case, what are
the special features of telecommunications? To begin with the conclusion, the
main features of telecouunications are its great size as a system spread out
over the entire country and the entire world, the organic qualities that
integrate this system, and its high reliability. I would like, as an easnple,
to consider the telephone. the most familiar part of telecommunications, and
at present, the part which performs the greatest role.

2h
vs: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He dial the telephone. The other party answers. He talk. This is an
everyday occurrence for all of us. However, in order to be able to do this
at any tine and from any locstion, it is necessary for each autonstic switching
nschine at telephone conpeny stations to handle several tens of thousands of
connections per hour with no'nistakes and in real tine. If even one of the
relay anplifiers set every 25 kiloneters along the long-distance call routes
broke down, connmication would be inpossible. Also, this sane kind of
assurance is needed for every pairing of two telephone sets anong the 39
nillion in service thrOughout the country. It will not do if a connection is
ends but the voices cannot be heard well. For the telephone to conquer
distance, voices should ideally be just as audible in calls between Hokkaido
and Okinawa as in local calls.

in order to achieve this ideal, the teleco-Iunication facilities of Japan,
which are reported to have cost ‘nore than 8 trillion yen. lust be very large.
But sore than that, the service nust be maintained by determining the functions
of each of the billions of parts under a unified systen design concept and
asking the whole function organically as if it were a living body.

This donestic system must be connected to foreign countries so that
international calling is possible. It is also necessary for the donestic
network to function as a subsysta of the international network. Therefore.
there are international conferences alnost every year with representatives of
the teleculnunicetion engineers of all countries. The issues for discussion
at these conferences are the conditions for design of present and future
telephone networks. These international neetings are held by the International
Telecousunication Union (ITU) and its various consulting conittees. The rm,
which celebrated its centennial 3 years ago, is an organ of the United Nations
with headquarters in Geneva.

1T0 conferences differ fron ordinary international scientific conferences.

They are not an occasion for reading papers and enchanging opinions. They are
special conferences for detersining design conditions for each country as a
part of the world network. Basic conditions for the donestic systan. including
the sensitivity of telephone receivers, the assigning of telephone nmbers.'

the sound volune of long-distance calls. and the assign-ant of wave use
frequencies, are deternined fron a global point of view. Detailed specifi-
cations for donestic systens are then determined on the basis of these
decisions. Measures are taken to ensure econoey and reliability. and new
technology is created.

Since the word reliability has cons up. I would like to briefly discuss the
reliability of technology for telephone networks.

One maple is the electronic switching systen. Although the electronic
switching syata is technically similar to a large conputer. its function is
linited to telephone and data switching. Therefore, it is often supposed to
be nuch sinpler than a general-purpose conputer. However. there are
difficulties in the function of the electronic switching systel which differ
fron those of the general-purpose conputer. These include the extrenely large
umber of input and output circuits and the require-ant for literal real-tine

25
ms omcw. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

processing. A large switching machine must handle up to 100,000 telephone
sets and it must process several hundred thousand dialing signals that come
from those telephone sets each hour with no delay. Because of the nature of
public co-mications. no momentary delay in the switching functions can be
allowed.

Because of this, the design conditions for the 0-10, an". standard switching
machine. specify that the probability of occurrence of a systen breakdown of

30 minutes or more is once in 20 years per machine. These conditions are

about three orders of magnitude nore severe than the conditions necessary for

a general-purpose computer. Therefore. the component parts of these systems
must have an incredible rate of reliability. within il'IT (no more then one
breakdown in 1 billion hours, or about 10,000 years). however. the fact that
breakdowns can still occur. such as the 8-hour breakdown in the Kobe Hotn-machi
Telephone Office last September, shows the difficulty of designing for
reliability. '

The only technology with higher reliability than that of electronic switching
systems is probably the space technology used for the space shuttle. It would
probably not be a good policy from an economic point of view to expect the
same level of reliability in a public co-unications systqa. high reliability
is unbelievably expensive. Hethods of reducing breakdowns in co-unications
within economically feasible limits will always be an issue for
teleco-unications technology. Our engineers will continue to make efforts.

The NIT Family

The facilities for this organic. highly reliable. and very large system that

I have described are not at all the kind of thing that can be simply purchased
on the open market. Therefore. all countries determine detailed specifications
for the equipment that makes up the teleco-Inications network itself. if not
the telephone sets, selects manufacturers with sufficient experience. and keeps
close contact with then as they unufacture it. Furthermore, because this is
the central nervous system of the nation, it is natural that in making this
selection, priority has been given to donestic manufacturers.

For this reason, the Co-micationa Ministry took great pains from the Meiji
period on to nurture the growth of domestic manufacturers of co-unications
equipment. Private contracts becane systematised in 1922. and the position of
the four companies that stand at the head of the so-celled m family. Nippon
Electric Company Ltd. Fujitsu Ltd. Oki Electric Industry Company Ltd. and
ﬂitachi Ltd. was already established by 1935.

This way of thinking is not unique to Japan. The American Telephone and
Telegraph Company (ANT), which controls 85 percent of American telephones,
has under it a manufacturing conpany, Western Electric. and Bell Laboratories,
which has 16,000 researchers. it is well known how this company has carried
out unified operations from research to manufacture.

Three years ago. this sane United States pressed for the opening up of 811‘ in
connection with the government procurement issue at the Tokyo round of the

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GATT talks. It asked that conunicationa equipment he opened up to
international coapetitive bidding. As I have indicated, ATGT was actually
filling its own needs independently and not using competitive bidding at all.
However, because it is a private company, it was not subject to the GATT
proposals. European coqanies were excluding co-rnications equipment fro-
GATT as a basic principle. Considered in this light, the 0.8. request was
naturally seen as unreasonable by comunications people.

In spite of this, people inside and outside the govermae'nt in Japan took a very
detached attitude toward this problem. Some sectors of the media turned the
problu inside out. They expressed indignation at the monopolising of NTT
orders by the 200 odd companies, led by the_four companies mentioned above.
which asks up the m family. Not even waiting for the 0.8. duand, they
demanded liberalization inside Japan.

As I said at the beginning of this article, the teleco-nnications network
cannot be seen and its structure is difficult to understand. With respect
to the GATT problem, it is regrettable that NTT did not make an attmapt in
ordinary times to obtain general understanding of the social significance of
the network using “Japanese language" instead of ”MT language."

As I have repeatedly pointed out, the special features of the teleco-mications
network are its great size, its organic qualities, and its reliability.

Another feature that should not be overlooked is the fact that, because it
extends to every part of the country, it is inpossible to rely on a
nanufacturer in case of a breakdown. It must be possible to repair and

operate the system with NTT's own personal.

Because of this, it is necessary for NTT engineers to thorOughly understand
every feature of the parts and every detail of the software. In other words,
we cannot allow any black boxes. However, NTT does not have a manufacturing
capability and even the researchers in the Electrical Conunications Laboratory
are not conversant with all the details of manufacturing technology. The
manufacturers, on the other hand, cannot possibly know all there is to know
about the design conditions for this huge network. Therefore, the fastest
way to develop a large-scale system like the electronic switching systen is
to have researchers from Tsuken and design personnel fron the manufacturing
companies sit down at the sane table for discussion. This is what is known
as joint developaent.

Since the days of the old Con-unications Ministry, although there may have
been greater or lesser involvement depending on the piece of equipment. there
has been some fora of joint development with the nsnufacturing sector,
especially the four companies mentioned. As a result, the so-called 1111‘ family
was formed. It is fair to say that it was created because of technological
necessity for the large-scale system described above.

Although it may be repetitious to say this, the joint development systel set
up between the najor comunications enterprise and manufacturers is not

unique to Japan. As a result of the GATT problu, the door has been opened,
formally, for joint development with foreign Ianufacturers for rather important

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm. use ONLY

facilities. however. because of the nature of the telecouunications network.
great care should be exercised in actually carrying this out.

The Future of Autonomous Research and Developnent

Toward the first of this article, I stated that NTT's technology was on the
highest level in the world in the area of develop-ant. In the area of research.
it is close to the top. Further-ore. we can be congratulated on arriving at
this point in such a short tine after world Her 11, starting fro. the level

ofa senideveloped country. from the international viewpoint. however. it is
probably necessary to take a sore sober point of view. Tor a long tine after
the war. Japanese industry was ruled by the custon of secondhand development.
"The seeds of developneut are in foreign countries. He can just take the- and
sake products with the world's best perfoanance." has telecoI-nications been
an exception?

If we make a fairly strict evaluation. it seens best to say that it was not an
exception. Particularly during the period up to 1965, an was busy trying to
catch up with the perforlance of Bell Laboratories, which was regarded as the
world leader in teleco-mications. Even though it produced nany snall itsns
of technology that were worthy of attention. the nodal was always Bell
Laboratories in systaa development objectives such as electronic-switching
systas or aultiplex transmission.

The research and develop-eat syaten of m which I have described was certainly
the nost effective systel possible during this period of secondhand develop-ant.
As a result. NTT was able to perforn like a good student in the area of
develop-ant. however, because of excessive emphasis on practical applications.
basic research was shunted off to a corner for a tins. This is indicated by
the fact that the uses of the "Basic Research Departnent," which had a
tradition going back to the old Electrical Laboratory. actually disappeared

for about 10 years.

Looking back. it scene that 1966 was a banner year for Tauhen. For one thing.
the previously nsntioned technological assistance agreaaent with Bell
Laboratories went into effect. Another event was the reactivation of the Basic
Research Departnent (present personnel: 200 people). The forner event narked
the end of a phase in the catching up process. The latter can be seen as the
start of original development. Tsuken furiously and one-sidedly pursued
practical applications. and recently it has begun to realise that it has
reached an impasse.

Generally speaking. in any field of teclmology, large anomts of original
technology cannot be produced sinply by creating an organization. Fortunately.
however. in the 15 years since the Basic Research Depath was reestablished.
there have been several good results. Along than were at least two world-class
achieve-ants.

One was the "Par Call" principle of synthetic speech jointly invented by
Itakura and Saito in 1970. I have mentioned that the "Speak and Spell"
nachine produced according to this principle is being narheted all over the
world.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

“the other achieve-ant was in optical fibers. I have already nentioned that

the original invention for optical fiber co-nnication was nade in the old
Electrical Laboratory. However, 'the invention which anticipated the fore of
today's technology was, unfortunately, nade by Cove [phonetic] of Great Britain
(in 1966). In response to this, lorihiho Hiaushina of ‘l'suken nade a theoretical
analysis and nade the first prediction. in 1975, that the donsin through which
light could physically pass nost easily would be a long-wave long donain
greater than 1 nicron in wavelength. This was verified by a joint research
teen nade up of researchers fron the Electrical Co-unications Laboratory and
the nanufacturing conpanies. Since then, Japan has continued to hold a top
position in optical fiber research, recognized at bone and oversees.’

tron these results. we can probably say that ‘rsuken research has begun to nova.
if only in sone areas, toward original developnant.

Even in the field of teleco-nications, a nore active effort to develop
original technology will be required. l'or this, the unique nu research and
developnent systen which I have described in sons detail in this article will
probably be forced to undergo sons changes. Here I would like to point out
two problen areas.

One problen is the research repertory—how wide a range nust be covered in
electronics technology to provide sufficiently for the future of teleco-uni-
cations. By law, NIT has a nission of providing public teleco-mications
services. In conpliance with this, the Electrical Co-Inications Laboratory
has been quite scrupulous in not pursuing research or davelopnent in areas not
directly connected to couunications. As a pest exenple in conputer research,
Tsuken developed the Hueashino No l in 1958, and it was considered revolutionary
for its tine. However, work was stopped because it was not considered a part
of the laboratory's nain duties. Bork on it finally recs-enced in 1968, when
data cmication operations were approved by the Diet. Another sample
concerning conputera is the fact that the science and technology superconputer
does not appear on the Electrical Commications Laboratory agenda because it
is not actually related to cornunications. Today, however, when the boundary
between connications and data processing is gradually beconing blurred in
terns of pure technology, it would probably be a good idea to include at least
the architecture and parts of the superconputer in basic research. This is
just one emple, but essentially, I an afraid that if we do not expend the
categories of research, we will have reason to regret it in the future.

Another problen is related to joint research done with the nanufecturers.
During the period when the goals of systens to be developed were clear and it .
was certain that the products would be adopted by m. the nanufecturers could
rely on future purchases, and because of this, it was easy to carry out joint
research. however, now that the expansion of the telephone network has reached
a fairly conplete stage, the new services to be offered by m have not yet
taken concrete fora. Of course, the IRS (Information Network Systen) advocated
by Vice President Kitahara seens to anticipate a rather large range of services.
However, because it involves such a wide range, it does not seen to offer any
clearly attractive developnent objectives to the nanufacturers at premt.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unlike the catching up period, the period we have entered is one in which we
lust choose our own objectives. and the role of m. as leader of the entire
telemications industry in Japan, including the nanufacturers, has taken
on note and nore inportance. In' proposals for new systus, greater aphasis '
should probably be put on basic research. In this respect. we can say that
the tine has arrived for sone reforns in the practical develop-ent-oriented
research and develop-ant systu.

Use of brain Power Collection

Electronics has spread its effects to all industries. and it is certain that
it will have the position of a najor basic industry in Japan tron now on.
within this industry, teleconmications technology will continue to play an
inportant leadership role because of its level of sophistication and
reliability. Fortunately. as I have stated in this article, Japanese
technology in this area is on a very high level internationally.

However, it we look over the entire field of electronics. not just teleco-uni-
cations, the uses production technology, with high reliability and low cost.

may be first rate, but nest developnent is secondhand. Even my VLSl's are
still nanufactured with Ansrican equip-ant. 1n the area of technology trading
with foreign comtries, there is still an overwhelning excess of inports fro-
the United States. This is exactly the opposite fron product trade. Of course.
this is one reason for the friction in trade. We hope that electronics. as a
basic industry. will be able to break out of this situation as soon as possible.

however. there are linits to the ability of the private sector, in terns of
spending and risks, to undertake all develop-eat of electronics technology

as it becones further niniaturiaed and sore sophisticated. It is often reported
that ripple effects fron nilitary and aerospace develop-ant in the United Stats:
sake a great indirect contribution to teclnological developnent in this field.
For a sinilar reason, while ll'r'r'will naturally continue to focus upon its own
business. because it is a public enterprise, it should use part of the large
collection of brain power at Isuken to provide assistance in fields where the
burden is excessive for the private sector.

COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronsha 1981
Interview with MT President Shinto
Tokyo cuuo ROM in Japanese Autuln 1981 pp 170-179
[Interview with m President ﬂisashi Shinto by hitoshi Hiranatsu]
[Text] Pros a 'Geocentric Theory' to a 'ﬂeliocentric Theory‘
am the 180-degree change in consciousness succeed? A

discussion with the president brought in free private industry
and known as "Dr nationalisation."

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l‘wo Objectives

hiranatsu: I have heard leaked reports of "Shinto statuents" during your 7
months in office as president of m, and ay interest in art has grown. Today
I would like to have as wide ranging a discussion as tine pernits.

Shinto: Hell. a public corporation has certain characteristics that sake it
different froa a private enterprise. In fact. after being here for a half year.
it seas that there is a growing gap between what I say and any concrete action
within 1111 in response to it. Lately I an feeling that 1 any be accused of
being all talk and no action (laughter).

Hiraaatsu: Oh. that's probably because you are concerned with a revolution in
consciousness. It is natural for such a gap to exist at a turning point.

There are my issues facing “‘11 during this period of change. today. I would
like to ask about m's role in relation to data comications technology.
which is held to be the centerpiece of a technological revolution that will
occur between the 1980's and the beginning of the 21st century. Data
cousunications technology will have a great impact on future industry. daily
life. and society. The way it is handled will have a great effect on our
future. It naturally has a strongly international character. and we can expect
sore intense international coepetition in the area of technological innovation.

I believe it is appropriate to give high aarka to m for its role so far in
developing Japan's data comications technology. Pro- now on. this technology
is likely to become lore diverse and couples. 1 would like to ask what you
think about the state of data co-Iunications and the objectives and issues

of "11's research and development.

Shinto: It is just 7 aontbs since I cane here. so you should regard what I
say as what I have learned by arming during that ties. At any rate. what
an is considering now is a switchover of the entire co-unicationa network
from an analog to a digital system.

Right now. sons circuits especially prepared for linking conputera are
digital. However. if the entire syst- is Iade digital. than the sale
transmission technology can be used for sending telephone voice signals.
conputer signals, and inage signals. The signals could be converted into
sounds. images. or computer data depending 0n the capability of terninal
equip-ent. so the systae could be used in any different ways. Our next
objective is to change the systee so that it can be applied flexibly to a
wide range of uses over the long tern.

Another goal is to change our present co-unications network. nade of copper
wire. to an optical fiber ants. in order to seat the increased demand for new .
conunicat ions .

Even if things go well. it will take 15 or 20 years to carry out both of
these objectives together. however. we have already acquired the basic

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technology necessary for this within IITT. The problu is how to finance it.
Can we cone up with the funds soon enough to respond to the rapid changes in
society and prevent any inconvenience to the public? This is what I take to
be “To basic path for the future.

Biro-nun: Since m was established, it has had a long-tern technology
plan based on 5-year plans in order to elininate a leg in telephone
communications and build up an autonatic telephone network thrOughout the
country. And now you will also note an ultra-longerange plan....

Shinto: It will probably be necessary. Right now we are at a turning point.
By 1982. the telephone network will reach every corner of Japan. The growth
of telephone subscriptions has reached a ceiling. Therefore, our previous,
objectives will soon be net ooepletely. Pro- now on we will have to sake
basic qualitative changes on an upanded scale.

Not Going To Increase Borrowing

Hiranatsu: The biggest px .‘ablsn in achieving these new goals is how to raise
the huge amount of money for invest-eat through sound eansgeeent.

Shinto: That is correct. Our ability in this area will deter-ins how nany
years it will take.

ﬂiranateu: However, if we actually look at MT finances right now, it uses
that the enterprise is close to death. With less than lo trillion yen in
incone, it labors under a debt of 5.5 trillion yen. Further-ore, the
"expansion law," under which subscribers were obligated to purchase NTT
diversifies its nethods of financing. so the bond earket will require a
sound financial condition.

Shinto: That's right.

ﬂiranatsu: Not only that, until recently, new investnents for scrap-and-build
projects led directly to increased incone. The need for nontelephone services
is unclear, and investnent will not necessarily lead to higher income.

Shinto: Therefore, what I an saying in the company is that, regardless of
what anyone says, I will not increase borrowing. I will only renew old loans.

Hiranatsu: By not increasing borrowing. do you mean to reduce the scale of
investment?

Shinto: Even without expanding harming. we have 1.5-1.6 trillion yen of
our own funds which can be put into investment in the mediate future.

lliranatsu: Depreciation and equip-sat fees?

Shinto: Right. Therefore I an saying that for the tine being, we will hep
invest-eat within these linits.

32
MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hiranstsu: Does that mean at least during the sixth 5-year plan?
Shinto: No, just for a while. At least while I an in office.

Birmtsu: During that tine, 1.5-1.6 trillion yen for inveatnsnt?

Shinto: According to any co-onsense, even though we keep talkiu about the
information industry, I do not believe that there will be a denand as large
as the talk would have it. I an saying that for the tine being, we should
concentrate on the areas where there is an actual d-snd.

In previous facilities planning, the thinking was that it did not setter if
investments were sonewhat mecononical. Because of what would happen in

10 or 20 years, we should act on a big scale now to avoid having to do twice
as such later. I an telling people to give up these luxurious standards for
decisionnaking. Of course, we should avoid duplication of effort, but there
is no reason to discuss what will happen 20 years fron now. If we work
according to present conditions, now that the dsnand for telephones has
levelled off, we should be able to do just fine with this such self-financing.
This will not lead to any inconvenience for society.

liirasatsu: Considering the nature of the public corporation, this kind of
thinking is not in their line, is it?

Shinto: Not at all (laughter). However, no matter what anyone else says, I
will not budge on this point. They bring up the public responsibility of

an at every opportunity, but if the financial base is destroyed, how can we
fulfill our public responsibility? If we go ahead with the present way of
thinking, expanding borrowing every year by 300-400 billion yen, the debt will
be 10 trillion yen in no tine. He would have to borrow sore noney to pay
interest on the debt. Isn't that the reason for the present insolvency of
Japan? Isn't that :bv the National Railways are bankrupt? Since the public
responsibility cannot be fulfilled that way, they say they'll raise the rates,
raise taxes, and cut welfare and social security. Do you want an to end up

like that too? Right now I'm doing a lot of this kind of criticising.

lliranatsu: This relates to the problen of the financial base. Income has
reached a ceiling, and Japan stands out ssong the advanced nations as the
only country where this has happened. It seems to as that this is because
the syste- and policies have not been flexible enough.

Shinto: The old Public Teleco-unications Law was obeyed too strictly.

Right after I took office, I told everyone that even if they tried to resist
liberalization of the cosmnication network, it would be inpossible to resist.
If we do not get 'rid of these restrictions quickly, m's intone will not go
up. You're building a fence by yourself that keeps your inoose fro. expanding.
That's ridiculous. Although your income grows by less than 4 percent per

year, your expenditures grow by 6 percent. Isn't it clear that the

difference between incuse and expenditures is a lines 2 percent or 80 billion
yen a year? to rectify this, the Public Teleco-unicstions Law should be
radically rewritten as soon as possible. I talk about this persistmtly

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within an, and I have nade a request to the Hinistry of Posts and Tele-
comnications to subunit a bill in the next session of the Diet.

lliranatsu: Liberalization of the mication network has been debated for
the last 10 years.

Shinto: More than 10 years.

hire-atsu: l’or m. it should be fine if the lines are used freely and traffic
(volme of co-unications flow) increases, shouldn't it?

Shinto: Yes. But now it is building a fence.

hiranatsu: however, if the network is opened up to private enterprise, there
is the argument that "cream ski-sing" will occur, that good incone sources will
be taken away by the private sector.

Shinto: Therefore, I as saying that we should specify what should be linited
and asks a law for liberalisation of all other areas. '

liiranatsu: then specifically you are proposing that certain rules should be
accepted by the co-unicstions industry on nessage switching or addedvalue
co-unioations‘l

Shinto: Yes. It would take the forn of a clear negative list. and everything
else would be left free. It should be node so that daand for nontelephone
services can grow easily. Then while discussing the various issues, we could
provide equiwent corresponding to the «sand. Otherwise. if we continue as
is, the gap between investment and income will grow even wider.

Pushing into the Area of Co-unications

nirmtsu: It is a fact that restrictions in the systen and policies have
obstructed the socialization of data conunications technology. At the age
tine. when we consider the further diversification of needs. isn't it necessary
to renove these restrictions and also lake m nore open and create a sore
diverse research and developeent systen.

Shinto: I feel that very strongly. I've been saying this over and over to the
people inside an. and they have generally cone to accept it. on has been
totally enveloped inside the systsa of the ninistry of Poets and teleco-uni-
cations. However, the world has changed and the hardmre manufacturers. the
intonation industry. is under the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry. Therefore. HI'rI created the Machinery and Infornation Industries
Bureau. m, the president hinself. will have to nova into HIII's area, as
necessary. and actively sell m's technological develop-ant capability.

Recently, we held the first regular conference related to trade.

nirmtsu: ‘rrade‘!

ncm. USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shinto: Yes, because it is necessary for us to work internationally.
Therefore, we have decided to asks the first contact with the Machinery and
Information Industries Bureau in the last part of August and work with the-

regularly.

At any rate, unless we provide easy access to ll'l'l‘, there will be a ridiculous
situation. I have known the new chief secretary, Ogura, for a long tine. I
told his: to handle things at HITI and I'll take charge at m. This arrange-
ment seems to be working.

Hirasatsu: As a concrete example...

Shinto: Essentially, we are purchasers of equip-eat, so we must open up to a
wider range of suppliers, not just the nu family. Also, we must hecone nore
international. Therefore, we must provide than with infornation or they will
not know what to do with m. They will not be able to cone up with the good
ideas necessary. we nust open the necessary infornation. Uith a systa
where what we are doing is hidden and nobody can know anything about it, we
cannot expect anyone to cooperate with us.

Hirsnstsu: This same sort of thing has been said before. However, the
restrictions of the present system took priority, and it was not carried out.

Shinto: If we do not change our position 180 degrees, NTT will go way into
the red. That sense of crisis was lacking until now.

"Post-Fanny" Syste-

liiraastsu: A liberalized systen is also being called for internationally.
However, NTT is under the restriction of the Public Corporation Law which says
it is a domestic enterprise. During the adninistration of the first president.
Kajii, a foundation known as the Overseas Technical Cooperation Agency was
created to serve as a tunnel organization. However, I think it would be

mable to fulfill the role in an age of international technological cooperation.

Shinto: There is an organization called JTBC (Japan Teleconmications
Economic Cooperation (foundation)) . It'can be done freely through the action
of this organization. I do not think it is necessary to sake special changes
in the systen now. The problen is people. If the NTT people change their
thinking and their response to the job of the JTBC people. there will be no
problane. Sons N‘l'l‘ people can be temporarily loaned to JTEC as necessary.

Hiranstsu: There are also talented people anong previous employees.

Shinto: Yes, any. It is not necessary to be limited to the present
personnel.

Hirsnatsu: These organizations are related to the developing countries.
what about "cooperation" with the advanced countries.

35
roe omcm. use ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shinto: Hell. fortunately. an agreement was made recently between the 0.8.
and Japanese Governments for that.

Hiramatsu: For material procurement?
Shinto: Not only material procurement.
Hiramatsu: Joint development with both domestic and foreign conpanies?

Shinto: If we carry it out seriously. and if we open up to the other side
so they can work seriously, I believe that agreement is sufficient. After
that, everything depends on how it is carried out.

Hiramstsu: It will be difficult until NIT gets used to it. Iron the
beginning, MT has claimed that liberalization is not compatible with public
telecommunications operations.

Shinto: This is rather strange. art has a nietaken conception of being
above everything. In a closed society. In this frame of mind, no system
would work.

Hirametsu: In this new open systu, I understand that you have given out
homework to everyone to reexamine all systems, from development to production
and sales.

Shinto: That is because until now everything has been done with the m
family. However, because the agreement was made between Japan and the United
States. we have a clause prohibiting us from working with the domestic 1111‘
family as in the past.

lliranatsu: At least, there must be no discrimination between foreign and
domestic companies.

Shinto: In that case, even when the laboratory is looking for a partner to
carry out joint research, it will take much more time and trouble than before.
The laboratory people are getting irritated about this, so they are requesting
construction of a prototype production facility as part of the laboratory
organization.

hirematsu: Now that you mention it, there has been talk of creating a
prototype production facility for VLSI.

Shinto: So I am asking them to wait a little. I am also aware of the
problem. but even if a prototype shop is built, there is no guarantee that
things will go well. I gave them a homework assignment to think until the
end of the year about how to do this without inconvenience and without
reducing the speed of research.

Hiramatsu: In other words, there is no change in the policy of not directly
having a production capability?

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shinto: I believe it is wrong for us to have one. Therefore, I think of three
categories of research methods for 'rsuken (Electrical Commun‘ cation Laboratory).
One is research for modification of emisting hardware or production of new
hardware. Another is research for improvement of elements which have a
decisive effect on the hardware at hand. The other'is research in basic
materials for use in the elements we use. It is necessary to think in terms
of these three stages. And it is desirable to have technological cooperation
at each stage.

lliramatsu: Recently, Arm of the United States is actively moving into
overseas markets with Art? International. Of course, m can only go inter-
national with technological cooperation.

Shinto: As yoa say, an cannot enter foreign markets by itself. The things
produced under technical cooperation between NT! and domestic manufacturers
which are competitive nay go into the international marketplace. In a typical
development for Japanese industry, during the 3 years that have been spent
dawdling in negotiations with the United States, the situation has changed
completely.

hiramatsu: Hhat do you mean?

Shinto: The amount of exports has become far greater than the amount of
supply to NIT.

Hiramatsu: however, the private sector had many difficulties to overcome
since "export specifications" were completely different from "NIT specifi-
cations."

Shinto: However, this is the typical approach for private sector work. The
private sector can make a vigorous rcsponse in order to make sales.

Satellites and Big Projects

Hiramatsu: Actually, from the private sector’s point of view, what is expected
of NT’l‘ is a long-range development plan for the future of data commications
and public systemsm-for example, satellites....

Shinto: ‘Actually, there are two exceptions to my principle of not increasing
borrowing. One is orders for the data comunications network on a national
scale where expenditures and income will clearly cancel each other out. The
second is cal-unications satellites. For these two things. I an saying that
I will borrow money.

I say that the coonunications satellite network and the present an network
can be compared like airplanes and trains. Therefore. if m did not create
the lines used for public comnications with the use of conunications
satellites. we might be all right today and tomorrow, but in 30 or 60 years
we would be in a sad situation. I also say that there is plenty of danger
that it will become difficult to maintain the public character of the network.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hiranatsu: The problu is that satellites are a new network. right?

Shinto: I believe that we are entering a period when we must move quite
quickly in both technological development and policy decisionnaking.

airs-atsu: That time is closer than people think.
Shinto: I agree. That is why I am in such a hurry.
hiramatsu: However, the next problem is what to do with the system.

Shinto: One thing that surprised me upon coning here was that this is not
being considered seriously in the Ministry of Posts and Telecommications
or in the Diet. The tine has cone for than to get serious.

Hiresatsu: You said that another exception to your rule was data co-uni-
cations on a national scale. Specifically...

Shinto: For example. there is an attempt to link all the financial insti-
tutions in the country. Then there are things like the national network of
the Meteorological Agency and the air traffic control system.

lliramatsu: That's right. There was some discussion in NTT abOut the
Meteorological Agency network. whsn't there?

Shinto: I told everyone to come up with ideas and prepare a plan for getting
orders so that the budget of the Transport Ministry could be used. Essentially
the Transport Ministry handles most of the work related directly to meteorology
such as the Ports and Harbors Bureau, the Ships Bureau. the Civil Aviation
Bureau. the Meteorological Agency. and the Msritine Safety Agency. Right now.
only the ground system for the Meteorological Agency has been constructed.
Items related to meteorology in the air could be handled in connection with
the air traffic control systen. For the sea, the Secretariat's Technology
Section has started a maritime survey. If these things are all connected,

one good systee will be created.

hirsutsu: A total systen.

Shinto: The Meteorological Agency will use part of the system and the Civil
Aviation Bureau, the Ports and Harbors Bureau, and the Maritine Safety Agency
will all use parts of the system. I as saying that this can be done.
Hiramatsu: You will not stop with only the Ministry of Transport, will you?

Shinto: We will connect up with the Fishery Agency and then the Ministry of
Agriculture. Forestry, and Fishery. '

Hiranatsu: There is one more, the Self-Defense Agency.

Shinto: No, no that's taboo (laughter).

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F03¢Hﬂﬂc1Al.USEIMVLY

ﬂiramatsu: In short, you will actively move toward large national projects.
data communications systems as foundations for society.

Shinto: This is not profitable for private businesses. It is something that
NTT's data group must do.

airamatsu: There is also the CATV network which America has and Japan does
not. If s network is not possible, CATV will be stopped at the present stage
of small, separate stations.

Shinto: If we use optical fibers, CATV would be simple. If it becomes
digital.

niramatsu: Technologically, that's correct.

Shinto: If the investment can be recovered in a reasonable period of time
from CATV income, there is no reason not to do it. I am saying we will borrow
money. However, I am saying that we will not increase borrowing to make an
outright investment in the name of public responsibility.

The Heaning of the Greater Public Good

Hiramatsu: Finally, the reexamination of the management system now being
undertaken by the temporary study committee.

when NTT was organized as a public corporation, it was stated that it would
use the good elements of private management as much as possible. Up to the
present. at least, it has done the opposite. Of course, in arguing about the
management system, it is necessary to sort out the advantages to be gained
from using private management and what can be done by modifying the present
system without using private management. However, the debate over the

management system has serious repercussions, especially for research and
development. “hat is your position on this?

Shinto: Recently, in the Diet, I was asked what I thought about the idea of
private management. I stated then that I was not in a position to say whether
I favored or opposed it or hoped for private management or not. That is
something for you to decide. however, if the stage of serious discussion were
reached, I would, as a concerned party, take the responsibility of providing
the necessary reference materials for discussion. That is what I said.
Although we are involved in this, we are not in a decisionmaking position.

Hiramatsu: That may be true. However, it is a fact that after becoming
president, you have come to have many doubts about the manner of operation
of the public corporation.

Shinto: I have very many doubts (laughter).

Hiramatsu: Could you be more specific?

39
FOR!0FFKJA1.USEIMWLY
FOR‘OIIIC]AI.US€IMVLY

Shinto: The problem is how to get efficiency fron this huge organization.
There are several different possible responses. If a two-dimensional. narrow
public enterprise is what is wanted, that is one possible kind of operation.
But if, as first principles, we want to lead the world in technological
develop-ant capability, lake the fee for telephone service the lowest in the-
world, and meet new demand, and then do other things with our remaining
strength, then there is a manner of operation appropraite for these objectives.

Therefore, I am telling the temporary study committee to begin by saying what
the world is demanding of NTT in the process of examining the business
structure of the public enterprise. I have said that I will provide reference
eaterials to indicate what for. nay be best for that direction. however.

we are not in a position to say this is what should be done or this is what
we want.

Hiraeatsu: In order to provide good service at a low price. freedoe should
be granted to the enterprise and efficient management should be expected.
This was argued when NTT was first organized as a public enterprise.

Shinto: The first article of the Public Corporation Law has the words
"universal and fair." If "universal and fair" becomes defined too narrowly,
the system will break down.

Hiramatsu: If there is aonething wrong with "universal and fair,” what is
your view of public responsibility?

Shinto: I did not say there was anything wrong with it. I an asking whether
that should be emphasized or whether a more broadninded view of public
responsibility should be emphasized.

Hiranatsu: Hhat do you nean by a broadminded view of public responsibility?

Shinto: To operate with the prilary objective of promoting the economic
activity of society. With this kind of capability. the financial base can

be nade sound. Then it is not what everyone would call "universal," but

we should pay careful attention to the social welfare aspects and investigate
it carefully. That is my kind of public responsibility. If we destroy our
financial base, what kind of public responsibility is that?

Hiranatsu: However, isn't a wider debate necessary on public responsibility?
At least until recently, NTT was not understood well enough.

Shinto: Yes, until recently. however, it will be explained clearly. I will
take responsibility for that. It is clear that we cannot cope with the
present situation with NTT's previous ways of thinking. However. it has
already changed a lot.

Hirenatsu: In any case. it is necessary to put an end to the "geocentric
theory" that NTT is an absolute institution in data communications.

ho
FOR‘OFFKJAI,USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shinto: We have already moved to a "heliocentric theory."

COPYRIGHT: Chus Koronshe 1981

Interview With Vice President Kitehara
Tokyo 0300 K030“ in Japanese Autt-n 1981 pp 180-186
[Interview with m Vice President Yssuesda Kitahars by litoshi llirenatsu]

[Text] Hope for Success in International Data Co-unications
War

The fanous vice president, who produced the ”IRS concept"
and has devoted himself totally to the teleco-unicatione
field, is asked about NTT's techmlogy develop-ant systen.

A New Relationship With the Two Giants

hire-stem I got the inpressien on a recent trip to America that since the
Reagan adninistration took power, aiming for a "strong America," the United
States is putting a lot of effort into data conunicstions as a strategic
area. Of course, it's the sane in Europe. The intensified technology war
between the advanced countries over this strategic field and technological
cooperation, which is significant in international readjustment in this
field, will he a natter of concern fron now on. Therefore, I thought I
would like to reexamine the role of IITT in terns of the international aspects
of data cosmunicstions, the core of the emerging technological revolution.

Ritahara: What you say is certainly true.

Hirmtsu: Recently. a cross-licensing agree-eat was wade between NTT and
1m. Also, the patent licensing agreenent between an and Western Electric
(WE), which was known as an unequal treaty, will be revised soon. According
to one way of thinking, this is a phenonanon showing that there is a great
increase in the provision of technical expertise by NTT. It also signifies
that NTT has emerged as a competitor with these two giants in the world
sarketplace.

Kitahara: With respect to the W3 agree-ant. we had a lot to learn, at least
until now. Therefore, rather than saying that it was "mequal" or whatever,
I an grateful that we let NT]: use that aany patents so freely.

ﬂiranatau: However. you are paying royalties, right? It isn't quite right
from the viewpoint of reciprocal nonconpensated granting of licenses.

Kitahara: There were my things that were not quite right fro- the tine the
agreasent was first nede (laughter). However, there was nothing we could
teach then. so there was no use in putting up a front. That was how it was.

Hiranatau: What are sone specific examples of knowhow supplied by WB?

2:1
roe omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kitahara: One example was the cross-bar switching system. He received

that in complete form including drawings. Of course, the manufacturers paid
a license fee.

liiramatsu: Has knowhow included?

Kitahara: Yes, we also received the knowhow. Even the production plants were
shown to employees of an. Even the maintenance syst- was shown to us. So
we were taken good care of. He were like children (laughter).

Recutly. however, as you say, in VLSI research and development and optical
technology. Japan is probably running ahead of the pack. If things rennin as
they are, we cannot avoid the scorn of the people. Therefore, from now on,
when we obtain patents. we have made a proposal to do it with cros: -licensing.

hiramatsu: “that proposal suggested that the range should be expanded beyond
Japan and the United States.

Kitahara: That' a right.

Hirmteu: This is related to the problem of international reorganisation.

Another development is that new International recently opened an office in

Tokyo. It seems that it is aiming at the Chinese market. But there is also
reason to believe that it is aiming at joint development with m.

Kitahara: This is a donestic problem in the United States. There were
various problems between new and m. and as a result, Ata‘r was given
permission to operate overseas. It first moved into Iran, but eventually it
decided to enter the world market in earnest under the name A“? International.
Once its position became” clear, more areas of competition merged. .And we
decided that cross-licensing was necessary.

when the present agreement was made in 1965, A161 was blockaded inside the
United States. so there were no such problens. I think we have been fortunate
to do as well as we have during the last 15 years without trouble. However,
froa now on, as you say, new will enter upon the world stage. So will .-
Japanese manufacturers. Therefore, we must arrange things so that when 811‘
patents are used, we can also use corresponding American patents.

So. in answer to your question about our relationship to an: International,
from the long-range point of view, we would like to do research and
development in which an and new work together as one.

airsnatsu: The cross-licensing egth with IBM is bilateral. isn't it?
Kitahara: This agreement will probably be formalised when the tan vice
president comes in September. his is probably the first tine that 1314 has

made a cross-licensing agreement with a goveruent organisation.

Joint Research Requires Give and Take

112
Ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLWEONLY

uiranatsu: Hith reference to the joint develop-ant you have just sectioned,
the asterial procure-ant liberalization agree-ant "Track III" will 0pm up
development and equip-ant orders to foreign countries in an extension of the
private contracting systen. Is it possible Bell Laboratories and 'rsuken night
work together on the develop-ant of long-range projects, for ems-pie, an
auto-stic translation nachine‘l

Kitahara: Yes, it is possible. I do not think it is .a dreal.

hire-atsu: have there been any proposals froa Bell?

Kitahara: Not fron Bell. however, we have infornelly expressed a desire to
work on such projects.

hirsmtsu: For example?

Kitahara: For exanple, developent of a single-node undersea cable using
optical fibers. Anerican products are used in 70 to 80 percent of the
world's oceans. This research end developnent would be advantageous to their
side as well. As you know. the best fibers right now are those node in
Japan, but relay equip-eat is an Anerican specialty. Uith this thought in
nind, I an sounding out the New York office infer-ally.

Hire-atsu: Hith the opening up of asterial procurensnt, there has been a
great change in the environ-ant surrounding the previous developnent and
production systea of the m feaily. There are still sane probl-s ruining,
but what is your view concerning the ideal state of the future develop-ant
and production systen‘l

Kitahara: There are any difficulties to be solved before realistic
solutions can be found to this problu. .In Europe, all countries have several
trial production conpanies. However, we are not thinking of having a
production conpany. I believe it is inpossible. - It is nonsense when, as
today. the private sector is so fully developed.

Therefore, as a aethod of expanding the range of things that we have developed,
or for which we seek cooperation in the process of develop-ant, we will ask
conpanies which are suited to a certain type of research to continually carry
out research above a certain level. Further-ore, we will try to asintain
fairness as nuch as possible in this. The patents obtained through this
process now are, of course, being publicly announced, and I believe that these
patents. including knowhow, should be nade public.

For exanpls, the developaent of V1.81 technology has been carried out between
N11 and three other conpanies. The biggest problen in joint research is
balancing give and take. For this purpose, it is necessary to align the
standards of development to sons extent. Therefore, we nust continually
keep track of information on these things through exchange of docuasnts and
autual discussion by researchers. Previously, certain things were put on

the table for joint research, and everything beyond that was considered
impossible. Now these things must be shown openly.

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

At any rate. V1.51 research has been carried out with three companies. Are
three conpanies enough? He plan to extend this as much as possible as a

sample.

niranatsu: Hhat about joint develop-ant with foreign conpanies other than
um and VB?

Kitahara: I do not know yet. HIT! is proposing joint develop-eat on an
international scale. In Sept-Iber, the British ninister of industry came
to Japan and set sons Joint research objectives. I understand that colputers
are included. He would like to watch such nave-eats and consider the proper

form of "liberalization," or if that care is not appropriate, the fora of
"cooperation . "

Expectations of Facsimile

Kira-stem During this discussion. several developaent issues have cons up.
Looking ahead to the year 2000, we can imagine a great diversification of
data conunications technology. "hen we think about setting objectives, it
is impossible to go in only one direction. "hat is your view of the future
developnent objectives for m2

Kitahara: By way of a preface, it is a fact that m has spent the 30 years
since it was established in 1952 totally aboorbedin installing telephones.

Hith 65 million subscribers. it formed the second largest telephone conpsny

in the world.

However, in the intonation society that will follow the telephone society.
we will have a deep relationship with the national life and econony. We
have not sade a sufficient appeal or attempt to gain the understanding of
the people with regard to the "m of the future." I believe this was a
failure in aanagsnent.

I actually wrote a paper entitled "an of the Future" and published it in
the laboratory report of May 1968. In that article I stated that the delay
in telephone service would be elininated in 10 years. I asked the question.
"Hhat will be waiting for us after that", and answered it in my own way.
One part of the answer is facsiaile. The Japanese are a nation of writers.
However, they do not take easily to the typewriter or other machines using
the alphabet such as the 17.1.33. They also dislike using the kana syllabary
alone. It is desirable to have sonething that accepts writing with a mixture
of the has syllsbary and Chinese characters. Therefore, facsimile is bound
to succeed, and it is an objective that Japan should work toward in its
role as the nost technologically developed comtry of Asia. with this in
nind, we began to work on facsinile in 1970.

A fundaaental part of success with facsinile is the problen of paper. ﬂow
can copies be made in the most conpact and econonical way? Ultimately, a
thoroughgoing application of electronics is necessary. In the process of
radically reducing costs. 10 research energed as a "secondary" research
objective and we saw that this would be a basic element in future technology.

FOROH-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hr Yonezawa. the president of NTT at the tine, want to the United States

in 1973 and asked to see Bell Laboratories with this in mind. However, Bell
was very cool toward facsimile. and we found that it had been left to the
private sector. Therefore, as we found out. the standards were different
for each company. But overall. facsimile technology was very advanced.

In the course of this process, we seriously began working on facsimile with
the idea of making it our own in 1975. The cost of 1c had been greatly
reduced. 80 we decided to go ahead. We were able to use size A5 paper and
we produced the facsimile service which will go into practical application
soon. And we are asking a proposal to CCITT (Comite Consultatif International
Telegraphique et Telephonique) for drawing up international standards and
making coalaon international connections possible.

This will be most inconvenient for America because of its variety of standards

for existing equipment. But the United States is a country of rapid
regeneration. so another new star will probably merge soon.

The Pros and Cons of Fasily-Style Development

Iliranatsu: I knew that you had been enthusiastic about facsimile for some
tine. An example of one of the characteristics of ll.S.-Japan technological
development came up in what you just said. That is. NTT has always followed
the international standards of CCITT. However, Bell Laboratories has a kind
of pride and does not use anything not developed in its own laboratories.
America has taken its own independent path with respect to standardisation.

Kitahara: when I attended the CCITT conferences as a younger man, ATST hdd
an air of superiority. It was generally accpeted that the things they had
developed were the best. One reason for this was that, because of the
antitrust act, ATGT was shut up inside the United States and did not need to
go overseas.

However, Japan has to earn its breed by exports. For this reason, it always
had to meet international standards and work hard inside that framework.

hiranatsu: I understand that. However, this was done within the closed
system of the NTT family. And did this not actually delay m's product
development?

For example, there is the facsimile which you just discussed. In spite of
your enthusiasm. the product directly under control of MT was late in
achieving high-speed facsimile service. Ricoh has obtained a very large
share of the market. And Ricoh is an outsider. not a part of the m fanily.
I believe that this demonstrates a weakness of the closed joint development,
production, and sales system known as the NTT family.

Kitehara: One reason that the facsimile was delayed, as I mentioned before.
was that NTT was intent on building a telephone company and missed its
timing for starting development of the facsimile. Another problem was that
facsimile research was not very advanced at Bell Laboratories. and so it

1.5
roe omcm. us: on“
MOFHCIALWEONLY

failed to stinulate us. Also. there is the problua of division of labor
between us and the private sector. '

with respect to the general facsinile service in use today. only the products
purchased by m were used during the first year. After 1 year. the standards
were nade public. and there was nothing to prevent anyone who could nest the
standards from operating freely. Therefore, I want you to realize that we
plan to have the public sector participate actively.

Hiramatsu: Another sinilar problem is the electronic switching systcn.

For a long time, an neinly used the space-sharing systen. Because this
differed from the systen used in other parts of the world, private
manufacturers had a difficult tine. They were forced to nake double research
investnents.

The sane thing was true for ANT, wasn't it?

Kitahara: Yes.

Hiranatsu: ATGT overcane this with the No lo 888, but m was unable to change
its policy for a long tine.

Kitahara: I believe there was sons poor judge-ant on our part. we were

weak in giving directions to the people in charge of switching. In retrospect,
it was mistaken for NTT to change the electronic switching system twice using
the space-sharing systen known as the D10. Rather than doing that over again,
it would have been better to switch to a tine-sharing eysten. '

And, as you say. "8 also continued to stick to the space-sharing systen.
Teleco-unications technology is truly a difficult field. One mistaken
decision on the systen and you can get caught in a deep valley in acne areas.

Develop-ant in an Age Hitheut Precedents

airs-atsu: I see. Data communications technology can be partially understood
for the 1980's. host observers see Japan as strong in this area. But there
are nany things which are not yet understood.

Kitahara: Very nany.

Hirsnatsu: Anong these. what do you think the development objectives of MT
will be? -

Kitahara: "hat I an thinking about wrh respect to the network are the
fields related to distribution of opticul fiber conunications to the home.
This involves large nunbers. There wil.’ be a large umber of elements such
as connections. however, we will find solutions in these fields. I believe
that the technology for the INS (infornstion network systen) is fairly
conplete. The next problen is to prepare the functions of mications
processing and data processing related to this system.

l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By preparing the functions of co-unications processing and data processing.
we can produce a system that is very economical and efficient to use. that
can be used easily by everyone fron yam children to the elderly.
Commications processing includes four kinds of systems. These are the
telephone system the facsimile systa, systass which produce printouts

such as those used in data ecu-Imitation, and systems which produce video
images such as the CAPTAIN systn. The network will be ends up of these-four
types of systems in spite of differences in size, speed, newness, or oldness
of the systus.

For the other elenent. data processing, the only approach is to expand the
computer to a very large size. In order to build a nechine that can "talk
to huan beings," a super conputer is necessary, a computer which can learn
end conbine infatuation as couple: as the billions of hulan brain cells. '
The basic research directed toward this new age will be very important.

liiranatsu: Finally, with an aphasia on Tsuken, I would like to ask about
problas related to the motivation of 1m". researchers, personnel
management, and management of research and development. With respect to the
ideal state of future research and development where originality nust be
brought out.

Kitahara: Just recently, I discussed this with some managers from the I.
laboratory. Essentially, we have entered an era in telecommunications
research and develop-ant in which we have no models in the rest of the world.
However, it is not a situation where we do not have even a whiff or a glimpse
of something. Everyone goes to international scientific conferences at least
once a year. There is always something startling anong the things talked
about there. Everyone says that there are. The problem is how to develop
these things into something original.

Putting it another way, from now on we may need people wm stand out. If
"stand out" is the wrong word, perhaps ”stick out"...naybe that's a worse.
expression (laughter).

Hiramatsu: Basically, people who are unusual, have unusual talents.

Kitshara: The view was expressed that perhaps we should encourage this type
of person more, and I listened carefully. The era of control, of creating
nodal students, is past. He were able to follow after certain things with
nodel students. Model students will probably be necessary free now on too,
but now the-important issue is how to nurture and encourage outstanding
individuals. I received the impression that this is what the new are will
require of us.

mPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronsha 1981

9651
050: 6105/ 73

FOIOWICMLUSEONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSCONLY

SCIHCB AND TECHNOLOGY

FIB USING sum HIGH hummer LASER PROJECT DISCUSSED
Tokyo RIM ROGYO 83mm in Japanese 26 Peb 82 pp 63

[text] In the industrial field of shall-quantity production
of diverse products. nuch attention is being given to M—
the "flexible nenufacturing systen"—vwhich is called the
nenufecturing systen of the future. Snell quantities of
diverse products are efficiently produce by ms. an asssnbly
of "sechatronice" (electronically controlled n'echinery).
represented by NC (numerically controlled) nschine tools
such as industrial robots and K: (nechining centers). with
a computer at the cutter. this is an manned systen which
requires elnost no hill-n intervention. and it holds the key
to econonicel end rational production. One ettenpt at
realising the ideal of ms is the "cosbined nsnufacturing
eyetee using a super high perfornence laser" which has gone
forward under a national project; it is hoped that a pilot
plant will be built in 1983. with effects which will spread
to other sites. Attention is therefore focused on the
present situation at national laboratories ettenpting to
advance end eyetenetise' uchenicel technology. primarily for
this project. '

Efficient production nethods using autonetion. prinerily of nechinery, are
fir-1y established in the fields of ease production represented by eutonobiles
end electrical appliances. But in the fields of sun—quantity production of
diverse products. which nuke up about 70 percent of total nschine production.
labor reduction end rationalization of processes are difficult and diversi-

fication of denend is expected to increase. so improve-eat of productivity has
becone e nsjor topic in these fields.

Accordingly. the project for a codained production systen using uper high
perfornence laser is intended to solve the my and varied problene in the
field of smell-quantity production of diverse products. and to develop

innovative new technology which is in no way inferior to the eutoeetion
technology of Ines-production industries. That is. the goal is "to establish

a codined production syste- capeble of quick and flexible production of
ensll qunatities of diverse nechine perte using a systen which is integrated
iron netel raw neterials' through the conpleted perte."

ha
mommuseormr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This project was planned for 7’yeare. fro- 1977 to 1983. with a total
investaent of about 13 billion yen. Research and development is being
carried out as a national project. with close coordination of three national
research organs. including the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory of the
Agency of Industrial Science and Technology, and universities and 20 private
coqanies under the unbrella of the Technical Research and Developnsnt
Association.

The research and developaent is organised into four subgroups: cutting and
assenbly. raw material processing. laser use. and diagnosis and control.
Research and development of the total systen has been carried out through
the cooperation of the various subgroups. rive or six companies participate
in each subgroup.

In order to bring about rapid advances in production technology in the fields
of mall-quantity production of diverse products. the concepts of cod>ined
and nodular processes have been taken was new production technology.
resulting in developnent of a new production system which is capable of
carrying out a variety of processes at one time in one location. This has
neant the develop-ant of new processing conponents. including raw asterials
processing aschinery. coabination cutting nachinery. coabination assdly
machinery. product inspection aschinery and laser machinery. as well as the
developnent of related new basic techniques.

The plan also includes developnant of design and control technology and
autontic diagnostic technology. the develop-ant of systan design technology
for the total systee, and also integrated technical development of the
combined production systea. The various subgroups have already coapleted
research and developnent on their eleaents. and the final design of the
codined production systea will be coapleted around March. The Inchinery
will begin to be unufactured in April. and construction of a pilot plant in
the Hechanical Engineering Laboratory is to begin in May.

Although the design of the pilot plant has not yet been decided. the intention,
according to industrial Technology Director Shotaro Osski of the Mechanical
Engineering Laboratory. is "to design a practical system through experimenta-
tion in the pilot plant." This is risky. advanced industrial technology

including processing technology, assembly technolosY. inspection technology
and laser technology. and the ripple effect will be isneaeurable.

The fusion of electronic and mechanical technology. for exasple, will
facilitate autonation of snall-quantity production of diverse products and
24-hour operation with few operators (none at night). and the codining of
processing and assembly and application of lasers will cut aachine production
tine in half. It is also hoped that this technology will serve to reduce the
shortage of skilled workers for machinery production and improve the work
environnant by handling dirty and hazardous operations.

The goal of total systea research and development is to facilitate efficient

production of the products in question by establishing system operation
technology centering on planning and control. and ayaten design technology

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY

which coﬁines and concentrates such processes as processing of raw naterials.
cutting. assedaly. laser processing. and product inspection. It is thought
that the products which can be produced using this system will include a
broad range of mechanical comonsnts produced in sssll quantities. such as
construction sschinery and eachine tools. It will use a carbon monoxide

gas laser with a 20 kw output for production of trenseission devices and
hydraulic devices weighing 500 kg. nsasuring l ester and having up to 300
parts.

The companies particpating in the project are Toshiba Machine Co. Toyoda
Macine Horks. Makino Milling Machine 00. Hitachi Seiki Co. Yamsaki Machinery
h'orks and Yasukawa Electric Mfg Co in the cutting and assembly group;
lshikawajima-llarina Heavy Industries Co. Kobe Steel Ltd. Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries Ltd and Aida Engineering Ltd in the raw materials group; Mitsubishi
Electric Corp. Toshiba Corp. Nippon Electric Corp. Matsushita Laboratories.
lloriba Ltd and Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd in the laser group; and
Fujitsu Fanuc. Okuea Machinery Horks. Nippon Steel Corp and Oki Electric
Industries in the diagnosis and control group.

The details of research and development are as follows:

First. the raw materials processing technology will require development of
super-free forges to for: the larger shafts. hot hydrostatic particle presses
to fore particles into parts with irregular shapes. disk and ring shapers to
form circular parts. and precision nulti-sxis forges to fore ensll. graduated
spindles. Each of these nachines will require shaping technology such that
they can respond with a certain degree of flexibility to changes in the shapes
of parts. using only a snsll nudaer of tools.

ﬂat, the cutting process technology will require combination cutting
equipment which will incorporate technology of six types: (1) technology to
combine interchangeable units and put together cosbinstion cutting sachines
which cut. grind and measure; (2) technology for feeder nechanisns capable of
separations or codination. having improved nainshaft performance. fewer
varieties of mainshaft unite. and more conpact structure; (3) technology for
improved cutting efficiency and methods of cutting away scrap pieces and
preparatory cutting; (4) technology on supports adaptable to varied processing
of parts having different shapes; (5) technology for control and drive systems
suited to combination cutters with nodular construction; and (6) technology to
diagnose operating conditions. sense impending nelfuntions. and make
adjusteents. Through use of these technologies. the processes now perforned
by separate machine tools can be handled ins single location. and the nusber
of processes and workers can be reduced significantly.

In regard to automatic assedaly technology, the goal is to develop varied
technology for small quantities of diverse products for which standard
sutomtic assesbly is not possible. Standard asselbly machinery uses separate
stations for different processes such as screw-tightening. injection or
insertion. and each station performs a single. specialized function. For

that reason. such nachinery can be used only for mass production. Hith
combination assealy machinery. on the other hand. it will be necessary to

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

develop the capability to exchange assembly tools within an assembly machine.
and to develop technology to perform a variety of functions. such as determin-
ing the location of a unit and picking up parts to be assembled. or inspecting
and replacing parts. In this system, the work will continue automatically
until the product is completely assembled.

The use of lasers-—a carbon monoxide gas laser with an output of 20 kw in this
case--is one method for reducing the time and the number of processes needed
for small-quantity production of diverse products. Lasers can combine the
cutting off of minor distortions (to save subsequent processing). welding. and
case hardening with rough formation and cutting processes. The national '
research organization with responsibility for this aspect is the Blectrotechni-
cs1 Laboratory of the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology; it is
pursuing the establishment of the basic technology.

Because laser beams can be used for a number of purposes like cutting,
welding and hardening. there is no need for automatic exchange of tools.
Moreover, robot or unmanned operation is possible; this is related to the
individual process times. Lasers are expected to be a trump card in the era
of new materials. since they can efficiently handle difficult materials like
ceramics and composites. Director of Electronic Processing Research Hasayuki
Ikeda of the Electrotechnical Laboratory says: "Laser beams can be used
together with other processing methods. in addition to uses combining such
functions as processing and measuring." From this, it appears that the era of
laser processing will arrive even sooner than had been anticipated.

Basic Technology To Be Established To Meet Demands of Industry

Hechatronics devices have been introduced to reduce manpower and costs to the
minimum, and employees have begun to escape from simple tasks and dirty work.
Completely unmanned factories which efficiently produce diverse products in
small quantities will soon make their appearance. What kind of research

and development have national research organizations embarked on? We visited
the Industrial Technology Agency's Mechanical Engineering Laboratory in
lbaraki Prefecture's Tsukuba Research Park.

It appears to be true that "machatronics is no more than improving the
performance of machines" (Deputy Director Hakoto Kimura). and that “there are
many things the national research organizations should be doing. and they
haven't done research on mechatronics" (machine tool section chief Kataro

Yoshida).

The advancement and systemization of mechanical technology is the basic
directioncﬁ'research at the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory. but it has
played a central role in research and development of the combined production
system using a super high performance laser. a large-scale industrial
technology research and development project. It has carried out research

in some 10 basic areas. including cutting. molding, automatic assembly.
automatic diagnosis. and design and control technology.

The demands on processing technology have increased from micron range
tolerances to the submicron range. Superprecision processing technology

51
ron omcuu. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has not yet been firmly established in Japan. and the transfer of technology
from the United States has become impossible. For this reason. special
research on superpreciaion metal mirror processing technology began in 1981.
This was intended to develop technology for processing natallic mirrors
(aluminum alloy, deoxidized copper) up to 500 am in diameter. involving
turning and cutting technology including evaluation of processing character-
istics. design of high-precision processing devices. and technology for
precise control of movenent in the x, Y and z axes.

Robots can be called the "representative player" of the mechatronic team.

The Mechanical Engineering Laboratory has developed seeing-eye dog robots
(machines with the function of leading the blind) and system. to aid those
with serious physical impairments. which codaine nanipulators controlled
through dialog with the operator and self-propelled vehicles which can move
in any direction. These are all aimed at physical welfare. but Welfare
equipaent always involves risk; it is a problem with which the national
research organizations and universities are experienced" (industrial technology
director Ozaki).

Robot research has attempted. from a number of different angles. to give
machines and computers the functions of the eyes and ears of non and animals
(functions such as pattern recognition. visual informatics: processing and
voice recognition). This smart robot research "has the primary purpose of
developing functions which can be used in future industrial robots" (robot
engineering section chief Eiji Nakano).

In order to automate operations like manned asseatly. the laboratory has
developed adaptive manipulators with actuators reseabling human nuscle
movement functions. It has become clear that simple control logic can make
these manipulators execute basic assed>ly operations like pressing. handling.
aligning, or inserting shafts. "As these basic techniques are established.
one by one, assembly robots will become a reality” (chief researcher Bidetoahi
Ito).

Computer-assisted design (CAD) has, with the miniaturization of microprocessors
and advances in image processing, appeared in workplaces where energy conser-
vation and automation were thought impossible, and has been called "the second
industrial robot." The Mechanical Engineering Laboratory has developed
autontic design systems capable of very efficiently designing press molds
which require a high degree of dexterity. Research to achieve comercial
utility has continued on the basis of this success.

In any case, the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory. which handles a broad
range of mechanical research topics. will play an important role in
"establishing basic techniques one by one" in response to industry's demands
for "nachines that can use the new tools that appear and new tools for
high-perforaance and high-speed machines" (Deputy Director Kimura).

52
me OFFICIAL use on“
