NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10630
2 JULY 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(F000 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar mmes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itans are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
“TERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TRAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS °'."§.ICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLWIIE REPORT

NUCLEAR Devemmeur AND PROLIFERATION
(rouo 7/82)

Cou'rems

EAST EUROPE
CZECROSLOVARIA

Chemical Effects in Peat Breeder Reactor-e viewed
(lolealav Ere-in, Kiroalev Preel; 3mm m, No 3,

1982) oeoeeeeeaoeeeoodoOOOIOOOOIOCOOOOOOO00000000000000...

Deposits Control in V-l Plant During Fire: Shutdown
(Rudolf lure], et 01.; JADKRNA' man, No 3, 1982) ......

um mu
ARGENTINA

Survey Concludes Nation Near Nuclear Weapon Capability
(Christopher Huey; m 11188, 27 Kay 82) ................

WEST mam
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Anealdo To Deliver Magnet for trench Toke-alt
(Amxtmsmn’ 1-15 Apt 82) 00......OOOOOOOUIOOOIOOO.

ITALY

actor- of Nuclear Agency Approved
(AMB mm. 1.15”: 82) eeeeeeneeeaooeeeeeeooeeoo

Nuclear Power Plant To Be Deactivated
(Amnmmm. 1-15 m: 82) 0.0.00.0.000000000000000.

-a- [III-HW-IAIPOI

mommustmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0236505 mum

CHEMICAL ms IN PAST BREED!!! M12038 VIEWED
Prague JADBRNA 3138618 in Czech ho 3, 1982 pp 88-90

[Article by Boleslav Breaias and Hiroslav Presl. the G. V. Akiaov State Research
Institute for the Protection of Materials, Prague: "Influence of the Chenical Cou-
position of Materials on Their Corrosion Resistance and Mass Transport Behavior in
Sodiun Circuits of Peer Reactors”

[Text] The article out-arises and evaluates the investiga-
tions to date into the corrosion resistance and uses trans-
port behavior in liquid sodiu- of an extensive series of aa-
terisls in a wide range of chenical coepositiono.

l. Cheaical Waition of Materials and Their Corrosion

The quantity of information available on corrosion and mass transport in liquid so-
dium. which could be of inediete use in desiping fast motors. is liaited. How-
ever, many organizations have investigated the factors that influence the behavior
of materials in a sodium environment.

Generally speaking, so far as hot spots (temperatures higher than 500%) in sodiu-
circuits are concerned. the corrosion behavior of the investigated nateriala-aus-
tenitic steels and alloys, and also chroaiurnolybdenua steels—in circulating so-
diun tends to follow the trend of the so-called incubation period. which teens
that in the initial stages of exposure to sodium there develop on the surface of
the mterials fi‘na of reaction products with sodiun, respectively with the input-
ities contained in it; with continuing exposure these fills tend to disappear. and
the aaterial goes over into the region of use defects that are functions of tins

[1].

Studies undertaken in a number of laboratories [2, 3] established that the time ne-
cessary for the renoval of the oxide file of reaction products with soditn signifi--
cantly depends on the mechanical stability of this file in flowing sodima, and the
conclusions state that different rates of corrosion were observed in the process

of the file's renoval. Other works in this field also pointed out that different
types of surface finish could produce files with different degrees of nachanical
stability in sodium [41. Under isotheraal conditions and at a stationary concentra-
tion of oxygen, the formation of oxide file of reaction products with sodiun is lin-
ited to the surface of the raterials. but it also has been denonatrated [3] that,
under certain conditions. this file nay fore in the regions of grain boundaries as

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well. So far it has not been determined whether such formations can weaken the grain
boundaries and become the precursors of intercrystalline corrosion attack. If under
the conditions of operation this type of intercrystalline attack eppnrs sipificsnt
in the case of alloys of the Incoloy 800 type and chormium-molybdenum steels of the
9Crlho type. then the state of the material's surface and the distribution of oxi-
disable elements (Cr. Ho, Al and Ti) in the astrix of the alloy will be critical fac-
tors in determining the nature and extent of the attack. Therefore a comparison of
the corrosion behavior of the mentioned two alloys with other potential materials for
steaa generators in installations with fast reactors-osuch as materials of the A131
304 or 316 type, or ferritic steels of the 21/loCr1Ho, zl/loCrmoIIh or 21/4Crlnohilih
type--showed [6] that the effect of chemical composition on the resistance to cor-
rosion and mass transfer in liquid sodium depends significantly on the parameters of
the sodium circuits (the temperature and flow velocity of the sodiua, and its oxygen
content .

In tests at high temratures (for example, at 650°C) and high sodium flow veloci-
ties (greater that 3.7 m/sec), with different contents of oxygen. Incoloy 800 and
9Cr1ﬂo are insignificantly less sensitive to changes of the oxygen level of the so-
dium than is A151 306 or 316, and significantly less sensitive than lehCrlHo.
21/601!be or 21/lcCr1HoNiNh. At low oxygen levels (less than 30 pm) the corrosion
rates rank as follows: 1-800 > 304 > 316 > 9CrDio > 21/6Crllio > 21/6Crlﬂolib >

> 21/6CrmoNiNb; at higher oxygen levels (over 30 ppa) the rates of corrosion rank
as follows: 21/4Cr1UoNb (21/6Cr1MoNiNb)> 9Cr1Mo > 316 > 304.> I-800. In tests at low

tcnperetures (for example. at 550°C) and very low sodium flow velocities (convective
sodium loops) and different oxygen levels, the difference between the corrosion
rates of austenitic and low-alloy ferritic steels is especially significant; and
when both types of materials are tested together and the oxygen content is not high,
the corrosion rate is influenced more by the flow velocity and period of exposure
than by the oxygen content of the sodium [7]. Although many organizations have made
preliminary studies of the corrosion behavior of materials for the sodium circuits
of fast reactors, none of these studies is sufficiently detailed to provide an over-
all picture of the corrosion behavior of all the considered types of materials, espe-
cially when two or more types are tested together. The information available from
published data on corrosion tests in sodium loops. which characterizes the date
mentioned above, is sumarized in Tables 1 and 2.

Table 1. Effect of Chemical Composition on the Corrosion Resistance of Materials
for the Sodium Circuits of Fast Reactors, at High Temperatures and Sodium

Flow Velocities

lemma n'elnlu-I' rub-ah Imroml

)(ulrnal will“: . u-dlkn I kulnlu r)‘<‘hl01-l

('CI lm'sl _ Im-m] jun-trot:
...__——____.

2l’4L‘rIMoNh ' «mu 5 o . I 2.54
ovrIMo mm '. 9 . - :uu
AIS! run «5» 9 . ' n,“

“mo «.10 u .- . 3.80

l-HM Mn g 9 .‘.u | In
Al?” 310 “.‘m 9 50
01 'r 1M0 650 ' 9 | m
2!41'rl310.\'h mo : u an

 

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PO‘R OFFICIAL USE (ELY

Content: The above data were obtained at the Rialcy Engineering luterisls Labor-
atory (United Kingdom) for periods of emposura from 100 to 1000 hours, at a high
degree of the sodim's saturation with corrosion products.

Key to Table l:
1. Sodium teqerature. ’c 3. Oxygen content. ppm
2. Sodium flow velocity. m/sec It. Corrosion rate. ulyear

table 2. Effect of Chenicel Woeition on the Corrosion Resistance of Materials
for the Sodium Circuits of Fast Reactors. at Low Temperatures and Sodium
Plow Velocities

“14an I
mullan
v :

[NH

21 imam
(:lHCthoNiNb)

IOCrllNi

 

Conant: The above data were obtained at SVUG! [State Research Institute for the
Protection of Materials], Czechoslovakia, on eagles placed at the inlet of the
convective loop'a hot branch. The degree of the sodium's saturation vith corrosion
products was low.

Key to Table 2:
1. Sodium temperature, 'c lo. Period of exposure, hours
2. Sodium flov velocity. m/oec 5. Corrosion rate, u/year

3. Oxygen content, ppm

2. Chemical Composition of the Haterials and Hess Transport

Even though the cross section's attenuation by corrosion can be reduced for all the
mentioned materials by lowering the sodium's oxygen level, as well as by reducing
the sodium coolent'a flow velocity and teqerature [8], there are two other factoru
«the extraction of aubatition elements. and the transport of intarstitiale--that
must be considered before any of the mentioned materials is approved for use in a
sodium environment.

Considerable attention in this direction has been devoted particularly to the study
of carbon transport in mixed ferritic-sustenitic systems that are used for reasons
of economy, and also for the sake of thermal efficiency, in practically all proto-
type steam generators for fast reactors, i.e., EN 350. RN 600, larcoule, Phoenix
and m. Since carbon in ferritic steels is unable to form stable carbides with the
elements of substitutional alloys, these alloys will have a high carbon activity and

3
'09. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transport can take place between chromium-nolybdanm steels and austanitic alloys.
but none of these studies sttewted to identify the reaction components participat-
ing in this transport or to datarnine the rate of the controlling process [9].
Since technical difficulties, at the present state of liquid natal technology. rule
out the feasibility of doping the audit: for the purpose of modifying carbon trans-
port, considerable effort has been devoted to modifying carbon activity in ferritic
steels. to a value similar to the ones calculated for austenitic alloys. In this
manner it is possible to design systems with different alloys in such a say that
their carbon activity is constant and similar to the activity of carbon in sodium.
Then the only carbon transport that takes place is transport between the high- and
low-temperature branches of the circuit.

In tests at a temperature of sso’c, very low sodium flow velocities (convective
loops) and different contents of oxygen, this fact was vividly demonstrated by ob—
serving the mass transport between naterials Zl/loCrlHo, 21/6Crl/l‘loNillb and l9CrllNi
[7]. The results likewise confirmed that carbon transport was a function of the
carbon's stationary activity which, after 10,000 hours of exposure to sodium under
the conditions outlined above, was the same for low-alloy steals as for austenitic
steels. as well as for the soc'i . The difference found between the values of this
variable in two upstate 10.000-hour experiments led to the conclusion that its val-
ue, and hence also the observed carbon transport, is a function of the carbon's ini-
tial activity in materials 21/4Crllio and l9CrllNi. The negligible carbon transport
observed in steel 21/6Cr1ﬂoﬂiﬂb showed a moderate rise with an increasing stabil-
ization ratio, confirming the expectation that the long-tern affects of carburizing,
caused in this material by the action of the sodium, will be similar to the effects
published for austenitic steel. but lllch smaller.

With special attention to the phenomenon of the transport of interstitial elements
in a liquid~sodiumlstainless-steel system, two methods were available for measuring
the surface equilibrium. The first method involves the solution of several thermo-
dynamic equations that express the relationship between carbon activity in the so-
dium (AE‘). carbon activity in the steel ( C). and the carbon concentration at the
sodium/steel interface (c). These conputat one require data on the solubility of
carbon in sodium, and lmowledge of the tasperature correlations of activity and
concentration. Researchers in the United States developed a model for austenitic
reactor alloy based on this approach. Computer techniques introduced considerable
refinements, with special attention to changes in carbon activity produced by nach-
anical processing and heat treatment.

The obtained results showed good correlation between predictions and experimental
measures under the conditions of csrburiaation [10]. however. the main inconveni-
ence of this approach is the need to extrapolate the activity (concentration) data
to the low values that were found in many of the tested systens and are predicted
at least for the primary circuits of fast reactors.

l;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 082 Gal?

of a standard material at a fixed temperature. The concentration changes in other
alloys within a certain reaperature range were then related to the standard data on
carbon activity or the system's carbon potential. The results obtained in this

case showed good correlation between the predictions and experimental measurements
under the conditions of decarburization [11]. A direct quantitative comparison like-
wise was made, with special attention to the established behavior of nitrogen trans-
port. Within a wide range of the investigated variables, the data on nitrogen

encea the initial carbon activity. and hence also the observed carbon transport fron
austenitic materials to sodium at 700‘C [13]. The presence of Ti as a stabilizing
element in austenitic a“oys of the lncoloy 800 type likewise has a significant ef-
fect on carbon activity in austenitic materials, but also here the transport of car-
bon and nitrogen can be influenced not only by the temperature, but by the presence
of other types of materials in the sodium circuit as well. In this respect the

system remains unclarified [14]. The transition temperature for carburisation/de-
carburization of austenitic steels, the transition teeperature for nitriding/deni-
triding alloys of the 1-800 type, and the feasibility of influencing the transition
temperatures through the chemical compositions of the materials [15] likewise remain
debatable.

In conclusion it should be noted that if the mentioned materials are used for the
secondary sodium circuits of fast reactors, the surface or structural changes that
can be influenced on the one hand by the chemical composition of the material or the
loss of C and N in the hotter sections of the circuit, or on the other hand by car-
burizing, nitriding as well as oxidation or by the deposition of corrosion products
in the cooler sections, nay be decisive with respect to any changes in mechanical

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Atsuno, 5., et al: ”International Conference on Liquid Metal Technology in an-
ergy Production," Champion,l976, vol 2, p 869.

2. Hines Safety Appliance Research Corporation, Report MSAR-67-103, 1967.

3. Grouch, A. 6., and Buasey, P. R.: "nuns Conference on Perritic Steels for Fast
Reactor Steam Generators," London, 1977, Vol 1, p 258.

4. Fresl, H.. Ere-ias, 3., Storek, F., and Janda, 3.: SVUOH [Research Institute
for the Protection of Materials] Research Report 9/78, 1978.

5. Hooper, A. J.: "BNES Conference on Perritic Steels for Fast Reactor Steam Gen-
erators," London, 1977. Vol 1, p 280.

5
FOR OIPICIAL USE ONLY
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
16.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE om

Thorley. A. l, and Tyzack, 0.: "an Conference on Liquid um: Ketele." Not-
tinghae. 1973, p 257.

Brenue, 3.. and heel. it: MTG!!! um KORROSIN, Vol 31. 1980, p 600.
Kreyev, N. 1)., et el: autumn, .Vol 11, 1978, p 2“.
Andrew, R. 0.: Report DEAR-67403, 1967.

Snyder, R. 3., Neteeen. L, and Keeener, r. 1.: JOURNAL 01' 1mm MATERIALS.
Vol 50. 1974. p 259.

Shiele, S. A., 38311311, 0.. end Shrock, S. 1": mm TECHNOLOGY. Vol 23, 197‘,
p 273.

Shrock, s. I... Shula. s. A., and Begun, c.: "International Conference on
Liquid Here]. Technology in Energy Production." Champion. 1976, Vol 2, p 809.

Breathe, 3.. end Precl, Md 30mm. 0? mm mmms, Vol 87, 1979, p 365.

Pole, l. c.. end Taylor, J. “.3 "ms Conference onl'errltic Steele for rest
Reactor Stea- Generetore," London, 1977. Vol 1, p 271.

Fuel. 5., and Brennan. 3.: SW!!! Remrch Report 1-79, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: SW-Nekladeteletvi technicke literatury, 11.9., 1982

10110
080:

5100/ 3021

6
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZBGIOSWAKIA

DEPOSITS CONTROL IN V-l PLANT mm FIRST smrnowu

Prague JADERIIA ENERGIB in Slovak No 3, 1982 pp 98-101

[Article by Rudolf Burcl, Jozef lie-ole, Vladilisr llroncek and Anna Varadinova, Re-
search Institute of Nuclear Power Plants. Jaslovske Bolmnice; and Stefan Cepcek,
Nuclear Power Plant, Jaslovske Bohnmice: ”Investigation of Deposits on the Primary
Circuit's Internal Surfaces in the V-l Nuclear Power Plant During Its First Shutdown
for Refueling"]

[Text] The article describes the use of closed-circuit televi-

sion-the “relekar and Telehop systens-for nonitoring deposits
'on the internal surfaces of the V—l Nuclear Power Plaat's prin-

ary circuit. It was found that the overall quantity of depos-
its wss stall. and that the state of the surface of the struc-
tural naterials was very good, which indicates that the prin-
sry circuit's chemical regime was properly selected from the
viewpoint of the fornation and migration of corrosion products.

1. Introduction

A part of the study of the effect that the coolant has on the state of the structur-
al asterials in the priury circuits of nuclear power plants is also the investiga-
tion of deposits that are formed predoninantly by corrosion products. In the pro-
cesses of the release and deposition of corrosion products there can occur-and as
evident froa the data published in the literature, there does occur—preferential
deposition of corrosion products at certain points in the prilary circuit. particu-
larly on surfaces where heat transfer is high. i.e., on the surface of the fuel and
in the areas generators. Deterioration of heat transfer can cause complications in

the operation of the reactor, and in the extreme case even a nuclear accident.

Preferential formation of deposits (these contain, in addition to active corrosion
products. also other adsorbed radionuclides) on the internal surfaces of the steam
generator (i.e.. the transfer of radioactivity iron the active zone) simltaneously
worsens the radiation situation. colpliceting naintenance and repairs.

Even though selection and observation of a suitable chemical regine make it possible

to favorably influence the formation and migration of corrosion products, and thus
to forestall possible conplicationa, long-tern experience with the operation of nu-
clear power plants showa that it is essential to devote systuatic attention not only

7
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
Fig. 3. Sample with a layer of magne- Fig. 4. Close-up of sample in Pig. 3,
cite and intentionally left finger recorded by Talekar.

prints. Photograph (raster 10 x 10 mil-

limeters).

to controlling the content of corrosion products in the water of the primary cir-
cuit. but also to direct monitoring of the corrosion products deposited on the in-
ternal surfaces of the circuit.

The use of closed-circuit television is one of the most convenient methods of moni-
toring the primary circuit's internal surfaces. In recent years VUJE [Research In-
stitute of Nuclear Power Plants] developed and built the Telekop and Telekar systems

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5. Sample of a layer of magnetite Fig. 6. Clean surface of tubing, practi-
changing into hematite, recorded by tally without deposits. Clearly evident
Tclekar. grinding marks.

   

Fig. 7. Header with part of tube plate. Fig. 8. Perpendicular tubing under head-
Thin layer of magnetite. er. Tracks made by Telekar's wheels. Sur-
face formed during production clearly evi-

dent.

that are intended primarily for visual inspection and control of the mechanical
state of the primary Circuit's internal {arts in nuclear power plants of VVER [wa—

ter-cooled water-moderated power reactori-hko type [1].

The purpose of our study described below was to experimentally verify the feasibil-

ity of using the mentioned systems also for monitoring deposits directly in the
primary circuit of one of the reactors at the V-l Nuclear Power Plant. The info:—
nation gained can be used to assess quantity, type and distribution of the deposits,

P03 OFFICIAL USE MY

it was necessary to verify experimentally their suitability for monitoring deposits.
Because the limiting part of the systeas for the given purpose is their camera,
which is identical for both systems, the experiments were conducted only with “rele-
kar. The purpose of the experiments was to check the resolution, the ability to
identify the type and determine the quantity of the deposits.

Corrosion products in the primary circuit of pressurized-meter reactors consist

mostly of magnetite, occasionally with an admixture of heutite. Therefore planar
samples with nagnetite and hematite layers. differing in their thickness and struc-
ture, were prepared artificially. Defects (for example, fingerprints) were planted
in them in some instances. The artificially prepared samples were then recorded by

'l‘elakar, processed, and the obtained shots were compared with the actual appearance
of the samples [2].

For illustration we present some of the obtained shots. Pig. 2 is a sample covered
with a very thin layer of magnetite, dull black in color, recorded by Telekar.
Figure 3. is a photograph of a sample covered with a thin layer of magnetite, on
which fingerprints were left intentionally before recording. Fig. 6 is a detail of
this sample, recorded by ‘l‘elelrar from a distance of 25 en. which corresponds to the
actual situation inside the primary circuit. Pig. 5 is a angle with a layer of
magnetite gradually changing into hematite, recorded by Telekar.

The results of the experiments confirmed that the television equipment of the sys-
tems satisfies the requirements for investigating deposits on the primary circuit's
internal surfaces. The prepared set of samples can be used as standards for compari-
son.

2.3. Use of Telekar and ‘relekop to Monitor Deposits in the V-l Primary Circuit

The results obtained with the standard samples became the basis for operational veri-
fication of the feasibility of monitoring deposits during the shuth of the V-l
Nuclear Power Plant'a No 1 unit, in June 1980. In the course of this the low-tem-
perature branch of one of the steam generators was inspected, from (and including)
the header almost to the circulation pump. The header was inspected by means of
Telekop, the rest by ‘relekar. Since a detailed description of the obtained date
would require too much space [3, lo], in the following we present only photographs

of selected details that are characteristic of the general situation.

Basically four types of surfaces were. encountered in the inspected section. The
first type, documented in Pig. 6, is very clean, without deposits and practically
also without a layer of corrosion products, as evidenced by the clearly visible
grinding marks around the well of the temperature sensor, and by the marks left af-

ter finishing the surface during production. In th“ state 8" the '14“ “4 top
of the line along its entire inspected length, with the exception of the perpendi-

cular part under the header.

The perpendicular part under the header and the surface of the header belong to the
second type. The surface is coated with a thin layer of dark corrosion products
that look like velvet and correspond to magnetite (compared with the aforementioned
standard samples and also observed directly by means of Telekar). Fig. 7 shows al-
so some of the tubes in addition to the header surface. In Fig. 8 the tracks of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Telekar's rubber tires also are evident (the dark spots are sneared drops of water).
together with the surface structure forned during the production of the tubing.

The bottom of the perpendicular part of the tubing represents the two renaining
types of surface, with deposits. A part of the botton is covered by a thicker lay-
er of white, seemingly crystalline sediment. probably the ranins of boric acid (see
Fig. 9). This layer, as can be concluded from the tracks of Telehar in Fig. 9, is
brittle and nonadhering. Under it is a surface covered by a thin layer of sediment.
respectively of corrosion products of a dark color; it does not coat the structure
of the surface formed during the production of the tubing.

The last type of surface (Fig. 10) can be found in some sections of the horizontal
part of the tubing covered with water. Here the aforementioned white sediments of
boric acid have not crystallized as yet. But it can be observed that the sediment
contains two layers: a darker bottom layer, and a lighter top layer. As can be
concluded from the tracks of Telehar, the light top layer is very thin, and it ap-

pears that also the bottom layer does not exceed in thickness of deposits in the
other sections of the tubing.

3. Discussion

The described investigations first of all confirmed the feasibility of using Tele-
kar and Telekop to investigate the type, quantity anddistributionof the deposits
on the inner surfaces of a nuclear power plant's drained primary circuit. In view
of its simplicity, speed and abundant information yield, the method is very valu-
able and can be reconmendsd as a part of the periodic inspections during extended
shutdowns of a nuclear power plant.

Even though only a part of one branch in the primary circuit was inspected, there
is nothing to prevent applying the obtained information to the entire primary cir-
cuit. The total quantity of deposits on the internal surfaces was found to be very
small, practically a thin ‘m of adhering corrosion products consisting of magne-
tite. In some places, particularly in the bottom part of the horizontal sections,
thicker layers of sediment were found. evidently crystallized boric acid from the
evaporated coolant that remained after draining. These deposits do not pose any
danger from the viewpoint of the structural materials' stability.

0n the basis of the presented findings it can be established that the chosen and
applied chemical regine of the V-l Nuclear Power Plant's No 1 unit is suitable from
the viewpoint of the formation. migration and deposition of corrosion products.

b. Conclusion

1. The study demonstrated that closed-circuit television. specifically the Telekop
and Telekar systsns. can be used to advantage in monitoring deposits on the inside
surfaces of the primary circuit in nuclear power plants.

2. Inspection of a section of the primary circuit in the No 1 unit of the V-l Nu-
clear Power Plant showed that the total quantity of deposits on the inside surfaces
is very snall. Two types of deposits were identified: dark (formed by corrosion
products) and light (predominantly boric acid).

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL 118! ONLY

3. The ohteined reeulte confirl thet the chenicel regime chosen for the winery
circuit of the V-l “ulcer Potter Plent'e No 1 unit in eound fro- the viewpoint of
depoeit forntion.

6. The advantages of using cloned-circuit television justify reco-endmthil
nethod for inclueion in the eet of periodic inepectione perforled during extended
ehutdovne ot the reactor when the princry circuit in dreined.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Korean, 14.. ct e1: WJB Report llo 11/78, 1978.
2. Burcl, IL, Veredinove, A.. and Sentova, 8.: WJB Report No 75/79, 1979.

3. Peritny, J.. Burcl, 11., Kalete, 1., ct n1: WJB Report No 56/80, 1980.

6. Burcl, R.. and llronecek, V.: Unpublished report, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: sm--Nekledeteletvi technicke literetury, n.p., 1982

1014
080: 5100/3021

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARGENTINA

SURVEY MCLUNS NATION NEAR RUG.“ W CAPABILITY
PM271213 London THE TIMES in English 27 May 82 p 9

[Dispatch by alristopher Mossy: "Argentina About to Join unclear Beapons
awn]

[Text] Stockholm 26 Hay—Argentina could be on the verge of acquiring
nuclear weapons, according to a survey carried out by the Stockholn Inter-
national Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) and pwlished tomorrow as part
of its "1982 Yearbook."

"with its 1,000 physicists and engineers involved in extensive nuclear
research, Argentina is more advanced than brazil in the nuclear field, "

says the report. "It is also less dependent upon foreigi applies and

even intends to become a usionsl swplier of heavy water, research reactors.
nuclear material and nuclear knowhow.”

‘lhe yearbook concludes: "Fro. the technological point of view, Argentina

is certainly closer to the acquisition of a nuclear-weapon capability than

is Brazil. It is estimated that Argentina's power reactor has already
produced enough plutoniua, contained in spent fuel, to nake several doaen
nuclear bodaa of the Nagasaki type. At the present tine, however, spent

fuel is being stored near the power reactor for possible future reprocessing."

‘l'he yearbook confirms that the Soviet Union ha overtaken the limited States
in the production of conventional arm-ants but says the United States
continues to saintain a technological advantage, particularly in micro-
electronics and counters.

The institute's researchers say that while "the Soviet Navy continua to
isprove its ocean-going capacity...this capacity is still inferior to that
of the United States."

But the yearbook does confirm that the Soviet Ihion overtook the United
States in the period between 1979 and 1981 as leading exporter of najor
weapons. ”1111s was partly because of a big increase in ans exports to
Inida, and to countries in the Middle East and North Africa. the other
reason was a decline in Ihited States exports resulting free the policy of
restraint initiated by President Carter in 1971.

WWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The Soviet Union traditionally charges low prices. has favorable credit
terns, and has been prepared to consider barter arrangements; however,
nore recently it has been looking for payment in hard currency."

The yearbook says the Soviet Union uses arns transfers as an instnnnt for
naintaining and expanding its influence in the Third world, ares transfers
playing a greater role that aid or trade.

Referring to chemical weapons, the yearbook forecasts: "The world is saving
to the verge of a chenical arns race that could nahe ispossible any further
strengthaing of the arse control neasures in this field." But it says:

"There is no hard evidence that the SJviet Ihion ha been producing chenical

agents or munitions during the 12 years since lhited States production
stopped.”

The institute says that if new long-range missiles are installed by NATO
to comter-balance the Soviet tvo—to-one superiority in this field. "it
is a nistake to think that they would serve to re-eatablish the United
States' nuclear usbrella." There is no doubt that. if a war broke out in
Europe, both najor powers would attent to keep their own honelands free
free attack with nuclear weapons by initially avoiding attacks on the
homeland of the other side.

"Thus. the new nissiles if introduced, would in all probability have a
set of targets in Eastern Europe. west of the Soviet border. For if a
nuclear missile fired by United States forces strikes the Soviet Union.
the Soviet Union would in all probability retaliate against the United
States. whether the nissile cane from the Federal Republic of Germany or
from Montana."

But the yearbook points to one hopeful sign: The growing concern over the
arms race in both Western and Eastern Europe.

COPYRIGblT: Times Newspapers united, 1982

(ISO: 5100/2176

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFORM OF NUCLEAR AGENCY APPROVED

Bole ATOM) 3 INDUSTRIA 1n Bngneh 1-15 Her 82 p 16

[Text]

the leet deye oi Februery end
the iiret deye oi Moron hove do
terrnined e turn on the i Ieletive
2;" m"? 71c."‘°u.'."i.'ii..""

eer . n . try
Committee of the Chamber oi Do
mice. airs:¢ by '9". Enrico

. ill tlve engraved
CNEN'e Reform Bill. which extende
lie teeite end chengee it. nerne
lrotn OMEN into ENEA (Netionel
v..°‘”"'"’"‘° l°’~3&'°"°e”n.;y" 2.:
oprnent o eer
Altetnetlve Energleei.

A um mldetlve rneeeute.
peeeed i uetry Commiuion
oi the Seneie. choked Sen. Li-
bero Gueltlerl. tor the time
In the hietory of the nuoieer Agen-
cy hes endowed OMEN. thue the
new ENEA. with e etebie plurlen.
nuei ﬁnencing. for e toteie of 2.900
billion lite. covering the whole cur-
rent eer glen Imam. Three

billion lire will be
prieted tor eourcee dtiierent irorn
ntioleer end for energy eeving.
lhie leet meeeure but to be re-
turned in the Senete otter ernend
mente by the Chember of Deputiee
on Memory l7. 1m (Ael. Februery

15. 1882).
Eetebiiohed by bow in l9”.
CNEN inherited etructuree end

pereonnei oi the former Netionel
Committee ior Nucieer itemrch
iCNliNi. eeiebilehed Decree in
ma. At the end mt. the
Agency underwent e tiret reetruo
turing thet. however. did not tno-
diiy the deilmitetione oi ire Juri-
ediction to the nuoieer sector. Sin-
ce 1979. the new energy problem
due to the head to hose“?
dependence rent 0 . hove n
mined the trend to use the techno.
logical know-how ecgulred in ineny

'2‘.ero

y'e‘e'r'e' «WMWE
vehement with

m w .h 22.! teel.lgeve
pu to e reorm ereedy
mad. I intended to moire

3

"9
Agency reiorrn Bill and extending
ite iuriedlction eieo to energy rout-
cee dliierent iroin nucleer. ee eoier,
eolien end biomeee. the rnein ml:
at the . whoee pereonnei
eheil not me the con-
trecte oi eein el bodiee —

eheil be to reduce lteilen d
dence Irorn oil. ee envl by
the Netionei Energy Pien. A low
deye ego the lnduetry continuum
euthorlzed the 'e oyeere
. with en epproprietlon oi

Ilre 0.
the new: releeee reoorte eleo'
the ioilowin eteteinent by the
Com irinen. On. Enrico
Hence: . By extending the teeite oi
CHEN. which now ie ENEA. to
eourcee dillerenr from nuclear end
chengi hunt the etetue oi the
“thm W em“
pereon.
nei. which ropreeent e technlcei
eeeet to be retained end Increeeed,
we endowed the country with en
eliective Inetrvnrent ior reeeerch
end lnduetrlel promotion.

17
FORWUSIONLY

ITALY

”Tim Wife—elite to give
0 manhole contribution to the
eﬂdnrnent oi the book: purpeee ol

the Netionel E Flen. that to.
to reduce mama». irom
oil. A further eu to thle oblect
all! be given, “doll! Tuba” will
tweed. t e w energy
uving end renewebie eour-
cee end will eppropriete i M
”in, "If; ior Induetrlel inzleetmente
wt t purpose to cont ii energy
ptlon end to develop re-
e energy eourcee e.
A eteteinetrt

tive meeeure to the industry
mime oi the Chernber oi Deputiee.
follows:

ICNEN'e reiorrn bill, oi which I
bed the honour to be the upper-
tour. le ilnelly e reellty. l em euro
tint ENEA. thet ie CNEN’e new
nerne. with new ilnencing through
the Iegleietive ineuure peeeed Ieet
week by the Committee. end re-
newed in in iuriedictione oi re.
eeerch end lntiuetrlel promotion.
eheii be eble to contribute to ooive
the country‘e problems oi
eveilebillly. inoetiy ee concerne e
Southern one. All the nicer
eerloue poee blIitIee oi economic
end eoclel devei ent ere loun-
detl on thie on” I e.

"Within—— ._._._

of the Reform

Thoee ere the moot eignliicent
eleinente ot CNEN'e reform:

— widening oi the litetittttionel
teelte to eitornetive energy eourcee
dliierent from nucleer end. in pen
tinder. to the renewebie onee.
ouch ee eoler‘. eolien. bloateee. the
engegement n energyaevlng pro
motion ecthiltiee. the Agency will

ii
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-ROPsz-oossoRooosooosooo-t-4
_' iron omcm. us: 01ml

. not be enpeped In eoel end pen
I then: I I I
-- in. te roe ee pro-
moter ol nettonel lnduetry end
. thet ot adviser ol lleplone end locel
. Aoenclee:

— new reguletlone ee concert-e
pertneuhlp In compenlee. which
Include the poeelbility tor ENEA to
hold ntelor'ty eheree. thue operet»

e more elteottve control on

Ic inveetrnente:
. — elrnpllﬂed commutative end
3 control proceduree In lteeplng with
the remirementeot en Agency
Much ehelI operete In cloee con
nectlon with lndttetry, wlth well
deﬁned teelte of economic end pro-
ductlve Intereete:

— eobetltntlon. ee con'cerne Doro
eoniIeI edrnlnletretlon. ol the pre-
eent eetnlotllclel body etetue with
enother one. more not to en elli-
clem ecoonipllehnient ol the ob-
lecte depicted ehove. 'l’hle leet
relotrn Io coneldetod ee WW
eeble to retein end inoreeee one
Illled technlcel reonnel reenurcee
et e moment e elpnillcent nu
cleer power plent conetructlon
program le being eterted In ltely.

Alurther element representing
' '.°¢"""“.?3.° wan."“°'m"'n§2§
teln In .
In order to etrengthen the declelon-
melting end operetlnp eutonotny of
ENEA‘e Centrel Directorete lor 8e-
lety end Protection (DISH mlee
Ihet the Director at this unit. which
hee the“ teelt to guarantee nucleer
eelety. “ted Decree ol
the lnduetglnl o thle Mln-
Ieter the IS? Director Inuet eul»
miI en ennuei report on theectl-
vitIee of the Directorete.

ConwnIng the PEG end ClIlENE
prolecte. within three monthe the
intenninieteriel Conmittee lor Eco-
nomic Plennlng (CIPE) wlll exemlu
no the celender. the coete end the
3 conditions required for the cone-
; tructlon end operetwn ol the two

reectore: the lnduetry Mlnleter will
submit Cll’E‘e dellberetlone to the
oplnlon of the competent Pertin-
mentery Cotunltteee; tinelly. the
Minister Iney propoee to CIPE

enyneceeeery verietion. «Included
ehould this be the cue. the cencel
lotion oi the prolecte -

COPYRIGHT: 1982 by mutant Atom 3 Industru

080: 5100/ 2186

. 18
| . roe omcm. us: ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080004-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR PM PLANT '10 BB DMC'I'IVATID

noun emouo 3 runusrnte 1n Englieh 1-15 Her 82 9 1i

[Text]

Enel hee decided not to out beck
into eervice the Geriolleno mcieer
power etation (10 “We. OWN).
ehut down eince Manet. me.
owing to the development of
make at the bottom of one of
the two heat exchangare for pro-
duction of eecondery eteam to be
sent to en lntermodiate stage of
the mein turbine.

The deoieion le luetiﬂed by the
eerioue feeelbtllty and economy
robleme preeented by the re-eve-
uetion woriu to be carried out.
keeping into oonelderetion the re

elduel mean llfe oi the plent. whole:
commercial operetion aterted In-
it would.
to exclude;
irom operation the two aeoorr.
dery eteem oeneratom. in order t0,

June 1. 1m. in tact.
have been neceeeery

al this nuoieer power etetion to
themcurrent retion of Millie
etetlone. whi ioreeee eendlng to
the turbine the eoie orimery steam
produced by the reactor. Further-
more. the core cooling eyeteme

COPYRIGHT:

cso: 5100/ 2184

E
ii
5

2'
?%§;
35!?

in which ehouid be of re.
intent! for nuoieer oom-
triea in Europe.

Atthe eemetime.Enelwilletu~
:mm-mmumwtmmz
earpowereu eeenvleeg
by the Netiorui Enamﬂan t»

1982 by mutant. Atom e Induetrie

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

 

pendix A) along

a! the Oarlplleno rm". elnoa the
aree ie coneldered euitebie to the
purpoee end well connected to the
national grid.

We recall that the nation wee
ordered in me to General Electric
by the Societe Eiettrouuoleere Ne
zioneie (sens), ot the liil Group.
Conatruction aborted in me over

enareaofdxmioohactaree.

.owned the ' ny end with
no minimum wt the territo

ry of the Seeee Attrunca (Ceaertei
Municipality. met a bend of the
Garigiieno river. about 1 ism from
the eeeehore. The hector becalne