POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10439

6 April 1982

Worldwide Report

ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
more

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language scurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OP
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIDE REPORT
Euvmom'eu'rAL QUALITY

(rouo 3/82)

CONTENTS
MST EUROPE

cm, MORATIC REPUBLIC

Widespread Pollution Problems Seen Threatening ODR
(Dieter Bub; arm. b Feb 82) 1

SUB-8m AFRICA
NIGERIA

New Foundation To Fight Hebite Destruction
(Jinoh Mradﬂk‘; Mme”. J“ 82) 00.000.00.00... 6

RWANDA

Briers
Drought in Eastern Part 8

088R
naviromentel Protection Problems in lorthveat Siberian Gee
Region Examined
(Bur. Bud'kov, Am. 8111a; Izvm'rm mm mm
ummY: m‘I M. NO 7. 1981)eeoeeoeoeeeeeeeeeee 9
"391' MOP!
FEDERAL REPUBLIC 01’ W

Air, Water Polluted By Illegel Poison Gee Production
(Rudolf Mueller; STERN. 11 Feb 82) ..................... 15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GERMAN W10 REPUBLIC

"IDBSPRBAD POLLUTION PNBLMS SEEN WING GD!
Hamburg STERN in German Vol 35 No 6, 4 Feb 82 pp 58-62

[Report by Dieter Bub: "The Mess Prom Over There: In the GDR Ilardly Anything
Is bone for Environmental Protection. Water and Air Are Heavily Burdened Hith
Industrial Toxicants. Via the Elbe and Herra Rivers, the Pollution Enters
Also the Federal Republic"]

[Text] When evening falls on the socialist German fatherland, thick clouds
darken the sky between Rostock and Karl-Harx-Stadt. In factories and power
plants the filter systems are shut off. From the smokestacks sulfur-yellow,
brown, gray and black wisps rise opus-eke signals of an industrial state in
which fulfilling the plan has priority over environmental protection. That
which stinks to high heaven in East Germany and bubbles in the rivers can
always be measured by the toxicants in the West.

On paper environmental protection in the GDR is guaranteed. In 1963 a water
management law was passed, in 1970 a law concerning the plan-based development
of socialist enviromental control. There is a Ministry for Environmental
Protection and Water Management. In the bezirks "standing commissions" meet
to which experts are appointed. Everywhere in the country honorary helpers
are going around who are supposed to prevent damage and catch little sinners.

But the big ones are allowed to get away. The environmental control law, in
elastic clauses, provides for keeping the air clean and combatting noise-to
be sure only following the "social requirements" of production. The authors
were obviously of the opinion, which has been propagated for years, that
environmental pollution is typical only of capitalism, but in the socialist
social order is "alien to the system."

The GDR has its environmental scandals just as the FRG does. The inhabitants
of Hettstedt near Halle were exposed for decades to a by far stronger lead
poison than the citizens in Goslar in the PRC. Yet no one heard anything
about it. Even today the fact is concealed that after shutting down the lead
refining plant vegetables and crops still contain too much lead.

In Blankenstein so much unpurified waste water was fed into the Sale
reservoirs from the previously private and than state cellulose paper factory
that in 1977 the water "flippedz" Above the river hydrogen sulfide flared,

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UfI'ILIAL UM UI‘LI

shipping had to be stopped, a part of the population had to be teeporerily
evacuated. Only with the use of water aeration unite was it possible to avert
the danger. Only after that did the state authorize the money for the
construction of a clarification plant.

Even today the Suns Chemical Works feeds between 45 and 90 kg of poisonous
cyanide into the Sale River every hour. After rowers o.‘ the "Kalle Chemistry"
sport club fainted during training, air measurements in the region of the Hehre
River in the city area of Belle exceeded by 50 tines the usual internationally
accepted maxin- enission values for residential areas.

The alarmed GD! Council of Kinistere resolved to expand quickly the Buns
clarification plant by the end of 1980. Since then the project has been
postponed by at least 2 years.

Of course, the top athletes of "Belle Chemistry" no longer have to train on
the filthy waste water from the factories, but the children of the enterprise
sport clubs "Es-por" and 'Turbine" continue to be sent onto the polluted river
in spite of warnings by doctors and scientists. Along the bank you can rent
rowboats for a boat outing, and at the Giebichenstein bridge across from the
"Pitcher at the Sign of the Green Wreath," a restaurant catering to excursions,
the steamers of the "White Fleet“ depart in the direction of Bernburg on the
dead black river.

In 1971, the office of the head river master put forth a program for keeping
the Sale River clean and it was passed by the chief bezirk authority. The
chief nayor of Halle’ pronised for 1975 new swiming pleasures on the banks of
the Sale River. If he were to venture into the river today, he would have
to figure on heavy damage to his health. The grand plans have long since
been filed.

The Hulde River is also totally polluted. The river in Saxony is turning into
a sewer because of the largest crop pesticide producer in the GDB, the
Bitterfeld Chemical Combine. Every day 120,000 cubic esters of chemical waste
water are fed into the river through a feeder and a canal.

In addition, organically polluted waste water cones fron the Holfen
l'hotochenicsl (to-bine. The hulde River is so heavily polluted that in a test,
in which the river water was diluted 20 tines, half the fish in it perished.

Axel-Thomas Lilia, former manager of the state water inapectorats in Belle
Bezirk who lives in the west today, explained to the STERN that the GDR, in
the 33 years since its establishemnt, had transformed once clean rivers into
waste water sewers:

--the Ripper and Herra Rivers in Thuringia are brine canals;

--the Saale River, in the region of the Bleiloch reservoir, is a gigantic
quagmire which stinks of hydrogen sulfide and fron Leuna on is black slop;
--the Parthe and Heisse Bleter Rivers have turned into black foaming phenol
rivers; '

-the Hulda River, from Bitterfeld on, is like a poisonous sewer pipe.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not only the water, the air, too, is polluted. when in summer 1981 the
moving van drove up in front of an apartment building in Merseburg 2.
housewife Gisela 5. [name known to the editor] breathed a sigh of relief. She
was moving with her family to Schwerin and in this way was escaping the
constant cloud of poison from the neighboring Leuna works. Pot years her two
children had suffered from severe respiratory problems. Medical treatment
brought only temporary relief. Chronic bronchitis occurs in the halls Bezirk
two and one-half times more frequently than in Neubrandenburg Bezirk.

0n the average, life expectancy here is 5 years less than in the rest of the
GDR. There are one-fourth more cancer cases and 10 to 15 percent more heart
and circulatory diseases. A ward physician confirmed for the STERN: ”Whoever
lives in Belle and the environs lives an unhealthy life and a shorter one."

In Leipzig, Karl-Harx-Stadt and Berlin, too, breathing is unhealthy. In
addition to the industrial exhaust gases, the clouds of smoke from the home
heaters which use brown coal briqueta pollute the air. Besides dust and ash,
every year four to five million tons of sulfur dioxide rain down on the can
(by way of comparison: every year 3.5 million tons of sulfur dioxide fall on
the PRC which is two and one-half times as big). The forests of the a
Oberlausitz and the Erzgebirge are dying. In the vicinity of the "Schwarze
Pumpe" Brown Coal Combine in the Cottbus Bezirk, which processes 100,000 tons
of crude brown coal every day, in an area of 40 hectares only one-fifth of all
the trees is healthy and more than 10 percent of the stands of forest are
totally destroyed.

There is no money for expensive air filter systems which would have to be
imported from the West. Air pollution over the large cities becomes critical
in the winter months. When during the heating season smoke, cold and increased
air humidity come together and the exhaust gases in a weather inversion
situation cannot move away for days, then, for example, Berlin threatens to
suffocate under a layer of smog. Just in the past 2 months in the western
part of the city there were three smog alarms. The magistrate of East Berlin
did not report any special occurrences.

In addition to the chemical industry and brown coal, agriculture is the third
large environmental polluter in the GDR. The use of large areas in the
cooperative and the mass keeping of cattle in the combines resulted in severe
pollution of the soil and ground water. For higher harvest yields entire
tracts of land are covered with fertilizer, agricultural pilots spray
insecticides which the rain washes into the brooks. The consequences can
still be detected in the Baltic Sea. Fishermen on Ruegen complained to

STERN: "This poison is not only destroying the vermin. It is also making

the fish sick for us. More and more have sores." In 1980 the authorities had
to admit to a large scale death of eels. Consumption was forbidden.

In order to save construction :aterial, large stalls were built which did not
have adequate facilities for removing manure. Thus, in the Seegrehna Cattle
Breeding Plant in Hittenberg kreis, for example, the kreis and besirk councils
had to authorize putting 5,000 cubic meters of liquid manure into the Elbe
River. In Berlstedt large cattle facilities pollute two streams and the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CUR VA'I‘ILII‘I. 095 Ul‘hl

ground water. In Trannroda near Heimar leakage from a green fodder silo got
into the soil and made the drinking water brackish for the city of Kranichfeld.
A new water pipe cost “1.7 million.

Water is scarce. can Minister for Environmental Protection Hans Reichelt
explained at the end of November that by 1985 industrial consumption must be
lowered by one-fourth. Only 6.3 percent of the waters are considered "clean."
With 260 milligrams per liter the nitrate content in individual regions
exceeds the car's highest possible value of 60 milligrams by an amount that
is six and one-half times greater. For adults this means increased danger of
cancer, and babies are threatened by a severe blood disease (cyanosis). Thus,
in 1980 in the 60k 12,000 small children had to be supplied with mineral
water. The number will rise rapidly in the future according to estimates by

experts.

The GDR youth journal PORHH established the following: "At present, out of
economic and political necessities. it is not possible to solve in a
comprehensive way the contradiction between the necessary efficiency of the
economy and the essential environmental protection."

Even if large demonstrations are not possible in the can. such as those in the
ran against Prankfurt's west runway or the nuclear storage site of Gorlsben.
there is nonetheless still opposition to the unquestioning belief in socialist
progress.

The Protestant church in the GDR is demanding a radical reorientation. Erfurt
theologian Reins Falcke explains: "Basically the issue is that we have come
to the limits of how much nature can be polluted, that under the perfected
domination by man nature is threatening to breathe out its last."

In November 1979 the national synod of the Protestant church in Hecklenburg
demanded public discussion of the opportunities and dangers of the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Up to then the topic was taboo. The GDR built its
five nuclear reactors without complicated licensing procedures. The same is
true of the three nuclear power plants that are under construction. There
were and are neither citizens' initiatives nor demonstrations against the
building of the nuclear power plants of the Soviet type "Novo-Voronesh,"
whose safety equipment is considered by western experts to be inadequate.
They do not have a costly energency cooling system as is prescribed in Western
countries, and their protection against cracking is insufficient. A sport
plane crashing on the factory can result in a catastrophe.

Not only theologians and church newspapers increasingly draw attention to the
dangers for the environment. even 603 journalists, usually world-asters at
concealing defects in the “developed socialist society.” in the meantime are
showing spirit for environmental protection. Thus, the LBIPZIGBR VOLKSZBITUNG
In October 1980 reported: ”Everyone knows that the large enterprise in
Boehlen is not exactly dumping perfume into the Pleisse liver.” In 1979 the
chemical factory had to pay a fine of H33,000 per day for polluting this river.

h
FOI‘OFFKJA1.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The SED paper mentioned a second example: "For years the Electroplating Plant
VEB, Leipzig, has been draining waste water with an illegally high concen-
tration of pollutant from its grounds." Commentary by the technical director:
"Re have not yet solved the problem technically." The LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
admonishes all GDR industy: "More can be done. Boughly one-third of the ‘
environmental pollution could be avoided immediately, for it is encumbered-
with subjective failure: negligence, carelessness. slovenliness. This does
not concern available electric filters on power plant chimneys, waste water
clarification plants, which in the purest sense of the word let everything
pass by. or even vehicles which in an uncontrolled way puff diesel and
gasoline gases into the air.”

With the establishment of the "Nature and aninmmwnt" society in the can
cultural League, the attempt was node to calm the people. Some 1,600 working
groups are organized in it. According to the resolution of the Ninth Congress
of the Cultural League in 1977 they are supposed to preserve nature as the

source of life, material wealth, health and pleasure and utilize it in
accordance with scientific findings.

"Nature as the source of life" has meanwhile been largely ruined in the COR-
as in the industrial countries of the Heat. The Pan also has this damage. A
large part of the toxic waste-water is washed into the west of Germany. when
the Elbe River at Schankenburg leaves the GDR, it has long since been a
stinking river to which industry in Hamburg then gives the death blow. And
every day the Herra River moves 30,000 tons of salt from the potash conbines
of the GDR to the PRC. The amount of salt. with 40 grams per liter, is twice
as high as in the North Sea.

In seven discussions to date between Bonn and East Berlin experts have
discussed the various possibilities for eliminating the salt in a different
way. There is talk of a dry separation process with which a large part of
the salt could be filtered out in the GDR. That would cost H200 million.

And then there is the plan for a waste water pipeline from the Uerrs River
to the North Sea. The project would come to H2 billion. Because the 608
does not want to finance the salt removal, the one process or the other would
only be put into action if the PRG would assume the costs. But at present
there is no money for that in the Bonn state treasury.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jarh AG 5 Co

12124
cs0: 5000/3009

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R0005000500156

‘_ NEH WTION no PIGlﬂ‘ HABITAT WIN

MOFﬂClALlJSEONLY

Iondon mm in English No 172, Jan oz 9 94

[Article by Jinah Om-Podoka]

[1'9th

THE N'iGBRlAN Conaarvation Founda-
tion. whidi hocanoo oporativo on Octohor
l 1981 in Logoo, promiooo tobothohooio
ofa quiet rovolution In oonotvation in
Nigeria It may maloo oonaomtion an
important political inﬂuonooin tho Inan
moot of the countryo rooourcoo. It
could aho movido a pooitivo and con-
otructivo input into planning and
onvirontnontal pmtoction in Nicotia.
Tho Foundation will be oﬁioially
launched with a hanquot in FohI-uary
mo: in Luna.

Tho truatooo of tho Foundation ano
throo troll-known and roop ootod

Niau'ian huoinooouon. Chioi‘ 8.1.. Eda.
his-A. Guohadia. MrA. Lovontio. and ono
ot‘thoniootinlluontialmoniancoria.
Mioo Aduko Moon. Tho diroctot of tho
Foundation in Mt Olayinka Moo. a
fortnot Nigorian diplomat in tho
Nigotian PM Sorvioo.

mmm Hoonaarvation Inoanodil'fot-
onithinotodiﬂotontpooplo. ltiotho
motion of wildlife. tho oonthiuod
utiliootion of natural rooourooo o: the
"ovation of imablo damaco to tho
onvimniont. Aonntdin‘ to Ohio! Eda.

'Chainnanol'thoBoardof'l‘tuotooooi'tho

Foundation. "conoorvation ohould
attompt to onoun ouuainablo utiliootion
ol‘ natuno and natural rooourooo Includ-
ing wildlifo. An dovoloptnont rah- tho
otandandoﬂivin (.matimottonipto
to manta tho loo; toxin bondita of
dominant. Both woooao. oro thou-o-

'l'hoo tho
Foundation will o:-
be aware of the in.
tion and tho wioo t
notural rooourooo
Tho Foundation in
and charitable or;
and staff in Lagos.
08am public ow
tion mattero. Th
thtouxh tho prodt
andoduoationalnu
tho tnaao nodia
public mootinr a:
OEnoourace and ti
Quito a mambo: 0
tion wojuto oto
Nicotion and ii:

I‘m comp Nigerian inuituti:
Although much ottontion' to focuood on Limitation 9’ fund
dovoloplnont. Chlol‘ Bdu {cola very M “WWW“.
6
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050015-5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050015-5

. —.~ -. . . u...— ~~~ ulna-o

malnmnhm
O in funds to carry out than
asthma

NFMBmutofmm

and d upoiluion of the €01!qu
mun-”pound

to'o far. no mimics will via.
fathom We,"

vmdemNmm
(IUCN) duo Mum in Man-
land. with a world-rid. m of
mnndovuﬁoomindud-
Momentum”

copmcm'a 1981 re main" united

CSO: 5000/5667

FOIOFFIGALUSBONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050015s‘5
BRIEFS

DROUGHT IN EASTERN PART-The m (French News Agency) recently announced in Kigali
that a serious drought was affecting the eastern part of Rwanda at the time, along
the Tanzanian border, and that the destruction of all the crops in the area had
given rise to fanine. The people in this region are said to have begun to flee
because of lack of water. Almost all the rivers are dry. The search for water--
usually left up to women and children-“is now being carried on by men, who must
someti-es travel more than 30 km on bicycles. Lake Cyohoha—Nord is said to be in
danger of vanishing from the map. The water level has dropped more than 600 meters
in places. Thousands of people dig for a little water in the mud left behind by
the receding lake. The Revolutionary Movement for Development (HRND), Rwanda's
only party, has asked the authorities to mobilize the country's food resources to
cope with the famine. It has also appealed to foreign governments and organiza-
tions to furnish emergency aid to drought victim. Rwanda, with 200 inhabitants
per square kiloseter, is the most densely populated country in Africa. We recall
that in order to lessen demographic pressure on the best land, the Kigali govern-
ment has been promoting the settlement of the southeastern part of the country

for several years, as this area was relatively sparsely populated. It is this re-
gion which is nov suffering from the drought. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICADX

ET mlTERRANBBNS in French No 1885. 25 Dec 81 p 3443] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux
et Cie Paris 1981] 9855

080: 5000/ 5645

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

0130 622.279.671.15) : 502.7

EIVIROIMIITAL PﬁDTBCTIOH PROBLEMS IN HORTEWEBT SIBERIAI GAS RIGID] ElklIIED

Moscow IZVISTIYA VYBSEIKB UCEEBIYKB ZAVEDBIIX: NIFT' I 6A2 in Russian lo 7.
1981 pp 86-90

_— __ . _._..———--

 

[Article by S. T. Bud'kov and A. N. Silin. Tyumen' State University: "Urgent
Questions of Environmental Protection of Gas Recovery Areas in Northwest
Siberio”]

[Text] The discovery of an oil and gas province in West Siberia has created
favorable economic prerequisites for the formation of a powerful fuel and

energy complex. An oil and gas extracting base has been set up here in a

short time. The Tyumenskays Oblast extract 312 million T of oil in 1980.
including gas condensate, and 156 billion m of natural gas [1]. It is currently
responsible for every second ton of oil and every third cubic meter of gas

that is extracted in the country.

Potential atural gas resources in the Tyunenskaya Oblast are assessed at 75
trillion n [2]. This will allow a gas-extracting region to be set up here in

the future that will be unequalled in the world.

In the accountability report to the 26th 6950 Congress, the General Secretary

of the CPSU Central Committee. Chairman of the Presdium of the USSR Supreme
Soviet. L. I. Brezhnev stressed the uniqueness of the Heat Siberian fields. The
decisions of the 26th CPS“ Congress have outlined accelerated development of

the Heat Siberian gas industry. Gas extraction here will reach 330-370 bil-
lion m in 1985. This will be more than half of the national amount [1]. In
this case the questions of environmental protection in the region will acquire

even greater urgency.

with the intensive formation of the gas industry, one has to take into con-
sideration that the natural landscapes of the Tyuaen' north are in a very
unstable equilibrium. This refers to the entire camplex of man's environment:
air and water basins. soil, depths. plant and animal world. Water of the
northern surface reservoirs by itself is qualitatively worse than the water

in the central belt of the European sector of the USSR: it is poorly miners-
lized. because of the low soil temperature and the lack of subsoil nutrition
it contains little oxygen, it does not always have a pleasant taste, often
has a swampy smell and brownish color since it comes from swampy territories.
Oil is the most intensive water pollutant. One gram of petroleum products
pollutes 100 liters of water and makes them unsuitable for consumption. Develop—
mentof the Heat Siberian oil fields therefore requires careful observance of
the measures that eliminate pollution of river waters|of the Ob'-Irtyah basin

9
F08‘0FFIC1AI.IINE(M§LY
PUI WIMAL UM UNI!

with oil and petroleum products. It is especially important to take this into
account because the basin provides the country with 352.0f the total catch of
freshwater fish, and the rivers in the extreme north have considerably lower

capacity for self-purification than normal [3]. Oil breaks down slowly. especi-
ally at low temperatures, and requires a large quantity of oxygen.

Specific environmental protection questions have to be resolved in the gas-
extraction regions. This primarily refers to-nxotection of water sources and
the air basin. A completely closed cycle of water supply and drainage .at the
fields which eliminates discharge of industrial effluent into the reservoirs
is the most promising. Such systems are still very expensive, however. there-
fore another method that can be suggested for temporary use is the dis-
charge of waste water after'prepurification in deep layers that are well
screened and are not used for water supply needs.

The use of natural gas and its replacement of coal and oil makes significant
and positive changes in the condition of the air basin. However, it is neces-
sary.to take into consideration that oxygen in the north is reproduced from

a unit of area smaller than in the southern regions. consequently. the possi-
bility of self-purification of the air is also lower. At the sane time. many
more wastes are discharged into the air in the northern regions because of the
long duration of the heating season.

In order to prevent air pollution it is necessary to improve the gas field
equipment, completely recover the gases and reprocess the components accompany-
ing the gas. The most efficient method of controlling air pollution in the
extreme north is the introduction of waste-free technology with a ginsgdxmter
supply cycle which increases the ecological capacity of the natural complex.

Air purity can also be guaranteed by intensive landscaping and preservation of
the extant forest masses. It has been established at the same time that a
natural process of retreat of the northern boundary of forests is occurring in
thenorthern Tyumenskaya Oblast as a result of the swamping of the level
sections. This leads to the growth of tundra-like territories and increase

in the severity of the climate [4]. These natural processes are sometimes

. aggravated by man's thoughtless activity.

The regions of gas field development are characterised by great territorial
scope of industrial construction. The extent of fields to be developed from
north to south is: 90 km of Medveah'ye and 180 of Urengoy. Over 500 km of
roads. about 1000 km of gas pipeline loops and a field gas collector over

350 km long have to be laid on the Urengoy field alone. A multiple-branch
system of trunk gas pipelines has to be made to transport the gas. A corri-
dor 250-300 m wide has to be made for the entire route for even the minimum
permissible convergence of a 32 a line for pipes 1420 II in diameter. The .
width of the route for the gas pipelines can be significantly increased more--
over, under the northern conditions because of the features of the territory's
hydrography and other natural factors [5].

A large quantiy of lumber is being used to build log roads and create foun-
dations for drilling units. The log roads are in use for 2-3 years. while the
platforms under the boreholes with the clusterdrillingaethod last an average

of 60 days. Considerable volumes of lumber are consumed for these purposes.
It has been established at the same time that construction of the foundations

by hydraulic fill is less expensive and more reliable.
lO
Ftl!(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOI:OITHCLKLIﬁﬂE(M‘LY

Since the interfluvial spaces are severely swamped. the agricultural crops

are located near the young cities of the oil uorkers. In this case, the forest
is chopped down and the lands near the river.uhich usually slope.touards the
river are plowed up. This results in the development of intensive erosive
processes that can convert the plowed fields into unproductive lands. cut.
with a dense network of ravines.

A characteristic feature of the gas regions of the Tyumen' north to be
developed is the presence here of perennial permafrost which in the majority of
cases is protected by a soil-vegetation layer..moss-peat cover and forest.

The inevitable disruption of the protective cover (about 40 years are needed
to restore the reindeer moss) during summer traffic changes the heat-exchange
processes between the frozen ground and the atmosphere. Consequently, the
frozen ground begins to thaw intensively. In an area where a tractor has
passed 2-3 times. a muddy. thermokarstic-erosion gully with sinkholes and
troughs can develop.

It is consequently necessary to provide for resolution of this problem when
developing plans for transport movement inthe gas regions of the north. There
are numerous published suggestions that different promising types of transpor-
tation be used which preserve the natural conditions: dirigibles. monorail
suspended road. trucks on an air cushion, etc.

The permafrost rocks are destroyed not only as a result of the use of tracked
vehicles. but also in the construction of different field facilities and

supply lines: wells. pipelines, etc. The artificially induced processes

of freezing and thawing together with.the exogenous permafrost-geological
processes result in deformations in the diurnal surface, changes in the
natural landscapes. complications in operating the facilities and deterioration
in the living conditions of the people.

An example of the changes in the conditions of the environment caused by human
activity is the condition of the Salekhard-Radym railroad. Destruction of the
plant cover, creation of structures. embankments and excavations and pollution
along the road bed resulted in the development of heaving. sagging, thermo-
kartstic lakes. and finally, the deformation of the slope which in certain
places went under the water of the thermokarstic lakes [4,6]. The initial
low cost in construction is considerably exceeded as a consequence of the
expenditures for repair and restoration work. In addition, these roads have
low passage capacity and the speed of the trains is slowed down on them. This
affects the cost of the shipments. The average velocity on the Chum-Labyt-
nangi railroad spur is 15-20 km. The route of the Alaskan railroad that
was built in 1910-1923 when environmental protection regulations and standards
were not observed now requires'annual investment of $177,000 for repair opera-
tions. The road abounds in thermokaratic troughs and heaving knolls [7].

Man's economic activity not only affects the upper layers of the permafrost
rocks, but also the deep layers located tens and hundreds of meters below the
diurnal surface. Drilling wells promote redistribution of water in the rocks
and the emergence of new hydraulic links. Penetrating to different depths in
a short time, the underground and surface waters can cause considerable
thawing of the froZen masses. These factors correspond in strength and rate
of influence to natural processes occurring in the space of entire epochs.

ll
Ft"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1kl.U§EINVLY
a van v. a emu... “we. Va Veal

The practice of developing the northern territories has made it possible to
work out certain useful recommendations. The plans thus stipulate sand-
gravcl and rip-rap fills. high ventilated cellars and pile-supported founda-
tions. The road fills are built with reinforced concrete slab pavements with
drainage ditches. slope fortification and water passages. In high-temperature
(sluggish) frozen ground and sandy ground, preconstruction thawing is used
with subsequent packing of the ground with electric vibrators. Regulation of
the snow accumulation processes has begun in order to direct the processes of
freezing and thawing. The listed measures are not sufficient however. It is
necessary to thoroughly study all the possible consequences that development

of the northern gas territories could entail. There are still too few of
these studies at the present time.

A detailed analysis is needed of the condition of the environment of the gas
regions which will allow tracing of the ecological chains of its interaction
with the processes of development and to pass to the development of substan-
tinted predictions for the condition of the biosphere in different versions
for the development of the gas industry. and in the final analysis. to the
optimal plan which takes into consideration all the interrelationships of the
biosocial system. ‘

Different plans for preparing the gas for further transporting are now being
simultaneously used at Hedvezhiye and other fields. They are distinguished

by a varying degree of effect on the environment (volume of consumed water.
degree of extraction of the condensate. set of structures. etc.). However, in
design practice. a certain technology is often selected only based on economic

criteria (in the majority of cases. the relative expenditures) without con-
sideration for the ecological.

There is a varying degree of interaction between the natural and socio-
economic subsystems in other ways of developing the gas fields (method of
laying supply lines. transportation plan, water supply system. etc.).
Consideration for the indicated interrelationships will allow selection of
technological versions of gas extraction that are based on a system of pre-
dictions which must synthesise both standard and exploratory predictions for
the condition of the environment.

The standard prediction of the biosphere begins with the detection of certain
initial values of its parameters before the beginning of development. One
can take as these initial values the parameters which are close to the
natural. FUrther. with regard for the planned volumes of industrial develop-
ment, a system is worked out for environmental protection measures which allows
these initial parameters to be realised. This system can include the use of
closedproduotion cycles. construction of treatment works. and complete
elimination of certain production processes. Then the technical and economic
indicators are defined for the formulated measures (expenditures of different
materials. underproduced products, etc.). and finally, the final parameters
for economic development of the predicted system.

The consequences for the environment from the construction and functioning of

the gas-extracting complex and its accompanying infrastructure can be divided
into three groups: deep irreversible disorders in the geological and ecosystems
as a result of construction of wells. roads and other facilities. new

engineering and technical elements in nature; entrance into the environment of

12 .
Ft“!(lﬂﬂ€1al.l!ﬂ!(HVLY
INUI‘OFFIC1A1.1EHE(MWLY

gas. condensate and products of their combustion because of imperfection

in either the technology or organization of gas extraction. or the equipment
(accidents); possible unforeseen changes as a result of discharge of indus—
trial effluent; disruption in the hydrological regime of rivers. etc.

The build-up of the Ysmburgskiy. Zapolyarnyy and other gas fields is.ahead.

It is necessary to take into consideration the experience of the already
developed territories. and based on an analysis of the effect of gaspindustr)
structures on the environment, to formulate and realize a set of specific
measures and technical means of preserving or artificially restoring the
frozen conditions. to select the most favorable sections for construction sites,
and to evaluate the effectiveness of the methods of engineering and biological
recultivstion. In the construction on age-old permafrost ground primary
attention should be given to the engineering preparation of the territory. and
formulation of a set of measures and engineering solutions the: can be ful-
filled in the preconstruction period or during construction [8].

It is necessary to consider that the nature of the north is extremely sensi-
tive and easily damaged. Disorders in the permafrost zone are maintained
for tens and hundreds of years, often adopting an irreversible nature.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Brezhnev. L. I. "Otchetnyy doklad TsK KPSS XXVI s"yezdu Rommunistcheskoy
partii Sovetskogo Soyuza i ocherednyye zadachi partii v oblasti vnu-
trenney i vneshney politiki" [Accountability Report of the CPSU Central
Committee to the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

and Next Tasks of the Party in the Area of Domestic and Foreign Policy].
Moscow. Politiedat. 1981. 109 p.

2. Karyagin. I. D.; Bulatov. V. 5.; and Tandyalov. V. V. "Razvitiye gazovoy
promyshlennosti Severe Tyumenskoy oblasti" [Development of the Gas Industry
in the Northern Tyumenskaya Oblast]. Hoscow. Nedra. 1979. 169 p.

3. Trofimuk. A. A. "Mineral Resources of Siberia in the Service of the Mother-
land." EKONOMIKA I ORGANIZATSIYA PBOHYSHLENNOGO PROIZVODSTVA. No 6. Novo-
sibirsk. 1980. pp 6-33.

A. Kryuchkov. V. V. "Krsyniy Sever: problemy ratsionsl'nogo ispol'zovaniya
prirodnykh resursov " [The Extreme North: Problems of Efficient Use of
Natural Resources]. Moscow. Nysl'. 1973. 183 p.

5. Silin. A. N. “Preservation of the Environment in the Development of Gas
Resources of the Northern Tyuaen'skaya Oblast." "Problemy rasvitiya i
razneshcheniya proizvoditel'nkykh sil Sibiri"[Probleme of the Develop-eat

and Disposal of Productive Forces of Siberia]. Novosibirsk. 1976. pp 39-43.

6. Kryuchkov. V. V. "Sever: prirods i chelovek" [The North: Nature and Han}.
Moscow. Nauka. 1979. 126 p.

7. Sorokin. Yu. P. "Environmental Protection and Efficient Use of Natural
Resources.""Bkonomicheskeya bibliotechka neftyanika”[Bconomic Library of

the Oil Worker]. Sverdlovsk. Sred. Ursl'sk. kn. izd-vo. 1979. pp 100—120.

13
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE10NLY
8.

a sun U. a gummy vot- VI‘HI

Bud'kov. 8.; and Bud'kove, H. "The North: Eighty and Easily Damaged."
ZA NAURU V 8131111. 15 January 1981.

Buu'kov. S. T.; and.Nefedo§a. V. B. "Sever Zapadnoy Sibiri. Problely
khozyayatvennogo osvoyeniya i okhrana okruzhnyuahchey nrady" [Northwest

Siberia. Problema of Economic Development and Environmental Protection],
Tyumen'. Izd-vo TC". 1977. 88 p.

COPYRIGHT: Not available

9035
C50:

5000/11

1h
IKHICIWNC1A1.USE1DNIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF cm

AIR. HATER POLLUT- BY ILLEGAL POISON GAS PRODUCTION
Hamburg STERN in German 11 Feb 82 pp 132, 136

[Article by Rudolf Mueller: ".Stored Death"] /

[Text] "If something had happened," said a detective superintendent, "then we
could have written off the southern part of Berlin." Prof Bans Bornowski
fro. the Technical University verified the police-en's appraisal: "Just .02
ng per liter is a lethal dosage for hunans." But it was not a matter of mini--
grans. There were 18 barrels with 5,860 kg. Berlin had its worst poisons
scandal since World liar II.

For 2 days the fire department had to renove broken and rusty barrels from a
storage room in the Brit: ward and pump the contmts into new containers.
After just s few attempts protected gloves were eaten away and compressed air
breathing apparatus and suits to protect against acid were brought up as
quickly as possible.

To be renewed were waste products of the chenical Thiophosgen.""one of the
nost inportant poison gases," according to district attorney Lut: Raga. The
chenical eonpany "Ferak" had manufactured the poison gas in West Berlin. That
is forbidden and according to the allied Control Council Law No 43, it can
be "punishable by death." Company head Erich Ottuar Gruendensnn, 52. accused
by the district attorney's office of the production of war material, ilproper
storage of toxic substances and environmental pollution, had his principal
customer in Israel: the company "Plantex Limited" in Nathanya. In a year and
a half the Israelis received 1,555 kg of Thiophosgen valued at m 307,125.
Cruendenann even wanted to gradually increase his production to 5 tons of
poison gas annually. Neighbors of his production plants, however. conplained
of a stench in the air and brawn apples in the surrounding allotnsnt gardens,
and alerted the health agency.

Again and again Gruendenann was able to put off authorities. As early as 1979
he received a reprimand fron the senator for health and environaental protec-

tion on account of disorder on his industrial property—and he proceeded
diligently as before. In the sane year in the form of a pee. he advised the
agency that he had ordered a nu anokesteck for one of his factories.

Gruendemann was far less witty in other papers. "Thiophoagen is a dreadful
chemical," he told his business partner in Israel in teletype nessage No

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
eon UI'DILML var. URL!

150-203/1058. The poison gas destroys the lungs and causes an excruciating
death. "Re are convinced that we are the only producers in the world," said
another Telex. Such rammed chaicel concerns as Bayer in Leverlmsen and
Merck in Demtadt had ceased producing the gas for ”environaental protec-
tion reasons." Gruenduann was not so scrupulous. The foraer chesistry
studmt (12 s-esters without a diplons) even sought additional orders fron
Israeli "He hope that you, too, will need Thiophosgen in the future.”

The Israeli business partners sent barrels nade out of a special alloy to
Berlin for shipping, for Thiophoegen develops a high pressure within the con-
tainers. If a barrel were to burst the chasical and air would conbine ined-
iately to for: a deadly gas. The dangerous freight traveled by rail fron
Feral: all the way across the 60! to Murg. Tron here it went by ship to
Israel. -

The manufacture of Thiophosgen results in tons of highly toxic wastes,
especially host, which likewise serves as a poison gas. Forty barrels of the
highly explosive wastes were stored in the yard of the Feral: plant on
Ger-ania Street, "in part .with a “kc-shift tenporary covering, and in part
not at all protected free the effects of weather, next to a pile of rubbish"
(according to the district attorney's office). Sons barrels-wcontents: a
highly toxic solvent—were even open. The investigators: "Gray vapors
emanated, and there was a stench in the entire area."

According to an expert's opinion by the Technical University in Berlin,
breathing the vapors causes "dizziness, headaches, nausea, vomiting, irrita-
tion of the conjuntiva and coughing." Another waste product fron the manu-
facture of Thiophosgan mayo-evenlin the anallsst quantitiesm-cauae "strong
irritation to the eyes. throat. chest md mucous aubranes." "In View of the
iaproper storage," even with the lealling of a single barrel of lethal dosage
"would almost certainly prevail in the air for a tine."

According to the district attorney's office, in addition to Thiophosgen.
Grnendemann has apparently also manufactured "at least 65 kg" of the poison
gas Broncyan. He say have had this poison asnufactured on the first floor
of his production plant on Genenis Street. Wastes were conducted through a
rainpipe directly into the Teltow Canal, where as a result nuamus fish
died. Hhat happened to 1,700 grans of the highly toxic substance natriua
cyanide, which results iron the production of bro-cyan, is still unsolved.
Prof Kane aornowski: ”This quantity is equivalent to a lethal dosage for
17,000 persons."

Gonpsny heed Gruendaaann has so far aade no consents on the affair to the
district attorney's office. To STERN he said: We produce no poison gases.
In Israel the Thiophosgen is used in producing a aedication against athlete's
Foot.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr & Go.

9746
cso: 5000/2073 m

16

POROI'l-‘ICIALISEONLY