FOR OFHC‘IAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10627
2 JULY 1982

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. ‘4. APRIL 1982

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
|
m

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and bOoks, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteraterl are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as

given by source .

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

HETEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 4.19111 1982

Translation of the Russian-language monthly journal METEORODOGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA published in Mosccw by Gidronateoizdat.

CONTENTS

*Mesoscale Numerical Heather Forecasting........................................ 1

*Applicat ion of Objective Analysis for Computing Gradients in Lagrangian
Method for Integrating Prognostic Equations.................................. 2

*Numerical Prediction of Pressure Field in Regional Model Using Two Grid Types.. 3

*Problens in Objective Analysis of Data Pro- lndirect Meteorological

Observations....uu”nun”................................................ 1‘

*Radioactive Containation of Atmospheric Surface Layer Over USSR in 1980....... 5
*Space Correlation Functions of Air humidity in Western Siberia and Kazakhstan.. 6
itMean latitudinal Hater and Air Temperature Values for World 0cean..... 7

*Spatial-Tenporal Variability of Petroleun Hydrocarbons in North Atlantic

Waters...oo.o..............o..-..................u.....o............. ...... a 8

*Turbulent Structure of Natural Density Flow in Its Formation Region..... ...... . 9
*Studylng Trend in River Volune Changes for Evaluating Noml Runoff............ 10

*llydrodynanics of Erosion of Islands in Kiyevskoye and Kremenchugskoye

Reservoirs..................................................... ....... ....... 11

Evaluation of Influence of Meteorological Factors on Biological Productivity

of “ads...OOOOOOOOIOOOOOOIDOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOIIOOOOOOOO0.0... ..... 0.0.0.0.... 12

*Mcthod for Measuring Vertical Ozone Distribution by Optical Method on
Meteorological Rockets. 23

.—

*Denotes article abstracted by JPRS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

*Available Atmospheric Potential Energy and Its Transformation Into

Kinetic Porn...........................................................

*Review of Monograph by I. V. Busalayev: 'Complex Water Management SYBCGIS
(Methods for Hydrological Validation, Modeling and Optinization of
Decisions)‘ [Slozhnyye vodokhozyaystvennyye aistemy (Metody gidro-
logicheskogo obosnovaniye, modelirovaniya 1 optinizatsii resheniy)]
AIM‘ACG. "N80“,"1980, 23° Pagesaoa-ooooaoo-nc-o..........a-coo-0000v

*Activities at USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring........... ........ ................. ....... ....... ...... .....

*Confcrences. Meetings and Seninara.................... ....... ....... .....
*New Salinity Scale and New Equation for State of Sea water. ........ ......
*Notes From Abroad.................................................. ..... .
*Obituary of Ruvim Leyzerovich Kagan (1928-1981)..........................

*
Denotes article abstracted by JPRS

FOIOFII'IGALUSEONLY

2!

25

26

27
28

29

31
Moscow MEIEOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No lo, Apr 82 (manuscript received

[Article by N. F. Vel'tishchev, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences.
A. A. Zhelnin, V. 2. Kisel'nikova, Ye. M. Pekelis and 1). Ya. Pressman. candi-
dates of physical and mathematical sciences, USSR Hydrometeorological Sci-

cnti f ic Research Center]

[Abstract] Existing aesoscaie models in most cases are specialized and intended
for investigating individual atmospheric processes; at present there is not

even one sufficiently complete mesoscale nonhydrostatic model which can be used
for prognostic purposes. The authors felt that the results obtained with spec-
ialized models can be used as a foundation for more univeer nesoscale models
of prognostic importance. Such a model is presented here; it was developed at
the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. It was formulated in such a way that it is
possible to make a short-range forecast of the principal meteorological ele—
ments: temperature, pressure, three velocity components, hmidity, cloud cover
and precipitation with direct modeling of the mesoscale processes exerting a sig-
nificant influence on weather conditions. The predictable elements include cloud
cover and precipitation and moisture transport in the atmosphere (with parameter-
ization of its phase transitions). Radiation transfer processes are included.
Processes of transport of heat and moisture in the active soil layer with a
depth of about a meter are included in the model for a more detailed allowance
for the processes of heat and moisture exchange between the atmosphere and the
underlying surface. As the initial equations use was made of the deep convection
equations proposed by Y. Ogura, et al. (J. A1105. 561.. Vol 19, No 2. 1962) and
R. Hilhelmson, et s1. (J. ATMOS. SCI., Vol 29, No 7, 1972). These equations were
supplemented by the corresponding moisture transfer equations and the equations
for the transport of heat and moisture in the upper meter soil layer. Figures

2: references 20: 7 Russian, 13 Western.

MWLUSEONLY
INTI 0511(1AI.[£5E|MNLY

unc 551.509'.3n

APPLICATION OF OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS FOR COMPUTING CRADIENTS IN LAGRANGIAN METHOD
FOR INTEGRATING PROGNOSTIC EQUATIONS

Moscow HEIEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (manuscript received
15 Jun 81) pp 16-20

[Article by B. Bakirbayev and V. V. Kostyukov. candidate of physical and math-
ematical sciences, West Siberian Regional Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] Eulerian representations of independent variables are usually em-
ployed in numerical forecasting methods. In synoptic forecasts the basis is
the trajectories method, providing a clear interpretation of developing pro-
cesses. As a mathematical expression it is possible to use the equations of
atmospheric dynamics in Lagrangian variables. The possibilities of these tra-
ditional approaches have reached their limits, dictating a search for new ap-
proaches. In actuality, in the schemes which have been employed the require-
ments on the properties of the initial and predicted fields have often not been
satisfied; there may not be adequate accuracy in computations due to the high
values of the residual terms in the Taylor expansion. It is proposed that such
effects can be reduced by the use of variable grids adapted to the values of
local gradients. The article therefore is a detailed discussion of the prob-
lems involved in application of this approach in the example of a barotropic
model of the atmosphere. For example, one of the main difficulties in inte-
gration in Lagrangian variables involves computation of the gradients. since
in the course of a forecast the positions of the particles change and become
irregular. Usually in each interval there is a reinterpolation of the values
of meteorological elements in a fixed regular grid. from which the required de-
rivatives are then computed. Here it is shown that the derivatives can be
found directly from a changing grid of particles by using the objective anal-
ysis procedure. There are three methods which can be employed for this pur-
pose: polynomial approximation. optimum interpolation and weighted mean. Each
is discussed and it is indicated that the most convenient is the weighted
mean method due to the analytical form of the interpolation weights. The fore-
casting algorithm for each time interval consists of objective analysis for
points at which the particles are situated at the current moment. Numerical
experiments are discussed; both real and model data were used. The success of
the described forecasting method is dependent on the accuracy in integration
of the system of differential equations and approximation of the gradients.
Figures 1, tables 1; references: 8 Russian.

FOI1OIIIC1A1.IIII(HNLY
UDC 551.509.313.001.57:551.54
NUMERICAL PREDICTION OF PRESSURE FIELD IN REGIONAL MODEL USING THO GRID TYPES

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4. Apr 82 (manuscript received
11 Jan 81) pp 21-30

[Article by H. Ahrens, East German Meteorological Service]

[Abstract] ﬂeshed grids are coming into increasingly wider use with the Arakawa
C grid having considerable advantages in comparison with the so-called A grid.
The author here outlines the changes which must be introduced in order to em-
ploy schemes using a C grid. The model presented here employs a system of
primitive equations of atmospheric dynamics and a semi-implicit scheme for
time integration. Particular attention is given to the behavior of the ampli-
tudes of waves in a linear case for two types of grids. The purpose of this
investigation was to ascertain how the form of approximation of the horizontal
derivatives exerts an influence on the behavior of wave amplitudes, especially
meteorologically significant Rossby waves. The difference approximations for
both types of grids are obtained using a central differences scheme. but with
approximation of the terms with adaptation and diffusion the grid C has an in-
terval half as great as for grid A. Two variants of the model are examined ap-
plicable to short-range forecasts for the period 1 March 1978-5 March 1979 (30
cases). The horizontal spatial interval was 300 km and the values of the geo-
potential and wind variables were constant at the lateral boundary. A table
gives the mean values of evaluations for the two cases. Improvement of vari-
ant C in comparison with variant A is significant for almost all levels of the
model (1000, 850, 700, 500, 300 gPa). especially for 1000 and 850 gPa. Despite
differences in variants of the model (change in the-form of the equations,
types of grids. filtering regime), they were quite identical - same time in-
tervals, space intervals, number of points and time expended on the computer
for a 24-hour forecast (4 minutes). Accordingly, improvement of evaluations of
the forecasts using the model with the c grid is quite convincing evidence of

the advantage of this variant of the model. Figures 2, tables 2; references 6:
6 Russian, 2 western. '

FOI4OFFHJA1.USB(ﬂNLY
FOR OH'ILIAL US! ONLY

UDC 551.509.313
PROBLEMS IN OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS OF DATA PROM INDIRECT METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, Apr 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) PP 31-37

[Article by A. I. Belyavskiy and O. H. Pokrovskiy, candidate of physical and
mathematical sciences, Main Geophysical Observatory]

[Abstract] Vigorous efforts are being nade to use data from indirect observa~
tions in numerical analysis of meteorological fields. A generalized variant of
this method makes possible the direct use of data from radiometric observations
of outgoing radiation in a numerical analysis scheme. However, a two-stage ap-
proach is being developed in which the objective analysis scheme involves use
of the vertical profiles of temperature and relative geopotemtial, first recon-
structed using some nethod for solving the inverse problem. The authors sought
to evaluate the validity of the two-stage approach. For this purpose a study
was made of the three principal types of correlations in the distribution of
errors in the remote sounding method. Formulas were derived asking it possible

found that the errors in determining temperature by the indirect sounding meth—
od and the true values are strongly correlated. The nature of correlations of
this type was clarified. The variability of all these correlations vaa invest-
igated; it is shown that theoretical evaluations give a correct qualitative pic-
ture of the spatial distribution of the correlation coefficients. The signif-
icant seasonal and spatial variability of the correlation coefficients was
clarified. It is concluded that since allowance for many varying correlations
is difficult, but neglecting then leads to a decrease in the effectiveness of
the optimum interpolation procedure, in numerical analysis it is better not to
use the results of solution of the inverse problem, but initial data from
radiometric measurements, whose errors are uncorrelated under ordinary experi-
mental conditions. Pigurea 3; references 13: 8 Russian, 5 western.

FOR‘OFFIJAI.USE(I§LY
UDC 551 . 510. 72 (47+S7)

RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINATION OF ATHOSI’HEIC SURFACE LAYER OVER USSR IN 1980

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO'LOGIYA in Russian No lo. Apr 82 (manuscript received
10 Aug 81) pp 38-103

[Article by X. P. hakhon'ko, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
V. P. Hartynenko, V. B. Chunichev and P. A. Rabotnova, Institute of Experi-

mental Meteorology]

[Abstract] During all of 1980 radioactive contamination of the surface layer of

the atmosphere over the territory of the USSR was at a very low level, but a
nuclear explosion in the atmosphere took place in the Chinese People's Repub-
lic on 16 October 1980. A marked increase in the levels of total beta activ—
ity was observed in the USSR in the southern part of Primorskiy Kray- several
days after the shot; there was also some increase in radioactive fallout in

the Kirgia and Uzbek 8883. However, lost of the decay products first encircled
the earth before appearing over the western boundaries of the USSR, for the
most part in the southern part of the country. In the retaining part of the
USSR there was no appreciable increase in total beta activity but everywhere
fission products were detected in sanples. The greatest increase in the concen—
tration of radioactive products in the air and their fallout was observed be—
ginning in the middle of the first 10-day period in November. The article gives
a careful review of the annual variation of total beta activity over the USSR
during 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979 and 1980. Table 1 gives the concentration of
nuclides in aerosol samples for the USSR in late October and mid-November 1980
for Kursk, Riga, Moscow and Tashkent. All the observed parameters were charac-
teristic for nuclear shots set off in the atmosphere at a considerable altitude
precluding the possibility of capture of soil and its entrainment into a fire-
ball. Host of the fission products by the tine of their arrival in the emo-
spheric surface layer over the territory of the USSR were quite well mixed and
there was no significant change in isotopic composition in tine or space. Pig-
ures 1. tables 2; references 5: 2 Russian, 3 western. '

MWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.571(571.l)(574)
SPACE CORRELATION FUNCTIONS OF AIR HUMIDITY IN WESTERN SIBERIA AND KAZAKHSTAN

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) pp (010-69

[Article by L. P. Kuznetsova, candidate of geographical sciences, and T. A.
Mozhina, Institute of Hater Problems]

[Abstract] A study was made of the spatial structure of the air humidity
fields at the level of the isobaric surfaces 850 and 700 lb and the total
moisture content in the troposphere within the territory of Western Siberia
and Northern Kazakhstan. The spatial structure was represented by aerological
observations at 35 stations, including several stations on the western slope
of the Urals and in the Yenisey valley. Aerological data were available only
for the 10-year period 1961-1970. The field of mean monthly atmospheric mois-
ture content values was virtually isotropic in all seasons other than summer
when there are closer correlations in the NH-SB direction, which corresponds
to the direction of the prevailing transport of air masses in this season.
There were no substantial differences between the correlation functions of at—
mospheric moisture content computed for 20 stations in the Ob' and Yenisey
basins and for the 35 stations situated over the entire territory of Western
Siberia and Kazakhstan. It was found that the space correlation functions com-
puted using data from aerological sounding stations regardless of their geo-
graphical location correctly describe the spatial structure of the air humid-
ity fields at the 850— and 700-lb levels and total moisture content. It is
demonstrated that the space correlation functions. computed on the basis of
the mean monthly moisture content values. were determined with sufficient re-
liability for their use in objective analysis. Figures é, tables 1: references:
6 Russian.

llﬂlflﬂﬂClAl.lﬂIE(NNLY
UDC 551.526.6+551.526.34(261)(265)(267)
MEAN LATITUDINAL HATER ARD AIR TEMPERATURE VALUES FOR HORLD OCEAN

Moscow HETEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (manuscript received
14 Jul 81) PP 50-55

[Article L. A. Strokina, candidate of geographical sciences, State Hydrological
Institute]

[Abstract] Climatic maps published during recent years were used in determin-
ing the mean latitudinal water and air temperature values for the entire world
ocean for each month of the year. More than 31.000 values characterizing water
and air temperature at the points of intersection of a regular 5' grid were
used in determining the zonal water temperature (to) and air temperature (ta)
values in the ice-free parts of the world ocean. Monthly maps were used for
this purpose. All these values are summarized in a two-page table. Among the
conclusions which can be drawn from this tabulation are the following. The de-
crease in water and air temperatures with an increase in latitude occurs non-
uniformly. The meridional gradients of to and t. increase from the equator
toward the subtropical latitudes in both hemispheres and then decrease in

the direction of the middle latitudes. The northern part of the world ocean

is warmer than the southern part. In owner in the northern hemisphere the

to and t, values are higher than the corresponding values in the southern hemi-
sphere by l-4°c in the tropical and by 5-7’0 in the extratropical latitudes.
In winter the temperature regime in the two hemispheres differs to a lesser
degree. In the subtropical and temperate latitudes the air temperature in the
northern hemisphere is lower than in the southern hemisphere. The mean to and
ta values for the northern hemisphere exceed the corresponding means for the
southern hemisphere by 3.5-6°C in winter and by 5.0-5.6'0 in summer. For the
world ocean as a whole the maximum to and t8 values are in September and the
minimum values are in March. During the period of heating the most intensive
warming of the ocean and atmosphere is in the northern hemisphere from June
through July, and in the southern hemisphere -— from November through December.
During the entire year the effect of the surrounding continents exerts a
stronger influence on the temperature regime of the atmosphere in comparison

with the temperature regime of the ocean. Tables 1; references 19: 16 Russian,
5 Western.

7
itﬂltlﬂﬂCIAl.llﬂ!(ﬂilY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.466.(261.1)
SPATIAL-TEMPORAL VARIABILITY OF PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS IN NORTH ATLANTIC UATBRS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (manuscript received
8 Jun 81) pp 56-65

[Article by Ye. A. Sobchenko, candidate of geographical sciences, I. G. Orlova,
candidate of chemical sciences, V. A. Mikhaylov and R. I. Lisovskiy, Odessa
Division, State Oceanographic Institute]

[Abstract] The results of observations of three forms of petroleum contamination
in the North Atlantic for the three-year period 1977-1979 are given; these were
made primarily between the 5th and the 70th parallels in the northern hemi-
sphere. There were 16 000 observations of petroleum films, 2500 observations of
petroleum aggregates and 1050 observations of the dissolved-emulsified fraction
of petroleum hydrocarbons. Figure l is a map of the spatial distribution of pet-
roleum films during this period. The most contaminated zone was that between

the 10th and 50th parallels. These films are usually observed in shelf waters,
regions of intensive navigation and transporting of petrol um. Table 1 gives

the content of petroleum films in different parts of the North Atlantic; Table

2 gives the temporal Variability of the occurrence of petroleum films. The max-
imum occurrence of films is along the shores of North America and Europe, where
the pollution is 2-3 times greater than in the open part of the ocean. The re-
gions of extremal contamination were the sane during 1977-1979 as during 1975-
1976. There were considerable yesr-to-year variations in the occurrence of

films in different zones. In some areas there is a tendency to a decrease in

the pollution level, and elsewhere -- an increase. Figure 2 is a map of the dis-
tribution of petroleum aggregates and Table 3 gives the temporal variability

of these aggregates. This type of pollution is most common in the Gulf of Cadiz,
along the shores of Africa and America. Dynamic factors are responsible for
their concentration in the frontal zones of currents and at the center of the
Sargasso Sea. Table k gives the temporal variability of the dissolved-emulsified
fraction of petroleum hydrocarbons in the surface water layer in different zones.
All this work was carried out within the framework of the IOC-HHD Pilot Project.
Figures 2. tables 6; references 14: 12 Russian, 2 western.

FOR1OFFHJA1.USEIIULY
UDC 551.552:551.h65.41
TURBULENT STRUCTURE OF NATURAL DENSITY FLO" IN ITS FORMATION REGION

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (manuscript received
20 Jan 81) pp 66-7b

[Article by Yu. G. Pyrkin, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences. B. I.
Samolyubov and A. A. Kuznetsov. candidates of physical and mathematical sci-
ences, Moscow State University]

[Abstract] Expeditionary investigations by the authors indicated that the dis-
tributions of intensity of turbulence of a density current and its averaged_
characteristics are interrelated to the spectral composition of turbulence.
which varies in different stages of flow development. The measurements were
made in a sector of formation of a bottom stratified current of a fluvial sus-
pension-carrying flow entering a deep natural water body of the canyon type.
(The apparatus and the measurement method and certain aspects of the generation
and subsequent propagation of the current on the basis of its averaged para-
meters were described earlier (Yu. G. Pyrkin, et a1., VODNYYE RESURSY. No 6,
1978; OKEANOLOGIYA, 20. No 1, 1980; VODNYYE RBSURSY, No b. 1980)). This article
essentially is a continuation of the work done earlier along these lines. Em—
phasis is on the period of autumn cooling of river waters and the receiving
water body when the formation of the density flow is attributable to mechan-
ical and thermal stratification, with a predominance of the latter. The meas—
urements were made only during calms. Figure 1 shows the vertical distrib-
utions of the concentration of suspended matter, water temperature. current
velocity. intensity of turbulence and spectral density of fluctuation energy

in a bottom density flow at six points along a stream. The text gives a detail-
ed analysis of the observations made in this reach. Figures 3, tables 3: ref-
erences 9: 8 Russian, 1 Western.

9
FOIiofFﬂJAl.USE(MNLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLV

UDC 556.165(67+57)
STUDYING TREND IN RIVER VOLUME CHANGES FOR EVALUATING NORHAL RUNOF?

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 5, Apr 82 (manuscript received
15 Jul 81) pp 75-84

[Article by Ye. A. Leonov, candidate of technical sciences, and V. Ye. Leonov,
State Hydrological Institute]

[Abstract] The authors investigated long-term variations in the runoff of major
rivers in the USSR and analyzed the possibilities of predicting the "projected
normal runoff" using statistical forecasting methods. ("Projected normal run-
off" is defined as the mean long-term quantity anticipated during the period

of operation of a projected water management enterprise or for any stage in
operation and determined from the value of the.norm for a past period with al-
lowance for the corresponding changes introduced into physiographic conditions
by man's economic activity and the trend in change in runoff in comparison with
the past period due to secular fluctuations of climate). Table 1 gives the nor-
mal and mean values of annual runoff of major rivers during different periods
(the rivers analysed include: Severnaya Dvina, Neva, Vyatka, Volga, Neman, Don,
Ural, Tura, Tobol, Nitsa, 0b', Irtysh, Yenisey and Amur). The materials present-
ed here reveal that a statistical evaluation of water resources solely on the
basis of the long-term normal runoff and its extrapolation to the future with-
out correction for economic activity and the climatic trend is inadmissible.
The data indicate that in the long-term variation of runoff there are prolong-
ed tendencies to a dropoff and increase in water volume and that the change of
runoff in these phases is described well by the equation for a complex exponen-
tial curve. The mean duration of the dropoff-increase period is 60-70 years.
For European rivers since the end of the last century there has been a nega-
tive water volume trend. the dropoff being 5-252, whereas for Asiatic rivers
the volume has been 1-191 above the long-term norm. The analysis made it pos-
sible to predict water volumes for European and Asiatic rivers for the year
2000 and the years 2020-2040. Figures 3, tables 6; references: 18 Russian.

10

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
UDC 551.311.21:551.52(282.247.323)(282.247.325.8)

“YDRODYNAHICS 0F EROSION 0P ISLANDS IN KIYEVSKOYE AND KREMENCHUGSKOYE
RESERVOIRS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6. Apr 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) pp 85—89

[Article by B. I. Novikov, candidate of geographical sciences, and Ye. G. Glad-
kaya. hydrobiology Institute. Ukrainian Academy of Sciences]

{Abstract} The authors determined the hydrodynamic erosion of islands in Dnepr
River reservoirs in the form of the temporal change in their size and volume.
The investigation was important because it was found that the quantity of
silts accumulated in Kiyevskoye Reservoir was 3.1 times greater than computed
and the corresponding factor for the Kremenchugskoye Reservoir was 2.1. It be-
came clear that this was attributable at least in part to the erosion of is-
lands in these water bodies. The islands were mapped and their areas and vol—
umes were precisely determined. The total area of the islands in Kiyevskoyi
Reservoir was 21.0 kmz; the area for Kremenchugskoye Reservoir was 94.5 km .
In the upper reaches the islands were low and flat, essentially unflooded
parts of the floodplain. They were eroded primarily by level fluctuations, al-
though near the shipping channels the waves created by ships were a factor. In
the middle and lower reaches the islands were 5-10 m above the surface, hilly,
consisting of sand and loess, representing remnants of floodplain terraces

and channel banks. For these islands erosion is caused for the most part by
wind-wave processes. The initial survey was made in 1973-197h and the repeated
survey was made in 1980. It was found that as a result of hydrodynamic erosion
the area of the islands has been reduced by 30-95%. The mean annual reduction
in area is as much as 5.3% Thus. by 1980 the two reservoirs had received
128,500 I3 and 1,507,500 ms of material respectively. The islands may be com-
pletely eroded away in 13-15 years. The cited figures are comparable to the
annual receipts of the erosional products of shores. The islands are also a
source of a considerable quantity of biogenous elements —- carbon, nitrogen.
phosphorus. iron, calcium, magnesium, sodium. potassiun and others. These are
capable of exerting an influence on water quality. Figures 2, tables 3; refer—
ences: 3 Russian.
'wa (mm/u. use «mu

UDC 551.50:63l.l75

EVALUATION OF INFLUENCE OF METEOROLOGICAL FACTORS ON BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY
OP LANDS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Apr 82 (manuscript
received 2? Aug 81) pp 90-99

[Article by V. D. Skalaban, candidate of biological sciences. State Institute
of Land Resources]

[Text] Abstract: The article sets forth the prin-
ciples for evaluating the productivity of
lands on the basis of a set of natural fac-
tors using the dimensionless relative index
Kl,z'---N - K1.Kz...KN, where K1, K2....,Ks
are special indices for individual factors.
The author gives evaluations of the prin-
cipal meteorological factors and their coir
parison with actual productivity.

The increase in the earth's population and the development of productive
forces is making increasingly timely the problem of the conservation and
rational use of land resources, being the "principal means of production in
agriculture and the areal basis for the siting and development of all branch-
es of the national economy" [6]. Accordingly, the USSR "is carrying out a
national land inventory involving the totality of reliable and necessary in-
formation on the natural...tosition of lands" [6], and a climatic survey is
being made which takes in the totality of agrometeorological information.

The required range of information on land resources is set forth in a defin-
ite system which includes the cadastral regionalization and classification

of lands. All this information can be employed in monitoring agricultural pro-
duction to the maximum degree if it can be used in obtaining some idea con-
cerning the productivity of lands with respect to different crops.

In this communication we set forth a general approach to solution of the prob—
lem of multisided evaluation of the productivity of lands with respect to the
principal production factors and specific procedures are proposed for evaluat-
ing land parcels on the basis of the most important of these factors, the

most difficult to control, meteorological factors.

The process of production of a product of plant cultivation can be represented
as one of the types of production subordinate to general patterns. with this
in mind it can be shown that this final product is a function of many parameters

12

inliofFﬂﬂAl.USE(lﬂLY
x|. x2. x ....x" [2]. The entire range of factors can be divided into four
nrnups: light -- 1. heat -- T. moisture -- B. nutrients -— q [2]. Each par-
cel is characterized by a definite set of values of these parameters. which
also determines its productivity with respect to one crop or another. In ac-
cordance with the above, it can be written that

M-f’ (XII x2! ‘3! "or x” ): (1)
M-’ (I: T: BI (.1)’ (2)
Here M is the productivity of the agricultural crop, expressed in the form of

total biomass and the quantity of commercial product of some substance (for
example. sugars, oil, protein. etc.).

It is evident that for each type (variety) there is some optimum set of val-
ues Io. To, so. q0 which ensures the maximum productivity H0:

M. = m. r.. 3.. in. - (3)
hence
ﬁ-‘iﬂhtamy (1.)

Here H/Ho is a function determined in a four-dimensional continuum and hav-
ing a maximum equal to l with l.- 10’ T - To. B - 30. q - qo, and a minimum
equal to 0 with some extremal value of at least one of the factors.

Different values can be selected as the generalized parameters 1, T, B. q.
Fnr example. the averaged evaluations of extensive territories are given by
the generalized indices: the relationship of the annual values of precipita-
tion and evaporability. annual sum of active temperatures. etc. More detailed
evaluations are given by the indices of moistening of the soils and growing
season temperature. It is possible to use still more detailed indices taking
into account the age requirements of plants for moisture, heat. etc.

In all cases it is better to express productivity and the factors determin-
ing it by dimensionless relative values. This procedure is employed by many
researchers and makes it possible to give comparable evaluations of various
types of objects.

For example. if the supply of plants with heat, moisture and light is not ex-
pressed in absolute values (degrees. millimeters. lux. watts. etc.). but in
fractions of the requirement for a given type (variety), it is possible to
give comparable evaluations for different crops and seek generalised expres-
sions for productivity with these relative indices.

A complexity in characterizing the productivity of lands by the use of equa-
tions (1)-(6) is that first of all. the parameters have a stochastic charac-
ter. and second. the production factors are related not only to productivity.
but also to one another. Strictly speaking. equation (1) must be written in
the following way [ll]:

13
IIIICNWHCIAI.IEIB(INLV
FIHICNWWCJAI.1EHE(MVLY

M=f’(xltlex300 ' Ooxupxl.'loxl.ayu . ..X|.N.X2.3,X7.1.. a .,-\'2.N.

X14,Xaa.o . ..XNV--- ~)- (5)

Hqunllnn (5) shows how diverse are the possibilities for combining the values
of individual parameters. As a result of this diversity, complicated by the
probabilistic character of the parameters, it is virtually impossible to re-
veal the essence of f' and on the basis of (S) establish the multifactor pro-
duction functions by which it is possible to give complex evaluations of pro-
ductivity on the basis of the principal production factors.

We attempted, using the general ecological patterns of interrelationship of
factors. to break down the overall problem of multisided evaluation into in-
dividual components and to solve it by parts. He formulated these patterns on
the basis of an analysis of materials from the investigations of different
authors and our own experiments.

He will examine the influence of one factor, such as moisture supply, on the
productivity of ear grain crops, averaged for drought resistance and mois-
ture requirements. We will express the moisture supply in the form of soil
moistening Y'- W - HH/HMC - "H, where H are the moisture supplies in the

soil layer used in the computations. "M is the same with wilting moisture,
mc is the same with minimum moisture capacity. The dependence of productiv-
ity on the means for the period of the active growing season, active moisture
consumption and Y values is indicated in Fig. l.

 

Fig. 1. Dependence of productivity of "Gerkules" oats on soil moistening with -
different supply of plants with nutrients. Soddy-slightly podzolic soil. mod-
erate clayey loam. Acul'

He obtained these data in growing experiments carried out in a closed labor-
atory room at constant temperature. air humidity and illumination. In all ex-
periments the temperature was maintained at the level 23tl°c by the ordinary
procedures of thermostating with the use of contact thermometers and temper-
ature relays. A wet-bulb contact thermometer was paired with a dry thermo-
meter 0

The psychrometric difference was set by the contacts in accordance with a stip-

ulated air humidity level of about 701. In the transpiration process the
plants increased the humidity, and as soon as it exceeded a stipulated level

15

FOR1Hﬂﬂl1hl.UBEiﬂNLY
a relay connected to the wet-bulb contact thermometer was triggered and by
means of ventilation fans fresh air was fed from the street. which. heating,
reduced the relative air humidity to the stipulated level. This caused a gas
exchange such as is necessary for photosynthesis. A device of such a type was
used by I. I. Sudnitsyn and was described by him in [8]. Illumination was main-
tained at the level 6000-5000 lux by DBL-250 lamps.

Prior to the "tillering" phase the plants were cultivated with optimum moist-
ening attained by capillary wetting from below with the subsequent outflow

of water through drainage openings. Beginning with the phase of "leaf tube
formation" different groups of pots were exposed to different moistening lev-
els, first of all by differentiated watering from above to the computed weight
and second by capillary wetting from below at different times. watering from
above was better in maintaining a constancy of soil moisture in the course of
the experiment but it was nonuniformly distributed in the soil volume. wetting
from below resulted in a more uniform distribution of moisture in the soil
volume but there was a considerable variation in moisture content in the
course of the experiment.

In the maturing stage the plants were cut, dried at a temperature of 80°C and
weighed. The mean dry weight of the plant was plotted on the y-axis in Fig.
1a. Optimum doses of lime and NPR were applied to the soil in variant 1 in

the form of solutions of NH4NO3, anpoa. K2504 salts. In variants 2 and 3 par-
tial doses of fertilizers were applied. In variant 4 the plants were cultivated
with an acute shortage of nutrients achieved by triple cultivation of the same
crop without the application of fertilizers. In variants l, 2, 3 the curves

H - M(1') have a one-dimensional geometric similarity, that is. with any stip-
ulated moistening the ratio of the ordinates of these curves is constant

(Fig. la). If the values M of each curve are represented in fractions of

H0 . these curves 1. 2. 3 merge into a single curve (Fig. lb). A change in
3091 fertility to an equal degree exerts an influence on M and H03. not
changing their relationship. In the case of an extremely low level of supply—
ing of plants with nutrients their reaction to the moisture supply changes;
the optimum Y value is displaced into the direction of low moisture contents.
A zero productivity is not noted with the wilting moisture, but with a some-
what higher moisture content. Similar results have been noted by many authors:
with a low supply of nutrients (especially nitrogen) to the plants there is a
decrease in their resistance to drought and a reduction in moisture require-
ments: the lower boundary of optimum moistening is displaced into the direc-
tion of lesser moisture contents. These phenomena are observed when there is

n considerable inadequacy of nutrients. which is inadmissible in production.
with a moderate insufficiency of nutrients, causing a decrease in productiv-
ity by a factor of 2-2.5, the correlation between the relative H/Ho value

and Y is stable and is described by the equation which we proposed in [7]

M"'01: ' 1 - (Y- DZ. (6)

The data cited by V. S. Hezentsev using materials from a mass analysis of the
yield of wheat as a function of soil moistening coincide with our conclusion:
with different levels of soil fertility (differences in crop yield by a fac-
tor of 2) the dependences of crop yield on moistening are described by sim-
ilar curves [5], which, being scaled in accordance with our proposal. merge

15

F0!‘0FFKJAI.U§E(HVLY
F0l40FFﬂﬂAl.lEE20NLY

into one. being approximated fairly well by equation (6).

 

Fig. 2. Light curves of photosynthesis of uheat sprouts with different €02
concentrations in air (according to [4]). 1) illumination in thousands of
lux. 1) 0.282, 2) 0.13%, 3) 0.052 C02.

The influence of the illumination factor on the productivity of crops with a

different supply of the elements necessary for the forming of production
is manifested similarly. Figure 2,a shows data illustrating this influence.

It is easy to see the analogy with Fig. 1a,b. With high and moderate supply
of photosynthesis with €02 there is a geometric similarity of curves 1, 2
which would enable us to approximate them with the single equation

l;$n04

I" ._
we} =1—0,22(-—".—'i’-- . (7)

The extremely low level of supplying of 002 (curve 3) impairs this pattern
similarly to Fig. 1: an increase in the intensity of illumination cannot be
realized due to the insufficiency of 002 and photosynthesis is maintained at

a level corresponding to «’2000 qu.

The noted pattern is observed in numerous series of curves constructed by
D. I. Shashko for the correlation between crop yield and atmospheric moisten-
ing in regions with different heat supply [12].

 

Pig. 3. Dependence of productivity “/HOBT on moistening B and heat supply T
indices. a) dependence of “lunar on 3 against different temperature back-
ground; b) dependence of “I“OBT on T against different noistening background;

c) dependence of "/HOBT on B and T.

The dependence of the productivity production functions on any factor was an-

alyzed by Heddi and Dillon applicable to different types of agricultural pro-
duction [9]. As a result they demonstrated that the production function of

16
FOQ1DFFIJAI.USI(INLY
any factor can be represented by a family of such curves. each of which cor-
responds to a definite value of another factor. To this conclusion we add
that with high levels of the "other" factor the curves have a uniform geo-
metrical similarity. which makes it possible to represent them in relative
units in the form of one generalized curve,and that with adequately low lev-
els of the "other“ factor the similarity is impaired in the direction of a
convergence of the boundaries of the admissible and optimum values of the
studied factor, in the direction of a reduction of the tolerance limits rel-
etive to this factor. The experimental data show that such an impairment
occurs with such low values of the limiting factor that these conditions can-
not be considered admissible for production.

Using these conclusions and making the assumption that under production con-
ditions not one of these factors lessens productivity to the level at which
the normal adaptation of plants to other factors is impaired. we will exam-
ine the complex influence exerted on productivity by two factors, such as
moistening B and heat supnly T. Figure 3 schematically shows the nature of this
influence. The correlation of different functions of two variables, includ-
ing the production functions of productivity due to any two factors [9], 13 ex-
pressed similarly. In much the same way, we express productivity in fractions
of the maximum No“ values corresponding to the optimum moistening and heat
supply values. With such an expression the changes in l and q within the
framework of the adopted assumptions are proportional to the change in the
numerator and denominator, retaining the form of the dependence H/HOB 31 =
r (B. T). Using the assertion of a uniform geometric similarity of the

amfy of curves in Fig. 3a, b, it can be shown that at any point in the
plane with the coordinates T, B the function H/Ho - H/HOBT (B, T) within
the limits of the region of its determination cannge represented as the pro-
duct of the particular functions for one variable:

 

M M
[08 - 08; GET - on; ——(B. T): _'7ZL(B ) 73:17): M... (BY-3707(7) (8)
0T - 0T; 0th - opt] r=1on a.n ”, r+rw, n+nm"

For the proof of equation (8) we will return to Fig. 3. Assume that some heat
and moisture conditions BI and T1 are stipulated.

M(T.B.) __ M , M(T|B-) _ M .
540.5.) — o'er (B L ”(TIBo) _ Mo, (8’).

r. o" 7* 0"

M (7.8.)_ 717")?” M (7.1m __ M
I

1“ 0030’: Tu?“ 7777.717) _ ”‘7‘,”
M'

It follows from the similarity of the curves in Fig. 3a that

M (7.8.) _M(TB) _M_ u
M" (7.57)" M(r.'5,")= rm!" (3. .)-—¢ r (B).
r: f

0" BI!

17

IN)! OFFICIA1.IISI:(HNLY
FOR OFFNJAJ.USEGDNLY

It follows from the similarity of the curves in Fig. 3b that

; M<r.n.)_ mm. _ (r) —(7.)
Mug—0:) m— WM— |-' 7-1...

s-ﬁ" us,"

'Expressing the sought-for productivity H(T1B ) in fractions of productivity
under optimum heat and moisture conditions IHETOBO) we obtain

M(T.8.l _ M(T-n;l'MlTuR) =
MUM.)- “(Tsua)‘ndoﬁ'l) ﬁ.;'(8|) it." (7"): M: H‘B) TIL _(,)

1'." 5-D.“ ”if“, n/nm,

If, for example, M(T1 B1 ) is 0.80 of “(T1 B ). whereas H(Tlﬂo) is 0.90 of
H(ToBo), it is obvious1 that H(T131) is 0.18 0.8 - 0.72 of H(TOBO).

The principles set forth can be used in evaluating productivity on the basis
of a great number of factors. In a general case, if the productivity of lands
ls evaluated on the basis of N factors (such as q is broken down into a number
of individual factors: pH, supply with nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, trace
elements, etc. ), as a comparison it is necessary to select the parameter

"0x1' x2...., “ON. corresponding to the optimum supply for these N fac-
tors. The depengence M/HON - f' (:1, x2..... x N) does not have a geometrical
representation if N>’2; for its analytical expression it is necessary to have
recourse to the mathematical tool of N-dimensional space.

In this general case it can also be demonstrated that within the limits of the
assumption made, when under production conditions not one of the factors drops
to a level impairing the normal reaction to other factors (impairing the uni-
form geometrical similarity of the curves). the function H/Ho“ - HIM?“ (x1, x2,

..xN ) can be represented in the form of the product of particular unctions
for one variable

A! A!

.u .u . .-ﬂ_ .__ . __ .
173;. ;: M: 1.“) Max, (x) 01: (A3) . . . Max” (3,.) (9)

or written more concisely
K1.....N'-=K1'K2'K1" - 'KN' (9')

Since productivity as a function of n factors does not have a geometric rep-
resentation, it is impossible to give a graphic illustration of the proof of
equations (9) and (9').

A proof can be obtained similar to that given above for equation (8). suc-
cessively examining the joint coefficient of two factors K1 2 - K1. K2 with a
coefficient of the third factor K3, of three factors K1 2 3 with the fourth

Kg. etc.
A'"3=K"-"K3=KI'KVK33
l\’l..'.',l4-I\’L-I3--K'—Kl K3. KJK. etc.

Thus, the overall problem of expression of productivity as a function of many
variables can be divided into individual independent problems of expression
of productivity as functions of the individual factors determined with arbi-
trary values of the other factors.

18

FOI‘OFMKJAI.USE(IVLY
In order to use equations (8) and (9) for obtaining some idea concerning the
productivity “/HOBT as a function of the two variables 8 and T it is suf-
ficient to have n experiments for determining H - H(B) with arbitrary values
of the other factors (in Fig. 3c - an arbitrary section of the "dome" along
the T—axis), that is, a total of Zn experiments. It is easy to confirm that
for solvtion of this problem without equations (8) and (9) it is necessary to
carry out n experiments for determining H - “(3) with n temperature levels,
that is. n2 experiments. with an increase in the number of studied factors
the use of equation (9) gives still greater advantages.

Equation (9) also simplifies conversion from the determined evaluations of
productivity as a function of N production factors to probabilistic evalua-
tions, which in direct computations are unwieldy and are possible on a prac-
tical basis only in the case of what are known to be incorrect simplifica-
tions [10]. For probabilistic evaluations of productivity in time it is suf-
ficient to obtain long-term series of values of the necessary parameters,

to compute the productivity for each year using equation (9) and find the
parameters of the distribution of the determined series of N/Ho values, on
the basis of which usual procedures are employed in computing tﬁe integrals
of probabilities.

we will show further how it is possible. using the principles set forth above.
on a practical basis to make an evaluation of the productivity of lands using
the most important production factors -— heat and moisture supply. It was in-
dicated above that the generalized evaluations of large land parcels coal-en-
surable in size with geographic zones should be made using mean annual atmo-
spheric indices of moistening and heat supply [7]. For practical production
evaluations in a system for cadastral regionalization and classification of
lands the resolution of these indices is inadequate. For these purposes we
proposed more detailed indices, on the average characterizing the conditions
of the growing season for different crops [7]. The dependence H/Hog '

M/HOB (B) (see (8)) is described by equation (6). As the heat supply in-

dex we use the parameter TITO, where T is the mean air temperature for the
growing season, To is the optimum T value for the considered crop. An anal-
ysis of data in the literature on the correlation of the productivity of
different crops and the temperature of their growing season enabled us to de-
scribe the dependence H/HOT - H/HOT (T) by the equation

[or - or] K, :17. :2, (1L)n(1,5o — -;-). (10)

Comparing equations (6), (8) and (10). we obtain

[31' = 8T; 03': . oar] Kn=m%=l‘.-(r—I)=l'i2'°(‘l1':.‘)m'("50—';7“ (11)

l .

As an illustration we will cite the following example. The mean long-term val-
ucs of the Y'and TITO parameters for the meteorological stations Nemehinovka
in Moskovskaya Oblast and Shemakha in the Nagorno-Kabardinskaya Autonomous 0b-
last applicable to winter wheat are equal to the following: r’for the soil
layer 0-100 cm - 0.75 and 0.65; T -- 15 and 19.5’c; TITO -- 0.60 and 0.90.

19

FOI<OFHKJAJ.USE(NNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

For the Nemchinovka meteorological station MIMOBT - M/Mog (B)-M/M0T (T) - 0.93

~0.65 - 0.60. For the Shemakha meteorological station the corresponding value
is 0.70:0.97 . 0.68.

77%

7/
W

777/

.Z/

 

M.
47 a

Pig. 4. Correlation between mean (1970-1975) yield of winter wheat and hydro-
thermal index KB?-
Table 1

Winter Wheat Yield (1970-1975. Mean Rayon Data) and Mean Long-Term Indices of
Heat and Moisture Supply of Spring-Sumner Growing Season According to Data of
Meteorological Stations in Krasnodarskiy Kray

Rayon center, )’ K3 T'c T/To KT KB'KT centners,
meteorological hectare
station

Belaya Glina 0.51 0.76 14.0 0.78 0.88 0.67 23.5
Kanevskaya 0.57 0.82 13.5 0.75 0.85 0.70 29.6
Tikhoretsk 0.61 0.85 13.5 0.75 0.85 0.72 26.3
Korenovsk 0.69 0.90 13.7 0.76 0.86 0.77 38.4
Slavyansk-na-

Kubani 0.74 0.93 12.9 0.71 0.80 0.74 31.1
Ust'-Labinsk 0.70 0.91 13.9 0.77 0.87 0.79 40.1
Krasnodar '

(Kruglik) 0.63 0.87 14.1 0.78 0.88 0.76 35.9
Krymsk 0.68 0.90 13.4 0.74 0.84 0.75 33.1
Maykop 0.68 0.90 13.4 0.74 0.84 0.75 28.7

It is evident that an evaluation of productivity using equations (6). (10) and
(11) is not comprehensive and complete because it does not take into account
the dynamics of moistening and heat supply during the course of the growing
season and does not take into account the probability of wintering of winter
crops and the possibilities of frosts, the difference in nighttime and daytime
temperatures, etc. This does not discredit the proposed principles for evalu-
ating productivity. An evaluation using equations (6), (10) and (11) on the
basis of the mean indices of the growing season is more detailed than mean
annual evaluations, but is not the last degree of detail: each of the enumerat-
ed factors can be taken into account and included in the computations in

20
FOIIOFFKJA1.UBIIMNLY
accordance with equation (9). This requires a clarification of the influence
of an individual factor on productivity, as was done by A. I. Korovin. et a1.
with respect to frosts [3].

He can add to the hydrothermal characteristic of productivity still another
characteristic related to illumination (see equation (7)), but it will not
have great practical importance because the agricultural zones of the coun-
try are adequately supplied with light. This characteristic is of signif-
icance in the case of cultivation of crops under a glass cover, when it is
necessary to compare the energy expenditures on illumination and the antic-
ipated increment of production. The illumination factor is interesting with
respect to the influence of solar activity on the productivity of plants, but
the lack of clear criteria of this factor and especially its quantitative
correlations with productivity at present does not make possible its use in
computations. although equation (9) in principle affords such a possibility.

In order to check the procedures which we have proposed for evaluating produc-
tivity on the basis of equation (11), we carried out computations for winter
wheat using data from several meteorological stations located in Krasnodarskiy
Kray. a rather uniform region favorable for agriculture. and compared these
computations with the actual productivity, crop yield.

The results given in Table l and in Fig. 6 show that the high yields of win-
ter wheat in the Ust'-Labinskiy Rayon and the relatively low yields in Belo-
glinskiy Rayon are regular and attributable to the characteristics of moisten-
lng and heat supply. One should not expect from the grain farmers in Belo-
glinskiy Rayon the same production as in Ust'-Labinskiy Rayon. The results also
indicate that the yields in Haykopskiy and Tikhoretskiy Rayons are 5-6 centner/
hectare below the level governed by their heat and moisture supply. The at-
tainment of this level is possible with an increase in soil fertility and

an upgrading of the crop cultivation system.

Summary

I. The productivity of agricultural crops. a target, the criterion of optimal—
ity of agricultural production -- can be represented mathematically as a func-
tion of many variables, the complex interrelationships between which do not
make it possible to represent it in explicit form suitable for specific com-
putations.

2. With a good and satisfactory supply of agricultural crops with growth con-
ditions suitable for production the correlation between productivity and an
individual factor is expressed by a family of similar curves, each of which
corresponds to a definite level of assurance of other factors.

3. The uniform geometric similarity of the family of curves relating produc-
tlvity and an individual factor makes it possible to represent them by a gen-
eralized function. and the general problem of expressing productivity as a

function of many variables can be divided into special problems for individ-

ual factors and it is possible to give a quantitative evaluation of the influ-
ence of each of them.

21

FOI1DFFKJA1.0881MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. The cited conputations on the principal meteorological factors — heat and
moisture supply -- make it possible to evaluate the actual and poaential pro-
ductivity of crop cultivation in different land use areas at the level of
cadastral regions.

The author expresses appreciation to Ye. M. Chirk and D. I. Shsshko for con-
sultations and assistance in carrying out this study.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Boyarinov, A. I. and Kafarov, V. V., MB‘I'ODY OPTIMIZATSII V KHIMICMESKOY
TEKIINOLOGII (Optimization Methods in Chemical Technology), Moscow. Khim—
iya, 1975.

2. Vil'yans, V. R., OSNOVY ZMEDELIYA (Principles of Crop Cultivation), Mos-
cow. Sel'khozgiz. 1939.

3. Korovin, A. 1., Msnayev, Ye. V. and Mokiyevskiy, V. M., OSENNE-VESEMNIYE
USLOVIYA POCODY I UROZHAY OZIMYKH (Autumn—Spring Weather Conditions and
the Yield of Winter Crops), Leningrad, Gidroueteoizdat, 1977.

la. Lenan, V. M., KURS SVETOKUL'TURY RASTENIY (Course on Illumination Condi-
tions for Plants), Moscow, Vysshaya Shkola, 1976.

5. Mezentsev, V. 8.. RASCHET VODNOGO BALANSA (Computation of the Water Bal-
ance). Omsk. 1976.

6. OSNOVY ZEMEL'NOGO ZAKONODATEL'STVA SOYUZA SSR I SOYUZNYKH RBSPUBLIK
(Principles of Land Legislation for the Soviet Union and Union Republics),
VBDOMOSTI VERKHOVNOGO SOVETA SSSR, No 51, 1968.

7. Skalaban, V. 0., "Methods for Evaluating Moisture Supply of Lands in a
System for Natural-Agricultural Regionalization and Classification of
Land Resources in the USSR, " SB. 'I'RUDOV 61le (Collection of Transactions
of the State Institute of Land Resources), No 20, 1978.

8. Sudnitsyn. I. 1., DVIZ'IENIYB POCHVENNOY VLAGI I VLAGOPUIRBBLBNIYE RASTENIY
(Movcnent of Soil Moisture and Moisture Supply of Plants), Moscow, Izd-vo
MGU, 1979.

9. Hedi, B. and Dillon, 0., PROIZVODSTVENNYYE PUNK‘I'SII V SBL'SKOM KHOZYAYSI'VE
(Production Functions in Agriculture), Moscow, Progress, 1965.

[0. Shabanov, V. V., BIOKLIMATICHESKOYB OBOSNOVANIYE HELIORATSIY (Bioclinatic
Basis of Melioration), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1973.

ll. AGROFIZICHESKIYB, AGROME‘I‘BOROLOGICIIESKIYE I AGRO’IKKHNICHESKIYE OSNOVY PRO-
CWIROVANIYA UROZHAY (Agrophysical, Agrometeorological and Agrotechnical
Principles of Yield Programing), Leningrad, Gidroueteoizdat, 1980.

12. Shashko, D. 1.. AGROKLIMATICHESKOYE RAYONIROVANIYE SSSR (Agroclilatic Re-
gionalization of the USSR), Moscow, Kolos. 1967.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 551.510.36:551.501.793+551.507.362.1

METHOD FOR MEASURING VERTICAL OZONE DISTRIBUTION BY OPTICAL METHOD 0“
METEOROLOGICAL ROCKETS ,

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No lo, Apr 82 (manuscript received
11 Jun 81) pp 100-105

[Article by N. I. Brezgin. Central Aerological Observatory]

[Abstract] Since 1973 specialists at the Central Aerological Observatory have
been carrying out investigations of the vertical distribution of ozone by an
optical method using meteorological rockets. Here the author describes the
method for computing the vertical distribution of ozone on the basis of observ—
ations of the absorption of UV solar radiation. This is accompanied by a com-
parison of different methods for determining ozone content by the optical neth-
od employed by various authors (N. P. Bobkov, (TRUDY 1P6. No 23. 1975; a. K.
Paetzold. et al., BEITR. PHYS. ATMOSPHARB. Bd 35, BE. 1/2. 1961; R. G. Roble,
et al., PLANET SCI.. Vol 20. 1972). as well as investigation of the error in
measuring the vertical distribution of ozone by the optical method. The ele-
ments and characteristics of the MR512 and “-100 aeteorological rockets most
important for evaluating the measurement errors are examined. The statistical
tests reported here revealed that the photometers and aethods for computing the
vertical distribution of ozone developed for the MR-lZ and M-lOO meteorological
rockets in fact make it possible to determine ozone content in the altitude
range from 20 to 60 km with an error of 10-301. The several comparisons of both
the optical and electrochemical methods revealed that there was a good quanti-
tative and qualitative agreement of the results of measurement of the vertical
distribution of ozone for both the middle and equatorial latitudes. Figures 3,

tables 1; references 16: 9 Russian. 7 western.

23

INNICIHNCIAI.USIIHTLY
FIHlCNﬂNCJAL.USEIDNL¥

UDC 551.513.l

AVAILABLE ATMOSPHERIC POTENTIAL ENERGY AND ITS TRANSFORMATION INTO KINETIC FORM

Moscow HEIEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6. Apr 82 (manuscript received
11. Aug 81) Pp 106-116

[Article by N. Z. Pinus, professor, Central Aerological Observatory]

[Abstract] As early as 1903 H. Hargules demonstrated that in principle only
some part_of the total potential energy can be transformed into kinetic energy;
in 1955 Er N. Lorenz pointed out that that part of the total potential energy
which only in principle can be transformed into kinetic energy can be called
"availablb potential energy." This is the maximum possible quantity of total
potential energy available for transformation into kinetic energy in a consid-
ered closed system. It is not only the quantity of heat entering the atmosphere.
but also the degree of spatial nonuniformity of heating (or cooling) which is
important for the generation of kinetic energy and the maintenance of atmo-
spheric movements of the corresponding (synoptic or larger) scale. This review
of the su ject is based exclusively on the foreign literature. The following
are exami ed: equation of available potential energy, button-Johnson formula,
quantitative evaluations of global available potential energy; budget of avail-
able potential energy; generation of available potential energy and its trans-
formation into kinetic energy; budget of available potential energy for an un-
closed system in a limited area; quantitative evaluation of generation of avail-
able potential energy in middle-latitude cyclones; sources of generation of at-
mospheric kinetic energy; generation of available and kinetic energy in cyclon-
ic formations and in system of general circulation of atmosphere. A series of
tables gives such data as: generation of kinetic energy in cyclones (in develop-
ing, mature and occluded stages); generation of kinetic energy in anticyclones.
The presented materials make clear the the important role of the energetics of
middle-latitude cyclones for the energetics of total circulation of the atmo-
sphere and the complexity of energy transformations. Tables 7; references: 22
Russian.

24

IIIICIHHC1A1.USEGINLV
REVIEW OF MONOGRAPH BY I. V. BUSALAXEV: 'COMPLEX HATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
(METHODS FOR HYDROLOGICAL VALIDATION, MODELING AMD OPTIMIZATION OF DECISIONS)'
(SLOZHNYYB VODOKHOZYAYSTVEMNYYE SISTEMY (MBTODY GIDROLOGICHESKDGO OBOSNOVANIYA,
MODELIROVANIYA I OPTIMIZATSII RESHENIY)). ALMA-ATA, "MAUKA." 1980, 230 PAGES

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 6, Apr 82 pp 117-119

[Review by c. c. Svanidze, corresponding member. USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] The reviewed monograph is devoted to the timely problem of construc-
tion of water management structures: hydrological validation, modeling and op-
timization of the parameters of complex water management systems in the basins
of major rivers. The author approaches solution of this problem by applicatic~
of systems analysis and mathematical programming. The first two chapters, on
the basis of an analysis of the structure and trends in the development of
water management, give a formulation of the methodological principles for

the optimum planning of water management systems. A hierarchical system of
models taking in all the principal aspects of formation of complex water nan-
agement systems is proposed. It is said that this is the very first examination
of the problem in its full breadth and on a unified methodological basis. The
third and fourth chapters examine methods for optimization of the parameters of
the water management system in a river basin and also models related to the
territorial redistribution of runoff. The fifth and sixth chapters are devoted
to the formulation of models of natural conditions, such as local relief and
river runoff. Methods and modeling algorithms developed for the most part by
the author himself are outlined. The seventh chapter deals with the data sup-
port for the adopted decisions.

25
IMHICHNNCIAI.USElH‘LY
PW WIN—IA]. 08b (INL'

ACTIVITIES AT USSR STATE COMMITTEE ON MYDROMETBOROLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
MONITORING

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4, Apr 82 pp 120-121
[Article by G. K. Veselova]

[Abstract] The Central Methodological Commission on Hydrometeorological Fore-
casts held a meeting on 9 December 1981 for discussion of reports by repre—
sentatives of various agencies on the results of testing and adoption of new
forecasting methods. The commission approved a method for the short-range
forecasting of meteorological conditions for atmospheric contamination devel-
oped at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. Tests have revealed that the
probable success of qualitative forecasts for 12-2h hours in advance was 84-87%
and for 36 hours in advance -- from 77 to 822. Details concerning the method
are outlined in TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR, No 220. 1980. The commission also
approved synoptic-statistical methods for background and detailed forecasts of
the mean monthly air temperature anomaly for western Siberia developed at the
Rest Siberian Scientific Research Institute. The methods are based on joint
allowance for various kinds of information on the preceding history of develop-
ment of atmospheric processes, some characteristics of the underlying surface
and solar activity. The background forecast is prepared using correlation
curves and characterizes the most probable class of temperature anomalies in
Western Siberia. The detailed forecast is computed using multiple regression
equations for 15 points in Western Siberia. The fundamentals of the method

are published in TRUDY ZSRNIGMI. No 62, 1979. On an interim basis the commis-
sion allowed the Heat Siberian Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Honitoring to make routine use of a physicostatistical method for pre-
dicting the mean monthly air temperature anomaly and the monthly precipitation
totals during 1982-1983. The method is based on a multiaspect evaluation of

the significance of prognostic criteria characterizing the initial state of the
atmosphere-ocean—continent system. The principles of this method were published
in TRUDY ZSRNICMI. No 35, 1978. A similar method is also to be tested for the
southern part of Western Siberia, but in this case for the months of June-July.
rather than April-July. This variant is described in TRUDY ZSRNIGHI. No 31,
1977. The commission also recommended continued (1982-1983) testing of a meth-
od for predicting droughts in the European USSR and Kazakhstan. Also discussed
and approved was a method for predicting thunderstorms for 12 hours in advance
- a method published in TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR, No 185, 1977.

26

FOIIO'IICIAI.IIIE¢MNLY
CONFERENCES. MEETINGS AND SEMINARS
Moscow HBTEORDLOGIYA I GIDROLDGIYA in Russian No 6, Apr 82 pp 121-123
{Article by G. N. Chichasov]

[Abstract] A conference on "Investigation of Interaction of Heso- and Macro-
processes in the Atmosphere and Application of Statistical Methods in Meteor-
ology" was held at Alma-Ata during the period 20-23 October. A total of 123
reports were presented. Summaries of all the reports were published (TEZISY
VSESOYUZNOY KONFERENTSII. Alma-Ate, FOL KazUGKS, 1981, 103 pages). The article
cited above summarizes some of the most interesting reports (only a few lines
or brief paragraph is devoted to each). Examples of the reports presented are
as follows: Ye. M. Dobryshman, et al. -- on macroscale statistical character-
istics of the global surface pressure field; Ye. P. Borisenkov. et al. -- on
statistical analysis of different schemes for superlong-range forecasts of

the air temperature anomaly for the northern hemisphere; V. P. Heleshko - on
the influence of processes in the atmospheric boundary layer on the formation
of macroscale climatic characteristics; H. I. Yudin -— on determining the qual-
ity of meteorological information and the maximum possible effect of its use;
Ye. Ye. Zhukovskiy -- on effective use of forecasts for different times in ad-
vance; N. A. Bagrov -- on combining several forecasting methods; A. P. Belyshev
-— on methods for correlation and spectral analyses of time series of wind vel-
ocity in invariant form; V. Ye. Prival'skiy - on stochastic models and predict-
ability of macroscale processes in the atmosphere and hydrosphere; L. T. Hat-
veyev -- on the global cloud cover field (statistical analysis and applica-
tions); A. A. Girs, et al. -- allowance for persistent trends and probabilis-
tic characteristics and background forecasts; K. Ya. Vinnikov, et al. -- on

the monitoring of changes in the global thermal regime of the northern hemi-
sphere for the analysis and prediction of recent climatic changes; V. I. Vor-
ob'yev -- seasonal features of distribution of clouds of different genera in
the northern hemisphere on the basis of satellite data; V. V. Penenko -- on
applications of methods of the theory of response in weather and climate fore-
casting; A. S. Ginsburg, et al. -— on numerical modeling of moist convection;
V. Z. Kisel'nikova, et al. -— method for numerical hydrodynamic local weather
forecasting; S. A. Vladimirov -- on numerical modeling of fronts and their
cloud systems; I. P. Kapitanova. et al. -- on energetic and kinematic features
of temperate-latitude cyclones; V. I. Ivanov, et a1. -- on some types of inter-
action of processes at different scales in tropical atmosphere: !h. A. Akhmed-
zhanov -- on the role of mesometeorological processes in the forming of gen—
eral circulation of the atmosphere; D. h. Sonechkin -- on development, realiz-
ation and results of testing of spectral objective analysis of meteorological

fields for the northern hemisphere.
27

F0!!0FFKJAI.USE¢INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NB" SALINITY SCALE AND NEW EQUATION FOR STATE 01’ SEA WATER

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4. Apr 82 pp 123-125
' [Article by 0. I. Hauyev]

[Abstract] A group of UNESCO experts in the field of oceanographic tables and
standards net at Sidney. British Colunbia. during the period 1-5 Septenber
1980 and-adopted important reconendations on the introduction of new ocean-
ographic standards: practical salinity scales (1978) and international equa-
tion for the state of sea water (1980). Constituting the product of 15 years
of work, it was proposed that the recomendations become effective on 1 Janu-
ary 1982. (See TENTH REPORT OF m Jonrr PANEL ON OCEANOGRAPHIC TABLES AND
STANDARDS, Sidney, B. c., Canada, 1-5 September 1980, sponsored by UNESCO,
ICES. SCOR. IAPSO, UNESCO Technical Papers in Marine Science, No 36, 1981.)
Both the official docments resulting from this nesting were published in
OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), No 2, 1982. This article sumarizes the UNESCO
publication. It is noted that nunbers 37 and 38 of the TECHNICAL PAPERS will
contain the technical docunentstion and measure-en: data serving as a basis
for the standards. Nuaoers 49 and 40 will contain Volumes 3 and 6 of the
"International Oceanographic Tables," devoted to the conversion of conduc-
tivity into salinity and vice versa, as well as computation of the density of
sea water and other related parameters. such as the speed of sound, and each
section will contain determinations of the functions and the algorithms for
their computation, examples of the progress in FORTRAN and concise tables of
oceanographic data.

28

roe OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No (6, Apr 82 pp 125-128
[Article by V. A. Znamenskiy and B. I. Silkin]

[Abstract] In 1981 UNESCO issued Volume I of METHODS OF CMUTATION OF THE HATER
BALANCE 0? LARGE LAKES AND RESERVOIRS. This manual, briefly reviewed here, de-
scribes methods for deter-lining individual balance components, criteria for
determining the quantity of precipitation by radars and gives details on con-
puting the quantity of precipitation by indirect methods. Other sections are
devoted to the use of data on water masses for computing the balances of chen-
ical and contaminating substances entering water bodies, use of evaporators of
different types. turbulent diffusion, water- and heat balance methods. Volume
II, prepared by Russian and Canadian specialists, will give the requirements
on initial intonation necessary for the coaputations, a description of pro-
cedures for computing the balance and its components in specific and abstract
examples, empirical methods for checking the correctness of computation of
water balance elements and netth for using the water balance for evaluating
the balance of cheaical substances. A special section gives a review of the
water balances of lakes and reservoirs prepared using data from 42 countries,
all these data being systenatized by continents for lakes with areas of more
and less than 500 In? and for reservoirs.

in

It is reported in CLIMATIC CHANGE. Vol 3, 1981, and NE" SCIENTIST. Vol 91. No
1274. 1981. that the researcher N. Rosenburg, a professor at the University
of Nebraska, has made interesting studies of the influence of 002 accumulat-
ing in the atmosphere as a result of human activityon vegetation. It ap-
pears that "group C3" crops, such as rice. oats, wheat, sugar beets and soy-
beans, are most sensitive to the content of (20:, which favors a rapid increase
in their green lass. Sugar cane. sorghum, corn and nillet. in "group C1,," also
undergo an activation of photosynthesis processes under the influence of an
increase in the quantity of 602, but to a lesser degree. The pores in the
leaves of "ca" plants are closed to a greater degree with an increase in 002
and this results in a reduction in moisture and gas exchange with the atmo-
sphere and plants in both groups have an increased efficiency in using water.
An increase in atnospheric C02 content, predicted for the next 50 years, even
if it leads to appreciable climatic changes, should exert a direct positive in-
fluence on the growth of may plants.

it

29
mammouu
FOR¢MﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NQLY

1n NATURE, V01 291, 1981. and NEW SCIENTIST, Vol 91, No 1262, 1981 it was re-

ported that the Australian geologist c. 1. Williams, in studying niltstone and
sandstone deposits in the Plinders Range, discovered easily discernable evi-
dence of a periodicity coinciding with solar activity cycles. Since the age

of these rocks dates back to the Precambrian, they can be used in judging

the course of solar activity and its influence on climate. At that tine it
appears that the cyclicity of solar activity was the sane as now but its in-
fluence on meteorological processes was greater than at the present time. A
l80-year series indicates that the cycles were repeated on the average each
11.2-11.3 years, whereas the record for the last 203 years indicates that the
mean period between solar ninima is 11.1 years and between naxina is an aver-
age of 10.9 years. The Flinders deposits also reveal evidence of a 22-year
cycle of solar spot-forming activity. During the 22 years the magnetic field
first changes its direction and then returns to the initial direction. A 90—
year cycle is also reflected in these deposits. It was possible in this way to
trace solar activity over the course of 1760 years. A hypothesis was advanced
explaining why solar activity exerted such an influence on weather and climate
700 million years ago and why its effect has now greatly diminished. The geo-
logical evidence from the Flindera Range indicates that during the last 700
million years solar activity has remained virtually at the same level.

30

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(HNLY
OBITUARY 0F RUVIM LEYZBROVICH KAGAN (1928-1981)
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 4. Apr 82 p 128

[Article by a group of associates]

[Abstract] Ruvim Leyzerovich Kagan. doctor of physical and mathematical sci-
ences. a leading specialist in the field of statistical meteorology, died on

5 October 1981. Leyzerovich devoted 30 years of his life to the field of
meteorology. 25 of them being spent at the Main Geophysical Observatory. His
career began as a weatherman in Central Asia in 1951 after his graduation from
the Physics Faculty of Leningrad University. After loving to the Main Geophys-
ical Observatory in 1955, he carried out a series of investigations of the in-
fluence of stratification on the dynamics of macroscale atmospheric movements,
work which led to receipt of his candidate's degree in 1960; his doctoral de-
gree was awarded in 1968 for his investigations in the field of interpreta-
tion of meteorological observations. His monograph STATISTICHESKIYZ HETODY IR-
TERPRETATSII METEOROLOGICHESKIKH DANNYKR (Statistical Methods for the Inter-
pretation of Meteorological Data) was published in 1976. His fundamental stud-
tea in the field of the stochastic theory of averaging were generalized in

the monograph OSRBDNENIYE METEOROLOGICHESKIKH FOLEY (Averaging of Meteorolog-
ical Fields), the only monograph ever published on this subject. The author

of more than 150 scientific studies, he made significant contributions in the
development of the method for the climatological processing of data and the
development of methods for computing climatic characteristics for the purposes
of monitoring climate and solving practical problems.

COPYRIGHT: "Meteorologiya i gidrologiya". 1982

S303 - END -
C50: 1864/10

31
FOI‘OIFKJAI.UBE¢MULY