FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10110

10 November 1981

Translation

MAN AND SPACE ASTRONAVIGATION

By

Valeriy Fedorovich Bykovskiy. at al.

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
“ill OFFN'I \l {'31: “SI \

JPRS L/lOllO
10 November 1981

MAN AND SPACE ASTRONAVIGATION

Moscow CHELOVEK I KOSMICHESKAYA ASTRONAVIGAISIYA in Russian 1979
(signed to press 26 Jan 79) pp 2-6, 31-71, 103-207, 220-222

[Annotation, introduction, Chapters 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and table of
contents from book "Man and Space Astronavigation", by Valeriy
Fedorovich Bykovskiy, Leonid Pavlovich Grimak, Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich
Ivanov et 81., edited by V. F. Bykovskiy, candidate of engineering
sciences, pilot-cosmonaut of the USSR, V. P. Merkulov, doctor of
engineering sciences and L. S. Khachatur'yants, doctor of medical
sciences, lzdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye", 1700 copies, 224 pages,
illustrated]

CONTENTS

Annotation OOOOOOUOOOOOOOOOIOOO0.0.00.00I...OIOOOIOOIOOODOOOOOOOOIIO00.... 1
IntraduCtion noose...oeesou-ooeo-eooeeeeeeeesoeeeoeeooeoo-eeeaoeoeeoooo-co 2
Chapter 2. Man in the System of Space Astronavigation ................... 5
Chapter 3. Problems of Engineering Psychology in Development of Visual

Optical Means of Space Astronavisation oODeocooooeoootoIOOIIIOOOOO'OIOOO 22
Chapter 5. Modeling Conditions of Operator-Astronaut Performance in

Solving Astronavlgation Problem oeooeeoeoooooooeoeeoeeeooolooooeoeoeeoe (.1
Chapter 6. Evaluation of Effectiveness of Astronavigation Systems

"ilhaﬂumn operator 0'0.0.0.0....IIOOOOOIOOOIOOUOOOOIOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOO. 59

Chapter 7. Method for Overall Evaluation and Forecasting Quality of
Operator Performance in Solving Astronavigation Problems (According to
Characteristics of His Psychophysiological State) ...................... 117
Table of contents O...OIOIOOIOOOIOOOO0.0.0.0...IIIIIIDOOOOOODOOOODO0...... 133
FOI_OI11(1A|.llﬂE(NVLV

UDC: 629.78.05.001.24

' mention

'[Text] This book deals with the inception of astronavigation; it denonstrates the
link between aviation and space astronavigation. There is discussion of the

: equipment for space astronavigation, methods of assessing the accuracy of various
astronavigation techniques. Analysis is nade of cosmonaut work during space

flights.

This book is intended for engineering and technical workers involved in development
and use of systems of navigation and control of manned space flights.

1
RUIIMWHCIAI.USE¢MVLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USB(NﬂUY

INTRODUCTIOR

Celestial navigation is an ancient science that mankind used to solve numerous
practical problems for many centuries. The famous sesfarer, Christopher Columbus,
who discovered America, realized even then, in 1692, the great importance of
astronomy in determining the location of a ship at see. He said: "There is only
one error-free seafaring calculation-astronomic; fortunate is the one who is
familiar with it" [“7]. without the help of celestial navigation it would be
extremely difficult for man to orient himself, not only in the open sea but, in
many cases, on land as well.

For a long time, celestial navigation was an area of applied astronomy. With the
development of all types of transportation and, in particular, aviation, astro-

navigation gradually developed into an independent branch of science dealing with
the patterns and methods of spatial orientation with the help of heavenly bodies.

Aviation astronomy is a relatively young discipline, which took over many methods
from maritime astronomy. However, because of the differences in aviation, as
compared to ships (for example, higher speeds), these methods underwent substantial
refinement and changes.

For example, it is considerably more complicated to measure the altitude of heavenly
bodies above the planet‘s horizon in aviation. The reasons for this are. in the
first place, the great distance from the horizon, which makes it difficult to
superimpose precisely the image of such a body on the horizon due to atmospheric
haze; in the second place, inaccurate knowledge about the aircraft's altitude

above the surface of the earth and irregularity of earth's topography at the hori-
zon, as well as bumpiness of aircraft in some cases, which makes it difficult to
take precise readings. These differences are so significant that they led to the
use in aviation of sextants with an artificial horizon, which is formed on the
basis of diverse pendulums, often of the liquid type. In order to reduce reading
errors due to bumpy flight, special integral averaging devices are also used. In
addition, by now some high-precision automatic and automated (i.e., those operating
with the participation of an aircraft navigator) navigation systems have been
developed and constructed, which permit continuous determination of the geographic

coordinates of an aircraft in flight; automatic astronomic course instruments,
astrocorrectors for inertial navigation systems and many others were also
developed.

Launching in the Soviet Union of the Vostok spacecraft manned by Yuriy Gagarin
inaugurated the era of manned space flights. As time passes, the duration of
space flights is increasing and their programs are growing more complex. The

FINICHNHCIAI.USE¢DNLY
FOI*0F1WC1AI.USE¢DNLV

knowhow gained in flying aboard modern aircraft and manned spacecraft showed the
great importance of operational and accurate navigation support. The increasing
complexity of space flight programs makes it necessary to develop and use autonomic
[self-contained] ways and means of space navigation involving the use of modern on-
board computer equipment.

It is a pressing task to pursue studies for development and improvement of the
effectiveness of ways and means of astronomic navigation of manned spacecraft. In
this regard, cosmonauticsmmst define the duties of a spacecraft navigator, his role
and place when performing the main operations for autonomous navigation.

There are a number of distinctions to solving problems of celestial guidance of
spacecraft, and they affect the professional performance of cosmonauts.

The navigation methods that are guided by the sun, stars and planets, which are
very accurate and unrelated to distance or duration of flight are quite promising.
Astronavigation systems are autonomous in nature, and they require no additional
information from ground-based equipment. They can operate at infinitely long dis-
tances from earth. These systems, which use heavenly bodies as reference points,
are quite resistant to possible artificial interference.

Development of celestial guidance systems is a complex technical task. and it re-
quires work on a wide range of interrelated problems referable to optics, light
engineering, precision mechanics and a number of other branches of modern science
and technology. The difficulty of navigation support of spacecraft flights lies
in the fact that each flight must provide for laying out the optimum trajectories
for efficient performance of the specified assignment with specified energy re-
sources. This means that there is a rigid flight schedule which is planned on
earth for each mission. However, because of errors in guidance [into orbit?], use
of corrective maneuvers and possibility of "overshooting" in flight, it becomes
necessary to have autonomous calculation of many navigational data abbard the
spacecraft. In this regard, the efficiency of performing the set assignment
aboard a manned spacecraft will depend significantly on the characteristics of its
navigational equipment and the crew‘ s ability to solve navigation problems at
different stages of a flight.

In recent times, development of navigation equipment resulted in the use of inertial
navigation systems (INS) with and without platform. Those without platform have
several advantages overthose with them. Development of such systems involving the
use of inertial elements based on new physical principles will make it possible to
create inertial systems that will provide for a high degree of precision in deter-
mining the piloting-navigational and orbital parameters of flight.

Pressing problems of theory of inertial systems have been studied comprehensively
by Soviet and foreign authors [2, 36, 42, 66].

The requirement that accuracy of inertial navigation systems had to be improved
first led to an effort to make use of classical statistical methods, such as the
least squares or maximum plausibility method. Subsequently, to improve the
accuracy of inertial navigation, recurrent methods of statistical evaluation became
popular. Analysis of the margin of error of inertial elements (accelerometers,
gyroscopes) revealed that it is impossible at the present time to assure the ne-
cessary precision of solving navigation problems by inertial systems with or without
platforms without using additional external information.

3
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY

The following sensors of external information can be used to correct inertial navi-
gation systems aboard manned spacecraft: automatic astronsvigational devices (astro-
telescopes); Doppler flight speed and altitude indicator; unit for determining the
direction of the local vertical (1! [infrared1] vertical, radio vertical); visual
optic device for determining directions on celestial reference points (optical
sight); optical visual devices for determining the altitude of heavenly bodies.

Space flights will continue to be unique events for a long time, and the capabili-
ties of spacecraft will remain limited. For this reason, developers of space equip-
ment will be faced for a long time with the requirements of low weight, small size
and low energy consumption. In this respect, the use of optical visual means of
correction (sights and sextants) is the most acceptable variant. The expediency of
such devices is also due to the fact that the operator-cosmonaut can determine with
their help, independently and without communication with earth, not only the coor-
dinates of the position of his spacecraft, but check (monitor, control] such navi-
gational parameters as the direction of the local vertical and altitude of flight.

For a long time, man aboard a spacecraft will remain the principal link in a semi-
automated system of self-contained astronavigation.

As we know, the psychophysiological functions of a cosmonaut change during flight,
and this is manifested the most obviously by the change in senaorimotor fine
coordination functions, which constitute the foundation of professional skill in
astronavigstional orientation [38, 73, 75].

A designer who plans and designs any system that operates with the participation

of a human operator must take into consideration the psychophysiological capabilities
of man, not only under conditions of normal function, but with exposure to different
space flight factors which alter the level of his work capacity.

Thus, space astronavigation of today is based on many branches of knowledge,

which at first glance often appear to be very far removed from one another. For
this reason, this monograph is the collective work of various specialists-engineers
and psychophysiologists, cosmonauts and physicians, psychologists, mathematicians
and methodologists.

The authors concentrated primarily on shedding light on questions of improving

the efficiency of operation of a semiautomated system of self-contained astronavi-
gation and formation of recommendations on optimizing its operation.

6
FOR»OFT1(IAI.USI2(NWLY
roe OFFKJAI.IINI¢NVLY

CHAPTER 2. MAN IN THE SYSTEM OF SPAQE ASTRONAVIGAIION

2.1. Structure of Cosmonaut's work in Astronavigation System

At the present time, the opinion has been established that complete automation

of solving space astronavigation problems is not efficient. It is imperative to
include an element that integrates all other elements to assure the operation of

a complex navigation system as a whole. In modern navigation systems, man is such
an element, since his mental properties enable him to best solve problems of integ-
ration. Expressly man organizes and coordinates the operation of all elements in
the system, uniting them into a single whole [53, 74].

while automatic calculations are used in a navigation system, the main observations
must still be made and finalized by man. Man is the principal element in all
possible approaches with respect to performing reserve functions in solving naviga-
tion problems (of both observation and calculation). Horeover, the human operator
has definite advantages in solving a number of special problems of space astro-
navigation.

Thus, it has now becoae apparent that it is impossible to develop either the Iain
or ancillary navigation system without taking into consideration the capabilities
of the human operator.

Development of equipment, with which the operator works, must be preceded by analysis
of the structure of his activities in solving a specific problem. In space astro-
navigation, one of the main operations performed by man is taking astronomical
measureaents. The entire operation required for this can be illustrated with an
abstract algorithm scheme (Figure 20). After receiving an order for an astro-
navigational operation, the cosmonaut displays "instrument zero." Then he identi-
fies the specified reference points 094). If the reference point is not identi-
fied (n) he works with the next reference points (92); if it is identified (logic
condition (n) not met), he performs the next operation (aining at reference point)
to which the corresponding needle comes. After sighting [aiming),superposition of
both reference points and taking readings (P, S, C), the cosmonaut must provide
for performance of arithmetic operations (K).

A second operation can be performed to increase the reliability of the results of
solving the astronavigation problem, starting with action "0," to which goes a
needle with the number 7. Consequently, man's visual and motor analyzers are the
psychophysiological basis of this work, as well as his operative memory uhich
is instrumental in identification, guidance, reading instruments and calculations.

5
FOI:OFIICLALIJ§E(N§LY
FIHI(Mﬂﬁ(1Al.USEIM§LY

a: «7 1 5 1

~ _ ' mmoguenteuiﬁfsmfcaixsiawi

  

Logical conditions

 
    
   

   

 

 
     
       
    
      
      
     
    
  

X issuing order "0” data are normal
0 removal of instrument "0" reference point not
identified
01 identification of reference point reference point in cross-
- hairs
02 identification of reserve reference points super-
reference point imposed
P sighting measurement device on parameters do not exceed
reference point range of mean static
series
5 convergence of both reference -
points
C reading instrument correct performance of
actions
K mathematical operations always false logical

 
  
 

   

condition

 

   
 

finding coordinates

Figure 20. Abstract algorithmic scheme for solving astronavigation problem
(variant): actions and logical conditions

2.2. The Cosmonaut's Visual Analyzer During Flight

The cosmonaut’s sight is the decisive factor in a number of cases in solving problems
of autonomous astronavigation. This applies, first of all, to operations such as
measuring angular distances between celestial bodies, between them and the planet's
horizon, between objects on the planet's surface and its horizon, etc. In all
cases, regardless of the design and parameters of sstronomic measuring instru-
ments, the cosmonaut uses the main physiological functions of sight: acuity, dis-
crimination, sensitivity to light and time parameters of visual perception. Of
course, proper manufacture of measurement instruments increases the accuracy and
reliability of the cosmonaut's work, but none of the listed visual functions is ever
excluded from his work.

It should be noted that before publication of the first results of studying visual
functions during space flights, the designers and developers of astromeasurement in-
struments fel'manned spacecraft used data from ground-based experiments. However,
before there were flights into space it was not known what changes could occur in
vision in space. Assumptions were expounded that absence of gravity could cause
deformation of the eyeball and alter the functional capabilities of the visual
analyzer. It was expected that the motor system of the eye would lose, to some
extent, coordination of movements that developed in the course of life, as a

result of which there would be disturbances of visual functions, deterioration

6
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(M‘LY
F0810FFNJAI.USE(NULV

of depth vision, change in processes of accosnodstion and convergence, etc. All
this had to be checked before man would fly into space.

The first experisents were conducted with aircraft with the use of brief weightless-
ness. American specialists reported a decrease in acuity of vision by an average
of 62 during such flights [18]. Some interesting data were also obtained by Soviet
medical men. Thus, L. A. Kitayev-Smyk [66], observed enlargement, vagueness and
distortion of visible objects during brief weightlessness. In his study of color
perception he found that there was heightened sensitivity to brightness of colors,
particularly yellow. Some of his operators observed a purple halo around luminous
objects.

Studies revealed that visual acuity diminished with onset of weightlessness, but
with further exposure to this state it was restored in some subjects or even ex-
ceeded the initial level. These studies were started with the Voskhod spacecraft,
then continued aboard Voskhod-Z, Soyuz-3, -é, -S, ~6, -7, -8 and -9. They con-
sisted of testing visual acuity, visual discrimination or contrast capacity, color
vision and a certain general characteristic of sight, which included both the
above-mentioned functions and some of the time characteristics of vision. We
named the latter general function of vision the operational efficiency of vision
[work capacity]. The studies were conducted by means of specially developed
tabular tests with the use of lined patterns and objects of different colors and
contrast [75].

According to our data, the duration of flights aboard Soyuz spacecraft was adequate
for analysis of the dynamics of visual functions. we found that noticeable changes
occurred in these functions within the first 2-3 days of space flight. The studies
revealed that, while visual functions K diminished by 5-30: during the first days

of flight, as compared to the preflight level, there was subsequent restoration

as a function of flight duration (7: orbital passes), which was indicative of
development by the cosmonauts of certain adaptive or compensatory mechanisms

(Figure 21). Starting with the 60th-50th passes, this process starts to be affected
by other factors, which again lead to some decline of visual functions though not

as significant as at the start of the flight. The maxi-um decline occurred in the
70th-80th orbital passes.

Subsequently, visual functions improved
again, and it is expected that they
‘9 would remain more stable than in the

” I H__L- period between the 30th and 60th passes.
7” 1 After a considerable period of time,
1, there could be another monotonous de-
n, ,1 cline of all of the body's functional
capacities, including sight. He cannot
5 "\—r- .2 state definitely how long this would
-—4-u»a last until a sufficient number of appro-
7 " ’° 7"“ ‘7 9 "' " priate studies is conducted during long-
Figure 21. ‘ term space flights.
changes in visual functions K as related
to duration of flight (Iv-passes) The nature of visual problems, which are
l) operational visual efficiency solved most often with the use of stars
2) visual acuity or other luminous point sources, is
important to working with
7

903(NﬂﬂCLALllﬂZONlY
FINIOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

astromeasuring instruments. It is also known that the operator's visual acuity,
contrast sensitivity and photosensitivity play a substantial role in solving such
problems. Only experiments could show how these parameters of vision would change
during space flights. A special technique was developed for this purpose, which
involved the use of point light sources of graded intensity located on earth's
surface.

He conducted an experiment with the use of such a ground-based visual test during
the flight of the Voskhod spacecraft in October 1965. A special lighting situation
was created on the ground in a desert region, i.e., far from city and village
lights that would hinder the work of the cosmonaut. It consisted of three strips
of lights, each of which consisted of six point sources of light and one reference
light, which was very bright, for certain detection of the strip.

Floodlights with up to 60' angle of beam divergence, powered by a mobile projector
power plant were used as lights. Such projectors can provide a light with intensity
of the order of Jo - 0.2 Hcd. Illusination 3 created in the observer's pupil at

a distance L from the floodlight at orbital altitude H, with atmospheric transmittance
Ta and craft's port transmittance [transparency] TP' can be calculated with the
following formula:

3 - J.urarpL'

For the expected flight conditions. the following values of these parameters could
be expected: H . 200 km, L - 400 km, 1. I 0.8 and tp - 0.75. In this case,

B - 0.4 ulux. Hith such illumination of the pupil from a point source and

with adequate light adaptation, the eye sees this light source in the form of a
star of about the first magnitude. If we consider, however, that six such lights
will be concentrated in each strip, we can be sure that the distance of L - 600 km
is not the maximum when atmospheric conditions are good and there is a good level
of dark adaptation.

Types A and B flares were discussed as another light source. They provide light
intensity J. in the range of 5 to 15 Hcd. Measurement of illumination generated
at an altitude of 1000 m by burning flares revealed that the intensity of light
from these types of flares constituted 6-5 and 10 Hcd, respectively.

By making calculations analogous to those described above. we will find that
intensity of light on the cosmonaut's pupil at a distance of L - 600 km is E -
5 ulux and E - 10 ulux, respectively. we used lights created by flares for the
experiment conducted during the flight of the Voskhod spacecraft.

The angular distances between lights diminished because of the distortions of
perspective when the cosmonauts observed the light strips. If we use 1 to desig-
nate the horizontal distance to the lights, 3 for altitude of flight and A for the
linear distance between the lights on the ground, the angular distance An (in
angular minutes) between the lights, as observed by the cosmonauts, can be ob-
tained with the following equation:

 

FK”IOFFHJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

If the minimum angular distance between lights observed by the cosmonaut consti-
tutes Aqn1n, his visual acuity will be V - l/Aqun (for point sources).

During the experiment, the flares were lit 2 min before the spacecraft flew over
the lights. At this time, the distance between the manned spacecraft and lights
was about 1000 km and Voskhod was so oriented that the axis of the porthole
through which spacecraft commander V. H. Komarov looked out was directed forward
and tilted by an angle of the order of 60‘ in relation to earth's surface. The
cosmonaut saw earth's horizon.u:the very top part of the porthole and the rushing
surface of the earth in the middle and at the bottom. V. H. Komarov adapted to
the dark for 8-10 min before approaching the region of the lights.

V. H. Kamarov observed all three light strips at a distance of 400 km and recognized
their location from the familiar configuration, which he immediately reported over
radio. For 1 min, he observed the lights continuously until they left his field

of vision. At the last stage of the overflight, the cosmonaut counted them and
reported that he saw 12 separate lights.

At the time Voskhod flew over the area of the lights, these lights were photographed
continuously from an aircraft flying on the same course and staying constantly on
the line that connected the spacecraft and light strip. Concurrently, measurements
were taken of the light intensty fromam aircraft flying at an altitude of 1000 m.
All this made it possible to check visibility of the lights to the cosmonaut,

since cloud conditions constituted 2-3 points (at an altitude of 6-7 km) and
visibility was 20 km in the area where the lights were used at the time the
spacecraft flew over it. Moreover, the measurements gave us an idea about the
intensity of the lights.

In analyzing the results of this experiment, let us consider two aspects of the
cosmonaut's visual activities. The first is the visual search for the point
sources of light on the dark side of earth. The cosmonaut performed this task
quite well. He not only saw the lighting situation, but identified it. As we
indicated above, the glare of the lights at the time they were detected consti-
tuted 5 ulux for type A flares and 10 plus for type 3. They appeared like stars
of l and 1.58 stellar magnitude, i.e., about the same as the brightest stars in
the sky--Canopus and Sirius.

In the absence of interfering light sources, the detection problem was not difficult.
However, there is usually a difference in time of visual detection of photic
stimuli. In the process of the search, the operator either does not look where

the stimulus is situated, and then detection time increases, or else he looks by
chance expressly at the spot where the stimulus is located and then the search

time is significantly reduced. For this reason, the fact that the cosmonaut

saw the lights at a distance of 400 km is primarily of evaluational value, showing
the order of magnitude determining conditions that are sufficient for this visual
problem.

The second aspect is determination of the cosmonaut's visual acuity from ground-
based lights. It was based on his counting the total number of lights he saw
separately. V. H. Kamarov made such a count at the last phase of the flight, when
the direction of the beam of vision of the lights constituted an angle of about
60° in relation to the plane of the horizon. He counted 12 separate lights in all
3 strips. From this, calculation was made of maximum angles-l.5 to 2.0’, which
corresponds to visual acuity of 0.7 to 0.5 units.

9
FOIIOITICIAI.USE(NVLY
FIHIC”ﬂNCLALI£ﬂE(HVLV

In evaluating the results, it should be noted that visual acuity determined from
point sources situated against a black background is always lower by an average

of 2-4 times than when measured by the conventional method (Landolt rings) [13].

If we consider that the visual acuity of V. H. Romarov measured by the lined
patterns constituted 1.6-1.5 on the ground and underwent virtually no change during
the flight, the obtained decline of visual acuity when measured by point sources

of light conforms well with the above-mentioned range, constituting about 2.5-fold.

The studies revealed that there were relatively minor changes in the main physiolo-
gical functions of sight during the space flight. The levels thereof, which ranged
from 5 to 30-h02, depending on the physiological function, were not high enough to
be detected by the cosmonauts. This gives us some idea about the distinctions of
psychology of visual perception, which is based on comparison of photic stimuli
(simultaneously or after short intervals), ratherthanperception of their absolute
parameters. For this reason, the work capacity of.zha visual analyzer.diminishes
during a space flight by a magnitude of second order smallness, as compared to the
work capacity of different physiological functions of sight given in this chapter,
since the ratio of increment of photic stimulus AS to its value S, to which the
visual analyzer reacts, will remain virtually unchanged if visual sensitivity to
this stimulus is diminished, for example, by al. In this case, the following
ratio applies:

AS . aASllOO
S - aS/lOO

and after conversion:

AS(l - (41002 3 g
S(l - a/lOO) s

i.e., again the same initial ratio, distorted only due to nonlinearity of visual
perception as a function of magnitude of stimulus.

2.3. Photometric conditions Under Which Cosmonauts $01V€ Astronavigation
Problems

The photometric conditions under which a cosmonaut has to take angle measurements
for sstronavigation differ substantially from the conditions under which the same
tasks are performed in shipping and aviation astronomy.

Knowledge and comprehensive consideration of these conditions constitute a manda-
tory prerequisite for the cosmonaut'a proper performance.

The sun is the chief source of light during orbital and interplanetary flights.
However, the composition of its radiation differs appreciably from that present
near earth's surface because of the protective effect of the atmosphere. The
radiant energy of the sun, which fills the space near the sun, includes the entire
range of the electromagnetic spectrum, from long radiowaves and including short
radiowaves, infrared, visible and ultraviolet rays, extending to the region of x-
rays and gamma rays, bordering on cosmic rays. The earth's atmosphere is "trans-
parent" only for a narrow segment of this spectrum. Man is well-adapted to radi-
ations of this segment. The result of the radiation, including radiowavea, has
some deleterious effect on man, which is determined by its intensity, in addition
to frequency. As shown by the experimental studies of the last 2 decades, which

10
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1MNLY
FIHIIHHHC1A1.USE¢NNLY

were conducted with rockets and artificial earth satellites, the short-wave part of
the solar radiation spectrum contains rather intensive ultraviolet (at altitudes of
300 to 100 km) and x- (at less than 100 km) rays. The energy of the visible spectrum
does not differ in space in overall intensity and spectrum from the one on earth, so
' that no special protection against it is required. Radiation in the infrared (IR)
part of the spectrum is hazardous in some cases, in view of absence of absorption
in the atmosphere essentially due to water vapor, since it can be absorbed markedly
by bodies and heat them. In particular, IR radiation has the unpleasant property
of having a harmful effect on the cornea and other transparent media of the eye.
It has been demonstrated that prolonged exposure to IR rays could cause cataracts,
i.e., opacity of the lens. In this respect, short IR rays are of particular signi-

ficance, since they can penetrate through the cornea and aqueous humor of the
anterior chamber of the eye.

X- and ultraviolet (UV) rays are even more dangerous to sight. It is known that UV
radiation causes inflammatory processes in the conjunctiva and cornea. The distinc-
tion of such lesions is that the morbid symptoms of inflammatory processes (sharp

pain, burning of the eyes) do not appear right away, but 6-7 h or more after exposure
to UV.

The foregoing must convince one that the first prerequisite for a navigator-cosmo-
naut to work well when taking astronomic measurements is to protect his vision from

the deleterious effects of x-, UV and IR rays from the sun, including reflected
radiation.

In addition, determination must be made of levels of brightness, contrast, linear,
time and other illumination conditions that provide for optimum measurement quality.
Because of the wide diversity of elements that could be used as bases for astro-
measurements, it is not expedient to solve this problem in its general form. The
elements involved may be as follows: objects of small angular size and brightness
against the background of the stellar sky (stars, planets, artificial earth satel-
lites); objects against the background of the dark side of earth (cities, light
signals from earth, reference lights, artificial earth satellites); objects on
earth's surface illuminated by the sun (cities, seas, rivers, artificial installa-
tions, etc.); objects on the sunlit surface of the moon (craters, "seas," mountains);
horizons of earth. the moon and planets in the solar system, and other objects.

Let us consider the photometric characteristics of some of the above-listed objects.
Of course, stars and planets are and will continue to be the most frequently used
objects for space astronavigation. In view of the fact that the angular dimensions
of these objects are much smaller than the angular resolution of the eye, they
appear as point sources and are characterised by the magnitude of brightness [or
glare] E. Stellar brightness is estimated as the illumination it produces on the
observer's pupil near the boundary of earth's atmosphere. In addition, stellar
magnitude m is a gauge that determines the brightness of a star or other light
source. The scale of stellar magnitudes is determined by the equation m - ~13.89 -
2.5 log a", where an is illumination from the star's brightness m produced on the
pupil of the observer (in lux).

Minimal illumination on the observer's pupil, which enables him to see the star,
is called threshold. This threshold glare [brightness] is a variable that depends
on viewing conditions. These conditions should include, firstzofall, brightness of

11
FOR OFIHCLNLIHHECNVLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(ﬂVLY

the background against which the star is viewed, degree of dark adaptation of

vision, fullness of accommodation of the eye to infinity, approximate knowledge

by the observer of the location of the star, presence of other stars in the field

of vision, light sensitivity of the eyes. experience of the observer in finding

a dim star and, in particular, ability to detect it with lateral vision, ability

to provide optimum motor activity of the eye during the search and many other
factors. This is why reports about visibility during orbital flights are sometimes
so contradictory, particularly when flying over the daytime side of earth. One

of the most important of the above conditions isbackground brightness 3b' We

know that, while threshold brightness is about-But: - l-ulux with an absolutely

black background, with a background of Bg - 0.01 ucd/m‘, threshold brightness already
constitutes 10 ulux, i.e., it increases by 10 times. Thus, the faintest star that
the eye sees against the background of a moonless night sky is a star of the sixth
magnitude. These are average data, and they could change substantially for differeut
observers in either the direction of increase or decrease of threshold brightness. For
example, the results of our studies revealed that the number of stars viewed in the
triangle of a, B and 6 stars in the Dolphin constellation ranges from b to 13

for different observers, which corresponds to a change in brightnesa‘of more thanone
stellar magnitude.

The dependence of threshold brightness on brightness of adaptation background has
been the subject of numerous comprehensive studies. There were sometimes rather
wide discrepancies between data of different authors. Apparently this is attri-
butable to differences in setting up experiments and, in particular, differences
in level of dark adaptation of operators, which does not end entirely even after
50-60 min or more, as well as substantial differences in light sensitivity of
different individuals. Nevertheless, we shall submit as tentative data the re-
sults obtained by Luizov [54] on determination of threshold brightness of a point
source as related to brightness of the background:

Threshold brightness [glare], ulux 0.0203 0.0225 0.025 0.0288 0.0571
Brightness of background, ucd/m2 0.032 0.32 3.2 32.0 320.0

Stars could be viewed in space against a background other than absolutely black
when, for example. there is an "atmosphere" around the spacecraft that is formed
by exhaust from jet engines with angular orientation. The brightness of these
gases in the sun's rays could, in extreme cases, be of the order of 100 cd/m2 or
more, and could hinder viewing stars even of the first stellar magnitude. In
view of the possibility of poorer visibility of stars, one should effect the
angular orientation of the spacecraft in sufficient time for the above-mentioned
atmsophere to dissipate before undertaking astronomic measurements.

Spacecraft illuminated by the sun and viewed from great distances may not necessarily
differ in any way from stars with regard to their appearance. Indeed, if the
spacecraft is 10 m in size, already at a distance of 35 km it cannot be distin-
guished from a star, and its glare will be determined by the phase of illumina-

tion by the sun and aspect , in addition to dimensions and reflective properties

of its surface. Let us consider a spacecraft in the form of a sphere 10 m in
diameter with a diffuse coefficient of reflection of 0.3 and illumination by

the sun's lateral light (1/4 phase). For this case, its brightness will have the
values listed below:

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!“l(lﬁﬂ(141.lﬂﬂé(ﬂ't¥

Threshold glare of spacecraft, plum 10,000 5500 800 400 100 ‘ 4' ' l 0.01
Distance to spacecraft, km 10 20 35 50 100 $00 1000 10,000

As we see, the glare [brightness] of the spacecraft at a distance of several tens
or even hundreds of kilometers will be many times greater than the brightness of
navigational stars. This warrants the statement that there must be several neutral
filters in sextants to equalize the brightness needed for reliable and accurate
measurement of angles between a star (planet) and the spacecraft. This applies in
particular to the case of measuring angles when the distances to the object are
less than 20 km, when it would appear elongated'ts the viewer. It must be stipulated
that, for distances of 35...100 km such an object could also appear elongated. even
though the angular dimension is considerably smaller than the eye's resolution.
This phenomenon occurs due to irradiation of stimulation of retinal regions of the
eye that are adjacent to the one on which there is the image of the star. It is
known that the greater the irradiation, which'also'means the size of the luminous
object, the greater its brightness. Let us try to estimate the visible angular
diameter of a star as a function of its brightness. Let us consider that the
following are the main causes of irradiation: diffraction of light on the margin

of the pupil; aberration of optical media of the eye, particularly the marginal
regions of the cornea and lens; scatter of light in media of the eye; scatter of
light in layers of the retina; additional expansion of the circle of scatter due

to the large receptive fields of the retina.

The large number of factors causing the irradiation phenomenon warrants the assump-
tion that the most probable law of distribution of illumination from a star on the
retina according to its angular diameter will be the normal law, i.e.:

where y is angular distance from the center of the image of the star and a is the
parameter of the normal law.

Let us assume that there is a threshold level of illumination of the pupil 3.,
below which there is no sensation of light in the eye. He can then write down
the following equation:

from which we obtain the angular diameter of the circle of irradiation in the
form of:

.. . ._—-—_.-

v1:- 2: V2“ Tris/"E... '

In view of the fact that the diameter of the irradiation circle is close to l' for
a star of the sixth magnitude and taking 8. - 5 nlux, we obtain a - 0.6'. Under
these conditions, we shall have:
13
FOR10FFRJAI.USE(MNLY
..—__—-—~_..-—_._-_—- —-— .. __.‘ .

Calculations using this formula yielded the following results:

Illumination on the pupil, ulux 0.011 0&07 0.17 0.b5. l 10 100 1000
Diameter of irradiation circle, angular min 1 1.86 2.12 2.4 2.6 3.12 3.55 3.95

As we see from the submitted data, the angular diameter of the circle of irradiation
increases, though slowly, to values that could yield an inadmissibly high magnitude
of astronomical measurement error. This confirms the desirability of reducing
glare of the object for more accurate superposition of the image of the object in
the sextant over the star. However, it should be borne in mind that marked reduc-
tion of brightness of stars, the distance between which is being measured, makes it
difficult to work with a sextant and increases measuring error. One could there-
fore believe that there is an optimum level of brightness that leads to minimal
reading error. Its specific level will depend, to some extent, on the design of
the sextant, operator working conditions and other factors. Nevertheless this
level is of the order of 10 ulux. In conclusion, let us mention that all of the
foregoing refers to the naked eye. However, inclusion in the sextant system of
diopter systems, calculation of their optimum parameters, transfer functions,
coefficients of absorption of light filters, etc., should be based entirely on the
above comments.

we shall now cite a few photometric characteristics-of the moon as an object of
astronavigational measurements. The moon does not have an atmosphere, and this
makes it much easier to measure angular distances between stars and the moon's
horizon. However, it must be borne in mind that the brightness of the moon's
surface illuminated by the sun (full moon) constitutes about 5000 cd/mz, i.e., it
is to great for astronomical readings.

The increase in angular dimension of the moon during flight elicited the subjective
impression of increase in its brightness. Thus, one should consider it quite
desirable to use an absorbing light filter in astronomical measuring instruments.

The lunar luminous constant, i.e., illumination of the full noon at a distance
equaling the mean distance between the earth and moon, is 0.3 lux. Hence, the
dark side of earth illuminated by a full moon would have a mean brightness of
0.03 to 0.07 cd/mz, depending on the cloud cover over the earth's surface. At
this level of brightness, there is 5-3—fold reduction of resolution of vision, as
compared to the usual level. However, use of rapid diopter instruments in

The lunar disk illuminated by earth. the so-called earthshine, can be used with
even more success. The brightness of the moon's earthshine can constitute up to
0.6 cd/mz, i.e., about 10 times greater than that of earth. There is reason to
believe that use of the moon's horizon illuminated by earth for sstronomic measure~
ments may be wiser in many cases than the horizon illuminated by the sun.

16
FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NULY
ﬁdltﬂﬂﬂClAl.USE(NVLY

Let us discuss some of the parameters of the sun as an object of astronomic measure-
ments. The brightness of its surface constitutes a mean of about 2000 Hod/m2. It

is higher in the center of the solar disk, where it reaches 2500 Med/m3, whereas

on the margins it is somewhat lower-l300 Med/m2. The sun is surrounded by an at-
mosphere, the thickness of which is so small that it does not affect accuracy of
readings at distances equaling the average distance to earth, Venus and even Mercury.
During interplanetary flights. the brightness of artificial space vehicles at differ-
ent distances from the sun can be readily calculated, considering the fact that the
spherical intensity of solar light is 3.001027 ed, whereas absorption of light in
space equals zero. The dimensions of such objects, the phases of their illumina-

tion by the sun, foreshortening and mean brightness coefficients of their surfaces
should be known.

when designing astronavigation systems for a spacecraft, it should also be borne in
mind that astronavigational observations aboard a spacecraft are difficult because
of the diverse background spots. The sources of these spots could be the sun,
moon and earth. In addition, the inside light sources and reflection from parts

of the spacecraft also make astronavigational observations difficult.

The magnitude of background spots reflected by radiation from the earth's atmos-
phere is determined by the equation 0 - 3.16 SBty‘, where S is the area of the -
instruments input aperture of the instrument. 8 is background brightness at the
input of the instrument, I is the transmission coefficient and y is the angle of
the instrument's field of vision.

Hence, we see that the magnitude of background spots 0 increases proportionately to
the square of angle of visual field 7. Thus, background spots have the most sub-
stantial effect on observations dealing with identification of navigational
reference points, when the width of the astronavigation instrument visual field is
at a maximum.

The navigation instruments must have a visual field of at least 60' for certain

identification of navigational landmarks. with such width of the visual field,

the spot from earth's atmosphere could be so large that some navigational stars
would not be distinguished against its background.

A laboratory experiment was conducted to assess the effect of light reflected from
earth's atmosphere on discernibility of stars. During the experiment, a background
spot from earth's atmosphere was simulated and an astronavigation instrument used
with b0° width of visual field. Maximum discernible stellar magnitudes were
obtained as a function of their angular distance from earth's horizon. Thus,

with 20, 30, 40 and 50° angles between the star and earth's horizon, the maximum
discernible stellar magnitudes constitute +0.7, +1.5, +2.0 and +2.5, respectively.

According to the foregoing, only stars of the first order of magnitude or brighter
are discernedat angular distances of less than 30' from earth's horizon. If we
consider that it is desirable to use stars of the third and second magnitude for
high accuracy of astronavigational readings, it becomes apparent that optimum
accuracy of astronavigational measurements is possible at angles of at least 40-50'
from earth's horizon.

Foreign specialists believe that, because there is no atmosphere near the moon,
conditions would be more favorable for astronavigational readings near its horizon.

15
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR<0FFK3AL.USE20NLN

However, when landing on the illuminated side of the moon near the terminator,

there is a rather high probability of lateral glare [spot] from the Sun in the
window [porthole]. Such exposure makes it substantially more difficult to iden-
tify navigational landmarks. Attenuation of the effect of lateral exposure

[spots] is achieved, as shown by missions on the-Apollo program, by using naviga-
tional instruments of the periscope type which have a rather large aperture

(8)600 cmz). Such instruments make it possible to exclude the intermediate environ-
ment of the window from the optical system. ' '

A dirty window pane has an adverse effect on astronomic observations.

The outside panes are most often soiled by the waste from propulsion systems,
particularly the attitude engines that are usually situated in the immediate
vicinity of windows. According to the report of the crew of Apollo 7, discharge
of liquid waste caused formation of crystal clouds that made astronomic observa-
tion very difficult for several minutes.

According to the studies of American specialists, outgaaing of the silicone

sealof panes was the chief cause of a dull film on the window panes. The

size of the dull spot on the window can change over a wide range, including
complete coverage of the window. The size of the spot diminishes when the

window is illuminated by solar rays. .This phenomenon was used by the crew of

Apollo 8 to improve observation of landmarks on the moon's surface. In preparing
for subsequent missions aboard the Apollo, all seals for window panes were submitted
to prior outgasing on the grannd. and this was quite effective in preventing

dirty windows.

2.6. Motor Analyzer and Operative Memory of Cosmonauts in Flight

During space flights, weightlessness is a specific factor that affects the cosmo-
naut's motor analyzer. It can be maintained that no other analyzer system of man
is subject to such changes in weightlessness as the motor analyzer.

Studies of coordination of movements and motor activity in weightlessness were
started on man long before the first manned space flight. At first. experiments
were conducted in so-called Roman towers, high-speed elevators and in water. The
subjects' task was essentially to superimpose images of observed objects. Differ-
ent data were obtained by different authors. Thus, according to the findings of
Lomanako [92], drastic increase in scattered hits was observed at the assent of
weightlessness, whereas this was not observed in the experiments of V. s.
Gurfinkel' and P. K. lsakov [32]. He must believe that the brief duration of
weightlessness did not enable different authors to analyze performance under
identical conditions. The test conducted by L. A. Kitayev-Smyk [45] during
weightlessness in an aircraft revealed that the accuracy of superposition dimi-
nished, the shift occurring upward and to the right.

A. A. Leonov and V. I. Lebedev described the results of studies of coordination
during brief weightlessness, in which they used a special coordinograph instrument
[51]. They found that the speed of motor acts diminished in some cosmonauts in
weightlessness. In subsequent flights, the speed of performance of this test was
the same as obtained on the ground.

16
FOR 0511(1A1.US£1MVLY
FOR‘OFIICIAI.IHNE(HVLY

Authors who studied the effects of stable weightlessness devoted much attention to
writing skill, the stability and individual distinctions of which are well-known,
in the study of fine coordination. Thus, according to Yu. H. Volynkin [19], who
analyzed the handwriting of B. B. Yegorov during flight, there was a 512 increase
in time of writing some complex elements, whereas the increase constituted about
122 for simpler ones (numbers, signature).

Operations involved in manual control of the spacecraft were found to be the most
impaired. For this reason, during the first missions, all manual control systems
were backed up by automatic ones to improve reliability.

At the same time, analysis ofthetime spent on these operations revealed that
it was longer at the start of a flight than in subsequent passes or training on the
ground.

It is known that operating a telegraph key is the basis of radiotelegraphic
communication. This activity involves finely coordinated hand movements. In this
case, the quality of transmission of information depends on proprioceptive sensi-
bility and time predicting [gauging7] function. Analysis of this form of cosmonaut
activity during actual flight could contribute much to the demonstration of the
distinctions of motor analyzer function in weightlessness.

Let us analyze the radiograms of P. I. Belyayev during his flight aboard Voskhod-Z
spacecraft. Figure 22 illustrates the time graphs of different symbols in the
Horse code taken from radiograms referable to the first passes and those sent
shortly before the end of the flight [75]. For the sake of comparison, also
illustrated are the same values selected from radio texts transmitted by P. I.
Belyayev during training on the ground. As can be seen from the graphs, the
motor part of the skill of radiotelegraphic communication underwent considerable
changes, particularly at the first stage of the flight.

Experiments dealing with the dynamics of motor function of cosmonauts were started
during the flight of the Voskhod-Z spacecraft and were continued aboard all
spacecraft of the Soyuz type and Salyut orbital station.

Incidentally, let us note that, with increase in requirements of accuracy of man-
machine systems, the means of relaying command information is becoming increasingly
complicated, with increase in number of display equipment, and in structure of
data decoding. Analysis of command motor impulses of cosmonauts pertaining to
control of the spacecraft and navigation systems leads us to assume that the
tracking reaction (pursuit and compensatory). simple operator reactions, reactions
of choice and complex associative forecasting reactions could serve as the psycho-
physiologicsl correlates of these movements. For this reason, the experimental
psychophysiological part of the scientific programs of space flights was planned
on the basis of these considerations [80, 30, ‘1]. The results of studies of
man's dynamic characteristics are particularly important for further optimization
of control systems of future, maneuverable spacecraft, making soft landings on
other planets, docking, etc. For this reason, a model control system was used

for the first time aboard Voskhod-Z. The object of the studies consisted of the
above-mentioned operator functions included in the model control (tracking) system
during exposure to space flight factors and, first of all, prolonged and stable

weightlessness.

l7
FINIf)FFICIAI.llSEZ(NULY
Usually, one uses visual displays and,
less often. audio indicators in studies

in different ways is always considered the
quantitative gauge of the tracking process,
while the operator's task is to reduce to
a minimum the mismatch between signals.

The function of this error over a specific
period of time is a characteristic of
operator performance.

 

Figure 22.
Main parameters of radio messages of
. . Nelyayev on the ground (back-

There is particularly broad coverage in
the literature (unrelated to space flights)

of studies of human behavior in tracking
8rgrnggr::g°:n°;p:::erval systems as related to number of control
11) duration of dash levers, characteristics of input signal,
III) duration of dot damping of regulatory units, effects of

some noises, etc. In describing tracking
systems, many authors refer to theory of
communication in closed servosystems, considering them as models of the man-
machine tracking system. This thesis was very convenient for psychologists,
who had difficulties in their studies in offering accurate descriptions of the

studies. However, this generally involves the use of very complicated and cumber-
some equipment, which is difficult to use on spacecraft. For this reason, the
authors developed a functional system of a tracking process recorder (TPR) and
designed a special miniaturized recorder.

In order to create a self-contained tracking system, we used the method of visual
display with graphic recording of the output signal. The input signals were put -
on the tape of a tape-feeding mechanism, in the form of a sinusoid differing in
frequency and other curves. The output signal was recorded by a pen recorder-
finder, which was closely linked with the control lever. It was possible to study
the operator's reactions during immediate and deferred feedback, i.e., there was
simulation of an inertial control system. The contrast of the presented curve
constituted about 0.85. The shape of the curves, their order and duration were
the same at all stages of the experiment. The tape was fed at a stable rate of

5 mm/s.

Each measurement of a reaction consisted of 50 sinusoidal signals, 12 square-wave
pulses collected in alternating order and signals of random processes in two
segments, i.e., there was sufficient digital material for statistical processing on
a computer. The study of dynamic characteristics of the operator in these experi-
ments made it possible to define the following, which we know from automatic
control theory: amplitude-frequency characteristic A(w); phase-frequency charac-
teristic o(w), autocorrelation function R, coefficient of reciprocal correlation r,
transfer function and certain other characteristics of the operator as a dynamic
element of a control system.

18
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(lal.UBEiMVLY
F!“R(JFFICIAI.I£53‘OWHUY

The cosmonauts worked with a TPR under laboratory conditions, in a training space-
craft to fulfill a flight program, in a spacecraft during the prelaunching period
and in flight. Reactions were measured 3-4 times at all stages of the study, with
the exception of those conducted in flight. Bach measurement of the reaction con-
sisted of SO sinusoidal signals and 22 square-wave pulses gathered in random order.-

Analysis of all of the obtained data, as well as of frequency characteristics, led
us in virtually all cases to describing the dynamic properties of an operator
engaged in tracking by means of the following equation:

 

u" ”nah L" (071p +1) .
N.P1—UITJ’-|)

 

where "(p) is the operator's transfer function, r is operator reaction time. T; is
the time constant characterizing the lag in the operator's oculomotor system, a is
the coefficient characterizing the degree of participation of paychophysiological
mechanisms of anticipation, Ta is the time constant for delay in operator's decision

making, k is the amplification factor and p is the Laplace transform.argumant.

According to analysis of transfer function, the damping coefficient changes in
flight in the range of 0.1-1.0. Its optimum value is 0.7.

Analysis of amplitude-frequency and phase-frequency characteristics of the operator
as a dynsnic element of a control system revealed that the quality of tracking
higher frequency sinusoid signals worsens, particulany in flight. For 618-919.
noticeable changes in amplitude-frequency characteristics during flight occurred
already when working with a signal having a frequency of 3-4 rad/s. Analysis of
phase-frequency characteristics showed that changes start at input signal frequency
of the order of 1-2 rad/s, and in this case the magnitude of change was greater.
Experiments revealed that there was an increase in duration of the transient process
by a mean of 1.5-2.0 times for the operator to adjust a solitary mismatch during
space flight. It is not possible to define this time more accurately because of
substantial dispersion, which increased even more in flight, constituting 0.35 a’,
which corresponds to 452 in relation to mean value of the transient process and
alnost 75: according to standard measurement error. Moreover, in the course of

the flight we observed a tendency toward monotonous increase in duration of the
transient process, which was apparently related to progressive fatigue and adapta-
tion of the neuromotor system to weightlessness, when its overall tonue diminished
more and more with increase in duration of the flight. This occurred in particular
when no intensive physical exercise was performed.

It should be noted that the above-mentioned high dispersion of duration of the
transient process, which occurred during space flight, was attributable to some
extent to the less convenient conditions of working with the instrument than on
the ground. For this reason, the design of astronomic measuring instruments

must meet several special conditioaa to assure better and faster work with them.

In particular, an important prerequisite is to have the astronomic measuring
instrument well-secured aboard the spacecraft. The gear ratios of lever movements,
magnification of the sighting telescope and its luminous power will have an appre-
ciable effect on accuracy of astronomic readings. As shown by the results of
experimental studies, the brightness of stars °Y.EP9¢9.YFHi¢1Q‘ [objectal between

19
FOI!0FFNJA1.UBE(NVLY
FOR‘OiIICIAl.USE(HVLY

which the angles are measured should be at least +1 stellar magnitude, otherwise
there could be a marked increase in lag [value of t in the expression for H(;9] and
hence in work time. Such an effect can be the result of a wide difference between
brightness levels of two stars, the images of which are superimposed for the
measurements. In this case, adaptation of the eye becomes established at a
certain mean level between the two stars, and for this reason the less bright star
would be perceived as being dimmer than if it were alone in the field of vision.
For this reason. by virtue of the well-known law [56], the inertial properties

of the eye would be more pronounced.

To sum up the analysis of our experimental data, we can see that there are two
types of changes in nature of oculomotor coordination which is the most responsible
for accuracy of astronomic measurements during a space flight, as compared to
terrestrial conditions: in the first place, extension of all processes occurring
in the operator's motor sphere and, in the second place, increased instability of
work, which is manifested by increase in dispersion ofmistakes in oculomotor
coordination. These two factors together would, of course, diminish accuracy of
astronomic readings in flights. This decline constitutes a mean of “502. It must
be borne in mind that further refinement of the design of astronomic measuring
instruments, as well as of methodology of conditioning and training cosmonauts be-
fore flights could improve substantially the accuracy of astronomic measurements.

 

"E—
ﬂ J'Ia-
'2
J
70
50
u.
10
. . _. IJIIIﬂlJlillPlight
I! #0 a! a Training
Figure 23. Figure 24.

Change in reliability of operative memory Change in reliability of operative memory
Peg as a function of duration of space during training and 1-day space flights
fl g

ht (mean data) (K-general coefficient of quality of
1) background data obtained from labo- operative memory)

rstory experiments 1) data for cosmonaut A
2) data obtained in training spacecraft 2) data for cosmonaut B
3) data obtained during training 3) data for cosmonaut C

As has been shown previously [73], operative memory is the structural basis of
operator performance in an extrapolation system. For this reason, during the
flights aboard Voskhod~2 and Soyuz-6 spacecraft we studied the dynamics of cosmo-
nauts' operative memory, comparing it to the parameters obtained on the ground
and in a training spacecraft.

Figure 23 illustrates the mean results of testing operative memory of subjects
while fulfilling programs of long-term space flights (8 experiments, 16 subjects,

20
FOI¢OF1WCJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NWUY

260 measurements). Analysis of the submitted data confirmed the assumption we pre-
viously expounded that there is an adaptation phase in dynamics of psychophysiologi-
cal functions. It was demonstrated that, under the experimental conditions,
Operative memory diminished on the first day of flight and held, with some vari-
ation. at 35-45: of the control level to the end of the experiment. Longer experi-
ments did not alter the previously obtained data. Thus, in the course of a 70-day
experiment, it was also possible to single out the adaptation phase of changes in
operative memory and persistent change in this function in the next phases.

During preparations for performing the
scientific research program in flight,
each cosmonaut participated in 12-16
training sessions, during which 70-100
measurements were taken of tests charac-
terizing the functional level of operative
memory [75]. In all cases, a stable
"plateau" was reached for this form of
activity. which served as the control

    

Backgrouhd background. Figure 26 illustrates the
findings referable to a 1-day flight
Figure 25. (B. B. Yegorov, P. I. Belyayev and A. A.
Comparative characteristics of opera- Leonov) and Figure 25 to a many-day
tive memory at different stages of flight (G. S. Shonin, V. N. Kubasov).
many-day space flight (Pop--reliability
of operative memory) As can be seen from the results illus-

trated in these figures, starting with
the fifth and sixth training sessions the general coefficient of performance quality

became set at one level and did not undergo appreciable changes thereafter. The
highest coefficient was found for B. B. Yegorov, The same figure illustrates
results obtained during a space flight (using mean data for the flight as a whole).

A decline was inherent in this coefficient (most marked in B. a. Yegorov) during
the flight.

In the case of the multiday flight, there was fluctuation of reliability of operative
memory characterizing the adaptation phase of flight and phase of established work
capacity. The results indicate that space flight factors, particularly prolonged
weightlessneus, diminish lability of memory. which can be classified as operative
according to all of its characteristics. The fact that operative memory diminishes
should also be taken into consideration whenforecasting’performance of tasks deal-

ing with identification of navigational stars and orientation in the process of
taking astronomic readings.

21
FINII)FFIC1A1.II5E§CNVLY
FOI:0FFICIAI.USI‘ONLV

CHAPTER 3. PROBLEMS OF ENGINEERING PSYCHOLOGY IN DEVELOPMENT OF VISUAL.OPTICAL
MEANS OF SPACE ASTRONAVIGATION

3.1. Use of Optical Visual Devices

At the present time. increasing preference is being given to self-contained naviga-
tion equipment for space flights. As the programs of space exploration grow more
complicated, the importance of autonomous navigation systems will increase, the
class of problems solved with use thereof will expand, and there will be an increase
in requirements of their accuracy, speed and reliability.

Several specialized visual optical navigation instruments for manned spacecraft
have already been developed, both in our country and abroad. Some of our instru-
ments have undergone trials aboard Soyuz series spacecraft and the Salyut orbital
station. Some experience in using opticovisual navigation instruments was gained
during preparations for and participation in space flights. For this reason, we
are able to solve problems of navigation using existing optical devices and work
out the main specifications for future instruments and systems.

In developing opticoviaual means of space astronavigation. it is very important

to take into consideration the experience gained during actual space flights. For
example, considerable attention was devoted to testing astronsvigation systems

and observation of navigational landmarks during flights aboard American spacecraft
on the Gemini program.

Several navigation experiments were conducted.
1. Observing setting of stars beyond earth's horizon on the dark side of the orbit.

The experiment was conducted by the crews of Gemini 7, Gemini 10 anJ Gemini 11.
It was established that stars of less than 1.5 stellar magnitude could not be seen
in open space through the light filter of the space suit. '

2. Photography of objects on earth's surface.

In this experiment, the crew of Gemini 5 (Conrad and Cooper) detected rather
small objects (individual ships, aircraft) on earth.

3. Measurement of "star-star" and "star-objsct” (carrier rocket stage) angles.
This experiment was performed by the crews of Gemini 4, Gemini 6 and Gemini 7. It
was also conducted during the flight aboard Apollo 7 in 1968. The crev of_this

22
FOI‘OFEKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOIIWFFKJA1.UBECHQLY

spacecraft succeeded in viewing the last stage of the carrier rocket by means of
a sextant at a distance of up to 550 km.

4. Observation of special markings laid out on earth. As such markings, 16 white
strips were used, which were paved with plaster (Laredo, Texas), as well as shell-
rock (Carnarvon, Australia). The target indication of these signs was performed by
means of smoke signals. The crew of GeminiSand Gemini 6 were able to observe
these signs at a distance of 660 km.

The program of astronavigation experiments performed by the crew of the Apollo in-4
cluded most of the experiments that had been previously conducted aboard Geeini.

The technical tasks included the following: elimination of spots; development of
devices that would permit observation of navigational stars on the day side of
orbit; providing for high light transmission. -

When methodological problems are solved, it will be possible to make the final
choice of observation objects (navigation landmarks) and methods for processing the
obtained information in order to assure optimum efficiency of the astronavigation
systea. -

The statements of the cosmonauts also revealed that they set up many engineering
psychological problems, the solution of which would_permit development of an

optimal ergatic operator-inatrument system. The following tasks should be in-
cluded here: choice of optimum coefficient of magnification; determination of

size of visual field for certain identification of navigational landmarks; providing
for the necessary accuracy of readings; development of optimum system to stop the
image from "wandering" [running], and generally speaking developing a piece of
equipment that takes into consideration the dynamics of the object (manned space-
craft), etc.

3.2. Specifications for Space Sextants

The effects of space flight factors on man, as part of the system of space astro—
navigation. the accumulated experience with space flights, as well as ground-based
studies, enable us to formulate, even now, several specific requirements of optico-
visual instruments for space astronavigation.

Let us discuss several general requirements of space sextants.

1. Presence of two sighting lines. The fact of the matter is that one
cannot use pendulum verticals to create the datum point base in sextants. Use of
other types of verticals leads either to great errors and increase in dimensions
and weight that are not acceptable for opticovisual equipment, or loss of autonomy
of the system. For this reason, starsareused as the datum base in developing space
sextants, since they are an excellent datum base because of their very distant
location [35]. But stars carry no information about the location of a manned
spacecraft. As a result, it is necessary to add a second sightingchannel to the
sextant to measure the direction of the navigational landmark (nearest celestial
body). we shall call such a two-channel sextant a might-sextant (SS). The angle
measured with the 58 between directions to the star and landmark defines the sur-
face of the spacecraft position and constitutes primary navigational inforlation.

23
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N'LY
MWIBEONLY

Thus, a two-channel optical system. which permits simultaneous viewing of two
sighted objects, aust be used in a space sextant.

2. Visual field of sextant. It was established experimentally that the
sextant's field of vision should be about 60° for certain detection and identifi-
cation of navigational stars and landmarks. If a small visual field is chosen for
some reason or other, there must be provisions for high viewing speed.

3. Sextant magnification. Ueknowthat sighting is improved with increase
in sextant magnification. However. it is necessary to reduce the seatsnt's visual
field to increase magnification with retention of dimensions of the instrument
within a wise range. As a result, the task of detecting navigational stars and
terrestrial landmarks, and to measure angles between them from a spacecraft could
becoae quite difficult. For this reason, in preparing the specifications for
the sextant, it is necessary to search for compromises in selecting magnification
and field.

Below are the results of laboratory studies of accuracy of astronomic readings as
a function of sextant magnification [82]:

Sextant magnification 2.5 6 B 12 16 20
Root mean square error of sighting, angular a 22 15 12 8 6 5

The more precise results of astronomic readings are attributable mainly to in-
crease in angular distance between images of the sighted objects.

These data indicate that accuracy of readings increases by almost 322 when magnifi-
cation is increased from 2.5 to 6. On the other hand, an increase in magnifica-
tion from 10 to 20 increases accuracy by only 151, but worsens significantly the
conditions for identifying stars, which we mentioned above, and makes neasureaent
difficult due to the high_angular rate of movement and shaking of the image of

the stars in the eyepiece when taking readings with a sextant that is not secured.
Analytical studies revealed that to assure encounters of spacecraft in orbit,

the permissible error of readings when using a sextant as a self-contained means
of navigation would be of the order of 10' [35]. For this reason, there should

be over 8-fold magnification of the sextant telescope for these purposes.

10. Multifunction. There are many natural sensors of navigational information
(stars, sun, moon, earth, etc.) in space. Por this reason, a space sextant aust
make it possible to observe and sight them, in spite of the wide scatter of their
illumination characteristics. The cosmonaut must be able to adapt to changes in
flight conditions. This makes it necessary to provide filters differing in
optical density.

5. Multimodality. Since the space sextant could be used, on the one hand, as
a means of correcting the inertial navigation system and, on the other hand, as a
spare navigation tool, it must have provisions for automatic and manual collection
of navigational information. For automatic collection, precision sensors of
angles of rotation of the main mirrors of the space sextant must be installed,
and they must be linked with an alphanumeric conputer.

To increase the reliability of the navigation system, there must also be provisions
for the feasibility of reading data by asn, directly from dials [dial devices].

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJA1.USEGNNLY

6. Mechanism to stop image "wandering." As shown by different studies,
the dynamic characteristics of the manned spacecraft affect the accuracy of measur-
ing navigational parameters. This has the most adverse effect when sighting land-
marks on the surface of a planet in near-planet navigation. In this case, "wander-
ing" of the image must be compensated by means of some sort of electromechanical
drive operating automatically from signals computed by an alphanumeric computer
on the basis of information from the INS [inertial guidance systemll. In this
case, the operator would work under conditions where the visible "wandering" [or
running] of the image is determined solely by errors of compensation. The reading
accuracy then increases significantly.

7. Connection with timer [time sensor, clock]. The high speed of the space-
craft makes it necessary to be extremely accurate in checking the time of taking
angular measurements. while, for example, timing errors of l.scould lead to an
error of several tens or hundreds of meters in determining the location of a ship
or aircraft, the same error would cause a difference of 7000-8000 m in locating
an orbiting spacecraft. For this reason, space sextants must be connected to a
chronometer that permits fixing the time of taking angle measurements.

8. Compensation of systematic sighting errors. This requirement means that
there must be thorough examination of each instrument during exposure to factors
that affect its characteristics.

For example, the uneven surface of the window glass, presence of a wedge-like angle
between two surfaces of window glasses, as well as distortion of glass surface

due to pressure difference on both sides of the cabin, are factors that affect
distortion of object sighting lines. The difference in refraction coefficient of
the environment in which light spreads (space, interior of spacecraft) is a

fourth factor that is not directly related to the window.

Distortion of the surface of window glass, a wedge-shaped angle and pressure
gradient can be demonstrated both analytically and experimentally. Knowing the
characteristics of glass, angle of incidence and location of beams hitting the
glass, one can eliminate such errors within a range of up to 1".

One can estimate the correction for the difference in refraction if one knows
the measured angle, pressure and temperature in the spacecraft, as well as
direction of sighting lines in relation to the surface of the window glass.
Other similar errors must be evaluated and compensated in an analogous fashion.

9. Utmost simplicity, reliability and long operating time.

10. Minimum dimensions, weight and energy consumption. Specific requirements
for sextants can be formulated only with due consideration of the functions they
perform on a specific manned spacecraft.

For example, the requirements for the sextant used to conduct experiments aboard
Gemini 12 were formulated as follows:

25
FOR OllﬂCJAI.USI‘0hﬂJV
F08‘0FFNJAI.U§I(HVLY

Precision +10'

Maximum weight 6 pounds

Maximum length along main sighting line 7.5 inches

Eyepiece use normal and away from eyes when working

with space helmet visor closed

Information obtained in the course of experimental studies enabled the NASA»
Research Center in Ames to define the specifications for a space sextant to be

used for orbital flights around earth and to the moon [99, 101]. These require-
ments were as follows:

Magnification 8x (normal eyepiece)

Magnification 4.GX(eyepiece with attachment)
Telescope visual field angle 7’

Sextant's margin of error (overall) no more than +10'

Moving mirror actuation l and 5' per turn of handle

Range of measurements 6 to 70'

System of sextant with two lines of sight

Height of sextant ' 2.7 kg (selected rather arbitrarily)

In addition, there were several requirements, such as a chronometer on the sextant
with a button to start it and delivery of a synchronizing pulse at the moment of
reading the angle on the onboard recorder or computer. filters of different optical
density for simultaneous sighting of objects differing in brightness. need to
illuminate the angle counter and eyepiece hairs. mechanical angle counter. There
was special mention of the fact that the cosmonaut must be able to work with the
sextant when the space helmet is closed. as well as with a guard-filter used in

an emergency situation. The latter required an additional attachment for the
eyepiece. so that it could be at a distance of at least 5-7.5 cm from the eye.

New space sextants are being developed on the basis of the above requirements. At
first such work was pursued on the basis of existing aviation and maritime sextants.
The changes made in their design were usually directed toward making work easier
with them for cosmonauts during flight and increasing sextant accuracy [1, 88].

However, there are already some original instruments that are based on new prin-
ciples.

The functional diagram animain design features of a special type of space sextant
have been published [88]. It was indicated that use of a mirror made of beryllium,
which precluded the effect of temperature fluctuations on accuracy of readings, as
well as high quality of manufacturing the drive gears for the mirror, resulted in

a margin of error in the sextant not exceeding 10". Moskowita et a1. [95] describe
the design and drawings for a space sextant consisting of 3 telescopes with visual
field angles of 60, 7 and 1°. the sextant is equipped with a spectrometer that
permits measurement of Doppler shift of spectral lines in the radiation from
sighted stars, which permits calculation of radial velocity of the spacecraft. The
weight of such a sextant is estimated at about 2.7 kg, while the margin of error
does not exceed 1".

Let us consider the construction of one type of space sight-sextant, which wee
developed with consideration of the above-formulated requirements and is a visual
optical instrument for autonomic determination of the coordinates of the craft's
location [99, 101].

26
FOR(NHHK1A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The space sight-sextant. a diagram of which is illustrated in Figure 26. is a
combination in one instrument of an optical sight and sextant, and it consists
of the following: a) Optical mechanical sight consisting of the main sight
mirror é- with sensors of directional angles of terrestrial (lunar) landmarks,
sight window (4), optical system of sight (5 and 7), mechanism for controlling
position of main sight mirror and automatic setting of "wandering“ of image of
earth's (moon's) surface (8). binocular viewing system (9), eyepieces of binocular
system of sight (10 and 11); b) mechanical optical sextant instrument consisting
of sextant window (1), main sextant mirror (2) with sensors of angles of direc-
tion to celestial bodies, stationary semitranspsrent nirror (1?), optical system
of sextant (15 and 16), mechanism for controlling position of main sextant mirror
(14), monocular system of viewing the sky (13), sextant eyepiece (12).

Star

    

Terrestrial

landmark

Figure 26. Diagram of space sight-eaten; - n
l) sextant window 9) binocular viewing system .
2) main mirror of sextant 10, ll) eyepieces of binocular vision system
3) main mirror of eight 12) sextant eyepiece
6) sight window 13) sonocular system for viewing sky
5) optical system of sight lb) mechanism to control position of
6) housing main mirror of sextant
7) optical system of sight 15. 16) optical system of sextant
8) mechanism to control position of 17) stationary semitransparent mirror

main sight mirror

The task for the operator-astronaut is to superiapose identified images of naviga-
tional heavenly bodies and the terrestrial (lunar) landmark over the center of the

visual field of the space sextant. when these iaages are visually superimposed
over the center of the instruments field and a special button is depressed, there
is automatic reading and storage of readings of sensors of the angles of position
of main mirrors of the sextant. and the time of the messuraaent is recorded.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIICJAI.USllCH‘LY

During a space flight, astronomic measurements are made when the "wandering" of
the image in the field of the sextant is stopped in order to facilitate the
process of identification by the operator-astronaut of navigational stars and
landmarks. Image "wandering” is stopped automatically by using the algorithms for
selection of navigational stars and landmarks on the onboard digital computer and
adjusting the main mirrors of the sextant in the direction of specified stars and
landmarks.

In this mode of work, the operator-astronaut is given only the task of eliminating
mismatch and superposing the images of the star and terrestrial (lunar) landmark
over the center of the sextant's field.

To work with such instruments, the astronauts must be able to correctly choose the
navigation parameter to be measured in a given situation, i.e., he must know appro-
ximately what their characteristics are and have stable professional skill,
developed on earth, in taking measurements.

3.3. Navigational Parameters Measured With Space Sextants and Measurement
Errors

At the present time, the following navigational parameters can be measured with
space sextants: angle between directions of navigational star and landmark on

a planet's surface; angle between directions of navigational star and artificial
satellite of planet, as well as probe released from a spacecraft; angle between
directions of navigational star and centers of planet or its satellite (vertical
of earth, moon, etc.); angle between directions of navigational star and visible
planet horizon; angle between directions of two landmarks on surface of planet,

in the centers of two artificial satellites or two planets; angle between vertical
to the planet and landmark on its surface; angular diameter of celestial body (sun,
earth, moon and other artificial or natural bodies).

In addition, other angular values can be measured, as well as the rate of change
in these values, Doppler shift of spectral lines in radiation from sighted stars,
etc.

He shall discuss navigational measurements involving the use of an artificial
problem on the basis of foreign investigations.

Astronomic measurements of "probe-—star," "probe-terrestrial landmark" and "probe-
lunar landmark" are based on releasing an artificial probe from a spacecraft and
subsequent measurement by the astronaut, using a sextant, of the angular position

of the probe in relation to identified navigational stars or terrestrial (lunar)
landmarks. The method of self-contained navigation, which is based on the

release of an artificial probe, makes use of the effects of the gravity fields of
earth and the moon on movement of the artificial probe and spacecraft.

In view of the fact that this method does not require mandatory viewing of terres-
trial (lunar) landmarks, astronomic readings can be taken when the earth's surface
is covered with clouds. However, when taking astronomic measurements by this
method, some time is required for stabilization of the probe by the gravity field
of earth (moon). For this reason, when there is a shortage of time for astronomic
readings, use is made of other stars and landmarks.

28
FOR OFFICIALl1531NVLY
FIlltMﬂﬂCIAl.lﬂﬂl(ﬂULY

Thus, the use of an artificial probe combined with natural navigational stars and
landmarks solves the problem of astronavigation aboard manned spacecraft, not
only in orbital flight, but in flights from the earth to the moon and back, in
the absence of visibility of terrestrial landmarks.

Any of the aboveqmentioned navigational parameters measured from a manned spacecraft
determines the surface, in each point of which it will be the same at a given point
in time. To put it differently, the measured parameter determines the surface of
the position of the spacecraft or geometric location of points of its possible
position characterized by constancy of the measured parameter.

Since measurements of a parameter are made with some element of error under the
influence of different causes, the position surfaces obtained in measuring naviga-
tional parameters deviate from the actual ones. One can determine the link between
navigation measurement errors and errors in determining position surfaces by

using the concept of gradient of measured function.

As we know [20], the linear displacement of position surface in the direction of
the normal is determined by the equation An I Ae/g, i.e., it depends on error of
measuring parameter a and modulus of gradient g.

If function 6 is specified analytically in a rectangular system of coordinates,

9 I Ger,y,s), the numerical value of the gradient modulus is determined with
the formula:

en | (on 4'xv-I-«jﬂn IIyF-l-tw'ﬁzf-

Analogously, the error of determining the surface of the spacecraft position and
error manifested by change in navigational parameter 6 are related by the equation
Ap I Aelg. By using this correlation, one can estimate the error of determination
of surfaces of the spacecraft position when measuring various navigational
parameters.

When measuring angle 0 between a navigational star and landmark on a planet's surface,
the equation for surface of spacecraft position in a topocentric system of coordi-
nates OXYZ, whose Z axis coincides with the direction to the star and the beginning
of the coordinates is at the location of the selected navigational landmark
(Figure 27) will be written in the form of x2 + y2 - a: tan: 6 I 0; the gradient of
this position surface is=g I cos 0/1; the error of determining the position surface
is:

A9

Ap I 1;-- aAB/cos 9

Measurement of angle 0, between the direction of the navigational star and arti-
ficial earth satellite also determines the conical surface of position. The
difference is that the apex of this cone is at the location of the artificial earth
satellite at the time of the measurement. In the rectangular system of coordinates
01X1Y121(Figure 28) related [linked] to the artificial earth satellite (the axis of
this system is oriented along the line that connects the satellite and star), the
equation for this surface will be written down as :12 + y;2 - 3:3 tan2 6; I 0. The
error of determining position surface of the spacecraft when measuring this para-
meter with error AG; will be determined from the equation Apx I Aexlgx I x.Ae,/co.e,. .

29
INJIIOFFICLAI.IISI2CMULY
Tigure 27.
Surface of spacecraft position deter-
mined by angle between directions of
landmark on planet's surface and star

 

Figure 28.
Surface of spacecraft position deter-
mined by angle between direction of
navigational artificial earth satellite
and star

is also a right circular cone (Figure 30).

 

Figur. 290
Surface of spacecraft position deter-
ained by angle between vertical to
planet and direction of star

The angle between the vertical to the
planet and direction of navigational
star 63 also.deternines the conical
surface of position. The apex of this
cone will be in the center of the
planet, while the axis of rotation coin~
cides with the line that connects the
star with the center of the planet.

In a geocentric system of coordinates
03X1Y222 (1718011 29), 8818 Zz'of which
coincides with the direction of the
star from the center of earth, the
equation for this surface will be
written down as:

x34-y1—zltg‘9,-_-.o.

The error of determining the surface of
spacecraft position will be found with
the equation 4,, - deg/g2 - azaez/cos 6:.

The surface of spacecraft position, when
aeasuring the angle between the naviga-
tional star and visible planet horizon 6,
The apex of this cone is on the line

connecting the star with the middle of the planet at distance a. from its center:

30

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE€NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

where Rn is planet radius.

The equation for this surface in a rectangular systes of coordinates 031,232,, the
start of which coincides with the apex of the cone and whose Z, axis is in the

direction of the line connecting the planet center to the star, has the following
appearance: :33 + y,‘ - 3,3 tan: 0, - 0. The gradient of this position surface is

determined with the equation 9, - cos e,/3,, while error of determining position
surface is -

43.1 ‘33.);
I A = — = —.
I P, (3 cos .3

When measuring angle 9. between the directions of two landmarks 0, and 02 on the
surface of a planet or angle between directions of centers of two planets n‘ and Hz,
the distance between which is camaensurable to the distance to the spacecraft, de-
termination is made of the position surface that is a cyclide obtained by rotating
the arc of the circumference about axes 0‘01 (Figure 31s) or K)“; (Figure 31b),
which connect either two landmarks on the surface of a planet or the centers of
two planets (celestial bodies).

The cyclide equation is Z; - R11 + R,” - ZRIRZ cos y, where R,. R, are distances
from centers of celestial bodies (landmarks) to the spacecraft. z is the distance
between centers (landmarks). The coordinates of the landmarks or centers of
celestial bodies and distances between them are known.

In a rectangular system of coordinates H,X.Y~Z~, related to one of the planets n

(for example, earth). 12 - xnz + ya? + an’, where :5, yn, an are coordinates
defining the position of n: (for example, the moon) in relation to H; (earth) at
the time of measuring parameter 9.

The distances between H; and n; and the spacecraft are determined accordingly by
the following equations:

afterdifferentiation, we shall have the equation for the value of gradient gs -
l/Rakz. The error of detersining position surface is:

34’; 3 Al‘s £0 =- R:’\’:A°c'!-

Analogously, when measuring angle 03 between navigational landmarks on s planet's
surface and the vertical to it, determination is made of position surface in the
form of a cyclide. which is obtained by rotating the arc of the circumference
about the axis that links the center of the planet with the landmark (Figure 32).

31
IKNICHWHCIAI.USIIM¢LY
roe OFFICIAL WI ONLY

The equation for this surface has the
following appearance: Rh: - R12 + 352 -
Zlaks cos 6:.

for earth in a geocentric system of
coordinates 0.x.Yszs, this equation can
be written down on the basis of the
fact that

.-._.—..._— _. -

R§=x§+y§+z§:
Rz-‘J's— xni'TWs" lln' F—g—(n-qﬂ’:

Rgax‘. -;- yh. ;— :i'

where R. is the earth's radius in the
following‘fornzf.

-\

A; 420:, 4-8:. axE-hyg-4-234i-‘(Xs—x. F+lys-y.F+(zs-zu)‘-

. —-——1————.———
— 2 V (X§+v§+zs) lk-ss-‘xn F'rlys-93F'H‘s—anl CO5 9:-

 

 

 

After differentiation, we shall have
the equation for detersining the
gradient: as - n./n.n..

Figure 30.
Surface of spacecraft position deter- The error of deter-ination of position
nined by altitude of star in relation surface is:
to visible horizon of planet
4?: ' 92%;;53
0

Measurement of angular diameter of cosmic body 95 determines the position surface
in the forn of a sphere with its center in the center of the cosnic body (Figure 33).
The radius of this sphere is:

R - 31:55:75 - I, cosec e./2.

If we measure the angular diameter of earth. the equation for surface of spacecraft
position corresponding to this navigational systea of coordinates will have the
following appearance: 3;: + y;' + a.’ - 3.3 cosecz e./2.

The flaw of deternining the surface of spacecraft position when neasuring angular
diameter of earth Apr is determined with the fornula:

*Subscript "n" in formulas nay refer to land-ark ("or” in Russian).

32
FOI¢NHWCLALI£HBONlY
Figure 31. Surface of spacecraft position determined by angle between
directions of two terrestrial landmarks or centers of two planets

 

. -—.*.

to.
R.. rose: 7‘ .16.,
3,251: ”° ﬁe '

 

The above equations for errors of deter-
mination of postition surfaces when
measuring various navigational para-
meters enable us to conduct a comparative

curacy of
readings made under different conditions.

Figure 32.
Surface of spacecraft position deter-
mined by angle between vertical to

planet surface and direction of naviga- analysis of the potential at
tional landmark

but of the requirement of minimum error of the measured navigational parameter. The
latter could include various components for any parameter. For example, when measur-
ing the angular diameter of earth, measurement error would include operator error.

ricsl and the line of
a specific navigational para-

It lust also be taken

the visible horizon is blurred, etc. Thus, use of
roe 03M!- W ONLY

3.1.. Methods of Evaluating Potential Accuracy of Solving Astronavigation Probleas
With a Space Sextant

As we have already stated. the accuracy of solving astronavigation problems when
using a space sight-sextant is affected both by error of sextant reading and type
of reading taken. Moreover, accuracy of solving problems of space navigation also
depends on the selected set of types of angular measurements and geometric loca-
tion of the manned spacecraft in relation to sighted stars and landmarks.

We shall discuss below the methods of
estimating the potential accuracy of

solving astronavigation problems with
a manual [hand-heldl' space sextant.

In processing the astronomic measurements,
we shall assume that the approximate lo-
cation of the spacecraft is known; then
the astronavigation problem is reduced
to finding deviations of the spacecraft
fro. the base orbit of flight. For

this reason, for any type of astronomic
measurement, the matrix equation of

link between deviations of_measured
parameter q with location 1' can be
written down in the following form [10]:

dq - 7&1; (3.1)

where 3 is the vector-row [or line] that
depends on the type of sstronomic measure-
ment and characterizes the correlation
between measurement errors and errors in
determining the coordinates of the space
vehicle. Let us demonstrate this for
different types of astronomic measure-
ments.

 

Figure 33.
Surface of spacecraft position deter-
mined by angular diameter of planet
(celestial body) [ABS-«artificial earth
satellite]

"Star-—terrestrial landmark" type of measurement

According to Figure 34, we can write down:
if: - ~1- cos(A1 + 9) (3.2)

where r is the__vector of the location of the spacecraft in relation to the center
of the earth; n is the unit vector of direction of identified navigational
star, A; is the angle between the lines of sighting the star and terrestrial land-
mark, 6 is the angle between the direction of the landmark and local vertical.

By differentiating (3.2.), we shall obtain

5.17-l- Eln- -— ups-V1. Muir-34 5mm, 3, mum, g-u'b.. (3'3)

310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

Figure 310. Figure 35.
For measurement of "star-terrestrial For measurement of "starnvisible horizon
landmark" type of earth" type

we find angular deviation d0 from the equation:

72--rzcoﬂ. (3.10)

where 3 is the vector of inclined distance between the spacecraft and terrestrial
land-ark.

Differentiating equation (3.10), we shall obtain:

d..= (3+;W5)l_;-r(;+;cm03213 (3.5)

r: “a. '

where 17! - 5/8 is the unit vector of direction of. inclined distance; E - ;/r
is the unit motor of direction of earth‘s center.

In view of the fact that d5 - «is, d)? - 0, and inserting (3.5) in (3.3), we shall
have:

 

 

[4:- “H'” l—nrsI -.
l ' [W—smMH-O); +(rcznl(4.+0) + rslnl )k-r 6
tn. (3. )
+(':.‘.:;' H... )"‘I"-

where dA, is a value determined by the difference between measured and calculated
angle of sighting the star and terrestrial land-ark.

Let us rewrite (3.6) in the following torn: _ _ H , __
«In—13.4}. '

(3.7)
‘- -_. _.... _._... L"’.L.L3L§. +
"he:e J. I am (0' + A” Tl'.+( I )m ( all ~_- I)
I am i I am '0 I am '0 (3.8)
is the vector characterizing the "star-terreetriel landmark" type of estrous-1c
measurement s 35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”Star-dvisible horizon of earth" type of maurenent
According to Figure 35, we have:
;;""'C“%f%;F‘U2£
where y is the angular diameter of earth.

Calculating in. (3.9) the first order differentials. we shall obtain:

047-- -¢06M:+v.'2)dr-i-r 8|" (42+?l2)dﬁz+dvl2
We find angular deviation dy fro. the equation:
sin ﬁll—Rain

where Rs is earth's radius.

Taking in (3.11) the first order differential, let us write down

 

Substituting (3.12) in (3.10), we shall have:

dAa-— I'm “1+ICl8(Aa-l-Y.'3)+ 2‘! $3”! 4;-
FORIOF11CIAL,USSlNNLY

which is analogous to (3.11). Then, on the basis of (3.12), we can write down:

n 23.45. (3.16)

where d1 is determined by the difference between measured and calculated visible
angular diameter of earth

- —— u‘ . -—

JR-. 5.

"“V’: (3.17)

 

has-.- -

where 33 is the vector characterizing the "visible angular diameter of earth" type ‘
of astronomic measurement.

Equations of the (3.1) form can be obtained analogously for other types of astro-
nomic measurements.

Thus, while q is a parameter that has to be measured and dq is the difference
between its measured and approximately known estimated value, regardless of the

type of astronomic measurement, there is a correlation between dq and deflection
of spacecraft position d? in the form of (3.1).

As a rule, three independent and accurate astronomic measurements taken at a known
point in time are sufficient for unequivocal determination of the coordinates
of the spacecraft's location. Since the equations linking dq and d? are linear for

each of the different types of measurements, the result of the three readings can
be submitted in the following matrix form:

(13:775. (3.18)

where d5 is the three-dimensional vector-column composed of deviations of the
observed values; H is the 3X3 matrix, each line of which consists of components of
vector 5 inthe specified system of coordinates xrz, which correspond to a separate
atronomic measurement and can be submitted in the following form:

a: h; a:
an a': ”1' hi' .

I hill I!!!" I'll!

I“

If all three vectors characterizing different types of astronomic measurements, from
which matrix a was formed, are indeed independent, the vector of deviation of the

spacecraft from nominal orbit at the moment of taking the measurement can be cal-
culated with the formula:

“Fan-w. (3.19)
where H" is the matrix that is the reciprocal of a.

The above-described process of determining deviation d; of the position of the
spacecraft implies the use, for unequivocal determination of vector d5, of only

37
FOR OFFICIAI.l£ﬂB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the sufficient number of astroreadinga (at least three). To assess the accuracy of
solving an astronavigation problem with a space sutant, let us introduce an ana-
lytical expression for errors of determination of location coordinates. For this
purpose, let us consider the following:

(hr 4.14 ,u;
(3.20)
(1;; LII-’1 1": ’

where d; is the neasured deviation, dq is the real deviation, dr is estination or
seemed deviation of spacecraft from ngninal orbit, dr is true deviation of space-
craft position froa nominal orbit. a, e are errors node in neasursnents and estima-
tion of location of spacecraft, respectively.

Evidently, the true deviations d21- and dr- satisfy equation (3.1). Then, if we con-
sider only the sufficient number of measurements, the following fornula must be
fulfilled for an unshifted [‘I] evaluation:

.1717 ”.13. (3.21)

Consequently, error vectors a and E must also be linked through this matrix 3, i.e.,

i=7”! . (3.22)

 

hence we shall find that the nean square error of determination of coordinates of
the spacecraft's location is:

.-._.-._.. .-- ._.-._._-——.-

l;'=-;'I. (3.23)
where ET is transposed matrix 5.

As an example, let us discuss one set of the above-mentioned three astromeasure-
nents and determine the error in defining the coordinates of the location of the
spacecraft.

"Star--terrestria1 landmark." "star-terrestrial landnark" and “visible
angular disaster of earth" types of neasurenents

For the sake of convenience in obtaining the necessary mathematical functions, let
us select a systea of OXYZ coordinates related to the spacecraft and direct its
axis to the local vertical (Figure 36).

Let us orient unit vectors 7:; and m; so that they are in plane 12, where n; would
coincide with the direction of the X-axis and nu with the direction of terrestrial
landmark C1. Let us set vectors n: and m accordingly in plane 12. We shall pick
two navigation stars S; and s; in the direction of the axes of coordinates x and Y,
respectively. Let the angles between the direction of terrestrial landnarks and
navigation stars be A; and A2. Then, according to (3. 7), the projections of vector
in on the axis of xrz coordinates for two astroneasurements will have the following
appearance: '

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘Il=a|+ﬂm‘.. ‘W-O; -
hllubr’I-Cl sm A" (3.25)

for the first ”star—terrestrial landurﬂ'utroneuurenent, and:

" k:'.=o. n:' ,—a,+c,cosA,: —
h§1nh+casinM -

for the second "star-terrestrial landmark" mutant, vhere:

(3.25)

a”: " L. -M

”mum-n- our ""' '“ﬂMu-tha)

-m; M_L'I:L_

r an I... r do I... I an on

 

 

For the third measurement of "visible angular diameter of earth,” we shall have,
according to (3.16):

5?): o. 3'":- o; ;:'.'=Is.

where “”75!- _ (3.26)

According to (3.18), (3.210), (3.25) and (3.26), Intrix II will take on the followi:
appearance:

 

a.+¢1cos A, 0 Ore-c, sin A.
' H = u ag-Z-cﬁos A, o: '- c, sin A, .
I n o 1;; (3.27)

hence, the value of the reciprocal utrix will be:

 

.-.__.'-.__.- o .. Jim
a1+clrus A; a. '5- ﬂ Co) I"
1"“. ..-= 0 —_1- _ b; - C: sin ‘1 ,
“:4 ‘I"'-‘ 4‘: 1'. dug: (3'28)

0 U s
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

 

Figure 36.
For measurement of the "atar-terrea-
trial landmark," "staruterreatrial
landmark" and "visible angular dia-
meter of earth" type

.1“

...| I - u. .. 1h}; £819,131;
C; + C] (0‘ .01 ' ‘| it Q “-5 3|
1 (03 4- a; sm A.) a .

C I. (I a
I; 1- £305 A: ‘

 

 

a;
(3.29)

 

' a: + mos A2 '
0‘33m'0

where 03, a”, a; are errors in neaaure-
nent of aatronavigation angles with a
hand-held aextant.

Mamie. of .funcstsmg (3-29) shame that
errors of- determination of coordinates
of apacecraft location 5:9 . a, depend
not only on errora in maaaur g angles
with the sextant qx, , as, but on the
parameters characteriz a different

set of astronomic measurements and geometric location of the apacecraft in relation
to sighted stars and navigational landmarks.

If we assume that, in (3.29). the maximum valuea of the anslaa are A: - A; - 90°

and a. - 0, we shall have:

83.1%; ey-ruyzeg-O

(3.30)

We see from (3.30) that the obtained errors in determining the spacecraft coordi-

nates correspond to the known errors in aircraft aatronavigation.

a: . (1y . 1' and 256372 km, we shall find

40

Thua, with
that a, - eysl.8 kn.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINR13FFIC1AI.IﬂBIi(NVLY

CHAPTER 5. MODELING CONDITIONS OF OPERATORFASTBDNADT PERIORHANCE IN SOLVING
ASTRONAVICAIION PROBLEMS

5.1. Methods of Simulating the Celestial Map

The reliability of experimental data is largely determined by fullness of simulating
observation conditions. Several simulators of the celestial map [stellar sky] were
developed and tested for this purpose.

In one of the simulators, stars were modeled by means of orifices made in one of
the glass walls of a space illuminated from the inside.

A thin layer of metallic silver was applied to the glass. An electric discharge
was used to make holes in it. The diameter could be regulated over a wide range
by the voltage delivered to the punch. Provided several photometric conditions
are met, this can be used to simulate the stellar background, since it is the
most available and simple.

In another variant, the stellar sky was simulated by means of shining spheres
attached to a surface covered with black velvet and properly illuminated. If -.
illumination is such that the background brightness does not exceed the permissible
level, the reflection of the light source on the shiny surface of the spheres will
simulate stellar brilliance.

Calculation of radii of the spheres and background illumination when simulating
stars with brightness of the first to llth star magnitude, as well as conditions
of illumination of spheres, is made in accordance with the diagram illustrated in
Figure 51.

If the distance to the light source I - l m, which is quite advantageous from the
standpoint of construction since the light source could then fit within the tube
[barrel] that shields the background of the stellar sky fros extraneous light, we
shall obtain different angular dimensions of simulated stars, depending on the
dimensions of light source 8 (Table 5.1). Using the data listed in this table it
is easy to determine the illumination of the spheres as a function of sight magni-
fication.

One can also simulate the stellar sky by means of light guides, one end of which
is attached to the flat background surface of the simulator and the other illumin-
ated with a light source.

The following method is handier and rather simple to execute. Stars are simulated
[with either a dot (when the mirror surface of the sheet is impaired) or white

61
FOR1DFFKJA1.USE1MVLY
M OFFICIAL 058 ONLY

Table 5.1. Angular dimensions of simulated stars (in angular seconds) for different
radii of 1 ;ht source

    

Stellar may-itudes of simulated stars

light
source.

painton a sheet of plexiglass illuminated from the end. For the light not to
dissipate, the edges of the plexiglas sheet have a light-proof covering, the width
of which is determined by the maximum angle of total internal reflection. Hith an
ideal mirror surface of the plexiglsss, the brightness of the stellar background
will be determined by the brightness of the screen located in the back. when the
technique for applying the dots is worked out'well; this method is the simplest

and most accessible.

The method of applying luminophore par-
ticles exposed to ultraviolet rays was
also used. Luminescence of such par-

/’.\~ \ ticles simulated stars rather well.
- - I .
/’ Z-' \ At any rate, regardless of which method
! A; I is given preference, the simulator must
‘. 'jx / recreate a stellar map that is as close
‘ ' i}! to the real one as possible in order to
1‘.“ .\\‘. obtain reliable results. The resemblance
'1Ir\. \: can be considered adequate if the simu-
.Lf\\‘ ~_ lated stellar sky is on a plane and
_21 3' \ﬁ\ there is equality of the following para-
! ’ ! X \\\ meters: density of stellar background,
! I 3 \Qx distribution of stars according to
' ' ! \ ‘* stellar magnitudes, visible brightness
2 ﬁ'“ 7""'m}r of stars, angular dimension of stars,
brightness of background and a few others.
Figure 51.
Diagram of simulation of a star with a 5.2. Photometric Conditions for
shiny sphere ($0 I Ludistance from aur— Simulating Barth's Surface
face of sphere to light source; CD'S- '
radius of light source; R-radius of The task of adequately modeling the
of sphere; Dar-direct beam from source conditions under which the cosmonaut-
to sphere; AB-beam reflected from operator works in a system of self-
sphere; AK-BAD bisector) contained aatronavigation is one of the

principal ones in conducting studies
under ground-based conditions. Providing photometric conditions of operator work
should be considered one of the elements of such modeling; along with others this
must be taken into consideration in developing and building simulators of earth's

42
ROI 0F!ﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂB(ﬂWLY
FtIl(MHNCJAl.UB£1DNlN

surface. The choice of the basic plan [flowchart?] of the viewing unit or simula-
tor may be determined by a number of specified conditions: size of the room in
which experiments will be conducted, electricity supplied to lights, viewing angle,
etc. Thus, in developing one variant of the viewing unit, the above-mentioned
requirements resulted in constructing the earth simulator in the form of a panel

on a cylindrical surface with s large radius of curvature (R - 10 m). The surface
of this pannel was tilted toward the operator (angle of the order of 10') so that
the image of earth's horizon and segment of the sky reproduced in the top part would
be about 2.20-2.30 m away from the operator.

Geometric, photometric, scalar, foreshortening [aspect] and other parameters of
the picture viewed by the operator of the sunlit surface of earth were selected
for the most probable viewing conditions from space.

The following were the base data that were used to develop a simulator of earth's
surface: angle of operator's vision of earth's surface constituted 55‘ directed
toward the nadir; altitude of spacecraft flight 200 km; distance from sun to local
horizon h - 45'; azimuth of the sun counting from the vertical plane in the
direction of viewing constituted 90'; solar light constant a. - 135 klux; angle of
visual field when viewing terrestrial landmarks through a window 55'; mean reflec-
tivity of earth's surface 39% with clouds (in visible part of spectrum and 152
without clouds;

Because of the perspective nature of the image of earth's surface, geometric,
photometric, scalar, foreshortening and other altitude parameters must be variable.
Bearing this in mind, calculation was made of parameters for nine belts that we
distinguished, which separated the underlying surface ontheadaulstor according to
altitude. Figure 52 illustrates a diagram of location of the belts over the
height of the panel.

Scale H and foreshortening [angle of
approach r of terrestrial formations
for different angles of inclination
of viewing in relation to direction
of nadir e are determined using the
following equations:

M== . 215m!
R sin [attain -—M— f]

 

l:—'scc [arcolu ‘1?“ng sin! 1 .

where R is the radius of earth, H is
altitude of craft over earth's surface,
Figure 52. Z is distance at which the operator

views panel under training conditions
(1 constituted 2 m).

 

Diagram of location of belts on simulator
of earth's surface

1) window 2) earth's horizon As can be seen from the above equation,
angle of approach referred to the degree

63
INDR'OFFICIAI.IISEI(HVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE¢NVLY

of visible shortening of the object in the viewing direction, considering that
terrestrial landmarks were flat.

Calculation of photometric parameters of the underlying surface was made for a
standard atmosphere, which is characterized by horizontal visibility of 20 km and
optical thickness t - 0.299 (for light wavelength A - 550 us) for the known spectral
coefficients of brightness of terrestrial formations [58].

Calculation of optical characteristics of the atmospherq,which could constitute the
overall brightness of terrestrial landmarks and clouds, was made by the system of
K. S. Shifrin and I. N. hinin using the tables given by K. Ya. Kondrat'yev [47].

Table 5.2. lists the values of overall brightness of terrestrial formations calcu-
lated by this method when viewing them from space. After selection of the system
of lighting the underlying surface, calculation was made of brightness of forms-
tions (objects) in different belts. we took into consideration the actual illumi-
nation of various segments of the underlying surface.

Table 5.3. lists the brightness coefficients of formations (objects) on the simu-
lated surface of earth in different belts.

Table 5.2. Overall brightness of terrestrial formations observed from space, in
cd/m

   

  

Formation (object)

 

Nadir “II-nu“ 3

9176 11865 14046 14762 20000
9500 12120 14220 14893 20000
9840 12374 14400 15024 20000
10170 12630 14565 15155 20000
10500 12890 14740 15285 20000
10500 12890 14740 15285 20000
10500 12890 14740 15285 20000
11850 13910 15430 15810 20000
13500 15190 16300 16460 20000
15200 16470 17160 17120 20000

    
 
  
  
  
  
   
  

Wet chernozem soil
Dry chernozem
Coniferous forest
Leaf forest
Succulent meadow
Her loamy soil
Dry loamy soil
Stubble [fields]
Dry yellow sand
Dry white sand
Clouds

    
 

10700 11000 11020
12700 13000 12900
14700 14700 14750

5400 5300 5100

      
       
       
     
 

It should be noted that the image of the clouds on the panel could be changed,
since it was applied to polyethylene film stretched over the image of the under-
lying surface.

Hith the selected illumination and relative areas of different formations (objects),
overall adaptational brightness of the image of earth's surface was of the order of
7500 cd/mz, which is an average of one-fifth natural brightness under such condi-
tions. However, in view of the great compensatory capabilities of the visual ana-
lyzer, it can be maintained that neither resolution nor acuity of vision differed
under the experimental conditions from those present under natural ones (AJ/J‘0.012,
AV<0.06 ... 0.09, respectively [48]).

44
INJR OﬁFICIAL UBIICNVLY
FINR(NWKJAI.UBI(NVLV

Table 5.3. Brightness coefficients of formations (objects) on simulated surface
of earth

   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Formation (object)

"at chernozem soil
Dry chernozem soil
Coniferous forest
Leaf forest
Succulent meadow
wet loamy soil

Dry loamy soil
Stubble [fields]
Yellow dry sand
Uhite dry sand
Clouds

0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67

Other characteristics of sight, just like effective [adjusted‘l] sensitivity to light,
temporary [time-related?) processes of visual perception, color vision and other
brightneases for the indicated gradient, present even less deviation.

Operators were trained to find and identify landmakrs on the illuminated side of
earth in several stages, and some physiological parameters (pulse rate, respiration,
etc.) were recorded at that time. After the "ready" signal, which the operator
himself gave, an image of landmarks was displayed to him on the illuminated side

of earth and, simultaneoulsy, a stopwatch was started. Physiological parameters
were recorded concurrently. Upon detection of a landmark and determination of

its range, the operator turned off the lighting of the simulator by depressing the
proper key. the electric stopwatch equipment that recorded physiological parameters
were turned off and the window covered [shut]. Data about the site of detection

of the landmark, its range and foreshortening were entered in the operator's log.

At the same time, the experimenter set a new variant of underlying surface for
-searching for terrestrial landmarks. During one training session, the operator
worked on 6 variants with 10 displays in each variant. The variants were marked

by the background features (underlying surface) against which the landmarks were
selected (shoreline. boundaries of mountain formations, river deltas, etc.).

Daily training lasted an average of l h.

The results of the tests conducted on 12 operators for detection of landmarks on
the illuminated side of earth were characterized by the following parameters. As
can be seen in Figure 53, average time required to detect terrestrial landmarks
diminished significantly in the course of training. Thus, while the operator
needed about 40 s to search and detect a landmark at the early stage of the train-
ing processes, after 25-30 displays search and detection time was reduced to 5-7 a.
There was virtually no further change in time spent on the tested operation in
subsequent training sessions.

In the course of the studies it was found that the time required to search and
find landmarks depends on their range. Figure 54 illustrates time of detection
of some space landmarks as a function of their distance. An appreciable difference

65
FOI.0FHK1A1.USB(N¢LY
0..
0-0
__L___.|—_nl-——J—
6 20 v ”I
Figure 53.

Tine to of detection of manned spacecraft
as a function of number n of training
sessions (mean data for all operators,
range 5000 m)

 

Figure 55.
Time of detection of manned spacecraft
as a function of its background

Key:

a) boundary of formations
b) cloud

c) land

d) sea ‘

e) sky

5.3.

It is known that ground-base services make the
while the onboard equipment is used as a back-up [reserve]. For this

spacecraft,

landmarks was observed as a function of characteris-

Pigure 55 illustrates

. ._._.. . .._—

 

I I 2 J

5 L3H

"'?igure 55."
Time to of detection of manned space-
craft as a function of distance L

1) first training session
2) subsequent training sessions

0n the whole, it can be noted that the
method of training operators to solve
problems of detecting landmarks on the
illuminated side of earth, as well as
the simulator developed for this purpose,
were beneficial and able to improve
achievement with such problems in actual
fluht. e

there were some curious reports by the
cosmonauts after flights concerning the
laboratory simulator: "the segment of
earth's surface was well-rendered on the
"isoplan" [isochart, isomap71. the bright-
ness of terrestrial formations without
clouds was close to natural," etc. At
the same time. there were comments such
as: "Clouds and some terrestrial forma-
tions appeared much brighter from space
than on the panel, it would be desirable
to add the dynamics of motion of our
spacecraft,” etc.

Modeling the Visual Situation when Flying to the Moon

necessary calculation to control a

reason, American programs for professional training of crews for the Apollo space-

craft included 60 h of work in a planetarium [97),
lator imitating approximation to the moon and traveling away
time was spent on studying 37 navigational stars,

about 50 h on a special simu-
from it [651. Some
data about which were inputted

b6
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HWLY
FOR10FFRJAI.USE(MVLY

in an alphanumeric computer, as well as comprehensive instruction of the astronauts
with respect to elements of the lunar topography at the proposed landing sites.

Unquestionably,the flights to the noon and then landing of spacecraft crews on its
surface required concrete knowledge about the topography, its forms, names of differ-
ent elements, relative location of main details and chioce of main navigational
landmarks on the surface. Without these conditions, it would be inconceivable for
an astronaut to orient himself, not only on the lunar surface, but with regard to

guiding the spacecraft in a selenocentric orbit, taking navigational measurements,
selecting the specified landing site, etc.

There were other matters involved in training crews, the most important of which
were: determination of volume of information gathering about the lunar topography;
determination of groups of objects of lunar topography remembering which'would
present no difficulties; determination of reliability of remembering formations
of lunar topography for the purpose of singling out the main landmarks and zones;
retaining skill in identifying lunar landmarks as they approach the moon (with
decrease in number of objects in the field of vision).

The study of these matters required additional research and methods developed for
this purpose, as well as special simulators and mock-ups. Various methods and
equipment have been described in the foreign literature for the study of human
characteristics in the course of observing and identifying lunar objects (digital
data for Section 5.3 [65, 97]).

Slides of the moon, photographed in different phases and scales, were used to

study the psychophysiological capacities of astronaut-operators. In the course of
the work, the slides were projected on a round white screen with black masking
around it. Tota brightness of the image of the moon on the screen constituted a
mean of 200 cd/m . This brightness is sufficient for testing the process of
identifying lunar formations but, as it was established in the course of the experi-
ment, far from adequate for taking angular measurements.

Of course, the choice of stellar sky simulator is one of the factors that could
affect reliability of "lunar landmark-star” type of astronomic readings. It was
observed that it is desirable to simulate stars, thereon and lunar formations
between which angular distances were measured on a plane that is approximately per-
pendicular to the sighting line. The actual value of measured angles was calcu-
lated on the basis of measurements of distances between the objects to be measured
and distances to the apex of the measured angle. Collimation error was taken into
consideration by means of base reference points.

The dynamics of the process of flying to and around the moon were simulated by
projecting on the screen some specially taken slides and film. The base data for
them were obtained from examining several typical flight trajectories, for example
the trajectoriesof the flight of Apollo 8 and others (Figure 56).

Estimates revealed that, starting at a distance of l0,000-l$,000 km between the
spacecraft and'moon, its movement in relation to the stellar background would not be
observed by astronauts. Viewing this phase of the "flight," which lasted about
9-10 h, was performed by means of slides taken in the proper scales, phases of
illumination by the sun and foreshortening. It was found that 30 slides of the moon
were sufficient to similate flight at this stage [65].

67
KMOHKMLWEOMX
FOI<OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

The conditions of viewing the noon can

be calculated for different trajectories
at any stage of flight. Figure 56 illus-
trates the calculation of conditions of
viewing the‘noon while flying .about
70,000 kn away free it. During each

turn of the nanned spacecraft about the
direction of the sun, i.e.. every 20 min,
the astronauts will have the noon in
their visual field for 2 sin. In the
experiments, each successive slide was
shown to the subjects every 20 nin, like
in actual flight, which saved tine and
made it possible to use considerably

more slides. At distances of about
10,000 kn from the noon, the astronaut
begins to see novenent of the noon in
relation to the stellar background.
Figure 57 illustrates the results of cal-
culating the angular velocity of this
sovesent as a function of angle 0 be-
tween the direction of the periselene
and observer, as conpared to threshold
angular speed “thr observed by the astro-
naut. Under such conditions, the astro-
naut lust identify a specified object

in the topography, and this was included
in the training program. These data cor-
respond to reliability of the astronaut's
sight equal to its usual norn on earth.
However, at the tine of approaching the
noon, vision would undergo certain changes under the influence of prolonged weight-
lessness, andthis could lead to some corrections in the calculations.

 

Figure 56.
Calculation of conditions of viewing
noon while flying toward it (v-
vector of linear speed of spacecraft;
ur-vector of angular rotation of space-
craft about direction of sun; dr-angle
of astronaut's field of vision through
spacecraft window; qr-angle between
directions of sun and earth; uh-angle
between directions of sun and space-
craft; p-distance between spacecraft
and center of the moon
I) direction of sun
II) direction of earth
A) point where loon's longitude is 0
3) point of trajectory at which
astronaut begins to see the noon
through spacecraft window

’eu ang.nin/s

    

o s nun: ' “mum

Figure 57. Figure 58.
Angular velocity «5 of the noon's novenent Angular velocity ”6 of "running" of
in relation to stars as a function of lunar surface as a function of alti--
angle 0(according to data in foreign tude kg of periselene (according to
publications) data in foreign publications)
68

FOR OFFICIAI.USEGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, "backward running" of the moon's surface will be observed while flying
over it. The angular velocity of movement of lunar surface to, which is observed

from a spacecraft stabilized with its window in the direction of the center of the
moon, will depend on flight altitude.

Figure 58 illustrates the results of calculating the angular velocity of "running"

of the lunar surface as a function of the altitude h. of the spacecraft above the
moon.

Many foreign authors assumed that the changing brightness of the underlying surface
of the moon would make it difficult to identify specified landmarks. For this

reason, the amount of astronaut training was increased, as we have already mentioned
[97].

Moreover, the results of calculations, on the basis of which the curves of Figure 58
were plotted, served as the basis for making a fill simulating a flight toward the
moon and over its surface. However, for this method of visualization to be used
under laboratory conditions, it is necessary to make several changes in the optical
system of the film projector. In particular, a special optical attachment for

the lens was developed and built to increase the angle of the image field.

0n the whole, the described (according to data in foreign publications) methods
of simulating the visual situation in space made it possible to conduct extensive
studies, under laboratory conditions, of the psychophysiological capacities of an
astronaut-Operator with regard to solving aatronavigation problems.

5.6. Hodeling of Mental States of Operators

Host laboratory experiments in aviation and space psychophysiology, which explore
the capabilities of an operator, yield a somewhat unilateral idea about the level
of these capabilities.

The specifics of working conditions at different stages of space flights will
definitely effect work capacity. For this reason, finalization of existing and
future navigation systems should be based on studies, in which not only adequate
performance conditions, but corresponding mental states of operators are simulated.
It is relatively easy to experimentally aimlate stress factors of a physical
nature, such as accelerations, vibration, temperature, changes in gas atmosphere,
etc. At the same time, the problem of purposeful and adequate modeling of emo-
tional states caused by psychogenic factors (great responsibility, danger to life,
etc.), as well as prolonged sensation of weightlessness, present serious difficul-
ties.

The following main procedures are used in experimental psychology for purposefully
affecting a subject's emotional sphere: strong and unexpected audio, photic, noci-
ceptive or other unpleasant stimuli to form negative emotions and, on the contrary,
pleasant audio and visual images to create positive emotions; performance of

tasks that appear simple at first glance but actually difficult or unsolvable,
performance in the presence of interference, fatigue and shortage of time; use of
pharmacological agents that alter the emotional state; direct electrostimulation
of primary brain structures using microelectrode techniques; recreating real
working conditions that cause great emotional stress in the operator (controller,
pilot. etc.).

‘9
FOR omen USE ONLY
FOR 0f11C1A1.lEIEINVLY

It can be maintained that the most suitable method of studying emotions is to
examine them in a real situation (for example, sports competitions and perfor-
mances, during intensive industrial work) when the experimenter accompanies the
subject through the stages of a real activity and records, in some way or other,
data about his mental and physiological state. A. R. Luriya selected expressly
this route for the study of emotional states [56]. Emotional tension of a pilot
related to performance of his professional activities is studied by simulating
flights on simulators, as well as real situations.

More and more works are being published that deal with the study of emotional
states of cosmonauts at different stages of space flights [35. 49, 72]. The im-
portance of such research is just as great in our times, while the results thereof
are quite valuable in gaining understanding of human behavior under psychological
stress. -

There are different difficulties involved in modeling the state of an operator that
is caused by the sensation of weightlessness. The substantial change in performance
characteristics, including locomotor ones, of an operator in weightlessness compels
specialists in space medicine and psychology to continue research thereof, includ-
ing studies using various modeling methods.

The methods of modeling states of partial and total weightlessness are largely de-
termined by the researchers' objectives. However, all of the methods can be
reduced to several main groups.

Biomechanics of man's motor activity in weightlessness were studied with the use
of special stands, where the general center of gravity of the body and of different
parts of the limbs were weighted by means of a system of weights and blocks.

In many cases, an immersion medium was used to simulate the effects of diminished
gravity, into which the subject submerged with a special life-support system.

Under these conditions, there was refinement, for example, of the actions of Ameri-
can cosmonauts to perform some work operations within a spacecraft, as well as
during extravebicular activity.

Lockheed Aircraft (Georgia department) developed an original device for simulating
the physiological effect of weightleasness involving the use of immersion [7S].

Stands on air pillows with different degrees of freedom. were developed to study
some of thebioaechanical characteristics of man's motor activity in weightlessness
[in a support-free state].

Finally, the last method of simulating weightlessness best meets the requirements
of research problems. It makes use of the state of weightlessaess that occurs in
a free-falling body. It is expressly in this state that only gravity affects the
body, but no gravity force ["force of weight"] occurs in the body [32, 46, 85 and

others].

The planning and execution of prolonged space flights actualized, to a significant
extent, the problem of readaptation after long-term weightlessness. Comprehensive
investigation of this problem and development of effective measures to prevent the
adverse signs of the readaptation period also require a'search for adequate models.

50
HORINHHCIAL.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE¢MVLY

Modeling Emotional States

Of all the above-listed methods of modeling emotions, only a few are suitable for
experimental aerospace psychology. Thus, procedures of purposefully influencing

the emotional state of subjects, which involve the use of potent and unusual
stimuli, cannot be used repeatedly, since a healthy body adjusts to them very rapidly
and the severity of emotional reactions diminishes. The emotional reaction to a
strong stimulus may also be mild at the very beginning when the subjects' attitude
toward this stimulus is critical enough.

The study of emotional states of operator-cosmonauts during actual work involves,
first of all. technical difficulties, which arise in connection with the recording
of objective parameters at the work place. One must also take into consideration
the fact that awareness that one is the object of a study could turn out to be a
stronger emotiogenic factor than customary activities. This circumstance often
distorts substantially the nature of reactions, which is not acceptable, not only
from the standpoint of purpose of the studies, but safety of work.

In our studies, we used the method of hypnosis to simulate emotional states of
operators. The mahod of reproducing_ motions under hypnosis has been used since
1959 to study the emotional reactions of parachutists [26, 27, 29]. Physiological
changes related to suggested or reproduced emotion were studied during hypnotic
sleep. Of course, this method cannot be used to solve problems of experimental
psychology. Inhibition of the subjects' cerebral cortex, selectivity of verbal
contact, marked functional disturbances referable to the motor and other analyzers
render it unsuitable for psychological studies. The latter require ["imply"] that
there be satisfactory and coordinated function of mental and physiological compon-
ents of activity inherent only in the waking state.

On the basis of experimental experience, it can be stated that suggested emotional
states are expressed more fully when they are motivated by the appropriate
suggested situation. In such cases, they are productive reactions and formed on
the basis of the subject's own life and emotional experience. as well as his
characterological traits.

The above method of investigation is certainly not among simple and easy methods.
Use thereof is limited by availability of specialists in hypnosis and the proper
group of subjects. however, when these conditions are available, use thereof

is quite promising for simulating specified emotional states in the study of
operator reliability in control systems.

Modeling States Related to Sensation of Diminished Body Height

The stability of the gravity field is one of the most important constants that
determine normal vital functions of man, which were formed in the course of
phylogenesis. The role of gravity in functional development of organisms has

been repeatedly described in the works of classics in natural science-C. Darwin,
I. M. Sechenov, K. A. Timiryazev, I. P. Pavlov. "Gravity," wrote A. A. Ukhtomskiy,
"is the most persistent ["hard to get rid of"] and constant field, that no being
on earth can rid itself of (along with the electromagnetic field)" [70].

As a rule. weightlessness elicits a primary reaction in all systems of the body
(sensory, motor, autonomic and mental changes), which may become significantly

51
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attenuated as one adjusts to new conditions. Prolonged weightlessness elicits
secondary functional changes.

A distinction is made of three types of primary sensory reactions. according to
nature and severity thereof. Individuals presenting the first type of reaction
show now decrease in work capacity in weightlessness, and there is no change in
their well-being. The second type of reaction is related to experiencing the
experience of free fall, sensation of upturned position, rotation of the body, being
suspended head down, etc. These spatial illusions are often associated with rest-
lessness, disorientation and sensation of discomfort. The third type of reaction
is characterized by the "space form of motion sickness" [78, 79].

The data obtained from orbital flights performed in the Soviet Union and the United
States revealed that there are some important distinctions to function of the
motor analyzer during both the period of adaptation to weightlessness and period of
stabilization of functions. Studies of motor activity during space flight revealed
that the changes in speed of motor reactions occurred in different directions.

Slower performance of a test was noted in Yu. A. Gagarin and V. P. Bykovskiy in
weightlessness, whereas G. S. Iitov, A. G. Nikolayev and P. R. Popovich presented
a faster pace of movement than in the background demonstrated on the ground [63].

l. I. Kss' yan et a1. [43] studied the muscular_ strength of subjects submitted to brief
weightlessness (35-45 s) during flights in lab-oratory aircraft in a Keplerian para-
bola. It was established from 266 readings on 26 subjects that the muscular strength
of the hand decreased by 6-22 kgf in 822 of the cases, from the base level of 45-

65 kgf. However, in some cases (up to 91), when the readings were taken with the
subject attached to a chair, we also observed an increase in strength of the hands.
The authors believe that generalized decrease in tonic tension of muscles is one

of the causes of diminished muscular strength.

1.. A. Kitayev-Snyk [45], who studied coordination of movements during brief weight-
lessness by means of target shooting tests, demonstrated that precision was di-
minished due to a typical error—overshooting upward and to the right.

There were also distinctions to oculoaotor activity in cosmonauts A. G. Nikolsyev,
P. R. Popovich, V. F. Bykovskiy and V. V. Tereshkova during space flights [6]. At
the start of the flight there was persistent increase in oculomotor activity,
from 40 movements/min on earth to 300-1000 during the first passes. At the start
of the flight there was prevalence of wide-amplitude movements ("leading" of the
eyes). As adaptation progressed, the eye movements became better coordinated,
faster and completely normal on the 2d-3d day.

A large amount of information about autonomic functions in weightlessness was ob-
tained during space flights. Hush attention was devoted to the study of para-
meters of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems during all manned orbital
flights. It was established that the heart rate slows down in orbital flight in
all cosmonauts. Measurement of arterial pressure during the flights revealed that
there was a drop of systolic pressure and a tendency toward insignificant elevation
of diastolic pressure, which led to appreciable drop of pulse pressure.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHI()FFIC1A1.lﬂ§BIOBﬂLY

The existing data enable us to refer to different types of 336 changes during space
flights. Thus, A. c. Nikolayev and V. P. Bykovskiy presented a tendency toward
predominant replacement of low-frequency waves (less than 8 Hz) by high-frequency
oscillations with gradual decline of amplitude of bioelectrical rhythms in weight-

lessness. V. V. Tereshkova presented chiefly an increase in low-frequency poten-
tials. .

Biochemical studies of the cosmonauts following orbital flights revealed more or
less marked weight loss (3 kg for B. B. Yegorov). It is believed that inadequate
replacement of fluid loss is the main cause of weight loss in flight [6].

According to all of the foregoing, there are changes in sensory, as.well as motor
and autonomic components, of the systemic reaction in weightlaasness. Of course,
this cannot fail to be associated with a change in work capacity.

Studies of sensorimotor coordination during prolonged weightlessness during
flights of single and multipassenger spacecraft revealed that sensorimotor coordi-

nation worsened at the start of the flight, but was significantly restored as
adaptation to weightlessness progressed.

Evaluation of general locomotor activity in weightlessness and open space

was made by means of biomechsnical analysis of the process of exiting from

the spacecraft into space by A. A. Leonov [67]. A comparison of the generalized
criterion of quality of this action in space to the same criterion obtained during
brief weightlessness aboard a laboratory aircraft revealed that it was signifi-
cantly decreased (39.72, versus 57-601).

Simulation through hypnosis of states related to sensations of both diminished
and increased body weight implies that the sensation of actual change in body
weight, in either direction, is also encountered in man's everyday life.

Engrams with imprinted experience of subjective experiences elicited by weight
fluctuations and corresponding autonomic reactions are retained in long-term
memory. It can be stated that each adult man has some experience in subjective
evaluation of his state when there is a change in his body weight.

Persistent illusions of weightlesaness are also not uncommon in patients with de-
personalization syndromes, and this enabled R. Ya. Golsnt [26] to single out a
depersonalizstion syndrome, in which the sensation of weightlessness is the prime
sign.

It is logical to assume that the above cases of hypogravity illusions occur as a
result of temporary activation in the cerebral cortex of the engrams imprinted by
life experience in subjective sensations related to brief changes in body weight.
Impaired control and regulation by higher mental functions at a given time must
be a mandatory condition for such activation. However, direct indications that
"... the clinical signs of any disease, particularly at its early stages, are
formed from the material referable to prior life experience" [71] are considered
to be sufficient grounds for such assumptions.

All of the subjects presented rather typical changes in static posture with repro-
ductive suggestion of partial weight ("gravity hypoathesia"): the spine is
straightened out. not infrequently the subject stands on his toes, his arms are

53
FOR OFFHJM1.USEGMNLY
FOI*0F'N(1AI.|!N£(NULV

somewhat bent at the elbow and are moved away from the body. These postural dis-
tinctions persist when walking, which is performed at a slower pace with limited
biodynamic participation of the arms in this process.

Figure 59 illustrates the typical changes in vertical components of the test
movement of "elevating hands to shoulder level and dropping them" at a comfortable
pace. The analyzed movements were made in a hypnotic state, with sensation of

usual weight, as well as reproductive suggestion of l/g G hypogravity. Table 5.4
lists mean changes in movement parameters.

“a... .-
.-..——

 

Figure 59. Changes in vertical velocity (boldface lines) and accelerations
(thin lines) while raising and dropping hands in the ordinary
state (—-) and with suggestion of diminished body weight (--)

Table 5.4. Main parameters of test movement in a state of hypnosis

nean Max .uean.
speed speed aogile accele

 

 

.. .-_.—_.-—_.—

super Move-
mental ment.

 

   
 
   
  

     
    

   

 

 

 

 

Movement cogdi tine, ale ' den ' re “1‘ ‘1‘“:
Raising arm I l I 1.0 «no I 31.
1/6 1.1 o..s__ Ia. '
in arm I '156 I L1 ‘ 56.
Dropp g I II6 I 2.3 0.35 II.

 

 

As can be seen in this table, with reproductive suggestion of partial gravity

there was l.7-£old increase in speed of the active part of the test movement and 6.1-
fold increase in the passive part (dropping the hand). Hess and maximum speed
decreased by 1.8 and 1.9 times, respectively when elevating the arm and by «.8 and
4.6 times when dropping it; in the former case. mean and maximum acceleration
decrease by 1.8 and 2.2 times and in the latter case by 7.3 and 5.0 times. Accord-
ing to these figures, the initial biomechanical effect of partial gravity (longer
movement time) is manifested to a greater extent in the passive part of the loco-
motor act and to a lesser extent in its active phase. which is voluntary [77]. A
comparative analysis of horizontal elements is not made here on the grounds that

. 56
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(N¥LY
FOR'0FFKJA1.USE(HVLY

they reflect to a considerably lesser extent interaction between the motor analyzer
and exogenous force field. i.e., demonstrate to a lesser extent the functional
role of the muscular system in interaction with gravity forces [9].

Typically enough, progressive "increment" of body weight is associated with pro-
gressive increase in pulse rate. This is manifested the most when the factor is

real: reproductive suggestion elicits considerably less increment of pulse rate
than a real influence.

There were no physical factors of gravity in the form of deformation and displace-
ment of internal organs, change in pressure in blood vessels, etc., in this experi-
ment. Consequently, the observed cardiovascular reaction to reproductive sugges-
tion of gravity is attributable to increase in general mental tension, as well as
accentuetion or redistribution of general muscle tone. The data referable to the
galvanic skin response and actography are an indirect confirmation of this finding.
however, only special myographic studies can offer a direct reflection of func-
tional state of different muscle groups exposed to the above factors.

_ Functional reorganization of the motor analyzer in the course of decline of afferen-
tation associated with subjective sensation of diminished weight also'had-a;specific
effect on the electroencephalogram (Figure 60).

The results of studies of biomechanical
and autonomic reactions of man to whom
the reproductive suggestions are made
during hypnosis of different gravity
states revealed that the functional

and locomotor changes that occur are
similar to those that are observed under
actual conditions of partial weight
loss, as well as with the use of other
modeling methods.

. .
s

AU

Bearing this in mind, it was deemed
quite interesting to explore the possi-
bility of continuous retention of sug-
gested "gravity hypostheeia" for a long
time in the posthypnotic period (3-10 or
more days). during which the subjects
would be able to perform the complete
set of tasks stipulated in standard
programs for space flights. Experiments
following a specific program were con-
ducted twice for 3, 5 and 10 days

    

“no days zooowdﬁyl
a b

Figure 60.
Change in EEG spectrum when gradual de-
crease of body weight to 5 kgf is sug-
gested to subject (PR-pulse rate)

a) subject 1; b) subject 2; AU-arbi-
trary units

(repeated after 15-20 days) on the same
subjects. The experiments were preceded
by a period of instruction and training
of subjects in-all of the techniques
simulating operator work. The widely
used parameter, "establishment of a

functional plateau," served as a criterion of degree of readiness of operators
for these experiments dealing with quality of performance of test work.

55

INHR(MHHC1AI.USE(NVLY
FIHICHﬂﬂChlLIﬁ5l(NVLY

1n the first (control) experiments, the subjects were in their ordinary state and
the main factor affecting the body consisted of 3-, 5- or 10—day relative hypodynamia.
At the start of repeated (main) 3-, 5- and 10-day experiments, the subjects were
submerged into a deep hypnotic state, after which similar suggestions were made

of partial loss of sensitivity to gravity factors.

In group experiments, the

suggestions were made to all subjects at the same time. After appearance of ob-
jective signs ("floating" of the arms, electrophysiological parameters) and verbal
account of the subjects confirmed that the suggestion was effective, they were
brought out of hypnosis 5-7 min later and began to perform programs of the appro-
priate multidsy experiments with new gravity sensations.

Upon completion of the experimental programs at the end of the 3d, 5th and 10th days,

the subjects were again hypnotized.

Height “was restored" under hypnosis by means
of using a suggestion with opposite meaning.

There was gradual "increase" in weight

to the usual level over a period of 10 min, with constant monitoring of physiologi-
cal functions, after which the subjects were brought out of the hypnotic state just

as slowly.

Theuostcypical mental reaction in the first few hours of hypogravity was some
degree of euphoria, associated with excessive motor activity, talkativeness and

laughter.
weightlessness in orbital flights.

Such signs were also seen in cosmonauts who first experienced real

The second common [general] distinction of mental sensations during simulation of
decreased body weight is absence of pressure of the chair and tension of dorsal

muscles while keeping a constant position for several days.

The subjective sen-

sations of hypogravity are associated with corresponding objective manifestations,
which usually have a tendency to accumulate with time and become fixed.

Figure 61 illustrates some of the characteristics of movements when walking at
different stages of 10-day experiments (the data were averaged for three subjects).

-

 

I I D 1
Stages of experiment
Figure 61.

Plantography data at different stages of
long-term experiments (A--1eve1 of change
in function in relation to base readings;
L-1ength of step; s--deviation from mid-
line)
I) let day, hypogravity

II) 10th day, hypogravity

III) 10th day, hypodynamia

IV) 10th day, readaptation

56

As can be seen from this figure, the bio-
machanical changes when walking in a
state of diminished weight, as well as
at the first stage of the readaptation
period, lead to appearance of the so-
called "sailor's gait." The decreased
stability in vertical position causes
shortening of steps and placement of the
feet at a considerably greater distance
from the axial line of movement than is
normally the case. The gait disorder is
even more marked at the readaptation
stage.

The disturbances referable to coordina-
tion with the suggestion of diminished
weight are very graphically demonstrated
on oculograms. There is drastic change
in shape of the 206 [electrooculogram],
with appearance of irregular additional
waves. As time passes, these signs dis-
appetr; however, the amplitude of the
HOG continues to increase over the

FOR!OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
lill(ﬂ"ﬂClkLlJ§E(MNLY

entire period of suggested diminished weight.

In the readaptetion period, however,

there was drastic decrease in 306 amplitude (Figure 62).

Mﬂﬁﬁsuﬂlphl ,
-v----— W'——_V_-' ..

   

Udays
2:“, h

u ”U

3'
Figure 62.
BOG during simulation of diminished body
weight (P-oreadaptation, AU-arbitrary
units)
1) waking state
2) hypogravity
3) readaptation
A) averaged data for area circumscribed
by amplitude and isoline in hypo-
gravity state

Maligna-

ouham

  

50

‘0

.u

z .

c L: I r da t-' .

.1 lb! 11'"
Figure 63.

Change in visual functions during simula-
ted hypogravity (white columns) and actual

space flight (striped columns)
a) visual acuity
b) contrast sensibility

These changes were associated with fluc-
tuations of some characteristics of
visual functions, particularly acuity
and contrast sensitivity. These data are
illustrated in Figure 63, as coepared to
data obtained during an actual space
flight when performing the same visual
tests.

Figure 66 illustrates data characterizing
the pulse rate dynamics during 3-, 5- and
10-day experiments (curves 1, 2 and 3,
respectively). In all cases. simulated
states of diminished weight (hypogravity)
elicited considerably greater slowing of
the pulse (by 5-10!) than relative hypo-
dynamia. which was present in the control
experiments. The most marked decline of
pulse rate in such a state was observed
at rest, particularly nocturnal sleep,
and it was less marked when performing
work operations. Exercise in a state

of diminished weight was associated with
relatively greater increment of pulse
rate than in control experiments.

 

sackaIIzJOIOIsssunureas
ground ’ y

Btsvrsﬁéo .-
Changes in pulse rate [PR] (mean data)
in many-day experiments
1) 3-day experiments —) control
2) 5-day experiments experiment
3) 10-day experiments --) hypogravity

Orthostatic tests, which were conducted before and after control experiments. as
well as experiments where the suggestion of hypogrsvity was made, revealed that the
reactions of the cardiovascular system were less favorable in the latter case

(Figure 65).

57

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(N§LY
:2: (hereto: '1 MW,“ 2

m “V "“ (M‘ﬂ : K"
"sq

5P1 IISIUII JI SIZIIUIIU IIfl'IIﬂ'ﬂlI II 51"!” t lin-

M’«a . ‘ A W
"0 ' ‘
\ A l‘ '
W V V I, \J : \J . V 1
m L z '
AP
:5 , ’* -
100 I‘ If ﬂ ‘
1 I V ‘ \ r‘
W I g \I
u ‘I \ II ‘1'
1/ I
00 y g
a b a

 

Figure 65. Orthoststic reactions after 5-day control experinents (a) and
experinents with suggested hypogrsvity (h)

AP3) systolic arterial pressure let-15th nin-orthostatic position
APd) diastolic arterial pressure lSth-ZOth nin-horisontal position
APP) pulse arterial pressure -- before. -- after experinent

Marked cardiovascular and actor reactions were desonstrated in the period of re-

sdsptstion to usual weight, uhich lasted 1 day after the 3-day experilent, 2 days
after the 5-day one and 5 days after the 10-day one.

Thus. it was proven that the effectiveness of a single hypnotic suggestion of sub-
jected sensation of diminished body weight can persist for 5-10 days.* As time

passes. not only does the hypnotized state fail to regress, on the contrary, it
shows a tendency toward "further completion of expression,” of becoming fir-1y
fixed and eliciting adequate physical changes in the body.

*At the present tine there are experinsntal data indicating that such a state nay
persist for 30 days.

58
l!"l¢lﬂﬂ(1Al.USlllVLY
FOR<OFUKJAI.UIIGIELY

CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION OF EFFECTIVERBSS 0P ASTRONAVIGAIION SYSTEMS WITH A “MEAN
OPERATOR

6.1. Research-training astronavigstion unit

Modern systems of space astronavigation are systems of the man-machine type. In
such systems, the operator emerges in the role of the most important, most
responsible element. For this reason, it is impossible to design such systems
without consideration of the "human factor." At the present times, problems that
arise in designing systems including man, as well as studies of the effectiveness
[or efficiency] of such systems, involve essentially experimentation [22].

Experimental studies of systems of the man-machine type require the use of a
diversified approach, since it is only possible to obtain reliable results if
there is full enough recording of both the parameters characterizing the per-
formance and psychophysiological state of the operator and parameters of dynamics
of the machine and state of the environment.

For this reason, at the present time there has been broad development of experi-
mental research based on dynamic complexes [units]. They are intended for half-
scale ["seminatural"] modeling of systems of the man-machine type, objective
evaluation of the efficiency of such systems with the use of various algorithms,
demonstration of statistically reliable characteristics of the operator as part
of the system under study as affected by the environment, as well as for offering
work training with specific equipment, with concurrent evaluation of training
achievement.

we shall discuss below an astronavigational research-training unit (ARTU), which
consists of the following (Figure 66): system operator and consoles, with which
he works (model of sensorimotor field)-I; sensors and recorders (including
sensors of psychophysiological parameters)-II; combination computer system--III;
experimenter's monitoring and control consoles.

The computer system (CC) of this ART" consisted of a Minsk¥32 digital computer (DC),
Dnepr-lh multipurpose control computer (NBC) and HN-lb analog computer (AC), which
were all interconnected.

The HN-l8 AC makes it possible to preset [preselect] the model of the object,
change its dynamic properties easily and can serve as the matching element between
the operator's console and inputs of the Dnepr-lﬂ etc; it also solves problems of
modeling the dynamics of the aensorimotor field of the operator and filtration
task.

59
F0ﬂ109Fﬂ3A1.08l(NVLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.UBE(NVUV

o‘gsuln '
owls/nu. -

  
     
 
 

M»)?
In"
‘1‘.”

'4’ as

  

Dnepr-ln Hcc

Minsko32 DC

Figure 66.

  

 

Block diagram of astronavigational research
training complex (ARTU)

Key:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

actions

display signals of measuring systems
control handles, switches, buttons
recorders

experimenter
change in state of object of control

input of programs and initial
conditions

The Dnepr-lH ucc performs the func-
tions of a translator transmitting
information from the operator's
console and sensors to the Minsk-
32 Dc. It can perform the-follow—
ing tasks: convert analog signals
and submit them to preliminary
statistical processing (obtaining
mean values and dispersions, com-
puting criteria and estimates

of various types of work, averaging
the results of psychological tests,
etc.); form an array of electro-
physiological parameters and
evaluations of performance; con-
vert data into a form that is
convenient for input in the Minsk-
32 DC; produce control signals

and voltage for the AC.

The Minsk-32 Dc is used for final
processing of experimental data
by means of specified algorithms,
mathematical modeling of the sys-
tem (subsystem) under study,
printing out the results of
running the programs, etc. It is
knovn that computations made on
an analog computer are notable
for high speed but low accuracy.
At the same time, it is quite
difficult to use precise digital
methods when processing rapid
phenomena, particularly if many
parameters of a given process,

as well as various processes,are
being recorded. For this reason.
it is logical to combine digital
and analog computers in the cc.
The use of different types of
computers in the cc expands sig-
nificantly the capabilities of
the entire unit.

Converters (analog-digitsl-ADC, and digital-analog-DAC), multichannel switches and
decoders, synchronizers and controlling devices, buffer devices, memory, etc., are
required to make joint use of analog and digital computers.

Multichannel switches [commutators] and decoders are used so that the converters,
which translates condhuous signal into a discrete digital code and vice versa,

could function in a time-sharing mode.

The memories are needed to store the

values of continuously changing signals for a time that is sufficient to effect

the

conversion.

60

The buffer devices are needed to match the levels of amplitudes,

lin1€nﬂﬂ€lhl.lﬂiE(MVLY
FIHICNWHCJAI.U8840NLN

shapes and duration of pulses that provide for the Joint operation of digital and
analog computers. Finally. the synchronization and control circuits are needed
to synchronize processes in the different units that form the systen.

The functions of all of the above devices can be assumed by an intermediate digital
computer additionally connected into the systen as a mediator beween the base 00
and AC. Of course, the intermediate digital computer nust be small and have
adequate elementary software, but broad capabilities with regard to control of
input and output devices. The small digital computers of the Dnepr type meet these
requirements in full; each unit thereof contains a device for communication with
the object. which has a large enough number of analog and relay inputs, as well as
relay outputs. For this reason, one can easily connect the MN-lB AC with the
Dnepr-lH computer in the described ARTU, making direct use of analog and relay
inputs of the latter. The HN-lB AC and Dnepr-lﬂ hcc function together automatically
by means of a program with the use of a control unit (CD) and device for communica-
tion with the object (DCO) in the Dnepr-lh and its relay inputs (81).

In order to perform thetask of combining the Dnepr-lH Hcc with the base DC. which
is a series produced computer of the Minsk-32 type in the A310, special devices are
also required that are quite complicated when communicating via the fast channel
(they are not included with these computer units). It would be much simpler to

use one-way communication via the slow channel. Thus, in the ARTU under discussion,
information is transmitted from the Dnepr-lh to the Hinsk-BZ in a binary code

over the coded read lines using a buffer cascade, tape input (UVvL-23) of the
Minsk-32 and special programs for transmitting data, which function synchronously
in both computers.

 

 

 

[SS -
L-
F-
I
I-.. __ -- . L...:._._...._J
Figure 67. Block diagram of computer system of ARTU
8) data sensors CC) control console
DAC) digit-analog converter DT) device for input from papertape
ADC) analog-digital converter CU) control unit
10) input-output device AD) arithmetic device
SS) space sextant RI) relay input device

Figure 67 illustrates the block diagram of a combined CC in the ARTU. This figure
shows that the obtained system has both two-way (HN-l8-Dnepr-lh) and one-way

61
IN)! OWINCJAI.IEHE(NVLY
llﬂlllﬂnCIAl.USIINULY

(Dnepr-lH-Hinsk-32) communication. For this reason it is possible to control
progress of the experiment only on the basisof internediate results. Further
development of this cs is to create two-wey communications between the Minsk-32
and Dnepr-lu computers.

Current information from different sensors can be transmitted to the computer system
over the communication cable. This permits making fuller use of the cs by connect-
ing to it various models of the operator's aensorimotor fields (or real field).

For this reason, the operator, system and consoles with which he works can be
located in a separate room, which expands the capabilities of the complex with res-
pect to studying the effects of different factors on operator work capacity. In
addition, this creates beneficial conditions for simulating cosmonaut performance
as a whole, on a manned spacecraft in our case. Not only performance, but rest,
diet, etc., conditions can be simulated, i.e., concrete programs of short- or long-
term flights can be mcdeled. From the standpoint of obtaining reliable data, the
optimum approach to studies of psychophysiological capacities of man when working
in an sstronsvigation system is one where the work under study is included in the
overall "flight" program.

The model of the operator's sensorimotor field is designed to simulate systems,
consoles that the operator works with and conditions of his work. It is the most
expedient to use combined models in the complex (33], which include elements of
a general and detailed model. The composition of the model can be changed, de-
pending on the purpose of the study. However, the model must always include a
sensory field (displays, signals, viewfinders [sights], etc.) and a motor field
(control handles, buttons, switches. etc.).

The following are included in the model of aensorimotor field of the above-described
ARTU (which determines its specialization): functional mock-up of space sextant (88)
with its control console and simulator of earth's surface (detailed models). as

well as a mock-up of a manned spacecraft cockpit (general model).

The block diagram of linkage of elements of functional 88 model with the A310
computer system is illustrated in Figure 68. Sensors 01, D: and buttons K and a can
serve also to obtain the time characteristics of the process of directing the 85
(time spent on solving the entire problem, reaction time, decision making time,
etc.). while R), 3;, R,’ and R2' are precision characteristics (amplitude of error,
its integral, etc.).

work with the functional model of a space sextant was done in a special simulation
chamber (mock-up of manned spacecraft cockpit). A model of the operator's work
place was installed in this chamber, where he took navigational readings with a
space sextant.

The operator's work with an 88 model consisted of the following:

1) Identifying the specified sighting objects (for example, a star and
terrestrial landmark) upon receiving the signal to "start working," viewing
their images concurrently in the stationary eyepiece of the 88 model.

2) Guide the specified sighting objects into the crosslines of the eyepiece
of the SS model by manipulating control handles.

62
IND! OFFICIAI.IEHBCNVLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) Fix the end of the measurement and depress button for input of information.
The obtained angles of deflection of the main mirrors of the sextant and

sight are automatically read by the cosputer.

°"“'
ator

is; -;
[ANT
[3-] HI»;

-_--. __ _ -. ‘

l .
I 3 "1?) goal
U a
El] Li, [3 EH] {III-ﬂ Ito-ls

___l I
J
n 5; a: '
E] D ‘ID or '00 m: Dnepr-lﬂ

ICC

 

Figure 68. Block diagrae of comication between nodal of space sextant
and computer syste-

PY. PY') handles [knobs] of sextant and sight

88) space sextant
kl. R2. R,’, 113') 58 electric sensors free which information is taken to calculate

angle between direction of sighted objects
A), A2, A , A“) ssplifiera of matching unit
K) button for input of data into digital coeputer

1' D ) discrete sensors of position of control handles

Yca) device for lidta ge with object

AB) analog inputs of vco

CD) control device

10D) input-output device

AD) arithmetic device

Dl) discrete inputs of YCO

63
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FVIROFFNJAL.UBE(NNLY

Thus, this model of the sensorimotor field made it possible to include a real
operator in the aatronavigation system and thereby enabled us to study it as a whole.

The sensors and recorders are designed to receive end issue to the CS information
that is required to assess the efficiency of the system as a whole or its different
elements, as well as to determine the psychophysiological state of the operator.
Signals, buttons, contact strips and other position sensors and devices on the
operator's console, as well as various sensors attached to the operator and con-
nected to biopotential amplifiers (in the ARrU a type rapbo 8-channel encephalogrsph
was used), can serve as sensors of parameters of efficiency of the system. This
equipment makes it possible to input in the cs and use for evaluation of operator
performance such psychophysiological parameters as reaction time. decision making
time, encephalogram. pneumogrem, elsctromyogrem. oculogram, electrocardiogram. etc.

Such physiological parameters as mathematical expectation and dispersion of the
operator's heart rate are quite informative in studies of efficiency of operator
performance in s man-machine system. The general algorithm for obtaining them in
the A810 are: 1) recording the electrocardiogram (EKG) by means of biopotential
sensors and the TR-60 unit; 2) amplified biopotentiels (BIG) are fed to the HN-l8
input from the output of the 18960; 3) EKG R waves are singled out on the HN-18 and
fed to the relay input numbered K of the Dnepr-ln ace in the form of pulses with
negative polarity; 6) the Dnepr-lﬂ ucc interrogates input K following the set
program and, upon appearance ofapulse, stores time t: by means of the time pulse
counter. Upon appearance of the next pulse, time t; is stored. than £3. ..., ti,
..., tn; 5) in the arithmetic device (AD) of Dnepr-lh determination is made of

T - (ti’ti-l)’ which is the time between two cardiac contractions (in seconds),
where i - l, 2. 3, .... n is the number of transmitted pulses, j - i-l is the
number of recorded periods; 6) from the ti stored in Dnepr-l H, calculation is
made of mathematical expectation-qM(f)-and disparsion-D(f)-of heart rate within
the specified time (einute) using the equations:

 

where f is the frequency of cardiac contractions, beats/min.

Using analogous algorithms, we can process other psychophysiologicsl parameters
(for example. respiratory rate).

It should be noted that the program for processing psychophyeiological parameters

is executed together with other programs inputted in the ARTU computer system.

This makes it possible to evaluate. in the course of the experiment, the state of
the operator and his psychophysiological "expenditures" as an element of some system
or other.

Thus. one can do the following using the above-described astronsvigetionsl research-
training unit: teach operators various types of work with concurrent evaluation of

66
FOIGMHHC1A1.USE¢ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY

how well they were learned; study the effects of different factors on efficiency of
the ergatic system, and these factors may vary in nature (for example, technical
executation of some elements of the system. effect of simulated weightlessneaa,
distribution of functions between the operator and automatic equipment, etc.); evalu-
ate dynamic parameters of different systems of navigation and control; evaluate
time and precision characteristics of the process of taking sstronomic readings;
evaluation of efficiency of the astronsvigation system as a whole with the use of
some quantitative criteria or other; obtain generalized estimates on the basis of
psychophysiological and technical parameters.

This complex also permits solving many other problems. An important distinction of
using the complex for investigations is that it is possible to solve several prob-
lems simultaneously, with concurrent recording of many diverse parameters (psycho-
physiological, technical, state of the environment).

Such a method of evaluating a man-machine system is complex (polyeffector) [33].
The reliability and informativeness of results obtained by this method are deter-
mined by the fact that it is based on reproduction of the actual dynamics of the
control process. simulation of external operator working conditions, consideration
of quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the control process. as well as
recording and analyzing psychophysiological parameters of the operator.

6.2. Evaluation of Dynamic characteristics of Navigation and Control Systems

After analyzing cosmonaut performance referable to solving interrelated navigation
and control problems, it is not difficult to arrive at the conclusion that these
activities include tracking functions in the closed control circuit.

Modern control theory has comprehensively developed methods for analysis and syn-
thesis of tracking systems of different types. Use of this theory to study ergatic
systems is possible if we have a mathematical description of the work of an operator
in the system. It is desirable for this description to be of the same type as

used to describe machine elements of the system.

Along with other types of models, wide use is made in control theory of transfer
function. which is the input-output correlation in the Laplace image space [trans-
form?], as a mathematical model of various objects (systems).

There has already been development for several decades of studies of ergatic track-
ing systems by methods of automatic control theory with the use of transfer func-
tions as operator models. Man is a complex biological system, so that s mathema-
tical model thereof, which would take into consideration of the entire diversity
of distinctive features in man's controlling activities. would be tremendously
complicated. Obviously, development of an operator model should be based on the
optimum compromise approach. taking into consideration as many factors as possible
that reflect the specifics of man's performance in a tracking system and the need
to design a relatively simple model, which would be suitable for analysis and
synthesis of an ergatic system.

At present, we know of a considerable number of various mathematical models of
man’s performance in the tracking mode. Thus, 20 variants of mathematical models
of man as an element in a closed tracking system have been listed in [58]. Their
diversity is attributable not only to various methods of construction, but primarily

6S
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
NROFHGALIBEONLY

the fact that the reactions and functional characteristics of an operator depend
appreciably on many factors: type of controlled object, nature of input signal,
type of display [indicator], degree of operator fatigue, level of his training,
emotional state, etc. In the case in question, when the cosmonaut is the operator,
one must also hear in mind factors that are related to the specific conditions of
space flights.

The variability of characteristics of the operator and their dependence on many
different conditions move to the fore the task of evaluating the ergatic system
on a real time scale when controlling a specific object under concrete conditions.
In other words, it becomes necessary to identify the system, i.e., form an adequate
mathematical model on the basis of processing input signals and the system's reac-
tions to them.

Identification involves two tasks: 1) determination of the structure and parameters
of the model; 2) determination of parameters of the model of an object when a given
structure applies.

Since availability of information about the stmcture of the model or choice of a
rather general structure as the base to start the identification process speeds up
this process significantly. it is easier to make the identification on a real time
scale within the frnework of the second task.

The so-called quasilinear model has gained wide popularity as the model of man

as an element of a tracking system. Such a model. which is more general in form
than the one described in Chapter 2, has a linear part in the form of a transfer
function and a "remainder" [11]. One can obtain sufficient generality [or simila-
rity] of a quasilinear model, required to take into consideration the variability
of husan traits, by virtue of the fact that transfer function of the operator

("(p) is given in the form of relationship between two polynomials without stipulat-
ing a priori the nusber of terns in either the numerator or denominator:

 

.
X‘IP’ .
I J “ _ ’1?) (6.1)
“ (p)ms ﬂ -3 ,
\‘ ..Pl U“)
I.»

where a1: and b1; are parameters of the model of the operator which take into con-
sideration the linear component of man's reaction to an input signal presented to
him on a display. The "remainder" in the quasilinear model reflects the degree
of inadequacy of a linear model for men's actual characteristics when working

in a given system, under given concrete conditions.

After choosing the structure of the mathematical model of an ergatic system to be
of the (6.1) type. the task of identification is reduced to experimental determina-
tion of its parameters, evaluation of parameters. It must be noted that, although
we know of many different identification methods. most of tha were not developed
to the stage of concrete algorithms for estimation of parameters and structure of
an object on a real time scale; for this reason. it is still a pressing task to

66
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
INJR‘DFIHCIAI.USE2(MVLY

conduct research to upgrade these methods in the direction of improving accuracy
and speed of evaluation, particularly as related to ergatic systems.

He shall describe one of the effective methods of identification that is used on a
real time scale. This method amounts in essence to conversion of a differential
equation equivalent in the time area to a transfer function (6.1) to a system of
linear algebraic nonstationary equations and than to recurrent solution of this system.

In the time area, transfer function (6.1) corresponds to a differential equation of
the following appearance:

 

' .—__ _. .. .
I.

\‘ "'"m '1 I"

:1 -, ._ , - H!)

.64 . “I \ ['1 . "3—,... _ (6.22
‘4, ..

where u(t) and y(t) are input and output signals of the object, respectively; a; and
bj are unknown parameters of the object, one of which. for example a., can be con-

sidered to equal one. In this case, the vector of unknown parameters h is an Z-
dimensionsl vector (1 - nﬂn+l):

hr . lag, dz, soc. a". b0, b1, .00. bn] (603)

The task at the first stage of identification is to form algebraic equations in
relation to coordinates of unknown vector h. When there are unknowns, the coeffi-
cients should be the observed coordinates of the object.

Let us introduce the following designations:

in--=ﬁ'tn
—'-’£d$‘9--—.?,(n..... -- “f,"

 

. "VFW-”(Hi
4w

“— mum..." 7‘_=? (I):

w»-h.u>...w)l u=u+m+ u .

(6.4)

With consideration of designations (6.6), the differential equation (6.2) for
discrete points in time k can be submitted in the form of an algebraic equation:

wk) - Wk»: (6.5)

Let us call such a transformed model the ideal canonical model. It does not take
into consideration conversion and measurement errors. These errors can be taken
into consideration in a canonical model of the following appearance:

wk) - 07(10): + n(k) (6.6)

67
FOR‘OFFHJAJ.USE(NVLY
FOI‘OFTNCJAI.USE4MNLY

where n(k) is discrepancy, which is also called noise. The discrepancy could be
attributable to measurement errors, errors of approximation of a real object in a
linear model and other factors.

By measuring w(k) and 0(k) at successive points in time and using one of the iterative
computing algorithms, we can estimate parameter vector h, the coordinates of which
are, according to (6.3), coefficients of differential equation (6.2). The difficulty
lies in the fact that we need to know the derivatives of the input (to the m order)
and output (to the n order) signals. Under real conditions, repeated direct differ-

entiation is not effective because of the interference superimposed on input and
output signals.

To avoid direct differentiation of signals, let us turn to the other observed coordi-
nates of the object on the basis of the method of additional filtration (21]. For
this, let us use certain ancillary operator-filters with the same transfer functions
F(p) on the observed input u(t) and output y(t) signals of the object. with the
proper choice of filters, all of the phase coordinates of signals are observable

at their outputs and are found to be related in the fashion of (6.5) to vector h
determined by equation (6.3).

Using the Laplace transform for equation (6.2) and then multiplying it by function

F(p), all poles of which are to the.left of the imaginary axis of plane p, we shall
have:

 

 

,,, s I, (6.7)
_ 1 _, ("0(1)
-_I-|pl‘ﬂ‘b, plum—2" P’ ( w. .u )4.“

where ( )+ refers tothe initial conditions of variables. In this equation, the
terms that depend on base conditions of variables y(t) and u(t) and their deriva-
tives are extinguished [damped] in the time region, and the less the time of

the transfer processes of filters F(p), the faster this damping occurs:

llmL ' [Flpl‘l‘ #4 (M) l_o
+0

I .
and limi. ={F ,rnEp/q (I! 510))

IU'-‘

 

I 5

where L“ is the symbol for the inverse transform of Laplace.

Thus, by performing the inverse Laplace transform in equation (6.7) and disregard-
ing the influence of base conditions, we shall obtain the main equation for the
method of additional filtration:

68
FOR‘OFiﬂClAl.lEHI(ﬂVLY
Filltﬂﬂﬂ(14|.lﬂﬂB(NVLY

' r w . .
.‘ 'le -|:I ‘ I-I'II.I
\ :|-'—-' \tv:----' . 6.3
4-1 L W Jm- x... ’1.dt’ Jm» ( )
. ,.
where !:iméLL -rL"<Y p-p~F-pf
1 c" VHF! '
and ;.‘_u_(:_§ ' I." {Ll-[r pf]: .p.)

(6.9)

are the phase coordinates at the output of the additional filters when signals y(t)
and u(t), respectively, are fed to their inputs.

We assume that in equation (6.8) a. - l and introduce the following designations:

 

”I " (FL-u) nfhl';
” ” In”
'0 I’IIH‘) 'éa-.|:(;.
[Jiﬂll .,. ., [4:115L] _ ﬂ . (6.10)
1. J! '5in '1 l ..... I “1,, _l,-4,,I .. H,

Hith consideration of these designations, equation (6.8) for discrete points in
tine k is put into canonical form (6.5):

w(k) - ¢7(k)h

Here, w(k) and vector coordinates ¢(k) are converted phase coordinates of model
(6.2) observed at the outputs of the filters F(p) at discrete points in time k.

Let us discuss the requirements of the structure and parameters of the additional
filters.

In order to obtain estimates of all Z coefficients of the object's transfer func-
tion by the method of additional filtration. we must observe the appropriate number
of phase coordinates at the outputs of the additional filters. This condition is
satisfied If the order of the transfer function of additional filters F(p) is not
lower than the order of the object's transfer function. Thus, taking into consider-
ation the requirement that execution must be simple, we determine the structure of
the additional filters. In selecting the parameters of these filters, one should
proceed from the level of high-frequency interference. The higher this level, the
narrower the bandpass of the filters must be. One must also bear in mind that
reduction of the bandpass prolongsthetransient processes due to the nonzero

base conditions.

Figure 69 illustrates, as an example, the block diagram for conversion of phase
coordinates for parametric identification of an object, the model of which is

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY

described by a second order transfer function. For such an object, the order of
transfer function of additional filters should be at least two. The block diagram
illustrates third order filters F(p).

lb" — “—1,—2- -— -— ’ ’ .—
Clﬂl":’ 4,9 " ‘J’J'c.,p~o"’p o]

 

91/!)

4 .
MPH‘UW W‘I‘ T we» 151‘! rat/"$9 wry/41.,» -

Figure 69. Block diagram for conversion of second order model of a dynamic
object to canonical form

Output signal W(k) of the transformed model (6.5) is formed by measuring at successive
points in time k the output signal of filter P(p) connected to the output of the
object. To form the coordinates of four-dimensional vector 6(k) one uses discrete
measurements of two phase coordinates of the filter connected to the object's output
and two phase coordinates of input filter P(p). Additional filters can be executed

in analog or digital form.

The second stage of solving the problem of parametric identification is to calculate
the parameters of a nonstationary object when the structure of its model is specified.
In the general case, we shall discuss the model reduced to canonical form (6.6). The
algorithms for calculating estimates of parameters of nonstationary objects must
define the parameters of its model in the course of functioning of the object. Such
models were named adaptive [76].

The adaptive approach to solving the estimation problem makes it possible to track
the changing vector of object parameters as information is received about input and
output variables of the object. The simplest way to do this is to use recurrence
algorithms to calculate the estimates of parameters.

Recurrence algorithms, which do not require repeated processing of the entire
sequence of observations at every step, permits evaluation of the object's para-
meters in real time. Recurrent or interative estimation provides a solution in

the form of a sequence of vectors, which are formed by means of a uniform process-
the iteration process.

In each calculation of estimates, iterative algorithms can make use either of
only incoming information about input and output variables of the object, or of
preceding information as well. In the latter case, the algorithm should retain

70
FIHICHNHCJAI.USEZCM‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prior information (i.e., it should have a memory). The volume of information used
to obtain a new estimate of parameters determines the depth of algorithm memory.
Recurrence algorithms can be divided into three groups in relation to this feature.

The first group consists of algorithms without memory, which do not store the
results of prior observations, and they are often called single-step ones. They
use one-the last-—set of measurements of input and output variables of the object
to calculate estimates of parameters. The depth of their memory, which we shall
refer to hereafter as 5, equals one.

The second group refers‘to algorithm with memory of 2‘8(l (Z-dimensionality of
vector of object parameters). In these algorithms, each determination of estimates
is made as a result of processing 5 of the last sets of measurements of object
coordinates, so that (s-1) ofsets of prior readings must be stored.

The third group will include recurrence algorithms for adaptive solution of the
problem of estimating parameters with memory depth S>Z.

The basic distinction of the third group of algorithms, as compared to the second
group, is that Z linearly independent equations are required to solve the system
of equations (6.6) in relation to an l-dimensional stationary vector h. With S<l,
the system is underdefined and with S>l it is overdefined.

Both the second and third groups of algorithms are multistep ones in the sense that
the results of many steps of measuring the object's coordinates are used for each
Successive evaluation of the parameter vector.

To stress this fact and, at the same time, set off different algorithms, we shall
call the second group simply multistep algorithms and the third group multistep
with redundant memory.

Analysis revealed that, of the recurrence algorithms, single-step ones have the
best computer parameters; however, it is difficult to use them because of their
low operating speed (rate of convergence). 0n the other hand, algorithms with
redundant memory, which have good convergence, require a large volume of calcula-
tions for each iteration. This is suggestive of the conclusion that it is
desirable to develop and use multistep algorithms, which have better machine
characteristics than algorithmawith redundant memory and operate faster than
single-step ones.

There are several ways of forming algorithms for calculating estimates of parameters.
In essence the differences lie in method of finding the extremum of a certain

loss function. Use of methods of linear algebra makes it possible, in a number of
cases, to avoid time-consuming analytical conversions and obtain algorithms in
rather compact form, which is convenient for analysis and subsequent execution.

We assume that the equation of an object with Z-dimensionnl parameter vector is
reduced to canonical form (6.5):

wk) - ¢"(k)h

Let us consider this as an equation of a certain hyperplane consisting of a plane
with dimensionality 1-1 with a normal vector ¢(k), in l-dimensional Euclidean
space [17]. Apparently, with such an approach, vector k can be submitted as the

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:OF11CJAl.lEﬂECHULY

vector of intersection l of noncollinesr hyperplanes described by equations of the
(6.5) type. In the case where fewer than l equations are known, one cannot find
the vector of object parameters h with them, and one can obtain only some approxi-
mation thereof, its estimate c(k). When new information about the object is
received, this estimate can be successively defined. Let us follow expressly this
recurrent scheme, which is suitable for estimating parameters of both stationary
and nonstationary objects. He shall search for the multistep algorithm in a
certain general form, which is valid for different memory depth Sél. '

Let us write equation (6.5) in the form of a system of equations obtained from
measurement of converted coordinates of objects at 8 points in time, ending with

(k-u):
“us—Si I)- ewe —s+ IM: mm |)-=7'(k- mu

+(‘|'=1'(k)h- ‘6'“)

These equations can be considered as a description of S hyperplanes of l-dimensional
Euclidean space. He assume that at arbitrary point in time k-l vector c(k-l) is
known, which satisfies the first 5-1 equations of system (6.11). To correct
estimate c(k-1) at the kth point in time, another change is made in object coordi-
nates, a reflection of which is the last equation in system (6.11).

By definition, in an S-step algorithm, at each step of determination of estimates
of parameters there is processing of information about the object obtained as a
result of 3 steps of measuring object coordinates. Let us search for maximum
improvement of vector c(k-l) according to information contained in equations (6.11).
Improvement of the vector refers to reduction of the Euclidean norm of the vector
of error of parameter measurement.

The new vector c(k) must satisfy equations (6.11), and the Euclidean distance be-
tween vectors c(k-1) and c(k) must be minimal. Vector c(k) satisfying these con-
ditions can be found as the orthogonal projection of vector 0(k-l) on the hyper-
plane of (l-S+1)-dimensional space formed by intersection of hyperplanes (6.11) of
l-dimensional space.

Proceeding from this, we can write the correlation between the new and old estimates
in the following form:

c(k) - c(k-l) + as(k)f (6.12)

where zs(k) is component of vector ¢(k) orthogonal to the hyperplane containing the
first 8-1 vectors of system (6.11). Vector o(k) determined in this manner with
arbitrary number I satisfies the first 5-1 equations of system (6.11). The number f
can be determined from the condition that vector c(k) satisfies the last equation

of system (6.11) also, and in this case it can be rewritten as:

\ l ; -'.' .S- '. 1.3:
I ':"’.‘ I'llki;
I. I,

‘ ' ' (6.13)

72
FOR'OFFﬂﬂAl.USIi0NLN
FOR 0‘11C1AI.US£‘0NLN

Inserting c(k) from equation (6.12) in the last equation of system (6.13), we shall
find j?

w» -. mm ;)

l..-—-—'—-——....

. _u):,(; ' - . (6.15)

Inserting (6.14) in (6.12), we obtain the generalized multistep estimation algorithm,
in which the preceding and following estimates of parameters are related as
follows:

1 ’5 I l- ! .".(I;‘I_--_"‘v'_|_ll:‘lt --lll _ I,

i'“’:.'?l -' > (6.15)

The second summand in algorithm (6.15) is the vector-correction that is proportionate
to prediction error €(k), which is calculated with the formula:

um... we; when. .1). (6.16)

Vector zs(k), which determines the direction of the vector-correction,is a component
of vector 0(k) that is orthogonal to 5-1 of the preceding input vectors of the
object. Hence, to determine vector as (k) we must subtract from vector ¢(k) the
components that coincide in direction 8with vectors s;(k-S+l) (i - 1, 2, ..., 8-1).
Thus:

'02— 8 +090)
. m-_- In— \‘ _.._"__‘_ _____
:( ?( H‘Hk' "3 fu’dkﬂsﬁ'")

where :Jk--S-7l )=.-7(k-Si-IL (6.18)

£‘(k---S-+il, (6.17)

Let us mention that formula (6.17) is based on the orthogonalisation process of Gram-
Schmidt for a system of vectors [34].

Let us convert algorithm (6.15) into a form that is more convenient to use. Consid-
ering equation (6.17), let us calculate the denominator of the vector-correction
of algorithm (6.15):

‘ I:'(k-.$ . ”Inﬁll-1“
Q. .,:_., j. ”.1; -_. . ;
ll suk . \“f (I \zlll'lil. 5 n . J. \' I 1| - (6019)

"\‘ _ h: (L- s .I;v(kﬂ

-- -.-.-—--- ' ‘-— - (6.20)

:: .’.-‘:» k ; kl- I.
H 5" I I’. dz“ .8 hulk-Sal)

Indeed, since vectors zi are orthogonal to (6.17), we need to subtractfrom the
square of Euclidean norm of vector ¢(k) the square of Euclidean norms of subtracted
components to find the square of the Euclidean norm of vector 33(k).

According to comparison of (6.19) and (6.20):

Wk) 85 (k) - 2:00.500 (6.21)

Substituting (6.21) in (6.15), we shall have:

73
FIHI()FFICJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOI¢0F1W€1A1.IM§BIMNLY

_ ...__-. n—x _

-.— I .
,_/- . .I- 1.1 -.-_‘..’_ '._".".‘ "2.1.3 )7;
21's):¢t;

(6.22)

Equation (6.22), in which vector 35(k) is determined by equation (6.17), is the
basic form of writing down the generalized algorithm for correction of parameter
estimates in the next and 5-1 preceding step of measurement of coordinates of the
object. The algorithm is called generalized. since it istnitten in the same form
for different memory levels, from S - 1 to S - 2. Thus, the generalized algorithm
is in essence the description of an entire class of multistep algorithms. What is
in common in all algorithms in this class is the form of calculation of the vector-
correction of error of prediction e(k) and vector 35(k). The differences between
algorithms differing in memory depth are determined by (6.17). according to which
vector zs(k) is calculated. A change in value of parameter S will yield different
concrete algoritth.

For example, let S - 1; in this case system of equations (6.11) degenerates into
one equation:

Wk) - Wk»:
Replacing in (6.22), in accordance with (6.18), 31(k) with ¢(k), we shall have:

' t — "k 1-.
C‘klutlk .. ”I .YL). _9_(_£_(__‘_)_?M). ’

1'(*)9(i)

which corresponds to the so-called Kaczmarz algorithm [68].

When processing this algorithm for the initial evaluation of the vector of object
parameters an arbitrary vector of Z-dimensional space can be selected, for example,
zero. The preceding estimate c(k-1) is defined more accurately here by using the
orthogonal projection of vector c(k-l) on the hyperplane, the equation of which
was obtained as a result of the next measurement of object coordinates.

Then, let S - 2, and equation system (6.11) will consist of two equations:

.;,.(. I l : 1,. (6.23)
...' '. "' 5'. (6024)

By virtue of (6.16), (6.17) and (6.22), the two-step iterative algorithm can
be written down as:

”(I

£‘I.' _L. l' I: _. ._--. . . :"l::, (6.25)

.‘.IU.'.-lu

where ,I- " "5'2" ;: s (6.26)

In this case. the vector of preceding estimate c(k-1) belongs to the hyperplane
described by equation (6.23). A more definite estimate of c(k-l) is obtained here
by using orthogonal projection of vector c(k-l) on the hyperplane of (Z-l)-diaen-
sional space, which is formed by intersection of hyperplanes of l-dimensional
space described by equations (6.23) and (6.24).

If the depth of memory of the generalized multistep algorithm is increased there
is an increase in needed volume of calculations at each step of the iterative

74
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

process and processing the algorithm is more difficult. The largest number of
computing operations is required to determine vector ss(k).

As the depth of algorithm memory is increased, the process of determining vector
ss(k) grows increasingly time-consuming ["cumbersome"]. It can be simplified by
making it recurrent. The fact of the matter is that the simplicity of evaluation
algorithms is determined primarily by the simplicity of algorithm coding, rather
than number of calculating operations. He refer .t? the fact that, determination
of vector 35(k) should be a recurrent procedure at each iterative step of an
iterative multistep algorithm. Such a procedure can be obtained on the basis of
the Creville method [23].

Let us assume that, as a result of measuring object coordinates, we shall have a
system of equations of the (6.11) type. Let us rewrite it with simplification
of designations:

H')-="'(!)h
Hip-9' (2)». (6.27)
U(S|=—1.'(Slll.

Let us consider vector ¢(l) as a matrix 0;, 1x1 in size, and find for it pseudo-
inverse [reciprocal] matrix 01, IXZ in size:

W... _:_'.QL.. (6 28)
' ‘ v '(Inm ' '

All subsequent correlations are recurrent for j - 2, 3, ..., 5. They begin with
calculation of ancillary vector

d,=-='l';..|9li|. (6.29)

where dj is vector of dimensionality J-l and 0;.1 is a matrix (j-1)xl in size.
Vector dj is used to find the vector

:I 'QII' _‘I.I'|‘II' (6.30)

where oj-1 is a matrix with dimensionality lxcj-l), the columns of which are
the first to (j-l)th vectors OCJ).

He then check for fulfillment of the condition
j - s (6.31)

If it is satisfied, the calculations to determine the vector are terminated and
the found value of zs(k) is used to estimate 0(k) using formula (6.22). If, however,
condition (6.31) is not fulfilled, calculations continue using the following
formulas of the Greville method:
:.:J [Jﬁ

. 6.
I) "'_ ' .I."l' E6o§§3

7S
FI"!(NHH(JA[.USE(M§LY
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁ(1Al.USEGNVLY

where Dj is a matrix of dimensionality (j-1)XZ. This matrix, with bg attached
as the jth line of the vector, forms the matrix:

I)!" -' ' --—.... _—-
I (6.36)

 

b.
of dimensionality jXZ.

Matrix Qj+ is used for a new cycle of recurrent calculations, which begins with
equation (6.29) with values of s increased by one.

Let us discuss the distinctions of the generalized multistep algorithm with recur-
rent determination of vectors as(k). The recurrent nature of calculation of vectors
ss(k) simplifies the processing of multistep algorithms (6.22). With increase in
depth of memory, the nature of calculations does not change; there is only an
increase in number of calculations and, if the computer is rapid enough, this does
not prevent use of the algorithm.

By changing parameter s, the same cosputer program can permit processing of algorithms
differing in level of memory. For this reason, there is the possibility of simple
processing of algorithms with variable memory, which is necessary, in particular,

at the start of the iterative process of parametric identification, during the

period of storing information about the object in the identifier.

The structure of the generalized estimation algorithm is illustrated in Figure 70.
The first s steps of the estimate shaper with constant memory operates in the "run"
[start] mode. i.e., in the mode of increasing depth of memory from 1 to 3. At the
first step of the iterative process, calculations are made with memory depth of l,
at the second step with memory depth of 2, etc., to 8. Starting with the 8th step,
depth of memory remains constant. This mode of function is implemented by condi-
tional statements 3, 7. 9 and ii. Figure 70 does not show the estimate output
statements; these statements follow states 6 and 8 and function after a specified
number of steps.

When the algorithms of parametric identification are used under real conditions, the
input and output variables of the object [process] are measured with errors, and
this diminishes the accuracy of estimation of its parameters. 0ne,can improve the
accuracy of estimates by means of recurrent determination of vector ss(k) (6.28)-
(6.36), by using only the vectors whose length exceeds a certain value P, rather
than all vectors 85(k). Let us call this process of gathering the most informative
vectors 35(k) informational filtration.

Let us illustrate the order of determination of vectors with informational filtra-
tion.

1. The results of S steps of measurement of input and output variables of the
object (6.27) are stored in the digital computer's memory.

2. Determination is made of pseudo-inverse matrix 01* using formula (6.28).

3. The value of 2 is ascribed to parameter j.

76
INJR‘OFITCIAI.IENI(HVLY
FORiofﬁKJAJ.lEﬂEONLY

 

 

Figure 70. Structure of generalized aultistep recurrence estimation algorithm

a. Ancillary vector dB is calculated using equation (6.29).

5. Vector zj is determined using equation (6.30)

6. The Euclidean norm of vector aj is calculated and a check is nade of fulfillment

of the condition: I
ajaj>Fz (6.35)

7. If condition (6.35) is not fulfilled, vector ¢(k) and scalar w(k) are replaced
on the basis of the data of the new step in ueasuring input and output variables

of the object.
8. Calculations of items 2-6 [above] are repeated.

The values of d and w are changed until a vector 6 is found, with which condition
(6.35) is fulfilled.

77
FIH!(MWH(1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. Calculations are made using equations (6.31) and (6.34).

The values of 0 end (a are also changed in subsequent cycles of the recurrent pro-
cedure for deter-ining vector 8500-.

The above-described method for lowering the effect of noise [interference] on
accuracy of estination takes it possible to perform calculations for any input and
output variables of the object, even when they are closely timed. It permits
gathering only the signals that cause less influence of interference. Control of
interference is effected without making the algorithn more complicated or increaaing
the digital computer menory required for processing it.

The astronavigational research-training unit described in the preceding section
enabled us to conduct an experinentel study of the neth of identification of

dynamic characteristics of navigation and control systuas that we have discussed.
This study was conducted in the form of solving several test problene. its shell.
discuss eons of them.

Problem 1. Analysis of effect of depth of nemory of estismtion algorithn
on its operating speed.

A conpariaon is ude of identification time for algorithns differing in
nemory depth. Identification time is determined by the iteration number
starting with which the normalized mean square errror of estimation does
not exceed 12. Input vectors ¢(k) are formed from a noncorrelated pseudo-
random sequence with unit dispersion. The zero vector is taken as the
initial estinate of the vector of object para-stars.

Table 6.1 lists the results of determination of identification time for

a stationary object with paraneter vector dimensionality l - 5. we used
estinstion algoritI-s with memory depth 8 - 1, 3, 3 and lo. Ila obtained

12 estintes of identification time k (0.01) for each algorithm with
different processing of random input vector ¢(k). The mean identification
time k. (0.01). which was calculated from 12 runs, is listed for each of
the four algorithms in the last colunn of Table 6.1. Table 6.2 lists ena-
logoue data on identification time, but for a process with dimensionality
l - lo of the vector of parameters.

Table 6.1. Results of determining identification tine (s) of stationary process
' with l - 5 dimensionality of parameter vector
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.2. Results of determining identification time (s) of stationary process
with Z - h dimensionality of parameter vector

 

Table 6.3. Results of determining mean identification time (s) for processes
with l - 5 and Z - 4 dimensionality of parameter vector

‘Y'o'fbrgj

Mean identirigaci-grgting-kj

I l l i
Corre- .. . . .n.. —.-I_— —--—_—-— —._.__—_..—._l

The obtained data are indicative of monotonous increase in speed of
running estimation algorithms with increase in depth of their memory
and decrease in dimensionality of the vector of estimated parameters.

Problem 2. Analysis of the influence of statistical characteristics of
input signal on operating speed of estimation algorithms.

The set-up of this problem is the same as the first, but in addition there
is change in time of correlation of the pseudo-random sequence, from
which input vectors 0(k) are formed.

Table 6.3 lists the results of determination of mean identification'time
for processes with l - 5 and Z - 6 dimensionality of parameter vector.
These data enable us to derive an important conclusion: correlation time
of input sequence has very little influence on operating rate of multi-
step algorithms. Expressly this property of multistep algorithms deter-
mines, to a significant extent, the success of using them under condi-
tions of passive identification.

Problem 3. Identification of dynamic process with optimization of the
structure of model thereof.

This problem was formulated to check the efficiency [work capacity] of
identification algorithms when the structure of the model of the process

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is not rigidly set. It is only known that the model is described by a
transfer function of the (6.1) type and its maxi-am possible order 7:";
is known. In this case. the identification system functions as follows.

For all variants of models in the range of nan-u and mm, determina-
tion is made of established values of estimates of parameters. The
minimum mathematical expectation of square of discrepancy between process
output and model output is a criterion for choice of optimum model struc-
ture. In practice, calculation is made of the sum of squares of dis-
crepancy for each possible structure over a certain finite interval of
time. The minimum of these values indicates the structure and parameters
of the optimum model of the process.

Table 6.4.lists the results of defining the structure and parameters of
a process described by transfer function

_—

31‘1"). . ..."'..‘ 5‘"

 

n-‘ «n

I-' 1 m 3 .’,'~ ,' -

Identification is made on the assumption that nu; - 2.

Table 6.4. Results of determining structure and parameters of process

timalit
W“ H" ogriterioryi

 

 

61.1.0”.

H- I .93". a. m}-

   
 

uun 32.51,: = u,u7:_,.
I I |.!'.']' - |‘.'.M-r

Analysis 0: the data listed in Table 6.4 shows that it is possible to
define parameters of the process with adequate accuracy even when the
structure of its model is not rigidly specified.

Problem 1:. Parametric identification of a two-coordinate ergatic tracking
system.

The purpose of the experiment use to determine the effect of operator
proficiency ["degree of training"] on the dynamic parameters of a tracking

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system of which he is a part. The tracking system had two channels, hori-
rental and vertical. Determination was made of time constants for each
channel (Th, TV) during work of three different operators.

The results of parametric identification of the two-coordinate ergatic
tracking system are illustrated in Figure 71. This figure shows that

the estimates of time constants of the system are localized in region 1
with the best trained operator, and this corresponds to the lowest time
constants. Evaluation of the system with the least trained operator
corresponds to the highest values for time constants, and they are localized
in region 3. The region of localization of evaluation of the system with
the average operator, 2, corresponds to average time constants. In addi-
tion, this figure shows two regions for each operator, the one that is
farther away from the start of the coordinates corresponding to the first
performance of the tracking problem, while the region situated closer to the
start of the coordinates corresponds to performance of the task after 10
training sessions.

TV, a
,_ E]
LE]
’ 3"“
) u

a _.

1.1-1

._..'_____i_.___.._:._..__1
a I 1 J Th. 8

Figure 71. Results of parametric identification of two-coordinate ergatic
tracking system

The results we obtained enable us to conclude that it is possible to use parametric
identification to obtain estimates of efficiency of ergatic tracking systems.

6.3. Methods of Estimating Time Characteristics of the Process of Taking
Astronomic Measurements

Time criteria can be used to evaluate level of operator training for astronomic
readings by means of a space sextant. The time required for an operator to take
astromeasurements is a random parameter, and to estimate it one can use the law
of distribution of probabilities, which yields numerical characteristics-mthema-
tical expectation, dispersion, etc.

The operator--sextant element of the systea of autonomic navigation is characterized
by extreme complexity of internal and external correlations. For this reason,

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtoFFKIAl.USI(NVLY

statistical data about the time and accuracy of astromeasurements during a real
space flight would be the most reliable. However, there are some difficulties
involved in obtaining such statistical data. For this reason, the most expedient
thing is to obtain the necessary statistical characteristics of astromeasurements
with simulation of a space flight.

The algorithm for processing time parameters of operator's astromeasurements could
be based on the mathematical model of R. Bush [16], in which time T of performance
of astromeasurements by an operator is described by gamma distribution:

- -.-._ _ -. -‘-"-(‘ " g.
"" m—m '°”~“ ‘-'-"" " "" (6.36)

with termin, where R and p are parameters of gamma distribution, 1min is minimum
time of astromeasurement by the operator determined by the technical capabilities
of the sextant and physiological parameters of the operator and p" is a parameter
that depends on the number of operator training [practice] sessions.

To determine the values of R,-p. rn1n in equation (6.36), let us put p" - l and
introduce the designation:

-“ "W- ‘--~'- (6.37

Then equation (6.36) can be written down in the following form:

.N—I
?‘.\'l- .‘ __('A_ -_ . c-a

(R-—|H ' (6.38)
.t:20

0n the basis of (6.38), let us write the integral distribution of observed values
in the form of an incomplete gamma function:

 

:-,. “ ' "" (6.39)

Integral (6.39) is solved on the basis of tables [62]. Since the value of 3 here
depends on three unknown parameters, as a rule there are three set values for the
upper range of the integral (6.39) in the form of percentage points of distribution.

Let us propose, for example, a 101 u;., 252 u;, and 752 ﬂy; shares of integral
distribution. Then. using the tables [62] with the selected R, we find the values
of integral distribution (6.39) for u;o. uzs. uyg and solve the equation:

L.) (6.60)

Let us select from the experimental data the time of operator performance of astro-
measurements that equals three values of percentage shares of Tie: 12, and r,,,
and calculate:

ti 6;}..{:_ (6.61)

82
FOR!0F11C1AI.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Searching for the value of e (obtained from the table for a given R) that is closest
to the result of calculating E from experimental data, we find the sought parameter

R of gamma distribution. The values of parameters p, Tmin and pn of gamma distribu-
tion (6.36) are cnlvulntvd from the following equations:

Q.—_ “~__'_'_"_-*
‘15- "W
. .. .. ‘5‘“. ._ ._ u A
tn" t,‘ (I3 -- "5' (715 '- 1'25) — '73)" no“ . ; (6.42)

”A " u“. ‘Iﬂ + (I — 11.-.),

where P: and a are constants determined from experimental data, n is the number of
practice series (cycles).

To obtain parameter p", using (6.42) we determine in each training series the
median time of performance of astromeasurements by the operator using:

“5M: 9 (tiﬂa— Vole)-
(6.43)

where T59" isthe median time spent by the operator on measurements in the nth
training series. Then the estimate of parameter p" for this training series will
be:

”A ‘: "w; “50'
(6.46)

where us. isthe median tine spent by the operator on astromeasurements in the first
training series.

We obtain parameter a from the equation:

1‘. I. 1' I ‘: h (6.65)

where j is the number of practice sessions in the series.

The value of p; is determined using formula (6.56) with consideration of (6.63) for
values of time spent by the operator on astromeasurements in the first training
cycles.

Knowing parameters R, o. pn and Tmin of the law of distribution (6.36), we find
mathematical expectation m(T*) and dispersion 02(1*) of time spent by operator
on astromeasurcments using the formulas:

mt.l’ -:

(6.1.6)

83
FOR OITWC]AI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ler upcnl by tho uporntur on ustromeasurements corresponding to probability of
0.99 can be calculated on the basis of the following equation:

I _ I _ __ II. n (60")

where u,, is the value determined from tables corresponding to 0.99 probability and
the calculated value of parameter R of game distribution.

The effects of different space flight factors on time spent by the operator on
measurements using a sextant can be evaluated in the following manner. From the
experimental results, we calculate median time r,.¢ spent on astromeasurements by
the operator then exposed to different space flight factors, then we find:

‘5.“

u m." 'L'VJ‘ ' ‘suu': poo-‘3“; ° (6.168)

We assume here that the characteristics of law of distribution f(r) change only

at the expense of parameter Pno- i.e., parameters R, p and 1.1“ remain the same

as when taking astromeasurements without considering space flight factors. This
enables us to evaluate operator performance when there is a small volume of statis-
tical data pertaining to the influence of different flight factors.

Thus, knowing the value of pn¢, we can calculate mathematical expectation m(ﬁ*) and
dispersion o (r*) oftime spent by operator on astromeasurements when affected 2y
different space flight factors on the basis of the following equations:

”'“W ""R-"i".....: arut‘hn -—R-— ' .

on. Who)" ' (6.49)

'2": 'I' fIlIIII i u?"

The data obtained from several experimental studies were processed by the above-
described method.

First series of experiments. In the course of the experiments the following

time parameters were recorded: time spent by operator on astromessurements in the
operator-sextant system. which is the time from the moment the signal is given to
start working to the moment bearing is determined (when the operator depresses
button K); operator reaction time, which is the time between giving the signal to
start working to the moment the operator starts to manipulate controls; time of
making decision that sighting is completed, which is the interval between the moment
the operator finishes handling the controls to the moment he depresses the button.

In the course of instruction, which occurred in l to 206 training cycles, it was
demonstrated that the time spent by the operator on measurements in the last
training cycles, 151-205, changed negligible and was characterised by the following
parameters: 01. - 16.8 s; 025 - 17.5 a; 0,. - 22.33 s; v,, . 27.5 s.

Using equation (6.41) we calculate:

84
FOR 0FF1C1AI.IKHE(MVLY
ma OFHC‘IAI. USE ONI Y

The closest to E - 14.2 will be a value of 5 calculated with R - 2. For this reason,
we shall take R - 2. Using formula (6.42) we make the following calculation:

“Is

 

 

‘ . , 0. -. .— ..- _-~,
m.» ‘n m n.“ (9:. "5)
21.5 . 1L ' ~'.. :.
‘U‘ n, (-37.0 l7.5) ”.7 3

Here u15 and uzs were taken from the tables with R - 2. Using (6.42) we calculate:

'-““ - Weston 1/.

“.— 9; I. LIJD— ‘7,-‘

 

Hence, the asymptotic distribution of time spent on astromeasurements with sextant
by the operator, without consideration of effects of space flight factors, will
appear as:

fItl_JLl7ﬂLIT(r-~ll.7“e-°Jn1-HJ)V1tht‘; |L7 3

Mathematical expectation and dispersion of time spent by trained operator on astro-
measurements without consideration of space flight factors are:

mvr‘n (mg/(9 Il.7+'.’0.l7--'.’3.5°$
‘ﬁuH-Ro many mm 3

The time spent on astromeasurements by a trained operator with probability 0.99 is:

- |I - I . -
l ' 7, I. .- .... --.l. 1!... a'_- 8

The distribution of time spent by the operator on astromeasurements at different
stages of training can be written down as follows:

.i l " l... I" I.." ,l‘ I'_.l IQ T;-n.'l'2'"1th I ~: ”.7 3

where ' 'i I U -.. -"‘w.’:-- '

In order to estimate parameter a in (6.62), we separate training into training
series (Table 6.5). In Table 6.5, j is the number of practice sessions per series.
He calculate the value of pn using the following equation:

,Iv‘;..“‘““5| -- 2(5)::211 '
“9E — ‘uln

where us, (151-205) is the median time spent by the operator on astromeasurements
in the last training series, u5.£ is the median time spent by the operator on astro-
measurements in the ith training series.

85
FOR‘OFTHCJAI.USE§(”‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL 1.88 ONLY

From equation (6.65), substituting the values for n and m, we obtain:

159.99 - 205 - (1 -_o.234) ~11—
hence, a - 0.983.

Table 6.5. Parameters of distribution of tine spent on astroneaauraaents

Training "

 

 

. I
u a] . ;
series _“’ s p" P" .p" _199' ' I
. " ,7 .‘ 3 '.-'H , ,7, I :J... l
I u .' .':.-.-: s:- l u m- - --,‘
:r. _-. : |-_.l [.4 | ll-I" .r._'a I
.. - ' ' . I 0.1.)- I l' 11:. . Ln. 1
u- . , . ..'. u \.u 1')" I
I ‘I': 7' i I 17.9 n 9:3 I 3'5.
I m' ' | I n 'o I 'J'i" I 3.3,! I
I

On the basis of the foregoing, we can calculate mathematical expectation and dis-
persion at different stages of training using formulas (6.66) and (6.67).

Table 6.6 lists the parameters of distribution of reaction tine and operator's
decision taking time as to completion of astroneuurenents with a sextant, without
the influence of space flight factors.

Table 6.6. Paraneters of distribution of reaction time and tine of making
decision that astromeaaurenents are terminated

 

 

 
   
 
 
  
 

 

i I : - . I. I O : "W . |
p . . - I
Criterion “’ ?!Q|ﬁ..}§,l_n—,:.e
I I I = i _ - .
' '- ' '_- - .._ __‘_'__
. . I _l I. I
.3" “.'-'r2'..I-‘.'.'l,7.1‘-'I|,-. -'.I."‘v|!. n':. r.- -4 .sm: -:.: um

- _l!_l'.-'.|..'.

 

Table 6.7. Parameters of distribution of tine of astroneasurenenta by operator
under the influence of simulated space flight factors

 

  
 
   
     
     

I
Turni chair u-Ml 1w ‘I.5 ”u": Ix ' - -
Wei ght essness 'u |-.' - «1.. new n: 3:1..5 1:: I 23::
Irregular situ- u ..'n' :ufu 2'26 2.. 1.2-1 .1323 30:9!
agigntlessness
Irregular ".3! SILL-J '.'l').l 78.‘ .17 .1337 u 01
situation ' '

 

_. . ._-_.._ ..___, I
. -_e... —‘—_._. .—

 

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

In these experiments, we examined the effects of different space flight factors

on time spent by the operator on astromeasurenents, as well as the effects of these
factors on reaction tine and decision-making tine as to end of guidance process
(Table 6.7). Analysis of Table 6.7 indicates that mathematical expectation m(t*)
under the influence of space factors was 30-60: higher than the background value,
whereas dispersion of astromeasurement time increased by more than 3 times. Table
6.8 lists the results of experimental studies of decision-making time referable to the
the end of the astromeasurement process. Analysis of the figures in this table indi-
cates that the time required to make this decision increases by 100-1602 under the
influence of the different space flight factors. Table 6.9 lists the results of
experiments dealing with reaction tile. Analysis of these data indicates that

reaction time increased by 100-1252 under the influence of the different space
flight factors.

Table 6.8. Parameters of distribution of operator's decision-making tine as to
end of astroneasurenent process

 

 

_ __.___--_'

l l . (__) ....--:..) In"...

  
     
  
  
 
  

_ «any-(6.. )- =' ?-——-—-—- . -—-='ril

FBCCO ._ . ~-". I O ' 1' - :..__ u
r ‘n 1 5’ =""I "(fl—LIL!
Chair turnixg -~* _.‘ L"' f v,£ -.z:¢_virtua11y no change;
weightlesa- .. :r- . .' ..- ' - ' 'w '

Igsgaular
situation+

weightlessn.

Irregular ’ _,. . ""
situation

  

Table 6.9. Parameters of distribution of operator's reaction time under the
influence of simulated space flight factors

 

    
   
   

Chair turnng - -vnrf :'1 I (u ! L73 No cllmge
Heightless- -', .J‘ ' ' '
ness _. _: :
Weightlcssn. . .l.: 3“ 7 _
+ irregular _ | i . I
situation : _ ; _
Irregular " -* ..L. - 'hlzi. l'. . I. .
situation .

 
 

Second series of experiments. Operators with professional skill participated in
this series of experiments.

87
FOR 0FFNJA1.USEGDN1Y
FOR10FFKJAI.USEINVLY

 

6 16 26 36 46 56 66 n
Figure 72.
Changes in astromessurement time as a
function of number of training sessions
(t is sstromessurement time)
1, 2) operators who participated pre-
viously in experiments
3, 6) operators who did not partici-
pate in experiments before
5) operator with professional skill

. Unlike the first series of experiments.

in this case astromeasurements were
taken on the basis of other than point
landmarks on the ground, and they were
identified from navigation stars. The
estimated time of performance of astro-
measurements by the operators during
training is listed in Table 6.10. Ans-
lysis of these results indicates that
the changes in_time parameters of astro-
measurements by a professional operator
in the course of instruction are close
to the change in m(r*) for the entire
group of trainees. however, there was
considerably less scatter of values for
tine spent by professional operator on
astroneasurements.

Third series of experiments. In this
series we evaluated the time character-
istics of astronavigationsl operations
during simulation of a 3-day flight in
space. In preparing for the 3-day experi-
nent, operators were trained and each of
them had 80 practice sessions.

Analysis of the training results shows
that operators who had participated in
experiments before (1 and 2 in Figure I2)

. showed an insignificant loss of skill

after a 6-month break.

For the sake of comparison, the sane
figure illustrates changes in astro-
measurement time as related to training
unskilled operators (curves 3 and 6) and

an operator with professional skill (curve 5), which show that the operator with
professional skill "moves up" to the trained level with sore stability (less
scatter of results as to time spent on astromessurements).

Table 6.10.
ments during training

 

—. -......

I l

.. sil"._.: "Q
‘!13|:E:f.:

I I

sun.“ R u'.
' l

I ‘ ,I -.
.1 J“: - u“ .

Parameters of distribution of time spent by operator on satromeasure-

I 2 ' g :I l " |

'.- .LJ__- .-_ _. ._:
i . |
1“".'1.3: ‘ ' ‘ 7‘ '.‘-' i

The time parameters of astromeasurements during the 3-day experiment were determined

using the previously described method.

IN)R‘0FF1CIAI.IEHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY

Figure 73 illustrates the curves for changes in estimating mathematical expectation
of time spent by operator on astromeasurements for each operator during the 3-day
experiment (astromeasurements were taken during 8-h shifts) and Figure 76 shows the
analogous functions for reaction time.

2‘
g

nvhrs lit daﬁ 2d day 3d
l
| .
' l
I

    

 

_ I ' I
i.’ It ”200 IIZI‘Illﬁb 072 ll Wittgh

Figure 73. Changes in time spent on measurements during 3-day experiment
(t time of day; m(t*) estimate of mathematical expectation of
astromeasurement time); 1, 2, 3-operators

 

-1 . _._l ._....

|
l
A ﬁll; 3070.41”;- '.-' 75 20.70 5 I; [7"]; 71! 74?; (b)

Figure 74. Changes in reaction time during 3-day experiment; 1, 2. 3-
operators

Figure 75 illustrates the curves of change in estimation of mathematical expecta-
tion of astromeasurement time m(1*) (curve 1) and reaction time m(rr) (curve 2)

in different training cycles n.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROI "FFNWAI.U3FINVlV

 

H D 05 U 5 I II ”VI

Figure 75. Functions of changes in estimates of mathematical expectation of
astromeasurement time and reaction time during_3-day experiment

Analysis of the findings as to astromeasurement time shows that there was an in-
crease on the first day to 20%, as compared to the background. 0n the second and
third days. astromeasurement time diminished to the background level. Reaction
time increased by 301 on the first day and then gradually increased.

6.4. Evaluation of Effects of Different Space Flight Factors on Accuracy
05 Astronomic Measurements

The accuracy of navigatic~ 1 readings made by an operator using a sextant is one of
the main parameters deter.ining the efficiency of the astronavigation system. For
this reason. one must make a quantitative evaluation of this parameter of the astro-
navigation ,rocess.

It is known that when taking astroreadiags with a sextant it is virtually impossible
to obtain the true value of the measured angle. As a rule, various errors are
contained in the readings, including instrument and operator errors. There can

be systematic errors and random ones that are caused by numerous factors that cannot
be taken into consideration.

The main cause of a systematic error is refraction of the atmosphere, astrodome and
windows. In addition, noncoincidence with the initial position of the dial to the
initial position of the mirror or prism (error in dial zero) could be the cause of
systematic error.

Systematic errors can be detected and excluded from the measurement results. For
example. when measuring from earth the angles between two stars (Y) or between a
star and earth's horizon (h), the true values of these angles can be obtained

by calculation, using the equations

cos y. . ,1“ 5‘ 31a 5; + cos 6‘ cos 6; cos(a; - 02)

where y. is the true angle between stars, 61, dais inclination of stars, mg. a;
is right ascension of stars, and

sin h. - sin 9 sin 5 + cos 0 cos 6 cos (sGr - a + A)

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms ""1”“ I‘ﬂ' I‘Ni‘

where h. is the true angle between the star and earth's horizon, o is the latitude
of the point at which the reading was taken, 6 is inclination of the stars, Scr is
Greenwich siderealtimeat the moment of reading, a is right ascension of the star
and A is longitude of the point at which the reading was taken.

At the same time, .hese angles could be measured several times by many operators,

and then we would have N measured values of angle Yi(hi)' where i is the measure-
ment number.

Knowing y; and Yo we can determine the absolute error of the ith reading:
6Y1: - Yo -Y,:

when there is a large number of readings N, the following equation should apply:

N
3‘ 1y, - a".
‘-

This statement is based on the following thesis of error theory: when there is
a large number of measurements. random errors of the same magnitude but different
sign are encountered at the same frequency.

Random errors due to numerous factors that cause then to appear are distributed
according to the normal law (this is also confirmed in many experiments). Conse-
quently. dispersion D or standard deviation 0 is the exhaustive estimate of
accuracy oF astromeasurements after exclusion of systematic error.

The standard deviation for N readings can be calculated using the following
equation:

rT—'

3n.- n):
I -l
1, - . “-an

with a low N, one uses the following equation to obtain an unshifted estimate:

I'A';
/ Lon-m:
l-al
,, -1 ~---.—.-~

By using this quantitative estimate, one can demonstrate the influence of the
following factors on accuracy of astromeasurements: professional training of the
operator; weightlessness and confinement in a closed space; various factors (stress,
emergency situation. etc.); type of astronomic measurement taken. etc.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me (WI-1H“. INK ONUN

In the results submitted below of testing the effect of the above factors on accuracy
of the operator-sextant system, we used the relative standard deviation (RSD) as a
criterion. This criterion was introduced to demonstrate the effect of a factor

under study, not only with regard to a specific instrument or visualization model
used, but to obtain generalized results.

Table 6.11 lists the results of studying the effect of professional training of an
operator on accuracy of measurements in the operator-sextant system. This table
shows that operators with stable professional skill (cosmonauts) take astronomic
readings with 2-3 times more accuracy than operators who are not specialists, who
had performed 100 to 140 such operations before the study.

Table 6.11. Relative standard deviation of errors in astromeasurements for
different t -es of readin s

 
 

 
 
 
 
   

   

Operator

 
    

Unskilled operators
Cosmonaut-o erators

Table 6.12. Relative standard deviation of errors in astromeasurements for
different types of readings under the influence of simulated

   
  
 
 
 
   

   
 
 

  

s ace flizht factors
star landmark horizon landmark

None 2.53
Coriolis acceleration 2.81
Heightlessness 2.95

Heightlcssness + irregular situation
Irregular situation

The results of testing the effects of various factors, using the method described
in section 5.5. are listed in Table 6.12. As can be seen, an irregular situation
simulated by the method of posthypnotic suggestion had the least effect on accuracy
of readings. The scatter of results is apparently attributed to differences in
mental stability of operators who participated in the experiments. It must be
noted that there were cases when an operator was unable to take readings at all

in a simulated irregular situation.

The type of astronomic measurement is one of the main factors determining the
accuracy of readings (Tables 6.11 and 6.12).

The program of a 3-day space flight was simulated, with concurrent recording of
physiological parameters and performance (including accuracy) to test the effect
of time spent in a closed and confined area (mockup of manned spacecraft cabin)
and hypnotically suggested partial weightlessness on efficiency of the astronavi-
gatlon system. Table 6.13 lists the relative RSD of reading errors that were
demonstrated in this experiment. Analysis of the data in this table shows that
the accuracy of astromeasurements on the first day of simulated flight diminishes
by a mean of 30:. after which there is adjustment to "flight" conditions.

92
F0! OFIICJAL.U§E(HVLY
INDR‘OFF1C1Al.lEﬂE(MNLY

Table 6.13. Relative standard deviations of astromeasurement errors in
3-Ja ex eriment

   
 
   
 
 
    

 

Operator A
Operator 3
Operator C
Aver :e o-erator

The results of these studies are indicative of the strong influence of specific
space flight factors on accuracy of readings. Hence. it is mandatory to consider
these factors in designing systems of the operator-sextant type and in screening
operators. In view of the fact that these results were obtained under simulated
conditions and, therefore, constitute essentially a qualitative description of
the effects of the above-mentioned factors. one should call the attention of re-
searchers to obtaining strictly validated quantitative evaluation of the degree
of their influence under real conditions.

6.5. Algorithm for Evaluating the Accuracy of Solving Astronavigation Problems
by the Recurrence Method

The main purpose of astronavigation is to define the navigational parameters of
flight (coordinates of location, vectors of flight speed and direction angles).

In a manned spacecraft. this task can be performed by means of an inertial naviga-
tion system and a space sextant, which is used to correct the latter (see Chapterb).

In order to make corrections, one must first form an observation, i.e., obtain the
difference between measured values of some navigation parameter and value of the
same navigation parameter obtained with the INS [inertial navigation system].

Let us assume that the operator-cosmonaut uses the sextant to measure angle 9 as
between the direction of the terrestrial landmark c (¢1-. A1.) and navigationa
star 8 (6. a) (Figure 76).* The same angle ecslc can be calculated using the on-
board digital computer from the INS data using the equation:

(6.50)

where z, y, a are coordinates of location of the spacecraft in the inertial system
of coordinates OXYZ, calculated from INS data, 01., A1. are the geographic latitude
and longitude of the specified landmark [1m], 6 and n are inclination and right
ascension of the specified navigation star, R. is the mean radius of earth
cos “in - cos 01. cos A1.; cos 31m - con 01. sin All;
cos Ylm - sin °lm3 cos n* - cos 6 cos A;

cos Y* I sin 6; cos 8* - cos 6 sin X.

*\ variant of this problem is submitted above in a somewhat different form
(see Chapter 4).

93
FOI'OFFKJAI.U5810NLY
non omasl. use ONLY

0n the basis of the information obtained from the INS (ecalc) and sextant (omens)
observation 3 is formed as the difference between calculated and measured size
of angles, i.e.,

3 " Ocalc '0 meas ' Ae(:alc ' A9meas (6.51)

where Aocalc is the error that appears due to error of defining coordinates in INS
and mamas is the error of measuring angle 9 with use of the sextant.

To change finding (6.51) to the general
appearance of a - “a: + 1), one must
submit calculation error mean; in the
form of error of determination of coor-
dinates of the location of the space-
craft. Por this purpose, let us take
the partial derivatives for coordinate
elements 2:, y and z:

 

 

39 39 30
‘ where
J1 _ we!» u'N + M (x -— Mums
” '1 0: N I'VmJT '.
Figure 76 - 15° :_..f'.’..3..;v_+..‘"_(”."’?"‘""m .
Calculation of angle between direction of .._.. N "NW" ‘
star and terrestrial landmark [op—land- 1! a,_‘""_V.£+_M,"_"/fv‘£_‘1!, .
mark] I}: N I'N xm I ‘ .

,H -.'.(l\'_' a»; u in" x) msu' -}- l Rams ”in“ y) cos [1' +
-i-!R.ctr-\'1,-- :)---sv‘:
A’ ... II"o qt»; u” -- .\ F - HR” L09 Elm" yF-I- (Ru ('0: \‘ln— :)7.

In matrix form, equation (6.52) has the following appearance:

 

 

Ax
”5 1|" 1|.
Aocalc "_ ..u -09 ta; I i»? ‘ (6.53)

Substituting (6.53) in (6.51) and designating [semen - v, we shall obtain, with
consideration of errors in determining flight speed:

I‘M ..
Av
.10 0. ul 3»
- - - -- -00ll ‘ .. .
l.” 0y 0; ‘ AV, I I " (6.54)
I "t ' i

o 7“ - -

9!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

or in the general form of:
: '- H.\' + V.
where Ila- [ 2.- -‘§-~'—'---000] ;

I'.\‘ 0y (I:
.\ :IJA' A” A: M 'I. 51’." M ',l'.

He assume that the statistical characteristics of errrors v of astromeasurementa
are known and governed by the conditions of:

aha} - 0; mm?) - saw-r)

where H{...} is the symbol of mathematical expectation, R is the correlation matrix
of error vector v and 6(t—t) is delta function.

The obtained observation 3 can be used to calculate estimates of errors of deter-
mination by means of INS of navigational parameters 2 and covariation matrix of
dispersion of these estimates of errors P(t). Since there are measurement errors
when using a sextant in the astronavigation system, there will, of course, also
be estimation errors:

6£ - z e 9

where 62 is absolute error of estimation of the vector of state of errors of deter-
mination of navigation flight parameters with the use of the INS.

Absolute error of estimating mistakes and standard deviations of these estimates
of mistakes (square rootof diagonalelements of matrix P) could be the quantitative
indicators of accuracy of the astronavigation system.

On the basis of the foregoing, it can be stated that it is necessary to know the
real values of mistakes in determining coordinates :‘and their estimates 2, as well
as standard deviations of estimates 0%, in order to examine the accuracy of solving
astronavigation problems with the use of the IRS and space sextant.- These values
can only be obtained by solving the entire navigation problem. Use of mathematical
and half-scale models makes it possible to solve navigation problems on the ground.
The astronavigation research-training unit (ARTU) described in Section 6.1 is a
good basis for this purpose.

The algorithm for estimating accuracy of solving problems of autonomous navigation
with the use of aspace sextant is contained in the ARTU computer system. The dis-
tinctive feature of this navigation method is that the recurrence method is used
to process the results of navigational readings with the use of the optimum

Kalman linear filter. Chapter A has a mathematical description of this method.

In view of the limited storage provided in the ARTU computer system, a simplified
mathematical model was developed to solve this problem. In particular, we simulated
the flight of a manned spacecraft in a circular orbit inthe equatorial plane, and
measurements were taken at a constant rate.

Figure 77 illustrates the block diagram of the model produced in the ARTU. The
contents of the different units of the mathematical model inputted in the computer
system of the ARTU are as follows.

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu “MN “I \‘nt. “\I \

  
      
  

Computer

system

simulation chamber goégggon of
: no' on

.tiong

  
   

 

simulatorl

“:23”-
sphere |

'ear 'sl
!surfac3J

 

Figure 77. Block diagram of mathematical model for evaluating accuracy of
solving astronsvigation problems

61.c, 9r.c’ 01“, 9,.3) ideal and real calculated and measured navigational angles
in ith reading
H) linkage matrix
P) covarietion error matrix
0) transitional error matrix
z~) ith observation
£(ti/ti3) vector for estimating errors in determining coordinates
and speed of spacecraft flight at time ti according to
readings made at time ti. inclusively
£(ti/ti-l) vector of estimates of mistakes in determining coordinates
and flight speed at time t; according to readings taken at
preceding step (at time t£-1)
Ki) matrix of weighted coefficients at time ti
R) covaristion matrix of vector of mistakes in navigational
readings

1. Input data unit:

Ra - 6371.21 km--mean radius of earth;
H - 150 km-altitude of spacecraft flight;

V3; 7.8 1

Q - Ro+H - EEEITEI 3 -angular velocity of manned spacecraft;

96
FOR¢MﬂﬂClALIﬁﬂBONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

01“ - 60°}..geographic latitude and longitude of
A1. - 0‘ location of terrestrial landmark;
6a_-9g.}-coordinates of navigational star;
standard deviation of error of determining

location and flight speed at the point of
extraction in orbital system of coordinates;

0L0 - Ono - 050 -210 km}_
OVLo ' Ovno ' 0vso " 10'

v - l'-standard deviation of measurement error

2. Unit of initial conditions:

.c,._l(.. 3- H; *2" .x, ;.Ax.,: 3x0 1L, AL,=;' gm;
yaw": y.-- y. Ely-s In}. all [ 3k» : ARI-"Wm:

:w'm'": ~’|o'—"'~'.¢. F5393 - All: - 13¢, . 450335!"

VJ‘ -4) “3”" :“'.:dl . All“: "AV.” IAV’I') AVIII'::-,I’u,:
’. ,w _ _. . ' ,

‘ ”—31‘ - J" ”I... , 3‘ '., A» '7 ' ‘ I, AV” ; AVR'J==’I'RV;
-_~ .17. 5 Ian’s"

V,,,,= U; ",w - V n! :- AV 3‘"... Al's“, Al";.,=—";a‘-5‘,,

where OXYZ is the inertial system of coordinates (X and Y in the equatorial plane,
2 over the axis of earth's rotation), OlLRS is the accompanying trihedron of
reference of the orbital system of coordinates (L along orbit, R along local verti-
cal, 8 forms a right orthogonal trihedron with L and R), E are random numbers
distributed according to the normal law with HIE] - 0 and HI§2 ] - 1.8 is the
matrix of passage from orbital system of coordinates (OILRS) to inertial system

(OXYZ):
(as!!! siu‘Jl 0
I!” ---.~in'.2! r9523 0 .

U U l

Subscripts H and p refer to ideal and real coordinates, respectively.

The value of the covariation matrix of mistakes in setting initial conditions
at the initial point in time has the following appearance:

a} 0"
2'
3N
2

97
FOR10FFKJAI.USE10NLY
HR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Unit for solving equations of motion with ideal initial conditions:

a“; - (R. + H) cos ntig

yui I (R. + a) sin at,;;

am: - 0
where t1: - ti-‘ 4» h I ih; h is the measurement (observation) frequency ["pitch."],
h - 5 min; i is the number of measurements taken, 11 I l, 2, 3, ..., n.

0. Unit for solving equations of motion with real initial conditions:

.r,, — x." + Ax, =-(Ro+ H) (‘03 9!. + Ax,;
y“ =y.. + 6y. =(Ro-I- H) sin 9’5 + Am:

.-|.,--= :u. i‘ 3-31: ha-

 

 

 

 

 

 

where Ac 3!. are elements of errors in determining
Ay ‘15: AR coordinates in the OXYZ inertial
IA: ‘, AS _ system of coordinates:
I if; :2 l are elements of errors in coordinates
. l and flight speed in the orbital
"3 I my 3-5. system of coordinates.
AV, I I Ali. I
AV" Al"...
-AVA - I- A": J. -

 

The transition matrix of errrors of determining coordinates and flight speed in the

orbital system of coordinates in the case of constant frequency of observations
can be written down as follows:

L’c--I spam.- 0 Ms-32/1‘2‘J-‘CH 1:2 0 i
s 2- .3 n :{I--c)'.! 5/9 0 |
«1'. 0 0 c (I 0 5,9 a.
--25 99-“ I! 0 23cm! 3 n
21! - -s, 2‘32" -5) 0 39h - 2': 2- -t‘. U
n 'l L's H '1 c t

.- .-

where c - cos ﬂh; s - sin Rh.

5. Unit for calculating angle between direction of terrestrial landmark and
navigational star.

As we have shown above, one can calculate angle 0 between the directions of specified
terrestrial landmark and navigational star by using equation (6.50).

In order to obtain the value of the ideal calculated angle 01,¢ in the equation
for H and N one must insert the values of coordinates x”, y" and a", and to calculate
real angle 9r.c one must introduce xp, yp and 8p.

98
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“‘I "I1“? \I I'Kl- "\‘l \

6. Unit for calculating linkage [connection] matrix.

The matrix for linkage of astronomic measurements H can be written in the following
form:

 

“NW-[2'25 0&9 Li"- 000].
0: ﬂy 0:

0'21. I \ I.‘ "‘5',” — .". (Ruws (71!" x..') '

dx N.|Sﬂnnoi.c
“51“: u \ :o"\‘l -- U, (P ("15 :5].— Sl‘.) '

 

.q: .\', I Y 3:: '- 1":

'-_"i.c _ .‘.‘"V Z\“:.".!;:(."(.‘ " flu" :1;__
u: N, I .V; w." 1":

7. Unit of optimum filter.

Calculation of optimum estimates of errors made in determining coordinates of loca-
tion and spacecraft flight speed is made in the computer system of the ARTU, on

the basis of solving the following matrix equations of the optimum linear filter

of Kalman: .. ,m

.\.' '. .- .'_I . _-l\'.'.i.' ‘-/.-'.\‘ .'_.' .2;
l\'::_- -:I*: ':__:-I'I'[//‘/' I_ :._: I."- R]' 5'
I" '. .7 21'“! I_- . K! I/_I” .'
." .' :. ,; -:-/‘ :_ _ 'l- ‘

.-_'-.' I . 'l-.;' .' A:

is vector of estimates of errors in

I
l
: TR . determining coordinates and spacecraft
. _; 4‘ i flying speed in orbital system of
“here ” ' ‘ .l Al- = coordinates OILRS at time t; (ith
. g ,, : readinthaken with space sextant
i it} i through time ti-1 inclusively;

P(ti/ti_;) is the covariance matrix of errors in estimates of vector of system
status at time ti calculated from information as of time ti-; inclusively; P(t£/ti)
is the same with consideration of observation at time ti; K(ti) is the matrix of
weighted coefficients at time ti; R is the covariance matrix of the vector of
errors in navigational readings v. For a one-dimensional measurement of "star-
terrestrial landmark" the covariance matrix of errors in measurement of R equals
dispersion of errors of measurement [R] - 02; a; is the ith observation formed

on the basis of information obtained from t e INS (6r,c - 91.c) and space sextant
(or.m - 91.“), and it is the actual difference between calculated and measured
angle 9 at time ti:

3i ' 0r.c ' 0i.c + 0r.m ' ei.m - A01 + AG:

99
FOR.0I1HCJAI.USE¢JNLN
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

where A01 is error of determining angle 0 due to difference between real and ideal
vectors of spacecraft state and A02 is overall error, including operator error,
instrument error, error of converters, etc.

8. Printer unit.

The results of running the program for estimating the accuracy of solving navigation
problems by the recurrence method with use of the space sextant, the algorithm of
which was described above, the following are printed out:

0;,m-real measured angle, to check proper choice by operator of specified
navigational stars and landmarks;

Aozi--overall error of ith measurement, including operator error as one of
its elements;

ALi, Aki. ASi, AV i' Avnia AVs£-errors in determining coordinates and

A spacecraft~flying speed in the OILRS system of coordinates;

dLi, 6kg, 63,, 5VLi' Gvni, évsi-absolute errors in estimates of mistakes
made in determining coordinates and flying speed in Oans system of
coordinates, where:

a-AL-KL; ﬁL-AvL-A‘VL;
6R ' AR - OAR; ﬁg ' AVR ’ AAVR;
&-AS-£§; @s-Avs-tﬁls;

Kl, 5h, 5%, KVL. syn, 5V5 are estimates of mistak s in determining coordinates and
flying speed in the 01LRS system of coordinates; éb' 33, 3s. 3¥&. 3VR. 3v are
standard deviations of estimates of errors in coordinates and ying speeﬁ in
0,LRS system of coordinates.

The above algorithm is used for experimental evaluation of accuracy of solution by
cosmonaut-operator of navigation problems by the recurrence method with the use of
the space sextant.

The results obtained in the experimental studies with regard to estimates of accu-
racy of determining the coordinates of spacecraft location 81 made by three
operators are illustrated in Figures 78, 79 and 80. Figure 78 illustrates the
estimates of error 5L obtained when subject A worked on the first (1, 2, 3) and
third (7, 8, 9) days of flight.

Figures 79 and 80 illustrate estimates of error 6i obtained during work by subjects
B and C during the 3 days of flight (curves 1—9). Analysis of these results shows
that there is some scatter between estimates of accuracy of determination of
coordinates obtained during work by the same operator during different sessions

of solving astronavigation problems. Thus, this scatter constituted 6131“ I 2 km
and a...“ - 8 m for subject A in the 75:}. min of "flight." Figure 81 illustrates
errors averaged for each day in estimates of mistakes in determining coordinates
8L obtained for the work of subject A on the first (1) and third (2) days.

Figures 82 and 83 illustrate analogous results obtained for the performance of
subjects 8 and C in the 3 days (curves 1, 2, 3). These data indicate that there
is no overt correlation between accuracy of evaluation of determination of coordi-
nates and time of day in the 3-day period. For all three subjects, the scatter of
mean daily estimates constituted 1.5-6 km.

100
FOR‘0F11C1A1.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USO: ONLY

    

nosxsuuvtl'lin

   

 

 

Figure 78. Error in estimate of mistake in determining spacecraft coordinate
as a function of navigation system operating time with 5-min
intervals between readings, subject A

Figure 84 illustrates the estimates averaged for the entire 3-day experiment for
each operator (curve 1 for subject A, curve 2 for subject B and curve 3 for sub-
ject c). From these curves we can see that the individual distinctions of
trained operators had little effect on accuracy of evaluations of determination‘
of coordinates of the spacecraft's location. The scatter of average values of ab
in the 75th min of flight for the 3 days constituted 3-5 kl.

0n the whole, these experimental studies dealing with accuracy of determination of
coordinates of the spacecraft's position indicate that it is possible for a cosmo-
naut—operator to solve astronavigation problems using a sextant within the
available time after adequate training. the absolute error being 6i - 3 ... 5 km.
Other coordinates of the vector of evaluating errors have considerably lower
absolute error factors. In order to improve the accuracy of solving astronaviga—
tion problems it is necessary to upgrade the instrumental precision of the sextant
and increase the number of sessions of making astronavigational readings.

6.6. Standard Evaluation of Operator Performance in Taking Astromeasurements
With a Sextant

For standard evaluation of the performance of different operators during training
on an ARTU for astronavigational measurements, it is expedient to select a proportion

101
FOR OFIHCJAI.USII(”‘LY
FOI‘OFFK1AI.USEINNLV

of excellent, good, satisfactory and unsatisfactory ratings that would yield an
encouraging average grade. The initial parameters for standard evaluation could
be the time and accuracy of operator's aatronavigational measurements.

 

L_..._.__.._...__-___._._. _ - _.
r 5 . .

s u .. 2. x :9 c a: so :5 u 55 Main’

Figure 79. Error in estimate of mistake in determining spacecraft coordinate
as a function of navigation system operating time with 5-min
intervals between readings, subject 8

Let us discuss determination of the time-related standard evaluation of operator
training. According to the space flight conditions, available time Tav for
operator to take astromeasurements using a sextant and terrestrial landmarks can
be calculated on the basis of the following equation

Tav - H RRV+ a tan Y (6.56)

where R. is mean radius of earth, u is altitude of orbital flight, V is orbital
velocity of flight and y is the angle of sighting terrestrial landmark along
flight course.

Table 6.14 lists the available sighting time for the terrestrial landmark, in
seconds, at different flight altitudes and sighting angles.

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFI1CIAL.US£1DNLY

  

(2.4-3
:5-
u.
If;
I
y;
55'
g
.m-
I
m
_,.
"-r\ I"
.\.‘_
- ~‘Q‘l
l - .
) ‘. r.‘ :2: .«o 'r u as so 55 n 55 70 min

Figure 80. Error in estimate of mistake in determining spacecraft coordinate
as a function of navigation system operating time with 5-min
interval between readings, subject c

 

Figure 81. Daily averages of errors in estimating mistake in determining
spacecraft coordinate as a function of navigation system operating
time, subject A

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 82. Daily averages of errors in estimating mistake in determining

spacecraft coordinate as a function of navigation system operating
tine, subject 8

[Lad

    

~Nv¢

. - ._.. _._a__..——._..——J——J

0 ) IIlift/51015MI1511505570f,l1n

Figure 83. Daily averages of errors in estimating mistake in determining

spacecraft coordinate as a function of navigation system operating
tine, subject c

104
FOIIOFIIC1A1.lEﬂE(ﬂ'LY
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE¢NVLY

 

Ii .
J4 1/; §\Q§\\
.'."b\‘ / \ -\
l ‘.;j‘/ \5 ,//\\, \ ,j
‘ ~= ' -"'.«?'-.1..
Figure 86. Errors in estimating mistakes of determining spacecraft coordinates

as a function of navigation system operating tile, averaged for
3 days of work

1) subject A 2) subject B 3) subject c

‘ x

,, ..-- z" 1:?

Table 6.14. Estimated time (seconds) of viewing terrestrial landmark at
different flying altitudes and sighting angles

F1 in: altitude km

Sighting angle, degrees

 

Considering the specifications of the space sextant, the time spent by the opera-
tor on astromeasurements in orbital flight should not exceed 45 s. Operator
productivity diminishes when space flight factors (ueightlessness, vestibular sti-
mulation, negatiVe emotions, etc.) are present.

As shown by the experimental studies of operator performance using a sextant with
simulation of space flight factors (see Chapter 2), actual time for taking astro-
navigational measurements could be increased by 30-402, as conmared to training
on the ground. Consequently, the time available to the operator for astromeasure-
menta in orbital flight should be reduced, for example, from 45 to 27 s. This
standardized evaluation of time is considered satisfactory.

As we have mentioned above (see 6.36), the experimental studies established that
the time spent by the operator on astromeasurements using a sextant can be dea-
cribed by a gamma distribution:

105
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB(NVLY

DPn R-r (r-r )
—T— [pp (1’ - 1’ 1;,” ea?" min withtnmin
f(r) - { (R 1)! n I (6.57)
0 with «1 min

where Tmin - 11.7 s, R - 2, p - 0.17 11s and Pr: depends on operator proficiency
(for a well-trained operator Pu - 1).

0n the basis of (6.57), the probability that the operator will perform the astro-
measurements in specified time 13p can be determined from the formula:

I”
W - Tap) - I ﬂﬂdt (6.58)
T

min

Integral (6.58) is linked with a partial gamma function and tabulated. Setting
13p 7 27 9, let us calculate the value of u - p(t8p ~ Thin) - 0.l7(27 - 11.7) - 2.6.
which corresponds to probability 0.72-0.73.

In order to determine the standard time corresponding to the "excellent" rating,
let us establish in the table a value of pn corresponding to probability of 0.5.
Time 15. - 22.7 corresponds to such a value of pn.

In order to determine the standard time corresponding to a "good” rating, let us
establish a quantile corresponding to probability:

0.72 + 0.5
2

Then the standard time will be 1.0 - u‘0/p + 1.1“ - l.84l0.17 + 11.7 . 23.5 a.

' 0.6

Thus, the time spent on astronavigational measurements by a well-trained operator
using a sextant can be rated as follows: "excellent"-up to 18 s, "good"-up to
22.5 s, "satisfactory"--up to 27 s, "unaatisfactory"--27 s or more.

in order to determine the expected average grade, let us mention that the total
number of "satisfactory," "good" and "excellent" ratings constitutes 72:,
"excellent" constituting 502, i.e., "satisfactory" and "good“ make up 222. On the
other hand, the total number of "good" and "excellent" ratings constitutes 602.

then there will be 102 "good" ratings. Consequently, there will be 121 satisfactory
and 281 unsatisfactory ones.

Ultimately, the expected score will be: 0.5-S+0.1ob+0.12o3+0.28.2 ' 3.82. This is
a low expected average score.

To raise the average grade, let us select a quantile corresponding to probability
0.7 to establish the time rated as "excellent." Then the quantile corresponding
to probability of good scores is:

0.73 + 0.7 _
2

Hence, there will be 70: excellent ratings, 11 good, 21 satisfactory and 27% un-
satisfactory. Thc expected mean score will be 0.7+0.01-h+0.02-3+0.27-2 - 4.14.
This is a rather high expected mean grade and it will be a stimulus for reducing
measurement time.

0.71

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
R)! 0511(1Al. USS ONLY

Thus, the following standard ratings are established:

"excellent"-~to Tex I uyo/p + Tmin I 2.4/0.17 + 11.7 I 25.8 s;
"good"—-to ng I uyxlp + Tnin I 2.5/0.17 + 11.7 I 26.6 s;
"satisfactory"-to 138 I u1g/D + ruin I 2.6/0.17 + 11.7 I 27 s;
"unsatisfactory“-over Tsa I 27 s.

Standard ratings of astromeasurement time during training can also be established
for untrained operators. The time spent by an operator on astromeasurenents with
the established standards can be submitted as follows at different stages of
training:

"excellent"--to tex I uyolppn + 1min;

"sood"--to ng . un/Dpn + Tun;

"satisfactory"--to Isa I un/ppn + Tmin‘

"unsatisfactory"--over Isa. Pn I l - aﬂ(1 - Po).

We can determine the values of a and Po experimentally. As we have shown previously
(see Section 6.3). P" I i - (0.974)"X(1-0.29l) I l - (0.974)"-0.709; consequently,
by setting the number of practice sessions one can calculate Pu and determine the
standard time for the different ratings.

As an example, let us state that n I 10; then P10 I 1 - (0.974)‘°x0.709, while
standard time will be:

-r;;_-njaw3s
‘ex “H.073 ,
, _ _-’-§_- ”7-: 31.3 s:
88 u‘]: cj’7xl

Hence, there will be 70% excellent ratings, 12 each for good and satisfactory,
28% for unsatisfactory. The expected mean score will be:

0.7.5 + 0.01.4 + 0.01.3 + 0.2802 I 4.13

This is a high enough expected average grade and it would serve as a stimulus for
reducing astromeasnromonl Lime.

Standardrnting of accuracy of astromeasurements taken by operators is based on the
following considerations. Experimental studies using the analog-digital unit of

the autonomic navigation system revealed that the accuracy of superposing navigation
stars and terrestrial landmarks in the center of the visual field of the sextant
depends little on the number of training sessions. The errors of measurements are
governed by the normal law with mathematical expectation m(A*) I 0 and standard
deviation n(l\*) I 3.45'.

SinCe mean square error 0(A*) is a gauge of accuracy of astromeasurements, by
selecting the correlation between ratings, we can write down the standards for
accuracy in the following general form:

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"excellent" rating: Mex . KNU’);
"good" rating: Aygd . K20(A*)S
"satisfactory" rating: Ayn . K30(A*);
"unsatisfactory" rating: Ayn” . K.o(A*),

s tanda rd for
s tandard for
s tandard f or
s tandard for

where AYex' A1 d and “as are maximum mean errors of astromeasurement defined by
the correspond ng rating; K1. K2, K, and K. are coefficients characterizing the
selected proportions of standard ratings; a(A*) is the mean square error of astro-
navigation measurements using a sextant.

Errors A7 are governed by the normal law, and for this reason we can determine
the probability that error (IAyl) does not exceed the standards for "excellent,"
"good," "satisfactory" and "unsatisfactory" on the basis of the following:

P A ./A. .....f.(_’\'1-‘.lmt).

M H ‘ ‘9‘) ophw) '
.. K3)" d‘

I’.|3'/A 1:- -..._g.. -

‘ l H ‘ Y9d «b 0.6mm"
K." -

h A' ’o --- -—-”"
.1” \l\ Yea q’(n,ai7:(l’)_ I

I" (i341 < Av”): I ' ‘ I’Js '

where P1, P; and P, are probabilities that absolute measurement errors will not
exceed the standards for "excellent," "good" and “satisfactory," respectively.

or the probability that the error will fall into the specified interval; P. is

the probability that the measurement error will exceed standard A7”; 3 is reduced
Laplace function.

One can select coefficients K;, K; and K, by making calculations and comparisons

of different variants of standard ratings. Let us determine for 0(A*) . 3.45'

the probability that measurement errors with use of sextant will fall into each

of the confidence intervals, on the assumption that K; - 0.8. K: - 1.2 and K, - 1.8.

He can then obtain:
I'.-_..-.-.; .1-(u'su-V.

_ ) -l-.|.l?H=-0.$";
u,h..-(.\‘)

.‘l“~e‘|
‘ — may)
/' .\~-. .3- .-1.........
:(I \I . \gdl ”(umhn';

- Luann ' ,
\ - | . . . If“ . ( .c . .
‘3. «I (IL-ﬂour!) '[ ( ’ I ’ )3

I',.|.\\1- ~ ”mum -- I',.-_ 0.07,

) «Mun ) $0.75;

15m"-

Hence, 582 of the ratings

In order to determine the
borne in mind that 772 is

while 932 is referable to

are excellent and 71 unsatisfactory.

percentage of good and satisfactory ratings it must be
referable to the sum of "good" and "excellent" ratings,

"satisfactory," "good" and "excellent." Hence. there

will be (77-58)?! = 192 good and (93-58-19)Z I 161 satisfactory ratings.

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USU". ()NI."

0n the basis of the foregoing, the error made by the operator when taking astro-
measurements with a sextant can be rated as follows: "excellent"--up to 2.7';
"good"-up to 4.2'; "satisfactory"-up to 7.21' and "unsatisfactory"-over 7.21'.

With this variant of selected standards, the expected average grade of operator
ratings will be: 0.58°5+0.l9-4+0.l6°3+0.07°2 - 4.28. This is a rather good average _
score and it will be an incentive for the operator to improve measurement performance.

For space sextants with 0(A*) - 1', standard ratings with an average score of 4.28
will be: "excellent"--0.8'; "good"--l.2'; "satisfactory"--l.8'; "unsatisfactory"-
over 1.8'.

To rate an operator's performance as a whole for the duration of a navigation
session, we need a generalized criterion that takes into consideration both the
accuracy oi readings and time spent on taking them. The generalized average ex-
pected score for accuracy and time of performing astromeasurements with a sextant,
which would constitute 4.21 with average score of 4.28 for accuracy and 4.13 for
nuasurement time, could serve as such a criterion of operator proficiency.

A criterion selected in the form of polynomial K - A0(A) + Bo(t*) + C, which
includes error 0(A) in the operator-sextant system and time a(r*) spent by operator
to take astromeasurements using a sextant, could be one of the possible variants

of this criterion. Coefficients A, B and c are selected on the basis of the re-
sults of statistical processing of astronavigational measurements by the least
squares method.

However, use of this criterion alone to evaluate the professional performance of
cosmonaut—operators in a system of autonomous astronavigation cannot presune to be
entirely objective. This is attributable to the fact that identical errors in
astromeasurements could yield substantially different results with regard toerrors
in determining the piloting and navigational parameters of flight as a function

of time of the navigation session and type of orbit (normal or irregular).

6.7. Evaluation of Operator Training According to Quality of Performance of
Astronavigation Tasks

Optimization of modern systems of autnomous astronavigation is very closely related
to refinement of operator training, as the chief element in this system. At the
same time, a high level of operator training, as is the case for specialists in

any other occupation, is directly related to refinement of methods of evaluating
their proficiency and constant monitoring of training results.

However, development of criteria and methods for rating cosmonaut performance or,
more precisely, training level, is among the most difficult problems, and to
solve it one must make combined use of modern advances in various scientific dis-
ciplines. Mathematical methods should play a prominent role here.

The known ratings and characteristics, which have been well-developed for technical
equipment and closed automatic control systems are not suitable for quantitative
evaluation of a cosmonaut's work capacity. The reason is that an operator and,

in particular, a cosmonaut is notable for an immeasurable wider variation of all
his qualities, traits and characteristics. They can change rapidly and over con-
siderable ranges, depending on external working conditions of the cosmonaut, on

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his internal, psychological set, physical condition, activities and many other
factors. For this reason, the first and main distinction of quantitative ratings
of a cosmonaut's work capacity is their stochastic nature, since the experimental
data obtained each time characterize only a certain specific condition of the
cosmonaut or system at a given point in time, under given conditions, set, etc.,
but are not suitable for yielding any generalized evaluations. This problem is
the most important and, at the same time, the most difficult as it applies to

a research object such as a cosmonaut-operator.

Many authors have tried to describe the performance (training level [proficiency])
of human operators [15. 31]. He shall describe elsewhere (see Section 7.1) one of
them, which has been developed and used extensively. At the present time, re-
searchers (methodologists) must content themselves with the dynamics of critical
parameters of a given type of special work. To assess operator proficiency, it

is methodologically expedient to single out two ratings: immediate [operational]
evaluation of quality of operator performance referable to a specific activity and,
on the other hand, comparative evaluation of operator training for performing a
task with consideration of a series of training [practice] sessions within a
specific period of time. The later rating should characterize the degree of sta-
bility of operator work in accordance with the required standards.

The methods of quantitative analysis of everysuch complex systems as the astro-
navigation systems of a spacecraft are aimed at obtaining special [partial] criteria
of efficiency of performing different operations, which is characterized by such
parameters as accuracy (errors), time and energy spent to perform a specified task.
In more complicated cases, one uses criteria such as probability of solving a

given problem within a specific time under specified conditions, degree of completion
of the solution, etc.

Some researchers use, if it can be thus put, unilateral generalized ratings of
performance to describe ergatic systems. Thus, A. A. Bulat et al. use, as a
generalized criterion of level of operator training, an integral evaluation,
which is based essentially on technical parameters, such as control time, energy
expenditure, accuracy of control, etc. [15].

Another approach to the problem of evaluating the quality of operator training
involves the recording of various physiological parameters. Authors assess, on
the basis of dynamics thereof, the psychophyaiological tension of the operator and,
from these parameters, stability of skill [1b, 56, S7, 66, 75].

In some cases, one can assess the quality of cosmonaut training in astronavigation
operations by comparing current characteristics of special [partial] performance
parameters to the maximum values thereof, with which the entire problem can still
be solved. Thus, in one of the series of experiments conducted in the pressurized
cabin of a spacecraft, the subjects used an algorithm for solving a navigation
problem. The first part of the problem consisted of mathematical operations using
a Vega keyboard computer and tables. The second part consisted of determining
input data for subsequent calculations by means of graphs. Hork time and accuracy
of solution were recorded at each stage of calculation.

Figure 85 illustrates the values of time spent on running the algorithm by two
subjects, as well as mean values before and during the experiment. This figure
shows the maximum time, exceeding which could cause failure in solving the problem.

110
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USI§(ﬂVLY
I-‘Oll Ol-‘I-‘IUAI. lWl ONLY

As can be seen from the submitted data,
performance of both the first and second
‘3? “max subject did not exceed this range, even
‘ during the most difficult, adaptational
{ “\\,h\ K E“ bgfore experiment}1 stage of the experiment. Consequently.
‘ \.«.’;_v. "t? :i; experiment with regard to this special criterion
“ayx ﬁn.._ “yk~ ore experim.}2 it can be noted that the operators were
adequately trained to solve navigational
"""T",‘-‘"'; 77,"; ," days problems and were able to perform the
Figure 85. task under certain "stressful" experi-

Time characteristics of subjects 1 and2 mental conditions.

in the problem solving process as a func-
tion of number of training sessions n At one time we noted that development of

[rm--mean time] skill in controlling systems based on

the tracking operation depends largely
on the Operator's professional training for work with other systems [38). Thus, the
characteristics of tracking reaction of A. G. Nikolayev were somewhat higher than
those of the copilot of the Soyuz—9 spacecraft. Apparently, this is attributable
to the fact that the commander, A. G. Nikolayev, is a pilot; his training, prior
professional work were related to control movements of the order of visual and motor
coordination, i.e., his controlling (tracking) skill was labile and rapidly
"adjusted" to other types of similar work. On the other hand. control of tracking
creates a stable conceptual model, which is used actively when switching to other
control systems.

'.‘
:cl- .k

:\ .i
,—

He submitted this thesis to experimental verification. A large group of subjects,
consisting of students from an engineering school who were unfamiliar with the
astronavigation system, achieved the results (time of taking measurements) in the
course of training that are illustrated in Figures 86 and 87. Another group of
subjects, also with no prior knowledge about this astronavigation system, consisted
of USSR pilot-cosmonauts. Their achievement is also illustrated in the figures
(solid lines). As can be seen from these data, the latter group is superior to

the student group in all parameters. The instruction period for cosmonauts
consisted of about 40-50 training sessions (70-80 for the first group). At all
stages of training, their parameters for performance time were 50-60% better than
for the first group. A comparative analysis of mistakes in astronavigational
operations also revealed that the pilot-cosmonauts performed the work with consider-
ably less scatter of obtained data, and accuracy was 2-3 times higher than that of
ordinary subjects. It should benoted that there was manifestation of previously
established skills in the work of the professional operators. They used small
economical movements for control, holding the controls lightly, often with two
fingers, rather than grasping with the palm of the hand. Small wrist muscle
movements were used for control. In addition, the training process was not asso-
ciated with psychuphysiological tension.

Thus, professional skill in controlling an astronavigational measurement instrument
has a beneficial effect on speed and quality of training in the specialty of
astronavigator.

This fact is linked the most closely to the extremely important problem of re-
learning and "transfer" of skill. It is also encountered under the name of the
problem of skill interaction in the psychological literature. Many experimental
works deal with it. However, the problem of transfer and interaction of skills

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIII(HNHCIAI.USE<0NLN

has not been sufficiently investigated, although the success of training qualified
operators for various control systems depends on its scientific solution.

 

cl) 5 ”In

Figure 86. Integral-quadratic criterion for rating operator performance
quality as a function of number of training sessions n

sufficient to analyze the dynamics of
operator performance quality in the
course of training to assess his profi-
ciency in working with astronsvigatiou
systems. This can be done. But using
special criteria does not yield the

_ optimum evaluation. It is necessary to
up a work out generalized criteria that
would be based on both the reliability
features of machine work and functional
parameters of a man included in the
system as a separate unit.

- 1 We have tried to demonstrate that it is

   
 

_._.L-.L _-
ﬂ 1” ‘F N’ a~ MW 00

Figure 87.
Astromeasurement time as a function of
number of training sessions n

   

l) operator group 1.9
2) operator group m(t*)
3) operator with professional skills

6.8. Operator's Psychophysiological Characteristics in the Manual Mode of Navigation

Automation of control processes implies optimum distribution of functions between

the machine and man. Man is usually charged with the duty of "insuring" the equip-
ment, in the evenzof partial failure. For this reason, we studied here the operations
that a man must perform in the event of failure of the onboard computer. Concrete
astronavigation problems made up by a special algorithm served as information models.

Operator work consisted of performing successive arithmetic operations. The next

stage of work was with graph-nomograms. The time of beginning and ending each
operation was entered in a special log.

Concurrently with running the specified work algorithms, we examined such psycho-

physiological functions as logical thinking, immediate memory, motor coordination
activity, etc.

112
FOR(MHWCLALi£ﬂEONL¥
FOInOFITCh\LIJSEioNLY

The obtained results were used as base data to work out forms of presenting logical

and arithmetic material, logical algorithm systems that would provide for high
efficiency of operators in this type of work.

Psychophysiologicai Characteristics of Operator Performance in Solving
Autonomous Astronavigation Problems Using an Alphanumeric Computer

It is possible to obtain and process information in a system of autonomous astro-
navigation if there is a high-speed computer with memory units aboard the manned

spacecraft.
and operate reliably.

of course, the ANC [alphanumeric computer] must be small in size
If the ANC has a failure, man takes on its functions. In

this case, he has to perform many arithmetic and logic operations, and under cer-
tain working conditions this could lower the overall reliability of the system.
Moreover, participation of man as an element in the autonomic navigation system
could prolong significantly the time required to solve astronavigation problems.
Apparently, a search must be made of the optimum combination of human and machine
capabilities to assure reliability of the process of control and navigation of

space flight.

This problem can be resolved if the psychophysiological capabilities

of man are taken into consideration when designing manned spacecraft.

Numerous experimental studies and manned space flights have demonstrated convin-
cingly that it is expedient to have semiautomatic control and navigation systems,
in which the principle of optimum use of both man and machine is applied.

Thus, American researchers compared the reliability of operation of onboard auto-

mated systems with numerous back-ups and systems including an operator.

It was

established that, at first, the work capacity of all systems was the same, but
already on the 6th day of simulated flight the work capacity of the automatic sys-

tem began to decline.

However, by the 16th day, the work capacity of systems with

4-fold back-up was rated as satisfactory, whereas the reliability of the system
that included man was found to be much greater than that of automated ones.

l. min\

,1. - ______ ___._....__y

. L..IJ.A..I. .H.J..a...t_:

i 'J ”Harmonia"

Figure 88.
Running time for algorithm of autonomous
astronavigation using an ANC by subjects
I and II as a function of training
sessions n
l) presentations
2, 4) average before experiment
3. 5) average after experiment

of course, including man in any chosen
spacecraft navigation system is pre-
ceded by comprehensive determination

of his role in this system. his capa-
bilities with regard to performance

of concrete operations. In the case

in question of solving autonomous astro-
navigation problems using an ARC, the
operators worked with a set of test
tables which listed the results of the
preceding stage, i.e., astronomic para-
meters measured with the sextant. In
these experiments, data about primary
astromeasurements were given to operators
in sealed envelopes, which contained a
set of charts for calculating inter-
mediate results, as well as a log with
the algorithm for calculations.

In these experiments, we used the Vega general purpose computer that is small in

size.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The altered algorithm for solving the astronavigation problem consisted of two
parts that differed in structure of work. The first consisted of mathematical
operations (7-digit numbers). The second part involved mainly determination of
base information by means of charts for subsequent calculations. Bork starting and
finishing time was entered in the appropriate columns of the flight log.

The problem was considered solved when the operator made no mistakes in the course
of the calculations that would alter the digits in the 5th or higher positions.
Performance of arithmetic operations according to a specific algorithm with
specified accuracy, provided all operations were performed in the time reserved
for them, was the decisive factor in this methodological procedure. Two operators

participated in these tests, and they were trained to work with the Vega ANC 2 h
a day for 6 days.

Figure 88 illustrates the time spent on running the algorithm for autonomous navi-
gation by both operators under normal experimental conditions. As can be seen

in this figure, both curves present a tendency toward rising throughout virtually

the entire experiment. This is probably attributable not only to the influence

of the adaptation process but, to some degree, to the level of operator training.

However, it can be noticed that the operators spent the least time on the problem
using the specified algorithms on the 12th-l3th day, which virtually coincided
with the end of the experiment. For this reason, the improvement of performance
in this case can also be interpreted as being the result of diminished tension

of psychophysiological processes.

The fact that average time spent on solving the algorithm decreased by 152 for
both subjects at the end of the experiment confirms that, even in such a compli-
cated activity as arithmetic operations, one observes continuation of the training
process, refinement of skill in performing the different elements of the overall
experiment. In another instance, when there is a rather long interval between
performance of operations for autonomous astronavigation, one may observe some
decrease in work skill. The presence of a training unit aboard manned spacecraft
would make it possible to maintain a stable skill throughout the period of the
space flight.

The distribution of functions between the operator and computer implies, of course,
not only separation_of parts of the overall algorithm in order to program then for
the ANC. Since human characteristics are different when performing various mathe-
matical operations, as well as when working with charts and nomograms, one must
determine the question of form in which the algorithm data should be submitted to
obtain optimum characteristics for the entire system. The choice of one of the
forms of graphic presentation of specific parts of the algorithm is made in order
to improve reliability of work and reduce solving time.

Thus, one can obtain the quantitative characteristics of operator performance

in such studies. with regard to solving logic and arithmetic problems inherent in
autonomous navigation of a manned spacecraft and, consequently, one can determine
whether it is possible to perform a large amount of arithmetic work, including
work under extreme conditions.

Evaluation of quality of solving the algorithm was made by means of determining
the mistakes made by the operator when solving problems with simulation of a flight

114
FOR OFFﬂﬂAl.lEﬂE(NVlY
FOI:0FFNJAL.USE(NVLY

program. Table 6.15 lists the number of errors made by operators in parts of the
algorithm that are different in type of work.

Table 6.15. Distribution of errors in different types of work

 
 
   

Operators

       

work with tables work with charts and nomo;rams

As can be seen from the data listed in Table 6.15, both operators made most mistakes
when working with the tables in the first part of the algorithm. In the course of
the experiment, this part of the algorithm offered the least opportunity to improve
work skill. However, the part that was predominantly logical and required much
concentration was, strange as it seems, characterized by a tendency toward improving.

In this case, the dynamics of operator performance quality throughout the experiment
were of great interest. There was negligible increase in mistakes made in the
first part of the algorithm for the first few days. Most mistakes were made by the
operators on the 11th experimental day, when the research program called for 15%
oxygen in the room air.

An opposite tendency was noted in running the logical part of the algorithm. This
can apparently be explained as follows. Logic operations are less impervious to
interference when performed under normal conditions. In this case, normal condi-
tions refer to the absence of emotional tension, exposure to deleterious environ-
mental factors, etc.

However, when we could have expected the greatest number of mistakes in running
the algorithm according to the experimental conditions for the first few days of
the adaptation period, we demonstrated, on the contrary, improved work with it,
i.e., performance of logic operations under extreme conditions may be sufficiently
efficient and resistant to interference.

We stress the fact that the experiment was complicated and tests limited to only
two operators and, in spite of the fact that similar results were obtained for
both subjects, they cannot be deemed statistically reliable. For this reason, the
findings of this experiment should be interpreted as illustrative, but we shall
still try to find an explanation for the demonstrated distinctions.

The first, automated part of the algorithm is rather time-consuming, but still it
is the preliminary stage of work, which yields primary data for the second part of
the algorithm. The second part of the algorithm yields the result, which should
be considered the finite [final] one in reaching the goal. Thus, the second stage,
being the final one, gains the significance of psychological stimulation, which
mobilizes adaptive mechanisms in the body, its psychophysiological reserves, and
thereby increases reliability of the operator's work. For this reason, concentra-
tion of attention on this phase of work leads to inhibition of other parts of the
cerebral cortex, and this could be the precondition for worsening of the other
aetivity, which is simpler in its algorithmic structure.

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘lRiOIIECIAI.lEiE(HVLV

There is another possible approach to
t.min [1 interpretation of this phenomenon, based
I

  

3. on the hypothesis expounded by B. H.
H Teplov in 1955 [69]. According to this

 

 

Pavlov concerning the types of nervous

system, this hypothesis is valid for a

weak nervous system. For this reason.
Figure 89. it would hardly be correct to interpret

Characteristics of operator performance the obtained data from this point of

in manual solution of algorithm of auto- view.

nomous astronavigation (a--number of

m hypothesis, the assumption was advanced
ml :' L that low work capacity can be interpreted
l as the result of high reactivity. If we
I consider the theoretical theses of I. P.

 

errors) The closest step in this direction was
1) base data 3) 6th day the work of V. D. Nebylitsin [80], in
2) 13: day a) 11th day which he demonstrated an inverse corre-

lation between the functional state of
the nervous system and reliability of function of the visual analyser. thus, the

question remains open and it must be answered in specially conducted experiments.

In the same experiment. we also tested the possibility of solving the algorithm of
autonomous astronavigation withOut using a'computer. The same parts of the
algorithm, but in a somewhat abbreviated variant, were used for analysis. Three
experiments were conducted with each operator. Analysis of the results revealed
that they presented the same direction of changes and, consequently, it was possible
to submit them in the form of averaged data for one crew (Figure 89).

In this case, of interest is the relationship between mistakes and working time at
the extreme (according to gas composition of respiratory air mixture) stage of the
experiment, namely the 11th day. Analysis of the time required to solve this
algorithm revealed that it was the shortest, closest to the initial, background
data on the 11th day. However, the number of mistakes increased by 272 at this
period. This tendency of change in performance characteristics (time and accuracy
of work) under extreme conditions is not unexpected, and it is present in a number
of other instances. But, for the time being. we are not able to offer a compre-
hensive psychophysiological analysis of such a trend in changes in work quality,
to demonstrate the specific mechanisms causing such differences in the dynamics of
the parameters studied referable, it would seem, to homogeneous activity. Evi-
dently, the cause should be sought in the distinctive features of the structure

of a given activity and evaluation of its significance to performance.

116
IN)R1OFIWCIA1.IEHEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 7. METHOD FOR OVERALL EVALUATION AND FORECASTING QUALITY OF OPERATOR
PERFORMANCE IN SOLVING ASTRONAVIGATION PROBLEMS (ACCORDING TO
CHARACTERISTICS OF HIS PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL STATE)

7.1. The Question of Generalized Evaluations in Psychophysiology of Space-Related
Work

The problem of improving the quality of performance of an operator in complex con-
trol systems is one of the most important and pressing problems of engineering
psychology.

In designing modern man-machine systems, it is imperative to take into consideration
the fact that the operator will be solving his problems under the influence of many
factors. A change in psychophysiological state of the operator is one of the main
factors.

we do not yet have a general classification of objective psychophyaiological states
of an operator, and on the whole this problem can be viewed as formalization of
qualitative features of his performance on the basis of recreating their statistical
dependence on a certain base system of psychophysiological and technical parameters.
This is also an important question in solving astronavigation problems by a cosmo-
naut .

neequestion of optimizing the cosmonaut instruction and training process requires
immediate work on solving problems of objective generalized evaluation of cosmonaut
proficience, which could be used to formulate the principles of construction of
feedback with the training system, operator-simulator-instructor system and to
create the necessary conditions for effective control of training.

The problem is important, theoretically warranted and necessary in practice, but it
must be noted that many authors are skeptical about the possibility of a universal
approach to the solution of this range of problems. He shall not dwell on a des-
cription of the efforts made by different authors of generalized evaluation of
performance, but shall cite one example that characterizes the thinking of re-
searchers in this direction as it applies to cosmonaut work. Let a given form of
cosmonaut work be described by parameters a], a2, a,, ..., Gn' Let the conditions
be such that these parameters must have maximum values for optimum work quality.
Let us designate the same parameters obtained in ground-based experiments as 01'.
oz', 03', ..., on', and values obtained in space as o,", oz“, o3", ...,un". Then
the generalized evaluation of operator work quality referable to this form of
cosmonaut work Age“ can be expressed in the following form:

117
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
l-‘III OFFICIAL USE ONLY

01: I 3.1— —.-

Parameter A is measured in the range of 0 to 1. Indeed, if the value of parameters
of quality of work in space would be the same as under the calm conditions of a
laboratory, this type of work would not be subjected to the influence of space
stress factors, and the level of cosmonaut work capacity in flight could be evalu-
ated on the basis of the results of ground-based experimental studies. Otherwise,
as is usually the case, the values of the parameters studied «11", a2" ...) are
found to be lower than on earth (a;',a£, ...) and then en is less than 1, charac-
terizing the relative decline in quality of cosmonaut wor referable to this form
of activity in flight, as compared to ground-based conditions. Sometimes, it is
more convenient to use percentages instead of fractions of l, and for this the
value of “gen is multiplied by 100. It should be borne in mind that in making a

choice of parameters one must take only those that are functionally independent of
one another.

It is logical to assume that the significance of all parameters selected.for the
generalized evaluation in the general case will not be the same. Some may be impor-
tant to evaluation of a given type of work and others, less important. For example,
when a cosmonaut is engaged in docking spacecraft in orbit, it is more important

not to use too much fuel and the time spent on this operation is less important;

at another time, the reverse may be true, etc. For this reason, it is expedient to
introduce into the expression for generalized evaluation the value of the "weight"
of each parameter, which would take into consideration the importance of each of

them in the overall performance by the cosmonaut. If we consider that the sum of
"weights" is:

n
229,; - 1
in

a II a!" a II m"
Agen " ”1+ + ”2—2"? 4’ Ida—La" + ... ‘* War
or
1 ,3
gen“ . ‘ ”(’3'
“a
le-

There are some debatable questions about this solution, for example, how to define
the mathematical expression of the significance of the "weight" of each parameter;
there are elements that are difficult to execute, for example, to obtain a set of

values of parameters for space conditions, but expressly this model is the first
attempt at solving the formulated problem.

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
itﬂlfﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.US£1DNLY

7.2. Evaluation uI Psychuphysioiogicai State of an operator and Forecasting
the Quality of His Performance

As we have already stated, maximum reliability of spacecraft control can be ob-
tained only if there is a wise combination of operation of automatic systems and
actions of the operator.

Studies have shown that total automation of control of a dynamic system is not
economically justified. Thus. with complete automation of control, automation of
10—15% of the work of an operator usually costs just as much as 60-70% partial
automation [40]. Moreover, it is virtually impossible to take into consideration
in advance, in the design of an automatic control unit, all the diversity of situa-
tions, in which it is imperative to make the correct decision about a change in the
control program. The job of making important decisions in critical situations will
always belong to man.

0n the other hand, one must consider the fact that the specific conditions of space
flight, particularly a long one, affect man's work capacity. For example, cosmonaut
B. B. Yegorov spent 1.5-2 times more time on operations with equipment aboard the
Voskhod spacecraft than on earth. V. H. Komarov spent twice as much time on move-
ments related to guidance of the craft than in a training spacecraft.

During long—term flights, the cosmonaut's work capacity diminishes significantly
under the influence of the regular and prolonged effects of deleterious space
flight factors [75].

Thus, engineering psychological design of the cosmonaut's work should be considered
the most effective means of improving the reliability of the cosmonaut-spacecraft
system.

One of the most important routes for designing cosmonaut work is to develop special
systems that evaluate, on the basis of current psychophysiological parameters, the
state of the operator, his ability to control the system and, finally. systems that
can forecast in good time possible changes in the state of the operator that could
lead to inadmissible worsening of the quality of his work pertaining to the con-
trol of the dynamic characteristics of the system.

A number of difficulties arise in assessing the state of an operator according to
his psychophysiological parameters.

Thus. it is imperative to have not only a qualitative, but quantitative description
of man's work capacity states in terms of parameters of his psychophysiological
state in order to make such an assessment.

At the present time, efforts to define the work capacity of an operator inevitably
lead to qualitative descriptions.

It is obvious that such definitions, which are essentially correct and reflect the
essential features of the working state, but are too general, make it difficult
to use precise quantitative methods of evaluating states.

Many authors follow the route of determining the psychophysiological characteristics

of specific states of man, without offering a general definition of state or

119
FORIOFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OMCIM. "8.! ONLY

relating the state of an operator to some quantitative indicator of the quality of
his performance. Thus, A. N. Luk'yanov and H. V. Prolov [55] are concerned with
identification of two states: state of eaotional tension and state of attention
(defining, for example, the state of attention as selective readiness to react in
a specific way to a specific signal).

The distinctive feature of the proposed approach to evaluation and prediction of
the quality of operator performance according to psychophysiological characteristics
is that, from the very outset, the concept of man's work capacity is defined for
each type of activity in terms of a criterion of quality of performance thereof.

The activity of an operator aboard a spacecraft is a special form of human labor,
and it is characterized by the following distinctions: need to perform a complex
set of diverse forms of work operations, the successful performance of which is
possible only if the appropriate complex skills are present and maintained on a
high professional level; uniqueness of external conditions, under which the cosmo-
naut works (weightlessness, hypokinesia, limited space, etc.); severe manifesta-
tion of such psychophysiological states of a cosmonaut as fatigue, vestibular dis-
orders, emotional stress. etc.

These space flight factors affect the cosmonaut as an integral unit. and the
systems approach must be used to examine their effects on performance efficiency.

In our opinion, construction of an integral rating of quality of performance,

which takes into consideration the influence of conditions under which the work

is done, as well as parameters of the cosmonaut's psychophysiological state, is

the most consistent and promising implementation of the systems approach to analysis
of the complex operator work of a cosmonaut.

7.3. Methods of Devising Quantitative Criteria of Effectiveness of Operator Work

The first stage in development of methods of evaluating and predicting the quality
of operator performance according to the characteristics of his psychophysiological
state is the stage of construction of quantitative criteria of achievement
resulting from the operator's performance of the type of work under study.

The performance of an operator related to control of a system, for example, the
work of a cosmonaut in the operation of spacecraft docking, etc., is a purposeful
precision-type of work. The operations performed by an operator when manipulating
the controls must be done in the required order and so precisely as to assure the
required accuracy in solving the problem put to the operator, for example, accuracy
of finding coordinates in astronavigation, precise docking, etc.

Thus. the precision with which an operator solves a problem put to him is deter-
mined by the specificstions for the system, and it is always specified in terms that
describe the actions performed by the operator. The concrete activity of an
operator in solving this type of problem is in the nature of precision movements
under visual monitoring of execution thereof.

As a rule, the requirements for precision movements of an operator are integral,
i.e., generally speaking, they can be reduced to the requirement that a certain
functional of the error in operator work at a fixed period of time be low enough.

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill UFI-‘K'Ml. USE ONLY

The Intrurul of square uqrur, IiW u given fixed segment of time or the entire time
of performing the operation is an example of a widely used elementary functional
of this type.

For high-speed analysis of the quality of operator performance in solving pursuit
tracking problems, a monitoring [control] method was developed that permits
evaluation of the dynamics of the integral evaluation of tracking accuracy on the
basis of two numerical characteristics. The task of pursuit tracking is a good
experimental model of virtually any type of operator work pertaining to the

control of dynamic characteristics of a technical system, since it is a problem of
visual and motor coordination. Moreover. each such type of tracking (compensatory
or pursuit) is usually an element of an operator's real work.

The pursuit tracking problem consists of the following. There are a target and
operator mark on an osciiiograph screen. The target moves over the oscillograph
screen as specified by the experimenter, and it is usually corrected by an analog
computer. The operator mark can move when the operator manipulates the control
(handle), and movement is related to movement of the mark in accordance to some
specific law. The most elementary type of such relationship is the proportional
dependence of deflection of the mark on the screen on deflection of the handle
away from the zero position (zero order system).

The operator's task consists of continuously superposing the mark and the target.
In our experiments, we used the integral of square of error (deviation of mark
from target on the oscillograph screen) for fixed,consecutive and identical
periods of time as the quantitative gauge of quality of operator performance of
the specified task.

The proposed method of monitoring [checking] the quality of operator performance
referable to tracking makes it possible to develop a method of ongoing preventive
monitoring of quality of operator performance, which is based on the use of the
stochastic [probability] distribution of values of the integral of tracking error
square in successive and equal intervals of time.

It is logical to assume that tracking errors, i.e., the difference between the sig-
nal and operator's response, are distributed approximately in accordance to the
normal law with mathematical expectation of zero and some dispersion. Indeed,
tracking errors originate from a large number of factors that hinder tracking, each
of which individually has minimal adverse effect on tracking accuracy. Consequently,
according to the limit theorem of probability theory, trucking error resulting

from the aggregate effect of these factors should be distributed according to the
normal 14w. True, some distortion of normal probability distribution of error
magnitude arises because of the constant corrections made in tracking, but we

can disregard this distortion here. it should be noted that positive and negative
errors of the same magnitude are encountered equally often in tracking problems,
which is tantamount to the assumption that the mean error equals zero. Finally,
analysis of experimental data usually confirms the validity of this assumption.

Tracking accuracy was evaluated on the basis of counting the values of the integral
of the square (or some of squares with a discrete signal) of errors in consecutive
and equal time periods. it is known that the sum of squares m of equal normally
distributed values with zero mathematical expectation and single [or unit] standard
deviation has a x2 distribution with m degrees of freedom, the density of which

121
F0l.OFFﬂJAl.USE(N§LY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we shall designate as 19,,(K). Let us recall that the mathematical expectation of
this distribution equals m and dispersion Zn.

In the case under discussion, the values of the integral of squared error a in
fixed and equal periods of time are obtained by suunation (according to the ex-
pounded hypothesis) of equally distributed normal sumandswith zero mean and

a certain dispersion oz. The sum of such sumands will have a distribution density

31; km (6‘7) , mathematical expectation H3 - m0: and dispersion D3 - Zita“ Indeed,

I

-”. - \ 3- k. (:3 )dl=- 3" \ k_(.:nl::—- m:-‘;

I).~'*--L XII “ma".l’k. (L)!!! --='.Zm:'.
cl

Thus, by recording the values of the integral of squared error 3 and adding the
values of H3 and D3, we can restore the number of degrees of freedom m that equals
the number of normally distributed addends and dispersion of these sumands 02 using
the formulas:

(I2 - Balms; m - mglnz

Knowing m and (11, we can construct distribution with density 3} km (-5.2) of values

of squared errcr integral a, which enables us to construct the criterion of tracking
quality. Let x920") be the value found in the tables for P--percentile value of x
distribution with m degrees of freedom, i.e., P{a>x 2011)} - P, I. Then values

of squared error integral a greater than X020") - 05x20") will appear only in P1 of
the cases. Experiments involving operator tracking 0? a point moving uniformly
over a circumference or back-and-forth over a segment of a line at a constant

speed made it possible to check the validity of the proposed method.

Figure 90 illustrates a histogram of values of squared error integral for successive
l-s periods of time, which was obtained with the operator tracking a mark moving
back and forth at a constant speed. The histogram presents the typical appearance
of a X2 distribution.

Figure 91 illustrates an example of using this criterion for on-going preventive
monitoring of quality of operator performance during continuous and prolonged
(about 1 h) tracking of a signal moving over the circumference at a constant speed.
The boldface bottom curve indicates in arbitrary units the averaged values of
squared error integrals 3, each of which is counted for a 1-3 period of time. The
dash line represents the 952 boundary of values of squared error integrals; values
of squared error integrals for 1-3 tracking exceeding the 952 boundary can appear
only in 52 of the cases, which is unlikely in practice. The numbers of the con-
secutive 1-min intervals during which data are inputted in the computer are noted
on the x-axis. There were 30-s intervals between input periods, and the operator
continued to track in these intervals, although data about tracking accuracy were
not fed into the computer. The curve illustrating the behavior of 952 boundary of
tracking accuracy shows drastic worsening of accuracy when moving from the 8th to
the 9th time interval, which corresponds to the 12th-l3th min of tracking. We
also see that there is abrupt appearance of instability of tracking accuracy. Let
us mention that, during this time, the mean integral of squared error (solid bottom

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

curvu) increases lnsigniflcantly in the transition from the 8th to the 9th interval.

This could have been expected, since the 95% boundary of accuracy takes into
consideration not only the mean value, but dispersion of values of the squared

error integral .

 

I l I I

r ' a: :7 u n 0,: qt 3

Figure 90. Histogram of distribution of values of integral of squared error
of tracking in consecutive, equal periods of time

 

k If"
III I
r K I, ' p f‘
A w = n I:
p', ----- - I A - l\l-- -
. ‘ ,ﬁ‘ I, ‘l \‘ ’\ A I, I; I \.J I
l A A‘ ]\ \I 4 ‘I\’ ' " ""-'I "
I \ ’ \I \ I V V ‘I |
r ,.J \V’ I V " I
l
l \I 'I I'
— I a—- - — —— — - —I———-‘— |_—_.___—_—I
0' ,I a I- r R7 ’.' I: 35 II {1/ l.’ ."-7 3‘ .7” 30 I] 4'_

Figure 91. Dyna-ice of change in quality of tracking during a long-term
experiment

The described criterion makes it possible to construct the procedure for ongoing
preventive monitoring of quality of operator performance. Let the requirements
for operator tracking accuracy, dictated by the precision of the system controlled
by the operator, be such that an emergency situation is considered to be one

where the operator makes tracking errors a exceeding 0.5 in the arbitrary units

we are using. Then, by drawing a preventive boundary corresponding to the maximum

permissible level of operator errors a (in Figure 91, this boundary is traced by
the dash line for 3 - 0.40), at the end of the 7th time interval we shall obtain

a signal that is a warning that operator performance quality is worsening.
Figure 91 shows that an irregular situation occurs at the end of the 13th interval

(dash-line curve).

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.4. Algorithm for Evaluating and Forecasting the Quality of Operator Performance
With Consideration of Characteristics of His Psychophysiological State

Analysis of different types of operator work enabled us to distinguish the main
psychophysiological systems that essentially determine the quality of performance
of a given type of work. Analysis of conditions, under which the operator will
work, must take into consideration the possibility of occurrence of stress situa-
tions, the need to work in a state of fatigue or severe emotional excitement, etc.

On the basis of preliminary analysis of psychophysiological content and conditions
of operator work, we can define a certain set of psychophysiological features of
the functional state of an operator.

Analysis of studies dealing with the choice of characteristics of the state of an
operator indicates that they were investigated by different authors for different
conditions of many such characteristics.

Thus, such features as alpha rhythm of the background EEG, succession of intervals
of the cardiac cycle and inspiration phases were used to assess states of heightened
attention [55]. Several EEG parameters, heart rate and several parameters of the
verbal signal were also used to asses the operator's states of emotional tension
[55]. The method of determination of differential threshold of visual contrast
sensibility is commonly used to assess the functional state of the visual channel,
and for the acoustic channel determination is made of the differential threshold

for volume and frequency of sound.

Tests of attention, immediate [operative] memory, simple motor reaction and reac-
tion of choice, tests of operative thinking, visual and motor coordination (pursuit
and compensatory tracking) and others are often used.

In many works, the question of correlation with a given human state is studied for
each of the parameters discussed. However, there are virtually no works that
tried to make a complex evaluation of performance quality according to an entire
set of characteristics of the state of an operator with determination of the
characteristics that are the most informative for assessment of the quality of a
given form of work. Such attempts were made in [90], which considered the possi-
bility of forming an integral evaluation of work capacity of spacecraft crew
members.

Let us mention another work [8], which briefly describes an approach to evaluation
and prediction of operator performance quality according to the characteristics of
his state.

At the first stage, one must develop a quantitative criterion of operator work
quality for each of the tested types of work, in accordance with the relevant
requirements or specific technical elements of the control systems.

At the second stage, it is necessary to make an experimental study of the quanti-
tative values of the selected criterion of operator performance quality as a func-
tion of the characteristics of his state for each of the studied types of work.
And, as we have already stated before, it is desirable to simulate as fully and
accurately as possible the operator states that could appear under the influence
of different factors involved in a real activity. At this stage. it is desirable

124
FOR¢ﬂWNJAl.USE(MVLY
FDIC (”FINAL "SI". ONLY

to take into consideration the maximum possible number of parameters, which could
be characteristics of the state.

Finally, at the third stage, one must select for each of the tested types of work
the set of the most informative parameters characterizing the quality of this type
of work out of the number of recorded parameters, and forecast the quality of
performance using expressly these parameters, which have the most prognostic value.

At the second stage, one constructs the generalized evaluation of operator per-
formance quality n according to the preselected parameters of his state 6;, ...,
5k: using n in the form of polynomial n - Pq(£1. ..., 5k) of a certain fixed rank
[power] of the corresponding values of parameters 51. ..., 5k. Expression of
quality criterion n in the form of polynomial of state parameters 51, ..., 5k is
justified because any rather smooth function can be approximated with any degree
of accuracy with a polynomial of a high enough rank.

Let us note that, in the simplest linear case (q - l), the polynomial has the
appearance of q - 0151 + ... + Okﬁk + 6., so that coefficients 91, ..., 9k

can be interpreted (after appropriate standardization of parameters) as the "weights"
of state parameters during a given type of work. A variant of the generalized

least squares method, in which the standard approximation error is minimized, was
used to find coefficients 9;, ..., 9k of polynomial n - Pq(€1, ..., 5k)-

On the additional assumption that the errors present multidimensional normal dis-
tribution, the generalized sample evaluations obtained by this method coincide
with the sample estimates by the maximum-likelihood method [90].

Use of this method leads, by calculating the values of estimates of parameters 91
..., Oh, to a system of k linear equations with k unknowns. The coefficients of
the system's matrix are coefficients of covariance of state parameters £1, ..., 5k
with one another, while the right parts are coefficients between state parameters
£1, ..., Ck and performance quality n.

Let us describe in greater detail the algorithm for evaluating and predicting the
quality of operator performance n according to the characteristics of his psycho-
physioiogical state.

The program gives a certain value for the criterion of performance quality
n = (n1, 00-, l'IZ}-

It is mandatory to introudce the vector criterion, since the quality of a rather
complex activity can be characterized only by a set of parameters that cannot,
generally speaking, be reduced to one scalar criterion of quality. Thus, accuracy
of appropriate control movements and time spent by the operator on solving control
problems are the most frequently encountered features of operator actions in
controlling dynamic systems. To describe the quality of such work, it is expedient
to use a two-dimensional criterion, n - {n1, n2}, where n1 is the accuracy charac—
teristic and n2 is problem solving time. There may be a difference in relation-
ship of criterion elements n; and n; to operator state, so that it is expedient to
evaluate each element of the quality criterion as a function of different values
of parameters that characterize the state.

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFIWCJAI.lﬂiE(HNLY

In view of the foregoing, the algorithm includes vector values of the criterion;
however, to avoid redundancy we shal describe the algorithm for the scalar instance,

which really corresponds to the algorithm of evaluation and prediction of each ele-
ment of the vector criterion.

Let the state be characterized by a set of parameters 51. ..., 5k. As we have al-
ready explained above, we first search for n as a function of £1, ..., 5k in the
form of polynomial n I P (51, ..., 5k ) of rank [power] q. The program is designed
to calculate (more preciZely, estimate) the coefficients of the polynomial the
order of magnitude of which does not exceed 102 . The linear part of the polynomial
takes into consideration quality criterion n as a function of each parameter of
state ££(i I l, ..., k) separately. The quadratic part considers the combined
effect on criterion n of all sorts of paired combinations of parameters such as
€i€j(i. J I 1, ..., k). In the case of a quadratic polynomial, we shall have:

n = P2(€1.€k)' o. + excl + + ektk + 2 eggs,-

After adding for all derivatives £i§j(l‘£<jsk) the designations §k+1’ ..., €31§_;)
and for coefficients Gij(lsi<j<k) the designations 6k+;, ..., QkLkil)' the problem

of calculating the coefficients of the quadratic polynomial n I Pz(51, ..., 6k)

apparently amounts to the problem of calculating the coefficients of a first-degree
polynomial:

n ' 9° + 0151 + + 9k€k + °k+n€k+n + + 9kgk+sz Ekgkn)
2 2

which depends on a greater (than k) number of variables ksgtgl.

He can continue with the description, without loss of generality for a first-degree
polynomial, which is related to a certain number (let us again designate it as k)
of variables that equals the number of parameters of state, if the calculations are

made for a first-degree polynomial, and an equal number k(§+3 , where k is the

number of state parameters, if the calculations are made for a second-degree
[quadratic]polynomia1.

Let us recall that, at the first stage of the experiments, for a certain set of
points in time t = t1, ..., t" calculation is made of the quality criterion n(t)
and parameters characterizingN the state £.(t). ..., §k(t).

Let us use y,*, ..., yN* to designate the observed values'of n(t) for t I t1. ...,
t" and xia’ ..., x ' to designate the values of §£(t) (for all i I l, ..., k) for
tN I t1, ..., t" . irst we center and standardize in the program all of the

base data obtained from the experiment, 1. e., we calculate:

_ u
xJ___.-i'.e._.__ﬁ_’_.j:|.....N;i=1.....k).

I ”U

where .H., .. if.“ \.“ .v:,; I) ,-= ‘7" --- \‘(.r,,-- M)-
: l I" |

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USB(HNLY

(I: - M

we also calculate y,e:-T—irili:=lu...ﬁlh
.\ - ' .V‘
I ‘- 0 . 2'
I . . - . --- :—A .
where . I N L 9.. I), N— 1 )1‘ (J. I.)
I I . -
Then, using the least squares method, we search for estimates 31, ..., of

coefficients 0., ..., 9k of polynomial n I P(£g, ..., 5k) for standardized and
centered values of n, C;, ..., 5k. As we know, estimates 6:. .;., 9k are found in
a system of K linear equations with K unknowns of the x'x - x'y type, where X is a
rectangular matrix "13h elements 3119'“ - l, ..., N; ,7” - l, ..., k); x' is the
transposed matrix; 3 - { x, ..., 5k} is the vector of estimates of matrix coeffici-

ents; y ' (gt. ..., y“) is the vector of criterion n values calculated at times
t. tb one, t".

Thus, the coefficients of the system matrix are'covariances of state characteristics,

while the first parts of the system are covariances between state characteristics ana
performance quality criterion.

The accuracy of approximation of n as a function of 5;, ..., 5k is characterized
by:

A N \.

‘9‘ .- ‘ '
‘ 9: ‘ol\ .’l.-"c. 0. \‘y,x.,].

 

4.4 d H

The forecast (or more precisely, the static forecast) of performance quality 2.
calculated from state characteristics 5;, ..., 3k, is calculated with the formula:

' ' .u T - ll '
1! .J11: | Itﬁ'o"n g: .‘I.. b .s x_"
l/i’u ' *- ' ‘17};

for each vector {31, ..., 2k}. The accuracy of forecasting with a specified level
of significance is also calculated using the following equations:

' ii ' IS WEI/1T1.

I
‘ .-
where u-azl p,,,x,x,.
[.l I

Here Pij are elements of the matrix-that isﬁthe reciprocal of the matrix in the

system of calculating evaluations 0;, ..., 3k of polynomial coefficients. Numerical
parameter t depends on the level of significance of sample size N that is taken.

For N>50, parameter t a 1.96 for a significance level of 0.95 and t - 1.2 for a

significance level of 0.90. The values of parameter t increase in the case of small

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

samples. Thus with significance level of 0.95 for N - 20, parameter c - 2.10; for
N - 15,parameter t = 2.15; for N - 10, parameter t - 2.20 and for N - 5, parameter
b - 2.6.

Thus, the described method permits forecasting the quality of operator performance
according to the characteristics of his psychophysiological state, which are re-
corded just prior to work on the assumption that there will not be appreciable
change in his state during the period of time required to perform that work.

7.5. Simplified Block Diagram for Forecasting Operator Performance Quality
Aboard Spacecraft

Evaluation of accuracy of forecasting the quality of operator performance makes it
possible to solve the problem of screening a relatively small number of the most
informative parameters without appreciably impairing the accuracy of the forecast.
Such selection must be made in order to be able to forecast the quality of cosmonaut
performance aboard a spacecraft.

Experiments revealed that the parameters of test performance on special simulators
are the most informative. The design of the simulators should provide for utmost
approximation of parameters of performance on the simulator to the parameters of
real work. In this case, forecasting the quality of real performance according to
quality of simulator performance is the most accurate. Moreover, it is found
possible to limit oneself in forecasting of this type (”forecasting performance
according to performance") to a very small number of parameters characterizing the
changes in the state of the operator that are important to proper execution of
real work.

Thus, at the first stage, let us assume that the most informative parameters of
state from the standpoint of evaluating and forecasting performance quality have
been selected. These parameters are recorded aboard the spacecraft, and evalua-
tion of coefficients of polynomdalrl-P (5., ..., 5k) has already been made in
preliminary experiments. Then calcula ion of performance quality according to
state parameters amounts to calculation of the values of polynomiall1- Pq(£1, ...,
5k) with already known coefficients, as well as calculation of accuracy of forecast
f3 using the formulas given above.

Analysis of the experimental data revealed that the accuracy of forecast P: depends
little on the concrete values of the vector of state 51, ..., 3k, from which the
forecast is made. For this reason, one can calculate approximately the accuracy

of the forecast using the formulas F3 - gty, where

_':T -. . s .
y ..IS |-’l);|' I {-u; u x p,,.\‘r\',.
IJ-l

Here, 3;, ..., 5k are averaged values of the observed parameters of operator state.

In the simplest case of a first-degree polynomial (q - l), the quality of performance
is approximated by the expression n - 01E; + ... + epgk + 6..

128
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.USEfMNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Consequently. calculation of forecast g of performance.quallty n amounts, in this
simplest case, to summation with set weights 9;, ...,9kof the obtained values for
:1, ..., 3k of parameters 51, .... 5k. It must be borne in mind that one can rely

on the forecast of performance quality n only to the extent of the accuracy deter-
mined by 7, which is calculated in advance, at the first stage.

7.6. Examples of Forecasting Operator's Professional Performance

As we have described above. the problem of developing a generalized criterion for
evaluating and forecasting the quality of man's performance according to current
psychophysiological parameters implies that there is a good enough relationship
between values of the criterion characterizing performance and current values of
recorded parameters. In order to find this function and then be able to use it

to assess performance quality from the psychophysiological parameters, at the first
stage of laboratory studies one must simulate precisely as full a set as possible

of the different conditions, under which real work will be performed. In construct-
ing the generalized criterion, it is assumed that the performance quality as s func-
tion of psychophysiological parameters is the same for the entire range of change

in conditions. The change in performance quality is attributable only to a change

in man's state, reflecting a change in values of psychophysiological parameters
rather than change in nature of this function.

There was a special experiment in which operators were able to work under drasti-
cally different conditions (initial conditions (background) and effects on man
of space flight factors). Under such conditions, the operators had to perform

complex operator work: visual and motor problems of tracking, radio communication,
dynamic tests, etc.

The physiological parameters of the operator's state (pulse, respiration, tempera-
ture) were recorded during this work and at rest, with estimation of arrhythmia,
change in pulse and exertion in dynamic test.

Operator performance in transmitting radiograms (standard text, 100 symbols) was
rated by a special criterion, which took into consideration the speed and relia-
bility of transmission, as well as specifications for proper timing of elements

of transmitted symbols. Operator performance in the test for superposition of
moving marks was also rated with a special criterion, which took into consideration
technical requirements, accuracy of work and work time. Operator work in the mode

of radiotelegraphy. as well as work on superposition of moving marks, were con-
sidered alternately as the main regular work.

Mathematical analysis of all information obtained, both with the initial data and
under the influence of factors simulating real space flight factors, enabled us

to obtain a generalized evaluation of operator readiness for the main control
tests, i.e., his current [operative] work capacity. We used the following as the
parameters: pulse rate, arrhythmia, skin resistance, changes in pulse rate and
exertion of the operator in the dynamic test. Parameters of visual acuity, as well
as characteristics of operator performance in superposition of moving marks and

in the radiotelegraphy mode, were included in the generalized evaluation, in order
to describe the operator's communication channels.

The above-described software ["mathematical apparatus"], based on a modification of

the least squares method, which permits determination of the numerical values of

129
FOR¢OFFKJAI.US£(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

polynomial P (6;, ..., Ck), as well as evaluation of accuracy of function n ‘

P q(€1, ..., k), was used to find the concrete form of function n - Pq (£1, ..., 5k).
Evaluation of accuracy of function n - P q(Ex, ..., Ek) makes it possible to select
for each type of work the sets of parameters that provide maximum accuracy of
function n= Pq (£1, ..., 5k) for a given type of work. Thus, the proposed method
enables us to evaluate the significance of different sets of psychophyaiological
parameters to describe each type of work studied.

This method of evaluating the quality of operator performance according to his cur-
rent psychophysiological parameters was tested in an analysis of experimental data.
The algorithm for finding the generalized criterion was solved in the form of a
computer program. Table 7.1 lists the values of coefficients 6g of parameters of
function n - Pq (£1, ..., Ck) with q - l, for which the coefficients have the meaning
of each parameter in the description of the chosen form of work.

Table 7.1. Values of parameters for two types of operator work

 
  

Difference in

 
  

 

Pulse
work

 
 
 

[BEE

In radiotelegraphy
mode

Superpostion of
moving marks

 
 
 
 
 

The values of criteria characterizing performance quality and values of psycho-
physiological parameters were submitted to centering and standardizing operations;
for this reason, the values of the "weights" in this table for a given form of

work have the meaning of a rating of relative importance of each parameter. Ana-
lysis of the data listed in the table shows that, for each of the two selected
forms of work (working in radiotelegraphy mode and work to superpose moving marks),
the other work is the most significant indicator (superposition of marks for

work in radiotelegraphy mode and vice versa), which always participated in the
evaluation as a psychophysiological parameter (the "weights" constitute 0.340 and
0.536, respectively, and they are each the maximum in their own set). Coefficient
0i of dispersion of pulse rate was rather significant in both forms of work, which
shows that there is a link between increase in arrhythmia and worsening of per-
formance quality. The actual pulse rate was found to be significant (0.211) for
work in the radiotelegraphy mode, which involves considerable physical tension, and
much less significant (0.068) for the calmer work of superposing moving marks.
Interestinglyenough,a relatively higher (0.290) and negative coefficient, with
which increment of exertion in the dynamic test is contained in the formula, was
obtained for the same reasons. Thus. the data in this table indicate that the
more significant parameters were those whose psychophysiological basis was refer-
able to complex processes of higher nervous activity (superposition of moving
marks, as well as indicators of variability of parameters of some autonomic pro-

cesses).

Figure 92 illustrates the quality of approximation of real performance quality (solid
line) determined with concrete function n - Pq(€ , ..., (p) (dash line). Data for

130
FOR OITHCJA1.USEIJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the background experiment are shown on the left and those for the experiment with
the use of different factors are on the right. We see that our criterion permits
quite good diff aentiation between these two states. The developed method of ob-
taining a generalized evaluation of performance quality makes it possible to fors-
cast the quality of a selected work according to values of psychophyaiological
indicators. We excluded seven sets of data for points in time selected at random
to test the possibility of forecasting performance quality by the procedure of
finding the coefficients. After a specific form of function 11' P (51, ..., 5k) was
found from the rest of the data, we made a forecast of performance quality using
the seven omitted points in time and corresponding values of only psychophysiolo-
gicsl parameters.

_..-.__————

 

ti Background Test factor
[J
;.
.l ' 1.}:
" .I’ . '. I
' II I ‘1
"i /II 'KV”
I *4" ~’\
I
:
I
i
‘2
:_-_--. .-..- ..__._____.__.__l_ _
‘ ' " '9 '/ I'- I I; .'.‘ .-.-‘c

Figure 92. Quality of approximation of real performance by functions of
parameters

In Figure 93, the dash line illustrates
the obtained forecast values n. In the
same figure. the solid line shows the
real performance quality in the radio-
telegraphy mode. Let us mention that
the first four time segments are refer-
able to the main experiment and the
last three to the experiment with use
of stimuli ["factors"]. The data il-
lustrated in Figure 93 indicate that

  

L '— s .5 s the proposed method has a good potential
9 1 I "L“, , "4—H ‘ .v for predicting performance quality accord-

Figure 93. ing to psychophysiologicsl parameters.

Forecasting cosmonaut performance accord-
ing to psychophysiological parameters
(Km-performance quality criterion; N--
test number; S--stress factor)

This method was tested on the astronavi-
gstion research-training unit (ARTU).

In the course of the experiments. we
recorded the time spent by an operator
on astronavigation measurements using a space sextant. The same parameter was
predicted by the method of generalized evaluation. He used the above-described

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It“!(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.USE!DNLN

parameters, decision making time, reaction time, integral of squared error, pulse
rate and dispersion of pulse rate. Calculation of coefficients of polynomial n
was made on the basis of 14 astromeasurements in each experiment. The parameters
recorded automatically with each reading and time of performance of astromeasure-
ments were stored in the ARTU camputer system. The time spent on astromeasurements
was predicted on the basis of the readings obtained from 15 measurements, and we
recorded the real time. The method of generalized evaluation can also be used to
solve astronavigation problems (for example. to determine whether it is possible

to takc astromeasurements when time is short).

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INH!0FFHJAI.USE(N‘LY

CONTENTS

8:

Introduction

1.

Inception of Space Astronavigation

1.1. Space astronomy
1.2. Systems of celestial coordinates

2.

1.3. Astronavigation in aviation
1.4. Correlation between aviation and space astronavigation

Man in the Space Astronavigation System

2.1. Structure of cosmonaut's work in astronavigation system

3.

a.

5.

6.

2.2. Cosmonaut's visual analyzer during flight
2.3. Photometric conditions under which cosmonauts solve

astronavigation problems

2.4. Motor analyzer and operative memory of cosmonauts in flight

Problems of Engineering Psychology in Development of Optical
Visual Means of Space Astronavigation

3.1. Use of optical visual devices
3.2. Specifications for space sextants
3.3. Navigational parameters measured with space sextants and

measurement errors

3.4. Methods of evaluating potential accuracy of solving astro-

navigation problems with a space sextant
Methods for Optimum Information Processing in Space Navigation

4.1. Conditions for determining optimum evaluations of navigational

parameters of flight

4.2. Mathematical models of observations

4.3. Methods for optimum data processing
4.4. Analysis of flaws in recurrence method of astronavigation

with the use of a space sextant
Modeling Conditions of Operator-Astronaut Performance in Solving

Astronavigation Problems

5.1. Methods of simulating the celestial map
5.2. Photometric conditions for simulating earth's surface
5.3. Modeling the visual situation when flying to the moon
5.4. Modeling of mental states of operators

Evaluation of Effectiveness of Astronavigation Systems with a
Human Operator

6.1. Research-training astronavigation unit
6.2. Evaluation of dynamic characteristics of navigation and

control systems

6.3. Methods of estimating time characteristics of the process

of taking nstronomic measurements

133
ﬁﬂl¢lﬂﬂ€1Al.USl(ﬂVLY
6.4.
6.5.
6.6.
6.7.

6.8.

INJRiolIHCJAI.lEﬂE(NHLY

Evaluation of effects of different space flight factors on
accuracy of astronomic measurements

Algorithm for evaluating the accuracy of solving astronavigation
problems by the recurrence method

Standard evaluation of operator performance uhen taking
astromeasurements with a sextant

Evaluation of operator training according to quality of
performance of astronavigation tasks

Operator's psychophysiological characteristics in the manual
mode of navigation

7. Method for Overall Evaluation and Forecasting of Quality of Operator
Performance in Solving Astronavigation Problems (According to
Characteristics of His Psychophysiological State)

7.1.
7.2.
7.3.

7.4.

7.5.

7.6.

The question of generalized evaluations in psychophysiology
of space-related work

Evaluation of psychophysiological state of an operator and
forecasting the quality of his performance

Methods of devising quantitative criteria of effectiveness of
operator work

Algorithm for evaluating and forecasting the quality of operator
performance with consideration of characteristics of his
psychophysiological state

Simplified block diagram for forecasting operator performance
quality aboard spacecraft

Examplesofforecasting operator's professional performance

8. Autonomous Navigation in Interplanetary Flights

8.1. Instruments for interplanetary navigation

8.2. Future system for interplanetary navigation

8.3. Professional duties of cosmonaut-navigator in interplanetary flights
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye". 1979

10,657

CSO: 8144/1145

END

134
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY

158
162
173
180
184

190
190
192
194

197

200
203
208
208
209
210
215