FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS' L/10702

30 July 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 28/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information use
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes vithin the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(moo 28/82)

Coursu'rs

Imm‘l‘lmlﬂ. AFFAIRS

Inforud Source. on Ronaligmd ﬂoating Runlto
(mm “no“; mm, 17 Jul 82) 0.0000000000000000

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Conditiona for Poaaibla Pw-ﬂaahington Dialoguo
(Al-Mm AL'.AmI, “'10 Jun 82) 00000000000000000000

IRAN

Mnllaha' Bar Plans, Social Controla Outlined
(m2 “mar. 17 Jul 82) OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOICOO0.0...

The Avengers of Kat-halo
llov tha Mullahs Do It

IRAQ

Interview with we ne‘er Tariq 'Azia
(Iraq Tatiq 'Aaiz Interviav; AL-HAW AL-‘AMBI

“.10 J“ 82) .0O..0...O0.0.00000000000UOOOOOOOOOO0.0.

Speculaaion on [lat Phase of Itaq-Iran war
(AL’ﬂm AL"MI. 28 Nay-3 J“ 82) 000000000000000

JORDAN

Int0rviav With Jordan's Foreign Minister on Policy Ioauea
(Hanan Quin lntorviav; AL-m‘rAll AL-‘Ml,

“.10 J“ 82) OOOOOOOOOOOO0.000IOOOOOOCOOOOOOO00......
m WHCMI. USE MLY

meﬂ

Effect of Invasion on Electtm Mud
(AL-HAW AL'.MI. 11-17 Jun 82) cocoons-0000000000

LIBYAI

Spun Smash It. Inert Pay-nu
means TROPIGAUX er nor-ram, 9 Jul 82) .....

SYRIA

nuan- Brotherhood Leader an huh, Country's Arlen Forces
('Adnln 8"6 11-011: Interview; AL-HAm
MO"MI. 16-22 AP! 82) 00000oooooooooooooooooaooooo

- b .
FOR WFICIAL US! (111.!
INFORMED SOURCES 0R NORALIGIIED MEETING RESULTS
JN170110 Londat RBUTBR in English 0030 GMT 17 Jul 82
[Report by mouse Tho-son]

[Excerpt] Nicosia, 17 Jul (REUTER)--Nonaliped nations winding up eurgancy
talks today on the lehanese crisis will criticise the United States for
supporting Israel but invite Washington to help in solving the plight of
Palestinians. inforned conference sources said.

A commiqus to be issued by the 60 or so countries attending the nesting
to consider how to aid Palestinians trapped by Israeli troops in west Beirut
would also urge a political and econolic boycott of the Jewish state, they
said.

A fornula for criticising the United States wu Ila-cred out after many
hours of private negotiations. Radical states including Syria, Algeria.
Iran and Cuba, and the Palestine Liberation Organisation (FL) sought to
denounce the United States. the sources said. But others, including Egypt,
Jordan and Dunn. vented no reference to the United States.

The sources said the nesting was also noving last night towards approving
a proposal to send a delegation of foreign ninisters to Beirut, just
lSO niles [word indistinct] any across the Mediterranean.

The sources said the nonaligned nations were also considering the nerits of
sending a nission to the capitals of the five pernanent were of the

UN Security Oomcil to argue the case of the Palestinians but no final
decision had been taken by lat night.

(50: “000/ 376

mmmmv
CONDITIGQS FOR POSSIBLE PLO-UASHINGTOII DIALOGUE
Paris AL-HA‘I‘AN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 277, 13-10 Jun 82 pp 30-31
[Article: "The Conditions for a Dialogue Between Washington and the PLO")

[Text] AL-HA‘I‘AN AL-‘ARABI is following up the publication of the investiga-
tion it started last'issue into the "substance" of the directions of the poli-
cy of the Reagan Adninistration toward resolving the Middle East crisis and

its stbsidiary problens. At the forefront is the issue of the acceptable basis
for an Anerican dialogue with the PLO in light of Anerica's written coalit-
nent to Israel. made in 1975, not to negotiate with the PLO unless the

latter substantively modifies its charter with regard to the future of Israel,
i.e.. unless it accepts the principle of recognition of the establishment of
the State of Israel and its right to exist, as well as Security Council
Resolutions 262 and 338.

"hat is the real position of the United States? Are there ongoing commits-
tions in public and in private? What are they?

Washington - AL-HA‘I‘AN AL-‘ARABI Bureau

In his speech before the Council on Horld Affairs in Chicago in the niddle of
last week, 0.5. Secretary of State Alexander Eaig naintained silence over the
matter of resolving the problen of Anerican relations with the PLO. At the
sane tine he was quick to confirm that Alerica was taking speedy action to
resolve the Lebanese problen, and the problen of the autonony discussions.
whereas everyone is agreed that no realistic solution can ignore the Pm at
any basic or subsidiary level of the Middle East problan.

In this latter there are certain cryptic codes.

However, the dialogue that ensured between Lee B. Builton. Chairnan of the
Foreign Affairs Subco-Iittee for Europe and the Middle East of the house of

Representatives, and Nicholas Veliotis. 0.8. Assistant Secretary of State, in
the course of their testinony before the Co-Iittee. has shed sone light which
helps clarify sole of the secret aspects of the "codes":

Ila-ilton: Let me nova now to the PLO issue. Does the present adninistration
(the Reagan Administration) support and affirn the 1975 agree-ant?

woeomaatmsomx
* M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Veliotis: Yes. Mr President.

Hamilton: what is your understanding of the nature of that agreement exactly,
insofar as it relates to our dealing with the PLO?

Veliotia: In clearly defined language, it means that we will not recognise
or negotiate with it.

Hamilton: But can we speak to its officials?

Veliotis: As a general rule, no. but there have been exceptions. as we have
seen.

Hamilton: If the agreement (the 1975 agreement) concerns only negotiations
and recognition, then why can't we talk to then (with officials of the PLO)?

Veliotis: At the beginning of President Carter's term a decision was taken
to interpret the 1975 agreement as coqrehsnsive, except for certain limited
exceptions not relating to the issue of peace, i.e., that each decision be
aade on a case-by-caae basis.

Hamilton: Therefore. this policy is not linited to recognition or negotia-
tion, but is a policy predicated on the basis that we are forbidden from
speaking with the PLO?

Veliotis: That is the way the agreement was interpreted.
ﬂanilton: By when was it interpreted in this way?

Veliotis: By two successive adninistrations (the Johnson Administration and
the Carter Adninistration).

Bamilton: Does that include the current administration?
Veliotis: That includes the Current administration.

ﬂanilton: Can we conclude in brief that the wording of the agreemsnt's text
gives Israel the right to veto any (American) dealing with Israel? In this
regard I quote the following free the text of the agreeaent.

"The United States pronisse to consult fully with the Government of Israel
and to coordinate with it at the level of this issue its position and its
strategy in the Geneva Peace Conference.

Veliotis: Not at all. It means that in light of our praise to Israel we will
not deal with the mo until such time as the requisite condition are met.

Mr Chairman. I think that it is important to note that we are bound to a
co-Iitaent to Israel. Ever since we made that pledge—which is now public—

it has been regarded as an American proposal to the PLO which the latter may
accept if it wishes.

”WWMY
hanilton: Don't you accept the argment that the PLO is a powerful party to
the Middle East crisis?

Veliotis: Yes, sir.

Bamiltm: Does the United States enjoy flexibility or freedom of movement in
deciding on and inplamenting new or different policies regarding the PLO?

Veliotis: Presumably, we are free to do as we wish, as an independent and
sovereign state. However, I do believe that our words acknowledge that those
couitments and pledges are important to Israel. just as other parties in the
Middle East enjoy great importance in light of the confidence daaanded by the
situation. especially confidence in us (the United States).

ﬂaailton: Are we currently attempting to clarify or modify any of the PLO's
views through third parties?

Veliotis: There is what I would call an on-going process, became there is
an unlimited number of volunteer mediators carrying messages back and forth.
This process has been going on since 1975.

Hamilton: If we had s message that we would like to send to Yasir 'Arafat,
could we do so?

Veliotis: Certainly.

Ilanilton: And if he had a message that he would like to send to us, could he
do so?

Veliotis: There would be no problem.

hanilton: Are we presently conunicsting with any Palestinian officials?
Veliotis: Palestinian officials?

Hanilton: Officials of the PLO. for example?

Veliotis: Pm officials? Certainly not. There is nothing of that sort hap-
pening in the normal course of negotiations. However, as you know there is
some contact relating to security. And I would like to leave the matter
there.

But allow me to clear up things concerning the exchange of messages. The
situation is as follows: A man or woman comes up and says that he or she is
a contact. On this basis one or both of them says that the PLO would like to
talk to us. Our answer to this is: "That's great! That is our policy."
Conditions for Negotiation

At this point. Rep. Stephen Solar: (N.Y.) enters the debate and talks with
Veliotis:

MWLMMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Solars: If the PLO were to accept all of the condition which we placed in
the 1975 agreenent (with Israel). granting Israel the right to exist, accept-
ing Resolutions 2102 and 338, then fron our part could we begin serious
negotiations with the PLO? Or, do we have the right to insist (and I believe
President Reagan said that it is our right when he was canpaigning for
president) that the Palestinians give up terrorisn as a condition for our
country's preparedness to negotiate with then?

Veliotis: In ny own understanding. if the PLO decides to neet the above-
aentioned conditions, then we will have the right to start a dialogue with it.
But if it chooses not to forsake the use of terror before that tine, it will
be precisely the: which I will recs-end to then in order for then to occupy
first priority on the proposed agenda for negotiations.

Solarz: Let ne nention here the conversation that took place between nyself
and King Bessan II of Morocco. The King told ne that President Carter had
asked his to inform Yasir 'Arafat that as soon as he accepts Israel's right
to exist, as stipulated in Resolutions 262 and 338, President Carter would
invite his to breakfast at the White House the very next day.

I would like to know if you gentle-en have any other explanation for Yasir
'Arafat's continued refusal to recognise Israel's existence and to accept
Resolution 2&2, thereby foregoing an Anerican breakfast?

Isn't it true that the PLO which 'Arafst represents unwilling to recognise
Israel's right to exist because it really wants to establish a Palestinian
state, not only in the Heat Bank and Bass. butih all of the land ruled by
Israel?

Doesn't 'Arafat feel that if he were to accept the Nesrican conditions then he
would be recalled i-ediately fros his position of leadership in the PLO?

Veliotis: It would be very difficult for us to speak confidently about what
Mr Yassir 'Arafat thinks. I have never: spoken with hin.

Solarz: How do you explain their refmal of the conditions? Isn't it very
clear, after all, that it is a nation's right to be recognised, a nation that
is a neuter of the UN and already recognised in nost parts of the world?

Veliotis: I an unable to evince any nors than what we do know about the
PLO's position. we understand that it feels that recognition of Israel, in
this forn or any other, is the last card that the no has to play. Therefore,
this card will only be used during or after negotiations.

Our view has been clearly expressed privately and publicly on several occa-
sions. It is that this card is the first card to be played by any party
desiring to enter seriomly into the peace process.

The Final Question

At another point, Rep Toby Roth Wise.) entered into the teetinony:

"WWW?
Roth: I have two questions concerning the PLO which I would like to address
to Mr Veliotia: Do you think that it was appropriate (diplomatically) for two
for-er A-erican presidents to sake statenents like Carter and Ford did

after al-Sadat's funeral on the necessity for dealing with the PLO?

The other question is:

The Soviets have recently recognised the PLO. Does that change the situation
in any way?

Veliotis: To answer the last question first. I would say: no, it doesn't
change anything. Soviet recognition of the Pm is a kind of official veil
over a situation that has been going on for s long time. They are telling
the Pu): You now have diplomatic status. In Hoecow they have been receiving
'Arafat and other high Palestinian officials for years, treating each one as
a head of state. But as far as American policy is concerned, this kind of
recognition of the PLO, or any other political recognition, must cone after
and not before the PLO deeonatrates its willinpese to accept the premises

of the ”peace gene."

This is the significance of the wording of Resolutions 262 and 338.

As for the statuents of former presidents Ford and Carter, I believe that.
despite the publicity given to these statenents, the forest presidents will
refrain from interfering in our political life any more deeply, because
their views are only their own individual views. In any case, I don't be-
lieve that I can co-ent on whether or not it was appropriate to count on
the Pm. That is their business as ordinary citizens.

The De Pacto Truce

After that. incidentally, came the developments whose practical outcoee was
the "the real and worrisome truce" achieved by Anerican envoy Phillip Habib
between the three parties: Syria, Israel. and the PLO.

This truce is not supported by any written agree-ant. Phillip llabib trans-
nitted verbal nessagea between the three parties. These "verbal" nessages do
not cot-nit anyone to their contents...nor would they do so even if they
were written.

This truce was able to withstand an important trial lest nonth when Israel
asassed 25,000 troops to carry out a sweep over southern Lebanon. It aims at
destroying the nervous systea of the PLO's infrastructure. However, the
carrot-and-stick approach used by Anerica with Israel. in addition to the
responsible stance taken by the PLO by upholding its cmitmenta and then by
erecting the Israeli challenge. led to an easing of a crisis that could have
had unforeseeable results, and uncontrollable repercussions.

Observers in Washington see the PLO as having supported the de facto truce
achieved by Phillip habib as a political weapon in their hands. This truce

MWLUSIONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contains clear recognition of the PLO on the pert of the 0.8. and Israel as
a fact that cannot be ignored and as a Iain party to anything relating to
aspects of the Palestinian issue.

It is in light of this that inforned circles in Washington understand the
reasons why the PLO adheres to the truce and are anxious not to be the ones
to violate it on the Israeli-Lebanese borders.

In any case, observance of this "worrisone truce" is going to be one of

Mr liabib's concerns in his upconing mission, so that the Lebanese house nay
be put in order in an acceptable nanner until the conditions are created for
detaching the Lebanese crisis iron the Middle East problea. 0r, until such
tine that an acceptable fomla can be found to solve the problen of the fu-
ture of the West Bank and Gaza, and the future of any conprehensive plan to
resolve all of the aspects of the Middle East prohlen that all parties 'agree
to. mutt this fornula be based on Prince Pahd'e plan that night soon be put
into motion?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATM AL-‘AMBI

9965
080: “04/533

summon“
may VAR PLANS, SOCIAL CW 0mm
The Avengara of tarbala
London In zooms: in Engnah llo 7266, 17 Jul 82 pp 29, 30

Nathan mu Myofsua tel-trap the

massacre in AD m at the Ioreea oi
Hussein. the Prophet's uandson. at Kar-
hole. 50 miles south 0! Iran's
Shins are now getting their chance or
revenge. On July 12th. Teheran radio
announced that "the tons ol Khomeini
have now gone to the trout with the
intention ol occupying Karbala“. Ac-
cording to the broadcast. a “great and
historic battle“ was about to take place
which would result in the overthrow ol
Iraq‘s President Saddam Hussein.

The battle began on Tuesday night.
Iranian troops advanced into Iraq north
ol the once-butting port 0! Basra on a
Iront sorne l0 kilometres wide. The Iraqis
claimed to have stopped the invaders;
their aircraft borwad several Iranian
cities. including Kennartshah.

The Iraqis ﬁnally withdrew lrotn Iran.
ian territory to their own border last
month. alter suller‘tng a series oI deleats
in the war they atartedin I”. American
reconnaissance photographs suggest that
since then the Iranians have moved eight
divisionadowntotheareanorth-eaatol
Baara.bringingthestaeoltheirarrnyin
that sector to more than 100.00) rnen.
Basra. which indirectly across the Shat: al
Arab waterway front the shattered Iran-
ian cities oi Abadan and Khorrarnshahr.
hasbeenunderheavyshellingoverthe
past week. The push to capture the city
involves crossing taarshy land north ol
the Shatt al Arab (and jun south ol the
supposedstteoltheGardenolEdentn
ancient Mesopotamia).

‘nie lraqa' withdrawal lrorn the high
ground they had previously occupied in.
side lran expoaed to attack hundreds ol

square kilometres ol Iraqi territory on
thislrontJheynowappeartobetrying
tornakeaatandatthebaaeolalineol
hills well inside theirown territory which
joinsupwith theirdelenceainthenat
country north 0! Basra

Until last weekend. Iran still scented to
he in doubt Whether to we into Iraq.
Hashertt Ralsanjani. the speaker ol Iran‘s
parliament. told crowds at the Friday

prayer meeting that unless Iraq paid
reparations lot the war ”we shall draw

the money out oi its throat”. and threat.
ened that Iranian lotoea would shell
Baghdad. Iran's olftcial terms lor ending
the war are the paytnent ol stso billion in
reparation. ootidetnnation ol the Iraqi
"aggressor” by an internationaltribunal.
and the return ol worm Iraqi Shias
expelled to Iran belore the war began.
Marty senior mullahs are pressing lot a
landﬁll: invasion to cwerthrow Mr Sad-
danl HueinandsetupaShialslatnic
republic in Iraq. Ayatollah Khomeini's
probable processor. Ayatollah Hossetn
Montaaeri. has urged that an lslantic
any 0! 20th people go lorth to "liberate"

both Iraq and Palestine.
Thelraqis.dtistinte.rnaybeableto
stopthe Iranians. Theirsoldiersare likely
to light better to deIend their own coun-
try than they did in Iran. Ayatollah
Khorneinihaacalledonthe Shiahallol
Iran's population to rebel but so Iar the
Slim in Iraq‘s army have Iought as well
as. or no worse than. the Sunnis. And Mr
Saddam Hussein‘s grip on power has tl
anything tightened since the threat at
invasion became real. Hall the members
ol Iraq't ruling Revolution Command
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500080076-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Councrl have been parsed stnce It named
the order—at first apparently without the
prestdent's consent—tor Iraqi lorees to
withdraw from Iran.

Neither Iraq's army nor Iran‘s ts
starved [or spare parts Alter an early
moratonum an arms supplies from most
toreign sources. a ﬂow has been reachtng
both countnes. The Frenm and the Ital-
tans have been supplying the luqts. who
have also had arms [tom Bulgaria and
Poland. The Israels haVe helped the
Iranians with parts tor their American-
rnade tanks and aircraft. Other tqutp-
ment has reached Iran lrotn a eunous
vanety at other countnes. some 0! ll
ﬂown over the Sovtet Unton mth Sonet
permanent

A major lranun attack aton; the bar-

der could damage the Iraq: otllields
strung out along it. and tunher reduce
Iraq‘s oil exports. now running at less
than 700.000 barrels a day through the
country's sole remaintn; outlet. the pipe-
line across Turkey. lrantan oil production
may now be as htgh ”2.2m barrels a day.
and the Iranians say they want to raise it

 

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080076—5
|n mama 3. bowels a day. Innis. oil
mutilation: coda. m. be nil-no
outtoluqiﬁm.

The [unions I: win. M newly
dawﬂayeduﬁlhmwhhuuw
thheoilmoldnGdl.“
Saudi Arabia in partial-t. to produce
k“ oil. The WV: Gal Mb-
dummihotooﬂlyﬂunﬁhytbhlm
etc-vents. 13:“vawa

Iootwvmduhe ummm
Amia‘smtoaiidnluuh
m on the PLO in Lebanon. The
mewiedleslweuanw
mlouhccuﬂmaodlmaae
Immbotlamehcﬂulm-m
SovietUniou.Y¢uheWnuyhc
wmmmkymtdiadlhew
annuity-«WW.

BovtthluthoIt

London m WEST in 311311.!) No 7266, 17 Jul 82 p ”

[Text] v

mummtygwdsummcw

bemotTchean-‘Mcmyhy.
ButhWlheM-vb‘mjr
Wu penis may he almost won.
The metal Mica 0! a m
nuclei in Vat! by '
pcudcvhochqtoh‘lnmncm
manhunt-opposition M
mu ' ' on

5
5
i

3 .-
3533 E
25i52§5

E
E
5
3
i

emtmulldﬁuuobamamialy
lslunicmyollie mummies-uh:
‘9‘” checks at pnvue hone: scathing
lot nlooho‘. dcadcm likmmmlcuem
pop music nod video m m.
My aim «he sure that the winning
mdthcrichuekeptemptytomuy
wakumthmoathcsponlhhiddcl
houlcolScotchbdhcovuedeMy
Wmmwuw;mu
oﬂeusivc Ion-in he may he ﬁlled at
daplvvamcd.
Aolslmvcilisdemadqoavoq-
en. Duty I year no rating Bun-c
mm was still m. Now no
mwmmuwm
main; be! head and limbs. Wm

i
E
‘3 .
3
E
if

i‘
a
g
g

INTERVIEH H111! ncc man TARIQ 'AZIz
Paris AL-HATAN AIr'ARABI in Arabic No 277, 4-10 Jun 82 pp 20-22

[Interview with Vice President of Iraq ‘l‘ariq 'Asia by "slid Abu Dhahr in
Baghdad: "Final Calculations: Victory for Iraq"; date not specified]

[Text] Pro. the battlefield to the centers of decision-making ALPRAIAN AL-
'ARABI has followed the Iraqi-Iranian war week after week. The latest develop-
wants in the battlefield took Valid Abu Dhahr to Baghdad for an elucidation of
the situation on the Iraqi and Arab levels and to col-urticate the Iraqi
leadership'a expectations in the forthcoming phase.

Ihis interview with Iraqi Vice President Tariq 'Aziz, and Isl-her of the
Revolutionary Conand Council. disclosed these expectation and spells out
this critical noaent after Iraq's withdrawal fro. al-Huhanara [Khorranhahr].
he also focuses on the prevailing tripartite alliance between al-Asad,
muoneyni, and Begin, and the suspicious behavior of the Qadhdhafi regine
towards Arab national interests.

Baghdad is still Baghdad. and Ir.~q is still the Iraq that perturbs its ene-
aies and conforts its friends. his is the iapresaion one gets upon landing
in the Iraqi capital, interviewing the typical Iraqi, and aeeting with any
Iraqi official.

Iraqis. whether '1 positions of power and decision-making or in the battle-
ditches, share a canon faith hardened by experience and tezpered- by
sacrifice. The battle has made it more resolute than ever. They believe in
their own Arab aanuthis has never been so persistently repeated—is master
of his own destiny and history.

Tariq 'Aziz. whose faith is embodied in his frankness and quiet nanner. spoke
trustingly to AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI about everything. He had an interpretation
of the near future that surpassed hasty judgnents and was instead an eluci-
dation of ultinate truths.

His words were meant I: say that those who dream of an Iraqi defeatneven a
saall defeat-~will go on dreaming for a long tine before their dreaas are
shattered.

l2

MWMMV
FINICNHWCJAI.USEICNNLY

[Question] what is the situation now at the Iraqi-Iranian front?

[Answer] The situation is as follows: Iraqi forces have withdrawn to the
southern sector's international borders.

[Question] And the remaining Iraqi bases?

[Anwer] The Iraqi forces are still present, in varying degrees of force,
inside Iranian territories in the northern and central sectors, and in the
northern part of the southern sector (al-Shash-Desful).

[Question] Certain quarters in the Western and Arab nsdia that Iraq suf-
fered a severe defeat after the battle of Khorrsmshahr. what do you say?

[Answer] Iraq was not defeated. Rather, it achieved the nost outstanding
victory in contemporary Arab history. Allow ne to explain. Iraq did not
seek out this war, nor did it begin it. Iran was the one that started the
aggression. It began an attack on the nationalist and socialist regime of
Iraq and called for its overthrow. For several months it engaged in deliber-
ate provocations on bases and guard posts along the Iraqi border. It would
occupy the Iraqi territory Zayn sl-Qos and Sayf Sa'd. On 16 Septeﬁer 1980,
fron heavy artillery setup inside Iraqi territory. it shelled the towns of
Khansqin, Mandali, arrl Raft Khaneh. And for the first ties in contesporary
Arab history, an Arab any struck at an enemy occupying his land and
atteapting to expel him from it. Iraq then destroyed the aneey's eilitary
concentrations on its national borders and pursued the many tens of kilome-
ters inside his land. The Iraqi aruy remained inside Iranian territory for
over 29 nonths in defense of Iraq. It is still to be found in other parts of
Iran that are very important froa a strategic standpoint. So where is the
defeat? At no tine did we ever say that we desire to renain inside

Iranian territory, just as we always said that we do not covet any Iranian
land. Fran a position of strength we called for a peaceful and just settle-
ment of the conflict. On 18 September 1980. then Iraqi coin-1s were advanc-
ing into the heart of Iranian territory at every point, President Saddan
Husssyn called for a ceasefire and a just settle-ant of the conflict. lie
plainly said, "We absolutely do not wish to huailiate the people and arey of
Iran." This was our position free the beginning, and it is our position today.

Our fighters renain inside Iranian territory for over 20 sonths, and we were
a lie to achieve the greater part of our nilitary objectives in battle. namely,
the destruction of the enemy's military night. especially its technical
appendages. The achievement of this objective ensures the security of Iran
and the region, now and in the future. The truth will cons out sooner or
later that Iran no longer possesses an army capable of playing a major role
in the region. The thrust of Iran's forces presently is in its Guards and
its volunteers, which are only good for internal security and for psychologi-
cal warfare inside Iranian territory. But they are incapable of forming a
genuine army in the nilitary conflicts going on outside Iran. Iran's air
force, which was once the biggest air force in that region, has been des-
troyed. A large portion of its armored forces have been destroyed, as have
Iranian artillery. Its naval power'a importance has been dininished.

13

”WNW!”
Correspondingly, and despite the sacrifices made by Iraq in battle—which

is only natural-Iraq managed to preserve every category within its arned
forces, with its basic structure and striking force intact. Throughout the
previous period of fighting, it was well known that the rate of Iraqi
casualties was very low coupared to the exceeding high Iranian casualty rate.

In the strategic balance-sheet of the conflict between expansionist Iran and
Iraq and the Arab nation, Iraq was victorious. because it destroyed this
expansionist drive's fighting nachine.

The Threat...And Reality

[Question] But Iran continues to issue threats and says that it is a country
with a population of 60 nillion. and that it is the greatest power in the
region.

[Answer] Threats over the radio are one thing and reality is another. The
ones asking threats either have forgotten. or wish other people to forget,
that they have been at war for over 20 nonths, and have lost great nubers of
peopde and eaterial, in order to regain only a part of their land. not all of
it. Keep in aind that he ones fighting in his own land possesses greater ad-
vantages in terns of eaterial and norale than those that fight outside their
own land.

[Question] But how do you explain Iran's success in expelling Iraqi forces
fron its lands?

[Answer] Iraqi forces have withdrawn in certain instances froe Iranian terri-
tory voluntarily and without fighting. In other instances, under orders

fro. the general co-and, they withdrew under fire, i.e., while inflicting
heavy losses on the eneny. They would withdraw because our objective is not
to hold onto land but to destroy the enemy's fighting eachine that has
expansionist tendencies towards our country. And every tine our forces en-
gaged in battle in this fashion. they inflicted heavy losses on the enemy.

In the al-Shash-Desful battle, the eneny lost over 30.000 nen. Our own hunan
losses were much lower. And if Iran took a masher of prisoners. this doesn't
nean it scored a victory. In World War II there were large numbers of prisoners
taken by both sides, whether they had won or lost. The evaluation of the
success or failure of any battle depends upon the final outcoee. i.e., the cal-
culation of all categories of casualties (dead; wounded; prisoners), equip-
nent and territory. In that case, we cannot tern Iraq's withdrawal froa
Iranian territory itself a "defeat," because Iraq as I said is not intent on
holding land. He must renanber a basic truth in these battles, and that is

that the Iraqi fighter was fighting in a land which his comnders reminded
his: daily was not his own, and which he would abandon upon arrival at a peace-
ful settle-eat. whereas the Iranian fighter was fighting on his own lands.

and his lines of supply passed directly over his own lands. lie was fighting
to regain land that belonged to hie. Despite this very i-portant difference

in the two cases. the Iraqi fighters did not give up the land easily. They
fought for it bravely, and inflicted very heavy losses on the eneny.

110

“WWW?
MWLUSEONLV

Iran is three tines as great as Iraq in area and population. But despite
this, for more than 20 nontha the battle was conducted on Iranian territory,
not Iraqi. Does this mean that Iran is "superior"? It indicates a clear
and qualitative Iraqi "superiority" the like of which contemporary Arab
history has never seen.

Those who applaud Iran's alleged victories in this war do so out of a couples
over their own defeats. llsfis al-Asad, who surrendered the Golan heights
without a fight in 1967 when he was defense sinister, who couldn't fight for
sore than two weeks in 1973, and whose forces retreated at the end of that
battle while he was president, is unable to look Iraq's victories in the eye:

First: Iraq was able to continue the war for eore than 20 nonths. despite
conditions of international encirclenent and compiracy by certain Arab
reginee. At the sane tine Iraq succeeded in maintaining its prosperity and
its econonic and cultural develop-ant.

Second: Iraq was successful in carrying the battle to enemy territory and
was able to hold on to it the entire tine, which is exceptional anong even
arsed conflicts that crop up between those countries considered superpowers
in the world.

llafis al-Asad cannot face these truths. Along with those various Arabs whon
he nortaged to the Iranian regine, and who stabbed Iraq in the back, he is
attempting to depict the results of the battles as an Iranian "victory."

[Question] Do you expect Iranian forces to enter Iraqi territory?

[Answer] The war was started because Iranian forces were occupying Iraqi
territory, and because it placed its artillery there and shelled our cities.
At that tine, the Iranian regine was concentrating its forces along our
border. Its defense sinister, Pskuri, was threatening to wipe Iraq off the
map. That neant that they were planning to invade Iraq and append it to
Iran. They thought that they were capable of doing so. But now we have no
doubt that the rulers of Tehran still harbor those intentions, but they also
now realize what it neana to attack Iraq. They know the price they paid when
they fought Iraq on Iranian territory. Therefore, the natter is not couen-
surate with intentions, for the intentions of the rulers of Tehran are well
knwn. There are no illusions about then. The matter is co-ensurate with
the rulers of Tehran and their friends aaong Arab traitors, on the basis of
power, costs, and the Arab and international reaction. If you hear then say
that they will not cross the international border, you can be sure that they
have deduced that any action (i this sort will lead to a real tragedy for then.

[Question] What do you think the reaction of the Arab govern-ante will be if
the Iranians attempt to cross the Iraqi border?

[Answer] when the war with Iran started, we said that this case should call
into effect the principles of the Arab Mutual Defense Pact, and the principle
of a canon Arab destiny. It was incuabent upon the Arab governIents to

stand alongside Iraq in an official manner and with all available neam. But

15

summon“
some said that Iraq was inside Iranian territory. and that this was a dif-
ferent case because the Arabs have always confronted an occupation by

others of Arab lands. Perhaps this was the first time the Arabs found them-
selves confronting a situation where Arab forces were confronting the enemy
and fighting him in his own land in self-defense against certain aggression.

In any case, we don't want to argue the matter. It is not a legal matter,
but a political position. This is because certain Arab states knew from the
start that it is their duty to stand alongside Iraq publicly. Certain other
Arab states took Iran's side in a barefaced manner. This latter position has
no legal justification in either the Arab League's Charter or in the Arab
Mutual Defense yact. It is likewise a political position. But should Iran
try to cross the Iraqi border. then the legal aspect would be completely
clear. For this reason, and for political reasons also. we expect that the
majority of Arabs would support Iraq in its batile according to the provi-
sionsofthe Arab Mutual Defense Pact.

[Question] what results do you expect from the statements by the Zionist
enemy's Defense Minister Sharon toward arms cooperation between the rulers
of Tehran and Tel Aviv?

[Answer] The arms cooperation between Tel Aviv and Tehran is nothing new.
This scandal was exposed with the crash of the Argentine airplane on 18 June
1981. News of this matter was broadcast in journalistic circles all over the
world. Previous statements on the subject had been issued from Zionist
sources. Rafsanjani once admitted that they fought arms from Israel in re-
turn for past debts. Despite all of this information. Hafiz al-Asad's
regime denied it and defended the Iranians. But now Sharon's statements are
official and direct and cannot be denied. Now the argument revolves around
whether or not America knew about it. But there is no argument about the
truth of arms cooperation between Tel Aviv and Tehran.

The disclosure of the truth in this way totally exposes the al-Asad-Khomeyni-
Begin alliance against Arab nationalism. It also exposes the suspicious
behavior of the Qadhdhafi regime, that plays mysterious roles on the Arab
level. and the ultimate conclusion that it is against Arab nationalism and
the Arab entity.

we do not believe that the Syrian and Libyan regimes are going to change their
stances. because they are nntumaware of these truths. They are in secret
collusion. These sorta, even if it hurts them to have the truth exposed, will
nevertheless not change their real position even if they do engage in man-
euvering. “hat is important about these statements is the extent to which it
affects other Arabs who were deceived by Khomevni. who said he was a friend
and that he might ally himself with the Arabs against Zionism. If the dis-
closure of these truths makes the Arabs have a qualitative change in their
positions, then that is a gain ﬁorrmtionalism and will clear up the situation.
We hope so. But if they are silent and do not take action in light of these
truths, as every loyal Arab should. then this signifies many things to us
which we will have to confront in time. But we are confident that the vast

16

FOIIOINNCIAI.UBI!0NIY
PM OFFICIAL USE ONLY

majority of the Aria Netion who syupsthised with Iraq in its battle, and who
considered it frm the beginning to be e nationalist battle, will find in

these truths support for Iraq's position and an explanation of the suspi-
cious behavior of the others.

1110 roo- for lien end deceit in not very large. and truth will cone out.
It has been exposed. Thank God.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 “AIM AIP'MI

9965
680: 6404/525

17

“museum!
SPBCULATION 0" mm PHASE 0? IRAQ-IRAN UAR
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 276, 28 Hay - 3 Jun 82 pp 21-22
[Artic1e: "Iraq's lingers in the New Fhase"]

[Text] The latest developunts in the Iraq-Iran war are not. for the tine
being, in Iraq's favor. They nay be explained in light of the basic options
of the Iraqi leadership. These options are wary of becoming the pawns of
superpower interests and of providing gradually a pretext for their direct
intervention in the Gulf. Although the heated explanations of what is
happening on the battlefield do not lend then-elves to call interpretation.
this quick report from Baghdad may help to shed light on the situation.

The current phase of the Iraq-Iran war is considered. by virtue of its scope
and sheer military scale. to be a test for the Arabs and their ability to
distinguish their link to issues of cannon destiny. At the same tine, it is
a test for the capability of the Iraqi armed forces to plunge into war,
alone, for 2 years, for the site of all Arabs.

The Iraqi response to unwarranted Iranian provocationa has led inescapably
to arned confrontation, taking the fore of open war with Iran. In the esti-
nation of Iraqi political leaders and nilitary. the war is not a "romantic
frolic under the light of the moon." The two, united political and nilitsry
leaderships realise that they face a strong opponent with huge naterial and
human resources; Iran's population is four tines that of Iraq. But the root
of the latter does not lie in nmers. There is the factor of military
efficiency, and other factors such as the responses of the varima parties
directly or indirectly concerned with the war and its outcome. All of these
factors are vital.

From the start. the Iraqi forces denonstrated by training. arns, and absorption
of effective fighting techniques, this ability to obtain quick. even nag-
nificent. results-4n a manner which reminded nilitary analysts of a blitzkries.

It was these spectacular results which drew the Arabs away from the position of
enthusiastic on-looker to one of actual partnership. giving the battle the
nature of coma, nationalist struggle, and letting Iran know that it cannot
simply single Iraq out. Nor can it do so with any Arab state. The world

has learned that the Arabs know very well that it is a canon battle and a
canon destiny in a region that comprises the first line of defense of Arab
oil wealth, the new Arah power base in the world.

18

”WWW?
POI WHOM. US! WIN

Participation...and High llopes

however, effective Arab participation on the front has left such race for
raised hopes by sone. 0n the periphery of inortence, the Syrian and Libyan
regius played a role in stabbing in the hack the Arab front in the Iraq-
Iran war.

Previously there had been no need to announce the news that in the first
phase Iraqi forces could have occupied Abadan and lharg Island. It did not
do so because this in turn would have exposed the very heart of Iraq to the
danger of allied American-Soviet intervention against Iraq. The Iraqi
leadership acconplished the impossible by curbing the recalcitrance of its
Iraqi forces [who wished to push into Iran]. But Iraq did not wish to

start a world war, it only wanted to denonstrate and enphasise the Arab right
to Shatt al-‘Arab. And it really did.

Regardless of what is happening now on the front, one indisputable truth
remains: Iraqi nilitarv steadfastness is a living legend, and it will trans-
for- the Iraqi border ad territories into a graveyard for invaders. It does
not matter whether the Arabs join in the fateful battle or rennin for the
most part nerely spectators. looking and sighing at the fateful battle.

that Now?

Clearly. the western nedia's focus on the size of what it terns the latest
Iranian victories" in the southern sector (al-Huhuaara) hardly had the sane
enthusiaan 20 sonths ago when Iraq was scoring victory after victory. every
day, in the heart of Iran. There is no need to explain this enthusiast, since
the Zionist sources that direct the nedia are sore than well known.

Naturally one may ask about forthconing nilitary develop-ants, and ubether
the Iraqi leadership really desires to expand inside Iran in the near future.
The decisions taken in days to cone will detersine the outcome for Iraq and
the Arab Uorld.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Ala-“ATM Alr'ABAEI

9945
680: Mood/525

l9

summon“
INTERVIW um JOM'S YORBIQU mmn OR POLICY ISSUES
Paris Ala-HATAN AL-'AIABI in Arabic No 277. (0-10 Jun 82 pp 28-29

[Interview with Jordanian Minister of Porsign Affairs Harwau Qasis by Florence
Ra'd in m: "The Fahd Initiative has Become an Arab Initiative"; date
not specified]

a

[Text] Jordan continues to be the key to the new diplosatic phase in the
region. It has becone essential now to secure Jordan's stance on natters.
How does Jordan view phase following the Sinai evacuation...and the latest
develop-ants in the Iraq-Iran war and conditions on the west Bank? “hat is
Ann's position toward Damascus, and the reconvening of the Pe: sin-it? how
any be described Jordan-Aurican relations at this point?

These and other questions were responded to by Mr harvsn Qasin, Jordan's
Foreiyl Hinister, in an interview with AL-HA‘I'AN AL-‘APABI. He set with his
before his trip to Havana and after his return fro. horocco.

[Question] 25 April was a turning point between Camp David end the future.
How does Jordan picture the phase following 25 April?

[Answer] Re consider the Palestinian issue to be the major problem in the
region. It can only be resolved upon the guarantee of s conplete Israeli
withdrawal from Arab lands occupied in 1967. including Jerusalem, and upon
the Palestinian people securing its legitimate rights. particularly its rights
to «If-determination.

Jordan's position toward Camp Davis is well known. It ignores the train issue
and the rights of the Palestinian people. Jordan was hoping for a coeprehen-
sive and just settle-ent of the Palestinian issue, since it constitutes the
nain problem, whereupon it would becone easily to settle the other, sub-
sidiary problems. Nevertheless. I don't believe that there is any Arab
state or party that objects to another Arab state reconquering its own occu-
pied territory within the confines of its co-itnent to the welfare and
national rights of the Arab nation, inasmuch this doesn’t prejudice the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people in deteraining its own future on
its own national soil.

20

“WMMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h'hat is required at this point is focusing on regaining occupied Arab

lands and securing Palestinian rights. This will only be achieved with a
strong and cohesive Arab position, balanced by a responsible international
position. The latter entails that the superpowers, especially those with
influence over Israel, carry out their responsibility to inplenent the will
of the international cos-unity as represented by the resolutions of the
General Assenbly and the Security Council pertaining to this issue.

[Question] The Prince Fahd plan is still proposed. Does Jordan regard it as
a starting point in the research for a just peace in the near future?

[Answer] Actually, the Prince Fahd Peace Plan is not the first responsible
Arab initiative in the effort to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in
the region. Previously, in the Baghdad summit conference, the Arab states
combined took the initiative and proposed the foundations for the achievement
of a just and comprehensive settlement of the problen. These foundations
were defined as being conditional on the total withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all of the Arab. territories occupied in 1967, including Jerusalem. and
the guarantee of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, especially
its right to self-determination on its own national soil. Our acceptance of
this initiative, issued by Prince Fahd. was based on our mutual agreement

in the Baghdad suit to most of the principles that the Palestinian thinking
manifested in the plan of Mr Khaled al-Hassan, head of the Foreign Relations
Comittee of the Palestine National Congress, presented before the inter-
national synposium on the unchanging rights of the Palestinian people, con-
vened a few days ago in Paris, neets with the Saudi principles. which becale
an Arab initiative upon its adoption by the majority of Arab states in the
Fe: eta-it conference.

[Question] Does Jordan expect Israel to annex the west Bank once and for all.
Does it have a plan to abort this new scheme? What are its Iain directions?

[Answer] Israel's expansionist asbitions and Arab rights are no longer a
secret to anyone in the world. Israel won't hesitate to carry out these an-
bitions one of these days. As for confronting these ambitions this is a
matter that lust be submitted to Arab considerations first and foremost.

The latter of confrontation is a national issue not to be confined to Jordan
alone. For this reason, Jordan has persisted in calling for the urgent agree-
ment on a conprshenaive Arab strategy for confronting Israel's expansionist
aabitions, a strategy which could draw upon combined human, financial,
econonic, military and political energy and resources—in deed, not just in
words. Responsibility would have to be shared. On this basis it would be
possible to create a new Arab position and reality which Israel would be
unable to confront or overcome.

[Question] The latest act of aggression on the al-Aqsa Mosque caused wide-
ranging Arab and Islanic reactions. But no practical steps were taken to

prevent any further possible attacks. "hat possible plan is there in this
regard?

21

“MUSE”?
[Answer] It is not possible to detach the issue of Jerusalem and the al-

Aqss Mosque from the prevailing issue in the region as a whole. As much as
Jerusalem and the al-Aqsa Mosque are regarded as an Arab issue. they are also
an Islamic issue that has top priority among Islamic issues. In all of its
Arab and Isluic meetings, Jordan has been concerned to propose ideas relating
to maintaining the steadfastness of the citizens of Jerusalem and to pre-
venting the occupation authorities from attacking the holy places or changing
the Arabic and Islamic character of Jerusalen. Nevertheless, the prevention
of possible attacks can only be accomplished through an agreed-upon, compre-
hensive strategy emitting from a united and cohesive Arabic and Islamic stand.

Iraq's Strength

[Question] How do you view the results of the latest battles on the Iraq-
Iran front, and what are your expectations in the forthcoming stage?

[Answer] Iraq is waging a battle with Iran with complete faith that it is
defending Arab rights ignored by Iran. In this battle Iraq is relying upon
itself and upon the moral support given by its Arab brothers for whom it is
fighting, despite the fact that there are some who have chosen to aid the
enemy and abandon their brothers. Iraq is fighting to achieve certain ends
that are not opposed to these others' self-interests end their dreaas of in-
fluencing the destiny of the Arab nation. They are also providing dangerous
opportunities for the two superpowers to benefit at the expense of the
national welfare.

we must work sincerely to strengthen the Iraqi front and maintain its co-
hesiveness. Iraqi nilitary might is also our might. He must confront the
Iranian aggression despite what the Iranian regime and its allies in the
region and abroad promote as propaganda. Jordan's support of Iraq stems from
a position of principle. Jordan takes the same position on the issue of
Palestine or of any other Arab land faced with aggression.

[Question] what is Jordan's position toward the Gulf states' coordination
of military defense?

[Answer] Jordan was the first to point out the necessity for finding some
kind of cooperation and coordination sung the Gulf states in order to defend
itself from any external aﬁitions. On more than one occasion we asserted
that the task of defending the Gulf region is a responsibility of the Gulf
states, especially after Iranian asbitions and threats were newly manifested
In that region. In our estimation, the war that Iraq is fighting at present
with Iran and with all of the other parties aiding Iran is nothing but an
attempt by Ira-.. and its supportive parties to reach the Gulf states after
overcoming Iraq as a principal power in the region carrying out its duty of
defending the interests of the Arab nation against foreign threats.

[Question] Do you expect Israel to attack southern Lebanon, and what are the
Arab and international conditions that would determine such an attack?

22

FOIOFIICIALWWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Israel's asbitions on the water and soil of Lebanon are very old,
and continue to persist at present. They serve Israel's aims of expansion
and hegemony. Israel is trying to create pretexts for reaching the waters'
source in Lebanon and controlling it, even if there were no Palestinian
presence or resistance there. Similarly, Israel avoids any public announce-
ment of what its borders are. No one in the world today knows just which
borders Israel wants recognized. The situation currently prevailing. in
Lebanon has aided Israel in reaching Lebanese waters and will facilitate com-
plete control by Israel in the event of the success of those forces support-
ing Israel and helping it to partition Lebanon.

Hence. Arab efforts must be directed at rescuing Lebanon from the plot being
hatched by Israel and at pulling it out of the situation it has fallen into.
Several parties have worked continuously and persistently at fragmenting and
partitioning of Lebanon and imposing their domination over it. Similarly,
these parties along with certain Arab countries have provided Israel with one
excuse after another to do as it pleases and implement what it wishes in
Lebanon.

[Question] Jordan has announced that members of the Village League in the Heat
Bank have been sentenced to death. Has this decision part of a larger plan for
confrontation in coordination with the PLO, or was it an independent Jor-
danian decision?

[Answer] The application of Jordanian law to those adherents of the Village
League or those cooperating with the occupation authorities is not new. The
Jordanian government never ceased to apply it since the occupation of the

West Bank in 1967. Several Jordanian sentences have been issued against those
who have been proven to cooperate or to have sold real estate to the enemy.

We are continuing to apply Jordanian _law in the matter of the Vill'age League
because in our view the League constitutes a crime against the country.

These Jordanian measures were met with relief and with Arab support, and they
don't imply that we are coordinating with anyone by implementing Jordanian
law.

[Question] Do you expect the Fe: conference to reconvene?

[Answer] He are confident that there will undoubtedly be an Arab meeting at
the summit level so that all Arab countries may bear their historical respon-
sibilities with respect to the events and dangers confronting the Arab nation.
Similarly, there is no doubt that this meeting will take place in accordance
with new premises which will enable the Arab leadership to take an historic
decision to preserve the supreme national welfare and to guarantee that a
united Arab stand will be reached. It will be a decision to guarantee that
Arab rights are secured and the Arab character defended. Also. the absence
of certain parties from the sun-sit doesn't mean that the majority of Arabs
will not bear their national responsibility with confidence and courage.

[Question] How would you describe Jordan's relations with the new American
administration as covered with the Carter administration?

23
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
[Answer] He hope that our relations with the American administration will be
based on an understanding of our rights, our demands. and our fundamental
needs. After His Majesty's recent visit to the United States, we found more
understanding than in the past. He hope it will grow stronger in the

future.

[Question] Has Jordan chosen once and for all to go with the Soviet missiles,
or is it keeping up contact with the United States to buy the Hawk missiles?

[Answer] Jordan's defense needs are certain to be supplied by either side,
because we are defending Jordan and the vital welfare of the Arab nation.
These needs are subject to the particular conditions and events through which
we are passing. Re are concerned with strengthening our defense capability to
the greatest extent possible. He will obtain arms from either side. despite
efforts by Israel and its supporters in the Senate, led by Sen Kennedy, to
prevent Jordan from obtaining advanced American weaponry. Similarly, certain
other sides are unfortunately trying to sabotage Jordan's efforts to obtain
advanced weaponry.

The Dangerous Harbinger

[Question] Do you believe that the wave of Khomeyniism presents a direct and
genuine threat to the Arab Gulf States? Or is it on the verge of dying out?

[Answer] The attempts by Iraq and the Gulf States to build bridges of trust
and good neighborliness with the new regime in Iran are well known. But the
Khomeyni regime, in my opinion, is ignoring Iraq's initiative and its demand
that the agreements concluded between the two parties be implemented. That
regime persists in hatching plots and interfering in the internal affairs of
Iraq and the Gulf states, just as it did recently inBahrain. Similarly, the
new regime in Iran refused to withdraw from the Iraqi position determined in
the treaties signed by the two countries. Instead it went even further by
making threats to bring the region under its hegemony. In this way Iraq found
itself forced to confront Iranian anbitions in defense of threatened Arab
states and of the rights of itself and all of those who stood by Iraq. It had
to stop Iran's expansion and its editions, despite the opportunism of local
and international parties over the situation in attempting to weaken Iraq and
control the Gulf region.

[Question] The summit conference of non-aligned nations will be held shortly
in Baghdad. How does Jordan view this meeting. and how can it be employed in
the service of the Arab cause?

[Answer] The convening of the non-alignment suit in Baghdad comes as an
implementation of the non-alignment emit in Havana. There is no getting
around it, despite the attempts by Iran and its allies to change the meeting
place. Most of the countries in the non-aligned group are determined to
attend the session in Baghdad. This session will help greatly in explaining
the Arab cause to the greatest possible number of the world's countries.
This session will be the starting point of international support for the

24

MWLUSEONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

central Arab issue, and support for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. It will be a clear inauguration of the isolation of Israel and all
of the other aneaies of the Arab nation.

[Question] Now that the Syrian-Iraqi border is closed, as well as the oil
pipelines in Tripoli and Baniyas, how does Jordan view its relations with

Syria?

[Answer] The latest Syrian measures against Iraq constitute, in our view. a
dangerous harbinger that damages the national stance. They are regarded as a
frank violation of Arab economic agree-eats. as well as a breaking of the Arab
Mutual Defense Treaty. These neasures are also regarded as well as a
fragmentation of the principles and the national ideal that binds the Arab
sister states and draws our people together. It is the responsibility of all
the Arab states to forbid the Syrian regime fro. carrying out these

measures. Jordan appraises its relations in the light of the supra-s national
welfare. On this basis, Jordan encourages and works with any Arab movenent
which calls the Arab states to the road of common national work and which for-
bids than continuing to side with the eneay in its aggression against Iraq
and Arab rights.

[Question] Do you believe that Busni Hubarak is a continuation of al-Sadat,
or is he an Egyptian president pursuing an independent course?

[Answer] Re don't believe that husni Mubarak is a continuation of al-Sadat.
we evinced that from a number of his positions. the mat prominent being his
refusal to visit Jerusalem. Whereas it was easy for al-Sadat to visit
Jerusalea. He hope that what he intends to do in the future will be within
the limits we hopefully await.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HA‘IAN Alt-'MI

9965
C80: “06/538

25

Newman“
{EFFECT 01’ INVASIOI on rumors swam

Paris AL-‘JATAN AL-‘AMBI in Arabic No 278, 11-17 Jun 82 pp 18, 19
[Krucm "The Cards Are Being Shuttled in the Lebanese Presidential cupugnﬂ

ﬁexﬂ what about the Lebanese presidential canpaign, in the light or the Israeli
invasion?

The political cards have been reshufned, of course, and it will take some tine to
deal then again. However, there is a feeling that the "Syrian candidate" in the can-
paign has lost host of his cards and that new beta are being placed on a salvation
candidate.

Before the recent aggression, efforts were being devoted to setting the date of the
election and deternining a quorm and requisite majority for the desired candidate.
The official approach was that the elections should be held in July, provided that
the date be announced after consultations with various parties.

Today the picture has changed ooupletely, and the possibilities at issue are three in
nunber:

A constitutional crisis embodied in a vacuun in the center of power.

A new plan, Aaerican probably, calling for on extension of [the ter57 of President
Ilyss Saran.

A candidate suddenly brought forth by new conditions.

In the frenework or the contacts that are underway on the presidential caapaign, in-
formed sources have affix-led that the people p esented for serious consideration are
now 001 Gabi Lahud, Deputy was Naffa', and mag President Camille Chanotm, .1-
though it is Col Lahud, who recently returned to the any, who is now the focus of
contacts among active parties. Intonation being bruited about in his regard indicates
that his nomination enjoys the support of the United States, Syria and active Lebanese

forces, with the exception of the Phalange Party, which is in serious, decisive opposi-
tion to his.

the sources add that the Phalange Party, which has spelled out the specifications of

the new president through Szaykh Bashir al-Juaayyil's nuaerous stated positions, con-
siders that it is the basic Haronite force and has the right to deter-nine the torn and

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

specifications of this president. Therefore, when Shaykh Bashir al-Jumayyil declares
that he will not sign the "heronites' struggles" over to anyone, he means that he will
not allow any Maronite who does not receive his endorsement to be a cOndidate or a
president. Therefore, it appears out of the question so far, in the Phalange context,
that agreement night he reached over at least two persons, Gabi Lahud and Camilla
Chamoun. The latter was chairaan of the Lebanese Front, which has not with the dis-
favor of the Phalange, especially in the eyes of Shaykh Bashir al-Jmayyil, who has
not allowed the Ghaaoun clan to make Haronite decisions or have an influence in then.
He was behind the 7 July 1980 operations, which aliainated the effective Chanounite
presence by eliminating the military forces of the Liberal Nationalists' Party, and
in fact would have swept away Chanoun's own son, had he not nanaged to escape fro-
the eastern section. The person who contrived all that for the sake of unity in
Haronite representation now can, and is, spelling out the specifications of the coming
president. Therefore, Lebanese sources believe that no candidate for the presidency
will be so bold as to run before first going through Bashir al-Jmayyil in order to
receive his satisfaction and blessings. However, the same sources add that the Leban-
ese parties do not constitute a basic force in the equation of the election of the new
president, although they do constitute a pressure force. Therefore, Bashir al-
Juaayyil, who is trying to elininate the political influence of all Haronite leaders,
on grounds that he is the only person bearing the Haronite rifle, is trying to exert
such a pressure on the foreign forces that are helping to create the new president.
One can determine the features of this position through two positions he has taken.
The first is the refusal to take Philip Habib's visit insofar as it deals with the
presidential canpaign, seriously, and the second is to reject a president who eaergea
as the result of a settlement along the various parties.

However, the sources in their turn, state that my Haronite forces can

divorce the-selves free the will of Bashir al-Jmayyil if they sense a lack of inter-
national, especially American, enthusiasa for his theses and consider that the foreign
approach tends not to adopt severe or rigid positions vis-e-vis the issues at hand.

One itea of infomtion now being bruited about in Beirut is the fact that the Syrian-
Phalangist dialogue, which has been going on at various levels in Beirut and Daaascus
recently, has, along the issues it has been dealing with, discussed the presidential
campaign. Agreeaent was reached to keep some people out of the transactions because
they do not enjoy the support of any active party and they are unable to exercise any
role, that is, are weak and not suited to this position — for instance, the cment
minister of information, Michel Iddih, the governor of the Bank of Lebanon, Michel al-
Khuri, the deputy m'ad Lahud, and the sinister Rene Hu'awwad. In addition, ayeeaent
has been reached that it is necessary to try to bring in a strong president who can
take part in a solution to the Lebanese crisis or set forth a plan for a solution that
he can carry out, even if all parties do not agree to it. The information holds that

the discussion has not dealt with any persons who night be described as strong and
sole to arrive at a solution.

Although some parties still are putting people like Raymond Iddih or Sulayman Pran-

iyah, forward, thess parties have been persuaded that it is impossible that either of
the two could cone in, for well known Arab and local reasons, and that they are being
put forward Just for pressure’s sake or to maneuver to avoid the premature showing of

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cards. Therefore me chemce coneider that the obectwity cf the local-Arab-
intemtionel equetion will in the short run remit in e rece non; pertiee to nan-
euverendpleycnlythecerdethethhvebeenehom.butnettcpleythehidden
cards, which are the reel once. The real code are the once now being shuffled in

the wings, especially in the wings of the ujor electore. Bebib'e visit to Dene-
cus after Beirut lien in the context or this churning proceee.

hen the conﬁscation in the. eouth the new president any ecu-3e.

1.1887 .
cso: 4404/ 531

28

MOMMONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WA

SPAIN sum ITS mar rm
Porto W MIC”)! 81' mm in bench In 1913. 9 Jul 82 p 1967

[Text]Speinhnonnopended,eeof301nne,mtforiteinortefronuhye
inordertourgnuhyenenthoritiutoeettleenerreereofDominance!-
lnrednetoSpnniehhnoineuu.itheeheen1enrnedfronetroetvorthyeome.

The nunpeneion of pay-oat for Spenieh inortn. oonniedn; elnnet totnlly of
petrolnuendnoturel gee. mundtopurcheoee-dednringtheeeoondtri-
neeter of the year, the use enorce inﬂated.

Speeking for M. the Spanieh eecretory of etnte for foreign trnde. Hr
Agustin Hidden do In Quint-no, deocrihed the effeir ee ”delicate." a. never-

theloee ”haired thot spenieh enthoritiee hnd not tronen the Libyan Control
lenk'o mt at the Beneo de lepene (the Mk Control lent).

In View of Tripli'e delay in eettlins ite erreero which that hed rim to 11.5
niuion dollnro, lurid hed adopted et the beginning of the yeer e tiret re-
taliatory neeouree. by unending for one nnnth the inort oi Libyan petrol“.
1111981, theeepnrcheeeeofcrndeoilhodreecheoeonilymot 55
thoneend horreln.

By virtue of on agree-Int nined enbeeqnemly on 9 Pebroery to reeolve thin
diepote. Lihye pronieed to nettle ite erreero after n deny of one nonth. 0n
itnpert, apninhedegreedtoiwortSOthonnendhermeofmdednily.

‘l‘ripoliet theheunningot Joneveepeyingﬂniuiondouere. iorinorte
nnderteken in 1982, but etill oven 130 nillinn donate, Mr“ etetod. o! nhich

100nillionietorporchneeeof anodenndwniuiontorcivilengineerinz
contrncte.

The Spanieh-Lihynn trede helence pro-onto e eoneiderehle melon“ in Tripoli'e

fever. In 1981, the reoerve retio of Spam: iante to uporte no only 30
percent. Aleo,thehibynn0ontrellak'ee¢ooutetthelenoodelopeneec-
tueuy yieldo e poeitive helence of nnre then 232 ninion donore.

In Spenieh officinl circlee, it he been noted thet spein'o petroleu hill
“totoeonesomliondonereenonthendthetrtheuhyendehtthnecenhe
diechersed in leee then three nonthe.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Peri. 1982

(:50: 4519/2102
29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SYRIA

IllSLIIl summon more 01' am. CW'S am PORCES

Paris Ala-"ATM AL-‘ARMI in Arabic lo 270. 16-22 Apr 82 pp 35-39

[Interview with 'Adnan Sa'd al-Din by Valid Abu Zahr; date and place not
specified]

[Text] For this nesting and the ataosphere in which an enciting story was
told, I beg the indulgence of the reader for Iy skipping any of the dranstic
details and for casting shadows of dense secrecy over the events. Suffice it
to say that this letting took place in one of the iqenetrsble strongholds

of the Muslin Brotherhood that 'Adnsn Sa'd sl-Din uses as a secret aobile
co-and post free which he directs the activities of the thali- Brotherhood
snd their ar-ed struggle against the existing regine in Syria. The activities
are now mified under a single cmd whose threads 'Adnan 8a'd sl-Din

holds and coordinates with other arled resistance groups that have entered
the arena in Syria.

Preparation for this seating was actually begun in Paris after the tragic
events of M and after the annolmcsnent of the fornstion of the Patriotic
Alliance to save Syria. when eessengers cans to us to deliver state-ants in
the nape of the mslis brotherhood and in the hue of the Patriotic Alliance
and they obtained froe MAT“ AL-‘ARAII the agraeaent the iwlicstion of
which were final and unalterable, we asked peraisaion to seize a trip to
enable us. and the reader with us, to learn about the nsntality of the
leadership that the bloody struggle in ﬂash brought forth.

Since the nane of 'Adnan Ss'd al-Din had begun to appear in circles having
a conbat relationship with the liuslin brotherhood, we suggested neeting with
hin...we got what we wanted. He traveled for this purpose over ssny winding
paths until we reached the "base" in the darkness of a bitterly cold night.

The base was no Iore than a siqle, faded inconspicuous house. He entered
that eieply furniehed house with the "brothers” who accowanied us carrying
auto-atic weapons. While sipping the tea of traditional hospitality and
trying to restore with its warnth what the cold of the night deaanded, an
imposing nan in his 50's cane in. Everything about his signaled vitality and
dynnisn. You were fascinated by his eyes that radiated dignity and
enchant-ant. Calnly and confidently, he walked over to us and without

30

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preliminaries said: I - 'Adnsn Ss'd al-Din. 9e skipped the usual greetings
and faailiar courtesiea to engage (i-ediately) in this conversation which
lasted 2 hours. when it ended. it was past 2 as and the night had begun to
prepare to retreat before the light of dawn. That was an indication of an
arduous return to our starting point in order to bring this interview
proqtly to AL-HA‘IAII AL-‘AIABI and our readers at a tine when they are anxious
for anything that will throw light on the escalating arsed struggle in Syria.

[Abu Zahr] I said to his without any preliminaries. who are you? And he
answered without hesitation:

[Sa'd al-Din] Hy nsae is 'Adnan Sa'd al-Din and I as 52 years old. I joined
the mali- Brotherhood on 5 July 1965 and have been in close touch with the
soweeent ad the group free that day until this hour.

I participated in all kinds of activities. including guidance, political
action, and ad-inintrative work...‘l'hen in 1975 I was entrusted with the
leadership of the noweaent after differences of opinion had crept into the
ranks over secrecy because the sowanent changed fron open to secret activities
since the advent of this tyranical regi. now crouching on the cheat of Syria.

[Pam] After that a attsqt was ude to repair the rift and close ranks.
1hin attespt reached a peak in 1976 and ended with the call for general
elections in the ranks of the group in which the leadership participated just
a nont of the individuals of the group do likewise. As a result, I was
charged with serving as a general control officer responsible for activities
and for strengthening unity in the ranks.

[Continuing] Effective activity began early in 1976. Along the results of
this activity was the unification of individuals of the group in accordance
with sound organization...“ they operated in accordance with a well-conceived
plan the drafting and study of which took sore than a year and a half and
ended with a definition of purpose. goal...stagen, sethods. etc.

After this unification of the individuals of the organisation, there was
another mification of the organisation with the senses in nost Syrian cities.
The organisation grew at an astonishing rate. Byeryons knew its purpose.
goal. and tasks and adjusted his position accordingly. The true state of
affairs was asnifested particularly in the cities of the north, in Adlab.
Aleppo, Rif Adlah. and [if hash as well as in Latakia. This healthy
phenonenon then began to spread to the east of Syria and to the south as well.
Another accosplinhnent of this stage was the strengthening of the bond
between the organization on the inside and the organisation on the outside.
There had been a chase (...) Mover, it was filled up and bridges and
channels were built. Each of thee cospleeented the other. That produced
swift efforts, which also ended in a total unification of the mn-
Brotherhood sovenent inside syria with that outside and with the Muslin
Brotherhood sovenents elsewhere in the world. Thus, we established very firs
relations with about 30 organizations in the Arab world, Asia. Africa. and in
foreign countries as well.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Abu Zahr] Without trying to break his train of thought. I naked: Here
these relations liaited only to groups affiliated with the Muslin Brotherhood?

[Sa'd al-Din] no. we established relations and also strengthened than with
Inlanic organizations in the Indian subcontinent, Indonesia. Halayaia, Turkey,
and other placea in the world.

And finally...after a new spirit begm to spread and new blood circulated in
thin organization and after it discovered its way and purpose and defined
its goal. and after it proceeded in accordance with its well-conceived
plan...it found itself face to face with great treachery eabodiad in the
regiae of the dead brothers. Hafiz and Rif'at in Syria. This personal
regin did away with the ruling Arab regine of Syria and traveled down a
deviant path, propelling it (Syria) forcefully toward the abyss...llut let ua
not rush things. That story will energe in the conrne of our interview.

[Apologetic smile, continuing] One of the lost ilportant acconplinl-entn of
thin stage was the organization's preparation for the ntruggle with the enemy
and confrontation of thin danger. It responded to the supporters of God and
the cell of the people to save this plotted-against country. Thin in the
people who gained the upperhand so that the organization had to etand up
openly against opprennion and the oppressor and corruption. The movement
began to engage in stead activitiee in Syria.

[Abu Zahr] Hhen was the Malia Brotherhood organization founded as a
disciplined and united menent in Syria? And do ita leadern rennin inside
Syria while others are outaide‘!

[Sa'd al-Din] The Walk Brotherhood organization in Syria was an echo of the
Huelin Brotherhood organization in Egypt. Ita first ntirringa began in the
1930'n, 1935-1936, and it cane out into the open in 1937.

This organization at firat took the for. of widenpread ave-ents in the big
najor citiea. Theae novenentn had different noes auch an Noble Traita of
Character. Annociation of Belpera. Aseociation of Musli- Brothera. Huh-ad's
Youth, Muslin Youth...1'hen at the Id of the 1930's and beginning of the
191.0%, these novenentn. different in neat but similar in goals, urged each
other to fora a single love-ant called the Muslin brotherhood Hove-eat and
choone its first leader. i.e.. ita co-nnder, or controller of the organization,
Dr Huatafa al-Siba'i (Hay God Save nercy on hill).

The leaders of the organization were «signed to Syria and other countries.
However, they act in accordance with the dennnds of the stage to unify

activities and goals within and without and to ntrengthen the deep bond with
our people. our country, and our land in an atnosphare of increaning harlony.

The Tragedy of Our Age
[Abu Zahrl If we consider the Ila-ah uprining to be a concrete Ianifentation

of this harmony, I should like you to tell us in detail about what happened
in Hanah and what was the extent of the actual loosen suffered by the regine'n

32

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forces and your forces and by the inhabitants of “ah.

[I saw tears in his eyes menever the nae Ila-ah was aentioned. but he
continued to speak quietly] [Sa'd al-Din] Hhat happened in lie-ah can be
called "the tragedy of our age." He read and heard a great deal about
sieilar distressing events in our tine. but we never lived through a tragedy
like this one with such leaning and depth.

“a read about what happened in acne Ger-an cities after the war uhen the
occupiers devastated then and about the Marxist revolution in Grins and the
Soviet Union...liany tragedies have occurred in the world, especially in the
Third world. but we never heard or how of such a tragedy like the tragedy of

Iluaah.

He met not forget that Ila-sh stood up against the Crusaders and (other)
foreigners. That is why the Ayytbid kings took it as their first capitel.
Although the big Cmader arniss c-e close to the aain cities of Syria, they
were unable to cone close to this city.

In the tin of the French nandate, li-ah becane a hone sticking in the throat
of the French...It continued for a quarter of a century fighting, battling,
and resisting than. France punished lanah and deprived it of all leans of

subsistence and elenents for growth and develop-ant. leaving it a rural,
faraing town...It forbade it to create institutions on its land and to enter
the industrial age. louver. this only ads the people of and: sore
energetic. Prof Akran al-llurani in his talk with you last week told you a
great deal about the recent historical characteristics of M's

unyie ldinpess .

[Continuing] So it is not strange that the present regime finds in Ila-ah an
obstacle before it and before the plot which it cans to carry out on Syrian
land in order to eliminate its heroic and leading role in the Middle East.
As (Miles) Copeland. a CIA agent and representative of its nentality, said in
his book "The G. of Nations" and as his counterparts said: "Syria is a
snakepit for Anarican inerialise.” It refused foreign aid and alliaces.
It was always helping oppressed peoples. It was always offering assistance
to its brothers in obtaining their independence...‘l'herefore, Copeland and
other thinkers and observers of Western intelligence agencies were trying
to sabotage this role...‘rhey tried nilitary coups and other things. They
relied on leading personages but they didn't succeed...'l'hen they relied on
obvious agents to no avail. And finally they brought in this regiee as part
of their attespt to put an end to Syria's traditional role.

Since ﬂash forned an obstacle to this terrible plan, it was logical (to
believe) the reports that had been reaching for us a long tine which said
they are plotting evil agaimt this city...1'hey want to wipe it off the nap
and revise its population sake-up.

Yes, for lore than 2 years news ha been reaching us that they are plotting evil
agath this city. In fact, their ugly intentions were revealed by "sweep
operations." a eupheeisn for the desecration of cities, houses. and holy places.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Continuing] ﬂora than 2 years ago the oppressive regine began to give its
sen and eyrnidons in this city a free hand to wreak havoc in it. "hat nost
inflaned the people and provoked their resentnent and anger was that this gang
enjoyed, and still enjoys, a free hand in peaceful hoses to kill. desecrate,
and plunder.. .violate the honor of the sea and shredding the honor of the
woaen. indeed. they did not hesitate to attack (even) children and kill then.
During that ties the Arab nedia was nostly shackled and the Arab conscience
was on vacation...'l'hs world nedia shared in this indifference. It was as
though these crines were a notion picture. The lat act in these outrages
reveal that hsf'al-Asad ad his brother nif'at (there is no truth to what

was said in MAT“ Ab—‘MI about differences of opinion between then. it
is a play they perfected lore than 10 years ago and they revealed it by
dealing with the opposition in all of its aspects. are principle actors in
this play. whenever shocking crises occurred. linfis al-Asad disavowed than,
blaning than on his brother. Then later on we find the two brothers
cooperating in new crises and taking part in other plays. Therefore. the
Syrian people pronounced judgnent against than as being equally criednel and
responsible above others for everything that happens in Syria.

[Continuing and speaking like a roaring waterfall) About 2 nonths ago the
al-Assd brothers and the slyrnidons who help then, such as 'Ali ﬁnder and
Huha-ad al-lChauli. agreed to give Rif'at unlinited authority to declare
mrtial law and assign his 12,000 soldiers to launch an attack against the
northern cities in order to "cleanse than” of opponents. with the city of
Hanah regarded as the region of prinsry operations...'rhey said he could kill
as nany as 5000 without seeking the agreement of anyone, and they naned about
a hundred fanilies he could exterminate. They e-pwered his to kill
arbitrarily and randonly, which was nothing new in his nodus operandi. But
this tine it took the fore of a decree. Ba case to Bush where he continued
this policy for 2 nonths during which tine we received detailed news about it.
he were asking the yomg nen and hujahidin to be patient, control their
nerves, and avoid a clash. They were saying we will die every day...or part
of the city will die. how long? One house was searched more than 10 tires.
hardly had liulagu's soldiers left the house when they entered it again,
knowing that what eebittered the city nost was violation of the honor of the
people...» one possessed of dignity, knowledge. or advanced years escaped
being abused. No wonen in the hoses they invaded was safe froe their ugly
behavior or their disgraceful actions. Nor did the children escape...'l'hey were
often killed in front of their parents. Horst of all. when an inforser would
cone and tell the. "I saw a nan enter this building and he didn't cone out."
they would break into the apart-ents of the building. When they searched it
did didn't find his. they demolished it while the people were inside. They
killed eany innocent families. everyone of its net-hers, in this way. At this
tine Rafi: al-Asad was talking about how caln Syria was and how he wiped out
the gang. i.e., the Huslin Brotherhood and the opposition.

He Know...3ut

The world knew these facts yet renained silent about than. I say frankly that
we have infornation about sore than 10 Arab states representing about 75
percent of the inhabitants of the Arab hoeeland and persons directly
responsible...‘l'hey say we know sore than what you know about the tragedy that

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is befalling Syria. We have the details just as you do. and sore.
Nevertheless, we keep hearing about telegram of congratulations and telegraas
of condolence being exchanged between then and the butchers of Danascus...Yea,
sore than that, we find that they shower the non of the tyrannical regine with
gifts beyond all imgining. They give the. billions and they know how these
billions are spent. They met know, as we know. about the condition of the
banks. which are messy about the large was deposited by the Mafia nob ruling
Danascus.

let us return to Ila-ah. llanah found itself and its people found themselves
facing a systenatic plan for its annihilation. lie were hoping that reason
would prevail and that the city would be saved fron disaster. Mt what was
planned was planned.

When the inhabitants of Hannah realized they had reached a deadlock, they rose
up in the night using the weapons they had and the weapons they wrested fros .
those boisterous fellows after a surprise attack was launched against then...A
great battle broke out asong the people of the city with all its groups and ‘
factions. young nen and old sen, children and woaen, in defense of their land,
blood, and honor. The Christians were aide by aide with the Huslins. I say in
this connection that the Christians in Syria recorded a shining sari: that will
have a very great inpact on the future of Syria and the region in real
solidarity and in the nest critical of circuutsnces and in situations of the
strongest pressure. I record here that although llafis al-Aaad found hypocrites
song the ﬁnalise and all the other sects, he was unable to convince a single
responsible spiritual Chriuisn to issue a feral state-ant against the revolt
of the people. It mat be admitted that the Christian around Ila-ah were also
honorable. They were proud to aid the casualties when the nissilea and
artillery began to now then down in the quarters of Banah and force than to
seek refuge in the outskirts. Bafis al-Assd obtained with these terrible
weapons, weapons of sass destruction. an instrusent to suppress the people

of Syria after the star's nission changed fros the defense of Syria's borders
to the suppression and persecution of the Syrian people.

There are my details that out of respect for the honor of the people we
refrain fros nentioning, things the soul loathes to talk about, because one
cannot hear to hear tho. Hhen all the people know what happened to the girl
students and the circuntances under which they were crininally attacked, they
will know the nagnitude of the responsibility. the scale of the crine they
connitted, and the degree of responsibility of those who stood alongside
llafis sl-Asad and helped his. I an referring here to sons of the Arab rulers
whose nanes I need not sention...

The dead are many, 8,000 according to the lowest estinate. Other estimates
place the amber of victins of the nassacre at 30,000, not to nention the
enornous destruction of bones, although the lie-ah population was between
280.000 and 300.000 individuals.

I want to state that these fateful and tragic events cannot be ignored by the
people. I an not saying it is only the people of Banah who are seeking
revenge against this tyramicel regime, for all the Syrians sylpathise with

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the people of hanah. But those people of Bush who have sworn vengeance are
any. Perhaps the leaders of the ruling regine know that very well.

Liquidations in the Arly

[Abu Zahr] what is the present attitude of the Syrian Any, especially in light
of the events of fin-ah? And is it true that one of the brigades joined the
Hujahidin in lanah?

[Sa'd al-Din] The 67th Brigade was stationed 7 kn fro. limb near Ha‘rin, a
village on the way to Boll. This brigade was placed here as a neans of
threatening the city as was intended. "hen the fighting broke out in the city
and the Hujahedin were in control all over. there was an open split in the
brigade, sons of then supporting the people and the hujahedin. This breakdown
and dissension continued to the end. Sonething of this kind, but to a lesser
extent, occurred in the 21st Brigade, which was brought fro. Qatifah to the
city of Hanah to denolish it.

The Syrian Arwy is suffering fron this regime what (other) groups of people are
suffering. The basic mission of the Syrian Any, as I said, changed from
defense of the honeland and its borders to an instrunent of repression, and

the liquidation in it have not yet stopped. This shows that opposition has not
ceased nor does it appear that it can he stepped....

Hafiz al-Asad wanted to place the higher units of this err; in the hands of
those who assist his through the factions in governing Syria. Uprisings in the
any follow one another. Three nonths ago the whole world heard about the
arrest of a large number of officers. perhaps about 200 according to the

lowest estimate, but sone observers say there were ‘00 officers fron the
various services.

The army is going through the sans crisis in all respects free which the
Syrian people are suffering: sectarian discrinination, persecution of everyone
with a free voice, insulting individual honor without reason or cause.
arbitrary persecution to the point of crises--all of which we detest and
reject. The people entertain the hope that the Syrian Any will participate
in settling the situation at the decisive hour...This is our opinion of our
army. Despite all the liquidations and all the wounds it has suffered, it
will retain a patriotic ersy that will shake this ahane off itself and wipe it
fron the brow of the people and unite with then so that the people of Syria
can resune their well-known role in the region, resist their en-ies, and

share in bearing their burdens. This is our view of the say, that's what

it was and still is. The hope we rest on it increases day by day. I apologize
for holding back on sole of the details because they are military secrets,

but tonorrow holds no secrets.

[Abu Zahr] why don't Aleppo and the rest of the Syrian cities show solidarity
with Hat-ah?

[Sa'd al-Din] All the cities do naintain solidarity with one anothu because
of the people's unity. but they are not in a position to stand with Eaaah

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because the people are unarsed and the regime's army is not engaged at the
borders. The borders are protected'hy the international police which helped
it sore thm 20 times. The people were quickly disarmed. That was because
the penal code specified a one nonth's prison term for carrying a gal without
a perait. But Hafiz al-Asad raised the penalty from 1 aonth to 5 years and
then raised it (again) in a new decree to 20 years or death. The people were
stripped of all some of resistance.

We will Hang You in Front of Your shops

[Sa'd al-Din continues] Aleppo tried to protest but it was threatened with
boebardment, wipe out, and destruction. Damascus also tried, but Rafi:
al-Asad su-oned to the republican palace meders of the chambers of co-srce
and threatened that anyone who closed his shop would be hanged on its door...
Don't you believe. as I do, that foreign occupation would not dare to do
anything like that?

This we not all. Other actions were taken that provoke laughter and disgust
at the same tine - and the worst calamity is what provokes laughter. After
Ila-ah was demolished, the regime brought out the inhabitants of villages in
Jabal al-‘Alawi by well—known police methods to stage a demonstration in
support of Rafi: al-Asad's stance in which he would say: 'l'hese inhabitants
of [lamb are celebrating the demolition of their city (1) and dancing on the
corpses of their sons!

As the Prophet (God bless his and grant hin salvation!) said: "If it is not
grmted, do as you wish."

Does he know shane at all this creature who stands before a city that has been
denolished and flattened over the heads of its inhabitants. Poreign .
correspondents see that it has become like the ruins of some Germ cities
after world war 11. Despite that. inorality reached the point where he

could say that those singers in the phony desonstration are celebrating it
while dancing on the corpses of their children!

They talk about Nero who set fire to his capital. Rose, a little more than
2000 years ago to enjoy the sight of the fire. We do not know whether these
stories are inaginary or not, but people will say even after a thousand years
that during an extraordinary period Syria was governed by a perverted group
lacking in noral values, beliefs, and standards and that it was devoid of any
loyalty to the people or the homeland and the nation. Its head and president
deeply rooted with his regime in planned treachery could announce without
blinking that the people of Banh are now desonstrating to support his after
the city was pulled down on their heads.

The most ridiculous part of this disaster is the walk of 100 meters that
Hafiz al-Asad took along the crowds along the Corniche Hazrs'a in Dasaacus
last 7 March to prove he is not afraid to meat with the people.

But everyone knew that the crowd surrounding his were soldiers from the
intelligence service and defense units wearing civilian clothing. Moreover,

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
special forces had previously occupied all the houses along the route that
Hafiz al-Asad took and forced the inhabitants of every house to resain in one
roo- throughout this play.

Television began to join in the loo-ester walk, in scene after scene, to show
Rafi: al-Assd in a display of enpty heroisn.

He consider Hafiz al-Assd to be all but finished. and his last speech proves
it. The only consolation for the victims was that hysterical speech which
produced a good effect in warning the people of Syria and the other Arab
countries (about his).

These are short selections fros the tradegy of lush that will perhaps rouse
the nation to shake off the dust of inactivity. brush away the cobwebs, and
Isove forward.

...Is the Druggist Suitable?

[Abu Zahr] Last year the Syrian regise signed a treaty of friendship and
cooperation with the Soviet Union. "hat is your view of the backgound and
consequences of this treaty?

[Sa'd al-Din] The Soviet Union has signed nany treaties with sany countries.
However, this gene has been exposed. The Soviets insist on it, as they did
in their dealings with the Shah of Iran, Sadat. and others.

Therefore we do not expect too such fron these treaties.

More than anyone else. the Soviets know that Bafis el-Asad would not renain in
power five ninutes if there were genuine, credible. and honest elections.

Our infomtion confirss that the Soviets know the truth about Hafiz al-Asad.
but they ssintain theatrical friendly relations with his regina because

they are better for then than their absence...insteed of being out of the
region after their experience with al-Sadat and Soeelia. They are satisfied to
sell am in order to have funds with which to buy wheat and technology fro-
the advanced Western countries.

[Abu Zahr] Hhat do you think of the coalition of opponents in the new crucible.
And how can this coalition deliver the Syrians fro. their great ordeal?

[Ss'd al-Din] we stated in the program of our rebellion 2 years ago that our
power. after relying on God, is strengthened by all our people participating
in this rebellion...It was our intention fros the beginning and our
understanding of the history of Syria and of its population and social sake-up
that complete cooperation between all the sons of the people is essential.

he who doesn't understand this reality has forgotten the Iain issue in this
struggle.

Hence, this matter was self-evident and clear to us. Even the 'Alawites
whoa Hafiz sl-Asad wants to throw into the struggle were sent an appeal to

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

join us against this plague who wants to live on the debris of sectarian
disputes between the children of one people.

Our concern has been for this coalition to consider the faith of the action.
its tradition, values, and inheritance. Re have encountered no difficulties
in this regard...Indeed, we found the other parties just as desirous of it
as we are.

They are Arabs just as we are Arabs and Kuslins just as we are lluslins. He
. therefore found no difficulty in convincing the others. a: the contrary. we
found couplete nutual understanding.

We spoke about the freedons in our rebellion. He asserted our belief in a
multiplicity of parties and in the freedos of people to fora parties provided
that these parties do not adopt beliefs or principles that conflict with the
faith of the nation and that they are not tied to a foreign power. the decision
in this natter should be left up to the judicial authority and not to the
executive authority to use to murder the public freedols. Therefore, our

round of talks with the opposition groups did not take much tine. In fact.

we found ourselves in complete agrs-snt on a solution (to the problen) of

what will save 8yris...end deliver her free her ordeal so that she can rest-e
her role throughout the world.

Our next stage will be the stage of escalating sued struggle...how we wish
we didn't have to carry arns. but the regine in Syria has forced all cultured
persons, scholars. scientists, and acne of the people. all of then. to bear
arns against it.

We have suffered fron a regine that kills prisoners, assassinates leading
pereonalities, and takes away freedom. ‘lt bans the press, violates honor,

and kidnaps wonen fron the streets...“ have suffered in. a regine about
which it is useless to conplain. He can't even pray in the nosques. If people
meet in a mosque, the artillery duelishea it. Clesints even to God are
prohibited.

The hypocrites who surround Hafiz al-Ased tried to teach hi. to pray properly
in order to cosplete the deception. But they still haven't taught his, or he
was unable to learn, how to place his right hand on his left hand. And
whenever he appears on television, we (still) see hi. placing his left hand
on his right hand.

At any rate, discloaure of the secrets of the goveth and of the governor
nade all the parties believe there is no deliverance free his except by arned

struggle .

[Abu zahr] Did the political and Iilitary cooperation between the Syrian and
Iranian regimes also extend to econonic sstters?...aow do you understand this
relationship.

[Sa'd al-Din] As for the Iranian revolution, we fully eynpathiaed with it at
first in the days of the Shah. Rhoneyni in France kept saying that he would

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
have friendly relations with his neighbors, that he would call the Gulf not
the Persian Gulf but the Islasic (half. and that he would return the islands
occupied by force by the Shah to the United Arab hirates. Be said he would
not proceed free the fanatical Shi'a Safavid dynasty or free the Ueayyad
dynasty mich quarreled with the Prophet‘s fdly...but fr:- the concept of
the Orthodox (celiphs).

He said if this is indeed the case. the regine will be sound and cooperation
with it will be possible on great issues to the benefit of the inhabitants of
the region. But strange to say. after ntoeeyni case to power. he did not do
anything that he proeieed. 0n the contrary. we fond the studies and writings
and constitutional provisions heading in another and very narrow direction...
a sectarian direction. He thought our com interests would she us all go
beyond this franework, but we found then clinging to this more than in the
tine of the Shah.

We were very patient ad consulted with thee on this setter. A nuaber of our
delegations visited the-”Jo were very endot- to raeain on good terns with
then. The responsible ones among thee pronised us they would correct this
error. ‘rhey bis-ed it on the lack of govern-ant unity and on the fact that
their groups were very different and incowatible...that they do not understand
nany of the issues or know anything about then and they want to try to
understand then again. although their circu-tnces are grie...etc.

Then we sew then draw close to the regi-e of aafis al-Asad. They said we will
not be able to cooperate with you if you attack the ruling party in Syria
and don't attack sectarianisn there.

we said to then: If you saw two faults in the Syrian regime, why are we only
attacking it free one corner for only one shortcoeing...2ven if the regine were
partisan in Syria and freed the parties, we would enter into a free.
constructive, and public dialogue with it. But the danger is that the regiee

is heading in a dangerous partisan direction. You say you do not agree with it
either in its partisanship or in its sectariain. In that case, your hostility
toward this regime should steadily increase. why do you stretch out your

hands to it? They said we will correct this error. Hhenever we asked that,
they would say to us: "Do not attack it in a partisan way. "

At the sane tine there were secret and sectarian contacts between Duascus and
Tehran. Indeed, infomtion about our visit and talks with then was steadily
passed on to Daeascus. I did not visit Tehran, ey associates did. and every
delegation that went there returned with a negative attitude and we found its
hopes for the Iranian regime had dwindled. we soon discovered that this regiee
squatting in Tehran was in the one trench with the regine of Hafiz al-Asad.
we found this odd and asked for an explanation...ﬂe said: You want to regain
and liberate Palestine, yet Hafiz al-Asad agreed with "the red line." i.e..
the truce line with the Zionists. You say you want to liberate Jerusalen, yet
Hafiz al-Asad allows international police-en to cone in. You say you call for
nodesty in woeen, yet hafiz al-Asad tears the veil and clothes fron women and
looses the mob on veiled girls in Damascus. You want a regine that observes
the traditions of Islamic norality, yet Rafi: al-Asad and his regine violate

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

these traditions every day. What (I. you have in m with hafiz al-Asad
if not blind sectarian fanaticiss?

[Continuing] The situation in Iran, according to wy infornation. threatens
to fall apart...‘l'he noderstes with when we can cone to n understanding are
mderlsiege. ‘rhe nagasine mm. which pubished one letter fron us. was
threatened with destruction if it cooperated with us one were tin.

He know we are going with this regine down a blind alley ad that narrow
sectarian considerations have overcons rational values.

Just 2 week ago the preacher in Iran joined with the foreign ninister in
accusing us. distorting our history. and attacking us. We were forced to
defend ourselves and reply to this deceit and false charges in accordance with
the words of God: "Then those who are fighting would be victorious.”

[Continuing] The regise in Iran is proceeding in an increasingly sectarian

and significant direction. We received copies of books they recently published.
They are proceeding in a significant direction and attacking the best nen of
Isl- and some of the Orthodox caliphs...in the Persian lnguage. We think

too highly of ourselves and of the peoples of the region to fell into this

swap .
Caluity efter Cale-ity

[Abu Zahr] During 'Ahd al-lalin lhaddan's last visit to Iran he concluded an
agree-ant for Syria to be supplied with 60 nillion tons of Iranian oil in a
year in an sue.» to provide the Syrian regine with the mans of survival.
Uhat do you think of it?

[Sa'd al-Din] Cooperation between the Syrian and Iranian regime will lake
each of then a disaster for the other and whoever swports either of then
will suffer the consequences. An agree-eat like this is fresh proof of the
error of the Iranian regile because if it didn't know the truth, the netter
would be less serious. but the sen of the Iranian regise. as we heard fron
then. know the truth of the situation in Syria...

So Iran is not starting free a basis of principle in its foreign policy. Iran
calls itself an Islanic state but it associates and deals only with those who
cooperate with South Yenen and with the regine of Rafi: al-Ased...3ven in
conferences that it organizes in Iran (our youths attended several of then)
we find that 90 percent of those invited are fro. anon; the enenies of Isles
fros the entrees left, free Nicaragua. fron Vietnn. and fron other states not
tied to Islan.

(Abu Zahr] "hat is your opinion of the Gen David agree-ants? Do you favor
then as llafiz el-Asad ssys?

[Sa'd sl-Din, sniling] This question doesn't deserve en answen Those who
hear ares and offer their lives to free their honeland do not ask about

corrupt treaties.

(cl

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our history is eloquent. Nothing disturbs Zionisn as Inch as our novnent.
The Calp David group and aafiz al-Asad know who the non of the region are and
who are the ones willing to give up their lives for the cause of God in
defending their land and their people. They know who reject all solutions that
call for surrender. I ask who are the ones who opposed the treacherous
agree-ants in Egypt? They were the Muslin Brotherhood. Vho settled affairs
in Egypt? Khalid al-Islaahuli and his brothers froe along the university
youth are the ones who settled affairs. llafis sl—Asad didn't do it. Al-Asad
played with Gen David in another way consistent with the psychology of the
inhabitants of the region. using the "red line” and the inzernational
police...and a perpetual honey-non with Israel and joint drama.

The Camp David question, you'll forgive ae, se don't ask shout it. But the
real parties (concerned) ask about it and Hafiz aI-Assd does as head of his
real parties.

I want to note here that we have doculsents, secret letters exchanged between
Hafiz al-Assd and big powers sromd this region...In fact, we have doctnents in
llsfis al-Asad's voice as he announced sectarian states. relying on the support
of Israel for these sectarian states.

Voice of lesson
[Abu Zahr] "hat is your opinion of the war between Iraq and Iran?

[Sa‘d el-Din] He said before and we say now this war nust be halted ianediately.
Then unconditional and direct negotiations to settle the dispute, to stop the
war becasue it is wasting the strength of the region...“ hope the rulers of
Tehran will listen to the voice of reason.

[Abu Mr) Hill the Syrian Patriotic Front coabine with the Christians?

[Ss'd sl-Din] Yes, indeed. The first to broadcast the news in Paris was a
Christian belonging to the Pront. lie is solidly behind it.

[Abu zahr] what do you think of the relationship between Islaa and Arabisa‘!

[Sa'd al-Dinl There used to be an artificial and forsal dissension between
Arabia- and Isles, and the snowy profited greatly free it. Many of us and
others as well fell into the trap of bygone contradictions, but this
dissension shows signs of ending. with complete and total solidarity
developing between Arabian and Islu. western aissionaries and orientalists
worked for it. It has a long history. It has been interpreted in various
ways since the last century in the corridors of the Aaerican and Jesuit
universities. And secret conferences have been held (to discuss it).

You ask: Is it necessarily so that if I all an Arab, I an a heretic and enemy
of Islan? If I an a sincere Muslin, do I have to hate the Arabs to when I as
related?

...Nhat is this artificial disaension?

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we found the nelting pot where Arabian inspired lslan and Islan inspires
Arabian and there is no roon for dissension between then.

As my on both sides have said: Arabian is the body and Islan is its soul.
A soul-' cannot do without a body nor a body do without a soul. This
formletion will have the best consequences in this region, God willing.

[Abu Zahr] You are against what is called the Ba'th Party in Syria. what
is you" opinion of the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party now in power in Iraq?

[Sa'd al-Din] The Arab Socialist Ba'th Party in Iraq is the original one.
It opposes the regine of Rafi: al-Ased. It is one of the nain gronnps with
which we have had discussions. He did not find any inconpatibility between
then and ourselves, judging by the texts of the articles I nentioned
previously...0n the contrary, we found that it is based on believing. religious
people and that no party chose nalevolent sects to nake then a support for
their power. We therefore found nsny of the differences of opinion between
us and the party to enter the ranks of the Syrian opposition. It exists on
Syrian territory because we have allied ourselves with the Arab Socialist
Ba'th Party leading Iraq. The Nasserites and Arab socialists and my other
political groups have allied thanselvea with us on this basis.

The Ba'th in Iraq differs radically and totally in its lake-up and orientation
free the party of the sane nane in Syria. If it were like Rafi: al-Asad's
party in its orientation, we would not have not with it under any circt-stances.
He found it to be radically different fron unfit al-Asad's party. It is a
party of the nation. It has a foundation representing the nation while the
other (Syrian) is a sectarian party...we found its leaders. after we got to
know then close-up, to be truly religious sen. I don't want to go into the
details because we would be discussing personal natters of no concern to us now.

In Syria, it is iqossible for anyone who fears God and knows his to cone to
the top. In fact, one obtains a position of responsibility only by way of
i-orality, atheisa, apostasy or by attacking the values of the nation and its
inheritance. Sone party tasters at the top know the ture state of affairs in
Syria and there is a dialogue md cooperation between us and tha. Their
situation is distressing. Ito one dares to pray. In fact, sons of then reveal
their thoughts in Ranadsn so as to rennin in power, to prove they are worthy
of seaming responsibility in Hafiz al-Asad's regine...‘1'he distance is great
and the difference vast.

[Abu Zahr] There are Alawites who are for the regine and others against it...
How does the novenent deal with the Alawites‘!

[Ss'd sl-Din] Given our revolutionary bent. we do not want to exchange the rule
of one party for the rule of another. Given our fighting orientation, we do

not want one sect to take the place of snother...llere we say clearly the
Alswites are fellow citizens, nany of then have been wronged. Hafiz al-Assd
wants to hurl than into the furnace of sectarian war. Sons of th- actually
weep and curse Hafiz al-Asad the way the other sects curse his. we want to save
then fron the sectarian quspire as we want- to save all the groups of our people.

63

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hafiz al-Asad wanted to exalt the sect. Then he wanted to set the sect over the
nation and the tribe over the sect and the ﬁnally over the tribe. But our
accounting is only with those who acted in collusion and dipped their hands

in blood. As for the great najority of sects that case under the pressure of
this tyrannical regine. we are working to save the. just as we are working to
save other groups. He do not say this for political reasons...ﬂe say it out of
principle and good will. this is what we learned iron the noble nessenger

when he conquered liecce and said to its people: What do you think I u doing
to you?" They said, "noble brother and son of a noble brother." he said: "Go.
for you are free." '

[Abu Zahr] Syria's future progran is for everyone. This is clearly stated in
the progran oi the Patriotic Alliance. About a year ago an attth was nade
to assassinate Rafi: al-Aaad and you issued a statennt in which you announced
your responsibility for it. Can you throw a little light on this action?

[Sa'd al-Din] The truth is there are persons close to Hafiz al-Asad who are
cooperating with our Islandc meant. “they were weary of his crises so they
atte-pted to assassinate hill.

[Abu Zahr] Do you went the last word?

[Sa'd al-Din] Our word has been ready for a long tine and it is: 0 rulers of
the Arabs. 0 rulers of non-Arabs, 0 nankind everywhere...You nust consider the
future of your relations with the Syrian people.

It is a serious matter that this silence and this attitude prevail. We are
afraid that the rulers' attitudes will spoil the relations of our people in
Syria with the rest of the Arab people, relations that constitute a basic
strategy for this nation in its capacity for steadfastneas, liberation, and
progress.

I an convinced the regine in Syria is teqorary and eccidental...It does not
represent the inclination of anyone in our nation. God willing, it will go
away soon. I an not only optimistic. I an convinced this black sun-u cloud

will be dispersed soon. very soon.

Finally, our people have sworn and issued their judgnent to punish this killer
who has penetrated deeply into the blood and who has dipped his hands and the
hands of his retinue into the blood of the innocent and the blood of the
chaste. he say to hia what Khalid ibn IIalid said while besieging the
Byzantinee in the stronghold of Aleppo after the siege had been going on for

9 nonths and the Byzantine leader thought boredon had crept into the ranks of
the warriors so that he could negotiate with then to withdraw. Said Khalid ibn
Valid, May God be pleased with hin. addressing the reader and the infidels
around his: "Hhere is your escape? By God, if you ascended to heaven, God
would have caused us to ascend to you. ﬁnd if you descended to earth. God
would have cause us to descend to you. I have cue to you with a people who
love death the way you love life."

COPYRIGH‘: 1982 AL-IIATAN AL-‘ARABI

5216
(280: 6606/1039 END

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY