FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10705

2 August 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM
(FOUO' 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattriluted parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIIE EPORT
TERROR 1 sn

(rouo 9/32)
CONTENTS

HEAR EAST AND Rom AFRICA
AMI!!! AFFAIRS

Hardin: antchun: 17-19 December 1981 Gama
(mu. 19&)IAO...0...OIOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0....

LIBYA

Gunman: Organ enticin- Wooten wanton 91th
ummn
(‘II'JMIqu’ ‘ Jlll &)oooooooooocooovoooo0.00.00...

W831 BUDPB
1m?
3:031 Inn)» 33 Connections Rith Gar-n, Irish
‘lhrroruu
(Franco Coppola; LA IIPIBBIJCA. 26 h 82)............

lhporton matron--
(mm SUI. nmusm. 1981)....0000000000-0000....

Joann]. of the hd Baud”
(atom 031.13 BRIG“! 1688. he 81)...............

SPAIN

ETA (Jo—nun“ to the Buqu: People
(2m. ”r 81)..0.0!OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOO00.0.0.0.0000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUB-

”manna-nun
(m: w, 1977)000O....00000.00000.000000000000000000
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

WIRDS Jmo'rmm: 17-19 DEM". 1.98]. NA

Beirut m in French 1982 pp 2945

[text] The Palace of Justice in Geneva looked like a
temporarily fortified can set up for a trial on this scale.
The searches and the nethodical checking at the entrance to
the court showed. if it was still necessary to prove it,

that Switzerland is a well organised police state. Following
are the notes we took of the trial of Hardiroe Jngotchian.

"Please rise, the court is in session!" It was with these few Words that the
trial of hrdiroe Jasgotchisn began on Thursday. 17 Decorbor 1981. at 9:00 an.
The accused is a cadet soldier of the BAH [Armenian Secret Arly for the
Liberation of Amenia] inprisoned in Geneva since 9 June 1981. Hordiros
proudly entered the roon. With his era in the air, he gave the ”V for

victory sign. Around hi- s aob of photographers jostled each other. Photo-

graphic flashguns crackled. The hearing began with the inpaneling of the
jury. Out of 100 potential jurors called by the court. 12 were accepted, plus
two potential replecuonts. The jury _oat at the left hand side of the pre-
siding judge, facing the prosecutor. lay-0nd room In the first row of seats
was Hardiroe. Behind hin were his lawyers. Devedjian and Benoit. and to
their left was tho Yorgua fanily attorney. Ionnant. All the nsjor partici-
pants wero in place.

The presiding judge, Ourtin, said: Mrdiroe Jengotchian. you are appearing
before the Crininal Court of Geneva. You are accused of the deliberate
hoeicide of Kohl-st Yorguz. a mush diplonst assigned to the ‘mrkieh
Consulate in Geneva. The proceedings ray begin."

Lawyer Benoit for the defense rose and spoke: ”Your Honor, prosecutor.
ladies and gentleaen of the jury. the renarks which I have to asks concern
the age of ny client." Benoit then explained that in view of the different
elenente in the file concerning the identity of Hardiros. it appeared that
certain contradictions had becono evident. as said: "In fact the attorney
general of Lebanon on 7 Nova-bar 1981 brought to the attention of the Swiss
courts inforaation concerning thrdiros Jengotchian. He reported the exis-
tence of a paeeport iesued on 28 January 1981 indicating 2 July 1958 as his
birthdste. low the fanily relationships asntionad are incorrect. noreovor.
there are differences in the dates and in the given nanea of sons of the

MWWONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relativee. For ite part the defenee haa received a eworn etatuent froa the
Patriarchate of Jerueal. which contradicte the inforaetion previouely
referred to. There ie an Areenian tradition which calla for a child to be
preeented to the religioue anthoritiea in Jerueelen. like Jeeua Chriet, ‘0
daye after hie birth. Thie ie eccowenird by the tatooing of me arn. how
Iy client beare on hie era the tatooed date of 1966." At thia point .
Herdiroe, two had rolled up hie eleeve. raieed hie ern in the air to ahow
hie tatoo. "Hence," lawyer Benoit continued, "it ie clear that at the tine
theee evente occurred ny client wee not 18 but 17 yeare old. he a_ conee-
quence, I eat that thia trial be referred to a court having juriediction over
such nettere.”

The were of the jury frowned. They were there to find his guilty and they
did not eeen prepared to give up thia privilege.

Lawyer Devedjiar. for the defenee then roee and aid: "1 wOuld like to aka
a count on the attitude of Herdiroe Jelgotchian. lie hee atated that he
wee born on 1958. Today he etatee that he wae not born until 1966. Thie
apparent contradiction ie explained by the fact that during the entire pre-
trial hearing period he refueed to cooperate with the proeectuion regarding
all aapecte of hie identity, hie fenily relatione, end hie organization.
Moreover. he claim: to have perforned the act of which he ie eccueed. he did
not wish to cheapen it by attributing it to a ninor. Thie ie an act which he
eccepte full reaponeibility for ea the action of an adult who ie aware of hie
obligations. Let ue not forget that this in a netter of a boy who livee in
the Middle Beat and that in Lebanon at age 17 you are an adult. And a 17
year old ie not too young to fight when you belong to a people extereinated
by thoee executionere who nede no dietinction between children and adulte.”

Yergur fenily attorney Bonnent etood up and aaid: "I an aetoniehed. although
I an not too Iuch eurprieed at the etteqt nade by the defenee to raiee
prejudicial circulatencee. During the 6 nonthe of the pre-trial hearinge
the defenae had plenty of tile to raiee thie arguent which it now preeente
to the court for the firet tine. Thie wee Iy firet co-ent. 14y eecond con-
aent ie that the file on the eccueed givee ue the age which J-gotchien hia-
eelf gave no. And he confirned hie age to ue on any occaeione. The pene-
port corroboratee hie etat-ente. And to end thia etatenent we have the
etateaent of the ASA“ iteelf which. eoon after the attack. clained reepon-
eibility for it and identified the eccueed. On that occaeion aleo thia
co-unique Ientione the birth date of 1958. I therefore aelt the court not
to let iteelf be influenced by theee laet einute etatenente."

Prosecutor Reynond Poet, who in a (living?) caricature of what a proeecutor
can be. etood up nervouely end aaid: ”Thie ie a eatter of detereining what
the certent court ehould be. whether the Crininal Court or the Juvenile
Court. which eite behind cloead doore. All the fecte which we have had up to
now. whether the etatenente nade by the eccueed. thoee of hie organisation.
or thia viea forn which be filled out. all indicate 1958 ae the birth date
for Hardiroe Jengotchian. Attenting to neke ue believe that it wee out of
e deeire not to cooperate with the couree of juetice ie an error, eince even
to the doctor charged with giving hie expert opinion on bin Hardiroa

”WWWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jamgotchian said once again that he was born in 1958. And now they tell us
there is a sworn statement from the Patriarchate of Jerusalem which allegedly
proves that he was born in 1964! This is false. In exhibit 2A9 of the pre-
trial hearings, we read: 'In the course of the psychiatric exenination the
doctor mud on the tatoo which Jangotchian had on his arm. The explana-
tion that the latter gave is that his tatoo is from the time when he went to
live with his grandmother.‘ There are the facts." Poex‘s voice became
venomous and hissing when he added: "This is a naneuvar. a procedure in-
tended to sow doubt. In its desperate struggle against denocracy terrorism
has recourse to every possible leans: threats. bonbs. tricks. Previously,
the anarchist who struggled for his ideas boasted of his acts. Now the
terrorist is evasive. That is why I don't believe a word of what they tell
us, and I would say that if it were true, arming children would be the
suprenely shmseful act of terrorisnl" He sits down white-faced. his thin
face angry. Judge Ourtin orders the suspension of the court session for the
consideration of the points raised.

At 11:00 all the court session resumes. Judge Curtin reads the decision of
the jury: "In view of the question raised regarding the age of Hardiros
Jamgotchian, in view of the fact that the revelations naée today have no
other purpose than to make the Crininal court incowetent to hear this case.
in view of the fact that the statement of the Pstrlarchata of Jerusalem does
not state that Hardiros Jangotchian was presented to it 40 days after his
birth, in view of the fact that he has told us that he is the eldest of five
children, in view of what he has told us concerning his life, that is, the
succession of events and jobs he held until 1980, in view of the fact that he
then lived for 18 nonths in a can of Palestinian refugees. in view conse-
quently of all the evidence in the file lentioning the year 1958 as his birth
date, in view of the fact that on 12 August 1981, during his final interroga-
tion, he said he was born on 20 June 1958; for all of these motives, there-
fore, the court rejects these prejudicial state-ants and declares the
accused liable to trial in the Criminal Court."

A buzz of cement ran through the watching audience composed essentially of
Armenians, of Swiss. and above all of French citizens. The presiding judge
then read the charge: ”Hardiros Heguerditch Jamgotchian appears today before
the Crininal court charged with having violated the Swiss Penal Code on 9
June 1981 by deliberately killing a person; by being found in possession of
a revolver. a hand grenade and bullets: by receiving instructions while
traveling from Beirut to Zurich and than fron Zurich to Geneva from a person
who designated a trash can where the weapons were hidden; by loading his
weapon: by lying in wait for the Turkish diplomat. following and shooting
hie in the back with three bullets; by taking flight. removing his sweater
in the building; and subsequently by not displaying any regret in the course
of his interrogation but rather boasting of his act and saying that he was
ready to do it again. Hardiroa is there before us. standing straight, with
his head erect. We can begin the hearing of testimony by the witnesses."

The usher brings forward the first witness, Inspector R. The presiding judge
asks the witness: "Your nene, given name. age. and occupation. please. Do

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

you swesr to tell the truth end nothing but the truth. to speek without
hstred. feer. end fsvor. Reise your right hend end sey. 'I sweer' or 'I
pronise.” The presiding judge will restste this formuls neny tines during
the sessions. The first witness seys: "I wss in ly office on 9 June st
6:00 pl when e report reeched ne etsting thet there hed been s lurder
co-itted on the Boulevsrd Belvetique. The nurderer hed been erreeted end
questioned. The victim of the sttsck wee to die before reeching the hospitsl.
He continued with the interrogetion of the sttscker. Es eeid he wee celled
Jesnnot Krikorisn. The following dsy he wee interrogeted by Inspector Boukd.
The weepon found in his possession wee Belgien nede end wee pert of .e ship-
nent of weepone delivered to the Ireqi govern-stat. The weepon wee loeded
end hed been fired. In his pockets we found loose csrtridges. e legerine for
the pistol, end s hand grenede. he steted thet he hed co-itted this set
for his country."

The prosecutor eshed: "Be gsve no indicstion where he hed been stsying‘l"

Inspector R replied: "No. And despite the eppeels for infoxnstion which we

put in the press. no one hes cone forwerd to provide inforestion rsgsrding
hie."

The presiding judge esid: ”Good. the court thsnhs you. I wish to reed the
deposition nede by Herdiros Jengotchisn (exhibit 25 in the file of evidence)
sfter his interrogstion st 6:15 pe:

'I hitchhiked out of Tehersn to cerry out s eission for the ASALA. of which
I en en inortent officiel. I crossed the Swiss border on foot. 1 srrived
in Geneve where, in sccordence with the ASALA directives. I went every dey
st 2:00 pl to the English gerden under the norloge Fleurie. I wee greeted
by en unknown wonen with grey heir, e lerge bosom. end e red dress with lerge
bleck dots. She ssid to he in Arnenien: 'Good sfternoon. Selie' end told
me not to look st her. She leter pointed to e trssh cen in which weepons
were hidden. I went to get then end when I returned, she hed dissppesred.

I went to the public toilet end shut myself in one of the booths to clesn
the greese off the revolwr. During the following dsys I wslked eround the
city, seeing the sights. end slept outside under the stere. 0n Fridey. 5
June, I went to the Consulete of ‘they et shout 5:30 pn. I went to Iske
cleer thet I wes cerrying en unlosded pistol. 1 hed no intention to kill
snyone, ss I hed cone essentielly to look eround. My orgsnisetion hed given
he the right to choose eIIong possible courses of ection: either to go into
the Consulete end blow it up or kill e Thrkish diplolsst. 0n Pridey [5 June]
I wee in plece scross from the Coneulete of Turkey. I sew four nsn cone
out of it. They were speeking ‘Nrkish end hed rensrked thet I wss following
then. One of then seemed to be more ieportsnt then the others. I decided
to cone beck end to kill the lsrgest possible number of Turkish officiels.

I csne beck on Hondey [8 June]. The Consulste seemed to be closed. I
lesrned fron e peseerby thet it wee closed beceuse of Pentecost. 0n the
following dey, Thesdsy [9 June]. I csne heck. I hed loeded Ily pistol: 13
rounds in the ssgesine. 10 rounds in ny right hend pocket. end others in ey
left pocket. I wsited in the eels plece. At 6:00 pm 1 sew en individuel
cons out of the Consulete. I recognized hie es the one who seened the met

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inortant to Is on the previous Friday [5 June]. Another individual cans out
after his. and they went down the street together and then separated at a
corner. I followed the first individual on foot. Coeing up to a distance

of 2 nsters fron hie I fired three shots to his back. I then ran away. I
ran and after covering 500 or 600 esters I took cover in an alley. Then I
went up to the second floor of a building and I took off the blue sweater
that I had been wearing. Under it I had another sweater. I went out onto the
street again and bought a package of cigarettes. Then I went into a store
and at the exit I was stopped and questioned by a policeman. I surrendered
without resistance because those were the orders of Ily organization. I still
had the pistol and the hand grenade on us. They put handcuffs on us. I

was pushed into a police car. They threw Is on the floor of the car. and a
police dog jqued on Is and bit es in the shoulder. When we arrived at the
police station they pulled no out of the car by the hair and dragged us to
the entrance of the police station. I would like to say that I do not regret
this action. I had to do it in the nan. of ny people.”

The nonotone voice of the presiding judge fell silent after this reading of
the state-mt. and the voice of the prosecutor was heard: "This act was
clained in the course of the evening by ASAIA (Arasniau Secret Array for the
Liberation of Arnenia)."

Inspector R said: "Yes, and he always stated that he acted alone."

Defense attorney Benoit said: "I have to nsntion the fact that there was no
identification of the accused in a lineup. I uses to say by that the
witnesses did not have to recognise Hardiros Jaqotchian anong four or five
other persons."

Inspector It said: "The witnesses were in a state of shock and didn't want to
see his again."

Lawyer Benoit said: "However, the photographs of Hardiros Jengotchian
been nade. Here those shown to the witnesses?"

Inspector R replied: ”The photographs are a police foreality."

The presiding judge said: "In any case the photographs taken could not be
shown the sens evening to the witnesses. There was a letter of sons delay."

Defense attorney said: "But Polaroid photographs were used. Therefore. the
question asked by Lawyer henoit is pertinent!"

Pertinent questions were not to the taste cf the presiding jud'ze. and he
brought forward the second witness, a Mr I, and read his depos;-ion: "It was
after 6:00 pm when I heard pistol shots. I was on Iy notorcycle. I saw a
nan who was f [ring on a niddle-aged non who fell down. The attacker inedi-
ately fled. I started ry notorcycle and tried to follow hin. Near the Rue
des Beaux Arts I saw his again. I crossed the street and followed hie. he
was walking quickly but not running. Then I lost sight of hin. I then saw
sons police-en and went over to than."

S

MWLUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The judge then said: "To the question: 'Do you recognise the murderer in
this photo?’ you replied: 'It's the second fro. the right. They took an to
bio. I recognized hie froe his profile and his clothing. To be frank, it's
lore the silhouette that I recognized. If I had not been confronted with
hie at the police station. I would not have recognised hie.‘

Yergu: attorney Bonnet said: "Can you give us further infornstion. that is.
whether he was alone or not?" '

The witness said: ”It was the tine when offices were cloning and therefore
there were any people. However. I only new one nan fire.”

Defense attorney Devedjien asked: ”Would you recognise his today?"
The witness replied: "no, I can recognize his silhouette. that's all."

Defense attorney Devedjien said: ”I would like to ask the witness if he new
noneone who night have been present at the scene, 2 or 3 Intern fro. the nan
firing the pistol."

The witness replied: "I don't recall."

It was 12:15 pe when the third witness cans to testify. Miss A. In her
tentinony she said: "Hhen I was parking Iy car in the parking lot, I heard
three shots. I saw a nan run across the parking lot, with a large gun in
his hand. I followed hi- with two people I had not in the parking lot. We
telephoned the police when we so! hit enter a store. and he was then stopped
for questioning by a policeman.”

The presiding judge said: ”You were confronted with his in the court of the
investigating judge. You specifically recognised hill."

Miss A replied: "Yes, I would have recognized hie anong a thousand people.
his face has flashed through ey head and has followed no for moths and .-
nonths. I was overwhelnnd. It's not every day that you hear pistol shots in
the street." She nests-ed a drastic air and clung nervously to the railing
in front of her.

Defense attorney Devedjian: "Before the hearing before the judge. which took
place 2 weeks after the events. did you see his photograph in the press?"

Miss A replied: "Yes.”

Defense attorney Devedjian said: ”That's what I wanted to hear you say. And
did you see hie run or fire?"

Miss A replied: "Only run."

Defense attorney Devedj ion "How far was he fron you?"

FOIOII'I'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIC'AL USE ONLY

Hiss A: "About 30 tasters." She clutched her purse. trsn'oling. and without
looking at Hardiros, she left the courtroom. sniffing:

At 12:60 pn the fourth witness was heard. The prsiding judge read his state-
sent in a nonotone: "I was on sy sotorbike. I heard three pistol shots. I
saw a nan fall down and. in front of the wounded nan, another individual with
a revolver in his hand. He ran away. As he ran. he had his pistol in his
hand. a. had black hair and black eyebrows, which I noticed.” This state-
aent provoked sons reaction in the courtroom because hrdiros is not any
particular "type." With his hrowish hair, his light eyebrows. and his green
eyes, he did not really correspond to the rather fantastic description. to
say the least, which this witness gave. The witness continued: "I was
confronted with his and I recognized hia by his corpulence and his hair. I
saw hin first through a glass window and then, since it was dark, they opened
the door and I saw his, asking the 'V for victory' sign."

The prosecutor asked: "You couldn't see other people running or hiding?”
The witness answered: "Ito."

Defense attorney Devedjian asked: "Do you exclude the fact that there might
have been other persons at the scene of the attack?"

The witness replied: "Beginning with the tine when I could'nt see everything,
I don't see how I could exclude that possibility."

The fifth witness cans to the witness stand. "I was leaving my office." she
said. 'Vhen I reached the Avenue helvetique. I heard three shots. A person
ahead of as was falling. The person was followed by an arned nan who ran
away. I should state that I was slightly wounded: I felt a burning sensa-
tion on Iy are. The bullet oust have grazed us. however, in view of the
uninportsnce of the wound, I did not present a cowleint. I recognized his
at the hearing in the courtroon of the investigating judge because he had
been pointed out to no at the police station. There they asked us if I
recognized him. I said I did not. The two nan were very close together.
The first Ian turned his back on the nan following hits. The other continued
to follow, holding a pistol. I saw the first nan sag forward and fall to
the ground. I didn't see other persons at the scene. I ran after the
fugitive and I stopped. I saw a young Ian on e footbridge and I shouted:
'A:rest hinl' However, he left without understanding what I said."

Yergur attorney Bonnet said: "Can you tell us what you did when you ap-
proached the victin?"

The witness replied: "He wanted to tell as sonething. he let out a terrible
cry which node such an inpression on no."

The prosecutor asked: "You are a trained nurse. Couldn't you do anything
while you waited for help?"

The witness answered: "No, I couldn't do anything for hill. I simply held
his head. There was a spreading hloodstain on his chest."

7

l-‘OIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prosecutor esked: ”Did you see if there were other people eround‘!"
The witness replied: "It sealed to se thet there weren't ssny people erased."

Defense sttorney Devedjien esked: "Gen you exclude the possibility thet the
there were other persons eround whos you did not see?"

The witness seid: "I don't know. I didn't see eny."

Defense ettorney Devedjien esked: "And this young sen to when you spoke when
you esked his to stop the fugitive, is he one of the witnesses?"

The witness replied: "I don't think so. He ran ewey end diseppeered. I
don't know enything else."

The sixth witness cese to the witness stsnd end seid: "I hesrd three shots.
Isewessnfell to theground. Isewenothersenrunewey. Behedepistol
in his hend. I didn't recognize thet sen becsuse I only sew his fros the
heck." I wes street by his heircut. which wee very short on the beck of his
neck.

The prosecutor esked: "Hes he elone?"

The witness enewered: "Yes, but in fect I should sey thet I hed Iy eyes
firsly fixed on his."

Defense ettorney Devedjien esked: "Cen you exclude the possibility thet
there were other persons eround‘!"

The witness seid: "Where I wee there wes no one else."

The court session went on, serked by the fuzzy ststesents of the witnesses.
The usher brought in the seventh witness. The presiding Judge reed the
deposition of this witness: "I wes driving in ny cer. I noted e young sen
who wes looking behind his. He fired st e pessing person who greppled with
his. The first shot went into the men's chest and the second shot in the
face. At the police stetion they presented his to se, eeying thet he wes the
murderer, but I steted thet I hed never seen this young sen before."

The prosecutor seid: "You didn't see other fugitives?"

The witness replied: "No."

Then followed the testisony of the four policesen who interrogeted Herdiros.
"It wes e custoser of e store stending on the terrece who identified the sen
whon we were holding." These were slso the policesen who confisceted the

gun end the bend grenede which Herdiros wes cerrying on his. The policemen
testified, one sfter the other. At 1:30 ps the court session wes suspended.

At 3:15 ps the session resused with other witnesses being heerd. Judge
Ourtin seid: "Hr 0, I will reed your deposition: '1 wes driving in sy cer.

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suddenly, I heard three shots. like explosions. I noticed a young nan, his
an held out, a gun in his hand. who was looking at a nan who was falling
down before hin. I pulled Iy head down out of fear. The young nan seemed
to be about 18 years old and was dressed in light blue clothing. At the
police station they showed him to us through a window. Be resnhled the Ian
1 saw in height. I cannot say whether he was alone or not."'

At 3:35 pa Dr Brunswainer. the ballistics expert, cans to the stand to testi-
fy in Ger-an on the results of his study concerning the pistol, an m [Bel-
gianvnade] Browning. HP nodal, end the bullets. He gave an impression of
“parties in his explanations.

Defense attorney Benoit asked: "I would like the expert to say if on such a
gun it is possible to take off inressions of the fingerprints and what he
thinks of the validity of the Gonzales test?"

Dr Brunswainer replied: "I cannot answer that because these questions are
out of any area of coupetsnce. For the rest I can state categorically that
the cartridge cases certainly cons fron this gun."

At 6:20 pn Dr Mayer. an expert in explosives, cans to testify regarding the
hand grenade. "It's a Russian type grenade. It weighs 590 grans--530 grans
of casing end 60 grams of explosives. It's a fragnsntation grenade. This

type of grenade can kill over a radius of 10 asters end wound people over a

radius of 100 neters.

Hardiros stands up and speaks in Armenian. At his side Hr Godel, a Swiss
citizen of a respectable age, narried to an Arnenian wonan and a professor
of Arnenian, translates for his: ”The grenade was ready to be used when the
mrkish diplomat was killed. I defused it afterward." Mardiros leaned to-
ward the expert to explain how he defused it and held out his era as if to
take it. Dr Mayer draw back, as though afraid. There were sons laughs in
the courtroom.

At 6:50 pn a mrkish colleague of the nurdered nan cans to testify on the
stand. lie was Sadenin Sendogan, an attache at the Consulate of lurkey under
Hehnet Yerguz. It was also Mr Godel who translated the questions and answers
in Turkish. Hr Sadenin Sendogan said: "I left ay office with the consul and
we separated later. Then I saw a nan lying on the ground. He was dead. I
iuedietsly recognized Hehnet Yergus, the victim. 0n 5 June, about 6:00 pn.
I had left the Consulate in his company without noticing anything in partic-
ular."

Yerguz ‘anily attorney Bonnant asked: "Can you tell us sonething about the
personality of Yerguz'!"

Sadenin Sendogan replied: "He was a nan of perfect inpartiality. In his
position as a secretary of the Consulate he received everyone: mm, Kurds.
Armenians, without distinction."

Yerguz family attorney Bonnant said: "Yes, yes, on the whole, he was a good
nan, a tolerant man. This incident served no one's interest. It had no
justification."

9

FOIOI'l-‘ICIALlSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prosecutor esked questions in turn: ”Do you know the fenily of ﬁshnet
Yerguz?"

Sedenin Sendogen enswered: "Yes, I know then. And I know thet he hsd spent
his lest weekend with his fenily with their best friends, who ere Arneniens."
Annoyed end slightly ironic co-snts ren through the crowd ettending the
session. The word circuleted thet Teleet elso, his best friend. wss en
Amenien.

The presiding judge suddenly co-ented: "I find this leughter which we heve
just heerd quite uneccepteble. Let us not forget thet e nsn hes died. thet
st this mothers is e wonsn. e weeping wife, horn e Swiss citizen, who
could not ettend the triel heceuse since these events she hes been going

through s nervous hroekdownl And I u going to reed to you the letter which
she sent to the court to excuse her ehsence." And he reed this letter, e
reel funerel eulogy for the victin.

Defense ettorney stedjien seid: "I would like to set the witness if he hes
knowledge of the existence of genocide in Arnenie. His enswer will he very
interesting for us.”

The witness, ennoyed. turns towerd the lewyer end says with e helf snile: "I
e- 32 yeers old."

Defense ettorney Devedjien responds. dryly end coldly: "Ihet's enough for
ac. That's ell I wented to beer.”

The presiding judge seid: "As fer es Iy ns-ory goes—end. noreover. I wes
born well efter this set of genocide—I heve often heerd people speek of it,
end I recell thet when I wss e child, I wss wellting with Iy nother end we

passed e nunber of Arnsnien refugees in Geneve, end thet left so inpression
on use."

Defense ettorney Devedjien seid: "Thet is not the problem I en not setting
you the question but rether e Turkish diplonst. And I note thet he does not
went to answer."

The prosecutor seid: "But this is e question of historic culture!"

Devedjien seid decisevely: "No, sinly of hunen culture. If you esk e young
Ger-en if he knows of the existence of genocide egeinst the Jews. he would
surely not enswer: ‘I so only 20 yeers old!‘ And if he enswered. you would
have the right to esk other questions!"

The prosecutor hristled: "But they heve not just killed Ger-en diplonets on
our soil!"

Defense ettorney Devedjien cut his short heetedly: "But Gerneny does not
deny the existence of genocide egeinst the Jews by the Nexis. Hr Prosecutor,
thet is the whole difference!"

l-‘OIOI’FIGALUSEONLY
F03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It wee 5:05 ps. The heering of these storey discussions wes suspended for
e tine. At 5:30 ps the triel rest-ed with new witnesses testifying. A Hr D
wee on the stend.

Mr D seid: "I wee in ey texi. stopped st s red light. I heerd e series of
shots. I sew e crowd fertber up the street. I didn't see enyone else et the
scene."

Then cells Inspector R. The cheirsen of the court reed sons of the s'.etensnts
which Herdiros node end in which the dste of 26 April wee nentioned. Defense
ettorney Devedj isn erose end expleined: "The dete of 210 April is the
snniversery of the dey the decree wee signed by the Turkish ninister of the
interior, ordering the externinetion of e whole people."

The following stetenente by Merdiros Jeegotchien were real. "I scted in the
none of Ily people end I do not regret whet I did in eny wey. Like other
nenbers of the ASALA, I only know Alec Yeniconechien end Susy Hssbsredjien
by nene."

The Yerguz fenily sttorney ssked the inspector: "Did he speek to you of e
second co-endo group?"

Inspector R replied: "No."

The prosecutor turned to Herdiroe: "You told the inspector you hed been
something like e tourist in hence. “here, when. end with whoa?"

Msrdiros Jengotchien replied: "In Peris. end I wee there elone in 1977."

The prosecutor asked: "So you were 13 yesrs old then, if you ere l7 yeers
old todey. end you went on e trip elone et 13 yeers of ege?

Herdiros Jengotchien enswered: "Yes. since I hed the necessery penission
free .57 parents.”

The usher brought in enother witness. Inspector Bouke who, in his testimony.
steted thet the only essistence which Herdiros Jmotchun hed nsntioned wes
thet women who pointed out the treeh cen to his. The prosecutor esked: "a.
elso told you thet he hed been in Peris?"

Inspector Bouts replied: "Yes, end he eeid he wes elone."

The prosecutor esid: "Alone, which is, es you will ednit, difficult to
reconcile with the stetensnt thet he is l7 ysere old. Thet nsens thet he
was 13 et the tins of the visit to Peris." The cheirnen of the court con-

sented ironicelly: "In fect the eccused hes leerned todey thet he wes l7
yeers old.”

[pessege sissing]"...wes in contect with the events which were occurring. He
lived for e little less then 2 yeers in e treining cen where he received
nilitery. politicel. end ideologicel treining. men he wee designeted for

ll

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this operstion in Switzerland. hating the dielogue which we hed with hie we
hed the iwression thet e distsnt but my contect wss possible. He did not
hsve the inression of encountering e blind fensticue. 'rhere shone fron
hie e kind of feith, of trenquil deterninetion. s kind of sensitivity end of
enotionel cepscity. Be sppeered to us like e soldier swsre of whet he hed
to do. he wee slso swsre of the criticise which we outlined end of the
duty which he hed to perform It is certein thet he obeyed lsws other then
our lews. but as is not sick. Regerding the danger which he could constitute.
this cold conviction which he showed Isde us think of the denger but not of
e eentel denger: rether of the denger presented by s nsn who would not
respond to the cue lews es we do."

Yergus fenily lewyer honnent esked: "Did he express eny regrets?"

Professor hrenein replied: "No. he told I. of e rether lsrge nuder of
letters which he received frol eole of his conpetriots who spoke of him like
e hero. but he told es thet he regretted heving pleced Switzerlend in denger.

Yergut ettorney Bonnent continued: "Did he reise eny questions shout his
responsibilitius?”

Professor Breneie replied: "so."

Yerguz ettorney lonnent esked: ”Did he reise questions shout his responsi-
bility for the sct of which he is eccussd‘l"

Professor Breneis enswered: ”No."

Yerguz sttorney Bonnent ssked: "Professor. since we heve hed the opportunity
on my occasions to eppreciete your seriousness regerding expert psychietric
opinion in other triels. I en sstonished et the very short tine in which

your work hes been scconplished on this csse. could this he rether slepdeeh
work?"

Professor Brenein replied: "The four meetings which we hsd with hie were
enough to dusonstrste thet he wee not lentslly ill."

The sherp voice of the prosecutor wee reised: "Eben you perfomed this
eminetion, the Cornevin etteck [on s Swiss reilwsy stetion] hed elreedy
been perpetreted. whet did he sey shout this?”

Professor Bernein enswered: "He told as thet he wee executing e nilitery
type order end thet he wes obliged to beer the consequences which followed
without rejoicing in then."

The prosecutor seid: "You speek in your report of e nor-s1 nentel develop-
nent or even beyond?"

Professor Berneil replied: "yes, he is en intelligent boy. Let's not for-
get thet his fenily hed lived in e refugee cenp. terribly treunstised by

12

POI OFFICIAL [SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their experienced. I could only adnire that Itch nore the courage of thie
fanily vhich eucceeded, in a eituation of extreme poverty. in eetabliehing
a very favorable atloephere."

The proeecutor eaid: "You nantion in your report that you noticed the tatoo
vhichhehaeonhiearnandthatyouaekedhinvhat itneant. Canyoutell
no it. ae he hae alleged. the tatoo vee placed there when he nae a baby?”

The expert turned toward Hardiroe, looked at the tatoo. and eaid, ”Ho."

The proeecutor axclainad. addraeeing hineelf to the court: "They lied to
you! '

There wee aetoniehnant in the audience. Since when ie the view of an expert
in peychiatry a guarantee of truth about e tatoo? However, the proeecutor
continued the queetioning of the expert: "You renarhed that hie pereonality
wee lore adult than that of other young lent"

Profeaeor Bernein replied: ”Ilia detarnination ie that of an adult. but hie
enthueiaen, hie devotion to duty are rather juvenile. I would like to point
out that the terrible axperiencee of thie fanily probably earved to maintain
the very epecial atnoephare in which he lived. Ilia nother gave his a kind
of. bleeeing when she learned of hie joining the am. Thia ie not a trau-
aatic experience but a kind of reaction to a drana."

Defanee attorney Devedjian aehad: "The fact that the exietence of thie
drana to deetroy a nation hae been denied, ian't thie a way of heightening
the reactione of youth?"

Profeeeor Bernein answered: "That ie a natural reaction to thie drana." he
continued: ”la acted out of an ideali'en tranenitted to his hy hie family."

The preeiding judge interrupted hin: "Evidently. he only eav one thing:
avenging and winning hack a tetherland. end that neceeearily involved the
mrder of a Turk on the edge of a eidevelhl"

Detenee attorney Benoit aeked: "Profeeeor Bernein. doee my client have the
full capacity to undaretend the iqlicatione of the act which he co-ittad?"

The profueor replied that he did.

The presiding judge aehed: "Hie capacity to orient hineelf hae naceeeerily
been dininiehed hy hie fanaticienl"

Profeeeor Bernein eaid: "It ie certain that, coneidering hie young age, he
nae indoctrinated. but that ie not an illnaee."

The prosecutor aeked: "You have not diacerned any trouble in hie conecianca?"

Profeeeor Berneia replied: "No. Really no trouble. either in hie aenee of
righteoueneee. hie tranquility. and hie determination. we would be

13

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accustomed to speak of nental problems in my people. Bis deternination
inspires a certain kind of esteen and of understanding. Be is not sick."

Judge Ourtin said: "The court thanks you." This concluded the last witness
presented by the prosecution. This was the end of what people present at
the trial almst all felt was the first stage in the presentation of the
prosecution case, since the state-ante of the witnesses (who. moreover, were
not the lost convincing of witnesses nor particularly in agreement with each
other) sought to degrade as Iuch as possible the act by Hardiros. making
his: appear-except in the case of Professor Bernein—as the worst of scoun-
drels, a; the lost odious of criminals. They did not even hesitate to lake
inroper state-eats. referring to hill on several occasions by his "loutish"
appearance. Strongly supported in that direction by the prosecutor (which
hardly seens nor-e1) but also by the chair-an of the court. whose openly
partial attitude (he had been represented to us as favoring the Araenisns.)
shocked the audience on several occasions. It is curious to see these
supporters of the Armenians who only support the Araeniane by belosning
their fate.

The voice of the presiding judge was raised once again: "He will now proceed
to hearing the defense witnesses. Bring in Mr Beaufort."

Defense attorney Benoit asked: "Do television in 1975 Mr Beaufort inter-
viewed an historian of the Arnenisn genocide. and I would like to know the
reactions which this produced sung the Turks."

Beaufort replied: "Yes. in fact. following this broadcast I received a
cowlaint fro- the Turkish Blbaesy criticising use for having spoken of the
Arnenian question."

Judge Curtin. who during all of the testiIony toyed with his gavel to occupy
hisself, took the opportunity to show off his knowledge: “I advise all of
you to read the book by Mr Pasteraadjian. which tells the extraordinary story
of the Araenien people, and in which I read the following passage. which
shows that the ‘Durks adaittad in 1919 having couitted genocide, and it is
not because sons of then do not wish to recognise this fact that this should
be nade into a generality."

Defense attorney Devedjian said: "This concerns the official Position of the
Turkish anhassador who thus expresses the views of his governnentl" Be
nentioned the latter in which. with regard to the interview. he spoke of a
"one-sided broadcast." and of "alleged events without any foundation in fact."
etc.

Beaufort said: “This concerned an interview in which Jean Marie Carson
discussed the latter of the Arnenian genocide. It was the sunny of his
book. that is, of purely historical facts."

Defense attorney Devedjisn said: "I would like to say that it is to the
honor of Switzerland to have allowed his to speak on the air regarding the

Armien probles. despite the pressure fron a foreign government.

14

MWUSEONLY
I’OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prosecutor co-mted spitefully: "All of this does not justify the fact
that he emitted a cowardly mrder against an unarlad narJ"

Defense attorney Davedjian rose and retorted: "We have also been subject to
cowardly assassination, believe us!”

It was just before 7:00 pn. The trial was suspended until the following day
.t 9300 “a

Friday, 18 Decenber 1981. 9:15 an. "Please rise. the court is in saaaion."
The trial reamed with the hearing of defense witnesses. Mrs Sophie schnidt
entered. She looked with amathy at liardiros and began her testinony: "I
was born in Istanbul. As an eight year old child I saw no - refugees who
passed through our house. They were fleeing from the Arnanzan provinces
where the massacres had begun. As a young girl I heard the story of these
families which were victins of the mucus and of the poople who escaped
and went insane. I was spared that because I had the good luck to narry a
Swiss citizen who wished to save a young Arnenian girl. One of Iy cousins
saw her nother thrown into a well: gasoline was poured on her and she was set
on fire." Her voice broke as she added" "I have one thing to say." She
continued, sobbing: ”I an proud. proud of being an Arnenian. A people was
nassacred. He had a stainless nelaa. Today I regret that we have cone to
this!" Then between sobs. there followed an exhortation in Geraen in which
it turned out that she was revolted by the injustice done to her people.
Ber face bathed in tears. she turned toward Hardiros and said, pointing at
hin: "book. he doesn't have an assassin's face! I leave that to God's
judgeaanti" Overwhelasd, she suddenly laf t the witness chair. The throats
of the audience were choked with smathy. Reverend Telvedj ian fron
Marseille cane to the witness stand.

Defense attorney Devedj ien said: "Reverend Yelvadjian has participated in
the preparation of a nonumt to the victins of the genocide in Marseille.
I would like hin to explain the difficulties that were encountered."

Reverend Yelvadjian replied: "The connittee for the construction of our
nonunant sought to honor those Athenians who died for France during the
world wars. In 1972 it also sought to honor those who died in the genocide
in 1915. The Turkish anbassador opposed this and used all of his influence
to prevent the construction of this nonunent which, noreover. was to be
built in the private precincts of an Armenian religious building. At the
tine Minister Coniti told no of the col-ant of the French ninister of foreign
affairs, who said, 'I'n not going to have trouble with the harks because of
the Armenians.” Reverend Yelvadjir-t then hmded to the presiding judge a
letter fron the prefect of the Departnsnt of Bouchaa du Rhone in which he
inforned the connittee that construction of the moms-ant was prohibited. The
chairnan of the court read the latter and than co-anted: "Once again this
is a case which shows that the great powers have always engaged in a kind of
rivalry to show who was more cowardly toward the Athenians."

Defense attorney Devedjian arose and said: "liaanwhile, it is we who are
accused of cowardice. Your honor!"

MOFFIOALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The presiding judge said: "There is a question of public order."
Defense attorney Devedj ien replied: "Agreed, there are some circmstances."

Reverend Yelvadjien then began a long diatribe which just nissed turning

out badly: "This is a unique nonunsnt in the world when the Armenian
genocide perpetrated by the mrkieh govern-ant in 1915 is rennbered. Telaat
Pasha has his moment; as long as he has one. we will have ours. You won't
see the end of this, everywhere in Switzerlanc, in Trance. There will con-
tinue to be bois; you won't see the and of this! This is a ninister of
religion who tells you this. I have no hatred against the Turks, but I would
not like to be in the position of the defenders of the Turks at the judgnsnt
seat of God!” He continued. his face red with anger: "Hy father was decap-
itated, they painted ny mother's face. She who was so beautiful. at that
she wouldn't be raped! History will continue. That generation no longer
hears us!" He shook hie fist nenscingly: "when there no longer are solu-
tions for the wise, it is the nadnen who find solutions! Hell. Hardiros
Jengotchian is a Indian in a certain way, and there are thousands like that!
This is not vengeance. He demand justice. These assassins emitted a
disgraceful cri-e: let than admit it! Our cause is just. without any hatred
against the Turks. and I pray for the victim of this crime and hie family."

The prosecutor interrupted hia shrrply: "Oh. it's easy to kill and then pray
afterwards!"

Reverend Yelvadjian, foaming with rage. shouted; "Shut up! I forbid you to
speak, you hear! I pray for then and I also pray for out dead!" Herdiros'
lawyer made his quiet down. and Reverent Yslvadj ian regretfully gave place
to the next witness.

The narshell was instructed: "Bring in Reverend Karnusien."

Defense attorney Devedjian said: "Reverend Karnusian is assigned to the

town of Getaedt. Can you explain to us how your compatriots are able to live
with this rejection of the Arlenian genocide?"

Professor Godel translates the question to the minister into Arnenian. and
the latter replied: "I an a Swiss citizen. And for the last 30 years. as a
religious leader twice each week I an confronted with this question. By
Arlenians residing in Switzerland, but also by others who cane nore recently.
refugees who cone in search of assistance. of advice. And when I ask then
why they have left their countries. that is, Thrkey, Lebanon. Iran, etc, they
respond that where they were living they have no security. neither for their
lives or their property. They have no future. To understand this situation
you have to go back into history. Since 19“ the Middle East has been all
nixed up, and our young people in particular see no future for thuselves.

In a difficult situation such as has existed in Lebanon. Iran, or elsewhere,
they see their future is blocked because they don't have a country to go to.
The young people therefore have recourse to nsasures of violence. The
Arlenians don't hate the ‘Nrke. However. the only place where they could
settlendown would be their own country which has been taken over by the
mrks.

16

MWLWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prosecutor said: "The Russians also occupy their country."

Reverend Iarnusian said: ”I an speaking of the Arnenian territory occupied
by the Turks."

Defense attorney Devedjian said: "In Soviet Arnenia at least they can live.
In only one tenth of the historic territory of Arnenia there is a country in
which they can live, despite everything.” The minister calmly rest-ed his
statement and in a rigorously Swiss fashion he analysed the situation: "Up
to now the Turkish govern-ant has denied the existence of genocide. This
fact has treunatized ell Arnenians. even up to the present. This is not a
matter of ancient history. This is not politics or propaganda. This is the
history of today and of tonorrow. Every Armenian is profoundly effected by
this situation. The Armenian is ready to pardon the Turks. Christ pardoned
his enenies. however, this is on condition that the guilty parties repent
for what they did. The responsibility for what happened belongs to the
Turkish govern-mt. Re have lived together for centuries and we are prepared
to live again. side by side, since we are neighbors after all."

Reverend Kamusian stopped for an instant and then continued firnly: ”Ha are
ready for discussions. but we are not prepared to renounce our rights, our
land. This say go on for S, 10, 20 years, but we will not renounce our
rights, and the struggle will continue until we have a country that is
independent and free. like Switzerland. These young nan who take sction
now—it is the Turks who force then to use these neans. and it is also the
great powers who have betrayed the Arsenian people. If the Arnenians don't
draw attention to thenselves, who will speak in their place? No one. And
it is this silence which provokes these young people and incites then to have
recourse to these neane. I suffer free the fact that we have reached this
point, but I repeat. it is the Turkish and other govern-ants and even the
Russians who, by their silence, force us to have recourse to violence." He
ended his statement: "The Arnenian cause is not an historical but rather a
contoporary question. One day the Arnenian question will be a current
problea."

The presiding judge added: "You have to recognise that throughout their
history the Arnenian people have been able to depend only on thenselves."

Reverend Karnusian continued: "I recall the treaty of Lausanne. signed in
1923, by which the decisions of the treaty of Sevres were rejected as far as
Arnenia was concerned. I recall in 1978. at the United Nations. here in
Geneva, under the chairnanship of the hurts, the amen Rights Commission
removed all references to its decision to eention the Armenian genocide."

The presiding judge. who knows his history and wanted to show it, again inter-
vened: "Hasn't there an earlier betrayal of the Arnenien people after the
signature of the treaty of Berlin (1885]. which had at least given a certain
statute to the Arleniane and which was never applied because of the great
powers? Let's recall that this treaty followed nassecres which had taken
place in 1895 [sic], naesacree whose application, because of a defective

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and corrupt adninistration, was turned over to the Kurds. And let's not
forget the Russians in 1905. who had the Arneniens Iessacred by the Tartere.”

Reverend Karnusian said: "Yes, and for Iy part I regret that my country,
Switzerland, was where. on two occasions, in Lsusanne in 1923 and in Geneva
in 1978. the Aresnian people were buried. Switzerland becane the castery
of the ‘Arnenien people. There is a Chinese proverb which says: 'A nan dies
twice: once in his body and the second tine when he is forgotten.”

The presiding judge said sincerely: "You can be sure that the Arnenian people
will rise once again."

The prosecutor went on the attack and, speaking to Reverend hrnusien, he
said: "Do you approve of these attacks?”

Reverend Karnusian quickly retorted: "Do you approve of this genocide?"

The prosecutor said: "No, but that does not authorise anyone to cons end
place boobs and kill people!"

Defense attorney Devedjian then replied: ”Switserlend wanted to be a wel-
coning country. Geneva is an international city which. for eeny people is
the syﬂol of an evil policy."

The following witness, Mr Batsekotrian, escaped the genocide of 1915. Also
speaking through the interpreter, he said sadly: "In 1915 I was 9 years old.
I was living in Ourfa, I recall. I went to visit a neighbor and through the
open door I saw two Turks who were raping our neighbor's wife and her ll year
old daughter. They then killed the whole fanily. I was hiding. and they
didn't see no. or otherwise they would have killed use too. I wanted to go
hone. In the street I saw an old women who told as: 'You can't go hone."
And I then saw the street strewn with corpses. She covered ny head with s
shawl so that I would not see this." lie stopped out of enotion. His voice
trenbling. he resuned his testinony: "Then the deportation took place. I
found ey nother, but she had fallen ill. She was crying before dying, and

I was also crying." Ilia voice broken with enotion. he said: "‘lhet night

I dreaned of her. I saw again that scene which I had tried to bury in ny
Ienory. I recall that we ate grass. I saw three wonen lying under a tree
along the road. I wanted to ask then for soeething to eat. I approached
then. They had their abdonens ripped open." Tears fell fron the eyes of
the white-haired een whose sad testieony overwhelned the audience. ‘lhe jury
listened calnly and indifferently to this tragic story. The witness. over-
wheleed by his neeories. then described the travels which led hie to
Switzerland where. in 1957. he obtained Swiss nationality.

The presiding judge said: "The court respectfully bows before your sorrow
and your suffering. I recalled yesterday the cynicisn of Hitler. I would
like to show today the contents of Taleat's telegran sent to the Prefecture
of Aleppo on 15 Septeder 1915." lie read it.

Defense attorney Devedjien arose and said: “I thank you. Your Honor. for
having read that. Look at the neusoleue of Talent today in Ankara. Look at

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY

how that non ie rend-bored today in Turkey!" And he ehowed tho jury photo-
graphs of the naueoleun. the avenues and the schools built to honor the glory
of Talaat Pasha.

The preeiding judge said: "Unfortunately. the Nurenberg court does not exist
today."

Defenee attorney Devedjian said: "Attorney Wolf is president of the League
of the Rights of Man in Belgiu- and delegate of Balgitn to the United Nations
on the human Rights Co-ission. he has represented his country during tho
discueeion of paragraph 30 at tho 111'. a paragraph in which two lines non-
tioned tho Arnenian genocide. Turkey exerted preeeure for those two lines
to be left out. Can you give us this story in detail?"

Attorney Uolf said: "ﬁrst of all you have to go back to the beginning. In
1968 a convention for the repression and condemation of tho crine of
genocide wee voted on at the UK. It was never applied until 1975 when it was
decided to issue a report on the crine of genocide. Already. in 1976. a
draft report had been preeented. lbet of the countries were opposed to
paragraph 30, and the Bonn Righte Co-iesion returned the draft text to the
eub-counittoe. There were my debates held on the subject up to 1978. The
great powers abetained. coneidering that it was an error to attack a country
like Turkey. I reported on the docunent which was on hand in the foreign
ninistries of the great powers and which showed clearly that there had been
genocide co-itted. They siqu wiped out history, as if nothing had taken
place in 1915."

Attorney Rolf paueed and then continued: "The nattor then went back to the
Bunan Rights Comiesion. There, three or four countrioe asked that this
paragraph be included. Finally, it woe decided once again that it was
neceesrry to eend the draft back to the sub-co-ittee, which refused to
include the two lines on the Arnenian genocide."

Defense attorney Devedjian asked hin: "Woe international law applied as for
as the Arneniane are concerned?"

Attorney Volf replied: "In 1918 there was an Amenian etato which looted

for 2 years. Then cane the treaty of Sevres which sketched out the frontiere
of a substantial Arnonian state. thanks to President Rileon. 91th the caning
to power of Renal Ataturk in 1mm, all of this was wiped out, abolished.
Today I understand the actions of the Arnenian terroriete. but I do not
approve of then for all of that. However, let us not forget that there were
1.5 nillion persons executed, the seizure of a nation's territory. And today
there is still a forn of cultural genocide which is leading to the dieappear-
ance of architectural and cultural nervels. I note that everywhere I go
there is acre and more a etato of pernanent revolt anong the Arnenians. The
way in which the Arnenian people have been treated is quite unthinkable."

The prosecutor asked: "Does that legitimize an aaeaeeinetion?"

Attorney Rolf replied: "There have been other political aaaaseina who have
been acquitted."

19

MOMMONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The prosecutor then asked: "As a lawyer do you approve of these acts?”
Attorney Wolf answered: "I understand then but I do not approve of then."

The trial was suspended for 20 ninutes. In the snowy streets outside Attor-
ney wolf, a longtime friend of the Arnenians (who, despite his advanced age,
was prepared to cone to Geneva to give his support to a cause which he valued
above all others), walked slowly away.

At 11:15 an the trial resusd with the testinony of Jean Marie Carrou. an
historian of the Arlenian genocide. as said: "The Armenian people have
occupied their territory for 3,000 years. If there has been a dispersion

of these people, it is because there was an act of genocide." There followed
a brief historical account, retracing the sufferings experienced by the
Araenien people, from the beginnings of their history. continuing through

the capture of Ani. and until the 19th century. Carrou said: "The so-called
eastern question resulted fron the progressive establishnent of the Ottonan
hire and fron the resurgence of the national novenents of the various
ninority groups (Serbia, Greece, Bulgaria) who entered into a struggle again
against the Otto-en govern-ent. Contrary to the other ainorities, the
Arnenian people raneined a "faithful nation“ until the niddle of the 19th
century. Part of the Arnenisn elite even participated in the Turkish govern-
nent. The Arnenian question arose only in terns of claine for reforms and
especially in terns of obtaining a statute of relative autonony. These
clains led to the Congress of Berlin in 1878 under which Turkey col-itted
itself to undertake reforns in the Arnenisn provinces. In 1923 cause the
treaty of Lausanne which did not include even one word about Arnenia. Mean-
while, the genocide took place." Jean Marie Carton, in an analytical and
inacable way, than retraced the different stages of the process of exter-
nination of an entire people: "First of all there was the dress rehersal.
You will note later that the nassacres and the genocide always took place
following a denand for reforas. Following the treaty of Berlin. over a
period of a few nonths (during 1896-1896). there were 300,000 Arnenians
killed in various kinds of pogrou with the assistance of the Turkish arny.
You have to isagine that with the bugles blowing and with the participation
of the whole Turkish people. That was, therefore. the real response which
the Nrkish govern-ent nade to the denands for refer-s.

”Then there was the revolution of the young Mks. preceded by a congress in
the course of which all of the forces of opposition to the regime of Abdul
Hamid, the red sultan, joined together (harks, Jews, Ansenians. etc). The
announce-ent of the coup d'etat brought out a great spirit of fraternisation.
All problens sesned to have been solved. However. in fact the change of
regine did not lead to a change in doctrine.

"Those who cans to power were in fact ultra nationalists who did not accept
the idea that the various oppressed ainority groups in the mrkish Elmira
should kick over the traces. They adopted exactly the sales state of mind as
Abdul hanid had done. Vasn't it Talset who said, speaking of the Arnenians:
"There is no place here for two peoples"? So it was to be genocide. This
would be preceded. as in 1895. by a plan for reforns. presented by Russia and

20

MWWWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

England and accepted by the young harks. The allied governments furthermore
obliged Turkey to sign an agreement providing for the sending of international
observers to verify the application of the reforms.

"In 1916 world War I broke out. Turkey entered the war on the side of ~
Germany. It was not an accident that the genocide took place in 1915, in

the middle of the World war. The Russians were blockaded in the North; the
French were blockaded in the South. Communications were cut off and the
country was closed to foreign observers. however, there would remain some
Germans, since Turkey was allied to Germany. Regarding the genocide properly
speaking, the operation was mounted in two phases: "On 2". April 1915 some
400 Armenian intellectuals were arrested in Constantinople who, for the most
part, were shot. Therefore, the Armenian people were first of all deprived
of their elite group. It was then time to begin the second phase of the
genocide: the displacement of the people, who, according to the authorities,
'were endangering the Turkish Army by the risk of collusion with the Russian
Army.' The men in good health who were in the fully-armed battalions of the
Army were transferred to engineer battalions where they were disarmed and
then shot. There then remained in the provinces the women, the children,

and the old nen who were to be assembled and deported. The final destination
of the deportation was the deserts of Syria."

Jean Marie Carson then circulated a map and photographs of the genocide for
the information of the jury. He resumed his testimony: "The genocide was
carried out by means of this program of deportation. In each province it
happened in the sane way. A decree stated that the Armenians had to leave.
They were given 2 hours to prepare themselves, and convoys including up to
3,000 people were set in notion on the roads. Some of the people were trans-
ported by train, but the majority made the trip on foot. The objective, of
course, was that these convoys would not reach their destination. Along the
road the Armenian people were decimated with an unheard-of violence. The
horror involved reached such a level that many of then went mad. Certainly.
there was the evidence of those who escaped, but also there was testimony by
observers from neutral and even allied countries. The genocide continued
until 1918. Those who were able to reach the end of the road were placed in
'concentration cups.‘ This was the very term used by a German officer at
the time, and which today resounds in our ears. Laws were enacted concerning
the property of 'displaced' persons. Other decrees suppressed the Armenian
commnity as such. It was complete annihilation. Out of more than 2.0
million Armenians there renained no more than 200,000 survivors. What
happened to the others? Did they co-it suicide? The kingpin of this
exterminating effort was Talaat Pasha who, as minister of the interior,
signed the telegrana ordering extermination, which I all going to read to you."

me presiding judge interrupted hin: "I read than yesterday."

Carzou continued: "I will then cite what Talent said when Horgenthau, then
United ﬁtates ambassador to Turkey, tried to dissuade hie from undertaking
this act of genocide by underlining the economic consequences of this

decision. Talaat replied to his: We have estimated that as coating 5
million pounds. ' I will also mention another telegran sent to the Prefecture

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OMCIAL USE ONLY

in Aleppo and in which it is reco-ended to ‘kill all the children of the
persons in question because the innocent of today could become the guilty
of tonsrrow.‘ Talaat Pasha has never been dissvowed by any Turkish govern-
nent which followed him. Renal Ataturk arranged for the genocide by his
rejection as such of the treaty of Lausanne in 1923. Talaat Pasha is even
honored as a national hero, since Ankara has constructed a nausoleun as a
nonunent to his glory. Even after the Nuremberg trials, what effect would
nandng a boulevard after Iii-1e: have in Berlin?

"In 1978 the United Nations confirmed the denial of the act of genocide by
adopting the traditional Turkish thesis on the nyth of genocide. Even today
these undeniable facts are not generally admitted." ,‘

Then Jean Marie Carzou raised the second question, the censorship of his book.
"In 1975 I signed a contract with Bachette concerning a book entitled. '1915:
an Era-pie of Genocide.’ Ilere is the printed cover of the book" (he took it
out of the file.). "You see there, down below; it has the llachette nark.

And now here is the book as it finally appeared. book, it is Fla-arion
which put it out. "hat happened? well. one nonth before it was put in the
bookstores I was called to a meeting with llachette where they explained to

as that, following Turkish intervention and in order not to involve the

co-ercial interests of the publishing house with Turkey, they could not
publish Ily book. That is why it was finally published by Planarion, which
no doubt had fewer consrcial interests in Turkey."

The presiding judge said: "The court thanks you."

It was noon when Jean Marie Carsou left the courtroon to leave in his place
another witness of the genocide. Hr Analian, who. in great distress after
having said that his whole family in Caesarea had been nassacred, was only
able to say: "I can tell you that there was genocide. That's all." The
session was suspended until 2:30 pn.

At 2:65 Hardiros cane back into the courtrooa and sat three rows of seats in
front of us. The usher brought in the following witness, an old wonan with
a scarf tied around her neck who walked with difficulty. assisted by a nan
of about 60 years of age. This woun who walked like this and who, through
the tears which clouded her eyes. was looking for Mardires, was his grand-
mother. She saw hill in front of her and suddenly she lifted her am up to
heaven and cried: "Anan Yavrou" (oh. my child) and enbraced his: strongly
against her chest, chanting: "aissous Christos; Bissoua Christos."

There were nonents the enotional intensity of which is difficult to describe

in writing. The sorrow of this grandnother was ours and. through us. that
of all Arnenians. She sat down beside her grandson.

Defense attorney Devedjian asked her to recount her experiences. she who was
one of those who escaped the genocide. The grandmother of Mardiros only
spoke Turkish. That is why Mr Godel offered his translating services. After
an initial attent his efforts were challenged by Araenians attending the
court session. One of then was designated to serve as interpreter for this

22

POIOFHCIALWONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

inortant testimony. The grandmther said: "At the.time of the massacres I
was in Adana. My brother had had his throat cut before ny eyes and had been
buried without any religious cerenony. I was 10 years old, and my fanily
had all been deported. I saw..." liar voice broke and then continued her
slow chant: "I saw 25 menbers of ny family, tied one to the other. They
were thrown into the lburst River at the sans time..." Overwhelud, she
stopped.

Defense attorney Devedjian than intervened: "I agree to stopping at this
point the account of these events in order not to torture this old woman any

more, but I would like to ask just one question: 'Did ytu speak of all that
to Mardiros?”

Hrs Jangotchian replied: "I cried and I sang a dirge. lie asked my why I
was crying and why I was singing a dirge and I told him what I had seen."
She left the witness stand and came with difficulty to sit next to us. her
hands were trembling and she cried softly. half in Turkish. half in Armenian:
"Everything has cone back suddenly, everything has cone back."

See waved her hand before her eyes as if to try to chase away these visions
which pursued her. She shook our hand strongly, very strongly. now could
you fail to have respect for this old wonan, suffering from a heart condition,
who had sworn to come to testify at the trial of her grandson. even if she
died in the attent (which almost happened when she descended from the plane).
Next was Hardiros' father, this man who, 15 ninutes before, supporting his
mother on her arrival in the courtroon. He testified in Armenian: "He were
very poor. we lived in a refugee camp, and it was in this situation that

our children were born. I raised him to be a soldier, because there was no
alternative. In the present situation in Lebanon there is no future. The
young people want to succeed where we failed."

Defense attorney Devedjian asked him: "I would like to ask you a question
which I did not ask your nether: why didn't she speak in Arnsnian?"

Mr Jangotchian replied: "In Turkey instruction in Arnanian was prohibited.
I didn't learn Arnenian myself until I was ll years old."

The prosecutor interrupted him slyly: "But I saw a broadcast the other day
on television in which the Arunians in Turkey who were talking were freely
speaking Armenian."

Defense attorney Devedjian said: "You heard hostages speak. Mr. Prosecutor!
I will recall to you the law of 1965 which prohibits teaching their own
language to all minority groups."

The presiding judge said: "Bring in the next witness."
An Armenian of Swiss nationality testified to how, in his region, all of his
family was wiped out with an axe. he continued: ."Switterland was one of the

first countries to take pity on the nartyrdon of our people. Our dual
identity places us today face to face with the painful problem of the

23

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arnenien genocide. The yomger generetion living ebroed wents to ohtein
justice. The neeory of the people cennot be erased. One dsy the Turks will
heve to open the Areenien question once egein." Then he reed the trenecrip-
tion of e press conference given by the Union of Arneniene of Switzerlend in
the nonth of August, (to. which it turne out thet 'the actions of the

yomger generetion heve forced us to swine our consciences csrefully end
have nede us eccept the useleeenees of the diplouetic neesuree which heve
been used up to now."

At 3:65 pl the next witness wee Jenn-Herc Torenien. Torenien cene into the
courtrooe. took his oeth, end set down in front of the court. Then we sew
Judge Curtin direct cerefully-eined questions et hie. Hith his lips pressed
together the presiding judge ettecked hie: "Are you, yes or no, e “er of
the Issue?"

Torenien replied: "look, I belong to thin group of Arneniene."

The presiding judge. elreedy flushed with enger, eeid: "1 en not seizing you
to .begin the speech you prepered in sdvence. I heve esked you s question!
Answer yes or no!"

A silence followed. Then Torenien eeid: ”No. 1 en no: e eeeber of the
ASA“...

The presiding judge continued: "In October. 1980, s boob exploded in the
Pelece of Justice in Geneve. Hes it you who pleced thet bod)?"

‘l‘orenien seid: "nut. . ."
The presiding judge seid: "Answer yes or no."
Torenien seid: "No."

The preeiding judge continued: "And the bod» which exploded this em: in
e depertnent store in Geneve, did you set off thet bonb, yes or no?”

Torenien replied: "No . "

The presiding judge eeked; "And the bonb which exploded et Oornevin reilwey
stetion. wee it you who set off thet boﬁ?"

Torenien ensvered: "Bo, end I would like to eey thet we were the first to
denounce these terrible ettecks which do not serve the interests of the

Armien people. "

The preeiding judge continued: "And those ettecke which Alec Yeniconechien
use prepering egeinst the Ooneulete of Turkey?"

Torenien eeid: ”Alec Yeniconechien, I believe, wee releeeed (roe detention
by e Swiss court. in this very Pelsce of Justice. In is hero of the Arlsnien
people. like Herdiros Jelgotchien.”

24

”WISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

111a presiding judge said: "A hero is someone who risks his life for an ideal,
not an assassin."

Toranisn replied: ”I an absolutely in agreement with you. That is why I
have come in the name of the Com-ittee for the Support of Armenian Political
Prisoners, in the name of millions of Arunisns, to say that for all of us
Hardiros Jaqotchian is a national hero. This young boy volunteered to join
the Armenian resistance becausn the Arnsnien people are in a hopeless politi-
cal situation. That is why the young Arnenians. instead of living a noml
life. are forced to give their lives end to engage in armed resistance.
There are witnesses who have cons, you recall. to tell us of the gravity of
the genocide. I think that it is necessary to remember that for 60 years
the Armenians believed in dialogue. They knocked at the doors of inter-
national organizations, they peacefully appeared before the United Rations
so that the truth would simply be told about the genocide end the occupation
of our fatherland. so that our people would recover their land." In the
courtroom the pens were going full tilt and the journalists were listening
carefully to the man they would describe as "the dialectician of violence,"
having failed to understand what he was talking about.

Toranian continued. speaking to the expressionleas faces of the jury:
"Armenian history is a succession of massacres, of abominations. Many people
would have preferred that it had ended in 1915. The Athenian people are now
drawing on their last energies. A decimated people is fighting for its
existence, and its most devoted elensnts have constituted themselves into an
Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, of which hardiros
Jamgotchian is a member. Prom the moment when the Arnenian people have
exhausted all their strength to lake their cause triumh peacefully. no person
has the right to refuse the Armenian people recourse to an armed struggle.
Pacing us is a fascist state which refused to recognize the genocide of 1915
and which has taken from us nine tenths of Arnsnisn territory. which has
exercised repression against the Kurdish people."

The presiding judge interrupted him: "Regarding the turds, I would like to
say that they participated in the massacres. but it is true that the
Turkish state knows how to use others for its dirty work."

Toranian continued: ”We face a state which is exercising repression against
the people of Cyprus. My thoughts go to the 6,000 people of the island of
Cyprus who have disappeared. and no one speaks of them any more. I would
also like to correct a certain nuder of points. The way in which you asked
me the first questions just now favored all kinds of speculations. At
present there is a whole effort being nsde to comers the Armenian resistance
to international terrorism. which is plotting to destablire Turkey. This is
being done to obscure the natives and the profound realities of this
resistance. The ASALA is based on the history of the Armenian people.
Thousands of Arnenians throughout the world do not hesitate to state their
solidarity with this effort. This is not a minority. like the Red Brigades,
which seek to ispose a new social order through terror. No one can stop

the Armenian people fron fighting for the liberation of their fatherland.

We have been driven from our land by the final phase of terrorism: genocide.
Seven million Arnenians are looking at the Swiss people."

25

FOROFFICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'he presiding judge said: "Rat's not true!”

Ara Toranian reamed his statenent in a forceful voice: "They are waiting
for s neasure of justice for Hardiros Jugotchian. I would also like to
explain why the Arnenian struggle is not like classical guerrilla warfare.
Re have been driven out of our country. There lies the specific character
of the Arnenian struggle. Scattered here and there they wanted to dis
fighting. Certainly, they have been welconed. in France. in Switzerland.
but in each of these countries they have paid their tribute: there were
30,000 Arnenians who died for France in the course of Horld War II and in
the French colonial were. They have done their duty as citizens. however.
'they know their enemies. and they only hear arns against their enemies. I
would like to state that the Arnenisna have nothing against the ‘mrkish
people but fight against the Turkish nilitary state which also oppresses the
Turkish people. since there are 30.000 political prisoners in Turkey. This
is a struggle which we intend to carry on with the other oppressed peoples
of ‘nurkey. That is why the Armenian resistance does not attack the hoses of
Turkish enigres but rather quite specific targets. the enbassies. the
diplonats. and...."

The prosemtor interrupts bin: "And the Palace of Justice.”

Ara Toranian continued: "Listen. I have not node police inquiries to deter-
nine whether. in fact it was Arnenians who did these things. We have con-
dened then because they har- the Arnenisn struggle. however. and I hope
you will let ne sake these distinctions. if it was really Arneniana who set
off these boobs. I understand that Arnenians have becone exasperated. but I
conde-a these acts of nehilisn. However. I think that you have to distin-
guish between these actions and those of a resistant who takes as pistoLand
kills a Turkish diplonst. particularly in Europe. when we know what these
Consulates of Nrkey in Europe really are. They are acml police bureaus.
actual nilitary bases. keeping control of all coqonants of the Turkish
co-nnity.

"This wall of silence which has fallen on the Armenian problem. this apology
for crins at the international level which the denial of the rights of the
Arnenian people consists of. this occupation of their historical territory
and the denial of the genocide-mall of these things have led young Arlenians
to recourse to stud resistance. And those who support than say out loud
that those who have the courage to shoot down a mrkish diplonst are the
heroes of 1981. I would like to salute the grandeur of soul of Hardiros
Jasgotchian. because I an personally of the view that he did not kill the
diplonat in question.”

To the sneering laugh of the presiding judge. Toranian responded: "Whatever
the case. he left everything to undertake nilitary action. lie left his
fasily. his friends. his fiancee. he left everything for that. This is why
he is a hero."

Defense attorney Devedjian said: "I wo-nld like to ask Mr Torsnien if the

condemtion of these attacks which he has just lads is a definite or
denagogic condemtion."

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Ara 'l'oranian replied: I condem these bombs placed in the stations. in the
stores. I don't see for a single second how anyone could co-it such acts.
However. at the same time I understand that certain Arnenians nay have been
pushed into nihilisn when they see that it is Armenian resistance fighters
who are sitting on the bench of the accused. 1 condo-1 then because that
only favors the strategy used by all the enenias of the Arnenian people."

The presiding judge said slyly: ”but the A3114 has always clained these
attacks."

Hardiros stood up. lie understood that an effort was being ads to establish
the very opposite of the truth and in his broken French he rebelled against
it, saying: "It's not the ASN.1!”

Co-unity attorney Bonnant co-snted ironically: "I would like to remark
that hardiroa Jangotchian. who pretends not to understand French. has a
selective understanding of it."

‘lhere were liners of protest in the courtroon. Then the prosecutor went on
to the attack: "It's too easy to say now: 'It's not the AW!”

he was supported by the presiding judge: "hot to nention the threats nade by
Hardiros Jangotchian himself at the time this case was being prepared for
trial.”

Defense attorney Devadjian cut in with a mocking tone in his voice: "To say
that there was risk of reprisals. Is that a threat or a forecast of the
future?"

Ara Toranian picked up the the: "The AMA cannot control 7 million
Arnenians throughout the world. It cannot control these nillions of
Arnanians for when it is sinly not acceptable that an Armenian conbat
soldier should appear on the bench of the accused. while Turkey has never
appeared before any court at all. Today it is a matter of a single dead man.
Iaagine 10 dead. 100 dead, 1.000 dead, 100.000 dead, 1 million dead. 1.5
million dead! You cannot ask a people to emit suicide. You cannot ask a
people to give up fighting to defend itself. You cannot kill a people with

iwity.

The prosecutor. feeling that the situation was getting out of hand, tried to
regain control of the hearing. 'to do this. he tried again to involve Ara
'roranian in the attacks co-itted by the Organisation of 9 June and in the
threats made by Asm. For this purpose he waved the newspaper BAIASTAN, the
organ of the ASALA. and shouted: "ﬂare is the newspaper nu ms. of which
you are the publisher!’

Ara ‘l'oranian interrupted hits: "You are mistaken. You are holding in you
hands the newspaper mm. the organ of the AMA."

The prosecutor sealed determined to contradict him and than branched off in
another direction: "Yes. you are right. let us admit it. However, in this
newspaper there is an article signed by you!"

.27 .

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Are Torenien replied: "I cennot stop the republicetion of erticles which
eppeered in BAY m."

The prosecutor continued: "And in this erticle there ere threete--egeinst
when? Ageinst us! I will reed pert of it: 'Proeecutor Reylnnd You will
be the first tergst.’ Did you write thet, yes of no?" he wee choking with
snger.

Are 'rorenien responded with sons puezlensnt: "I don't see why I would heve
written thet. I would like to see the newspeper.”

The clerk of the court geve hi- the newspeper referred to. Sonewhet
perplexed. Are Torenien looked et it end then co-sntedx "Hell now. it is
still incredible. ‘rhey nsntion ly nens et the foot of en erticle. republished
fro. HAY m. end then you turn the pegs end you reed. in enother erticlen
not signed, thet one. end caning fron the ssm-the lines to which you heve
Just elluded! Thet's too web. I denounce this sheneful proceeding which

seeks to esteblish en enlgen of truth end felsehood. It's reelly scendel-
one!"

A nurmr of dieepprowel ren through the eudience end elong the rows of
Journeliste. Prosecutor Rey-nod Poex. unseeked end ridiculed, sluqed down
st his plece.

Defense ettorney Devedjien intervened: ”Herdiros Jenotchien is not being
tried for other ettecks but only the one of which he is eccused. You don't
heve to go on endlessly nsking reference to the ettecke end threete necks by
the Orgeniretion of 9 June."

The prosecutor replied: "Yes. but fro. the nonsnt when he himself nede
threete. or es you sey so elegently. 'foreceets of the future...”

Defense ettorney Devedjien seid: "hon reeding the newepepere I cen slso
Ieke predictions."

Are ‘rorenien seid" "Listen, I cen reed you sons ststensnts ends by Issue
which officielly condenn these blind sttecks." lie hed nothing in his hend
but turned to the journeliets end celled e journelist fro. the Agence
Telegrephique Suisse [Swiss Telegrephic Agency] who recently net represente-
tiwes of mm in Beirut. The journeliet, e young wonen. wee celled to
testify. The presiding Judge seid: "Pleese teke the oeth to tell the truth."

She did so and then seid: "ASALA hes never cleinsd these ects. lhet is ell
I heve to sey." She i-sdietsly returned to her plece.

Are Iorenien continued: "I would like to conclude by seying thet the feet
thet there heve been ettecks weds does not excuse us froe reflecting on the
ceuees of these ettecks. I think thet it is cleer thet Merdiroe Jelgotchien
joined the ASALA for politicel reesons. It wee e politicel choice, beceuse
the Arneniens ere in e deed-end politicel eituetion. There is sonething
terrible in violence. I sey thet to the reletivu of the 'mrkieh diplonte

28

MOMCIALlISEONLY
I'I'OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who have been killed. 1 say that all the eore since we know what it is. He
did not invent violence, but we were the first to suffer fro. it at the
beginning of this century. The violence of the ASALA is at least lore
selective then that which consists in crucifying woeen and children on the
doors of churches. I have nothing else to add."

The atnosphere wae tense. This second day of the trial had been a testing
experience, as lunch for what it brought out in terns of recollections of the
genocide as for what it represented in terns of justification of Armenian
resistance activity. It sinuld be noted that ell of the Turkish journalists
and correspondents, who had been in attendance on the first day. were absent
and that they were not to appear again until the m up by the Yergua
attorney.

The presiding judge, in a silence charged with emotion, announced a suspen-
sion of the trial. before the guards could take Herdiros away. sons of us
were ab1e to shake his hand. lie smiled at us, happily, naturally. Tor a
little while it was he who strengthened our Isorele. Us went out to relax
outside the courtroon. It had snowed the whole day in Geneva. A cold wind
chilled us. Rervously, sons of us lit cigarettes. Us counted the nuﬁer of

friendly faces. He were sore and sore nueerous now. having cone essentially
from the Rhone River and Alps area and fro- Parie. Sous friends froe Ville-
frenche, feeling an inner anger, told us how. to cross the Swiss frontier in
an auto, they had to "strip." in the literal sense of the tern. In Switzer-
land, having a nane ending with "ian" is equivalent to having a yellow star
on your coat.

At 5:00 pm we resu-ed our places in the large. austere courtroom. The
"accused" was brought in. The arrival of Hardiros in court was always
anticipated with the seas anxiety. but his seooth and serene face called our
apprehensions .

Judge Curtin reopened the session with the reading of all of the answers
which Hardiroe Jaegotchian nade during the pre-trial hearing. Mardiros'
answer to the question about the aotive for his act was as follows: "It was
to avenge 1.5 aillion Arasnians. 1n ey own fenily seven persons died in the
massacres."

Then the presiding judge read the letter written by Hardiros dated 12 October
1981 in which he went back on his previous stetuents and ends mention of a
companion (when he was ordered to assist) who was reportedly the person truly
responsible for the act. The letter said: "This asn fired at the Turin. he
gave as the gun and I ran away. These are the true facts. and I ask you

take note of thee.”

The presiding judge then read the first letter by Herdiros, dated 25 Septu-
ber 1981. in which he said he was infonsd about the operation carried out
at the Consulate of Turkey in Paris and that he said he should say nothing
about the exact circuastancas of the action carried out on 9 June until the
action in Paris took place. Hardiros stood up and said in Armenian that he

29.

MWMONLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wOuld like to speak. he said: "I would like to explain why this action took
place in Geneva. It should be said that this is related to Paragraph 30 of
the report of the Human Rights Conission of the United Nations and the
suppression of the reference to the Arnsnian genocide, carried out at the
request of the mrkish authorities. Furthermore. I would like to say that I
did not resist arrest when I could have used my hand grenade because the
orders of my organiration were quite clear on the point. We have nothing
against the Swiss people. I know that Switzerland. in the course of history
has helped the Armenian people and that Mtrerland built houses in Lebanon
for the Armenian refugees. That's why for ne there was no question of doing
something against Switzerland. Regarding the assassinated mrkish diplomat,
I would like to say that I had received a photograph of )ishmet Yergua and
that I knew that he was an agent of the mrkish secret police. I am a
soldier; so was he. Consequently, it is necessary for the judgment handed
down in this case to be just." Hardiros sat down.

The presiding ,udge said: "The next person to speak is the Yergua family
attorney, Bonnant."

Yergut family attorney Bonnant stood up. Up to this point he had been rather
discreo-t. however, now he wu going to take his revenge and began an address
which was basically tsndentious. although well-presented in its fora: "Your
Honor, prosecutor. ladies and gentlemen of the jury. In this tribunal I am
not the representative of the Ottoman aspire or of its successor, the Mkieh
state. You are not the tribunal of history. Hardiros Jamgotchian does not
represent the cause-I believe sacred-of Armenia. I represent here the widow
of ﬁshnet Yerguz, his nether. and his two children. The issue is not to know
whether or not there was an Armenian genocide. Armenia is not in question
here, and without any particular sense of vanity we can say that Switzerland
was one of the few countries which did what was in its power to help the
Armenian people. When I say that there is no particular reason to feel any
vanity. this is to say that in fact along the road of misery we have been
spared by history. The fact that our territory was chosed for this action.
of course, leaves us rather bitter but should leave our ability to reason
still intact. Hardiros Jamgotchian is a terrorist. lie is an assassin. And
it harms the Armenian cause to encourage those who pervert it. but there is
something else which saddens ne profoundly. Just now a ninister of religion
has come bare to tell us that you die twice. well. helmet Yergus has died
twice: the firt time. assassinated; and then by the indifference with which
his death has been treated.

"A criminal proceeding involves the presentation of an author of a crime and
of a criminal act. It is mrdiroe Jemgotchian. the protagonist of this drama,
whom we are trying today. Since yesterday I have been watching him. The
face of Hardiros Jamgotchian has the handsomsness of youth; he has expres-
sions on his face; he knows how to laugh; he has a certain look about his.
Whereas death has no face. Helmet Yergur only has one face: that which
death gave him. A witness. Mrs A. cans to tell us yesterday that while she
was holding the victim's head he seemed to be trying to say something with-
out being able to do so. He don't know what Mel-st Yergur was thinking in
that brief instant when he saw death coming. There is this matter of

J)

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OI OFFIClAL USE ONLY

forgetting the victin and other. very characteriatic. particular circul-
etancee. Yesterday you heard a lurkiah diplonat who cane back from Ankara

to aka a ninor depoaition. But I took advantage of it to have him apaak

of the victin. He aaid very ordinary things, that he was a good nan, narried.
happy. Recall the sarcastic trnor that ran through the audience. Did you
feel. as I did, in an almost palpable way. the rejection of Yerguz and of hie
life?

"And you reacted, Your Honor. You read the letter free Hrs Yergue to give
IBIS audience—Attorney nonnant pointed hie two tht-ba behind hin to desig-
nate the public. to who- he turned hie back—a leeeon in tolerance. Paaeion
is one thing. but I any that this pathological intolerance only anounta to
a difference of degree between ms kind of laugh"—ha again pointed to the
audience—"and 1118 act." (He pointed hie finger at Hardiroa.)

"I could not accept that at the and of this trial there will be daatha which
will be considered juat becauae they are the daatha of others. The repreean-
tativa of the Yergue f-ily nuet aeuura hinaelf that the one who etrikes ie
punished. Thin dual nieeion: being here to find Hardiroa Jengotchian guilty
of uurder and making aura that you do not let the diacuaeion get sidetracked.
to be used in the service of an act which is the negation of thie cauaa
which the accuead conaidera justified—thie dual niaeion is nine.

”First of all. can the crine be related to Hardiroe Jangotchian'l Let ue re-
call the facte. He arrives fron 'l‘ehran. with a nieaion and with certain
infatuation. I would like to pause here to recall the case of the two
nanbars of ASA“ who were arraatad in Geneva and who! the Juvenile Court
tried at the beginning of this year with infinite narcy. The inquiry had
ahown that they had come with a double nisaion: to engage in a racket along
the Arnaniana in Switzerland and to prepare an attack against the Consulate
of ‘mrkey. I nantion thie natter to refer to the continuity of terrorien ba-
cauaa it waa thie firat nieaion which allowed the ASALA, provided with the
infornation, to say to Hardiroe Jangotchian: ’Go and kill.’ The judgea of
the Juvenile Court in January. 1981, showed a aanaa of nercy which none of
then underatood. Touched to the heart by theee avente, the oyste- of justice
in our country aid to itself that it waa neceaaery for Switzerland to under-
standing toward the accuead.

”But what ia etrangth in terns of juetica if it ie not firmeaa? Our eysten
of justice waa deceived. By liberating Alec Yaniconachian and Suzy
Masharadjian Swiee juatice thought that. by paying a kind of noral debt. the
tarroriate would no longer use our territory for actions of thie kind. Now,
6 nonths later Jangotchian cones with e epacific nieeion: either to kill a
Turkiah diplonat or to blow up the mrkiah Consulate.

He chose the firet niaaion, the easier one. And what did he cone to kill?

Ila didn't know. Up to thie very nonent he haa never aaid that a epacific
pereon had been designated for hill to kill. Because that would not be true.
Because it ie the act of aaeaeaination alone which counta. And because he
wanted Geneva to be the platforn for this cauaa which he aupporte. During
the whole pra-trial examination, how did he daecribethe choice of his victin?
I read fron Exhibite 26 and 62: 'I had the niaeion of killing a nenbar of
the harkieh Coneulate." No detalla. "It eaanad to he that one of the three

31
MWUSCONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nan was the nest important." Hhat does that aean? That neans that when
they tell you that they want you to kill a representative of the Turkish
state. this amounts to giving Jangotchian a nobility which he did not have.
since it was not true, and that he was ready to kill anybody. It is he who
has told us this. he chose his own way of doing it. Can you see a nsn's
diplonatic rank on his face? Of course not! As a consequence he was ready
to kill. whatever the face of the victia. Provided he was Nrkish.

He continued, sarcastically: "The importance of this point has not escaped
either the Secret Arnenian Arty for the Liberation of Armenia or the defense.
which calls this arny--let us call it that out of a sense of mockery--
'secret'-it certainly is--but not for the liberation of Arlsnia since it
does not serve this cause by alienating synpathy for it. "hat did this ASA“
say in its first con-unique following the action of 9 June? It said that
ﬁshnet was a Isobar of the Turkish secret service of of the CIA! That he had
been sentenced to death by a people's tribunal. This tern has a special
resonance to it which Ara Toranian does not appear to attribute to it when he
says that the ASALA has nothing in co-on with the Red Brigades! And this
thesis of Nah-st Yergus as a secret agent is this thesis which hardiros
Jngotchian adopts for his own today, for the first tine! Because he knows
that if there is no relationship between this nan and the act which was
co-itted. there is no longer anything left. That is why Jangotchian and
his defenders have. little by little. invented a defense. nanufacturing even
this nonstruous statensnt that Yerguz had sonsthing to do with the Arnenian
problem!

"I have heard it said that there are forns of death which are nore painful
than others. Ara Toranian has told us: 'Hhat is this death. conparad to
the sufferings of those nailed to the doors of churches.‘ By a kind of
general state of confusion can you excuse the death of Yergus because it
was quick and not very painful? "as it just because he was a mm ﬁshnet
Yergu: died for nothing. Be died for having been a “hurt. the most hopeless
kind of death that could happen. since there was no reason for it."

There was a brief silence. Then Lawyer Bonnant continued: "As the attorney
for the Yerguz faily, I have an interest in ensuring that Hardiros
Jalgotchian does not dodge the noral responsibility for his act. It is his
for-a1 iqlication in this crine which I an going to prove to you. It is
this no who shot, who killed. and who assassinated another nan. This does
not involve a phanton. nythical cot-ando group, as they have tried to asks
you believe, even though the penalty risked by the co-author of an act is the
seas as that for the person also responsible for the act. may are these
statensnts aade which don't even carry the hope of victory? It is because
they cause doubt, a doubt which will have an impact on the sentence handed
down. Because you will have. to sone extent, this idea that things are pre-
haps not what they are. That is the naneuver, the possible tactic. If I
say that Jasgotchian is guilty of this crime, it is because the pro-trial
investigation showed it. And this investigation is supported by three
pillars of evidence: the testinony, the opinion of a ballistic expert,

the adnissions nsda by Hardiros Jangotchian.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”1 will begin with the testimony. As luck would heve it, on 9 June there
were paesersby at the scene. They were present to see what happened and
courageous enough to tell what they saw. This is overwhelming testinony
for hardiros Jangotchisn, although there were different versions of what
happened. I will only naution three. This is quite sufficient. Mr 1, who
recognized the accused that sane evening by his clothing, his hair. his
corpulence. Hr Y, who despite the elenents of confusion involved recognised
his fornally when confronted with bill. But there is sore and better testi-
nony. Hr lely. this nen who was on hie notorbika and who saw the assassin.
who saw his run away. who followed hi.- on his notorbike end who brought his
to the attention of the police. That is what you can put together sinply
free the three witnesses.

"I would like to nake a renark on courage. The real thing. not the false
courage of assassins. The ordinary courage of the sen who sees a dress
enacted in front of his. Hr lsly is not a hero. He followed the assassin,
knowing that the latter was erned. but he took this risk so that the police,
so that the forces of order, a dishonorable word but which is very dear to
ne. could cone and arrest this nan. I will give you an ere-pie, because of
the threats which hang over all of you. You know the danger which faces you,
which is that of everyone, since there have been 19 attacks against Switzer-
land.

The second pillar on «which I will rely to base Iy accusation is the nattar
of the weapons. This arsenal was found on this nan. which nakes possible
the cospsrison of the narks on the cartridge cases. And it turns out.
according to the testinony of the ballistics espert. that at least one
cartridge cane cane fron this nagasine and that at least one bullet cene out
of this pistol.

”The third pillar is the very ednissions ends by Hardiros Jengotchien. Of
course, ednissions nede by the accused are no longer considered the best of
proof, because there are circulstances in which adnissions nads are not the
reflection of the truth. Adnissions ends by the accused are the thing nost
open to challenge but which cases to be open to challenge once you review
the very nature of these adnissions. They were nade spontaneously and not
under torture. Let us recall this con-unique fron ASALA which reported the
torture suffered by Jangotchien and which denuded the intervention of all
kinds of international conitteas, the Red Cross. Anasty International. etc.
ASALA already was preparing eaterials for a carefully chosen defense. to sow
the seeds of doubt. but Hardiros Jeqotchian did not take advantage of this
chance. Nine tines he said. ‘Tes. it was l,’ at the police station and to
the investigating judge.

"I will nake special nsntion of expert testinony. We all know Professor
Bernein. he is s nan of extraordinary integrity. Ila is a just nan. Per-
haps this is due to his profession as a doctor which his profession as s nan
of the law has not succeeded in tapering. And when he faced Hardiros. the
accused said the sans thing. He said for the 10th tine that he was the one
who had co-itted this act. It is the 10th tins which is worth nore than

33

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the others beceuoe of tho circuntencos in which this ednission wos lode.
And for these ednissions he provided notivos. deteils which no one could
invent! Bo node this ednission before snd ofter the ASALA co-Iniquo wes
issued. "hon he seid: "I will weit for orders" to echo this felse stete-
nent of the truth. it wes e nisteke. ASALA had been soying it for e long
tine. but the feet is thet Herdiros Jengotchisn is probobly too setisfied,
too heppy ebout whet he did. I hove soon ossessins. but es for hi- I hove
seen hill sniling during those two days of the triel. In his own world he
soy sllow hineolf to do this. In his own world Yergus wee guilty boceuso he
wee e lurk.

"This is why I would like to ask you to decide thet it wee he who killed
this non. And thet this is cleerly e ceee of essessinetion end not of
honicide. whet nekes essessinetion sore serious then hooicide ere the
espects of perversion snd preneditstion. Re know thet Jengotchien hed been
preporing hinsolf for this nission for the post 2 nonths, thet he hed gone
through psychological end nilitsry trsining, thet he hsd prepered hinself to
kill. thet for 2 months tho ides o! killing hed becono his reeson for exis-

tence. hot is perversion of tho purest kind. Killing Yergus beceuse ho is
whet ho is: e Turk. Beceuso, being e hark, he hes no soul. The: is such e
derengenont of the nind thet. if it is not perversity. then perversity
exists nowhere else "

After this delirious orstion Attorney Bonnent continued grevoly: "Hhet ere
the possible oxtonueting circunstences for this gravest of crines which our
Penel Code recognises? '11:. defense is going to invoke the doctrine of
linited responsibility. Our code essunss thet people will set in e respon-
sible wey except when o given set is emitted intontionelly. The very
besis of the led of punishnont is thet s non is cepeble of undorstsnding whet
he does end epprocieting the consequences. we ere not conpotent to peso
judgnent on the nentel structure of people. Ihet is why Professor Bornoin
vos chorged with neking on expert judgnont. And whet did he sey? no seid
thet the sense of responsibility of Herdiros Jengotchien wes full end coe-
plete. And you con believe hin ell the more since very often, in other
cesos, ho hes told us sonothing else.

"Yesterdsy the defense tried to drew fro- hin tho ednission thet his judg-
nent wes pertielly felso. However. Doctor Bornein continued to soy: 'Ro,
there wee no chenge in the conscience of Herdiros Jengotchien.‘ Professor
Bornoin told us: ’Herdiros Jenotchisn is not e cose of pethologicel
feneticisn. Bo hes o vision of his duty es s soldier.‘ If. e feloo vision
of duty were token to be en honoreble sotivo. thet would be e grove letter.
Boceuse thet vision inies thet hunen life hes no inortsnce. It hoppens
thet in our world. es opposed to thet of Jengotchion, the hiererchy oi
veluos nekes huon life perticulerly ossentiel.

"Moreover. he knows thet hiorerchy of velues snd epplios it for hinsolt.

For oxenplo, when he refused to teko the risk of blowing up the Consnlete
boceuse in risking being blown up with it he undo e choice which subsunod e
hiererchy of velues in life-his life. not thet of others! Thet Ien repro- .
sents e concrete dongor for society. It is thet non who sold in the course

3’0

FOIOI’FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the pre-trial eminstion: 'I do not regret what I die. I will accept
another aission.‘ At the end of his road, unless prolonged detention should
change his, he will do it again. Virtually. because of his youth. Mardiros
Jangotchian is the assassin of toaorrow.

"Let us speak of natives. Coning to tell you that his notives were honorable
is the last chance for the defense. It will speak to you of his disinterest-
edness and of the Arnenian cause. That's where I told you that the discussion
was Iisplaced. You are going to believe, or they would like to make you
believe, that the Judgnent which you will lake will concern the honorableness
of the Arnanien cause. lhis Arnenian cause is scathing nervelousi But it
is the terrorist whon you are passing Judgnent on in this court. They will
talk to you of idealism and of passion: everyone has his own view of both

of these. 0f idealisn you can say that it is a lofty view of what is good.
It is an elevation of the soul. iqossible to dissociate froa aorality and
fro. respect for written and unwritten laws. The idealist is the bearer of
respect for life. Hhat relationship is there between the assassin of Yerguz
and idealien? None! None of the Athenian witnesses who testified yesterday
in this court, except for Mr" (he consults his notes with a scornful erpres-
sion) "Hr Torsnian, approves violence. hardiros Jeqotchian has proved he
has a political co-itllent. But political co-itlaent is far fron idealism.
It is sonething quite different. It is the product of a battle which always
supposes there is an eneny who must be elilineted. At the and of this there
is the death of ﬁshnet Yergur. If they talk to youvof idoalisa. they will
have taken the word away fron youl

"The circuastances under which he was raised make his the bearer of a nesssge
of vengeance. It's not for all of that that this vengeance becones sons-
thing noble. It's a kind of passion, no doubt. but reprehensible. And they
would like to asks you believe that it is honorable! I would like to say
that yesterday, at tines, I was overwhelmed when the Arnenian witnesses cane
to tell us about the drama of the Arnanians. Before all of then we could
bow our heads. “to all of then we could say that we understand the Arnsnian
cause. when it is a single. desperate act of the will to naintein cohesion.
when it is a sharp awareness of the indescribable cruelty of destiny, when

it brings the hope of land for one's own country. But I say to this court
that this cause with this nobility will not tolerate the actions co-itted by
Jalgotchian. It is either he or this cause which is right!

"There is no relationship between this cause and this sordid assassination!

I saw just now the grandnother of Hardiros Jaegotchian. I saw his father.

I saw their desperate and fraternal edarace. I was loved by it, and nothing
can tenper this feeling. At the seas tile I thought of two children who will
never know this kind of enbrece and of a anther who weeps for her son. 0f
the two nothers there is one who weeps over the detention of an assassin and
the other over the victim of assassination. The trenor that went through
this audience nede as say to you that I thought that m: Yergus had died
twice. Let as tell you that it is up to you to lake sure this is not true.”

Lawyer Bonnant sat don. The heavy silence which has surrounded his long
su-ing-up continued to weigh on our heads. After a brief pause the pre-
siding judge ordered the session to he resuned the following norning. The
night was a long one.

35

MWWEONLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Saturday 19 Deceaber 1981 - 9:15 an. The court resumed its session. perhaps
a little more sole-11y. Hardiros arrived with his calla, handsome face. The
neabers of the jury were seated above us like papacious peeping tons who had
no need to hear the prosecutor eu-ing-up, as their verdict could be seen in
their heartless feces.

Prosecutor Bay-and Poe: stood up. adjusted his heavy shell-rinsed glasses,
took sin. and began his su-ing-up with that yelping voice which made us want
to stand in front of hi- and say 'heil Bitler.‘ I” even had the lock of
unruly, greasy hair which he regularly put back in place, with e neniacal
gesture.

”Your Honor, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you have cons here despite the
threats and despite the boobs which have gone off right here at the doors of
the Palace of Justice. You have been like the witnesses of this event who
ran after the assassin and had hia arrested. You have been courageous. The
tile for inertia has passed, the tiles for courage has returned. You have
cone here to render a verdict on a crine co-itted quite near here. On 9
June a nan was leaving his office and going hone fron his job peacefully.

but he was watched, he was followed. and he was shot down like an sniaall

It was another person who went to knock on his door and who said to his wife:
'l‘ladene. be breve.‘ Faced with this death, we rsnslbered thousands of dead,
nillions of dead whose lives were cut short in the convulsions of war. He
could ask ourselves how we ourselves would behave in the storms of war. All
the deed. of all the wars. have a right to our conpession and to our nenory.

"Those who cone bringing death on our soil know that Swiss law prohibits the
death penalty. They know that in Switzerland they do not risk being tortured
or shot. and that is why they spread assassinations all over Switzerland.

"Now it is a letter of deciding without hatred and without weakness.
Herdiros Jaegotchien had the choice between two missions: blowing up the
Turkish Consulate. and perhaps risking blowing up with it, or killing a
Turkish diploaat. he chose the letter objective, the easiest and the least
dangerous. It is true that Arnenia has suffered froe unspeakable misfortunes.
You know that this was the first Christian state. You know that General
Vertan died in the course of heroic resistance against the Persians in 451;
that several centuries later it was Otto-en doaination which ended in the
easaacres of the end of the last century. If it is true that Arnenie was
invaded. crushed, and cut into pieces, it is nonetheless true that General
Antranik scorned those who today take their war onto friendly territory.
Jean Harie Carsou. the historian. recognised in this courtroom that Switzer-
land was a friendly country which had done a great deal for the Aneniens.

”Already. during the reign of Sultan Abdul ﬂuid. at the tins of the 1895
massacres, a petition was signed by 600,000 Swiss to have these eessacres in
the Riddle Bast brought to an end. It was in Geneva that Armenian orphanages
were established; it was in Switzerland that 700,000 Swiss francs were col-

lected for these orphans. They have spoken to you of 1915, they have told
you of the horrors of the aassacre of the Arneniens. but it was still

36

M OM‘ML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Switzerland which sent a relief calm to the scene. And when Armenia was
buried in 1923 it was Switzerland again which inadietely demanded the
restoration of the freedom, of the rights. and of the well-being of the
Armenian people. This effort was not successful. but it was repeated.

"That is how Mturland raised its voice in favor of Armenia and of the
Armenians! Switzerland does not have to welcome on its soil fanaticism,
violence. and crime! It is a matter of applying our law. Laws which decided
to punish assassination with iqrisonmsnt for life. We met apply the laws
justly. Be who dared to take life into his own hands we: expect that we
will dare to apply the law to hie. And the law provides that he who inten-
tionelly kills will be sentenced to at least 5 years iqrisonment. If it is
proved that the criminal is particularly perverse or dangerous, he will be
sentenced to life imprisonnnt. The man Hardiros Jamgotchien killed wee a
peaceful man, who spent the Pentecost holiday with Armenian friends! A ‘mrk
with Armenians!

"This wee a premeditated act. Premeditation wee already there in these
calms where they teach people to kill. They teech premeditation of crime,
they teach waiting. Jamgotchian has been prepared for a long time. Be
prowled about the streets. he observed. he made himself ready, he killed.
Like a soldier, he says. No! A soldier carries arms openly. lie wears a
distinctive unifora. The soldier risks hie life. It wee not a soldier but
a peaceful tourist who stepped down from the airplane in Zurich. lie spoke
of war, but he wee the only one to talk of itl That war which wee in hie
pocket in the form of a pistol and a hand grenade. It was in secret that he
waved hie weapons and that he opened fire. Then he threw away the seek of a
tourist! What we saw wee not the face of a soldier. It was the hideous
face of terrorism!

"Those who make people suffer are executioners. This is not an army but a
pack of assassins! They tell us that there wee a political motive. Is this
an extenuating circmtance? The political motive does not lessen the
criminal character of this act. An assassination renains an assassination.
And if a Turk, taking advantage of this trial, should assassinate Jaagotchian,
this would still be a political crime but we would pursue him and try him
also. Are you really going to say that the act by Hardiros Jamgotchian
deserves esteem. compels consideration and respect, and is in conformity with
the ideas of honor and of dignity? You have seen that Professor Bernein
declared hin to be normal. Therefore, there is no possible extenuation of
the punishment. You know that he suffered from the consequences of the
genocide. you know that he was overwhelmed by appalling accounts of these
events. You know that even so he was able to live a normal life and you
know that he is animated by fanaticism. I hold it against those who inspired
in him these deplorable ideas of hatred and of vengeance. For you know that
the genocide of 1915 was only a pretext.

"You know that Armenians right here. in Geneva. were held to ransom, you know
that there have been all kinds of attacks, you know after all that this is a
matter of shaking the west in the interests of I do not know what barbarian

empire! I present as proof the list of attacks which have taken place since

37

FOROI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the releese of Alec Yeniconechien end of Suzy Heehsredjien. At the ties any
people hed the infentile hope thet they hed persueded Arnenien terrorisa
to let us slone. An error. Less then 5 eonths efterwsrds en etteck tool:
plece on 9 June, end the culprit wee arrested. Iueedietely etteepts et
intimidation begen egnin. ASALA declered that it would strike. end I quote:
'All those who belong to the can of our eneny. As long es its interest
ere e pert of inperielist interests. we will strike Switzerlend.’ And these
threets ere being cerried out! Tirst it wee the Federel Pelece, then the
noten reilwey stetion. then the deperteent stores, end on 22 July it wee
the boub which exploded in the reilwey stetion of Cornevin end which ceueed
the deeth of one person. s Swiss citizen, 22 yeere of ege end reelly

younger then Jeqotchien here! A young, innocent Swiss citizen! And now
there ere these threets of other ettechs! They eey, 'We will strike in the
coming weeks! '

"Begop Hegopien boested in steting thet eny sentence of 5. 10. or 15 yeers'
ilprieoneent for Merdiros Jengotchien would leed to the sens nunber of yeete
of trouble for Switzerland! Thet is how they threeten us! The Areenien
people eleo condeen these ettscks. They ere trying to convince us by terror.
and we met resist thee. After the threete, efter the boobs. they tried
yesterdey to use the soft touch, to tell us thet they (onelly conde-Ied
these ettecks.

"They tried to enclose you in the following equetion: if you ere for the
genocide, you ere egeinst Herdiroe Jengotchien; if you ere egeinst Herdiros
Jeegotchien, you ere for the genocide. You heve the right to think thet the
genocide wes ebonineble end er the use tine you heve the right to condeen en
essessin who hes becoee like these mm whon he detests. en inetrunent of
deeth.

"You will hows the courege to eey thet Jengothhien is en eseesein end thet
there ere no extenueting circumstences." lt--wee 10:35 en when the prosecutor
set down, hie fece livid.

After e 10-minute peuse it wee the turn of the defense to speek. Defense
ettorney Devedjien stood up end seid: "Your Honor. Hr Prosecutor, lediee
and gentlemen of the jury. I heve listened very sttentively to the ettorney
for the Yerguz fenily end to the prosecutor end I heerd two nein points fro.
the prosecution.

"The first point is thet Merdiros Jengotchien is only one sull wheel in en
overell structure, thet he is e snell wheel in this blind, internetionel
structure of terrorism, sgeinst which we met defend ourselves to fight
egeinst ell the rest of it. Thet is the reeson why they would like you to
pronounce the verdict of. guilty.

"The second point is thet the victim is ellegedly en enonynous lurk, ettecked
solely beceuee he was s Turk, end thus e victim of e fort: of noise, which

would nehe this set beer no reletion to the personel experiences end dues
of the eccused.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"I will begin with the first main point, that of blind terrorisn. The court
has noted throughout the trial that Turkey is mobilizing its diplonatic
forces throughout the world to hide the least allusion to the Arnenian
genocide. Even in Switzerland, right here, pressures of this kind exist and
are having an effect. I will give you a smell but significant example: do
you know that the Swissair Colpany not very long ago published a tourist
brochure which was clearly innocent. 0n the map of turkey it had dared to
print on the eastern side these two words: 'Armenian plateau.' And do you
know, Swissair had to give way to hrkish pressure and take out this
"erroneous" reference! It was people held in YOUR prisons who spent days and
days crossing out the words 'Armenien plateau' on thousands and thousands

of copies of the brochure!" lie waved a copy of the brochure involved. "Even
the woxk 'Armenian'_is prohibited in YOUR country! In narseille a ninister
of religion has told you how the lurkish albassador in France returned to
Ankara because of a monument to soldiers who died for France! Just for that!

"Jean Marie Carsou has told you that the Hachette publishing company gave up
publishing his book in order to preserve its co-ercial outlets in mrkey.
Attorney Holf told you that all of mrkey's diplomatic resources were
nobilized to remove two and one-half lines fron an obscure report of the United
United Nations human Rights Conission, and what lines! I an going to read
them to you, as they are so inoffensive: "At the seas time we wish to under-
line rather substantial documentation concerning the massacre of the
Armenians, considered the first act of genocide in the 20th century." Just
for that! And they got it.

"So do you imagine for a single instant that, in view of the action of ASALA
which awakened the Arnenian people, mrkey has sat on its hands, has done
nothing? Do you imagine that the Turkish government could accept that and
did accept it? You have heard of psychological warfare, of the pressure ~-
which a totalitarian state can exercise. And what totalitarian state do we
have facing us today? Can you find a worse eraaple‘! There are 30,000
political prisoners, an opposition that is ausrled, in prison. Iurkey
practices torture, and what torture! It is enough to read the report of
Amnesty International. And I am not speaking of the people who have been
beaten with sticks or have had electric shocks applied to their abdomens or
moistened sexual parts. Today, at this nomant, at the time I an speaking to

you, hundreds of persons are being tortured in ‘mrkey. Yes, those are
anonymous harks.

"In reading the report of Amnesty International I happened on the horrors
described by Jean Marie Caraou, 65 years late. These are the sane horrors,
the sane abominations. Among those tortured there were, of course, Arneniaus
like Father Yergatian, and no doubt it touches us still nore to know of an
Armenian, and a priest furthemre, locked up in a Turkish jail. but we
should be as much scandalired over all the other victims of that government.
And you are not anonymous, when you serve such a government. when you are a
soldier in an arny that does such things, such things that hunsnity condemned
at the Nuremberg Tribunal. Do you think that a state which did not hesitate
to deploy all its resources to remove two lines fron a report, do you think
for an instant that it doesn't try to ignore the Armenian claims, that it

39

mommaowtv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

does not try to destroy the potsntiel for synpsthy which exists in our
fevor? Bscsuse this current of syrpethy exists. During the two deyo of
this triel the proof wss there. People sent us neny flowers, but the" were
the flowers you send to e funerel."

Instinctivsly, we looked st the presiding judge. Although he evidently felt
hinself under the gees of any of us, he did not stir. Devedjien continued
”Hhst the Turks went to do is to estsblish e well of nieundsrstending between
you endaus. Pelee co-Iniques, true co-miques. felse ettecks, infiltrstion.
nenipuletion-awe know then ell. Are you reelly sure thet this tregic etteck
st the Cornevin reilwey ststion wes the work of the Arneniene? These ettecks
do not serve the Arnenisn ceuse st ell. You elwsys heve to esk yourself:

who benefits fron this crime? lot us. end the evidence shows it.

"Switzerland hes elweye been nore then friendly to the Arnsniene. The Turks
therefore hsve every reeson to build e well of seperstion between you end us.
You will judge Herdiros for e single ect. Just one. Not for this whole
clinste of events, by which they would like to influence you. I hsvs elso
been personelly threetened with deeth. Arneniens heve been ettecked in Psris,
ceusing one desth. And before the church e bonb wss discovered, intended to
explode during Hess. "I wee threetened beceuse I defend the people. from
who: I cons. Perhepe sonsthing will hsppen to no. I eccept it. Attorney
Benoit knows this elso.” (Let us recell thet Attorney Benoit, Herdiros' other
lswyer end who hed defended Alec Yeniconechien. wee the victin of e drastic
etteck et the tine of the other trisl. which neerly cost hin his life.
Attorney Benoit, still welke with e cene due to the wounds he suffered lest
yeer.) "but we do not egree thet they cen refuse eccepting the reelity of
our deed. He will cry out this reelity perhsps with excessive vehenence.
equel to whet we heve undergone. We know thet terrorisn is blind. Don't
strike blindly. Don't strike unjustly. Judge with discern-set, I beg of you.
Seerch your ninds.

”The second ergment of the Yerguz feeily ettorney is that ﬁshnet Yergus wee
allegedly killed silply beceuse he wss s hark. I heve elreedy told you thet
when you ere en seen: of e stete thet enploys torture, you ere not so
anonymous lurk. These diploests ere busy neking the sttitude of their govern-
nent look nor-s1. These people ere engeged in Ieking torture look nor-e1.
They do whet the Neei ssbessedors did during world Her II. In Peris in 1938
e young Jew killed e Ger-en diplowst. lie seid: 'I vented to perforn e
synbolic ect. Don't betrey our nessege. ' There is en historic desire on the
pert of oppressed peoples to wish to trensnit their nsssege es en oppressed
people. k] the set perfornsd by Herdiros is en set in this tredition.
ﬁshnet Yea-gut wes e soldier. A soldier who fights e not very pretty bettle.
he wee killed by s soldier who fights for e csuse. And if you went to asks
the belence leen on the side of horror. it will not leen on our side.

"Hr Prosecutor, elthough you heve spoken of the fenily of Hebst Ysrgue, you
have not provided eny deteils ebout his erect functions within the mkish

Consulete. There is no resson to exclude the possibility thet this nen wss
e secret egent. I would like to ssy to you thet of ell the ettecks nede
egsinet Turkish diplonete. none hes been struck egeinst en enonynous Turk.

40

MOMMUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They are always adussadors, consuls, vice-consuls, first secretaries of

enbassy. They are always people occupying specific positions. To say to the
Arnenisns that there could be anti-Thrush racism is particularly injurious
to us—we who are the first victims of racist.

"To this argument I would oppose the claies of the ASALA col-endo which on
last 210 Septenber occupied the Consulate of Turkey in Paris and which
denanded the release fro. ‘mrkish prisons of four Arnenisn prisoners and
also of four Kurdish political prisoners and four Turks. We '..:.ow that the
solution of the M1811 problen can only enarge fron good relations with
mrkish and Kurdish denocratic forces. And they speak to us of racism. when
the co-asndo group of which I speak deasnded the release of eight Muslims
for four Christians. That is the opposite of wish to attack anonynous Turks.
Of course, the fact that he was not an anonynous Turk does not sake it

possible to saile at the death of s nan. If there was laughter yesterday it
was out of place.

"You ask the question why these acts take place in Europe. There is a war
between the mrkish govern-ant and the ASALA. Andzthst war spills over into
the Rest. But in hrkey itself there are nulsrous attacks in which Araenians
have their role. You don't know much about this in Western countries because
Turkish censorship covers it up. Do you think that information is freely
available in Turkey? Ask the European journalists what they have to do to
file reports on mrkey So you think that when something happens on its

soil the Turkish govern-ant is not going to clsis it or try to cover it up.

"You said that Hardiros Jauotchian perforated his act here in Geneva because
he risked nothing. he risked his life. Just as Yeghi lschichian risked his
life. lie was shot in Iran in Septewber in an sttespted assassination of the
mrkish asbsssador in Tehran. You ask yourselves why these Arnenian actions
take place here. But that is because it is here that the Turks are operating.
The Arsenians fled the genocide. They cans to Europe. where they becsns full-
fledged citizens. They wanted to speak of their history, of their genocide.
of what they had suffered. The lurks case here to hide this dialogue which
night take place between us. Even in exile they continue to pursue us. Even
in exile they still continue to persecute us. They strike at us in exile.
and we answer then in exile. It is in Switzerland that they act. and I pre-
sent as proof this well-hown Article 30 of the mean Rights Condssion re-
port. Therefore, it is in Switzerland that they will be struck. I know,

and I an beholden to you for it, that for the last 3 days everyone here.
including the press, has spoken of what the Arnsnisn genocide was. But not
everything happens like that. on every occasion. and you have largely made
clear all of what you were able to understand yesterday.

"The facts retain, those which are being judged today. In the expression of
Attorney bonnant the accusation rests on three pillars of evidence. I accept
these bases for debate.

"First of all the witnesses: I have also heard than. I did not get the sens
iwression frol then that you did. The first witness who- you mentioned. you

51

FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

seid thet he wee 20 meters ewey free the scene, It's e nejor echieve-ent.
you see. to recognise e fece. Be seid it hinself. "I recognized hin beceuse
he hed been presented to no st the police stetion.’ Therefore. herecognised
his e-ong four nen at tho office of the investigeting judge 2 weeks leter
becsuse they hed previously pointed hits out et the police stetion. Thet's
quite en schievenentl You cennot sey thet your witness' stetensnt provides
you with e foundetion for your eccusetion. I even wonder whet conclusion
you csn drew fron this kind of testinony!

"The second witness whon you teke es en exeqlewyou see I ‘ sticking only
to the witnesses who. you heve chosen—is e wonen. She seys she wes 30
neters fron the scene of the ection. Judge for yourselves: 30 netersl She
seys: "I sew his photogreph in the press." After thet she reconisee hi-
et the office of the investigeting judge. Thet's elso quite en echievenentl
And whon does she recognize? A nen who wee running, since 9he sew no one
else. She recognized his es s runner. but not es soneone firing e gun. She
tells you thet he is the sen who ren. This second witness' testimony. no '
nore then the first, does not esteblish the guilt of Herdiroe Jugotchien.

"The third witness seys: '1 met sey thet if I hed not seen hin er the
police stetion end his photogreph in the press, I would not heve recognized
hin.‘ Thet's e very honest witness. In bringing together these three pieces
of testimny whet nekee it possible for you to sey thet Herdiroe wes the

gun-en?

"And I will speek to you of this fourth witness. e wonen, who seys she sew
on the steps e nen who looked st her end who rsn ewey. there is this nen?
"here is he. since he is not one of the witnesses?

"Fro- the witnesses whoe you mentioned I don't see whet you got fron thee in
term of the sccusetion of the gun-en. All of the witnesses except one sey
thet it is possible thet there ney heve been enother nen. It‘s e nornel
thing thet no one peid ettention to hits, since it wee not he who ettrected
their ettention.

"The second pillar of evidence presented by the prosecution rests on the
weepons used. The bellistics expert decleres thet the certridge shells cent
from the gun found on hin. This is not in question. There wes no need for
s bellistics expert! Regerding the second pert of this expert testimony. I
would underline thet when Herdiros Jengotchien wee errested he hed two
nsgeeines on hin. the first one in the gun. The first two certridge shells
cene from it. The defense ednits it. It is likely thet the third certridge
shell elso cene from it. There were therefore three rounds fired. Hhet do
the police sey? Since this gun, which wee fired three tines, should no
longer contein more then 11 certridges. Inspector Seutier seid thet when
they went to question hin. it turned out thet the gun hed lb certridges in it!
There is something wrong in this. The police should egree enong the-selves.
Sons nenipuletions heve tehen plecel Re don't know whet heppsned to the gun.

"So out of the three pillars of evidence exenined so fer. two of then heve
elrsedy crumbled ewsy.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FORMUSEONLY

"Let's look at the third one. the stetesente of hardiros Jugotchian. It's
true. They are incoherent. I agree with you. but what conclusion do you
draw Eros this! Incoherence has never constituted proof of guilt!

"for sy part I attach no inortance to these statensnts. Because he is a
soldier and consequently does not collaborate with other authorities. if only
because the Turks oculd have brought civil proceedings against his and
obtained access to the file on this case. They could have used it, obtained
intonation on his and on his orgsnisation. As a result he says anything
deliberately. For that reason he attaches no inortance to the ASALA
co-unique which revealed the presence of the second We group. There-
fore. he is distrustful and does not know if this is really an ASAlA
cot-unique.

"Now when he takes this point of view, he does not take it to escape his
responsibilities, since fros the point of view of penal law, it is almet
the ease thing. he hes no particular interest in saying what he said. That
will not get his out of jail. If he says this. it is because he wants us to
reflect. Don't you think he states the contrary of the truth because he is
a young san who. up to the present. had a tendency to justify his actions
(didn't he say that he was in influential official of BALM)? Be is young.
he is a child, and therefore when he claims to be the gunsan. ask yourselves
if this is true! Pros all that you retain the impression that you are
swi-ing in contradictions, to soss extent. You have to appreciate the

facts in terms of the motive. You will judge the facts in terms of the
motive.

"And what is the motive? You cannot avoid it. I don't want you to think. as
it has been suggested to you. that I want to deviate fros this trial into

the Armenian question. You have to look and you have to understand. To
understand his. You have to understand this continuation of the persecution
which even today--including in your country—continues to pursue us. There
is also the enorsous weight of the genocide. The day before yesterday

[17 December). Your honor, you were good enough to read the telegres from
‘rslaat Pasha. So that you may understand how powerful this tramstic shock
is, I as going to read you several other telegrams from the ease Talaat
Pasha." Attorney Devedjian reads this overwhelming evidence and then resumes
his sunsrization: ”today. that continues. Today. in 1981. in Turkey. on
their identity paper is marked: 'Arsanian.’ ‘l'hat's not for nothing.

"when you are an Armenian. you cannot hold certain jobs. In 1965 there was
this law which prohibited instruction in Armenian. This man ‘l'elaat is today.
in 1981, a national hero in mrheyl With a saueoleun. with avenues. with
schools which bear his nasal And we don‘t have the right to have our dead
respected, while their executioner is glorified! "hat nan worthy of the name
could accept that? Would you accept that for a single instant without being
ready for legitimate revolt?

"I hope that you understand this well. This is not a setter of vengeance
but of elementary justice. It would be easy to stop the terroriss. It would

193

l-‘OIOFFICIALISEONLY
POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY

be enough for a mrkish government for the first ties to say" 'It's true.
‘hnrkey aasaacred the Armenians. u. say this the nore easily since it was
not we who did it. He ask your pardon. ' but they have never asked our
pardon. Turkey hee always refused to enter into a dialogue. Even today. in
this place, Turkey is not here because it doesn't want to talk to us. Even
here. they avoid a dialogue. One word would be enough to stop all that:
'Pardon. ' Let then ask pardon; can we agree that they will not ask pardon?"

Defense attorney Devedjien turned toward the Yergur f-ily attorney: "You
said that this is not the tribunal of history. But this audience, even so,
is historic. There were 1.5 Iillion Armenians killed. One Arlsnian killed
a Turk. la is being tried, Those are your laws. I agree. but for our 1.5
aillion victins no one has been tried. and that's why we no longer accept
thst an Araenian be tried today! Do you perceive the irony of history!
Siaply in terns of huean justice! The first to be judged in this affair was
we Arnenians! This is an extraordinary thing. I would like to say to ay
colleague representing the Yergu: fanily just this: you used unfortunate
language yesterday. You called for severity for this child. And to do this
you have said exactly the s-e thing as Talaat Pasha: 'Kill the children
because they will be the guilty of tonorrow.’ That bowled as over. Liter.
ally bowled ne over. but I pardon you."

A look at Yerguz family attorney bonnent showed us that this co-ent had hit
the ark. but defense attorney stedjian had already resuned hie argueentx
"If you had any doubts on his aotives, you have heard the expert witness
testify. They have told you that he is a just an. And what did he say? I
an sorry, lir Bonnent, but you cannot drew froa this testimony what you said.
The expert said that Nardiros Jangotchien acted by reason of an ideal, that
for his defending the Armenian cause was a question of honor. Further-ore.
he described to you the very special situation in which Hardiros Janootchian
has lived all hie life. in a systea of naked force. where it is the law of
the jungle which triuqhs, where you kill people like that. for nothing. he
has only lived in such an atnosphere. in this universe where only force can
protect you. How then could he have aseiailated your laws. For you he is
like a Martian. You are not going to judge a Martian by the laws of Earth!

"And then look at hie. You spoke yesterday of the handsoneness of youth.
Nothing has worked for hie. He is intelligent. he has a great learning
capacity. Be hes hie whole life before hie. Eyen so. you are not going to
consider that. at his age. everything is coupletely lost! Don't forget what
the expert said. this just nan. on the subject of aotives: 'His act is the
natural prolongation of the denial of the genocide.‘ and he added: 'The
circunstsnces as a whole which surround this act involve in the end a certain
fora of self-esteem" You are not going to allege perversity! You cannot
do so. After all these ale-ants have been available to you. You conclude
that he is being judged solely for his act and not for another. And that
this is an act of war: the victia was killed like a soldier of an arty that
wasn't very noble. You conclude that the facts are confused and that his
exact role is quite difficult to deter-ins. You also conclude that Switzer-
land is not his target. he acted in the defense of persecuted exiles.

POIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY
F0. OFFICIAL L83 ONLY

Turkey hae provided mle provocation for the attache of which it ie the
victin. And when it. will be enough to eay 'yee‘ to atop theee attache. "hen
Hilly Brandt got down on hie kneee at Aechwite, on that day the Jewieh people
could turn the page. The Ger-an prine uinieter grew in etature by thin
action. and hie people grew with hin. And whet do we deland of Turkey: at
leaet that it will recognize the horrore of the peat in order to be able to
look at the future.

"Our relationehipe with the 1mm. although they are cowlex. have alwaye
been relationehipe as between good neighbore. That in why I any to then:
'Stop the terrorien. aek our pardon. You will eeve nany livee. Thin ie not

a threat. The injustice we have undergone ie too etrong. But if you
recognize the genocide. the Armiane will no longer underetand why terrorien
ehould continue. Hhereae now there in etill the feeling of a etruggle for
juatice.’ That ie why I tell you that hardiroa Jngotchian acted in the
eervice of an ideal. There ie the evidence. You are going to judge hill. You
are going to judge ue.

"I eat you for underetanding. I aalv. you for a judgnent which ie not nerely
approval of the can of the executionere. You ehould not. by neane of a
eevere decieion, lake then believe that they are right and thue encourage
then in crinee 100,000 tiaee nore terrible than that which you are judging
today. Stay on our aide, ae you alwaye have: there are ac few countriee
which have been on our side."

The atnoephere wee tenee. Attorney Devedjian eat down. We looked at the
facee of the jury to eee if "eonehow" they were touched or aoved a little bit.
Nothing ehowed under their aaeka.

“me eeeeion wee euepended between noon and 2:55 pa. It wae then the turn of
defenee attorney Benoit to eu- up:

"Your Honor. Hr Proeecutor, ladiee and gentlenen of the jury. I firet Iuet
bow my head in view of the death of a Ian. I aleo met how .37 head before

the death of 1.5 nillion pereone eeeaeeinated in 1915 eiaply becauee they
were Arneniane! For ne it ie an honor to defend a human being who hae the
face of a child and ie eo handeone. For at it ie an honor to be able to plead
for a country which doee not exiet. for a country which hae been eraeed from

the nap. For ne it an honor to defend thia cauee which I have made into ly
own ceuee!

"When they eought to make you believe that there in no relationehip between
thie act of genocide and thin attack, I eaid no! I think that thin people
has the fight to regain ite country. I think that thia people hae the right
to have Iilitant eupportere. One of then ie in front of you. What ie he
accueed of? Of having eought to rediecover hie fatherland whoee children
have been naeaacred. I have eeen hardiroe Jalgotchien eeverel tinee in
prieon. Ieagine the eolitude of thia boy, ieolated in hie cell for Ionthe,
not epeaking our language. I tried to learn to know his deepite the barrier
of the interpretere. And what I new ie what Profeeeor Bernein epoke of: a

young adult. That neane that in our penal code there ie a chapter for young
adulte.

105

l-‘OIOI'I'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"But I would like to eay firot of all that I wee dioappointed in Attorney
nonnent'and in tho proaecutor. They have juot told you that the act which
you aro judging io the logical conooquenco of another trial which woo held
here at tho beginning of laat year. They tried to naho you believe that too
soft a aentenco waa handed down last Decoder and January. I on tho Dre
aotoniahed at thia oinco tho judgnont rendered woo honeot and ocrupuloua.

"To return to this trial. they have mentioned to you a Chineae proverb.
There are otinre. and here is one of then: 'Any deepot at all can force
hie alave to oing hym to liberty.‘ At the tine of the genocide there were
not juot dead people but also olevea. There were four gonerationo involved.
You have heard the religioua niniotor from harooillo epoak with a vehonence
towered by hie ago. My client hao the cane kind of vehooenco. In the arm
which permit a people to be recognized there are the lawa and there are the
am. They have told you that you are not the tribunal of hiotory. but
neither are you the tribunal of terroriea. becauoo you don't have the right
to be ouch a tribunal. You are the tribunal which in judging a kid. who
after year'o of nartyrdon of hie people porfornod the act which hie conacience
dictated.

"I will read to you an account of the genocide. an that you will undorotand."
Attorney Benoit reads it and than continueo: "There in the tine of tho
alavoa. there in the tine of the naooacree. there ia the tine of thoeo who
are prepared to be aeoinilatod, and finally there in the tine of thoae who
react to thooo ovental I know that the Arnenian people have been abandoned
by the American Senate. I know that they have been abandoned by the United
Rationa. And when they have tried all the chennola of diplonacy to no that
juetice is done. well, they come inevitably to oxtroniat aolutiono.

"Think of the M [Algerian National Liberation Front]. Haen't it by noono
of or. that they obtained their liberty? The Arneniona don't have the

one chance to have their country, oince this wee taken away fron then! You
have heard here a lurkiah diplonat 32 yoaro old eay that he woo 32 in order
to avoid exproeaing a view on tho Arnenien genocide! Hell. I an 3‘ years old
and I know about the Jewish and Arnonian gonocidoal

"You have heard the grandsothor of Hardiroo Jengotchian tell you that aho told
her children and grandchildren of the history of the naoaecreo. One thing
wee not said. One queation which eho was spared. becauoo on the day before
aha tootified thia aged poraon had a heart attack. The quoation woo thia:

in your tine in Turkey, in your region. ion't it true that any poraon who
opohe Armenian had hie tongue cut out? Despite her illneoo. oho cane here

on behalf of her grandoon.

"They have elao spoken to you of Lebanon. About thia Lebanon where, when you
go to school. no one knowo if you will can back.

”liiniater larnueian hea doacribod to you the blocked future in front of

Arnonian youth in the Riddle Beat and who, given the precariouenooo of their
situation, have decided to fight to reconquer a country. ‘l'heir country. You

know the cynician which io ohown then.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”What would we have done if Nazi Ger-any had invaded our country? Wouldn't
there have been anong us people willing to take up ares and to kill?

"It is true that hardiros Jengotchien did not experience the genocide. But
he has the suffering of it in his heart. And the wound will always bleed.
That is why this boy, who needs a country. obeyed en organisation. You can
ask yourselves why Janotchian cans here to Geneva. "hon did he cone to or
who helped hi- to kill? You have heard Attorney Devedjian tell you that
Herdiros Jamtchian cans to suppress an ener agent. Evidently, it wss not
just to kill anyone at all. He had s photograph of this personage who was

a nether of the ‘mrkish police. Therefore. it was soeaonu who was a part, as
a representative of the Turkish state. of the effort to deny the existence of
the genocide which led to this extrenity and to this act. ﬁshnet Yergus was
the representative of a state which annihilated hie race and which continues
the repression of his people.

"You have heard the nunarous exaeples of sabotage of discussion of the
Arnenian question. and you have seen the unpardoneble sample of the lean who
cane to say to you: '1 an 32 years old.‘ How could he dare to say to you:
'I an 32 years old, and that doen't concern ne.’ You know Hardiros' per-
sonality. You know that he was raised in a refugee caQ. You know that he
spent nore than 18 nonths in a training canp where he received training in
sports and nilitary subjects and where he took history courses.

"This boy was ready to die for the cause of his people. He is also a boy who
lives for this cause, who lives quite ainply to nuke one of the greatest
genocides which has ever existed in our tins fully recognised. Yes, he was
absolutely convinced of what he had to do. It is true that I have attacked
Professor Bernein to sons extent. For an answer which he geve no, saying I
think. I as sure that Article ll of the Penal Code is applicable to Mardiroa

Jangotchian.

"It. is for you to decide whether, after ell the suffering which his people
has undergone, he is capable or not of mderstending himself in terns of his
act. I say: 'No.‘ I tell you that if we had been externinated in the sane
way, we would have reacted as he did. is is a kid who acted like a soldier
in the service of his cause. Idealisn is sonething which is considered like
an extenuating circunstance in Swiss law. My client arrived here obedient to
his orders. They told him 'Go and kill.‘ It was the Yergus family
lawyer who said that. Hardiros arrived here in a different world. in a
different balance of forces. His world was falsified at its very base by
those who have been accused here during these 3 days, in this courtroon. be-
cause they refused to recognize the existence of the genocide of 1915.

"as is filled with the great valor of the struggle of his people. Hardiros.
whatever his age, was not in a position to orient hiuelf, could not orient
hinself. in terns of his act. Because in this false balance of force there
is a lessening of the capacity to understand. lhere will be at leest sons
such diminution. You have the task of deciding whether you should epply
Article ll or not. Let us cons to the core of the problen. What act did he

107

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

co-it in Geneva? A m is dead. It is not particularly inportant whether
my client was the gunman or not. Or whether he was the one who took the gun
and weapons and fled.

"However. I ask you to look at the personality of ny client. Is he really
perversel and i-aoral. as they would like to make you believe, so that you
will find him guilty of nurder. hardiros is neither ill-oral nor amoral. As
for perversities, I'n going to tell you what they are." Defense attorney
benoit then read from a text regarding several angles of crines already
Judged-and extracts from the judicial reports. All concerned nonstruous and
premeditated crinas. lie stopped and looked at the jury gravely: "So do
you think that, whatever his participation in this act, he acted without
native, with a aind a vile, as insensitive. with this desire to massacre.
such as is described in these trials? Hell, I tell you: 'No.‘

"Jaqotchian's motives were not i-nral and they were not egotistical. This
is not the act of a man who had only scorn for huun life, but rather a man
who gave no thought to his own worth in view of the enormity of the other
problea. So, yes, Jamgotchian could be considered dangerous. but not
particularly dangerous, as they would like to make you believe. The danger
which he presented. therefore. in no way is sufficient to characterize him
as an assassin. he is not particularly dangerous, and neither is he
particularly perverse. That involves, therefore, homicide, not mrder. what-
ever you find. you have the obligation to consider what are the circumstances
which could extenuate his act. It is true that the political native is not
considered to be an honorable notiva.

"But it was Professor Bernein who told you" 'ﬂs acted out of idealism.’ Row
idealisn can be taken into consideration in Swiss jurisprudence." Defense
attorney Benoit then referred to Orders 66 and 65 of the Swiss Federal .
Council. Then he said: ”The Penal Code does not take into account these

possibly extenuating circuastances which are presented to you. But look well
at Hardiros Jangotcbian. As that woman said to you. this first defense
witness. she said as she looked at this kid: "I'hat cannot be an assassini'

“That is why. at the tine you raise the question of whether you have before
you a aan guilty of murder or honicide. I ask you to answer yes to the
question as to whether the motive was honorable. Don't forget that you also
have to take into account .what happened after the act. He had a loaded gun
on him. He had a hand grenade on bin. He did not fire on those who came to
arrest hin. And if he didn't do this it is because he had no reason to fire
at the Swiss. and he said this to you. He simply came to carry out his
mission. And nothing else. Yesterday when reference was wade to the martyr-
dom of the Armenian people. some people wept. And I who have taken up the
cause of this people, I who have suffered in my own body, I who nevertheless
defend Hardiros—today I give you ﬂy tears and I ask you to render a fair
verdict." Defense attorney Benoit see-ed to be truly Dyed. Ila sat down.
overcome by station.

The faces of the nenbers of the Jury remained as impenetrable as ever. The
presiding judge addressed Herdiroe: "Do you have anything to say before I

68

MOMGALUSEONLY
l-‘OIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY

read the certificate of indictment?" llr Godel translates the question to
Hardiros. who stands up and says in a clear and fit: voice: What I did
here was not directed against the Swiss people nor against the mrkish
people, but rather against the Turkish fascist regine. I would like to
explain why Switzerland was chosen for this operation. The cancellation of
Paragraph 30 of the report concerning the Athenian genocide took place here

at the United Nations, and at the request of Turkey. That is all I have to
say."

The presiding judge said: 'Mers of the jury. do you have a question?"
One of the jurors in the first row said: "I would like to know if the
accused would be prepared to kill again if the AW asked hi- to do so."

The answer will he very inortant. We all hope that Hardiros understands
how such is involved. Defense attorney Devedjian leans toward Hardiros and
whispers to his several tines: "Votch ease. votch!“ (say no, say no!)
Hardiros answers with an assured voice: ”no. never."

‘l'he presiding judge. in a tense silence. then reads once again the entire
indict-ant. The jury retires to consider the question. We all know that if
the jury finds Hardiros guilty of mrder he will be autonstically sentenced
to life inriaonnent. A deep tension fills the courtroon. Threatening looks
are exchanged between Athenian synpathisers of Hardiros and the correspon-
dents of the harkish fascist newspapers such as mun. W. etc. We
leave the courtroon and pace nervously up and down the lobby of the Palace
of Justice. He find ourselves confronted with this nonstruous truth: this
is an Amnian soldier who is on the bench of the accused, whereas the
Turkish torturers never appeared before any court at all! It is an aberra-
tion of history. He also face the fact of these cops and these journalists
who are discussing a prohlen which, as good Swiss, they will never under-
stand.

SMS: "Gentlenen, the court is in session." The presiding judge says 8 "The
trial is resunsd. I call on the form of the jury." The latter. a Inn of
about 60, stands up and says in a monotonous voice:

"0n lay honor and Iy conscience I read the following decisions:

"As to the first question. concerning guilt. the jury answers 'yes';
extenuating circunstances. 'no' ;

"As to the second question, concerning guilt. the jury answers 'yes'; exten-
uating circumtances. 'no‘;

Our throats tighten. We begin to claw our jaws shut. The forenan of the
jury continues:

"As to the subsidiary question, the jury answers 'yes' and

a) as to the question as to whether the accused possesses all his nental
faculties, the jury answers 'yes';

POI OFFICIAL l8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) as to the question as to whether he understands the ilplications

of his act, the jury answers 'no‘."

the lawyers don't seen to have any reaction. In the crowd attending people
ask for explanations. and it is the appearance of things that wins out. The
verdict of "guilty" we quite understand: Mardiros has been found guilty of
nurdar. lowever. the jury found his only "partly responsible" for his acts.
This explains that the "trial continues." It is a letter now of determining
the length of the sentence.

The prosecutor stands up again. venon on his tongue: "The ‘mrkish state
could not participate in this trial. Defense attorney Devadjisn reproached
the victin. ﬁshnet Yergue, with being an agent of the mrkish secret police
by saying that in the course of this trial we had never heard a statensnt of
the real functions of the latter at the Consulate. ﬁshnet Yerguz, after
having conpleted his studies in Istanbul. was in a training position at the
031'? [French Radio-Television Office] and also with the AFP [Agenca France
Presse]. In 1978 he becane a locally engaged secretary of the Consulate of
Turkey in Geneva. lie was narried and had two children aged 5 and 7 years old.

"1'0 throw a kind of troubled suspicion on the victis. it was stated that he
was allegedly a aster of the mrkish secret service. How could I provide
you with proof that he was not. since no state in the world thus identifies
the functions of these agents. Just now I was at the Turkish Consulate and

I walked along the street where he was shot down. And I said to nyself that
a nether of the secret service would have paid attention and observed
whether he was followed. rurtheraore, you will recall that Jangotchien. in
the course of the pre-trial exanination. never went so far as to legitinise
this act of mrder by saying that the victin was a ester of the secret
service. On the contrary, he always said that he had chosen hits out of three
nen because he had a certain "air" about his. Now. angotchian. you say that
the under involved a certain nan whose photograph you had received. This

is the final trick. In the sans way. when you said today that you would not
kill again if you were asked to do so. you have stated the contrary up to
now!

'Menbers of the jury. you have followed the sunning-up. rejecting the pre-
sence of extenuating circumstances. and I congratulate you for it. Thus
your decision will not set a precedent. And you are right, for it would be
unacceptable to his to avoid his responsibilities by alleging that be obeyed
higher orders!

"I danand 20 years inprisonnsnt and 15 years of subsequent explusion fron
Switzerland." At the request of the lawyers the session was suspended.

At 6:65 pa defense attorney Benoit stood up to asks his final plea: "Ladies
and gentlenen of the jury, you have rendered a verdict which allows you to
lessen the penalty which you will give to Hardiros Jangotchian. The prosecu-
tor has denanded this sentence of 20 years inprisonnsnt, or the nsxim
which the law provides in this case. He has denuded this sentence fron you
by speaking only of the personality of the victim. Article 63 of the Panel

50

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Code provides for what should be taken into account: motives. previous
criminal record, personality of the accused.

"Regarding his previous crininal record. you know that the accused has never
conittsd a crime. He is unknown to the police records. We have here a first

first offender who appears for the first time before a court. That relates
to his record.

"Regarding his motives, you know what they were. You did not accept his
having acted for an honorable motive. You should take into account the fact
that his motives were neither vile. nor abject, nor egotistical. nor
appalling. This is because Mardiros Jamgotchian needed to make this gesture.
It was for himself, for his people that he did it. Mr Prosecutor, you have
spoken of a tardy repentance. Repentance is never too late.

"The third thing which you should take into account is the personality of the
accused. They have spoken to you of the situation in Lebanon. You have to
live in Iebanon to understand what the personal situations are. Although I
have been invited to go to Lebanon, 1'. never dared to go there because I was
afraid of dying. because people die there every day! his father told us
yesterday that he had raised his son like a soldier, but it is his kid who

is there now!" His voice broke at this point.

"I ask you to reduce the sentence to the minim of what you can do. Since
you do not know exactly what age my client has, and since he is 23 years old
at the most, since his character development has been gravely affected by the
tragedy of his people, and since his system of ethics is different from our
system. For me, Mardiros is a boy who is not fully aware of the realities,
and you have admitted this by applying Article 11. You have before you a
repentant boy for whom I daeand the application of Article 10."

The jury retired to deliberate. The presiding judge announced: "The session
is hereby suspended." -

What now begins for us; for Hardiros, whom they have taken away to be alone
in his cell; and for all Armenians present is hours of interminable waiting
during which the speculation flows freely.

From 7:30 pm to 10:46 pn. Hours during which we have to keep our tempers.
Hours to keep the brakes on. It is necessary to say it because some might
be tempted to believe the contrary. Yes. you have to say it. A trial is not
a pleasure party. It is difficult, it tests you. Nerves may crack. And we
could only admire Hardiros the nore since by his calm appearance he gives us
all a lesson in courage, and a strong dose of it at that. The lawyers try
to reassure us: "The discussions are long. That means that the jury has a
troubled conscience. That is good for us."

In the courtroom which no one dares to leave all of the views are in agree-
ment. At times they are optimistic: "He will be given an anneaty." "Even

if he is given 6 months, that is already too much." At times they take
into account the reality of the Swiss mentality: "If he gets 5 years, that

51

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will be better even so than 20 years. right?" The predictions of the lawyers
turn around 10 years. A stretch of 10 years for Mardiros. Our fists
tighten instinctively. He stub out the cigarettes on the floor as if we were
stubbing out a Turkish agent or a Swiss cop. Regarding the Swiss cops. all
of a sudden there are many more of then around. The reinforcements have
arrived. They are burly brutes, the equivalent of our (:33 [Republican
Security Coqenies—Prench riot police]. who take their places within the
courtrool. And then there it is. For the last tins. the same caranony.

The aeabers of the court cone and take their places. Hardiros arrives. a
little tense, but on his youthful futures the pride of an Arnenian prince.
A prince who is the heroic eysbol of a whole youth engaged in the struggle.

The presiding judge announces: "The session is resunad." Everyone sits down
heavily. A whole list of phrases beginning with "considering that," whose
content is more or less as follows:

"Considering that Jangotchien has omitted the lost serious crine covered
by our Penal Code;

"Considering that he prensditated his act for a long tins;

"Considering that he shot down the victia in cowardly fashion by firing three
bullets into his back;

"Considering that he was only driven to perforn this act by a dangerous kind
of fanaticisl;

"Considering that he can he considered to be a dangerous person;
"Considering that the fansticisn which drives hin has been carefully Iain-
tsined;

"Considering that those who have acted to influence the soul of Jaagotchian
have known how to exploit the undeniable suffering of the Arnenian people,
which every Arasnien today carries in his heart;

"Considering that this fanatic. Jengotchian, has lost his sense of values;
"Considering that it should be concluded that he is the victia of this
fanaticien which has lads hl‘! lose all sense of the real values of the society
in which he is developing;

"Considering that it must also be CM into consideration that his fanati-
cisn is exacerbated by the attitude of the mrkish state which is deter-lined
not to recopize the fact of the Amnian genocide;

"Considering that in Lebanon he lived in an uncontrollable situation for the
past 5 years, where only force prevails;

"Considering that he has an excellent previous record;

"Considering that he has his whole life before bin;

"Considering that he could work in the future for the cause of his people
through the use of honorable means;

"The court sentences hin to 15 years iaprisonnant and 15 years of subsequent
expulsion fro- Switzerland. "

Despite the stupefection which overcaas us, cries of protest spread through
the courtroon. People said: "Hardiros, we are with you."

Mr Godel translated for the accused. Mardiroa did not wait to learn the
sentence. He turned to Attorney Devedjien and without faltering learned

52

FORWUSEONLY
what the sentence was. He stood up solemnly when Godel. loved by auction,
translated into Araenian for hin the phrases beginning with "considering

that." hrdiros corrected hin when he heard the phrase about "his fanaticisn
was maintained by those who acted to influence his soul, "he said than, "It's
not true. I an not a fanatic. I an convinced of what I an doing."

The presiding judge announced that the defense had 5 days to appeal the
verdict and the sentence. ‘lhe trial was over. The state security police
took position so that no one could approach Hardiros, so that no one could
shake his hand. Then there was an explosion of revolt, a scuffle. Fingers
were raised throughout the entire courtroon in the "V for victory" sign such
as Hardiros had shown on entering the courtroon. Before Plardiros was led out
of the courtrooa, people shouted: ”Baiastan, llaiastan! (Arnenia, Armenia!)
Shouts spread through the root, "The Swiss have hearts of stone!"

A wonan's voice was heard, protesting: "He were not terrorists but we will
become terrorists!" The nenbera of the jury regarded us in perplexed
fashion, appreciating things all of a sudden, at the and of 3 days that it
was not an anonynous Arnenian who had just been condos-led. We left the court-
roon, sons crying, others shaking their fists at the large nunber of police-
nen. The Turkish journalists left by slinhing along the walls. Threats and
denunciations rained down on than.

An old Arnenian from Switzerland, passing in front of the Palace of Justice
at the nonent when we cans out learning of the sentence given to hardiros,
sighed, and with a gesture covering all of Switsarland said: "I pity than
for those 15 years." The Arnanians in the course of their long history have
learned that they could sore easily count their enemies than their friends.
Switzerland, by condeming hardiros by nsans of an unjust and severe judg-
nent, revolting to the Arnenian people, has shown in which can it is located.
And far tron putting a brake on this so-called "terrorists" which it seeks

to control, it will, on the contrary, breath into the Armenian resistance

a new force and deternination. Pacing adversity, faced with the feeling of
undergoing an unspeakable injustice, Arnenian youth will continue to resist,
nore resolutely than ever. He sincerely hope that Switzerland will not learn
at its own expense that you cannot huniliata a people with inunity.

Send your messages of support to Mardiros Jesgotchian, Prison de Che-p Dollon,
Thonex 1226, Geneva, Suisse.

5170
080: 6000/0016

53

FOR omcm. 083 ONLY
GUM? ORGAN 6111101228 “ESTER“ 03823510“ H113 mam
15319011 AL-JMAHIRIYAB in Arabic 4 Jtm 82 pp 19, 1.1

ﬁrticle: "Throw Out Your Arab Agents, But Uhat about Bader Heinhogf and the Brigu 37";
also published in Tripoli AL-zm tut-ma in Arabic 7 Jun 82 p _3,l .

[fexg Introduction .

‘-. . ‘ ._...~-.-—.—._.—.._—.-_‘ _—-. —--... -_ . ...‘ ..‘_ ..

Revolutionary violence is the hand-alder: of street action; it is not an alternative to
sass aoveaent or a Justification for eliainating and eaphasising the absence of it.
Revolutionary violence is an expression of 'a notion which serves the broadest group of
the nasses and is directed at their eneaies; it is aiaed at institutions which are
hostile to the people. Revolutionary violence does not Just consist of acts of vio-
lence which occur in isolation fro- the upbringing of the assess and their acquisition
of self confidence. It is always present in every revolutionary noveaent. Throughout
history there has been recourse to violence in periods of transition; decisive transi-
tions take place only through violence, because the enew does not give up easily and
people with privileges do not abandon their privileges by choice - rather, they sust
be coerced. Revolutionary violence, because of its connection with the senses, is a
denocretic process, because it is an expression of the interests of the majority.
Revolutionary violence therefore is a fora of inposition of ease denocracy. Violence
which occurs as an alternative to the nasses and takes place fro- the precise of a lack
of confidence in the people, in accordance with the deternination that the assess are
unable to act, beconcs chaos and terrorisn. Therefore, true revolutionary violence
does not supersede the noveaent of the aasees; it cones about as a construction of the
unreaitting process of inculcating consciousness which the leases' revolutionary and
progressive forces carry out. There can be no violence without a historic consciousness
of the aovenent of social developaent. Therefore the difference between right-wing

anarchical terrorist violence and the violence of revolutionary forces in confrontation
with the forces of fascist repression is very clear.

One

Toward the end of the sixties, the ideas of Herbert Harcuse. which he expressed in his
two books "Love and Civilization“ and "Toward a New Revolution," ripened in the minds
of the ninds of the international student generation in the quest to establish an ex-
trcnist consciousness by sabotaging the culture of the cloninent civilisation with its
eatisting econoaic, political and social institutions, which are founded on a principle

of repression Justified in tbnene of positive legitinate repression to confront un-
bridled iapulsiveness.

56
By 1968, the dialectic of current historical circumstances had brought the thesis of
rejection to the point of violence against the forces of repression and a student up-
heaval broke out in various areas of the world. In the fire of its acts and ideologi-
cal contradictions, it suddenly proceeded to look for an alternative which would
accommodate its rebelliousness, and, because it consisted of no but rejection, it
succumbed to 'the illusions of the abstract ideas of Herbert ﬂarcuse and Sartre.

In the Italian city of taste, Renato Ourcio and Margarita Cagiul, two students in the
faculty of social sciences, reached agree-ant over the idea that the world is a time
bash in a little bouquet of flowers in our bed, in a nearby evening, in the tiae of
childhood, and that if this vile world is to be changed that cannot be done through the
progress of the social sciences, which lack the effectiveness of the trigger of a gun; to
the degree that this progran establishes an exceptional consciousness which is conuary
to its program, it will transfers the existing cultural base through the effectiveness
of its perseverant nature, which restrains radical change.

Renato and Haragarita came to the conclusion that:

The alternative is to change the world, which means breaking up its foundations through
violence.

:Thus was born the Organisation of the Proletarian Left, which subsequently becane trans-
formed into the Red Brigades Organization. This represented the left wing which preaches
revolutionary violence as a legitimate neane aiaed at saving violence into the interior

of the capitalist state and provoking its repressive institutions through a counter-
repression whose slogan is:

"we say that fraudulent denocracy in Europe must be cospelled to reaove its masks by
provoking it at all tines to exercise rewession under the active of fear for itself.

It is repression alone that will create consciousness in the ranks of the working

class." That violence is justified when it is directed against these institutions. It
is a reaction. The bonb that blew up the supermarket in Heat Germany at the hands of

the ﬁnder )1ve gang was a "practical" expression of the rejection of socialist society,
and the attack on the Christian Denocratic Party at the hands of the Red Brigades was

a rejection of the ruling bourgeoisie in Italy.

The bold actions of the Basque organisation in Spain were an urgent revolutionary
approach whose pm'pose was national liberation corresponding to that of the Irish
Liberation Arsy. 0n the other hand, we find right wing violence.

That is terroris- for the sake of terroriss, and is the black side of revolutionary vio-
lence. Its style of violence reveals its criainal face, which is in collusion with the
capitalist state that uses it as a preventive device against revolutionary organizations.

In Milan in 1969 the terrorist right unleashed the massacre of the Agricultural Bank in
which 16 innocent persons were killed. It provoked labor denonstrations like a bosb

thrown into an anti-fascist dsaonstration. Another example is the crises of the Jewish
brigades in France which were aiaed against the Jews thenselves with the sin of gaining

the synpathy of the Rest and tuning the vindictive heritage against the Arabs and the
international left wing organisations that were helping the Arab cause. Therefore we

met distinguish between left wing violence and right wing violence, and consequently
draw up a new formulation for its natm.

55
These movements arose in geopaphical and ideological environments which had previously
witnessed the emergence of Gramsci and Carrillo who participated to a large extent in
the establishment of nurses-miss, which is based on the ideology of 'transormation,"
as an alternative to revolutionary violence, whereby the reform of existing institu-
tions would take place through what they call "the movement of internal dialectic ,"

that is, the institutions of the bourgeois class, in the form of the state, the church,
the media, the police, the family and the school. This, and not destruction or a radi-
cal overthrow by means of the impulsive rush toward change, is the focus of "revolution-
ary action." .

Thus these left wing movements by virtue of the circumstances of their birth and growth,
constituted the historic antithesis which almost declared the total bankruptcy of the
European communist moveaent, especially after recent years lmd witnessed the retreat on
the part of saw mropean communist parties from their progressive positions, causing
them almost to change for the sake of taking political power through general electica‘
and to reduce their relations with the man on the street and their historic forces

that is, the workers, because of the secessionist role which extremist materialist nd
potskyist currents contined to play within these parties and successive rifts over
many new political and ideological developments, the first of which were the events

in Czechoslovakia and the last of which will not be the events in Poland and the
increase in undemocratic practices and phenomena in internal organizational relations
at various levels within these parties.

These nova: ants, through their reliance on violence as a form and insu'ument of con-
frontation with the institutions of capitalist society and its class interests and
policies, fried to respond to the critical question that the movement of European and
American young people had posed in the middle of the sixties through hippyism. The
latter was a manifestation of a reaction to the relations and institutions of bom-
geois production, and surrealism and bohemianism came about in reaction to bourgeois
culture and arts, pragmatic objective, logical and structural philosophies, neoplato-
nic morality, patriarchical family relations and semal feudalism; it stresses "re-
Jection" in its static, nihilist' sense as a position regarding the existing state of
affairs, declaring its incapacity for destroying the 'capitalist institution" which

is supported by the power of neclear elecbonic armies and settling on having its "no"
function as the means for a cultural withdrawal from the era of cybernetics to the era
of primitive stone age or Jungle universalism. may tried to offer an alternative
which would tranweend the timidity of the contrast elders vis-a-vis "desu'uction"

and the adolescents' failtu-e and fear of nuclear death. They managed to create a broad
dialectical movement in the streets and among intellectuals, especially since they

did not present themselves as part of a vanguard formula superimposed from above: they

starter: with a practical assault, not with intellectual abstractions or theoretical
analys s.

ditions, the offspring of oppression, exploitation and clerical terrorism. Hhat can be
said about them can be said about the Corsica Liberation Arny, the Irish Republican

Army and the Basques. mesa move: ants are not shadenta in the school 3:
“W800“ PrOpsganda tries to portray them. ° Carlos, 3’
Here is where the question arises:
Uhy are we taking a position of hostility toward these novenents?

Uhy are we, the people of the Janahiriyah, in agreenent with the European bourgeoisie
against this leftist current, with its radical and revolutionary detachents‘!

Two
The mopean bourgeoisie, Ger-any and France.

The bourgeoisie of Italy and the capitalisn of Britain. These all eahrace the capit-
alism of Britain. base all enbrace the Arab right, which is fleeing fron revolution.

The hostile Syrian right.

The hostile Algerian right.
The hostile right in Adan.
Then the hostile Libyan right.

So how could it be logical and proper for us ourselves to refuse to recognise the
leftwing youth novaent in Europe, whose intense contradictions with capitalist inter-
ests (Mopean and Asarican) are bursting forth every day along with the explosions

in their econonic institutions, ailitary bases and political syabols, while the
European bourgeoisies enbrace the Arab right's publications, its gatherings, its
schenes. and its organizations, which are seeking to strike out at the naases' achieve-
nents and return to doainate thee and steal their sweat and daily bread. How could a
plan be presented to Arab nationalist regises and progressive forces in this great
nation for befriending the bourgeois European regines that are in political alliance

with the Arab right and are looking after its interests through their comtriee and
institutions?

How can we nake ﬁiends with Italy, which eabraces the Libyan bourgeoisie (Arabs and
Jews) who have fled free the socialisn of the toiling nasaes? 01' Britain, which eo-
braces the royalist sinisters who are trying to flash the constitution of their great
lord in the face of the authorities of the struggling naeses? 0r Gernany, where, in
Bonn and Cologne, there are centers for the gatherings and activities of Mosle-
Brothers for their training in terrorist activities and where Sa'id Ranadan resides and

is directing his hostile activity against the sasses of Syria and Aden, or Rance where
the Algerian right is present? '

ﬂow can this dual relationship and dual vision continue, where their capitals function
as sites for the residence of Bakhash, aawwas, and Bu ﬁajar, the issuance of AL-UATAN
AL-‘ARABI, SAHT LIBIA and AL-DA'UAH, the declaration of their state-ants, and the
holding of their press conferences and are also sites of our esbassiee and our people's
offices and the places where econoaic contracts are signed with their cospaniee and
organizations, while our capitals have sites of their governsents' eabassiee and the
activity of their cospaniee and organizations, but are not sites of the offices and
activities of the Red Brigade, Bader Meinhoff, Basque, Corsican and Irish Revolutionary
Any novesents, which are directed against their vital interests?

57
Three

Any objective reading of the newspapers AL-ZAHP Int-ma and AL-Jﬂ‘lAKIRIYAH will en-
able any impartial reader to discover that the e papers conduct the broadest critical
activities, and the door is open to everyone [is do eg7, and the exenples are many:

Attacks against the secretaries because of the existence of sone erroneous practices.
Criticism of the conduct of the General People's Couittee.

The exposure and masking of and attacks against the new class, with all its civilian

The denand that the secm-ity agencies be dissolved and criticism of their conduct.

This is a sample of the practices which we, so far as we know, do not believe coul‘ be
carried out with this scope and boldness in any other country.

The bourgeois papers prohibit attacks on the foundations of the bourgeois systen,
and the party papers do not engage in criticisn of their parties.

However. the revolutionary and ease papers do attack even the behavior of the revolution-
ary connittees frcn which these papers are iemd, if they renege on their tasks.

In addition to this freedoa of expression, there is the basic people's conference,

where the aasses, through the popular authorities. exercise the power to nake decisions
regarding all the nation's assets. Through their conferences, the masses have the

power to inpose their will and their decisions, because the governnent is the govern-eat
of the aasses. In spite of the short duration of the experiment. people who honestly

serious issues which poor people were not even pernitted to whisper about, or get close
to, because these delicate issues were the special concern of the few and the elite,
and the general public and the rabble could not approach then!

The Revolutionary Comnd Council's relinquishent of power and its taking a seat
within the ranks of the opposition, has given treaendous opportunities for the broader
and deeper pursuit of criticise. free iron touchinese, fear, terror or surveillance.

Indeed, the opposite has happened, and this is for the historical record: there has
been an inciteaent by the revolutioury oouand of the pursuit of criticise on the

broadest scale, and any reader or revolutionary eonittee senber can express his point
of view aost freely.

Opposition is carried out doaesticelly, so the ptreuit of opposition abroad objective-
ly becoees denocratically unjustified. Through a review of the mes of the fugitives
and their class coeposition we can understand the other Justifications which proapt
then to flee. his flight has no relationship to the interests of the assess. The
masses are able to protect their own interests through the popular collittees and the

possession of power, wealth and weapons, through an awareness of revolutionary power
and their historic leadership, and through their revolutionary aedis.

58
It is their bourgeois interests that the revolution has struck at, on behalf of the
assess, ridding society of all forms of oppression and exploitation. It is these
interests which have sowed then, even it they have concealed than with claiss of ne-
tionalisn and concern for the interests of the aassea.

Thus it is natural that Eastern Europe should eabrace then, not tron the political
standpoint but by considering then good sons of the sother who nursed than and
nurtured then in the days of the occupation.

It is the local bourgeoisie which has esbraced the legitinacy or the Woman bour-
geoisie, which colonised the nation.

when the revolution plowed the land of the nation over so that ours could becone a
new society without classes, the land was no longer fit for this strange plant, after
it had refused to be assinilated and acclinatized and to renew its life on this new
land through a new understanding and new values. The local eneqy preferred life in
the entrees or its nurse. It will be a short life; the enesy belongs to classes

that have collapsed historically, have collapsed socially, and have collapsed morally,
because they are swining against the current of life. The denocracy which this force
is claining to defend is the denocracy of its dead class, not the denocracy of the
living nasses. Sons day it will find itself as Ahnad al-Qarananli, the forner pasha
of bipoli, found himself - alone, repudiated and despised even by those who had
encouraged his to commit treason.

In addition, the pursuit of denooracy in the third world is a harsh conbative process,
a daily su'uggle against the ties of ages steeped in backwardness and oppression. It
is not just a prossnade along the water in the publications of the was or a statanent
ends in Hyde hark. It is daily suffering, a struggle of words with bullets and pens
that have spearheads pointed at everything that is vile and comzpt. It can be cc-
ried out only through true affiliation with the people, by having people cast then-
selves into the sea of the revolution, in order to wash off the rot of the past and
the selfishness o: the petty bourgeoisie and its small, wival sentiaents and row
against the current of obsoleteness, tribalisl, the bourgeoisie, inherited repressive
agencies, backward values and a backVard oultm-e, casting their poisons into the river
in order to offer salvation of vision and a proper approach. The deaocratic struggle
in the third world needs a new type or intellectual, who can throw hinself into the
embrace of the assess, and go to than in their huts, their factories and their fares,
where the sun shines with the warnth of life and true affiliation; there also will
you find generosity and innovation, without alienation.

Pour

Finally: If Europe wants and is anxious to have any relationship - other than one of
agents and espionage, of satires, with the Libyan opposition, for instance, as part or
the Arab opposition — we, the revolutionary conittees, the political and organization-
al cosbative forces of the assess, declare our readiness to deal with it through our

progressive ideological cultural vision, the platton of our action, the donestio
exercise of revolutionary practices.

Hill Europe be receptive to us?

11387
030: 6133/2301 59
33081 mums BR WCIIONS VIN cw, IRISH mm
hone LA mum in Itelien 26 by 82 r 8
[Article by Prenco Ooppole]

[Text] Disquieting ties with internstionsl terrorise ere
reveeled st the Moro trisl. Brogi, eres supplier to the
In [Red Brigsdee]. speshe: "We were connected with the
w [Red Arny Pection]. In prison I ssw three repeutsnt
terrorists eessscred. Gsllinsri'e "lessons" end the first
experiences of the stud struggle. As en Alitslis stewsrd
he brought in iron ebrosd grensde lsunchers,

teer-gss eprsys, leunching cherges for eodel eircrsft,

end sbove syl esbotsge esnuels used by the US levy end

Arty.

Bone—Dig end dig. end the internstionsl connections of the Bed Brigedes

cone out, nore disquieting then ever. Above ell. with the Ger-en m.

Csrlo Brogi. 29 yesrs old. who very recently repented, wee en Alitelis stewsrd
end so such es s vslusble eleeent for the terrorist orgsniestion. he wee
used es en eree courier between hone end new York end speaks st length shout
it. Brogi knows nothing sbout the Moro operstion nor of soy other fetel
ettscke; but thsnke to his feeilisrity with Englieh, he knows shout the rele-
tione linking the RB with the W. shove ell in the field of nutuel sssistsnce
in the sres trstfic.

Csrlo Brogi is eccused of psrticipsting in n steed bend end of three crises
(the Tsrtsg1ione nurdsr. end the sehushee of the Gelloni escort end s eobile
police sound) in which he probshly hed no pert. he wee interrogated three
tines between Iebrusry 1980 end July 1981 in the judiciel investigetion. end

hespolne eore then enything else shout his politico-tsrrorist experience in
the ranks of the "Co-unis: Ooehetent out." prior to his entry into the ted
brigsdes, sffirning in connection with his sctivities in the n. thet, "The
sccusetione ere quite unfounded."

Three Useless Murders
First of s11, then, Brogi explsine how he suddenly decided to chsnge tron s

eere person who hsd broken swsy iron the orgsnieetion into soeeone who hsd
defected with s11 its consequences. "After 26 nonths in prison I decided

60
to collaborate. 0n the other hand, ay breaking away fron the organisation
goes back to ny first day of iaprisonnent. but even before that, during the
6 ad 1/2 nonths of being a fugitive fron justice. I had already forned such
an intention, so such so that at a certain point I gave ayself up at the
Franco-Italian border, presenting ayself with ny papers."

"I have‘been in prisons all over Italy. In 6 months I saw three barbarous
and pointless nurders at Mao. 'l'he victins were Roberto Getti, a certain
Arnone,-and Giorgio Soldati, all believed to be inforners. Then, here, I
heard that the guerrilla-party is discussing the need to massacre all those
who have abandoned the arsed struggle. I only intended to dissociate nyself;
but after all I saw and heard I decided to collaborate."

Then, Brogi speaks of his political experiences. Pro- 1968 until at least
1976 he was with groups of the extraparlianentary heft. but alnost always as
a lone wolf; then he joined the "Go-mist Oonbattant Units," carrying out

the wounding of Vittorio lbrgers, the director of the Poligraphic; the robbery
of the current sinister, de Giesi; end a kidnapping that took place in Milan.
Brogi was reading Marx, lanin, toss Manhurg, and Toni Negri, and was working
as a seasonal worker at Alitalia. First, in the suner of 1977; than, free
15 June to 31 October I978. The second period is important in Brogi's life be-
cause it is precisely in June of 1978 that his entry into the RB is dated,
probably-even if it costs hin scathing to admit ituhecause of his work as
a steward. He says it was en "eaotional choice, determined by the desire for
counties, for equality, for the creation of beautiful things," a choice that
"reflected by effusiveness, ny wish to do big things; not for having read
Lenin."

Brogi enters the RB along with Horne Andriani, Arnaldo Hay, Roberta Cappelli,
and Annunciata Francols. There were the first neetings with the custoaary
Bruno Seghetti, that tireless recruiter in Rona; and the examination was
easily passed, although the only credentials consisted of a failed attack on
the Coniliter [Regional Territorial Military Conand], conputer at Pietra
Zane. On that occasion, Brogi, my, and others were disguised as Cersbinieri
and succeeded in penetrating into the premises of the any and in placing ex-
plosive charges, but nothing happened.

It is now June 1978. Brogi, Andriani. and any are accepted into the RB.

Brogi explains: "All that the organisation asked for was a pure past of a
proletarian co-unist. A spotless past. Gallineri said to use: 'Any conrade,
even Toni Negri, hinself, who asked to enter the 33 would be accepted; however
he would have to follow the usual course, starting at the botton.'.” Brogi's
indoctrination was the work of Gallinari hiuelf. They set two or three tines
before the new recruit was given an assignnent fron Valerio Horucci. The
letter showed Brogi publications with pictures showing parts of weapons. In
the United States Brogi was to obtain breech blocks, gun clips, launching
charges for nodal aircraft, grmade launchers, tear gas sprays and, then, so
many books, alnost all of th- sabotage nanuals used by the navy and the 0.3.
Arley. In about 10 trips Brogi succeeded in bringing into Italy everything
that the organisation needed. It cost $6,000 in all, about 6 aillion lire,
including Brogi's expenses.

61
The second assign-lent dates free the end of October 1978. liorucci introduced
Brogi to Mario Horetti. The latter gave hin an appointnent for l Novel-bar in
Paris. 3 pl, Cafe de la Paix, Place de l'Opera. Dbrucci entrusted hi- with
three false passports, two with photographs of wonen. one with a photo of a
nan. The veil over international relations was beginning to be torn aside.

In Paris Brogi found Horstti and a few hours later. Anna Laura Braghetti also.
These two confided to him that these passports were for three conrades of the
MP. a Gernan organization that was breaking up. having bell decinated by the
Ger-an police. There had been contacts with the M1" at the 38's very begin-
ning. Now they had again forned ties.

And here are Moretti's and Braghetti's disclosures about the 33's international
relations. Contacts had just been reauned for only a very little while. There
had been a couple of neetings during which Horetti had put a few nillion into
the RAP leaders' pockets, to help that organization, which had been "destroyed
by the Germ police." Nenty persons renained in the RAF. which was divided
into two squadrons. Brogi said, "My role was to have been to travel continuall
to naintain contact with the other European organisations. the RAP, but also
the IRA and the ETA. that is, the ones that had a national character and had
deep roots in the local proletariat."

Thrown Out of the Organization

The m then suggested that the RI naintain strategic co-Ion deposits of eras
in Italy. bretti responded by asking for arm, in particular a hundred or
so aubnachine guns which could be had for the paltry price of 300,000 lire
each. Horetti said that the noney paid represented a contribution to denou-
strate 33's availability. "And the sue for the false passports. too. They
asked me to go to hamburg to bring funds, and to Tel Aviv to deliver explo-
sives. But I said no. And I did well, because on ny return to Italy I found
that Alitalia had not renewed ny contract."

Brogi stayed for 2 weeks in Paris with Braghetti and with a Bonan girl he had
known for acne tine. 0n orders fron horetti, Braghetti looked for and found
a house, and rented it in Brogi's nane. On return to Italy. Brogi was to have
brought back with hin an "AK-07,” which had been used for killing Schleyer's
body guards. Horetti wanted that weapon badly, but Brogi could not do so.
"Thai, since there was a network of French elanants providing a hinterland

for the ETA and logistical support for the W, these were the ones who saw
to the clandestine transfer of area into Italy, which were delivered to the
Hare Cegol colm.

Back in Italy. Brogi was practically thrown out of the 83. he net Gallinari.
who nade an ugly scene. blaning hits for having been fired .fron Alitalia. for
having had a good tine in Paris, for having understood nothing about the as.

He was denoted fron "irregular" to "contact." kid to think that with Braghetti
only a few hours earlier. equipped with a false docunent nade out to "Ugo
Pecchioli.” Brogi had rented a post office box at Honteeacro in his nane; it
was to have served for RA? contacts. “They also blaned us for ny relations
with the M girl."

62
At tin owing of tin busing, Salvatore meat“, on behalf of thc but“.
group. and Moo Donnell. on halal! of tin "mun-party." m att-ptod
to eta-noun Motto Cnhbunt. "the condo “no in eta-hat.” but the
Jud” pmtod tun ftou doing .0. today, 310;: 1. min on atop.

a

9772
(80: 6131/515

63
”WWW!

ITALY

REPORT 0“ 138303191
Milan RAPPOR‘I'O 80!. 123103199: In Italian 1981 pp 69-100

[Text] RAPPORTO 801. MM: The eassacres, aabuscades, kidnappings, nasee
of criae organizations. 1969-1980

Preface by Ugo Pecchioli

With the collaboration of Giulio Andraotti, Tranco Parrarotti. Nicala Tranfaglia
Table of Contents

Preface by Ugo Pecchioli

RAPPORTO 80!. MRS”? edited by Mauro Galleni

Note

Chapter I: The Dead

Coapreheneive data

The msacres

The forces of public order

The victims of IIth

The aagistratea

The politicians, journalists. corporation directors and professionals
The laborers. other uployeee and workers

The men

The ailitanta

The persons assassinated by terrorists for revenge

The terrorists
The provincee where aortal crimes were co-itted
The terrorist organization which have omitted crises

mammal“
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-5

mmtl’SEONLY

Chapter 1!: Persons Rounded in Ambush Attacks

Comprehensive data

The politicians

Corporation directors and technicians

Members of the forces of public order

The doctors

The journalists

The magistrates and university professors

Laborers, employees and other workers

Terrorist organisations which have asbushed their victims
Su-ary of those killed or wounded in anbush

Chapter III: Crininal Assaults on Hatter

Cosprehensive data

Various objectives

Political and union objectives
Police objectives

Public and private vehicles destroyed
Perpetrators of the crimes

Chapter IV: Violent Deeds

Comprehensive data

Indirect data

Persons wounded by violent crininal acts
(except those hurt in aubush)

Chapter V: Violent and Criminal Acts in the Produces

Comprehensive data

Province of Rose
Milan
Turin
Naples
Bologna
Reggio Calabria
Padua
Bari
Florence
Genoa
Brescia
Palermo
Venice
Bergamo
Trieste
Cstania

6S
summon“

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-5
Chapter VI: Criminal Organizations

Conprehensive data

Terrorist organizations of the left

Brigate roese (Red Brigades)

Prim lines (Front Line)

Nuclei arnati proleteri (Proletarien Arned Nuclei)
Terrorist organizations of the right

Nuclei amti rivoluzionari (Revolutionary Arled Nuclei)
Ordine nuovo, Ordine nero (New Order, Black Order)

Other terrorist organizations of the right

Kidnappings

Appendix

Salary tables by years or crininal and violent acts in Italy
from 1969 to 1980

List of terrorist organizations of the left and nuber of
crines emitted province by province

List of terrorist organizations of the left and order of
crinea co-Iitted annually

List of terrorist organizations of the right and nnnber of
crines co-itted province by province

List of terrorist organizations of the right and nunber of
crimes committed annually

Chronology of episodes in which persons have been killed

Nanes of the victims killed

Chronology of episodes in which persons have been vounded
by ambush

Nance of the victims wounded

Contributions

Franco Ferrarotti: "Reflections and data on 12 years of
terrorism in Italy (1969-1981)"

Notes

Nicola Tranfaglia: ”The Italian crisis and the problem of
terrorisn"

Notes

Giulio Andreotti

Cements on terrorism
I!Il(lﬂﬂ(lAl.U8l(NNlY

Chapter I: The Dead
Conprehensive data

In the 12 years studied, the [terrorist] crimes and acts of violence in Italy
totalled-12,690: 7,866 against inanimate targets, 6,290 cases of violence, 362
dead and 182 inJured in albuscades (Table l).

The most-startling figure concerns the nulber of dead-362 persons, or an aver-
age of 31 every year.

Table 2 lists the number of dead year by year, classified according to their
professions or occupations and grouped under 17 categories including the forces
of public order; security and other guards, such as the urban police; nagiatra-
tes; journalists; politicians; corporation directors; laborers, employees and
other workers; students; university professors, elementary and high school
teachers; doctors and other professionals; private persons; housewives and
domestics; section chiefs in industrial plants; retired persons; businessmen,
shopkeepers and artisans; agriculturists and peasants; and a category including
terrorists and other deceased persons whose professions or occupations are un-
known.

The highest number of deaths occurred in 1980: 135 killed, 26 in sabueh, 85 in
the nassacre of the Bologna railroad station. and 26 in other circuastances.

The lowest number of deaths occurred in 1971: six, including one worker, one
policeman, one nason, one farm laborer, one bartender and one university stu-
dent.

Between 1975 and 1980, 270 persons were murdered, or 75.60 percent of the total:
115 by terrorists of the right, 110 by terrorists of the left, 29 in gun battles
with the police, 12 in other circumstances and four in terrorist actions con-
nitted by unknown individuals.

0f the 362 dead, 150 were victins of these naesacres: Piazza Fontana, the
Italicus express, the station in Bologna, and other such events; 87 were killed
in ambush; 12S died in other circumstances involving subversive crimes and acts
of violence.

As far as it has been possible to ascertain, the 362 dead are listed according
to the circumstances reported in Table 3.

The massacres

In the period studied, most of the victims died in 11 nassscres: 150, or 61.45
percent of the total, while the wounded nunbered 551. These nassscres occurred
in Milan (three). Gioia Tauro, Gorizia and Bologna (two), Rome, Frosinone and
Genoa, as indicated in Table 6.

67
FOI1OFFKJAI.UIIIIULY
The first massacre was committed by Ordine nuovo terrorists against the Dance
Nasionale dell'Agricoltura on Piazza Fontana, Milan. At 6:30 pm on 12 December
1969, a potent bomb exploded under a table in the center of the bank, which was
crowded with clients; 17 persons died and 88 sustained injuries. Ten years
later, on 23 February 1979, the Catanzaro tribunal sentenced the perpetrators
to life imprisonment-the neofasciats Franco Freda, Giovanni Ventura and SID

agent Guido Giannettini, subsequently acquitted in their appeal trial (20 March
1981) for lack of sufficient proof.

The following year, on 22 July 1970, in Gioia Tauro, about 60 kilometers from
Reggio Celebria, the second massacre took place. At 5:10 pm another fascist
bomb exploded at the rail station on the switching tracks, derailing the Sun

express train and killing six passengers. five women and one man, and wounding
50 others.

On 31 Hay 1972, three carabinieri lost their lives at Peteano, near Gorizis,
victims of a dynamite blast planted by the Ordine nuovo: Antonio Ferraro,
brigadier, and Donate Poveromo and Franco Domgiovanmi, both of the militia.

An anonymous telephone call alerted the carabinieri to a 500 (Fiat) abandoned

at Peteano with dynamite aboard. The carabinieri rushed to the scene were
blown to pieces by the bomb. Aside from the three dead, another two, Lieutenant
Francesco Spaziale and Brigadier Giuseppe Zassaro, were seriously wounded. In
September 1980, Giorgio Almirante, national secretary of the HST-DR. was in-
criminated for helping the principal defendant, Carlo Cicuttini, of Friuli, an
Ordine nuovo neofasciat, to flee.

On 17 May 1973, Giancarlo Bertoli perpetrated another massacre in Milan, this
time on the anniversary marking the assassination of Commissioner Luigi Cala-
bresi, whose memory was being honored in a ceremony held at police headquarters.
At the conclusion of the ceremony, as many persons were leaving the building on
the Via Fatebenefratelli, Bertoli hurled a hand bomb in their midst, killing
four persons: a woman, Gabriella Dortolon, 23, manager of the Diana boutique
in Busto Arsizio, and three police agents, Giuseppe Pansin. Felice Bertolaszi
and Federico Massarin.

The fifth massacre occurred in Brescia on 28 Hay 1976 during a unitarian demon-
stration against fascist violence and terrorism. The explosion of a bomb left
in a trash receptacle under a collonade by an Ordine nuovo terrorist, killed
eight persons: five teachers, three of them women, and three retired workers.
There were 94 wounded.

Sixth massacre: on 4 August 1975 at the mouth of the San Benedetto Val di
Sambro rail tunnel near Bologna, a charge of dynamite wrecked the Italicus
express-another Ordine nuovo crime--provoking the death of 12 passengers;
eight men and four women, and wounding 105 others.

Seventh massacre: on the steep Salita Santa Drigide, a street in Genoa, on 8
June 1976 a 8R commando murdered Francesco Coco, attorney general of the Re-
public for Genoa, and two men of his escort, carabinieri brigadier Giovanni
Saponara and corporal Antioco Dejana.

68
NOC4OIUKJAI.UBBGMVLV
FOI¢OFEKJA1.USE(N‘LY

Eighth massacre: 16 March 1978, on the Via Pani in Rome, a BR commando kid-
napped Aldo Moro, president of the Christian Democratic party, and killed five
men of his retinue: carabinieri marshal Oreste Leonardi. corporal Domenico
Ricci. Francesco Ziszi. police force brigadier. and police agents Raffaele
loezino and Giulio Rivera.

Ninth massacre: 8 November 1978 in the community of Patrice. a few kilometers
from Prosinone. A commando of the Formazioni combattenti communists (Formations
of Communist Combatants) killed chief attorney of the Republic for Prosinone

and two of his aides: driver Luciano Rossi and police agent Giuseppe Pagliei.
One of the terrorists. Roberto Capone, 2‘, geometrist. was wounded in the cross-
fire. Capone managed to escape all the same with the members of his commando.
he was then found dead on the back seat of a car driven by the fugitives but
abandoned about a kilometer from the scene of the ambush; before leaving him
behind, the terrorists shot him several times in the neck to prevent him from
falling alive into the hands of the police.

The 10th massacre occurred on the Via Schieveno in Milan on 8 January 1980.
when a BR commando killed three agents scouting the Naviglio Grande area:
police brigadier Rocco Santoro, corporal Antonio Cestari and the agent Michele
Tatulli.

The worst massacre was the last, which occurred in Bologna's railroad station
on 2 August 1980, a crime committed by terrorists of the right. At 10:25 am.
a powerful bomb set in the second class waiting room demolished a wing of the
station and caused the death of 85 persons in addition to 200 wounded. Among
the dead were bl men, 38 women, three girls (3. 7 and 8 years old). two boys

and one older girl.

For a breakdown of the victims. see Table 5.

Table 6 lists the names of the magistrates and police force members killed in
the massacres of Peteano. the police headquarters in Milan. Salita Santa Brigida
in Genoa. Via Pani in Rome, Patrice near Prosinone, and the Via Schievano in
Milan.

0f the 362 persons killed in acts of terrorism, 297 were civilians and 6S
nembers of the police forces. Table 7 reports the number of dead year by year.
classified as civilians or police force members.

The Porces of Public Order

During the period under study. 65 members of the state's police bodies were
killed; of these. 28 belonged to the Public Security. 22 to the carabinieri.
and five were agents of the custodian corps.

0f the 38 Public Security dead, six were marshals, five brigadiers. one deputy
brigadier, two corporals, Zl patrolman. three deputy questors and two commis-
ioners. 0f the same 38. 16 died in ambush, one in other circumstances. seven
during subversive violence. three in gun fights with terrorists. 10 in mass-
acres-three in the Via Petebenefratelli, Milan. episode, three in the Via
Fani, Rome episode, three in the Via Schievano. Milan. episode. and one in
Patrice (Frosinone).

69

F0!‘0¥FKJA1.USI(NVLY
The three fallen deputy questors are: Francesco Cusano, 51, killed in ambush

on 1 September 1976 in Biella (Vercelli) by a BR terrorist during a perquisition
in a little-frequented district near the park; Vittorio Padovani, 47. killed in
a gun fight with Halter Alasia when the police broke into the terrorist's home
on Via Leonardi 121 in Sesto San Giovanni (Milan); in the same armed battle. on
15 December 1976, Marshal Serfio Bazzega, 32, and Alasia himself died; and
Alfredo Albanese, director of DIGOS in Mestre, assassinated on his way to work
with seven pistol shots fired by a BR co-Iando.

One of the two commissioners murdered was Luigi Calabrasi, chief commissioner
at police headquarters in Milan; he was the first victim of a terrorist ambush.
This occurred on 17 May 1972 when, struck in the back by a pistol shot from an
unknown terrorist. he was finished by a shot in the back of his head. He was a
prominent figure in the investigation into the Piazza Pontans massacre and the
case of two anarchists, Pietro Valpreda and Giuseppe Pinelli. who died on 15
December 1969 when. under mysterious circumstances, he plunged to his death
from the fourth floor of police headquarters in Milan.

The other co-issioner was the chief of police beadquarter's antiterrorist unit
in Genoa; this was Antonio Esposito, assassinated on 21 June 1978 by the BR, who
mowed him down in a bus when he was on his way to work.

The 22 carabinieri victims included one general; two lieutenant colonels;
three marshals; six brigadiers; one deputy brigadier; six patrolmen; and three
carabinieri. Of these, six were killed in ambush, five in encounters with
terrorists, one during subversive violence, three in other circumstances re-
lated to terrorism, and seven in massacres (three at Peteqno, two on Via Pani
in Rome, two in Genoa).

Carabinieri General Enrico Galvaligi. 61, head of the Office for the Coordina-
tion of Prisons, was the last member of the police force to be assassinated by
the BR during the period under study. This mortal ambush occurred in Rome at
7:15 pm on 31 December 1980. while he and his wife were returning to their
home at Via Segato 13, in the Ardeatino quarter. Bis assailants were two
terrorist youths disguised as messengers.

The two lieutenant colonels killed in ambush were: Antonio Varisco. 58,
assassinated in Rome on 13 July 1979 by a BR commando shortly after 8:30 am
on the Lungotevere Arnaldo da Breacia; and Emanuele Tuttobena. killed with his
driver Antonio Casu on 25 January 1980 by a Prima linea commando on the Via
Riboli, Genoa, as he was returning home from work.

Apart from Oreste Leonardi, killed in the Via Pani massacre, the other two
carabinieri marshals victimized by terrorists were: Felice Maritano, who lost
his life in a gun fight with the DR Roberto Ognibene on 15 October 1974 during
an antiterrorist operation at Robbiano de Mediglia (Milan); and Vittorio
Battaglin, Ab. assassinated 21 November 1979 by the BR while he was taking a
coffee in the Da Nino bar in Sampierdarena (Genoa); Mario Tues, 26, of the
carabinieri, was killed with him.

of the five murdered agents of the custodian corps. four died in ambush and
one. Prisco Palumbo, was fatally wounded on 10 December 1976 in Rome during a
gun fight with the NAP terrorist Martino Zicchitella, who also died in the fray.

70
FOI1DFFKJAI.USEINVLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USEGNNLY

The on was responsible for three of the four deaths by ambush in 1978; the first
occurred on 11 April in Turin with the death of Lorenzo Cotugno. agent; the
second on 20 April in Milan with the murder of marshal Francesco De Caraldo;

the third. 6 June in Udine. when marshal Antonio Santoro died. The fourth
homicide was conmitted by Prima lines on 19 January 1979 in Turin with the
assassination of custodian agent Giuseppe Lorusso.

Traffic police Brigadier Lino Ghedini. b5. was assassinated on 19 February 1977
in Milan by a an terrorist during a patrol along the road between Milan and
Rho.

The victins of ambush

In the period under study 87 persons, all man. died in ambush. Of these, 28
belonged to the different branches of the police force (17 of the Public
Security, seven carsbinieri, four custodian agents); nine were eagistrates; two
journalists; three politicians; eight corporation directors; eight laborers,
employees and other workers; one university professor; 13 students; three pro-
fessionals; one a factory section chief; seven businessmen. ambulant vendors
and shopkeepers; one a security guard; one a private detective; and two drug
peddlers.

Table 8 shows the number of persons killed in ambush year by year and the pro-
fession or occupation of each.

The lowest nuaber of ambushed victims (five) is recorded for the years between
1969 and 1974. the highest number (82) between 1975 and 1980.

Of these 82 attacks, 77 were directed against single individuals and five
against two persons. 0f the 87 killed. 64 were assassinated by the BR. 14 by
Prina linea, eight by the Nuclei arnati rivolutionari (Armed Revolutionary
Nuclei-NAR). three by unidentified neofascist commandos. and 18 by other
terrorist units.

The first double assassination was camaitted on 17 June 1976 in Padua by a BR
commando in an attack on the HST provincial office on the Via Zaharella, kill-
ing Giuseppe Marsala, 60, ex-cerabiniere employed by the H81 in Padua, and
Graziano Girolucci, 30, salesman for health products. This twin crine was not
only the first of many embuscades recorded in the period under study. but also
the first of many murders committed by the 8K.

The other double honicides by ambush occurred in the following order:

In Rome on 7 January 1978. a comasndo of seven terrorists of the Nuclei armati
di contropotere territoriale (Armed Nuclei of Territorial Counterpower) killed
two young US! students. Franco Bigonsetti, 20. and Francesco Ciavata, 19, out-
side the NSI-DN quarters on the Via Acca Larentia in the Tuscolando quarter.

1n Turin on 15 December 1978 at 5:é0 an. two police-en. Salvatore Lansa and
Salvatore Porceddu, both 20. were machinegunned by several 8R terrorists.

The two were sitting in a Fiat 850 police car stationed at the corner of the
Via Piercarlo Boggio and the Corso Vittorio Emanuele in front of the New Prison.

IIIICHHICIAI.USB|HNLY
”WWW?

in Genoa on 21 November 1979, a BR co-sndo killed carabinieri marshal
Vittorio Battaglin, lob, and nilitieman Mario Tues, 26, while they were having
a coffee in the Da Nino bar on the Via Giovan Bettista Honti in Samplerdarena.

On 26 January 1980 in Genoa. shortly before 1:30 pm. a terrorist conando
traveling in a Giulia fired a nuber of shots against a carabinieri "gazelle"
vehicle on the Via Riboli in the Albaro quarter. In the ambush, carabinieri
lieutenant colonel Emanuele ‘l'uttobeme and his driver. the soldier Antonio Casu.
were slain.

Army lieutenant colonel Luigi Ramundo was seriously wounded. The crime was
claimed by Prime linea. later by the BR in a leaflet found in a trash receptacle
near the maritime station (Table 9).

The magistrates

Nine magistrates were assassinated by ambush in addition to those who died in
massacres two. of the nine. five were victims of the BR (two in 1978. three
in 1980); two of Prime linea (one in 1979 and one in 1980); one of Ordine nero
in 1976; and one of the MR in 1980. Host of these assassinations by ambush
were recorded in 1980 with five homicides. Another two were emitted in 1978
and one each in 1976 and 1980.

On 10 July 1976. one month after the murder of Coco, an Ordine nuovo coumando
in Rome killed deputy attorney general of the Republic Vittorio Occorsio. This
was the first fatal ambush of 15 conitted by terrorist organizations of the
right during the period under study.

The other magistrates were slain in 1978: on llo February in Rome, the BR killed
Ricardo Palms, of the court of cessation; on 10 October. again in Rome, the BR
fatally ambushed cessation magistrate Gerolamo Tartaglione. director general for
penal affairs in the Ministry of Grace and Justice. On 29 January of the follow-
ing year in Milan, a Prime linea terrorist co-ando assassinated Judge hilio
Alessandrini.

In Rome on 12 February 1980, a BR couando at the University of Rome killed
Prof Vittorio Bachelet, vice president of the Superior Council of the Magis-
tracy and professor of administrative law in the university's school of
political science.

This crime was followed by another three. conﬁned within three days: on 16
March the BR killed attorney of the Republic Nicola Giacumbi in Salerno; on 18
Harch in Rome. the BR shot to death the magistrate Girolamo Hinervini, counsellor
of the court of cessation: and in Hilan the next day, a Prime linea conando
killed the investigating judge Guido Galli. On 23 June 1980 in Rome, MR
terrorists killed attorney of the Republic Mario Amato. 65.

Table 10 lists the nose of the magistrates slain in ambush. the dates and
places where they died. and the organizations which conitted the crimes.

MOWUSIONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Politicians, journalists, corporation directors and professionals

The total nusber of politicians, journalists, corporation directors and pro-
fessionals killed number 36, 17 in albush, 16 in massacres and three in other

circuastances, as shown in Table 11.

The three politicians are: lion Aldo Horo. president of the Christian Denocratic
Party, assassinated by the 83' 9 Harch 1978 in Ross. Horo had been kidnapped

on 16 March on the Via Fani by a an arsed co-sndo which killed five nan of his
retinue by nachinegun fire. After 55 days in captivity, Noro was found dead in
the trunk of an R6 car, abandoned on the Via Castani, his body riddled by blasts
fro. a Skorpion nachinegun; Enrico Pedenovi, 65, HS! lawyer and provincial
counsellor, slain on Piazza Durante, Hilan, on 29 April 1976 by a Priea linea
co-ando; and Pino Anato, Neapolitan DC regional budget assessor. surdered on
19 May 1980 in Naples by a DR co-sndo.

The BR clsined responsibility for alnost all the crises co-Iitted against the
journalists, corporation directors and professionals killed between 1977 end
1980. On 28 April 1977 in Turin, they killed Pulvio Croce, president of the
Turin association of lawyers; on 16 November of the sue year, the journalist
Carlo Casalegno, assistant director of the daily LA STAMPA; on 21 hrch 1979

in Cuneo the industrialist Attilio Dutto; in Rose on 29 March the building con-
structor Italo Schettini, DC provincial counsellor; on 21 Septeaber 1980 in
Venice, Silvio Cori, assistant technical director of the petrochenical works in
Narghera; in Milan on 12 November Renato Briano, director of Nameti Nsrelli; on
28 November, also in Milan, Hanfredo Hassanti, director of Falck: and on 1
Decenber in Rose, Giuseppe Purci, health director of Rose's Regina Coeli prison.

A proainent corporation director, Paolo Paoletti, was slain in Milan on 5
February 1980 by a Prise linea coumdo. The sane organization was guilty of
killing Alfredo Paolella, university professor, in Naples on 11 October 1978.

On 28 Hay 1980 in Milan, a new terrorist unit, Brigata JOWIII ssrzo (28th of
March Brigade), assassinated Halter Tobagi, journalist on the CORRIERE DELLA
SBRA.

0f the 17 politicians, journalists, corporation directors, etc killed in snbuah,
one died in 1976, two in 1977, four in 1978, three in 1979 and seven in 1980.
The 8!! killed 10, Prina linea four, Arned workers for Col-unis- one, Dante Di

Nanni Armed Struggle for Miss one, and Brigats XXV!!! narro one. (See
Table 12)

The students

Sixty students died, or 16.55 percent of the total. Most were university
students. Their ages ranged fron 16 to 29 (Table 13).

Of the 60, 31 died in five cities in the North, 26 in three cities of Central
Italy, and five in two cities of the South (Table 16).

MWLUSIONLY
FOIGHHHCIALlﬁi30NlY

Nine were females. sis of them victims of the Bologna railroad station massacre,
one of the Italcus train massacre. The other two were Jolanda Palladino, 22,
who died on 21 June 1975 from burns sustained three days previously when neo-
fascists threw an incendiary bomb against several cars driven by PCT nilitants.
who were celebrating their party's electoral success; and Giorgiana Hasi, who

died on 12 Hay 1977 in Rome, caught in a battle between police and ex-parlia-
mentarian demonstrators on the Garibaldi bridge.

The highest number of student deaths (69) occurred between 1975 and 1980; there
were 11 student fatalities in the 1969-1976 period. (Table 15)

The first student victim of violence was Domenico Congredo. 23-year-old anarchist.
who died in Rome on 27 February 1969. Not only the first student victim of
violence, Congedo wes also the first of numerous persons killed in the period
under study. He died in the teachers' training faculty of the University of

Rome, occupied by students and a target of fascism violence.

In an attempt to escape the fascists' assault, Congedo fell out of a window
and crashed onto the pavement below.

For the circumstances in which the 60 lost their lives, see Table 16.

The first of the 15 students killed in ambush wss Mario Zicchieri, 16, member
of the HST-DR Youth Front. This mortal incident occurred on 29 October 1975
by a man who fired a sawed-off shotgun in front of the “SI-DR quarters on the
Via Bras-o Cattamelata in the Prenestino district of Rome. Investigators
believe that the killer was a NAP terrorist.

The last was Valerie Verbano, 19. murdered on 22 February 1980 in his home in
Hontesacro, Rome. by members of the Nuceli armati rivolusionari (NAR), terrorist
organization of the right.

Table 17 lists the noses of the students fatally attacked in ambush, the dates
and places of their death and the names of the guilty terrorist units.

Among others who died in violent confrontations with the police were Cesare
Pardini. 22, and Franco Serantini, 20, anarchist, both in Pisa, Pardini on 27
October 1969. struck in the chest by a tear gas bomb during an antifascist
demonstration. Serantini on 7 May 1972 in another battle with the police. In
Milan on 12 December 1970 Saverio Saltarelli. 22, was killed by a projectile
during a clash between police and groups of anarchists taking part in an anti-
Franco demonstration to save the lives of young Spanish patriots on trial in
Burgos.

Two other students died in 1973: Roberto Franceschi. of the extreme left,
wounded when a police agent fired at him in front of the Bocconi University (he
died in a hospital on 30 March); and Vincenzo Caporale, l9, adherent of the
Communist Struggle party. hit full in the chest in a clash between police and
members of the Struggle Committees in Naples on 15 February.

0n 8 September 1976 in Rome, Pabririo Caruso. 19. member of the Tivoli Prole-
tarian Committee was fatally wounded by a bullet fired by a police officer

74

FIIII)!’I(1AI.IIBI§(N‘LY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY

during a violent encounter between police and members of extra-parliamentary
units in the San Basilio quarter.

1975: Hikis Handakas, 21, a Greek student and adherent of YUAN, was killed in
Rome on 28 February by a revolver shot in the neck during a fray between fascists.
youths of the extra-psrlianentary left and police during a protest demonstration
against the trial under way for the arsonists of the disastrous fire in Prima-
valle on 12 April 1973, in which two children of the local HSI-DN secretary

died; and Sergio Ramelli. 19. died at the Polyclinic Hospital on 29 April after
67 days in the throes of death following violent actions against extremists of
the left.

1976: anong others. Luigi De Ross. 19, enrolled in the Federation of Young
Italian Columnists (PGGI), was assassinated on 28 May at Sears (Latina) by
fascist thugs, headed by MS! exponent Sandro Ssccucci.

1977: among others, Francesco Lorusso. 25, Lotta continua militant. was killed
on ll March in Bologna by a police agent during violent clashes between police
and extremists of the left. Mauro Amati, 21. was killed by a commando of the
Units conbattenti comuniste (Unity of Communist Combatants) on 8 July in Rome.
Halter Rossi, 28. sember of Lotta continua, was dispatched by neofascists on

30 September in the Vials delle hedaglie d'Oro in Rome.

0n 1 October 1977, serious incidents broke out in Turin during a demonstration

to protest the murder of Walter Rossi. Some 30 youths. who had detached them-
selves from the main body of demonstrators, with covered faces burst into the
Angelo Arturro bar on the Via Po. smashed the plate glass windows with iron

bars and hurled incendiary bottles into the premises. Aside from the owner.

there were two students present: Roberto Crescenzio, worker-student, and Diego
Hainardo. both 22. Hainardo was hit in the head, but managed to flee. Crescenzio,
with burns on 90 percent of his body, was rushed to the CTO. where he died after
several hours. The attack against the Angelo Assurro was claimed as the respon-
sibility of the Squadre proletarie territoriali (Proletarian Territorial Squads).

In Bari on 29 November of the same year. a student, Benedetto Petrone, l9. mem-
ber of the Italian Communist Youth Federation, was killed by a neofascist on the
Piazza della Preffettura during an uprising of rightists.

0n 7 January 1978 on the Via Acca larentia, Rome, the Nuclei armati di contro-
potere territoriale murdered two HBI youths. Franco bigonzetti. l9, and Francesco
Cisvatta, 20. outside the HSI—DN quarters. During a riot set off by the rightists
as a result of the attack, on the same day another young MS! student, Stefano
Recchioni, 20. was mortally wounded by a police bullet.

On 19 March 1977 in Milan. in an ambush perpetrated by a terrorist unit of the
right named Esercito narionale rivoluzionario Franco Anselmi (Franco Anselmi
National Revolutionary Army). Fausto Tinelli. 19, lost his life. A worker,
Lorenzo lsnnucci. was assassinated in the same ambush. In Naples on 5 October,
a student. Claudio Hiccoli. died after a neofascist commando beat him with iron
bars.

75
FOI‘OIFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FIHI()FI1C1A1.IMSIi(H‘LY

Ten students met their death in 1979, among them Umberto Giaquinto. 17, killed
on 10 January in Rome during clashes between police and nsofascists on the Piazza
dei Hirti; Stefano Cecchetti, 19, also killed in Home on the same day by a
commando of a leftist organization called Compagni organizzati per il communismo
(Comrades Organized for Communism); Emanuele Iurilli, 19, killed by Prime lines
in Turin on 19 April; Ciro Principessa, 20, PCI militant knifed by an extremist
of the right in front of the PCI section on Via Gabrio Serbelloni in the Rome
sector of Torpignattara; Francesco Cecchin, 18, P36 member who, attempting to
flee an attack from extremists of the left at Vescovio (Rome), fell off a wall
and died in a hospital on 10 June; Roberto Csvallsro, sympathiser with the Gruppo
sociale polesano, killed on 9 October in Padus in an ambush of the NAR.

Apart from the students who perished in the Bologna station massacre, in 1980
the student victims were: Hilliam Haccher, killed in Milan on 7 February;

Valerie Verbano, in Rome 22 February; and Martino Traversa, 19, in Bari 11
March. by extremists of the right.

Laborers, employees and other workers

After the students, the greatest number of persons victimized by terrorism and
violence included laborers, employees and other workers, with 56 dead (15.65
percent), 36 killed in massacres, 10 assassinated in ambush, eight by violence
and four in other circumstances (Table 18).

0f the 17 laborers, five died in the Bologna station massacre, one in the Piazza
della Loggia massacre, three in other circumstances, four by violence, and four
by ambush.

The laborers killed in ambush were: Guido Roses, 65, union delegate at Itslsider,
member of the FLH board, and PCI militant, assassinated by a BR commando 26
January 1979 in Genoa while on his way to work; Mario Lupo, 20, knifed to death
by neofascists on 25 August 1972 in Farms; Sergio Argads, slain by two neofas-
ciste on 20 October 1976 at Nicotera in the province of Cstsnzsro; and Lorenzo
Iannucci, 19, close to the ultra left, assassinated on 17 March 1980 in Milan

by the terrorist organization of the right called Bsercito nationals rivoluzion-
ario. brigate combsttenti Franco Anselmi (National Revolutionary Army, Franco
Anselmi Combattant Brigades).

The first laborer to fall victim to violence was Angelo Campanella, 63, father
of seven, chief worker at AMA in Reggio Calabria, who was struck by several

bullets fired by three policemen during serious uprisings in Reggio on 17
December 1970.

Another laborer, Gisnfranco Carminati, 30, PCI militant, died in Hilan on 7
January 1971 after long suffering from burns sustained when he helped to ex-
tinguish a raging fire set by terrorists in one of Pirelli's factory sections.

Fascists murdered another three laborers and two farm hands: Giuseppe Halacaria,
33, mason and PC! militant, killed by a bomb tossed from HSI-DN headquarters at

a throng of people dispersing after an antifascist demonstration in Catanzsro on
6 February 1971; Tonino Hicciche, 25, Lotta continua militant, killed on 17

76

FOI‘OIFNJAI.USIGHNLY
FOIlOFFHJAI.USE(NNLY

April 1975 in Turin; PCI militant Pietantonio Csstelnuovo, 102, assassinated on
5 September 1976 in Como; farm laborer Domenico Centola, who died on 26 February
1971 in Poggia during riots provoked by neofsscists; and Adriano Salvini, farm
laborer, killed in Fsenza by a neofascist on 18 July 1973.

Another five workers were mortally ambushed during the period under study:
Giuseppe Hazzola, 60, employee, killed by the BR on 17 June 1976 in Padua;
Luciano Rossi, driver, on 8 November 1978 in the Patrica (Frosinone) ambush
mounted by the Formationi combattenti comuniste; Luigi Allegretti, 36, cook,
socialist enrolled in the COIL, killed "by error" on 11 March 1980 in Rose by a
commando of the Compagni organiszati per il comunismo (the intended target was
Cianfranco Rossi, secretary of the H51 Flaminio section); Angelo Nancie,
employed by SECOLO, secretary of the "SI-Du section in Talmenti, killed in Rose
on 12 March 1980 by the Compsgni organzaati in volante roses (Comrades Organised
in a Red Flying Squad); and Maurizio Di Leo, 36, typographer, likewise assassin-
ated "by error" in Rome on 2 September 1980 by the “AR; the designated victim
was Michele Concina, a journalist on the daily HESSAGGBRO.

The percentage of women victimized by terrorism and violence was also high: 57.
accounting for 15.75 percent of the total dead (Table 19).

Host of these women--51 or 89.50 parcent--died in five massacres: 38 in the
Bologna station episode on 2 August 1980; five in the Sun express 22 July 1970;
four in the Italicus express, 4 August 1974; three in the Piazza della Loggia
incident 28 Hay 1974; and one in the Via Patebenefratelli massacre 17 Hay 1973.

Other women died in different circumstances, among them: Bianca Daller, 61,
teacher, on 16 December 1976 in Brescia, in the explosion of a bosb placed on
the Piazza Arnaldo by fascist terrorists in an attempt to provoke a massacre;
Giorgiana Hasi, 19, student, killed by a carbine shot during a manifestation of
extra-parliamentarians on the Garibaldi bridge in Rome on 12 Hay 1977; Gabr.e11a
Fava, 50, domestic, on 13 March 1979 in Bologna during an attack by the Gstti
selvaggi (wild Cats) against the headquarters of the Press Association; Anna
Maria Hinci, 65, housewife, killed accidentally on 31 January 1980 by one of
numerous revolver shots fired by a carabinieri patrol against two terrorists in
flight in the Rome Hontesacro quarter; and Islands Rozzi, 52, housewife, who
died in the San Giovanni Hospital after months of agonizing suffering from burns
sustained in an incendiary attempt on her home by the Nuclei proletari combatten-

ti (NPC) on 25 February 1980 at Torpignatara in Rome.

Aside from the politicians heretofore named, of the 362 dead there were 38 mili-
tants of the various parties and movements. Twelve of them were agitating in the
PCI, 11 in the MSI-DN, six in Lotta continua, three in the Hovimento anarchico,
two in the PSI, two in the Movimento studentesco, one in the PCHl (Vincenso
Caporali, 19, student, killed in Naples on 21 February 1973) and Jolands Rosei

of the DC, killed in Rome on 25 February 1980.

Of the 12 PCI adherents were four laborers, three students, four retired persons
and one teacher (Table 20).

Table 21 identifies the PSI militants by name.

77

I‘ll(ﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
soa«osrmc1ar.usc¢nvrv

The three Hovimento anarchico dead included two students and one laborer,
named in Table 22.

The ll HSI-DN dead included seven students, three employees and one messenger.
Nine were killed in Rome, one in Padua and one in Milan (Table 23).

The six Lotta continue and two Hovimento studentesco militants slain included
one laborer and seven students. Three were killed in Milan, two in Rome, one
in Turin, one in Reggio Emilia and one in Bologna (Table 25). '

The persons assassinated by terrorists for revenge

In the period under study, a particular characteristic of terrorism is indicated
in cases of those extremists of the right and left who were.certainly or noet
PVODOBIY #88830108ted for motives of revenge by persons belonging to subversive
groups of the same color. There were nine such victims, seven of them murdered

by terrorists of the left (three university students and four prisoners) and
three by terrorists of the right.

The first to die was a university student, Alceste Campanile, killed on 13 June
1975 on the banks of the Bass river in Reggio Emilia. The second was Luigi
Hascsgni. 26. also a university student, formerly exponent of Lotta continua,
slain by pistol shots in the head. His corpse was discovered in Milan's Lambro
Park on 1 July 1979.

On 17 December 1979, on the Piazza Dalmasie in Rome, a four-man commando of the
right led by Sergio Calore, killed a young passerby, Antonio Leandri, with
pistol shots. They had mistaken him for the lawyer Giorgio Arcangeli, notorious
in neofascist circles and accused by the NAR of having made possible, through a
ruse, the capture of Pierluigi Concutelli, military chief of Ordine nuovo, who
murdered Judge Occorsio.

In Hilan on 7 February 1980, Prime lines assassinated the university student
Hilliam Haccher, 26, one of the prime witnesses in the case of the "autonomous"
rebels of the Collettivo della Barons during the enquiry into the murders of
Judge Alessandrini and the goldsmith Torregiani.

On 11 September 1980 the corpse of Francesco Nangiamelli, 30. leader of the
Tersa posizione (Third Position) in Palermo, friend and right hand side of the
neofascist Concutelli, was found in Tor de‘ Cenci, Rome, the magistrecy attri-
buted the murder to Gilberto Cavallini. a terrorist who, together with an
accomplice Stefano Soderini, killed Ezio Lucerelli, brigadier of the carabinieri,
in a garage at Lambrate. Milan. on 26 November 1980.

Four other crimes motivated by revenge were committed in jails during 1980,
three by the BR and one by the NAF.

The first occurred on 19 June 1980 in Turin when a prisoner, Pasquale Viale, was
strangled in his cell in the New Prison. The deed was claimed by the BR during
the trial for the murder of Pino Amato in the court of assizes in Naples.

78
IIIIOINWCIAI.USI¢INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON! V

The second took place on 2 July 1980 in the Cuneo prison when a cannon prisoner,
Ugo Benaszi, 41, of Turin, had his throat cut with a rudinentary knife, with the
approval of the NAP. According to the investigators, the nurderer was NAP
member Emanuele Attinonelli, for whom a warrant of arrest was issued.

The BR omitted the other two Ilurders during the revolt in the Nuoro prison
27 October 1980. The victims, both prisoners, were Biagio laquinto and Pran-
cesco Zarillo.

The terrorists

Thirty-seven terrorists, five of thee women. were killed during the period
under study, 21 in gun battles with the police and 16 in other circumstances:
eight blown up by bombs they were assembling for planned crimes, two killed
when they were transporting boobs to the site of proposed crises. two killed
by the premature explosion of bombs in the preparatory stage of crimes; two
killed by gunshop owners during thefts of arms. and one, Roberto Capone. nur-
dered by his own terrorist commando.

0f the 37 terrorists, seven belonged to NAP; eight to BR; four to Prima lines;
three to Autononia operaia (Workers Autonomy); two to Ordine nuovo; one to
Avanguardia nazionale; one to Gruppi armati proletari (GAP); one to Hovimento
proletario resistenza offensive (Proletarian Offensive Resistance Movement);
one to Pornazioni combattenti comuniste; one to MAR; five to other terrorist
organizations on the left, not identified; and three to organisations of the
right, likewise unidentified.

For their individual professions. see Table 25.

0f the five women terrorists, one, Hargherita Cagol, 28, had taken a degree in
psychology. Anna Maria Mantini, 23. was unemployed; Barbara Anzaroni, 29, was
a kingergarten teacher, Anna Maria Ludnann, 33, a schoolteacher, and Maria
Antonietta Berna, 21, a student.

The average age of the terrorists was 25. The youngest of then-Alfredo Attilio
of Naples, Pierluigi Sciotti and Silvio Perrari—-were 19, the oldest was
Gisngiacono Feltrinelli. 46. Table 26 gives a breakdown of their ages.

The first terrorist to die was the publisher Giangiacono Peltrinelli, founder
of CAP. On 15 March 1972 he was blown up by a charge of dynamite he was setting
in place under a high tension pylon at Segrate, onthe periphery of Milan.

Other terrorists died when bombs they were assembling, transporting or placing
against targets exploded. Among these was Silvio Ferrari, rightist, killed

in Brescia on his motorcycle when a bomb he was carrying to the site of a plan-
ned crime blew up. On 11 March 1975, Giuseppe Principe Vitaliano, of NAP, was
instantly killed in Naples by the explosion of a bomb he was making in an
apartnent.

In Aversa, province of Caserta, on 30 Hay 1975 a 22-year-old worker student,
Giovanni Tsras, also of NAP, was blown up by a bomb he was depositing on the
roof of the Aversa insane asylum.

79

FOR‘OFFTClAl.lEIE(HNLV
l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NMLY

In Turin on 6 August 1977, two young terrorists of the left, Attilio Alfredo
Di Napoli. 19. student, and Orlando Marin Pinones, 25, a Chilean expatriate,
died in the explosion of a bomb they were handling for a criminal purpose.
Almost three months later, again in Turin, another terrorist of the left.

Rocco Sardone, 22, student, was killed by a bomb he was transporting in a
knapsack to the site of a crime.

In Catania on 31 December 1977, two terrorist youths of the right, Pierluigi
Sciotti, 19. student, and Prospero Condura. 22, electrician, were killed by
a bomb they were assembling on the slopes of Mount Etna for a criminal attack.

Three young Autonomia operaia terrorists, Angelo Del Saro. 25, laborer, Alberto
Craziano, 21, student, and Maria Antonietta Berna, 21, student were killed in

the explosion of a powerful bomb they were making in an apartment at Thiene
(Vicenza) for an intended crime.

The first terrorist to die in a clash with police was Giancarlo Bsposito. On

30 May 197‘ a carabinieri patrol surrounded a fascist paramilitary camp at Pian

di Rascino in the province of Rieti, several terrorists reacted by attempting

to open an escape route, and Bsposito, 24. of Avanguardia nazionale, fell in the
ensuing gun fight. In Florence on 29 October of the same year, Giuseppe Romeo,

20, and Luca Mantini, 23, NAP terrorists, were killed in an armed conflict with

carabinieri during an assault on a bank on the Piazza Leon Battista Alberti.

In an armed fight with the kidnappers of the industrialist Vallarino Gancia,
subsequently liberated, on 5 June 1975 the carabinieri killed Margherita Cagol,
28, university graduate in psychology, BR terrorist and wife of Renato Curcio,
BR chief. The battle took place in the Spiotta d'Azzello farmstead on the
hills of Acqui Terme in the province of Alessandria.

In 1976 two different clashes with the police cost the lives of Martino
Zicchitella, AD, NAP adherent, killed in Rome on 16 December during an ambush
attack on the deputy questor Alfonso Race; and "alter Alasia, 20, diplomat of
the BR, who was killed on 15 December near Milan when police broke into his
dwelling at 121 Via Leonardi, in Sesto San Giovanni.

In Rome on 1 July 1977, Antonio Lo Muscio, 27. of NAP, was killed in an armed
battle with a carabinieri patrol on the Piazza San Petronio in the center of
the city. On 4 May 1978 police killed Roberto Rigobello, 21, bank employee and
member of the Movimento proletario di resistenza offensive. during a holdup at
the Via dells Beverata branch of the Danes del Monte di Bologna e Ferrara.

Three other terrorists were killed in encounters with the police during 1979.

Two of them, Barbara Aazaroni, 29, kindergarten teacher, and Matteo Gaggegi,

23, laborer, were killed on 28 February at the entrance to the bar-restaurant
Dell'Angelo, 340 Via Paolo Veronese, in Turin. The third, Roberto Paultasso,

21, was killed on 14 December when, with two accomplices, he was preparing an
assault on the gates of the ELCAT metal works on the outskirts of Rivoli (Turin).
Finding themselves discovered in possession of dynamite, the three terrorists
opened fire against a police patrol, which responded in kind, killing Paultaaso.

80

IND! 0!1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ£(ﬂMLY
FOI1OFNKJAI.USE(HVLY

In 1980. eight terrorists were slain in clashes with the police. of these,
four died on 28 March in a BR hideout at 12 Via Pracchia in Genoa at the hands
of the carsbinieri: Anna Maria Ludmann, 33, schoolteacher, Lorenzo Betassa,
formerly a worker at Italimpianti, Piero Panciarelli, 25, previously employed
by Lancia, and Riccardo Dura, 30, ex—maritime worker.

On 13 November 1980, four terrorists affiliated with the BR robbed the Rural
Bank at Civitella Alfedena, near Aquila, of 30 million lire. Shortly there-
after, ordered to stop at a carabinieri road block near Cassino (Proeinone),
they opened fire and seriously wounded one of the guards. In the ensuing cross-
fire, Claudio Pallone. 26, was killed instantly. while two others were badly

wounded, Mario Guerra. 25, and Fausto Genoino, 36, who died at the Polyclinic
hospital in Rome after a month-long coma.

The last two killed in conflicts with the police were Roberto Serafini, 30,
journalist, formerly editor on R0880 magazine, and Walter Pezzoli, 25, both
killed on 11 December 1980 during an armed fight with the carabinieri in Milan.

Another three terrorists died in the following circumstances: Carlo Tognini,
30, bank employee and member of Prima lines, was killed by the proprietor of a
gunshop in Varese on 19 July 1977; Franco Anselmi, 22, student and member of
Ordine nuovo, was killed on 6 March 1978 in Rome. also by a seller of guns;
and Roberto Capone. 24, geometrist of the Pronte comunists combattente, was
wounded in the terrorist crossfire during the Patrica massacre. His comrades
themselves ended his life with pistol shots in the neck to prevent him from
falling alive into the hands of the police.

Table 27 lists the names of the terrorists slain in clashes with the police and
in other circumstances. the dates and places of their deaths, their ages,
occupations and titles of the terrorist groups to which they belonged.

The provinces in which mortal crimes were committed

The provinces which reported deaths caused by criminal actions and violence
number 38, 20 in the North. eight in Central Italy and 10 in the South. Nor-
thern Italy accounted for 240 dead, or 66.30 percent of the total, including

101 in Belogna (97 in massacres and four in other circumstances); 62 in Milan
(21 in massacres, 19 in anbuscades and four in other circumstances); 26 in Turin
(16 in ambuscades and 10 in other circumstances); 16 in Genoa (9 in ambuscades
and five in other circumstances); 10 in Brescia (eight in massacres and two in
other circumstances); and 29 in other provinces. as shown in Table 28.

Eight Central Italian provinces shve recorded deaths resulting from terrorism
and violence. with 89 victims (26.60 percent, 67 of them in the capital and 22
in another seven provinces (Table 29).

Ten provinces in Southern Italy recorded deaths resulting from terrorism and
violence, with 33 victims (9. 0 percent). The highest number of deaths
occurred in Reggie Cslabria (l ). followed by Naples (eight) and eight other
cities (Table 30).

81
FOI‘OF1ICIAI.USEGMVLY
The terrorist organizations which have committed crimes

of the 362 dead, 104 (28.70 percent of the total) were slain by 22 terrorist
groups of the left and 59 (16.30 percent of the total) by seven terrorist or-
ganizations of the right. Six were assassinated by unknown persons and two in
a dynamite blast set off by terrorists of the Secret Armenian Army.

Most of the crimes were committed by the Red Brigades. who assassinated 55
persons. 66 of them by ambush, 11 in massacres. Ordine nuovo committed 22
homicides, 20 in massacres. one by ambush and another by dynamite. Ordine nero:
22 homicides, 20 in massacres and two in other circumstances. Prime lines: 15
assassinations, 16 by ambush. NAR: eight mortal victims, all by ambush. In
addition, the Formationi combattenti comuniste killed four persons, NAP four,
Guerriglia comuniste (Communist Guerills Warfare), Neofascist Commandos (uni-
dentified) and the Hovimento proletario resistenza offensive, three each.
Another 32 persons were murdered by the same number of terrorist groups (32).
Table 31 shows the homicides committed annually by terrorist organizations of
the left and right, and by unknown persons or groups.

Chapter 11: Persons Wounded in Ambush Attacks

Comprehensive data

The number of persons wounded in attacks by ambush was 172. all except one (in
1971) in the years between 1975 and 1980, as seen in Table 33.

0f the 172, 167 (85.45 percent of the total) were victims of leftist terrorists,
six by rightist, and 19 by unknown persons or groups.

The data compiled show that the highest number of victims wounded were corpora-
tion directors and entrepreneurs, with 38 wounded; next were political figures
with 26; police force members, 22; doctors and other professionals, 22; factory
section chiefs, 13; functionaries, 10; journalists, eight; laborers, seven;
students and security guards, six in each category; university professors and
teachers, four; judges, three; businessmen and persons in retirement, one in
each category.

Ambuahing political figures, corporation directors, police agents and others
for the declared purpose of wounding them by gunfire began in 1975. In the
previous period from 1969 to 1976 there was only one ambush, on 23 June 1971
in Varese, mounted by unknown persons. Their victim was Enrico Rampini, a
unionist who was injured while he was returning home after taking part in a
strike, which he had helped to organise.

The second ambuscade, this time with incendiary bombs, was carried out on 15
February 1975 near Rome against Franco Galluppi, leader of the P501 delegation
to the basic regional council. On his way home with his wife after attending a
debate in Fiano on the problem of fascist violence, Galluppi was blocked by
four neofascists, who compelled him to stop his car. later threw an incendiary
bomb into his home, causing him serious burns.

FOI:0FIlC1Al.lEIE(HULY
FOI'OFFKJA1.US£(NNLY

The politicians

The first of numerous armed attacks by ambush against individuals occurred on
15 Hay 1975 in Milan when a BR commando invaded the ground floor office at 5
Via Monte di Fists of a lawyer, Massimo De Carolis. Dc group leader in the
Milan city council, and wounded him in the leg with a revolver shot.

In the period under study, 26 political figures were wounded in attacks by
ambush, 18 committed by the Red Brigades, one by Prime lines, five by unknown
persons, one by rightists and one by the Communist Group for Territorial
Counterpower. 0f the 26 politicians hurt, 20 represented the DC. two PCI, one
PSDI, one usr-nu. one PSI, and Bernard Leighton Guzman. formerly president of
the Christian Democratic Party in Chile (Table 36).

The greatest number of persons wounded by ambush (69, or 28.50 percent of the
total) were industrial directors, functionaries, factory section chiefs and
security guards in 21 different plants. 19 in the North and two (Alfa Sud and
FIAT) in the South (Table 35).

Corporation director and technicians

The highest number of terrorist targets were FIAT directors and technicians.
0f the total 49 wounded. 22 were FIAT men: nine directors, seven section
chiefs, three officials. one of them at the FIAT plant in Cassino. and three
security guards, one in Cassino.

FIAT was followed by Alfa Romeo, with six victims: four directors, one of them
at Alfa Sud. At the Brera plant in Hilan. three persons were wounded, one
director and two section chiefs; at Sit-Siemens in Milan, another three, one
official and two section chiefs. In Genoa two Ansaldo directors were wounded.

One person was wounded in each of another 15 plants (Table 35). For the
terrorist groups responsible for the 69 attacks, see Table 36.

The first factory director wounded by ambush was Enrico Boffa, 61, head of per-
sonnel at the Singer di Leini plant in Turin. Committed by three BR members,
the crime occurred at 6:65 pm on 21 October 1975 a moment after Boffa had parked
his car in the garage under his home. he was about to lower the shutter when
unmasked three men darted out from the shadows, brandishing pistols. Throwing
him to the ground, they forced him to kneel and hung a placard around his neck.
bearing the message: "Brigate rosse. Transform the contractual struggle into
a fight for power to defeat the presidential and corporative aims promoted by
Agnelli and Leone, and berlinguar's historic compromise." Next, they photo-
graphed him [wearing the placard] and fired two revolver shots at his legs.

The last man wounded in ambush during the period under study was an engineer,
Haurizio Caramello, director of Italgrafo, Milan. assailed by the—Bnnon 11
December 1980.

The first section chief of a plant to be ambushed was Giuseppe Borello, of FIAT
Hirafiori, wounded in the legs by four pistol shots fired by s an commando on
13 April 1976; the last in the period under study was Esio Gavello, FIAT labor-

83
POI OFFICIAL I“! ONLY
FOI¢HHHK1AI.USE(HNLY

story chief, wounded on 21 December 1979 by the Reparti comunisti d'stacco
(Communist Attack Units).

On 26 November 1976 in Casaino (Frosinone), the first of seven company officials
was wounded: Rocco Pavaloro, attached to the union office at the [FIAT] plant
in Cassino, ambushed by unknown persons. The last was Francesco Giacomazzi of
Montedison, felled by pistol shots fired by Prime lines on 10 May 1978 on the
Piazza Conciliatione in Milan.

The first security guard in a factory was also attacked in 1976: Matteo
Palmieri. chief security guard at Marelli. 0n 2 April. a BB commando broke

into the guards' room at Magneti Marelli. attempted to open the safe contain-
ing arms, wounded Palieri with several revolver bullets, and fled. The last
security guard wounded in ambush during the period under study was Giovanni
Pegorin, of Pramtek, attacked by the Nuclei comunisti territoriali on 31 January

1980 in Turin. 1n the same assault. another security guard, Carlo Ala, was
killed.

Over 50 directors and employees of several important factories were wounded.
including the president of Unione petrolifers italiana (Italian Petroleum Union)
Giovanni Theodoli by the Formazioni comuniste armate in Rome on 21 April 1976;
Vittorio Morgera, director general of Poligrafico dello State (State Polygraphic
Agency), wounded by the Units combettenti comuniste in Rome on 29 March 1977;
the industrialist Armando Girotto by the Squadre armate proletarie in Milan 31
January 1978; Felice Schiavetti, president of the Unione industriale of Liguria.
in Genoa by the BR on 7 April 1978; Mario Astarita, director of the Chemical
Bank. in Milan by Prime lines on 11 May 1978; Aldo Ravaioli. president of the
Comitato della piccola industria (Committee for Small Industry). in Turin by

the BR on 6 July 1978; Pausto Gasparino, deputy director of lntersind, wounded
in the legs by the BR in Turin on 7 July 1978; Franco Pilla, president of the
Venice Savings Bank, wounded by the Gruppi combattenti per il communiamo on

15 December 1978; Piercarlo Andreoletti. Praxi administrator, wounded in the
legs by Prime lines on 5 October 1979; and Settimio Imperi, building constructor,
wounded in Rome on 21 December 1979 by the Movimento comunista rivoluzionsrio.

Members of the Forces of Public Order

Apart from the 65 members of the police forces killed in the fight against
terrorism and violence. 22 others were wounded in ambush: one in 1975, two in
1976. seven in 1978, 10 in 1979 and two in 1980. For a breakdown by ranks.
see Table 37.

0f the 22 ambuscades against the police forces, eight were committed by the BR,
three by Prime lines, three by NAP. four by unknown persons. two by NAR, one
by the Proletsri srmati per il comuniamo, and one by the Roberto Scialobba
Antifascist Nucleus.

For the cities in which these 22 crimes occurred see Table 38.

The first to be wounded in ambush was Cosimo Vernich, 49. brigadier of the
custodian guards at San Vittore prison. The attack was staged at 7:25 am on

F0]:0FFKJAI.UBI¢INLY
INII‘OIIWCIAI.IIBE2(HVLY

7 October 1975 by the Giovanni Taras Armed Nucleus, a NAP affiliate, wounding
their victim in the right thigh with five pistol shots.

Table 39 lists the names of the policemen wounded by ambush, their ranks, dates
and places of their attacks, and the initials of the terrorist groups responsi-
ble for the crimes.

The physicians

In the period under study. 16 physicians were hurt in ambuscades (15 men and
one woman). The first was Luigi Solera, of the PIAT Hirafiori medical section.
wounded in the legs by four bullets fired by s BR co-sndo in Turin 17 December
1975.

The second ambush occurred in Pisa on 30 March 1977 against Alberto Hammoli,
doctor in the Pisa prison. In the same year, the following sustained wounds:
Giuseppe Ghetti. health officer in Seveso (Milan). wounded in the legs on 19
Hay by a terrorist group which called itself Combsttenti per il comunismo.
which then disappeared completely; Giorgio Coda, neuropsychiatrist, and Rober-
to Ansalone, president of the Associations medici mutualisti (Association of

Medical Insurers) in Milan.

Another five physicians were wounded in 1978, among than a gynecologist, two
prison doctors (Milan and Novara) and a chief doctor of INAH (Milan). Six
more were wounded in 1979, among them another gynecologist and two other
prison doctors (Cremona and Varese). In the period under study, the prison
doctors wounded in ambush numbered four.

0f the 16 victims, six were wounded in Turin, three in Milan, two in Rome and
one each in Seveso, Pisa, Novara, Varese and Naples.

Only one doctor was assaulted by the BR, the remaining 15 by terrorist organ-
izations listed in Table #0.

Table 41 gives the names of the physicians wounded in ambush, the dates and
places of the attacks against them and the initials of the criminal groups
responsible.

The journalists

Eight journalists were wounded in ambush. The first was Vittorio Bruno, deputy
director of IL SECOLO XIX. 0n 1 June 1977 in Genoa, a BR commando stopped him
in the street and shot him in the legs. In Milan the following day. shortly
after 10 am, a BR commando ambushed Cilindro (Indro) Hontanelli, director of
GIORNALE NUOVO. The terrorists waited for him to leave the Hotel Hsnin, where
he lives, to go to his office on the nearby Piazza Cavour; when they espied
him, they wounded him in a leg.

In Rome, 2b hours later (on 3 June) at 10 am. another BR coamando unit struck

at Emilio Rosai, director of Telegiornale Uno (Channel One television news), on
the Via Teulada, and wounded him seriously in the legs with pistol shots.

FOI10FFKJA1.U§B(IVLY
IN)! 0iﬂﬂ€1hl.ll§£i€ﬂﬂl¥

[n 1977 three other journalists were victimized: on 7 July at Albano Terme
(Padua), Antonio Garzotto of the GAZZETTINO, hit in the legs by a Fronte
comunista combattente commando; in Turin on 18 September, Nina Ferraro, of
UMITA, shot in the legs by two terrorists of the Azione rivoluzionaria (Revolu-
tionary Action) as he was on his way home; and on 25 December in Rome, Roberto
Giunto La Spada, of "Radio citta futura," wounded in one arm and a hip by two
bullets as he was leaving work. The cirme was committed by the Giustizia
nazionale rivoluzionaria (National Revolutionary Justice).

In Turin on 24 April 1979, the BR wounded Franco Piccinelli, a RAI editor. One
year later, on 7 May in Milan, two youths who claimed to be policemen. entered
the hone of Guido Passalacqua, journalist on the REPUBBLICA, seized him and
fired pistol shots into his leg. The deed was clained by the Brigata XXVIII
marzo.

These eight journalists suffered attacks by ambush in five cities, victims of
five terrorist organizations, four of the left and one of the right (Table 52).

Table 53 reports their names, dates and places of each ambush and the initials
of the terrorist groups which committed the crimes.

Magistrates and university professors

In the period under study, two magistrates, a judge, an official of the
Ministry of Grace and Justice and four university professors were wounded in
ambuscades.

One of the magistrates was Piero Margariti, counsellor at the court of cassa-
tion and head of the institutes of prevention and punishment in the Ministry
of Grace and Justice. The episode occurred on 28 January 1976 when MAP
terrorists fired four pistol shots into Margariti's legs.

The other magistrate was Paolino Dell'Anno, target of a MAP attack, fortunately
without serious consequences. 0n 5 May 1976, while he was driving to work in
his Fiat 500, he was flanked by a powerful motorcycle, with two youths aboard.
One of them fired his pistol repeatedly at the car, but failed to hit Dell'Anno.

With several revolver shots, on 12 February 1977 in Rome, the BR wounded Valerio
Traversi, functionary in the Ministry of Grace and Justice. In Florence 18
months 1ater-on 15 December l978-the Squadre rivoluzionarie di combattimento
wounded a praetor, Silvio Bozzi.

Summarized data on the persons killed or wounded in attacks in ambush

The number of persons killed and wounded in attacks by ambush totals 534, of
which 362 died in criminal actions and by violence, and 172 were wounded.

Forty-three provinces saw persons killed and wounded by ambush, 23 in the North,
nine in Central Italy and 11 in the South. Those which reported dead but no
wounded were 23, 12 in the North. three in Central Italy and eight in the South.
Those which reported only wounded by ambush were four, three in the North and
one in the South.

FOI‘OFUKJAI.USE(NNLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The South cleine the loveet nunber of deed—33. or 9.10 percent of the totel.
Eleven were wounded in .bneh. or 6.60 percent (Tehle 66).

The provinces of Centrel Itely counted 89 deed, or 26.60 percent of the totel.
end 66 wounded in edmeh. 25.60 percent of the totel (“rehle 67).

The greeteet number of deed end wounded were counted in the 23 provincee of

the north. The deed were 260. or 66.30 percent of the totel. end thou wounded
in nbueh 117. or 68 percent of the totel (Tehle 68).

‘reble 1

Terrorist crinee and ecte of violence in ltely between 1969 end 1980

—__—_—_______———————-——

Yeer Crinee egeinet in- Acte of timber Rider of Total
eninete tergete violence 0f deed enbueh
victine
1969 208 210 21 -- 639
1970 225 318 11 -- 556
1971 310 . 515 6 1 832
1972 293 673 10 - 776
1973 256 383 ll — 668
1976 323 630 33 - 786
1975 239 199 21 8 667
1976 681 176 17 11 685
1977 1,338 607 23 38 1,806
1978 1 , 862 781 38 66 2 , 725
1979 1 . 766 289 36 68 2 . 139
1980 567 109 135 22 833
Total 7,866 6,290 362 172 12.690
87

roeornanmmv
Helbers of the
police forces

Security end
other guards

Magistrates
Journalists
Politicisns

Corporation di-
rectors and
entrepreneurs

workers, emplo-
yees and other
sslsried persons

Students

University pro-
fessors and
school teachers

Doctors and other
professionals

Plsnt section
chiefs

Punctionsries

housewives and
dolestics

Retirees

lusinesssen.

shopkeepers.
srtissns

Asriculturists
end pesssnts

Others

Totsl

 

1

21
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-5

mmmmv

Table 3

178 victils of violence snd terrorist actions of the right,
135 in sessscres
27 in other crises snd cues of violence
16 in sdmscedes

119 victims of violence end terrorist notions of the left, a
70 in eduscsdes
36 in other crises end csses of violence
15 in Isssecres

39 in clsshes with the police, of which
21 in sued hsttles with terrorists
18 in csses of violence end other circa-stances

362 totsl
______—___________—.———
Tshle lo
The nesecres
Place Dete lit-hen
dest
Hilsn. Pieces Pontsns 12-12-1969 1‘.
Giois Teuro. Sun express trsin 22- 7-1970 1
Gorizis, Peteeno 31- 3-1972
nilsn. police headquarters,
Vie Pstehenefrstelli 17- 5-1973
Bresc.‘ u, Pieus dells Louis 28- 5-1976
Bologna. Itslcus express trein b- 8-1974 1
Genoa, Sslits Ssnte Brigids (street) 8- 6-1976
none, Vis Psni 16- 3-1978
Prosinone. Petrics 8-11-1978
Hilsn, Vie Schievsno 8- 1-1980
Bologna, reilroed station 2- 8-1980 8
‘l'otel 15

___—_________.—_———_—

as
summon“

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080002-5
summon“

Table 5

16 housewives 2 clerks (girls) 1 corporation director
8 retirees (non) 2 donestics 1 functionary (INA!)
3 retirees (we-en) 2 cabdrivers 1 university professor
6 office workers (Ien) 2 enlisted sea 1 plant section chief
9 office workers (wonsn) 1 nason 1 university graduate
8 students (sen) 1 sachanic 3 holders of diplolas
7 students (wonen) 1 rail signal-an 3 school children
5 business-en 1 electrician 1 salesnan

a railroad workers 1 cook 1 broker
2 magistrates 1 errand boy 1 insurance agent

17 police-en S far-era 1 air force narehal
7 schoolteachers (woeen) 2 far-ere 1 unemployed

2 teachers 1 merchant 1 office nanager

6 workers (nen) 1 artisan 1 barber

2 workers (wonen) 1 trade director 7 others
1 driver 1 boutique aanager (woeen)

of the 151 victina. 95 were nan, 69 women. 3 infant girls, 3 boys. 1 girl

The nassacres also cost the lives of 11 foreigners: 3 aboard the leelicua and 8
in the Bologna station. Anong then were 2 woaen students, 3 sen students, 2
grade school pupils. 1 clerk. 1 housewife, and 3 other persons whose occupations

are unknown.

Table 6

 

Magistrates and police force menbers killed in the massacres

 

 

Name Rank Place and date of death Name of terrorist
organization

______________________________________________________.._.___________________
Antonio Ferraro brigadier Pateano 31-5-1972 Ordine nuovo
Donato Foverano carabiniere Peteano 31-5-1972 Ordine nuovo
Franco Dongiovanni carabiniere Feteano 31-5-1972 Ordine nuovo

Felice Bertolazzi police agent questura (HI) 17-5-1973 Gianfranco Bertoli
Federico Hassarin police agent queatura (HI) 17-5-1973 Gianfranco Bertoli

Giuseppe Panzin police agent queatura (H1) 17-5-1973 Gianfranco Bertoli
Francesco Coco magistrate Genoa 8-6-1976 Brigate rosse
Giovanni Saponara carabinieri Genoa 8-6-1976 Brigate rosse
brigadier
Antioco Dejana carabinieri Genoa 8-6-1976 Brigate rosse
corporal
Oreste Leonardi carabinieri vie Fani (Rona) 16-3-1978 Brigste rosse
narahal
Raffaele Iozzino police agent via Fani (Rona) 16-3-1978 Brigate rosse
Donenico Ricci carabinieri via Fani (Rona) 16-3-1978 Brigate rosse
. corporal
Giulio Rivera police agent via Fani (Rona) 16-3-1978 Brigate rosse
Francesco Zizzi police via Fani (Rona) 16-3-1978 Brigate rosse
brigadier
Fedele Calvosa magistrate Patrice (FR) 8-11-1978 Forn.conb.col.
Giuseppe Pagliei police agent Patrice (FR) 8-11-1978 Forn.conb.con.
Rocco Santoro police vice via Schievano (H1) 8-1-1980 Brigate rosse
brigadier
Antonio Gestari policecorporalvia Schievano (HI) 8-1-1980 Brigate rosse
Michele Tatulli police agent vie Schievano (KI) 8-1-1980 Brigate rosse
Civilian. Police Total

20 1 21
10 1 11

5 1 6

6 6 10

7 6 11
31 2 33
17 6 21
11 6 17
18 5 23
26 16 36
25 11 36
123 12 135
297 65 362

to II.

___—_____————-————_—-—

1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1976 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Total

______—___——-—-——————————

- - - 1 - - -— 2 1 7 11 6 28
- - - - - - - 1 - 2 1 s 9
-- — - — - - - -- 1 — - 1 2
- - - -- - - -- 1 — 1 - 1 3
.- .. .- — .— — — — — 1 3 I. a
FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

Table 8 continued
1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1976 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Total

Plant section - - - - -— -- -. .. .. 1 -- .. 1
chiefs
Businessaen, - - - - -— 1 -- .. .. 3 3 .. 7

anhulants, shop-
keepers, artisans

Security and - - - - - -- -- .. .. 1 .. 1 2
other guards

Others - - -— -- - —- - .. .. 1 1 .. 2
Total -- - - 2 - 3 - 6 5 26 25 25 87

_______________________________._______________________________._______.______

Table 9

9 magistrates 1 albulant vendor

l lawyer 3 business-en

l notary 1 sales-en

1 university professor 2 journalists

l7 nenbers of the police forces 3 laborers
2 deputy questors 1 typographer
l corporal 1 cook
2 brigsdiers l doctor
3 marshals 1 lessenger
7 police agents 2 clerks

7 carabinieri l factory section chief
1 general 3 politicians
2 lieutenant colonels 13 students
1 earshal 6 corporation directors
2 corporsls l industrialist
l carabinieri 1 building constructor

k custodian agents 2 other (drug peddlers)
2 asrahala
2 agents

1 security guard

1 private detective
1 golds-1th

1 shopkeeper

.__.__________________________________._________________________________________

92

FOI*0IIICLAI.IIII¢I§LY
Magistrates killed in ambush

___—__——-__—-——

Date Place Terrorist organization
10- 7-1976 lone Ordine nuovo
16- 2-1978 Rene Brigate rosse
10-10-1978 Role Brigate rosse
29- 1-1979 Milan Prim lines
12- 2-1980 Rome Brigate rosse
16- 3-1980 Salerno Brlgste rosse
18- 3-1980 Rome Brigate rosse
19- 3-1980 Milan Prina llnea
23- 6-1980 lions Nuclei. matl rlvoluz
______________.___———
kllled in killed is killed in other 1':
anbush massacres circumstances
3 .. ..
2 .. ..

8 - 2 1
Table 12

FOIINHWCIAI.USE¢NNLY

Politicians. journalists, corporation directors, entrepreneurs and professionals
killed in anbush

__________—__—__—————————-———

Mane

Occupation

Place and date
of the crime

Terrorist organisation

___________—___—___—-————_

Enrico Pedenovi
Fulvio Croce

Carlo Casalegno
Carmine De Rosa

Gianfranco Spighi

Aldo Hora
Alfredo Paolella

Attilio Dutto
ltalo Schettini

Carlo Ghiglieno
Silvio Gori

Paolo Paoletti
Pino Anato

Halter Tobagi
Renato Briano

Hanfredo Hazzaati

Giuseppe Furci

HSI-DN exponent
lawyer
journalist
FIAT director

notary

DC president

university
professor

industrialist

Building
constructor

FIAT director
Director. Harg-

Hilan 29-4-1976
Turin 28-6-1977
Turin 16-11-1977
Cassino (FR) 5-1-1978

Prato (Fl) 7-2-1978

Rome 9-5-1978
Naples 11-10-1978

Cuneo 21-3-1979
Rome 29-3-1979

Turin 21-9-1979
Venice 28-1-1980

hera Petrochemical

ICHESA director
DC exponent
journalist

Hagneti Harelli
director

director of
Falck

prison health
director

Milan 5-2-1980

Naples 19-5-1980
Hilan 28-5-1980
Milan 12-11-1980

Milan 28-11-1980

ROIe 1-12-1980

Prina linea _
Brigate rosse
Brigate rosse

Operai arnati per il
conunisao

Lot.arn.per 11 con.
Dante di Nanni

Brigete rosse
Priaa lines

Brigate rosse
Brigate rosse

Prila lines

Brigate rosse

Prina linea
Brigate rosse
Brig.XXVIII largo
Brigate rosse

Brigate rosse

Brigate rosse

________—____——__————————-———————

Table 13

Ages of students killed

23
25
6

6

.—————

 

fron 14 to 19 years
iron 20 to 23 years
from 24 to 26 years
from 27 to 29 years
age unknown

94

FOIIOIIHCIAI.IEIE(HULY
IIIIUIU bu. "mﬁ' won-u u..--v-

______________——————————

In Northern Italy Central Italy Southern It

___________—_——————————

Bologna 15* Ila-e 20 Naplea 3
Milan Pisa Bari 2
Turin Latina

Padua

Reggio hilia

Total 31 (51.651) 2‘ (602) 5 (8.351)

* including 13 killed in the Bologna station mascre

—____—__———————————

 

 

Table 15
Number of students killed free 1969 to 1980

_________________._____________________________.

1969.1976 1975-191
_________________________________________._____________
Year Nusber of dead Year Nu
_______________________________________________________________
1969 3 1975
1970 1 1976
1971 1 1977
1972 1 1978
1973 3 1979
1976 2 1980
Total 11
percentage 18.35
Total 1969 to 1980 60
___________________________________________________________.___.
Table 16

Circustancea of students' deathe

—_____——_————-———-—————

32 through terrorian and violent actions of the right

15 in Iaseacrea
6 in anhuacadee
11 in other circumstances

12 through terrorisn and violent actions of the left

7 in aubuscades
5 in other circusstances

13 in riota and clashes with the police
3 in other circunatances or ambushed by unknown persons

___—____._——————-——-——

95
FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE¢MNLY

Table 17
Students killed in aabush
_____________________________________________________.___________________
Naae Age Date of death Place Terrorist organizations guilty
of the criae

__________________________________________________________________________._____.___-

Mario Zicchieri 16 29-10-1975 Rome Nuclei arnati proletari

Mauro Alati 21 8- 7-1977 Rona Units conhattenti coeuniete

Franco Bigonzetti 19 7- 1-1978 Role Nuclei armati di contropotere
territoriale

Francesco Ciavatta 20 7- 1-1978 Rome Nuclei armati di contropotere
territoriele

Pausto Tinelli 19 17- 3-1978 Hilan Ignoti di destra

Ivo Zini 25 28- 9-1978 Role Nuclei arlati rivoluzionari

Claudio Hiccoli 21 5-10-1978 Naples Col-ando fascists

Stefano Cecchetti 19 10- l-l979 Rome Conpasni organiaaati per il
colunieno

Emanuele Jurilli l9 9- 3-1979 Turin Prina linea
Ciro Principesaa 20 19- 4-1979 Rose Avanguardia nazionale

 

Luigi Hascsgni 2h 1- 7-1979 Milan Ignoti

Roberto Cavsllaro 22 9-10-1979 Psdua Nuclei aruati rivoluaionari
Antonio Leandri 25 17-12-1979 Rome Hovinento rivoluzionsrio popolare
Hi1lian Haccher 26 7- 2-1980 Milan Prina linea

Valerio Verbena 19 22- 2-1980 Rose Nuclei aruati rivoluzionari

Table 18

Laborers, euployeee and other workers

 

_____—_—————————

Occupations killed in killed in killed by killed in Total
massacres ambush violence other cir-
cumatancea
sale workers 6 6 b _ . 3 17
female workers 2 - - - 2
male employees 5 2 l - 8
female.enployeea 9 - - - 9
railroad workers A - 1 l 6
typographers ~ - - 1
drivers 2 l - - 3
96

liIICIﬂlC1A1.USB(lNLY
FillCIWﬂCLALIJ§E(NVLY

Table 18 continued

nesons l - - - 1
fern laborers - - 2 - 2
electricians 1 - - - l
cooks l 1 - - 2
sale shop clerks l - - - l
railroad signal-en 1 - - - 1
nechanics l - - - 1
nessengera - 1 - - 1
Total 36 10 8 6 56
_______________________________________________________________________________
Table 19
Honen killed by terrorisa and violence

____________________________________________________________________________
20 housewives 2 workers

8 school teachers 1 boutique nanaser

9 students 1 hosiery worker

9 elployees

6 donestics

3 retirees
_________________________________________________________________________._____
Table 20

Nanes of PCI nilitants killed in the period 1969-1980

___________________________________________________._____________________
Nane Age' Profession Date of death Place
___________________________________________________.___________________________
Gienfranco Carninati 3O laborer 7- 1-1971 Hilan
Euplio Natali 70 retiree 28- 5-1976 Brescia
Alberto Trebedeschi 37 teacher 28- 5-1976 Brescia
Vittorio Za-pards 60 retiree 28- 5-1976 Breecis
Vittorio Ingria 53 retiree 25- 6-1976 Enna
Rodolfo Boschi 22 laborer 18- 6-1975 Florence
Gennaro Costantino 62 retiree 16- 5-1975 Naples
Luigi De Rosa 19 student 28- 5-1976 Sense (PR)
Pietrsntonio Castelnovo 67 laborer 5- 9-1976 COIo
Benedetto Petrone 19 student 29-11-1977 Bari

Guido kossa 65 laborer 26- 1-1979 Genoa

Ciro Principesea 20 student 19- 6-1979 Role

_____-—__——————————-_

97

IOO4DIFKJA1.UBI(I‘LY
FIHICHﬂﬂCJAI.lEIE(HMLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 21
PSI militants killed in the period 1969-1980
Name Age Profession Date of Death Plsce
Giuseppe Malacsria 33 nason #- 2-1971 Catanze
Giuseppe Tavecchia 60 enployee 11- 3-1972 Milan
Table 22
Movemento anarchico victims killed in the period 1969-1980
.Name Age Profession Date of Death Place
Do-enico Congedo 23 student 27- 2-1969 Rune
(iuseppe Pinelli 61 railroad 15-12-1969 Milan
worker
Franco Serantini 20 student 7- 5-1972 Pisa
Table 23
m. n nelbers of asz-nu killed in the peace 1969-1980

Name Age Profession Date of Death Place
Ugo Venturini 33 laborer 18- 4-1970 aou‘
Virgilio Mattei 21 student 16- 5-1973 Rene
Giuseppe Marsala 60 employee 17- 6-1976 Padus
Sergio Ranelli 19 student 29- 4-1975 Milan
Mario Zicchieri 16 student 29-10-1975 Role
Angelo Pistolesi 31 enployee‘ 28-12-1977 Rome
Franco Bigonzetti 19 student 7- 1-1978 Rome
Francesco Ciavetta 20 student 7- 1-1978 Rona
Stefano Recchioni 20 student 7- 1-1978 Rome
Francesco Cecchin 18 student 20- 5-1979 Rene
Angelo Mancis 27 messenger 12- 3-1980 Rene

 

98
INJI10IIHCIAI.IIBI:CIMLY
Table 26
The six Lotta continua and two novie-ento studentesco nilitants

—_,__________————-——————'—'

ﬂue Age Profession Date of Death Place

—————————-—————-———__

Lotta continua

Tonino Hicciche 25 laborer 17- 6-1975 Nd“
Alceste Campanile 22 student 13- 6-1975 Reggie E.
Pietro Bruno 18 student 22-11-1975 lone
Francesco Lorusso 25 student 11- 3-1977 Bologna
Halter Rossi 20 student 30- 9-1977 Rose
Luigi Hascagni 26 student 1- 7-1979 Milan
Student novenent

Roberto Franceschi 23 student 23- 1-1973 Milan
Claudio Varalli 18 student 16- 5-1975 Milan
Table 25

The 37 terrorists killed in the period 1969-1980

____—_________—__———————-———

6 laborers 1 university graduate with degree
1 electrician 2 graduates with diplomas
11 students 3 teachers
1 publisher 3 asployees
6 unemployed 1 journalist
2 others
Table 26

Number of terrorists killed by age groups

__________________—————————

3 age 19 1 age 27
2 age 20 1 age 28
5 age 21 1 age 29
10 age 22 lo age 30
5 age 23 1 age 33
3 age 26 l age 36
2 age 25 1 age ‘0
2 age 26 1 age 66
In clashes with
the police

Ivan loccaccio
Giancarlo Eapoati

Giuseppe Romeo
Luca Hantinl
Hargherita Casol

Anna Maria Mantlni
Martino Ziechltella

Halter Alaala
Antonio Lo Huaclo
Roberto Rigobello
Barbara Azzaronl
Matteo Gagsegt
Roberto Pautaaao
Anna Maria Ludnann
Lorenzo Betalse
Piero Panclarelll

Riccardo Dura

Claudio Pallone
Arnaldo Pauato Genolno

Roberto Serafini
Halter Petroli

21
26

20
23
26

23
60

20
27
21
29
23
21
33
28
25

26
36

23
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-6

POI OHIO“. USE ONLY

Table 27 continued
NM Ase Profession Date of Death P1
__________________—————
In other
circulstances
Giangiacono Feltrinelli 66 editor 15- 3-1972 Sc
Silvio Ferrari 19 student 19- 5-19710 81
G. Principe Vitaliano 23 university 11- 3-1975 NI

student
Giovanni Tues 22 student 30- 5-1975 A!

worker
Carlo Tognini 30 bank CRIB 19- 7-1977 V4
Attilio Alfredo Di
Nepali 19 student 6- 8-1977 '1‘
Orlando Marin Pinones 2!: lo- 8-1977 1‘

, Rocco Sardone 22 student 30-10-1977 '1‘
Pierluisi Sciotti 19 student 31-12-1977 c
Prospero Condura 22 electrician 31-12-1977 c
Francesco Ansel-1 22 student 6- 3-1978 a
Roberto Capone 26 surveyor ‘ 8-11-1978 1"
Angelo Del Sarto 25 laborer 12- 5-1979 T
Alberto Graziani 21 student 12- 6-1979 1:
Maria Antonietta Berna 21 student 12- 6-1979 1
Francesco Hansianelli 30 ‘I 11- 9-1980 II
101
M OIIICIAL [Bl ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-6
(ﬂu-FIG

Sagan.-
3.0.25.7».
953
<93:
<ounow:

\I
Number of deaths in the provincee of Centre1 Italy

—_—_———.———————————-—

In mucree Alba-h Other cir- Total Percentage
. cmtencee
5 32 30 67 18. 50
- ‘2 4 6 1.65
6 1 2 7 1.95
- - 3 3 0.80
- - 2 2 0. 55
- - 2 2 0. 55
- - 1 1 0. 25
- - 1 1 0.25
9 35 65 89
2.50 9.65 12.65 24.60

_—__———_——-—————————

amber of deethe 1n the pravtncee of the South

_________________———_—-—-——-———

In meecree AIhueh Other cir- ‘rotel Percentage
cunetencee
nine 6 -- 6 12 3.30
- I. I. 8 2. 20
- - 2 2 0. 55
- 1 2 3 0.80
- - 2 2 0. 55
- -- 2 2 0.55
- - 1 1 0. 25
-- - 1 1 0. 25
- 1 -- 1 0. 25
- - 1 1 0.25
6 6 21 33
1.65 1.65 5.00 9.10
103

mommouu
IIIIIIHNC1A1.UIIGMNLY

Table 31
Runes of terrorist arsenitetione of the right end nulber of pereone

_____—___——_——-———-—————

Title 1969 1972 197‘ 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Totel

______—_—__———-—————_———__—_—

Avenguerdie netionnle - - - 1 - - - - - 1
Co-endi neofeecieti - 1 1 - «— - 1 — - 3

Eeercito nezionele
rivoluzionerio brigete

Prenco Ansel-1 -— -— - -— - - 2 .. -- 2
Hovinento rivoluzion-

ario popolare - - - - - .. .. 1 .- 1
nuclei erneti

rivoluzioneri - - - - - - 1 ,. 2 5 ﬂ
Ordine nuovo 17 3 - - l - 1 - - 2‘
Ordine nero - -- 22 -- .. .. .. .. -- 22
Total 17 6 23 1 1 -- 5 3 S 59
______________________________________________________________________________________
Table 32

Name: of terrorist organieetione of the left and nulber of pereone killed

__—____________—————————-—-

Title 1969 1972 1976 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Total
Brigete rouse - - 2 l 6 3 16 ll 16 55
Brigete coubettenti - - .. - -- 1 .- .. .. 1
Brigete XXVIII nerzo -- - -. -— .- .— .. .. 1 1
Conpagni organizzeti

per il colonic-o - - - —- - - - 1 1 2
Conpagni organizzeti

in volente roeea - - - - -. .. -- .. 1 1
Foruazioni calbettenti

conuniete -- - - - -- .— a -- -- a
Gatti selvegsi -- -- -— .. —. .. .. .. 1
Guerriglie proletarie - -- - - - .- .- .. 1
Guerriglie conuniete - - - - - - 3 - - 3

Lotte ornate per il
coeunisno D. Di Nanni - ’- -— - -- - l - - 1

Hov.prol. reoiotenze
offensive nucleo
antieroine -- - - - - .. 3 .. .. 3

10h
IOI‘OUFIJAI.UUI{MNLY
“WISEONLY

Table 32 continued
Title ' 1969 1972 1970 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Totel

 

Nuclei ere-ti proleteri - — - 1 l l — — 1 lo
Nuclei emti di con-

 

tropotere territoriele -- - - - .. - 2 — — 2

Nuclei emti per il

ennui-o -- - -- - - — - l - l

Nuclei counieti

tertitoriali - - - - - - — — l l

Nuclei proleteri

coubettenti - - -- -- - -- - — l l

Operei emti per il

commie-o -- - — - - - l -- - l

Fri-e linen - - - -- l -- - l 7 6 15

Proleteri emti per

il cosmic-o - -- - - - -- - l —

We proletarie - - - - - - — - 1

Square proleterie

territorieli - - - -- -- l - l - 2

Unite conbattenti

co-uniete - - - - - l l - - 2

Total - - 2 2 8 7 32 24 29 106

Ignoti - l - 3 — l - l - 6

Boercito emno - - - - - - -- - 2 2

Riporto aisle am 17 6 23 l l - 5 3 5 59

TOTAL cam 17 5 25 6 9 8 37 28 36 171
105

mmmouu
summon“

|I|II|I|||||l|l||III.

3:0. I I. I I I I H n I u Ho
wan—.33 run 028...

9.53.. I I I I I I I H I I N
Egan-no. I I I I I I I N I H I
90:33::- I I I I I I I I o I H
32,332». I I I I I I w I a u m
newton-«H2... 3.333... I I I I I I ~ ~ g Hw Ha
manna—.3505.-

Hieonono. 08:830..

092. .318: I I H I I I I I H n u
Salon-Haw 3.02.0.0»...

3.2.2.. I I I I I I I I H H n
9933.- .R. 093.

36:00ng I I I I I I H H a u o
3033 :0an

ozon- I I I I I I I ~ o u n
usages-«Ho. I I I I I I I H a a I
.33qu- I I I I I I I I I I H
vegan-0.2.. 38380—33.

."Hﬁ‘.g " I " Iv. 0" i I- .. I H I:-
Ongon I I I I I I H I H I I
den-H I I H I I I a HH 8 ﬁ. 3
333250 I I Poo I I I 93 93 3.8 3.8 3.0

IIIIIIII
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-5

 

F0. omen. USE ONLY
Table 36
Political figures wounded in anhuecadee
Franco Galluppi P301 -15- 2-1975 Ra
' Massimo De Carolia oc 15- 5-1975 Hi.

8. Leighton Guzman ex-pree. DC. Chile 6-10-1975 Ra
Giancarlo Nicolai DC deputy secretary 22- 6-1977 Pi
Angelo Sibilla DC regional secretary, 11- 7-1977 Ge
Hario Perlini DC 11- 7-1977 Ra
Maurizio Puddu DC regional deputy

secretary 13- 7-1977 1‘
Carlo Arienti DC co-unal

counsellor 26-10-1977 1“
Antonio Cocoezello DC conunal 26-10-1977 '1"

counsellor
Public Fiori DC 2-11-1977 R:
Carlo Caetellano PCI 17-11—1977 0.
Filippo Peechiera DC 18- 1-1978 0
Giovanni Picco DC ex-Inyor 26- 3-1978 1‘
Girolano Hechelli DC 26— 6-1978 Rt
Tito Berardini DC sectional 12- 5-1978 )1:

secretary
Giulio Tognini PSI federation 16- 9-1978 Cl

secretary
Paolo Signorelli H81 5- 3-1979 3.
Giencarlo Dagnino DC adniniatretive 26- 6-1979 5‘

secretary
Enrico Chio DC 29- 5-1979 G
Fauato Cuocolo DC 31- 5-1979 G
Cano Di Graziano DC 19-12-1979 C
Roberto Garrone PCI 8- 2-1980 I '11
Nadir Tedeechi DC 1- 6-1980 K
Ioea Antonio DC 1- 6-1980 H
Bros Robbiani DC sectional 1- 6-1980 H

secretary
Domenico Callucci DC sectional 17- 5-1980 R

secretary -

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-5
Factory directors

_—____—————_

FIAT Turin
Alfa Ronao Milan

Alfa Sud Naples
Anaaldo Genoau
Singer Turin
Olivetti Turin
Philco-Boach Bergano
Breda Milan

(l1 Milan

MGM Turin

Menarini Bologna
Pirelli Milan
Italgrafo Milan
Innocenti Leyland Milan

H

Factory officials

&

FIAT Canino

FIAT Turin

Alfa Romeo Milan
Sit-Sienna Milan
Italaider Genoa
Montediaon Milan
MWWONLY

Table 36
0f 69 plant directors and technicians

27 were anbushed by the BR, which injured 13 FIAT directors and technicians,
three at Alfa Boneo, two at Sit-Sienna, and one each at Hagneti Karelli.
Singer, um, Pirelli, Italeider, lreda. Ansaldo and Italgrafo

8 were albuahed by Prime lines. injuring four HAT directors and one et
Olivetti in an assault on the Valletta Institute of Corporation
Adninistration on the Via Ventiniglia, Turin, on 11 Decenber 1979, a
Prnxi director, s section chief at Sit-Siemens and an official of

Hontedison, Milan.
4 by unknown persons
10 by as many terrorist groups. all of the left

 

 

Table 37

Law enforce-eat personnel wounded in anbuscades
8 police agents 3 carabinieri
1 police corporal l carabinieri unrshel
l p~lice brigadier l deputy queator

7 custodian agents

 

 

Table 38

Cities in which law enforce-cut agents were wounded
none ll ' Milan 1
Turin 10 Verona l
Naples 1 Catenia l
Crenona 2 Trapeni l

 

109

mmmmy
FOR‘OFF‘CIAI.U§E¢MVLY

Law enforce-ant personnel wounded in anhuacades

 

 

h
lino

tritto

tini

ni

falo
11egrini
one
iello
.ni
olitano

:iullo

.ante
Inaiata
Lto

Ico
sfice
:eda

 

Rank Date Place Terrorist
83°“?
custodian agent 7-10-1975 Milan NAP
police brigadier 9- 2-1976 Ions NAP
deputy oueator 11-12-1976 Rome NAP
con-ander, 3- 6-1978 Catania unknown
custodian agents
DIGOS agent 17- 5-1978 Turin PL
custodian agent 26-10-1978 Verona PAC
carabiniere 28-10-1978 Rona BR
police agent 28-10-1978 Rose BR
police agent 21-12-1978 Rone 3R
police agent 21-12-1978 Rona BR
carabiniere 1- 2-1979 Crenona unknown
carabiniere 1- 2-1979 Creaona unknown
prison warden 5- 2-1979 Turin PL
(Ho-an)
custodian agent 3- 3-1979 Rone NAP
custodian agent 9- 3-1979 Turin PL
csrabinieri narshal 15- 3-1979 Trapani an
custodian agent 26- 3-1979 Naples BR
police agent 3- 5-1979 Bone BR
custodian agent 18- 9-1979 Turin unknown
police corporal 31-10-1979 Rone 38
'police agent 28- 5-1980 Rona “AR
police agent 28- 5-1980 Role NAR

__—_—___—_—————————————

110

FOI‘OIIICIAI.UBI!MNL¥
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1.0
Terrorist groups vhich wounded 16 doctors

 

 

the lrigate Rosse (Red Brigades)

the Proletari emti per il commie-o (Ar-ed Proletarians for Con-unis.)

Prila linea (Front Line)

Coabattenti per il co-uniano (Fighters for Comnisn)

the Squadre proletarie di coabattinento (Proletarian Conbat Squads)

the Reparti commiati d'attacco (Commist Attack Units)

the Unita conbattenti conuniste (Unity of Co-unist Cubatants)

y the Cowagni organiauti in volante rossa (Conrades Organised in a Red
Flying Squad)

1 by the Squadre arnate proletarie di conbattinento (Ar-ed Proletarian Combat
Squads)

1 by the Reparti proletari per l‘esereito di liberatione coaunista (Proletarian
Unite for the Any of Cor-unist Liberation)

1 by Aaione Rivoluaionaria (Revolutionary Action)

HHHHHHNH
Q‘O‘O’U'

0‘

 

Table 61
Doctors wounded in anbuacades
____________________—_———
Name Profession Date wounded Place Terrorist
830W
__—____________.————
Luigi Solera PIAT doctor 17-12-1975 'hzrin' BR
Alberto Ma-oli prison doctor 30- 3-1977 Pisa AR
Giuseppe Ghetti Health Office. 19- 5-1977 Seveso(MI) 'cc
Seveso
Roberto Anulone President. Associa- Zlo- 6-1977 Milan PL
. tion of Medical Insurers of Milan
Giorgio Coda psychiatrist 2-12-1977 'lurin SAP
Rodolfo Ohio gynecologist 10- 6-1978 Wrin, SAP
Giorgio Rosaanigo prison doctor 6- 5-1978 Novara PAC
in Rovara
Diego Pave chief doctor, 8- 5-1978 Milan PAC
IMAM. Milan
GiacOIo Ferraro doctor 8- 6-1978 ‘mrin SAP
Mario Marchetti prison doctor, 13-11-1978 Milan RC
San Vittore (Milan)
Franco Lanaardo prison doctor, 15- 1-1979 Varese SAP
Varese
Mauro Carlignoli doctor 23- 1-1979 Naplea UCC
Giuseppe Nicolino Muaco doctor 25- 1-1979 Role 00V].
Oraaio Rolano prison doctor, 1- 2-1979 Turin SAPC
Rev Prison
Donenica Sartori Nigra doctor 18- 5-1979 “1’1" SAP
Giulio De Pabritis gynecologist 30-11-1979 Rona RPELC

 

 

111
Journaliata wounded in albuacadea

——________—-——_——-———

Name Title Date Place
wounded

_______________—_——
Vittorio Bruno deputy director,

SW XI! 1- 6-1977 Genoa
Indro Hontaneni director, stoma

NUOVO 2- 6-1977 Milan
mlio Roui director,

"relegiornale I" 3- 6-1977 Rome
Antonio Garzotto editor, (M22311!!!) 7- 7-1977 Padua
Nino Ferrero dito L'uun

‘ " 13- 9-1977 mm.
Roberto Giunto La Spade editor, "Radio 25-12-1977 Role

citta futon"
Franco Piccinelli editor, MI 26- 6-1979 ‘Nrin
Guido Paaaalacqua journaliat,

LA REPUBBLICA 7- 5-1980 Milan

______—___—_—-———————
Brlgete roou

Prue linen

Nuclei. ar-tl proletarl

Squadre ornate proletarle

nuclei and rlvoluzlouerl
Reparti couunistl d'ottacco
Proleterl and per ll comalno
Pronto. commute conbattente
Antone rlvoluzlonarla

Unite coubattentl emulate

Gruppi prolotarl amt: organirutl
Squadre proletarie d1 conbetthento

 

 

 

Total

Table as

Terrorist organization; of the left v
jute th

Organizations 1971

Azlone rivoluzlonarla -

Associations conbattentl

conunletl -

Brignte roeoe -

Co-pagni organ. per 11

cannula-o '-

Brlgeta XXVIII nerzo -

COIbattentl per 11 counts-o -
Porn-21ml conunlete ornate -
Fronts comnieta coubettente --
Fronte conbnttente commute -

Grappo opereio combat.
per ll coo. --

Gmppl emtl operet --
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-5

illlllﬂﬂtlAl.lElE(lﬁl¥
Table 105 continued
Organizations 1971 1975 1976 1977 1
____________________________________________________.
Grappi calbnt. per 11
cosunislo - - - -—
Gruppi prolecnri nrnnti
organizzati - - - -
Guerriglin conuniete - - - -
Gruppo connniete per 11
contropotere territorinle - - - -
Lotta nrnate per il
connnieno - - 1 —-
Nucleo antifascietn Roberto
Sclalobba .- — no .-
Nuclei arnnti proletnri -- 1 b 1

_ Nuclei conbnttenti per il
conunisno - - - -

Nuclei conunisti territoriali - -- - --
Nucleo d'auaalto per la

liberazione territorinle - - - —-
Hovinento counnista

rivoluzionario - - - -
Potere proletario nrnnco - l - -
Prina linen -- .. .. 3
Proletnri nrnati per il

conunielo - - - -
Potere conunietn - - 1 -
Reperti calnninci d'nttncco - - - -
Reparti proletnri perl'eeercito

di liberation. conunintn -— .. - -
Ronde proletarie - - - -
Ronde proletarie ornate - - - --
Squadre atlate proletarie -- - - 1

Squadre nrlnte proletarie
d1 conbnttinento - -. .. ..

I
I
I
...

Squadrc atlate operaie

Squadre proletarie di -. .. ..
calbattinento
11b
FOI‘DIIIJAI.U!I|INLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500090002-6
INJIWOFIICIAI.IIBI:(IULY

Table ‘5 continued
Organizations 1971 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Total

 

Squadre prolataria di
coabattinanto per 1'eaercito

di liberaa. coanniata - - - - - 1 - l
Squadre rivoluz. di

coabattilanto - - -- 1 - l - 2
Total attacks by the left - 5 9 33 38 63 18 166
Percentage - 2.90 5.25 19.20 22.10 25.00 10.65 84.90

 

 

 

 

Terrorist organizationa of the right Ihich callittad aabuacadea intended to in-
jure their victila

 

 

 

 

Organizations 1971 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 Total
Giuatizia narionala

rivoluzionaria - - - l - - -- 1
Nuclei arlati rivoluzionari - - - - 1 - 2
Neofnacieti rivoluzionari - - - - - 1 - 1
Total attacks by the right - - - 1 1 1 2 5
Unidentified 1 3 2 6 21
Total attacka'by the left - s 9 33 38 1.3 13 166
Grand total 1 8 ll 38 66 b8 22 172
Percentage 0.60 6.65 6.40 22.10 25.60 27.90 12.80 100

115

IOI10'IKDAI.UUIINNEY
”WMMY

Victins killod in Southern Italy

____—__.——————————————'

"laces Huber of dud umber of ﬂash“
8 7
'1. 12 —
2 3
3 ..
2 ..
1 ..
1 .-
1 .—
1 .—
— l
2 ..
33 11
9.10 6.60

Victims killed in the pmlncu of Contra Italy

___________________—-————

llu-bor of dead Huber 1n «bush

67 39
6 l
7 2
3 1
2 ..
2 l
1 --
1 —

89 $4

240.60 25 .60

115

”ammonia!
”WWW!”

Victim 1111106 in the province. of llorthcrn Italy

_________————-—

Dad W 16 animal:

101 2
62 38
24 40
16 1‘
I. 7
10 —
I. 1
I. ..
2 2
3 _
2 .—
2 ..
1 1
- 2
1 —
1 .-
1 .-
1 .—
1 .-
1. 1 -
- 1
1 —
- 1
260 117

66.30 60.00

______________——-————

uuoli EDITOR. 1111.6

'0016

MWWMY
JGJIIAL 0? m m enemas

Unknown GIN! m3 BRIG“?! 3088! NO 4» in Italian Dec 81 pp 1-63 '

[M and a half pagee of introduction in ecript illegibleJ

[‘raxt] nod Brigadee

Resolution of the Strategic Executive Oo-ittee Decoder 1981

1. Philosophy of the Party'e Retabliehnent

II. Analyeie of the cycle and the General cyclical Policy Program

l—‘lhe [Political] Cycle
2—!» Preeent [Political] Cycle
3—‘m Italian Link in the Crieie of the Capitalietic Henna of Production

6—Sponteneoue Strugglae, Revolutionary Haee Hove-ante and Guerrilla
warfare in Betabliehing the Red Power Syetee

sum. General waical Political Progran.

m. For the Betabliahnent of in.» Line in the )btropolitan Proletariat Philo-
eophy of the Party'e Betabliehnent

"whether objective truth ie a part of hunan thought ie not a theoretical, but a
practical, quaetion.

"It ie in practical activity that nan leuet denonetrate the truth, that ie reality
and power, the earthly character of hie thought. The diecueeion about, or the

nonreality of, a thought that ie ieolated free practice to a purely echolaetic
quantion."

our!)

"the truth of a fact or of a theory ie not deternined by a euhjective judpant,
but iron the objective reeulte of eocial practice.

118

MOIHCIALUSIONLY
POI OFFICIAL l8! ONLY

"The precticel point of view ie the primary end fund-entel point of view of the
dialectical-neterielietic theory of knowledge."

(Ibo)

Index

Free Organisation to Perty

The Crieie-Reetructurieetion-Ver Hovenent
The Inperialiet State of the multinationals

The worldwide Inperieliet Counterrevolution ee an Arned Counter-
revolution for the forced Heintenance of the Reletionehipe of
Production

The Proceee end Conduct of the Her of Treneition for Co-uniee
The Metropolitan Proleteriet

The Guerrille Perty of the Hetropoliten Proleteriet

The Guerrilla Perty end the Definition of Program

The Progr- of Transition to Co-miee

Crieie, Her, Internetionelien

Pron Orgenieetion to Party

After 12 yeere of erned etruggle the reletionehip between revolution and counter-
revolution in Italy is being redefined end traneforned. A cycle in the hietory
of the Commiet Rad Brigedee Organiretion ie definitively cloud. The leep to
petty e‘tetue eetebliehee here ad now the eolid and concrete hence for the con-
etruction of the Fighting Commiet Perty [Partito Co-Iniete Codattente],
eetebliehee an hietoricel, profound end irreversible breeh am the pent of the
Fighting Conniet Organization. The only hietoricel continuity poeeible for
the Red Brigedae ie in the breelt with the put beceuec the only etretegic pro-
epect ie that of being the Metropolitan Proletariet'e Guerrilla Perty.

"The proceee of politicel, planned eetebliehnent end factory organization of the

Fighting Perty ie not et all lineer, evolutioniet. dependent upon tin. 0n the
contrary, it ie a diecontinuom. dielecticel proceee thet ie the conecioue pro-
duct of the political-nilitery venguerd. In the cmlu phenonene of clone
werfere thie affirm the validity of e etretagic perepective end the min
progren which it eupporte, ee well no the edequecy of the orgenizetionel inetru-
nente neceeeery to echieve then.” [no eource given]

The nonent when the politicel-nilitery vanguard of the Hetropoliten Proletariet
eetebliehee the Fighting Co-uniIt Perty in the etretegic perepective of the
treneitinn to co-Inien in en hietoricel eyntheeie, on the higher political
level, 01' the long proceee of revolutionary conetruction. At the once tine it ie
the neene by which ite orgeniretional etetue becne obeolete: the vanguard
coneciouely bringe about the end of e political-organizetionel cycle through
rupture beceuee objective and subjective conditions are at hand for the leap to

potty etetue .

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The leap to party status is the point of arrival of a complex process of stra-
tegic and organizational redefinition and political struggle which began fol-
lowing the 1978 Spring Campaign. with that campaign, the Armed Propaganda

Phase reached its highest point of maturity and as a consequence entered into

a state of crisis with the political-organizational concept that was at the
foundation of the Red Brigade Organization, and more generally, of all the
Fighting Communist Organizations. The crisis following [Aldo] Moro was charac-
terized by the need for a leap in the leadership-organization of the masses on
the terrain of the armed struggle, and from that time, there has developed with-
in these limits the political battle within the Organization to build a strategic
party structure.

The first phase of these complex processes is that which, beginning with the
discussions within the Revolutionary Mass Organizations, leads to the definition
of an articulated criticism of subjectivism in its variant forms.

The second phase is that in which, beginning with criticism of subjectivism, the
debate began to become focused within the question of the programs, and its first
achievement was the resolution of the us '80 [expansion unknown]. The D'Urso
Campaign, translates the political theses of the D8 '80 into practical action

by the Metropolitan Proletariat on a precise level. It also defines and articu-
lates the correct mass organization line and irrevocably fixes the substance for
action as a party at the crossroads of transition to deployment in a state of
civil war.

The third phase is that in which the process of acting as a party is translated
into the capacity to transfer the strategic concepts of the D'Urso Campaign on
the various class levels of the Metropolitan Proletariat. The Spring-Summer
Campaign of 1981 constitutes the highest point of party action because:

(a) It affirms the specific ability of the Organization to lead the various
proletarian strata and therefore the entire metropolitan proletariat; (b) It
brings to life the strategic substance of the destruction/construction dialec-
tic which is a distinguishing feature of the move toward war and establishes the
real bases for a decisive step toward the construction of the system of Red
Power; (c) Brings out and reinforces-through the politics; battle within the
organization--the revolutionary line of establishment of the fighting party in
opposition to the organizational-buresucratic line which-since it does not
appreciate the political problems that characterize the present state of af-
fairs, is inadequate and--in the final analysisnantagonistic to the historic
task of the leap to party status.

The Spring-Summer Campaign of 1981 supports the political defeat of this line

in the Organization and, establishing the subjective premiues for the leap to

party status, leads to the completion and conclusion of a cycle in the history
of the communist Red Brigades Fighting Organization.

Hhile the revolutionary line of party establishment continues, here and now,
the Fighting Communist Party advances and deepens the political battle in dif-
ferent ways against the erroneous lines within the Revolutionary Movements and
the Metropolitan Proletariat to definitively defeat their theoretical and
practical premises, and to reinforce and affirm, political unity on the highest
levels concerning the strategic prospects for transition to communism.

120
FOR OFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But the Fighting Comunist Party, in its historical form of Guerrilla-Party
of the Metropolitan Proletariat, also represents the historical continuity of
the Red Brigades Coal-unist Organization, from which it reaffirms and develops
the theoretical-practical points of reference and strategic principles that
were the basis for it from the beginning:

-1'he materialistic conception of history and the dialectical materialism ela-
borated by Mara: and Engels in their work of synthesis of the historical experience
of the ancient proletariat that developed from the later historical revolution-
ary experience: The Russian Revolution, the Chinese Revolution, the Great
Cultural Proletarian Revolution; that were reaffirmed and redefined in the
imperialist cities by the theory and practice of Marxism-Leninism of the Red
Brigades which find their point of maxim synthesis in the [illegible] and the
Communist.

«Democratic Centralism as the method the party uses to resolve internal contra-
dictions. Democratic Centralism is at the same time a philosophy, a policy, and
an organizational model. On the philosophical level it is a materialistic
conception: proletarian dialectic, which is based on the Maoist theory of con-
tradiction. 0n the political level the defense of the Metropolitan Proletariat's
interests as a class is urgent. This defense is iaplemented through specific
political lines, that is a complex of dialectical processes of transformation
synthesized by the slogans "from the masses to the masses" and, "existence in
contradiction." On the organizational plane it is a model that antagonistic-
ally denies the principles of the capitalist organization of work, of the large
factory, of the multinationalists' imperialist state. It is a model that is
created ir. order to give a voice to all members of the Metropolitan Proletariat.

The only correct way to resolve the struggle between political lines which is
the reflection within the party of the class struggle-—a struggle that will
exist so long as the opposing classes of Democratic Centralisn and Bureaucratic
Centralism exist-is the method based on the strategic principles of "unity-
criticism-unity," and of "atruggle-criticiss-change." Only the constant and
inflexible application of these principles can isolate and defeat the erroneous
line and therefore lead to the recuperation, reunification and reorganisation
of the entire party on the correct line.

[3 pages missing]
3. The Inperialist State of the Hultinationals

‘lhe state has always been tied to capital through organizational links: It is
not only a product of capital, but it is also a producer of capital. Today this
[illegible] is qualitatively redefined, changing the two interacting tem.

By its establishment, the state is present in the heart of the relations of
production and re-production. Its role becomes essential for the production and
re-production of these relationships in the structural crisis. It rust not
ensure the perennial nature of the capitalist relationship and of the underlying
relationship of exploitation. The state appears [illegible] as a "private
apparatus" of the dominant faction which is separated from it and is detached

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from "civil society." Even though it is "deduced" from capits‘ it maintains
an attitude that is "external" to capital, since it is through its action that
there is a passage of the determination and rsdetermination of the capitalist
relations of production and re-production, of respective social relations.

By detaching itself from "civil society," it returns to it, permeating it and
occupying all its pores; separated from the dominant fraction, it changes the
latter's exclusive interests into the general interest. here the state affirms
its absolute sovereignty over accumulation [of wealth] and over slass relation-
ships.

In the permanent crisis of accumlstion of wealth in the phase of inperialist
domination, the normal way of life becomes: Destruction of the forces of pro-
duction, through the means of production, and re-production in a relationship
of total war against the Metropolitan Proletariat.

There is no aspect of the economic-social structure that is exempt from state
intervention: there is no relationship and/or social relationship that is not
permeated by its coercive action. Everywhere the intervention of the state
destroys the productive force in order to maintain the power of its domination
over capitalist relationships of production, transportation and trade. It is
"state violence" that makes possible, and guarantees the survival of. the accu-
mulation of imperialist domination.

The imperialist state and the corresponding social relationships which have
been in a state of coma as against the emergence of the actual, infinitely
richer and qualitatively superior relations, was an outgrowth of war.

Now it has becone the private apparatus of the dominant sector of the imperial-
ist bourgeoisie and protects the interests of multinational monopolistic capital
in all regions of economic-social development. It increasingly loses every his-
torical legitimacy in setting itself up as the maximum artificer, defender and
guarantor of the process of capitalistic self enhancement which today is ex-
pressed only as strangulation and destruction of productive forces.

The Imperialist State of the Hultinationals exists today because of war. In
the develop-eat of the class war, the state unites around a single center of
gravity and the tendency will be toward the transformation into armed bands. as
already pointed out by Lenin in his analysis of the fem of state power in
prerevolutionary situations. Except that today. the prsrsvolutionary situation
extends over the long term, and is characteristic of an entire historical phase:
the long-term class war.

Marx says, "Beyond a certain point, the development of productive forces becomes
an obstacle for capital, that is. the capitalist relationship becomes an obstacle
for the development of productive forces of labor." In the present historical
period, that point has been reached; more precisely. the present period is
characterized by having reached this point: Capital sets itself up in relation-
ship to the development of social wealth by obstructing the development of
productive forces. 0n reaching this historical-social stage, a profound change
in the capitalist economic-social formation takes place because capital must

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iapose nechsnisms that diminish production and re-production of added value,
and instead strangle the development of productive forces and social wealth.
l'his develop-eat no longer comes about due to the perfecting of property rela-
tionships, but by making them superfluous because it is posed only as the
destruction of property relationships in all their possible and necessary form.

Capital, therefore, nuet prevent this process of being made superfluous and it
I!

can do so only by preserving its exclusive and general domination." since the
social base which supported it is now in a state of crisis.

It is precisely the preservation/imposition of "exclusive and general" domina-
tion by capital that fixes the lines and substance of the transformation of the
capitalist econoaic-social structure in the inperialist system of the multi-
nationals, that is, a systen in which international monopolistic capital doni-
nates and therefore doainates the fraction of the bourgeoisie that it repre-
sents: the imperialist bourgeoisie. In this syste- all the social regions are
simultaneously traversed by the same impulses, notivations, decisions and stra-
tegic orders under the domination of the multinational imperialisa. In it all
the various regions are violently brought together. Even though they conserve
a relative independence, they are imperiously subjected to a single pressing
demand: the forced maintenance of capitalist relations of production. transpor-
tation and trade. In order to pursue this necessary--and necessitated—objec-
tive, there is within the Multinational Imperialist State an accelerated ten-
dency toward total integration among all the functions, structures and units of

power.

6. lhe Global Imperialist Counterrevolution as an Armed Counterrevolution for
the Forced Hsintenance of Relations of Production

The more pressing the imperialist demand of forced maintenance of capitalist
social relations. the nore pressing becones the process of centralization,
ahinistration and integration of strategic decisions whose area of influence
becomes increasingly smaller to the point where it is fully identified with the
executive.

The centralization of strategic decisions exclusively in the hands of the Execu-
tive permits it an unlimited extension of power. Not only are they filled. in
an integrated way, with cooperative forces that are together political, economic,
military, juridical, etc., but they transmit. apply, put into practice with equal
intensity and counterrevolutionsry charge in all the regions of the changed eco-
nomic and social structure.

All this together, explains how the capitalist economic-socialist fornation has
become the state. It is a forced conversion into the state in the sense that
the reasons for the forced preservation of imperialist domination iapregnate,
and supply the model for, all the social regions.

Corresponding to this conversion into the state is the sdninistration of "civil
society." It is worthwhile here repeating that for Marx, the latter meant bour-

geois society. ‘lherefore, it is understandable that in the relations of power
among the cluses as well as in social relations that, going back to the economic

123

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
base, these circulate in every region of the capitalist economic, social forma-
tion.

Making bourgeois society an executive force neans that the strategic decisions
ascribed to the Executive have a total and totalizing sphere of application.

by noting itself the Executive, the power of the Multinational Imperialist State
is totalized, attempting to reproduce itself infinitely, aolding and remolding
all of society according to its demands for a survival that cannot be denied.

The political phase "invades" the economic phase; the military phase “invades"

the political phase; the juridical phase "invades" the ideological phase, etc.,
and altogether they invade the specificity of each, starting the process anew.

the counterrevolution arms itself, and arms all the single function» and orga-
nizations of power of the Multinational Imperialist State.

Changes within the capitalist economic-social formation rise as high as the units
of state power. which are profoundly changed. The crisis of the state in "mature
capitalism" corresponds to the crisis in relationships of production: The one
accentuates the other, bringing about and precipitating the general crisis of

the imperialist system.

In a state of crisis, and in need of redefinition, are the "classical" func-
tions of the state: As much that of "ideological collective capitalism" as well
as "real capitalism." 0n the one hand, what the state imposes "collectively" is
the general "corporative" interests of imperialist bourgeoisie. On the other
hand-and in powerful contradiction with this-is the essential instrument and
the privileged bearer of the partial "corporative" interest of a clearly defined
fraction of imperialist bourgeoisie: the state bourgeoisie.

0n the level of the state for war, new and sore daaaging contradictions are
introverted into the form of the state; new and more acute inter-inperialist
contradictions develop in a process of sedimentation. A larger and more fero-
cious "struggle behind the scenes," of reciprocal throat-cutting. is opened:
the struggle between consortiums and within the same consortium.

Definitively and irreversibly in a state of crisis is the role of the state "as
mediator of social conflict" which tries to reconcile "irreconcilable class
contradictions." In all its aspects, defending "corporative” interests. it
attacks "external reality.“ consisting of the economic-social formation and the
Metropolitan Proletariat. without reservation and aediation, going beyond all
possibility, now made impossible, of reconciliation among the classes. All the
aspects of the state now are actively integrated aaong themselves. The struc-
tures of power and the organizations of the ilperialist state together consti-
tute the "integrated structure" of the armed global counterrevolution which is
an emanation of the imperialist global counterrevolution, constituting its
specific aspect in this phase of the political cycle.

The obstacle to the development of productive forces cannot but be strategically
made functional by this integrated organism. It is not for this that it con-

stitutes an organizational structure with its own linited size. Rather, it
translates the level of asseablage and interaction among the various units and

126

FﬂllCﬂﬂﬂC1A1.USE(MNLY
ITNRCINICJAI.UEIE(NVLV

organizations of power in relation to the intervention of the inperialist state
in individual economic areas and junctures, in given social regions and against
precise and various class levels.

This integrated structure elaborates and translates into practice--on the high-
est decision level-the strategy of division for the achievement of a single
strategic objective: the annihilation of the Metropolitan Proletariat. In this
sens, it concentrates its fire against the Metropolitan Proletariat, dividing it.
In substance, it concentrates its warfare against the Metropolitan Proletariat.
dividing it according to various class levels. With this, it divides the gene-
ral front of war along the differentiated central fronts.

Division is annihilation in action: annihilation in a state of becoming. Hith
the progress of annihilation, the strategy of division always increasingly tends
to become directly a strategy of annihilation. The class enemies' centers of
power gravity always increasingly tend to re-forn around a single center, con-
sidering that the divided fronts of the war tend to be reduced to a single front.

Uithin the real existence of this new and complex dialectic, property, qualita-
tive forms, laws of movement and reciprocal relations of all the institutions
and power organizations of the imperialist state change substantially because
they become poles in the process of armed counterrevolutionary integration.

Cycle follows cycle and in the course of the same cycle there is a change in the
appearance of the dominant pole. All the poles contribute equally to the ela-
borstion of counterrevolutionary strategy: a single pole. or sons poles. imple-
Ient-cycle after cycle and in variations within the same cycle-that strategy
decisively. These constitute the pole or the dominant poles in the cycle, of
the integrated structure of the armed global counterrevolution.

Before cooperating among themselves, the various poles each bring together the
totality of functions carried out within their specific area of action, each one
of which constitutes a homogeneous bloc. All the structures of power and of the
Imperialist State Organisations operating in the economic sphere are associated
on a new basis and on a higher level of interaction. thus constituting the eco-
nomic pole of the integrated structure of the arned global counterrevolution.

In like fashion, there will be an association and installation of the military
pole, the juridical pole, etc. All the poles, which will be separate and inte-
grated with each other, act in a different way on different levels of the inte-
grated structure of the arned global counterrevolution. All the poles are
integrated on all levels, yet are distinct from each other: One pole is always
a part of a totality along with the others, and at the same time. is distinct
from the others. It is by virtue of this unity/distinction that the imperialist
state generalizes war. rooting it in its totality in every capillary fold of the
social fabric. not only to make it amorphous. but in order to bend and subor-
dinate it through unlimited war to the needs of the forced maintenance of pro-
ductive relationships. The despotic efficiency of added value becomes the mantle
of war with which the multinational imperialist state surrounds. suffocates and
squashes all of society.

125

FOI‘OFHKJAL.U§E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. lhe Process and Conduct of the Transitional War for Cosmnisn

(l) The Guerrilla Party that the Metropolitan Proletariat plans to build is not
exclusively a righting Party. It is not nerely the Political Party because in
this historical period the center of gravity of the class conflict is no longer
based in the political terrain but in the social terrain. It is not an exclu-
sively Fighting Party because revolutionary class war does not seen either
exclusively or predoeinantly nilitary combat. The nilitary is nerely a result
of the metropolitan war, in which the proletariat and the bourgeoisie take a

stand, oppose each other, irreducibly face each other as enenies: in term of
absolute enmity.

war is not a final and extraordinary act of class opposition, but already from
today it is pernenently interioriasd within the regions of economic-social forma-
tion, throughout the entire spectrun of class nations, in the universe of
social relationships.

In this sense, war is described as permanent total war, a radical social revolu-
tion, and in this period of history assumes the specific form of Class Warfare
for the Transition to Conunism.

The Class warfare for the Transition to Com-mien, or, the dialectic between the
iaperialist bourgeoisie and the Metropolitan Proleteriet, between revolution and
counterrevolution, determines and doeinates, cycle after cycle. the possible

and necessary historical forts of the organisations for the conduct of war, the
deter-ination of the Red Power Systen. It deter-inn the for: of combat in every
region of the economic-social fornstion: In the political, the military, the
economic, the ideological.

In this sense it is now possible to overcome the classical assumption that con-
ceives "war as an extension of politics by violent meme," bee-me there is a
reversal of the position in the politics-war contradictions since at the present
level of the Economic-Social Formation develop-cut politics also undergoes
qualitative changes.

Like all concepts, "politics" and 'hvar" are socially determined.

Now it is politics that, changing into "a secondary aspect," operates in a second-
ary relationship to the general laws imposed by war. But above all, since the
character of absolute antagonism has been extended to all social relationships,
the forms of action too undergo radical changes. Revolutionary politics becoees

a sinple distension-«the distributive dinenaion--of the war between classes

which, in the metropolitan context, is extended, using all means, to all social
relationships .

with the historical desturction of doninant relationships of production, of

the corresponding system of power and of the consequent division of nen into
opposing classes, there is the preparation and construction of comnist society,
the abolition of classes and therefore the abolition of war. The Maoist prin-
ciple of 'haking war to prevent a war" finds further and broader confirmation.

L26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(2) "The love of wsr sre s problem thst snyone who directs s wsr lust study
snd resolve." [ho source given]

Revolution is s wsr to s "finsl solution" insofsr so it is posed ss the his-
toricsl defest end destruction of the clsss eneny through the violent sbolition
of productive relstionehips.

Therefore, the systes of revolutionsry wsr is defined es "s couplets closed cir-
cuit.” within which revolution operstes with its theories and nodels end does
not per-it sny escspe fron this circuit.

The universsl exists in the specific, or. universsl contrsdiction exists in spe-
cific contrsdiction. "If this is not clesr, it is impossible to determine the
specific essence thst distinguishes one thing fro. the others, to discover the
csuse or the specific besis of the wt, of the developnett of things. sske
distinctions between things." (no source given].

(3) he sis of wsr is: to exercise politicsl-nilitsry power in order to exer-
cise socisl power.

‘Iherefore, it is socisl power thst doninstes the scensrio of wsr.

In revolutionsry wsr, which lives end met live in the inperislist netropolis, the
Clsss Her for the ‘I‘rsnsition to Co-nisn sppropristes sll revolutionsry kna-
ledge snd trsnsforne it into sctive socisl power. It is en sctivity of revolu-
tionsry power which destroys the eneny's power. while it builds the ‘l‘rsneition

to (bunnies.

After hevin; scrutinized the horizons of clsss struule for s long tine. revolu-
tionsry politics es en sctivity conforlins to the sis-sction constsntly tending
towsrd revolution, finds itself with the conditions snd possibilities of crest-

ing new horizons. ‘lhe resl object of the revolutionsry psrty is now clsss vsr
for the Transition to Miss.

Rexsrdless of how functionsl, politics no longer exists sepsrste fron vsr.
Ressrdless of how functionsl, there no longer exists s wsr thst is sepsrste fros
politics.

Now politics end wet sct, resct. intersct end cooperste within new form of
existence, doninsted by wsr. The dosinstion of wsr hss nothing to shsre with
nilitsry doninstion. In feet. the nilitsry is merely s specific forl of politics.
snd thst is the trsnsitionsl for. of s specific socisl relstionship.

‘lhe Clsss "er of the netropolis includes the nilitsry se one of its sspects, but
csnnot be reduced to it. This reduction is typicsl of nilitsrisn. Hespons ss
well es the techniques of cadet sre instrunents of revolutionsry sction, instru-
nents slongside other instrusente. But the bssis for this sction nust slwsys be
clesr, it is the socisl content of the chsnge thst it seeks.

‘l'he Guerrills Perry is rsther the psrty of socisl revolution, of cultursl revo-
lution. of the ‘l'rsnsition to (to-mien.

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the imperialist netropolis, the proletarian revolution is necessarily a
social revolution: proletarian in the content of scientific projections of new
social relationships that would break the bourgeois monopoly of their present
planning, as Inch as in the forms of power of its beconing.

In other words, it goes through ell social relationships and it is not content
with favoring one. let us say the econonic or the political-military. Limita-
tions of this kind, which in any case survive as mortgages of the past on the
present, oust be energetically liquidated.

The relationships of power between the classes cannot be overturned by saving
only on the political terrain, on the level of nilitary confrontation and least
of all on the econonic level. The Metropolitan Proletariat nust learn to nove

simultaneously and in different ways on all terrains, within all social rela-
tionships.

And it is only in order to destroy the syste- of bourgeois political power, first
of all its state, that the Metropolitan Proletariat nut in turn perfors poli-
tical acts. The political act par excellence, is in fact the overthrow of
existing power and the dissolution of old social relationships. But such an act
is not the soul nor the sin of proletarian revolution: instead it is its "inter-
nal guise." He affirn that proletsrian power is political only in its external
form, while it is social in its content. It is political in that it destroys

the state; social in that it collectively builds new social relationships and s
new classless society.

0.) There no longer exists an art of war, but the art of social war; there no
longer exists a plan of war. but the social plan of war; there no longer exists
a functional separation between "strategic calculation" and "practical calcula-
tion," but both coexist united and distinct at each stage of the evolution of
the Class "er for (to-anion.

The art of social war leads to achievenent of the Plsn of Transition to Co-u-
nisn. around which it revolves according to n iron discipline. In this sense,
it is the focus of general direction of revolutionary war. It is the art of the
final defeat of the eneny and of the establish-ent of transition to con-union.

‘lhe social plan of war organizes within the cycle and within various phases of

the cycle, the final defeat in historically possible and necessary cyclical forts.
Purthernore. the social plan of war strategically and tactically weds the final
defeat of the eneny on the one hand; and on the other, it weds in possible

torus, that have been prevented by the real domination of capital, the progress

of establish-eat of co-unist transition. To take the first step scans, in a
certain sense, to begin to take the last step.

(5) The social plan of war, aside fro- the conduct of the war, approxinstes the

absolute fore of war. It is integrated along the lines of principal actions
which attack the principal pole of the doeinant gravitation centers of the class

enemy’s power.

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

Starting with these praises, it concentrates its attack to the sexin- in as
aany principal actions as there are dominant poles of the principal caters of
gravity. Therefore. it is not limited to attacking the heart of the state. but
begins to destroy its vital ganglia.

(6) All this is still not enough. within the social practice based on the
«articulation/destructionIconstruction dialectic, there is an interaction, a
joining, of all the elensnts that characterize the action of the Guerrilla-
Party as mltidiaensional action.

The Guerrilla-Party acts along the entire arc of social relations. Bven though
it concentrates its fire on practice, in a cyclical process. on the principal
pole of the centers of gravity of eneny power. it noves simultaneously and in a
differentiated aanner on all terrains, within all social relationships.

Even though it has a very clear "nain objective." it does not neglect ”second-
ary objectives." They are necessarily couple-entary to the “principal objec-
tive." They exist around and within it and in substance, they constitute it.

It is within this dialectic that the duration and the rhyth- of the camaign is
established.

It is a rhythn that is developed over a long period of tine: the tile necessary
to pursue the principal objective upon which the canpsip is founded. ‘Ihe stra-
tegic principle is alive within the foundation of the camaign: "Act as rapidly
as possible," in the sense of knowing how to identify and attack one of the
centers of gravity of the iaperialist project within the correct disarticulation/
destruction/construction dialectic. Further-acre: Also alive within the develop.
aent of the capaign is the strategic principle: "Act as rapidly as possible"
in the sense of knowing how to profit by and deeper-through diverse objectives—
the contradiction in each of the spheres of social relations. fostering the
existence of the correct disarticulation/destruction/construction dialectic each
ties at its highest point.

In this sense the Canpaign is like the thousand waves that intersect, clash,

strengthen each other when nany stones are thrown into the water rather than the
concentric waves of a single stone in the water.

To act as rapidly as possible, is to fill quickly the distance that separates
the first free the last step of war; it is. thus, to take it closer to its abso-
lute forn. to absolute revolution. which today is historically possible since it
is a revolution that attacks and transform the entire arc of social relations.
Absolute because it definitively closes the book on an entire historical era.

The strategic point of View is the long-tern class war for con-miss.
An i-cdiate prospect that met iaasdiately translate—in historically deter-
ained forasntha strategic point of View are the Caapaigns of Rapid Decision.

both at the aoaent of their establith as well as in the course of their
develop-ant.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Concentration/acceleration nsans Power in Being of the netropolitan proletariat.
'l'o exist as power means to unite Bed Power live, legitiniu it, legalize it.

To legalize and legitinize Red Power nssns to make any fare of power "super-
fluoua." to extinguish it. the only for. of historically justified legality is
revolutionary legality since it is posed as the abolition of legality.

(7) In the inperialist netropolis, the conservation of one's own forces and
the annihilation of those of the any does not go back to two distinct phases
of the war: first the defense of strategy; later the counteroffensive strategy.

To preserve in order to annihilate and to annihilate in order to preserve charac-
terizes fron beginning to end the conduct of war in the inperialist metropolis.

In an historical context in which, as Mao said, "The forces of the reaction are
powerful and the forces of the revolution grow gradually" guerrilla warfare is
always in a condition of defensive strategy.

It lives in a condition of strategic encirclenent within the relationship of
general power. The strategic counteroffenaive leans producing. in a relationship
of unfavorable general power, special favorable relationships of power. It scans
to break through the encirclesent, to encircle those who encircle. And further-
more: Revolutionary metropolitan war is characterized. on the one hand, by the
"lack of a stable front line:” The instability of the lines induces a higher

degree of nobility of fighting forces. In this sense, revolutionary war is '-
war of nsneuver.

0n the other hand, it constantly acquires lore favorable power relationships:
that is, it acquires and takes a stand on increasingly stable power positions.
In this sense, revolutionary war is also a war of position.

The var of position here is the equivalent of position of power.

Maneuver makes the field of battle unlinited; the position confers on the battle-
field a character of unlimited stability. In other words, the front lines tend
toward st¢ility and the operational directions are stabilized: All the factors
of instability are progressively alininated and brought under control. All this

contributes to the opening of a new and more delicate phase: the civil war
deployed for co-nnisn.

(7) [As published. Should be "8"]. On these bases, the connections that tie
the for-a of war to the lines of war become profound in the imperialist netropo-
lis.

The center of war—the inperialiat netropolis-u-is not only a territory of state

in war, but also [the territory of] of the Metropolitan Proletariet under area.
It is a fortress for both. but with one substantial difference: Hhile the
imperialist state at war wants to naintain the Metropolitan Proletariat, chained
in the fortress in order to defend it, the Metropolitan Proletariat under arIs
wants to destroy the isperialist state and. therefore. blow up the fortress.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

The lines of wer sre for both internel-aternsl, hoth noving end confronting
esch other in the use territory. Internel lines end enternsl lines sre length-
ened end one penetretes the other. The operstions slong internsl lines end
operstions slang uternel lines teke plece st the seas tine end in the use
spece: A spstisl-teuporsl sinultsneity exists between then, yet there is s
dislecticsl distinction.

The Metropolitan Proletsriet mder srns is within the fortress. It is invisible
to the inerielist stete st wer ad visible to the assess: One is the result of
the other.

Nonetheless. it is reveeled to the eyes of the inperislist stete et wsr. exter-
nslizing itself es power. It externslises itself in order to sttsck end destroy
the inerielist stete st wsr. To destroy the fortress seens to energe fro- the
fortress: It neens the Trsnsition to Mien.

Heving reached this epex. the nexim level of invisibility coincides with the
nexime level of enternslirstion end it is inedistely end per-enently visible.

The system of Red Power becones visible becsuse it orgenizes the trensition to
miss through Cless Her. The future of the Cless Her—commisr-elreedy
exists in the present of the Cless Her. The future of the stete is thet there
will no longer he s stete. The future of the Cless Her is thet there will no

longer be eny wer.

(8) [9] In the cenpsign of repid decision. the repid peesege is: free invi-
sibility to open disclosure [externslizetion]. The cespsigns of rspid decision
constitute the "open disclosure of the invisibility" of Red Power. By exter-
nsliring—thst is ilposingnpower, they eesure victory in the stretegic field
so well es in the succession of bottles. Through such csupeigns the Ketropoli-
ten Proleteriet under erns is on the stteck in ell circuutences end in chenging
circunstences.

There is nore. They enliven the rsnks of the cosbstents in function of the en-
lsrgenent of the thester of wsr, extending both the direct effects of wer—
through the sctusl defeet of the enely-end indirect effects, through dissussion.

‘ﬂte csqsigns of repid decision proceed eccording to pertiel bettles, revolving
eround the use hericenter. The unity of the bettlee is the unity between prin-
cipel ections end secondery sctions.

[bong principel ections snd secondery ections there is estsblished s necessary
interconnection in perpetusl novenent, to the extent thet during the course of
the cycle end in the veristion of the cycle. the principel pole of the centers
of grevity of eneny cless power is trsnsforned into secondery; end vice verse.

In feet, the forner ettsck the principel pole; the letter, the secondery poles es
they because principel poles.

The necessary two-pronged chsrscter of principel sctions-secondery sctione Isles
it possible during the progress of the "er of Trensition to Co-unisn to destroy

the principel poles of cless eneny power so it chenges its eppesrence: end in
its eppeerence of todsy end tonorrow.

131

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the progress toward long-tern Class Var for Co-uniam there is an expansion
of dialectic unity within the campaigns of rapid decision: The principle of
open disclosure is increasingly affirmed on a broader scale. From the cam-
paigns of rapid decision articulated by partial battles there is a passage to
campaign articulated as large battles. Through the realization of the princi-
ple of open disclosure, therefore, the tensions and the breadth of the intrinsic
consequences of var increasingly tend to me toward extremes. The development

of canpsigns as large battles marks the passage from civil var deployed for
co-unism.

(9) [10] Bngels says, ”The arty is the orgniution that best represents the
state of the future."

Let us look at the quality of the imperialist metropolis.

The Red Army is established as the organisation of an army on a scale that is
broader than the dictatorship of the proletariat for min. It represents,

better than any other organization. class interest and the proletarian state
dictatorship's sphere of action.

Through the Red Army the possibility/necessity of inposing/exercising power
arises out of the potential of the army of revolutionary power, a nultidimen-
sionsl functionality of revolutionary paler. Thus, the Red Army is the organi-
zation par excellence of the revolutionary var. In this sense it is the organi-
zation best suited to the final solution. Therefore. as Engels said, it is the
organisation that best represents the state of the future: the state that abo-
lishes itself following the destruction of the imperialist state at var. As
such, it is the leans of edification of the dictatorship of the proletariat for

co-uunisn that cannot be elininated because it eliminates the dictatorship of
the proletariat.

A system of Red Power which does not adopt this organization free the beginning,
which does not constitute such specific unexcludsble organisms in possible and
necessary form is not edifiable.

The Red Army is also the unexcludable purpose for which, from the beginning,
the edification of the systen of revolutionary power nust tend.

The systen of revolutionary power in formation, from the beginning to the end,
refers back to the formation of the Red Army.

In the relationship between revolutionary power. that is, the dictatorship of
the proletarist in developnent. and its suprae organ, that is, the Red Army.
the revolutionary policy-var dialectic reaches its culmination: The revolution-
ary power creates its organization. the organisation of power develops the revo-
lutionary potter to destroy any kind of power.

(10) [11] In the imperialist netropolis. the Red Army is the organisation par
excellence for the dissolution of bourgeois pover as vell as for the dissolution
of any possible form of poser.

132

I‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In it the Hetropolitan Proletariat under ans is reorganized as a class: The
Red Amy is the suprene organization of the proletarian reorganization.

In it exists the recowosition of all social practices.

In it exists the social proletarian individual who, by transforndng all of
society. transforms hi-elf and, therefore. his organs of haulage/power. The
Red Arty is the last tenant of the old society, but also the first organization
that constructs the new.

Proletarian knowledge. connecting the social projects in the progran. is wedded
directly to power; the exercise of power is the exercise of thousands of bits of

knowledge in the transition to co-Inisn.

‘l'he unity of knowledge and power is the unity of Social Planning md Social Change.
The Red Army is the organization best suited for such a task of planning/change,
both in its quality of organisational totality as well as in its real articulations.

The Red Army is the organ of social revolution.

And it is the proletarian ”No!" anaed with thousands of bits of knowledge and
thousands of sources of power, organised and reconposed as the social totality
that cannot be reduced to isperialist donination.

It is not an "any," but arned knowledge.

It is not the power of weapons. but the weapon that. through knowledge. can, and
through power knows.

Marx said, "'lhe nsrely political revolution leaves the supports of the home
intact." As the suprene organ of social revolution, 'the Red Army destroys the
supports of the house because it adopts the "point of view of totality."

The advance of the lied Arny on unlinitad fronts of the class war for col-min is
the advance-ant fron political emancipation to social enancipation.

6. The Metropolitan Proletariat

The metropolitan proletariat is the result of three interacting forces produced
by the crisis:

(a) The production-restructurization which is the new site of the productive
base that leads to the continuing disintegration of the working class, that is to
say. to the restriction of its productive abilities and to the increase of nar-
ginsl cad/or salaried activity;

(1:) The high nobility/circulation of each proletariat .ong the various patterns
that become a typifying and generalized factor of the proletarian condition;

(c) lhe crisis of the influence of bourgeois and revisionist ideology. ad par-
ticularly of certain nyths such as the ability of capital to ensure gradual and

secure progress, the work ethic, etc.; the affirmation of a co-snist conscience,
which is trmgressive. and decisively turned toward the future.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is the irreversible and general character of the crisis that establishes the
irreversible and proletarian interest-«f all the patterns of the Marginal Pro-
letariet, considered as a class - to overturn the present Capitalist Means of
Production.

This does not mean that within the Metropolitan Proletsriat production does not
objectively maintain the central position and that therefor-e the workers engaged
in production are entitled to a political centrality and revolutionary direc-
tion in the process of class recoaposition. From this it follows that the other
proletariat: personnel (sidelined, non-productive, etc.), since they are frag-
ments of the disintegration of the "orking Clr-e in the process of the crisis,
do not at all appear as its "external" allies, but rather as an internal strati-
fication of a single class: the Metropolitan Proletariat.

within this framework we believe it would be an error to resort to the revision-
ist and Gramscian concept of "hegemony" which presupposes the sepsratenesa of
the Working Class from other proletarians and the subjection of the latter to
its interests. As Gramsci says, "The fact of hegemony undoubtedly presupposes
that the groups upon which hegemony is exercised will have their interests and
positions taken into accomt, and that a certain equilibriu-s of compromises will
be formed." But this is precisely a compromise, a “mediation" between substan-
tially different interests. In short, the Working Class is something else!

This is precisely what we now deny when we affirm that the Metropolitan Ptole-
tsriat is "the unity of the numerous and dominating workers." When we affirm
that it includes all the productive workers, manual laborers, the reserve indus-
trial srmy, the proletarized classes and those who are becoming proletarised and
who, for this reason, constitute the very largest majority of our country's

population .

In conclusion, the reconposition of the Metropolitan Proletsriat within the pat-
tern of the metropolitan mass worker cannot take place unless various strata
which compose it deny themselves or do away with their specific characteristics;
in like fashion, the working class of this reconposition [illegible] denying
itself as a labor force that gives value to capital.

The inability to understand the concept of Metropolitan Proletariat leads the
comrades to replace it with the category of "people," as a subject of the revolu-
tionary process in the cities. This category on the one hand recalls the Third
World theory of "popular fronts," and on the other, the well-known Maoist notion.
In both cases the word "people" means a mix of different classes whose political
unity is determined by the worker hegemony exercised on them through the party

of the Horking Class.

Now. as we have seen, in the general-historical crisis of the Capitalist Means of
Production, the Metropolitan Proletariat does not at all envision itself as a

congolomeration of classes, nor is the party the vanguard only of the Vorking
Class. The process of reconposition of the Metropolitan Proletariat is in fact

a political re-fusion of various strata into a single class.

1310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the contrary, the concept of "people" alludes to a "nsdiation" of separate
interests of the working class with the specific ones of other classes. This

is why we believe it is wrong to speak of a "long-term people's civil war."

It is not superfluous to recall that in the imperialist metropolis characterised
by the real doeinati'on of capital over labor, and over all social relations, the
form and content of the proletarian revolution coincide and become concrete in
the social practice of Transition to Cosmnism. 0n the contrary, in the
Bolshevik and Chinese revolutions, precisely because of the non-coincidence of
fore and content, it was possible to create alliances of different classes into
"popular fronts" under the hegenony of the working class; that is, it was pos-
sible that democratic-bourgeois substance would be perpetuated in proletarian
forms.

An exasple of this - the slogan, "The land to the farmers" launched during the
1917 Revolution by the bolshevik Party which evidently had a democratic-bourgeois
character, meant the denand for private property and land ownership.

The non-coincidence between forn and content of the revolution in Russia and in
China is explained by the fact that these revolutionary processes developed in
societies characterized by the "fornsl domination" of capital over labor and
over social relationships; that is, characterized by the fact that capital was
iaposed on productive relationships, but not yet attended to all social rela-
tionships.

It is evident in the imperialist metropolis, and therefore also in our country,
that to once again propose, even only tactically, the plans elaborated by the
conunist parties in other phases of capitalist development is not only a theore-
tical error but leads to the proposal of a revolutionary strategy that is
entirely inadequate to the new levels of the penetration of capital in all social
relationships. In fact, it is a natter of leading a revolutionary process that
would place the Transition to Counties on the agenda imadiately.

7. The Guerrilla Party of the Metropolitan Proletariat

(1) In this cycle, the leap to party status is an objective necessity imposed
by the revolution-counterrevolution relationship. It is through the leap to
party status that the revolutionary solution of total war is absorbed by the
classes of society. '

This leap is not a willful act of the Fighting Columnist Organizations. but rather
the unexcludable breadth of the relationship that arose historically between
revolution and counterrevolution in this cycle.

It translates, in the relationship among the classes, the objective stabilisation
of that pernanent relationship of absolute enmity that ha developed among the
classes. In turn, the absolute ennity is the reflection of the crisis in the
Capitalist Hethod of Production in the phase of the real domination of capital,

a phase in which all relations of capitalist production, in order to preserve
themselves, produce and reproduce total war against the Metropolitan Proletariat

on all levels of the economic-social formation and in all interstices of social
relationships .

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is only the party that, in the changed cycle can activate and enlarge the
edification of the system of red power. merely acting as a party, which was
characteristic of the Fighting Communist Organisations is no longer sufficient.

The epochal leap to communist transition, to the establishment and the free
multilateral development of the communist social individual, demands the leap to
party status: the one is unequivocally and rigorously tied to the other.

Without the leap to party status, there can be no establishment of a Red Power
System. no dictatorship of the proletariat. no transition to communism.

(2) The leap to party status makes it possible to organise and unfold the aims
of the Transition to Communism. Not only that: it activates and develops all
its levers and its organizational units. Furthermore: It models all its deci-
sions. Finally: It recomposea the Metropolitan Proletariat as a social subject
of the revolutionary process, as a universal class which emancipates all of
humanity by emancipating itself.

To do away with the leap to party status now means liquidating the class war for
the transition to communism, liquidating the historical and strategic tasks in-
posed by eventsat this cycle.

To delay the leap to party status to an uncertain and vague future means to fail
in its own function as s vanguard and to practice a mass line that has been his-
torically made obsolete, which knows about and speaks of armed propaganda while
instead it is a matter of beginning to organize the war of esancipation from
capitalist labor.

To act as a party in this cycle means to establish the leap to party status,
means to become and to be a party.

(3) Having identified and indicated the objective need for the leap to party
status does not exhaust the work of establishing the political foundations of
the party, nor does it throw light on the form that the party historically must
take.

The form of the revolutionary party is always historically determined and. there-
fore, changes with changing historical periods and the corresponding forms and
qualities assumed by the revolutionary process.

In the final analysis, the form of the party is always determined by the relation-
ship that is established between the relationships of production and forces of
production since it is this specific relationship which, by regulating produc-
tion and re-production of social wealth, regulates and models the progress, the
forms and the objectives of revolution.

The form of the party must always be measured and developed in relation to that
trend and form and those objectives. It does not predetermine anything, but it
is determined. In turn, by complying with these objective laws. interpreting
them scientifically. it models revolutionary strategy. converting it into a
program and social project, into the revolutionary organization of the masses.

136

FOR OFIICIAI.USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(’0) The present historical period. in which the doninant relatiomhips of pro-
duction constitute the aaxinun obstacle to the development of productive forces.
is followed by and lust be followed by a period of social revolution. ﬂith this
the revolutionary process is fundanentally qualified with a social character.

By virtue of the structural antagonisn between the relationships of doainant
production and productive forces, the revolutionary process leaps over the

sphere of the political, i-ediately taking on the aspects of a social revolu-
tion.

After all, Marx already had written that, ”Political intelligence is political
intelligence because it thinks within the linits of politics... The aore acute
it i., the livelier it is, the less is it capable of understanding social evils...
The more unilateral, that is to say, therefore, the more perfect political in-
telligence is, the note it believes in the omipotence of will and the sore it

is blind to the natural and spiritual linits of will and the nore incapable it

is of discovering the source of social evils." And again. "So long as the pro-
letarians think in a political form, they see the source of all evil in the will
and all the renedies in power and the defeat of a certain for. of the state.
Political will hides the roots of social poverty. falsifies the understanding

of their real aim: their political intelligence deceives their social instinct.”

Again referring to Marx, it is to be observed that "the col-son political nature
is the nature of the states." The aim [illegible] is the conquest of the state.
The naintenance of state power that has been conquered transforns the doninant
class into a ferocious oppressor: The state is always—and it cannot fail to
be—the instrument of oppression of one class over the other.

(5) The nature of the proletarian revolution in the netropolis is not the con-
quest of political power but the resolute defeat of all foras of power and, with
this. of all forns of the state.

The proletarian social revolution knows that "hunan life is more universal than
political life," and therefore it can and must dissolve not only the putrified
imperialist [illegiblez state but also the narch [illegible] capitalist.

Con-union needs the political act of seizing power, "since it needs destruction
and dissolution." However, "where its organizational activity has begun, where
it nanifests its sin and its spirit, that is more it establishes its political
image."

The proletarian revolution uses politics as an "inage" to affirn the social sub-
stance of the epochal leap to the real co-Iunity. When this sdastance is
affirned, the image itself is put aside and thrown into the dustbin of history.
The proletarian social revolution is the death of politics which, as an "(ille-
gible] totality" at one tine dominated the progress of revolution. That pro-
gress however qualified the bourgeois revolution since the bourgeoisie and only
the bourgeoisie adopted the point of view of the state. The proletarian social
revolution breaks decisively with this tradition because it adopts the point of
view of concrete totality, that is to say, society and the social subject of
universal emancipation of productive forces, beginning with the fundanentel
force: nan.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(6) "Revolution is not only necessary because the douinating class cannot be
defeated in any other way, but also became the class that defeats it can shake
off the old dirt and become capable of establishing a society on new fonda-
tions only through a revolution." (Gerann ideology).

Commis- neans establishing society on a new basis.
This leap is the passage "fro. the reign of need to the reign of liberty."

This leap is the passage froa prehistory to a history that is truly and entirely
hut-an.

The only way to do this is to break the capitalist relationships of production.
the corresponding social relationships. the capitalist division of labor, etc.

Using the Paris Col-me as an exane. Engels said that the state of dictator-
ship of the proletariat was not a state in the real sense of the tern but a
col-unity, since by abolishing classes and extinguishing itself it reunifies

individuals into a real commity that is no longer separated froa, and above it,
as was the state.

In the Transition to Conunisa, co-unity neans the reunification of all social
practices of deatruction/construction/reunification of knowledge through power.
Ihis reunification runs through all the decisions of the Red Systen of Power, its
agents and its organizations”

To build the Transition to the Con-mist Systen also aeans developing co-unist
social individuals and the practice of knowledge/power. of destruction/construc-
tion.

Here, on this threshold, the revolutionary process is carried to its highest
expression. After all. Marx hiaself seys, "The antagonisn between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie is a war of class against class, a war that, carried to its
highest expression, is a total revolution."

(7) In the [illegible] of politics [illegible] the couplexity [illegible] of the
revolutionary process. Therefore, the party cannot be exclusively and predomi-
nantly political in form.

The "power of ares" and their language do not evoke absolute power and the know-
ledge/power which reunifies social [illegible] "absolute power." Therefore.
the party cannot adopt an exclusively codsatant fora.

"In the imperialist netropolis the birth of guerrilla warfare is ilaediately cha-
racterized as a political and nilitary dialectical unity. It is no longer the
"two who becone one," but "the one that is divided into two." No longer a

party on the one hand and an em on the other, buts aGuerrilla Party.

...'l‘he Guerrilla Party that the Metropolitan Proletariat intends to build is not
a sinple political party, just as it is not exclusively a fighting party. It is
not a sinple political party, as for exanple the Bolshevik Party and the

1.38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Cos-mist Glineae Party, became at that tins in history the centers of gravity
of class conflict was no longer based on the political terrain, but on the
social terrain. It is not an exclusively fiditing party because the revolu-

tionary Class War does not—nor does it prevalently or exclusively-dean I111-
tary codat.”

These are the bases and the principle of inspiration of the forn of the Party in
the netropolis.

The party assunes the social for. of guerrilla varfare, which is social since it
united within itself all social practices.

(8) The Guerrilla Party is the suprens agent of the invisibility and evocation
of the knovledge/pover of the httopolitan Proletariat: invisibility to the
eneny and open disclosure against the many coexist in it at the highest level
of synthesis.

This neana that the sore invisible the party is and the sore it discloses itself
in regard to the Inparialist Global Comterrevolution, the nore it is visible and
it because an inner part of the htropolitan Proletariat: that is, the nore it
connunicates with the Metropolitan Proletsriat. And it co-unicatea relation-
ships of power, social relationships. exercise of knowledge, exercise of power.

In this the Guerrilla Part is the party of social conunication.

That is, it par-its society to organize, to recoqose and to transform the spon-
taneity of the netropolitan party into the unity of the my which pulses and is
enriched within the Red Power Systen. In turn this reacts in terns of the
party itself ad transform it. The real dialectic intention of knavledse/pover
which is unchained by the dictatorship of the proletariat in construction thus
transforns those who transforl.

Not only that: The nore the invisibility/disclosure permits the affirnation
of the social substance of Red Power, the nore the party forn becones visible,
and thus, the nore visible becones the fort- of Transition to (Jo-mien.

The nore visible this transition, the sore visible is the transitory character of
the Party's need.

Just as the dictatorship of the proletariat is the final forn of possible and

necessary power, as the Red Amy is the final forn of the any. so the Guerrilla
Party is the final forn of the possible and necessary party.

Once the classes are abolished, the state, the arny and the party disappear.
Social contradictions will no longer be antagonistic. Through their solution
social sen, as Marx has said, affirn their were and definitive donination over
nature and over their own nature.

The capacity for enjoyment will lean enjoymt at the highest natural, hunan and
social level. The capacity for enjoylsent and to enjoy leans the unilateral deve-
lopment of husn social enjoy-ants. A hunen social cot-unity for the first tine

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
will [illegible] the "festival" in the relationship of social nan-nature.
Nature itself will for the first tins be coepletely hman and social.

(9) The Guerrilla Party inserts into this epochal framework the diserticulation/
destruction of the imrialist state on the one hand. and on the other, conquest]
organization of the Metropolitan Party on the terrain of the war of Transition
for (2min.

There can be no other dialectic of destruction/construction outside this fr-e-
work.

It is these epochal sins that render the destruction/construction dialectic objec-
tively possible and subjectively organisable. In turn, this dialectic projects

and constructs, so to speak, the spochsl sins in their historically detenined
form within the concrete present.

The Guerrilla Party is at the center of the incessant work of translation of
epochsl sins into social practices. And vice versa.

In this sense, the Guerrilla Party is the "abstract” bearer of the Programs of
Transition to Ca-Imisn as well as the cyclical translation of it into a General
Cyclical Political Program. Its path is fron the abstract to the specific. Also
belonging to it is the path that, starting fron practical application, and con-

verting the progran into practical application. goes fron the specific to the
general.

To go fron the specific to the general neans starting fron the Metropolitan Pro-
letarist to arrive at party status.

To nove fron the abstract to the specific neam starting with the party and
returning to the Hetropolitan Proletarist.

In this conplex and rich dialectic, then, it is not only true that the Program
of Transition to Cosmnisn, the General welical Political Programs, are present.
but a further decisive elenent is added: the specific Inediate Progran of
power, since it refers concreter to the inediete needs of the Hetropolitan
Proletarist.

The tern definition of prograns refers to this couple: dialectic and to all its
interacting elenents.

The definition of prograns exists in this interaction in continuous novenent.

It is to this interaction in the concrete deveth of the class war and in
its specific interconnections that there is the insinuation, the novenent and
transformation of the dynanic among all the expressions of the Red Power System:
party, revolutionary nass organisations, revolutionary ness novenents.

Inextricably, the definition of prograns refers to the construction of the uses
line since the program can exist only in the ooncretenesa of the revolutionary
theory/practice that organizes and transform the "spontaneity of the eesses."

140

F0. OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dinension of the program—frail the general to the cyclical up to ‘the int-
diate, is narkad by unity. Nonetheless, within it there exists distinctions.
The relationship that links the variet- progr-s is therefore dialectical, a
unity/saparatenass. This nesns it is not possible to first define a progrn and
later another and all the others. Bach progran considered singly necessarily
refers to all the others: by itself it is inconplete. It is in the definition
of program that each progran begins to find its character of nature conplata-
neas. It begins to find, we said, because they altogether acuc'n and can find

only their nost nature identity in the revolutionary stmggla." [No open-quote].

It can be concluded that the definition of prograns and their developnent to
naturity [illegible] identity is- inscribed on the highest level of unity in the
theory/practice relationship.

The Guerrilla Party and the Definition of Program
[Illegibla]

The definition of the program qualifies the essence of the party and distin-
guishes it fron other expressions of the Red Power Systen. In this sense, there
can be no party without a definition of prograns.

The definition of prograns, further-ore, qualifies and finalizes the relation-
ship of the party with the nasses. In this sense, there is no Party and defini-
tion of progress without a relationship with the nsssas. This is a relationship
of reciprocal nodal construction starting fron the nasses [illegible], the
party is "nodeled" and is finalized as an aware and planned decision of the had
Power Systen; the nasses affected by the ﬂare and planned decision of the
party are "nodeied" in the sense that they are reunifiad, transforned and orga-
nized on the revolutionary terrain.

This nesns that the party—the Party—is continually united with the whole-the
macs—even while renaining continually separate. The party and the nasses

together constitute an open totality that is ”opened" increasingly, in the sense
that each one, noving into the other, changes itself, and therefore the other,

and therefore, the total quality of the revolutionary process.

This is why a characteristic trait of the party's existence is the definition
of program.

This is why definition of progress cannot be separate fron the davelopnent of the
nass line, that is, placed outside (and worse, before) the Party-Kass relation-
ship.

The Party-Mass relationships cannot escape-ss no relationship and determination
can ever escapeufron the repercussions of the historically changeable character
of all social relationships. The Party-Haas relationship, in other words, is
itself an historically datarnined relationship.

This nesns that today, on the one hand, speaking of Party-Haas one nust nore pre-
ciaely speak of the Guerrilla Party-Metropolitan Proletariat relationship; on the

141

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
other hand. that such a relationship is not generically deter-ined and finalized
by the prospect of organizing the masses on the revolutionary terrain, but aore
pertinently, it is deter-ined and finalised by the prospect of organising the
Hetropolitan Proletariat on the terrain of the War of Transition to Co-uniea.

Only the Guerrilla Party can reunify the lietropolitan Proletariat.

Only in the historical era of the Metropolitan Proletariat could the need for
the Guerrilla Party be produced.

Without the establish-ant of the Guerrilla Party it is not possible to unify the
Metropolitan Proletsriat.

‘l‘o rennin outside of this establishment, not to pronote it, not to direct it, not
to build it in a leap that redefines the revolutionary social practices. scans

to iaprecisely refer to the Hetropolitan l’roletariat, but note generically to the
nssses; it leans to refer without pertinence to the War of Transition for Conu-
nisn but still generically to revolution.

In both these cases, not only is there a failure to understand the objective needs
and the possible progress tovard the epochsl leap to min, but the very
salient characteristics of the cycle of transition are lost. In any case it
could not have been otherwise.

Definition of the progrn/construction of the ease line neans construction of
social unity (political, military, ideological, etc.) of the Metropolitan Prole-
tariat. The epochsl leap to co-rnisn depends upon the social unity of the
Hetropolitan Proletariat. This unity, after all, can exist only if it is pene-
trated, supplied and nolded by the epochsl social stbstnce of the leap to
oomnisn.

The construction of the ease line. therefore, the construction of social unity of
the netropolitan party develop like three indivisible links that constitute an
indestructible chain: Progran of Transition to (Io-mien, General cyclical Poli-
tical Program, Ilsediste Political Progru.

Each of these three links is related to the other and each flovs into the other:
altogether and separately they find their identity and their basis for estab-
lishnent and develop-cut in social revolutionary practice.

The Guerrilla Party of the Metropolitan Proletarist is distinguished precisely
because of its capacity to go through each of these links and to reconpose then
incessantly in a chain of profoundly united relationships. No space of the
"social being"-vithin which reside the nultiplicity of unities that conpoee the
Hetropolitan Proletsriat and the nultidinensionality of the practices of
knowledge/power that flor fron then-is renoved or can be renoved fron the
Guerrilla Party's field of action.

The sphere vithin which the Guerrilla Party noves is the social universe of the
unification of all the social practices and all the levels that constitute the
Metropolitan Proletariat. In this universe there are no space-tine divisions.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'he "before" and the "after." the logic of the two, three... sequence "go to
hell." or better. social practice senb then to hell.

Precisely because of this order of reasons, the Progran of Transition to Co-u-
nisn, the General Cyclical Political Progrn. and the l-ediats Political Pro-
gran are not separate fron each other. To break the uity/aaparateness that

links than in space and tine is equivalent to breaking the chain and therefore

breﬁing the totality of social revolutionary practice that constitutes the ‘l‘ran-
sition to Camden.

But if the Progran of Transition to Ca-unisn. the General Cyclical Political
Progran, and the 1-sdiste Political Progr- elwaye constitute an indivisible
unity, a scale of priorities exists within this historically deter-load totality.

The neaning of priority is two-pronged.

Regarding the foundation and possible davelopnents of the strategic tendencies of
the Class War for Co-unian, the Program of Transition to Cos-mien is central
since it is the naxinm abstraction of the general.

Regarding the neterial iaplensntation of revolutionary social practice. the l-e-
diats Political Prograns are the nerve centers since they are the naxinun con-
crete expression of the particular.

To politically and socially reconnect the Progran of Transition to Miss with
the l-ediate Political Progran within the cycle. is the -~cific task of the
General Cyclical Political Progran since it is the cyclic. nvntheeis between the
general abstraction and the concrete expression of the particular.

I-ediate Political Prograns are not only reconnected and find their cowleted
identity within the General Cyclical Political Progrn, but in this they cyclic-
ally bring alive the Transition to Co-Inian in all strata, and therefore. in
the reconposed Metropolitan Proletarist. Even though having been deternined by
the forns brought about by the transition, only they can supply these ferns and
confer upon than their concrete character.

The concrete expression of the General chical Political Progr- is here, spe-
cifically, the concrete expression of the Progran of Transnission to Co-unisn
in the cycle.

In this way. each lnnediate Political Progranneven though it is directed toward
and built upon a given stratun of classes—refers to all the others: the organi-
ration of one stratun of classes on the terrain of the War of ‘l‘ramition to
Cos-unisn for co-Inisn takes place in strict unity with all the others. This
is a law of social revolution in the netropolis. No organization of e stratun
of classes exists outside of the political and social recomosition of the Metro-
politan Proletarist.

Thus. if it is true that without a General Cyclical Political Progran there can
be no Iuediate Political Progran, the reverse also is true. Again, the rela-

tionship and the dialectic do not tolerate reductionisn and diagranatic presen-
tation of any kind outside of Harsist-Laninist dialectical naterialisn.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the Program of Transition to Co-unism refers to the epochal leap of col-u-
nism, the General cyclical Political Program refers to the need for analysis of
the cycle and how to bring alive the Transition to Co-Inism within it and with-
ing historically determined forms.

These requirements not only must contribute to solving the problem of identify-
ing the "central target" to be attached. but also to the identification of
"central terrains of struggle" to be used and the social objectives to be
achieved. 1he General Cyclical Political Program is not merely s plan of attack
on the heart of the state. but also a program for the development of new rela-
tionships of knowledge/power among the classes. with the aim of abolishing and
achieving the social transformation of capitalist society. In short, the General
(hrclical Political Program contains-within the specific form of the cycle and
on the line of its possible and necessary progress—an indivisible dialectic
between destruction and construction.

To favor destruction means to transform the General Cyclical Political Program
into a military offensive against the apparatus of the imperialist state.

To favor construction means to transform the General chical Political Progre-
into vulgar and crude propaganda for a "counterpower" that coexists alongside.
and not against. the bourgeois power.

In their turn the lanediate Political Programs refer to the need to start with
the immediate needs of the Metropolitan Proletarist.

Here some things must be made clear.

Only a purely formal reference to Leninism can result in the description of the
establishment of I-ediate Political Programs for the Metropolitan Proletariet as
"economism." Today, in fact, "economies" cannot be the "childhood sickness of
metropolitaniem” as we shall see.

Actually, Lenin does not pose the matter in these terms. He does not tire of
warning of the existence of "spontaneity and spontaneity," urging the party to
very carefully consider "the forward progress made by the movement." Spon-
taneity for him. finally. constitutes the "embryonic form of consciomneas."
Therefore, to speak with scorn of

[Page missing]

The inediate political programs do not alone take shape from this dialectic. but
the Organizations of Revolutionary Masses are born and develop from it as is the
missing determinant of the Red Power System. since Revolutionary Kass Movements
and the Party whose genesis is mutually influenced. are determinants already in
existence.

The Revolutionary Haas Organizations constitute the missing link in the Red Power
System since they are not born, nor are they reproduced, spontaneomly. 'lhey are
the precise result of a precise dialectic: that between the Party and the
Revolutionary Haas Movement.

41.1..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even when there will he thouaande of Revolutionary Haaa Organization, there-
fore, they continue to take on the character of the aiaaing link in the revolu-

tionary power ayetee.
8. The Progran of Transition to (Jo—mien

Without a Progran of Tranaition to Con-union that would explain the aociel oh-
jectivea of war, it ia not poaaible to identify all the proletarian coqonenta
that are objectively involved in it.

Thia prograa on the other hand, does not grow out of nothing, but 10 yeara of
proletarian atrugale, of practical and radical critician in the {actoriee and in
the capitaliat aocial iornation, have in very general term produced an outline
of ita eaaential attatance that we nay emerire aa followa:

~Reduction of working houra: Everyone auat work, but work leaa; eaaaive freeing
of tine for aocial action and developeent of aocial conditiona for evolved uae of
that tine;

—A new diatrihution of manual labor and intellectual labor, of atudy and work,
in each individual and within the apan of a lifetine;

«Abolition of private property, and the reatoration of wealth to aociety;

«Overthrow of the enerciac of power and of the planning of collective ai- on all
levela of aociel life;

-Retraining in production, in the Ian-nature relationahip, on the haaie of valuea
of uae that are collectively defined and hiatorically poeaihle;

-A shift in our aocial developnent according to the principlea of .1 effective
proletarian internationalian.

The condition of this progr- it to do away with capitaliat relationahipa of pro-
duction, of production baled on the value of trade.

Utopia doea not enter into it. Here it in a matter of a prosran that, aa Marx
would say, "Doea not leave the pillara of the houae atmdins" aince ita founda-
tiona have already fully natured. It ia a latter of a proaran conatantly related
to the atmslea of the lore oonacioua proletarian auhjecta who violently break
with the doaineering and conaervetive tendenciea of capitaliat develop-ant and
clash in antagoniatic waya with the atate.

However, it ia a letter of a program that aeeka ita loot nature identity in revo-
lutionary atruggle. The growth of Red Power coincidea with thia aearch and it ia
up to the Party to lake iteelf ita pronoter.

9. Criaia, War and Proletarian Internationaliaa

(l) The general law: The criaia of inperialiaa generatea war.

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Soviet revisioniam and Yankee imperialism which exist under the s-e mantle,
have coemitted so nany crinas that the revolutionary centers throughout the
world will not permit them to reeain unpunished.

"Peoples of all nations arise. A new historical period of struggle against Yankee
imperialism, against Soviet-social iqsrialism. has already begun.

"If war causes revolution, as well as if revolution prevents war. the days of
Yankee imperialism and Soviet revisionism are now numbered.

Proletarians of all countries unite." [lo source given].
2. 'lhe Pour Contradictions lave becone Three

The foun fundamental contradictions of our time, as they were explained by Mao in
the 9th and 10th Congresses of the Guineas Co-Inist Party--that is before ‘l‘sng
Chiao Ping developed his bourgeois theory of "Three Vorlds"-can be smarited

as follows:

--'l'he contradiction betwe- the world proletariat and the world bourgeoisie is
the principal one. It goes through all the [illegible] social fornations domi-
nated by the Capitalist hens of Production, including that of "state nonopoly
capitalists" (USSR. Grins, etc);

--‘!he contradiction between the socialist and imperialist nations, considering
as "socialist" those nations in which the proletarian dictatorship dominates. and
including among the ieperialist nations also those with state capitalism;

-The contradiction between oppressed peoples and nations on the one hand, and
imperialisn on the other:

-'l'he contradictions within the imperialist system long states, financial groups,
imperialist mltinationals.

In the past 10 years such water has passed under the bridge. The cultural revolu-
tion, even though temporarily. was defeated and the bourgeois line of Tang won
out. It is always difficult to find nations in which the dictatorship of the
proletariat actually dominates.

Therefore it seems to us that in the present phase the second great contradiction
in order of importance should be put into last place.

Despite this, the contradiction between the world proletariat and the world bour-
geoisie has becone nore acute and more widespread; and as a result of this. the
other two referred to are becoming nore explosive.

This seens to us to be the [illegible] that characterizes the l9w's.

Despite those who maintain that the tendency toward war prevails over the tendency

toward revolution, we naintain the opposite: Revolution is the forenoet tendency
in the era of dying ieperialism.

1106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When we speak of i-perielisn we refer as such to the novenent of private nonopo-
listic capital as to that of nations run by state capitalisn.

"Re wat to be very explicit concerning this point. lnperialiss end sociel
inerialisn are two specific variables in the capitalist neans of production in
this phase: private capitalisn and state cspitalisn. They forn an inperielist
systen in which there is unity as well as contradiction: Unity in the Capitalist
Means of Production; contradiction between its for- of geographical and his-
toricelly detenined existence.

”Modern revisionis- ie the ideological, political, end neteriel expression of a
sector of world inperielisn: social inerielisn, an organic conponent (and also
in contradiction) of the clsss dictatorship of ilperielist bourgeoisie.” [ho
source given].

The general law of crisis runs through the entire inperieliet systen.

The nain contradiction in this systen is that between the nultinetional nonopolis-
tic systen heeded by the United States, and the state nonopolistic systea headed
by the USSR.

3. Unlike what happened in "arid Her I and world Her 11, the present one hes a -
triple character:

«It is a class war in each sector of inperielisn;
--It is a war between peoples and nations oppressed by inperialisn:
--It is a war between sectors of inperialisn and within each one of then.

This is because the export of capital end the "cowtertendency" of the crisis of
overproduction react violently as such within ereu thet export capital as in
areas in which it is establishing its doninetion.

(a) In the areas that export capital (reel doninetion) the class war tends to
essune the fore of a total sociel war for the transition to couunisn.

Cb) In the areas penetrated by internationalized capital, the war tends to
assue nultiple forns that are defined by the degree of developeent of productive
forces and of social relations within which capital hes taken root ad has begun
[illegible2 to inpose itself as a relationship. Wars of national liberation)

[As published].

(c) Conflicts nultiply between states, financial groups and nultinetional con-
panies within each inperielist sector.

The intertwining of these three characteristics explains the particular fora of
present war which is a world process. that is si-ultaneous and interacting, of
guerrilla warfare and revolutionary struggle in the cities. were of national
liberation. mltiplicetion of hotbeds of direct nilitsry conflict between the
imperialist and the social inperielist sectors.

1107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘lhe "tendency toward war" is not, therefore, an incubation of latent tendencies
that are getting ready to explode at an "a nonant" so-tine in the future.

6. [Illegibla2 of our discussion interest [as published] now is to ewhasise
the fact that the i-perialist sector in which our social forntion is placed is
also characterized by an mequal develop-ant of capital.

The political forts of this unequal developnsnt is that of a aysten of inperialist
states interrelated (on the econouic. political and nilitary level) according to
a coqlex hierarchy at the suit of which is the United States, or, the nest
powerful capitalist nultinational.

lt nust be said. however, that there is a contradiction within the iaperialist
systen, but the united interest of the iQerialist bourgeoisie to defend the en-

tire arc of uploitation of nultinational monopolistic capital doninates in any
6382.

It therefore has established for this purpose an integrated world political-mili-
tary systen devised to intervene as ouch within each single inperialist state in
a counterrevolutionsry function as to attack each potential "external enemy."

NATO is the heart of this integrated political-ailitary system in Europe and the
Mediterranean.

5. The imperialist nations at- thenselvea for war. NATO is an organization
that defends the interests of multinational nonopolistic capital and above all
the strongest ones: the American nultinationals.

RAID is not a "defensive" institution: If it defends anything. it is only the
interests of imperialist capital.

RAID is the nerve center of the inperialist countarrevolution in Europe and the
Mediterranean

NATO neans donestic and foreign war.

Domestic war:

-Pronotes the integration of the apparatuses and standardization of antiguerrilla
theory;

-Prolaotea psychological counterguerrilla warfare through books. sass nedia. filns,
etc.. for example the libel by [Claire] Sterling ("lha Network of Terror") is
repeatedly cited by the American Secretary of State naig and the newspaper wonan

has been invited to participate in the deliverations of the 0.8. Senate Subcon-
nission on Terrorisa and Security;

«It prepares a use psychology to support the aggressive policies of ilperialisn.

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreign war!

“Integration of parts of the national armed forces into aggressive expedition-
ary forces;

-Installation of nissile bases with nuclear warheads. It is taken for granted
that every decision on their "use" sust be made solely by the Americans since
the European govern-eats have no vote in this regard.

6. ‘Ihe deepening of the crisis is the origin of the need for a tighter transla-
tionel integration of comterrevolutionary and warmongering apparatuses of im-
perialist bourgeoisie.

In this process, which naturally is disturbed by profound contradictions, the
apparatuses of the single states undergo ilportant changes.

6.1. me ideological cement of all of this is the philosophy of the American
"Nev Right" that "thinks" for nesgen ad is supported by four pillars.

-Visceral anti-Co-xnisn in the McCarthyite tradition;

"The neo-libaralisn and the neo-nonstarisn of Hilton Priednen in economics. that
redimensions state control of the novsnent of noney.

—Within the states: cuts in social programs and increase of military expendi-
tures, and strengthening of war industries. On the world scale: See the annual
assetrbly of the International Monetary Fund of October and the Cancun Smit.

-The "moral najority," or, the "restoration" after the 1968 [illegible] ad the
social struggles of the past 10 years. (lav-Order-Paeily).

The new military doctrine synthesizes the slogan: Amsrika Uber Alles! [America
Over All].

6.2. This process has developed in specific forms also in our country and was
dragged onto the political level by the PSI [Italian Socialist Party], by the
Ameriksner Craxi and by the DC [Christian Democratic Party].

It assumes the following form:

-A dizzying increase in the military dubget (sore than double in the past 2
years);

-Increase of war industries;

-—A warmongering policy of government (see the decision to send troops to' [ille-
gibleuthe Siani?] and to install sissilas with nuclear warheads at Comiso and
elsewhere against the Arab and North African peoples);

--Integration of the defense sinistry and interior sinistry within the NAN pro-

jects. Italy is increasingly becoming the center of inerialist policy in the
Mediterranean arc;

1’69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
«Corporativisation of military personnel;
—-Rebuilding armed forces within the framework of the "renodernisation" of mm.

7. lhe intensity of conflict between the two poles of the nain contradiction of

the imperialist systen grows in relation to the fact that Europe is increasimly
in the center of this conflict.

That this is so is demonstrated by recent statements by Reagan and llaig on the
possibility of a limited nuclear war against Europe.

‘Ihe infamous "Directive 59" approved by Reagan provides for the possibility of a
limited war against Europe and the 0881! in American interests.

Haig: "‘l'here are things worse than war."

Haig: "Among the extraordinary plans contewlated under the NATO Doctrine there
is that of the use of an atomic weapon for democstration purposes to make the

other side understand the linit of tolerance in the conventional sector is being
overstepped.

For Haig, therefore, there are "things worse than" some tens of millions of dead:
some tens of nillions of unemployed proletarians.

1he metropolitan proletariat at Rome, London, Brussels, Amsterdam, Bonn, Scandinavia,
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, has denonstrated its acute awareness of the problem by
immediately mobilizing and staging the most powerful lass political demonstra-

tions of the past 10 years. Unlike demonstrations against the American war of
aggression in Vietnam at the end of the 1960's, today the mass sovementa identify

imperialisn as a threatening and aggressive force directly oriented against the
European proletariat.

Not overlooked is the inextricable connection between sore than 10 million unam-
ployed without hope, and destined to increase. who wander through Europe. and
preparations for "an atomic solution” of their problen.

Thus, if yesterday, aside from some rare exceptions like the RAF [probably Rad
Arny Faction] such demonstrations were linited to condoning the imperialist
aggression of a distant people. today the struggle is beginning to prevent the
interiaperialist war from attacking and destroying Burope itself, and the idea-
force that is beginning to make headway in the awareness of the leases that only
the proletarian revolution can prevent this war.

Within these novements, it is possible to identify different positions that are
the reflection as much of the breadth and heterogeneity of classes of social

forces that participate, as of the ideological influence of revisionist propaganda
and even of the psychological warfare conducth by NATO.

It is important to see clearly into the ideological class content of the principal
positions since the ideological class struggle is a fmdamental terrain in the
relationship between the party and the mass movement.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Criticizing the slogans influenced by the bourgeoisie and revisionist: is a con-
dition for affirming the correct ones that the Metropolitan Proletariat aust use
as the basis for its efforts.

Neo-revisionism. This construct has profound roots even in our own country. ‘Ihe
proponents of this thesis affirm, more or less explicitly. that the strategic
rear guard of revolutionary struggles developing throughout the world (and there-
fore also in Europe) is the so-called "socialist cap," the reason why the stra-
tegy of these struggles cannot be measured by anything but what carries the USSR
and its allies forvard on the world level.

A shameful, timid variant, is that which maintains that in any case the principal
enemy is American iwerialism and that therefore there is nothing wrong in depend-
ing upon the USSR to codat it.

Neither the forner nor the latter understand very well that the aythical ”social-
ist camp" in reality is socialist in words only and imperialist in deeds because
the dominant means of production, for many years now. in the USSR as in the
nations tied to it, is state capitalism.

Pacifist revisionisn. Acceptance of NATO and affirmation of its "defensive"
character (in 1977 Berlinguer described mm as a defensive alliance: in 1981 the

PCI Central Co-ittee, in October, repeated this concept).

Proposal of negotiated progressive diaernement. This thesis is counterrevolution-
ary because it accepts for the proletariat a position within the warmongering
designs of imperialisa and sows the illusion that peace is possible without the
destruction of capitalist means of production within its imperialist phase, and
that is, of the one and only generator of war.

his position ideologically disarms the proletarians and is actively a part of
imperialisms' plans.

8. In this context, in order to carry out a vanguard position in the leadership
of Transition to Cox-unisn the Party [must] affirn three fundamental theses:

--"A great peace can be achieved only after imperialism in all its for-s is anni-
hilated." "no.

--In order to annihilate inperialism it is necessary to nobilize the proletariat
to develop the revolution and transform the interimperielist war into a class war.

-‘l'rue internationalism Lenin says, consists of developing the revolutionary
struggle in one's own country.

In our country. it is the imperialism of American, European, national and multi-
national monopolistic capitalism that nust be sent to hell together with the

imperialist state which defends its interests and the aggressive military organi-
zations that it has generated. ..

Therefore, it is not a matter of affirming that in the contradiction between the
two sectors of imperialism, the one headed by the Yankees is the principal, one

1.51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and that headed by the USSR is the "secondary" one, and therefore, inplicitly,
if not explicitly, leaving open the door to the neorevisionist thesis that it
is possible to seek the backing of the latter in order to codut the forner.

0n the contrary, the attack against the ilperialist state and the transnational
political-military structures that are part of the inperialist sector in which
our revolutionary nilitancy develops is detersined exclusively by our position
and does not involve an assess-ent of different dangers for the world prole-
tariat posed by the two poles of the inperialist systa.

‘lhis slogan acquires a new leaning in the present conditions of the political-
nilitary interaction of states. In fact, revolutionary action is not liaitsd
here to naking "insecure" [illegible] "rear guard" of the imperialist bourgeoisie,
but proposes a direct and systeaatic disarticulation of the plans and organs of
inperialist aggression.

9. In the crisis of inperislisn every guerrilla who does not act on hearing the
order "annihilate inperislisa" is inevitably refornist.

‘lhe order "annihilate inpsrialisn" is central to the program of Transition to
Comnisn.

In fact it is not possible to definitively revolutionise sozial relations of pro-
duction without a definitive defeat of the inerielist system.

However, precisely because of the unequal developnent of capitalism and the
chain of imperialist states. it is possible to break the weakest link and to es-
tsblish a process of liberation fron capitalist labor in a local area.

Precisely because of this we speak of "reloving the Italian link fro. the i-per-
ialist chain" and establishing the process of transition to co-sunisa as an
independent and nilitant path against all inperialisa in unity with all nilitnt
proletarians and all oppressed nations.

10. It is necessary to deal with the problem of unity with all guerrillas who
fight for communism and nore in general with those who, even though they do not
have a proletarian content, fight against the inperislist systaa.

60310
080: 6000/0017

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ETA COMMUNIQUBS TO THE BASQUE PEOPLE
Unknown ZUZBN in Spanish April I98I pp 1, ll. I-I2
[Text] Actions Against Iberduero S.A.

June I977: Explosion at the nuclear powerplant under construction.
Lenoniz

II June I977: Blowing up of poles along a stretch of the Hadrid power supply
line

June I977: Explosion at the electric powerplant at Berango

22 December I977: Confrontation with the Civil Guard at the Lenoni:
nuclear Powerplant, during which activist Jose David
Alvarez Pena was wounded; he later died.

I9 March I977: Blowing up of part of the nuclear powerplant, Lemoniz

9 April I977: Blowing up of four Iberduero power line towers, Gatika

Ia June I979: Bombing of the turbines at the nuclear powerplant, Lenoniz

I6 June I977: Burning of an Iberduero S.A. truck, Bibar

l2 November I979: Blowing up of essential Iberduero technical conponents
for the Lenoniz Nuclear Powerplant, Santander

3 February I980: Blowing up of 800 storage batteries destined for Lenonis,
Gasteiz (SAFT-lberica)

I June I980: Burning of the Iberduero offices, Durango

II July I980: Blowing up of the "Electra" (affiliate of Iberduero)
substation, Oyon

7 August I980: Burning of the Iberduero S.A. offices, Eibar
29 August I980: Burning of Iberduero S.A. offices, Tolosa

28 August I980: Burning of Iberduero S.A. offices, Gernika

153
II September I980: Blowing up of the lberduero s.A. company store,

Bilbao

I2 September I980: Burning of Iberduero offices, Irun

29 Septenber I980: Burning of three Iberduero S.A. jeeps. Getxo

I October I980: Burning of an lberduero 8.A. transformer. Donostia

7 October I980: Blowing up of an lberduero 8.A. transformer, Santurce

I9 November I980: Blowing up of an lberduero 8.A. substation, Oiartzun

I3 Decenber I980: Blowing up of an lberduero 8.A. substation, Lasarte

I9 December I980: Boabing of a Fuerzas Blectricas de Navarre office.

Iruina

22 December I980: Burning of an Iberduero 8.A. substation, Elgoibar

I January
I January
I January

5 January

5 January

I2 January
I9 January
20 January

22 January

Zb January

25 January

29 January

29 January

I98I:
I98I:
I98I:
I98I:

I98I:

I98I:
I98I:
I98I:
I98I:
I98I:

I98I:

I98I:

I98I:

Blowing up of two Iberduero 8.A. substations. Renteria
Blowing up of the Iberduero S.A. substation at Irun
Blowing up of the Iberduero S.A. substation at Oiartaun

Blowing up of the Iberduero 8.A. (Urreta) substation
at Galdakano

Blowing up of two Iberduero 8.A. substations (Atxukarro
and Artunduraga). Basauri

Blowing up of an lberduero 8.A. substation, Berneo
Blowing up of lberduero 8.A. headquarters. Donostia
Blowing up of an lberduero $.A. transformer, Usurbil
Blowing up of an lberduero S.A. transfer-er, Urretxua

Blowing up of the switching center along the Bilbao-
Behobia highway at Arireta. Zaraua

Blowing up of a transformer center in the process
of being outfitted. Tolosa

Bonbing of an Iberduero 8.A. substation (activist
Bikardo Barros Berreiro killed). Tudela

Capture of chief Lenonir engineer Jose Maria Ryan,
Lenoniz

15$
30 January 1981: Blowing up of the Iberduero (Audele) substation, Oiartzun
31 January 1981: Blowing up of the Iberduero S.A. substation, Villabona

31 January 1981: Blowing up of the Iberduero S.A. substation, Hendabia

5 February 1981: Blowing up a power transmission tower. Itxaso

7 February 1981: Execution of Jose ﬂaria Ryan, chief engineer at the
Lemoniz Nuclear Fowerplant, Bilbao

8 February 1981: Blowing up of an Iberduero 8.A. substation, Tolosa
17 February 1981: Blowing up of an lberduero s.A. transformer, Urnieta
28 February 1981: Blowing up of an lberduero S.A.subststion, Leioa

28 February 1981: Blowing up of Vitoriana de Blectricidad, an affiliate
of Iberduero s.A., Altube

Farewell:

ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty], the Basque Revolutionary Socialist
Organization of National Liberation, claims Mario Lavaret Pena as one
of its nenbers; this activist was killed accidentally on 17 March when
a boob that he was handling exploded.

Once again ETA must mourn the death of an activist. one who fell weapons
in hand to secure an independent, reunified and socialist Basque Country
with its own language and culture. The loss of Comrade Hario Alvarez
was due to an accident, when a bomb that he was putting together went
off. On other occasions, torture and confrontations with the enemy

have caused dozens of Basque strugglers to be mowed down by those who
hold political and military power in Spain and oppress and exploit

our working Basque people.

Many have given everything, even their own lives, for the Basque Country.
This is not the tine for weeping or sadness. The struggle for Basque
National Liberation demands the efforts of all those of us who sincerely
and honestly have an awareness of the people and feel that the only

way to denocracy and self-government is through force. Unfortunately,
however, this path oust claim victims. such as Mario, his brother David
and other Basque soldiers wrested from the people.

ETA joins Mario Alvarez's family and the Basque working people in their
sorrow over this najor loss and renders our comrade the best tribute
that we can give him, which is to continue Our course, bearing witness
to our generosity, until we achieve the objectives for which he gave
his life.

Farewell Mario

155
ETA Communique to the Basque People

ETA. the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of Rational Liberation,
claims responsibility for the execution of Jose Luis Iaimundo Hoya,

the head of the General Police Corps in the Santiago district, on 5 March
in Bilbao.

ETA has thus put an end to a life that for 30 years was devoted to
repressing, coercing and torturing activists and sympathisers of the
Basque National Liberation Hovement. Eloquant testimony of Police

Chief Psi-undo's involvement in political and social efforts can be
given by the hundreds of detainees who fell into his hands just because
they were regarded as patriotic Basques and because they were struggling
for just grievances. They were insulted, accused and mistreated by

the police chief and his aides to obtain information from them or at
least to frighten the people in their district.

They wanted to portray the torture-caused death of our comrade Joxe

Arregi as an isolated, accidental incident. But we know that that

is not the case. He know that torture and mistreatment are widespread
practices at all police stations and Civil Guard barracks and are part

of the system of securing declarations or intimidating the Basque resistance.
Therefore, we do not buy the Carrillo-style arguments calling for the

firing and sanctioning of those who are proven torturers, and we do

not buy them simply because they are false. In the first place, it

is impossible to prove something to which there are no witnesses. and

as far as we know at this point, what happens in a dungeon remains
exclusively between the detainee and police officials. So except in

cases like that of Jose Arregi, whose dead body was proof of the horrors

that he suffered, recourse to the courts will be useless because the
officials will refuse to admit anything. Secondly, talk of firings

suggests that any possible candidates for this sanction are a few individuals
who have violated the legal code of the police structure itself. In

fact, the exact opposite is the case; in other words, it is the very

police and executive structure of the system that forces its officials

to act in this manner to achieve the proposed end.

Thus, ETA will continue to attack all of the State structures that

make repression and torture possible in the southern Basque Country

and we will basically try to eliminate the police commands and professional
torturers who are best known for their odious work. At the same time,

we must not forget that this struggle is, above all, one of national
liberation and that the underlying aim of our attacks on Spain's repressive
corps is their withdrawal from the southern Basque Country, the political
grievance set forth in the KAS [Patriotic Socialist Coordination) Tactical
Alternative.

Separately, ETA also claims responsibility for the blowing up of the
lberduero S.A. transformer center in the Donostia district of Ibaeta
on 7 March and the blowing up of two Iberduero S.A. power transmission
towers carrying energy to France, on ID “arch in Aretxabaleta. both

156
of these actions were part of our campaign against Iberduero under
the rallying cry of "Lemoniz Apurtu."

Basque Country, ll March 1981
Core Busksdi Askatuta
Cora Buskadi Sosialista

ETA Communique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Organisation of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for the IA March bombings in Getxo and Donostia.
respectively, of an apartment building being built for the civil Guard.
of an lberduero power transformer at Ibaeta and of the Rugby Bar, where
drugs are sold and consumed.

He also claim responsibility for the bomb that was placed on 12 March

in the offices that Mr Area, the president of the Foral Delegation

of Navarre, maintains in Bstella. This was done to counter the bossist,
anti-Basque policy that the rightwing in Navarre has been pursuing
through the Foral Delegation against the national and social aspirations
of the people of Navarre and the southern Basque Country as a whole.

Although at first glance it night seem that because of the diversity

of our targets our armed actions are not consistent as to their political
objectives, the fact is that there is a common thread of political inter-
vention running through this series of moves.

Harassing the Spanish occupation forces in the southern Basque Country;
intimidating the bourgeoisie responsible for the construction of the
Lemoniz Nuclear Powerplant, which is a threat to the people. and uncovering
the network through which the world of drugs has invaded our people

are areas of armed intervention that are part of the basic struggle

for democracy and the national sovereignty of the Basque working people.
ETA is openly opposing those who would illicitly and in Machiavellian
fashion impose on the Basque people a model of society that entails

such obvious human and political risks as the Lemonis Nuclear Powerplant
or the spread of drug use in our neighborhoods and towns, and we are
doing so as part of the struggle to achieve a democratic break that

will bring sweeping changes in our social and national relations with
those who have so far denied us our minimum sovereign rights. The
Lemoniz Nuclear Powerplant and the so-called "Drug Hattie" are not
explicitly set forth as targets in the KAS Tactical Alternative, but
they are present implicitly because they represent two clear-cut attacks
on the principles and freedoms that are part of the political democracy
and self-government proposed in the alternative.

We feel that it is absurd to talk about amnesty for prisoners and exiles
before having achieved a political system that will guarantee their
personal security and, more importantly, because these kinds of extreme
situations can surely recur. He cannot brag about home rule and democracy

157
when daily events, such as the building of the Lemoniz plant, show

us that instead of moving towards the loosening of bonds, the Basque
people are increasingly shackled and dependent on ties that are alien to
their own process of home rule development.

The BBB [Basque Executive Committee] of the PNV [Basque Nationalist

Party] has charged that our campaign against Lemoniz has worsened unemploy-
ment and put thousands of workers whoaredependent today on the nuclear
powerplant on the street. The leaders of the PNV are groping for arguments
every day to refute our reasons for struggling for the people's grievances,
and their demagogic, naive efforts have failed. The workers at Lemonis
have been on the verge of unemployment for some time now, and not because
of us but because-(he’cbnstruction work is almost finished. Like so

many other capitalist'ionsters, Lemonie offered many direct and indirect
jobs during its construction. but the result of all this highly specialized
and sophisticated construction work does not provide for any continuing

job posts, except for a few technicians and intermediate executive
personnel. Therefore, the problem of unemployment and a shortage of

jobs cannot be analyzed childishly with arguments that do not make

sense; it can be tackled only on an in-depth basis. This anguishing
problem will be resolved only through an economic reconversion program

on a structural basis and within the framework of social and political
relations based on a full-fledged statute-governed system and civic
normalization.

Blaming ETA now for the crises that capitalism has gotten our workers
into is as absurd as contending that the Spanish State has demonstrated
its desire for democracy and for our autonomy because we still exist.

The time has now come for each person to assume his responsibility

to the people, without pointing the finger at others. To do otherwise
only shows weakness in a bid to justify the lack of desire to struggle
for the interests that our people are demanding.

To close this communique, ETA feels that it must counter some regrettable
statements by Eurocommunist leader Xabier Harkiegi in the wake of the
attack on the Bilbao police station, in which he hinted at alleged
differences within ETA, which he described as internal strife, regarding
a cease-fire.

In such instances of cheap raving and crude lies we usually go by the

old saying that "the best way to show contempt for something is to

ignore it," but in this case we will make an exception. It is to be
expected that as a counterrevolutionary Hr Harkiegui would try to discredit
ETA in every possible way, including false rumors about alleged internal
dissent. Up to now, when such rumors appeared in the press, we always
noted that they came frOm an official new agency, which in fact

was merely pursuing the tactics of confusion employed by Spanish intelli-
gance services against ETA. From here on in, Mr Harkiegi's precedent

is going to make us stop and think, especially when we notice an odd

158
similarity between this fellow's way of inventing things about ETA
and the methods regularly employed by Spanish secret services in the
same field of lies and manipulation. We would tell Hr Harkiegi these
two things: one, that if you play with fire, you could get burned;

and two, that you might be imagining the mote in another's eye and not
seeing the beam in your own.

In case there are any doubts, ETA would like to inform the Basque working
people that with regard to both strategy, the tactical alternative

and short-term political and military policy, there is complete internal
unity and identification among the entire activist membership and among
all leadership organs.

Our path is clear, as is the immediate and future objective for which
we are struggling. There will be a cease-fire to the armed struggle
only under the conditions that ETA submitted to the Spanish Government
almost 0 years ago.

Basque Country, l6 March I98]
Cora Buskadi Askatuta
Cora Buskadi Sosialista

ETA Comnunique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organisation of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for blowing up a truck owned by the firm Explosives
Forestales of RENEE [Spanish National Railroads] on l7 "arch in Iruina.

The purpose of this action was to unmask and speak out against the
way that the Spanish State, through RBNFS, has usurped the communal
forests of Quinto Real.

Many years ago RENFB obtained from the Spanish State and central government
institutions the lease to develop and use the lumber from the Quinta

Real forests in railway ties and posts. It is currently not being

used for this purpose because the ties and posts are being nude of

cement and concrete. nevertheless, RENPB continues to cut down trees

in Quinto Real and sellthem for other purposes, earning sizable profits
that the region does not share in at all.

But the swindle that RENPE and the Spanish State are pulling on the
people of Quinto Real is just a tiny part of the serious problem in
this regard.

Areas such as Urbasa and Andia, Aralar, Bardenas reales, Aezkoa, el
Honte de la Cuestion and Quinto Real are all rich livestock and forest
zones that the oppressive institutions are plundering from the communal
patrimony of the people of Navarre.

ETA took action some time ago, during the grassroots rallies for the
grievances of the villages of Aeskoa in connection with their forests,

159
and we have just taken action again in the case of Quinto Real. Our
objective is to support with every means at our disposal the just demands
of the people of Navarre, based on these two matters of principle:

l. An immediate halt to the irrational exploitation of these communal
forests, with the felling ofthﬁrtrees and the steady impoverishment

of their natural riches by the Spanish State and companies like RBNFB;

?. The start of a suitable process leading to the return of this communal
patrimony to its legitimate owners, in other words. the people of Navarre.
who should be the sole beneficiaries of its development.

In the event that these grievances of the people are not satisfied,
BTA cautions that it will continue to militarily harass those directly
or indirectly responsible for the current situation to whatever extent
necessary.

Cora Busksdi Askatuta

Gora Euskadi Socialists
Basque Country, l9 March I981
ETA

ETA Communique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for the executions of Artillery Corps Lt Cols

Ramon Romeo Botaeche and Jose Luis Prieto Garcia on 19 and 21 March

in Bilbao and lruins, respectively.

ETA has once again attacked the high commands of the Spanish Armed
Forces to defend against the clear-cut aggression that the people of
the Basque Country have been suffering at the hands of the political
and military power of the Spanish State.

At no time did we intend for these actions against the Armed Forces

to constitute a provocation for a regression from a political situation
that has arbitrarily been called "democratic." The suspicious coup

on 23 February and, above all, its negative impact on a judicial and
legislative overhaul show us quite clearly the policy of a regime that
although on the surface it has altered its methods of oppression, actually
continues to be marked by a fascist ideology and by the predominance

of the de facto military powers inherited from Franco's military dictator-
ship.

From various political angles we have been described as enemies of
democracy and freedoms, when exactly the opposite is the case. If
ETA has historically and at present taken up arms, it has done so
because of an unacceptable political situation for the Basque people
that ruled out these two elementary principles.

Thus, the real enemy of democracy is not ETA or armed action, but the

reform itself and its own origin and development, which have made a

solution consistent with the people's democratic demands impossible. You can-
not expect healthy fruit from a sick tree. The only thing to do is

160
cut it down and plant a new one. There is no way that ETA wants to

see Spanish Armed Forces tanks rolling through the streets of the southern
Basque Country or the rest of the State. ETA wants the democratic

break to come once and for all and and wants the Basque people to be
given back their basic freedoms and to have their legitimate and sovereign
rights recognized. It is for these objectives that we are struggling

and to attain them we are willing to offer a sincere and lasting cease-
fire. If the Spanish Armed Forces and Government do not understand

what compromise is and cannot accept a framework that is unfavorable

to their interests, then that is their problem exclusively. what they

can be quite sure of is that any solution they decide on outside the
framework of the armistice alternative offered by the Patriotic Left

is going to cause them serious strategic problems that could plunge

the Spanish State and political system into an irreversible crisis.

Nadrid must make a realistic choice between guns and diplomacy. Today

it has come out clearly for the former. But for how long? The autarky
during the Franco era is unthinkable today given the present demands

of the capitalist system and the interrelationship of markets in Europe
and throughout the world.

The course they have chosen tends to leave all political (and, therefore,
economic) decision-making power in the hands of the military. Over

time and given our acute economic and governmental crisis, this approach
can only lead to a disaster whose repercussions will affect the entire
Spanish State, not just the Basque Country.

ETA's program for a break alternative offers a political path to avoid
this disaster: a "cease-fire" tied to the five points contained in
the KAS Democratic Alternative.

we feel that we would all benefit from its acceptance: the Basque
working people, in that a series of minimum rights and freedoms that
most of them want would be returned to them; the Spanish State, because
it would be clearly showing a shift from fascism to democracy and could
begin making stable progress towards becoming part of Europe; both

of them, in a word, because this would be a way of surmnmnting the
current bloody confrontations and preventing sacrifices and suffering
that no one wants.

We are determined to continue struggling for peace, and sooner or later
the oligarchy and the Spanish Armed Forces will have to yield if they
want to safeguard principles that are not being questioned in the current
tactical phase and that, otherwise, run the risk of decaying.

Basque Country, 23 March I981

Lemoniz Apurtu

Sir:

We are writing to tell you of certain facts that are vitally important to

your person.

161
The people of the Basque Country have been rallying for about 7 years
against the nuclear powerplant that lberduero S.A. is building at Lenoniz.
During this period there has been an uninterrupted series of information
meetings, debates, demonstrations, campaigns of civil disobedience

and mass rallies, illustrating the people's firn opposition to this
project.

Joining the Basque people in their outcry, our organization took up
a commitment in practice to help achieve this grievance through revolutionary
armed struggle.

Because of the authoritarianism and haughty disdain shown by the Board
of Directors of lberduero S.A. and the Spanish Government in connection
with the Basque people's justified refusal to mortgage their security
and their political sovereignty with the Lemonia Nuclear Powerplant,
both the grassroots rallies and the ETA armed struggle have been forced
into increasing confrontation with those who do not hesitate to employ
repression and coercion to crush civil liberties.

Thus, tragic developments such as the deaths of David, Gladis, three
Lemoniz workers, Rikardo and Ryan are merely consequences of the absurd
and irrational policy imposed by the bourgeoisie represented on the
lberduero S.A. Board of Directors.

In our communique claining responsibility for the execution of chief
development engineer Hr Ryan, we cautioned that this action "is not
an isolated incident; it narks the beginning of a new front that will
affect all of the upper-level executive personnel connected with the
Lemoniz Nuclear Powerplant."

Therefore, we are addressing you as a person with technical responsibilities
in the construction and startup of the powerplant to remind you once

again that we are firmly committed to our decision and that the measures

we adopt in this regard will be conditioned by the approach that lberduero
S.A. and the pertinent agencies of the Spanish Government adopt from

here on towards the people's rallying cry ”Lemoniz Apurtu.“

You can rest completely assured that the moves that we are planning
to make in this regard have nothing at all to do with the technical
services that you are rendering as a professional, but rather and exclusively
with your involvement in the illegal and unwelcome Lenoniz project.

As always, we would like to avoid using weapons as much as possible

in achieving the objectives for which the Basque working people are
struggling, but this does not depend exclusively on us; it also depends

on how our national and class enemies act towards this grassroots struggle.

If lberduero S.A. has special security services and the backing of

the police and even the Armed Forces to carry on its plans, then those

of us in the opposition have just as much or more right to avail ourselves
of every form of combat at our disposal to defend our interests and
prevent the plant from going up.

162
There are only two possible paths today: either with the people or
against the people. It is now up to you to decide and act accordingly.

Basque Country, I98!

Cora Euskadi Askatuta

Gora Buskadi Sozialista

Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation, ETA

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for the arrest, interrogation and subsequent
execution of drug trafficker and Spanish police collaborator Juan Costas
Otamendi (alias Hippy and Juantxo) on 27 March in Tolosa.

The Basque people continue to be subjected to an unending drug traffic
that affects every segment and level of our society. Political forces
and reformist institutions have maintained an odd silence and taken

a restrained approach towards this, which is surprising and paradoxical
in View of the proven involvement of the Spanish Government in the
ways by which the deranged world of drugs has penetrated the southern
Basque Country.

As an organization that is part of the Basque Social and National Liberation
Movement, ETA cannot allow the abuses that have been committed in this
area to continue. We are struggling to regain for our people their
freedoms and sovereign rights on a political level, but we are also
struggling to completely eliminate a model of society in which chaos
and degeneracy have been fostered by the capitalist system. Juan Costas
Otamendi had voluntarily and self-interestedly chosen to collaborate
with the police in this sophisticated method of repression. He was
part of the local drug trafficking and distribution network and at

the same time he furnished information to his police contacts about
members, sympathizers and activists “a the Patriotic Left.

Juan Costas usually went around armed and had been involved in the
clandestine trafficking of weapons earmarked for parapolice elements
and fascists.

At the outset of his work as a trafficker, Juan Costas went about creating
a soft drugs market among youth so that after he gained their confidence
he could later introduce other items such as heroin, cocaine, etc...ﬂis
distribution spots were various bars and "putin-clubs" in Tolosa, Andoain,
Urnieta and Villabona. From our interrogation of Juan Costas we have
obtained a wealth of information that we will use at the appropriate
moment.

in view of the scantresponsethst our appeals have gotten in certain
trafficker-police circles, whom we have asked to halt their activities

or leave the Basque Country, we in ETA have once again been forced

to take action against one of them. We hope that they finally grasp

the importance of taking our warnings seriously and of agreeing to

stop what they are doing, even if only to insure their own personal security.

163
Otherwise. we will continue to take action by striking at the lost
significant people in charge and at the inter-ediaries they employ,
until we eradicate once and for all these undesirable elenents, who
are nothing more than nercenaries in service to the oppressive
Spanish Government.

Basque Country, 28 March I98!

8763
680: 6000/0026

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUEDE

RAF PRONOUNCEHENTS
Helm TEXTS: W in German 1977 pp 61-36. 208-231, 312-322, 323-325

[Excerpts] Part VII. Segments on the Pronouncemant of RA! Prisoners,
January 19 76

we do not think much of a proclamation and we are quite certain that it
would be meaningless considering the sham publicity of this trial--

of the distorted, corrupt and completely manipulated public which (accord-
ing to "under) allows observation in this case.

It is a problem and also a component of this miserable show, the reason why

it is conducted in this building and in Stammheim and not in a city where
the legitimate leftwing public can participate--that, essentially, there is
nobody here

who listens differently to what we say, who does not respond with banal
sensationalism, listens with the ear of an informer or the narket. This

market cannot absorb substance. and where the issue is political annihila-
tion it cannot even accept facts. If the bourgeois public, which is per-

mitted here or able to observe, still had a controlling function, the trial
would be impossible.

Its project, according to the politicians, according to the Iilitsry charac-
ter of the trial dramaturgy and the corrupt worn who is in charge-

its project of imperial self-portrayal, which determines every detail of
this pitiful show, is demagogic

and it has been developed through the propaganda of 5 years of psychological
warfare.

He are fighting on a territory which has actually been totally organized
through and through and I do not want to list the details again.

In the meantime everybody knows that every illegal neans has been used and

is still being applied to inpair our ability to defend ourselves. because
it is identical with the interpretation of the militarized systes of

165

lﬂ)l!0lﬁﬂ(1Al.lh§E‘0hﬂUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

justice--incapable to be politically articulate in this dispute, which the
state must fear because it runs the whole thing.

The aanner in which it conveys the revolutionary character of the dispute.
defines the state attempt to settle it, this extraordinarily enormous effort
of the reactionary aobilixation. which was looking for a way to express
itself also architecturally-as counterrevolutionary, as a class struggle.

That is the reason why we are here. we are conducting this trial. or we have
tried to show and interpret its weakness while it is denonatreting its
strength, the miserable measure. which it is, and the fact that the state is

forced to use all means possible in this instance to take away the legitimacy
of four prisonerso-Schnidt said it many times.

The arguaent of a scientific reason for our politics (I believe that we can

certainly provide it right now) is an absurdity at this point-our interest
can only be one concept--to develop experience and analysis--the legitimate

publication of which the federal prosecution cannot prevent after it has
been stated here.

He decided against a couple: presentation. the fundanental concept of revo-
lutionary strategy now. at this point in time:

and:

Printing would interrupt us anyway. because it would take too long and
because, as far as he is concerned. his job here as a national security
judge gives him the right to block political subjects during this trial-

Second--the text will be analyzed-that has been our experience and we are
not sure whether we would not provide weapons to the national security

organ with the reconstruction of strategic provisions without sinultane-
ously placing then at the disposal of the organization of revolutionary

politics--

Pinally--and that is also ieportant--we are only speaking for the prisoners
and their discussions as well as for us, we are not speaking for the groups

that are fighting illegally.

And the following must be said about it:

The continuity of the urban guerrillas. the continuity of their revolu-
tionary attack is transaitted through their actions. hardly through the
proclaaations of their prisoners.

A complex development of the connection--this claim would already be wrong.
because this show is neaningless for the process of develop-eat of the
urban guerrillas.

He also feel that the atteapt of a scientific reason presupposes a minimal
consensus-the consensus of argumentation. where it does not exist openly

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and brutally. and even if it applies only to Prinzing's shabby measures

intended to prevent this text-it is a contradiction in itself. Without
regard to the fact that this court has proved through the months that it

cannot and will not follow substantial argumentation.

The scientific concept of our politics-their theoretical basis on the
level of the 1970 analysis alone would be totally meaningless to this

court. it would only be
informative

for national security analysts—according to evidence that has been proven
through 5 years of urban guerrillas.

In addition, a pronouncement always means that something has to be defended
against the brutal machination-by getting involved with it-even if it is
a presentation of a confession--it becomes an interaction and we would have

to get involved with this court. this show. That is impossible-even
tactically--and it has become even more impossible during these last 3

years. Substantive the show has nothing to do with us. What concerns us
are its actions and the possibility to explain them. Andreas said a lot
about that and presumably we will say a great deal more about the testi-
mony--we will see.

Now Andreas or we will talk briefly--or relatively briefly according to the
lines of the discussion--only about two aspects of the matter, since just
before the trial Zeis was able to get his hands on the concepts and a
manuscript which is at least theoretically important, and he did not spit
them out again:

1. The necessity of our politics from a historic mandate and the process
of concrete resistance. which 5 years ago led to the development of the
RAF and leads to the development of

2. the possibility as the fragment of the fragment of planning the revolu-
tionary process, anticipating the urban guerrillas as a tactic.

Considering the abstraction level which has been achieved in the meantime
through Prinzing's narrow-minded, wormlike, savage insistence on normal

criminal proceedings. we have really no other choice but to counter with
our abstraction. It is to be clearly understood here that it was not our

intention from the beginning--in other words, it was not our plan to con-
front this trial with the substance of revolutionary politics-solely by

presenting it here like a seminar. He considered one or several brief

statements and planned to present the substance in a concrete form while
witnesses were called to testify--

So much about our interpretation of the dramsturgy. In the meantime it has

become apparent that. first. we will probably not be able to do it, because

we are in bad shape, which probably corresponds to Prinzing's plan. who
after all--has been using all means available to fight for our inability to

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR¢0F1WC1AL US£13NLY

defend ourselves-and who is still fighting, using-as he calls it-a
"final" ruling on the confinement conditions, which is to freeze our condi-
tion of only partial inconpetency to stand trial and sake things even worse.
and

second, because he would prevent it directly. by aessing up petitions for
testinonv--as has happened to every petition during the last 6 nonths--one
should take another look at it. In aiaple terns it aeans that the fact and

the connection of our politics cannot be conveyed through testiaony. There-
fore'we will try to explain it by actually trying the ritual of a process

pronouncement-which, however--although frag-antary--using at least the
lines of our analysis. Much of what would be inportant for that purpose-
was acquired by the federal prosecution just before the trial.“

3.:

Now the natter is detersinad by the absurd working conditions and it actually
depends on our not being interrupted. If Prinzing should interrupt several

tines, we will terninate our presentation-because we only have a partial
manuscript and, furthernore, we have not been able to talk about this matter

for a long tine and sonetine we will have it published more clearly struc-
tured.

The whole attespt to make it available here through the ninutes-to enpha-

size it one more tine~-is definitely due to the international discussion of
the nilitant antirevisioniet Left in Europe and not only in Europe. He will

show how the encirclenent and conplete integration of the traditional class
organizations of the proletariat into the politics of capital in the PRC is
historically postulated

and we

are trying to show how this process can only be stopped internationally,
through the international political reconstruction of the proletariat; free

the development of capital the strategy of the class. The guerrilla nove-
nent in the metropolitan areas is the conscious expression. the interpreta-

tion, the conscious subjective attempt to convey this reconstruction in and
free its international dinansion.

He lust. to describe it, to nake it comprehensible, also deal with econonic

categories. No matter how fragnentary and abbreviated, it can only be
developed fro. the concept of the objective trend (not a trend on the con-

ceptual level of Schaidt but of Harx-basic plans).
Certainly
it is unusual and I never heard of it before, the fact that something like

that has been tried in a political trial. Nevertheless. it is not only a

reaction to the atteapt, the insipid denagogic attenpt to deny any politi-
cal substance to this trial-to quote Sartre--I believe-the crine is that

they want to treat us like criainals--although. naturally. we have to agree

168

IN]! OFFICLAl.lEﬂE(HNLY
FOR¢MHHCJAI.USE(HVLY

with it inasmuch as revolutionary politics and not only revolutionaries but
any attempt of democratic, social opposition in this state must of neces-
sity be criminalized and is criminalized and we have no problems with form
of resistance which the class criminal system calls ordinary criminality.

Rather, it is a practical attempt to break through the censorship and the
illegalization of our texts; at any rate, what has been said here so far
can be published; although luback will probably again cone up with a
savage trick, we will try it. (And for that very reason we are not making
any concessions to those who are listening here.)

it is a fact and l have to state it once again briefly-we all (and I am
referring to the prisoners) are sure that the development will confirm our

analysis and practice, as has been the case during the past 5 years-

He made mistakes, but we would have to say that they were objectively neces-
sary, mistakes resulting from the weakness of proletarian politics in the
FRG.

And--this text--now, however, in reverse-~ia to foster i:--in the RAF there
is no separation between theorists and practitioners--the kind of division
of labor, exploitation and hierarchic structure which is projected on us

by the psychological warfare. Everything was perfectly clear and everybody
understood how the burdens and the problems and the structure of a group.
which is organized and fights illegally, are to be handled and determined.
There has been no change with respect to our assessment of their necessity.
Nevertheless, we learned that illegality is the only liberated territory in
the class struggle where human relationships are possible. He became
familiar with its emancipationist, its liberating dialectic even in the
subjective manner. hothing--or little--can be said here about the learning
process, existential radicalism and collective structure, because in the
meantime it happened that the reaction of the imperialist state of the
Social Democracy, the SPD imperialism came up with a word for the counter-
propaganda against us and the brutal repression by the national security
force-counterinsurgency-which has become propaganda for us. It conveys
the dimension and the relevance, the proletarian politics which is inherent
in the attack of small armed illegal groups that determine their strategy
against the 0.5. capital and the imperialist state from the international
connection of the anti-inerialist liberation struggles during this phase
of the strategic defensive of imperialism...

and:

For that reason something must be said here about the leadership structure,
because the personalization of the psychological warfare as a method to

split the proletariat--revolutionary politics is personalized to prevent
it from being interpreted as the politics of the class--is simultaneously

the propagandistic territory of the physical liquidation of individual
fighters.

169

FOIIOFFNJAI.US£(NVLY
FOR 0FTWC1AL.USE|DNLY

1he isolation was intended to break the group and the plan of the federal
prosecution to cretenize-ne--first, by placing me in a separate cell and
then by using a stereotactic procedure, while Andreas, at the same time-
during the summer of l973-was to be aurdered. we were on a hunger strike
and water was to be withheld from hin. we have given the facts here and
nothing has been eraggerated-lolger was murdered because he had a leading
function in the group. in other words. he was a factor of orientation
within the group.

The guerrilla move-ent is a cadre organization--the goal of their collective
learning process is the equality of the fighters. the collectiviration of
each individual. his fitness for analysis. practice, independence and the

ability to build an armed nucleus himself and to keep open the collective
learning process. Andreas initiated this process in the RAF. and from the

very beginning Andreas' function in the RAP was what every fighter wants
to become and west becoae: the politics and the strategy in the person of
each individual.

The guerrillas are the group.

To subject their collective process to the mechanics of the hierarchical
imperialist structure--and the objective. the necessity to revolutionize

the individual will--the unique factor--is what "under wants to use and talk
about, calling it "political motivation."

(A terrible infany--the fact that the representative of an authority. which
directly supports the interest of U.S. capital and the U.S. military with
125 military bases and 7.000 nuclear warheads, thinks that he can capitalize
an armed struggle against 0.8. capital and the iaperialist state.)

Leadership in the guerrilla movement is the function to transmit the rela-
tionship between subjectivity and necessity. will and objectivity into the
practice of the group, its structure and actions.

It is a result of the process of the group. the complex force of the
struggle fought illegally, conveying the collective learning and working

process. The initiative of each individual in the collective process, as
initiated froa and for practice, as a special function sakes possible the

continuity of the learning process, the experience. the interaction, the
organizational ability to act against all frictions due to external and

internal causes. In the guerrilla movement there is no contradiction
between leadership and collectivismr-they derive their identity fro. the

destiny of each individual and thus the collective and its Leadership with
respect to the goal--freedon. liberation and the fact that the experience

of each individual shows that life and subjectivity are only possible in
the armed anti-imperialist struggle; in imperialisa, armed struggle fought

illegally, is the only possibility for practical-critical activity.

It is a function which does not constitute the group but which grows during
the process of its constitutionalization; it is a result of its practice

and thus its collective process, and it sticks with the one to whom it is

170

FOI‘OFFHJAI.US£(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

passed on because of his power of anticipation and decision to keep open
the collective process. It is a burden and it is—that is the experience--

always the one or they are the ones for when leadership is not a necessity;
only in iaperialisn there is always the need for domination.

If one wants to cut it short, one will have to say, that in the guerrilla

mvenent leadership is initiative, interaction and always, at every nonent,
the inlenntation of the inortance of practice, of politics as proletarian

politics, that is the action-«pint the trend toward the reproduction of
iwerialist structures like domination, schenatization. systentic division
of labor. coqetition and the irrational reflexes fro. isolation and fear.

In the RAP Andreas has this function because he trans-its proletarian poli-
tics in the RAIL-and that is the insurrection-«a leadership in the func-
tion, practicelly--to make it superfluous through colleczive practice—as
the concept of the unique in the general, the possible in the necessary,

the subjective in the objective, theory for practice.

It is the reason why Andreas is hated lost. They are intent on destroying
the new, the new Inn, the new society, the nucleus of which is the guerrilla

mveaent in its identity of power, subjectivity, learning process, practice.

Psychological warfare oust personalize because it cannot attack that which
constitutes the guerrilla noveneet--the collective struggle fron illegality

against the state--without propagating the politics of the guerrilla nove-
Inent, its freedom, which is its freedom to fight; it nus: personalize to
present as unfree the central element of the freedoa. illegality and i.e.
ability to act.

But when Herold says

"Baaders and Ibinhofs," the plural indicates what is to be conveyed by using
the sethod of personalization-4n other words, they did not get across the
idea that the action of the guerrilla novenent is the affair of individuals.

Of course, Herold cannot understand what a collective is. His plural
reflects the fact that there are many of us because of the objective neces-

sity to fight, it is a material necessity. Leadership also leans the
transmission of the dialectic of possibility and necessity, that necessity

increases the possibility of having to fight, i.e. to organize, carry out
attacks, also the effect increases.

Consequently, subjectively leadership also has the function of encouragement
and it is an elenent of nobilization. Its function excludes its institu-
tionalization, it depends on the collective interaction of the group as mch
as the group depends on it“

It excludes all dead and very deadly structures of iaperialist bureaucrats,
radical-

Applying sieple dialectics, just as such as the organization of the military
is the estodiunt of inerialist structure, i.e. alienation, in the

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

guerrilla novel-est. as a nilitary organization of proletarian politics,
alienation is necessarily cowletely abolished;

--it has been abolished through the politics-wt will be abolished in a
continuing process.

The politics of the guerrilla novenent is the basis for its ability to act--
it is its possibility.

But we would say that the counterpropagsnda, which personalized Andreas as
the enbodinent of inerialist structure. collapsed in the neantine. that
extensive propaganda is conveying, is the strength of the subjectivity,

the strength of proletarian politics-and we know that the nane has been
representative for rebellion for a long tine; the fact that national

security propaganda against us used his nan as an exaqale for nany. an
exawle which Andreas is for us: an example for—as Ibo says—"politics

is the conander” usning: proletarian politics, the politics of those who
have nothing.

The rationality of the statenent that the RAF had started politically and

was later depoliticized leans that the national security organ has not been
able to penetrate the RAP, that because of Andreas the MP always had a

revolutionary concept of politics—it is discussed in Peuerbach's second
thesis:

"The question whether hunan thinking is capable of objective truth. is not
a question of theory but a practical question; in practice an must prove
truth. i.e. reality and power. the here and now of this thinking. ‘lhe
dispute over the reality of a nanner of thinking that is isolated fron
practice is a purely scholastic question."

Andreas is being persecuted as the ewodinent of this kind of politics.

because he represents the codaination of analysis. collectiviss and
action.

Revolutionary theory is critical theory. Hhen we formulated it for publi-
cation. it was intended as a weapon and it always referred to distinctly
outlined problem of the practice of fighting illegally. We have never
been interested in a theory which is not related to practice and therefore
does not explain our situation and provide the possibility to change it:

it is the kind of theory which is eaployed in psychological warfare and
which mde Mler and ne (Ulrike) into RAF theorists, eoaething like

columiation or the alienated febling with Marxist concepts, taking the
reception of the Marxist literature and falsifying it into a dogm-for

dogsatic reasons. sosething that Mahler did in his writing, "The Arned
Struggle in Heat Europe." The theoretical writings of the RAF were news-

papers and they were concerned with convincing individuals that it was
right to support urban guerrillas and the reason for it. we used then as

weapons, because everything is a weapon that helps the arsed struggle
which is conducted illegally.

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Talking about Andreas neans talking about us, because when we say that the
function of leadership is to lake it practically unnecessary through
collectivian. it neans that the guerrilla noveeent is and oust be a
politico-eilitary organization, since it is an illegal organization. and

that leans that everybody beconsa leadership. nust qualify hiuelf to be
leadership--

The coqrehensive tern for it is:

To qualify oneself to learn-

to transcend experience, one's own experience as well as the group's,
including those of the liberation mvenents of the bird World. and that
everybody qualifies hit-elf to convey experiences. Even learning is only
possible in the struggle against the state. against the method of propa-
ganda, lie and dirt, against the structure of inerialist socialization
and indoctrination and it is only collectively possible and only with the
goal of engaging in armed action.

Collective leadershipuwe are referring to Grand-means that the project

nust be understood by everyone in the guerrilla organisation to lake sure
that everybody understands his task during the realization and execution

as a function of the whole--

that the project leading to an act lust reveal the possibility of positive
and negative consequences. approval and reaction and that it already con-

tains the answers within itself, in other words, is opening a field for
the organization. It is-a relationship between theory and practice.

8.:

'Ihe concept of personalizing revolutionary politics in psychological war-

fare aim at--and the sane is true for the propagandiat correlation of
torture through isolation to desocialiae the fighters-deperaonsliaing the

fighters. to take revolutionary action, which is always understood by the
noses no natter how it is conveyed—using the depersonalization of the
fighters as a leans to nake then appear like foreign bodies-o

Personalization aim at giving the revolutionary state of emergency the
appearance of a brutal, isperialist everyday occurrence, taking the latent

hatred of the masses for the state. for state parasitisn, for parasitic,
all-construing machines of repressive and ideological state apparatuses of

the federal prosecution, the legal aysten. police, etc. and diverting it
to the guerrilla novenent. It aim at using the state of emergency in
which the people are living to intimidate than. to deter then from using
the state of emergency for their own purpose. But because the mchine
cannot do anything but project. because it is incapable of perceiving any-
thing but self-reflection and is incapable of any production other than

reproduction. all the things. all the dirt which it raised during the
psychological warfare will inevitably cone back to it.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gradually it is being understood that odious are those who cone with things
to be used as surrogates for ideology and as a replacement for legitimstion.

In short: Leadership--what it should be, is the concrete concept of the
situation and its transcendence:

the goals and their trans-lesion in the structure of the fighting group/
organisation.

To put it simply: In the necessity (it is the history which produces the
concept, and thus it is the history of the group and each individual within
its concept: revolutionary struggle)-in the necessity of antagonisn, in
which we place ourselves, place our politics, willing to fight, in other
words. in its power and its complex force for the individual freedon,
liberation is possible.

and:

In this context--psychological warfare, we have to place Hunder's dunb idea
that Andreas had never worked in a factory--becauae he shows how a scien-
tific anticosnunisn usurps history, prejudice, existing structures during
psychological warfare to freeze them. The sentence is wrong. Andreas
learned and understood in the factory, in the street, in jail--another dis-
tortion of facts through psychological warfare is the statement that the
RAP consists of a group of types and wonen from the upper middle class with
bourgeois associations. Hith respect to sociology, it has to be said that
half of us come from proletarian backgrounds-grade school, apprenticeship,
factory, hone, prison. The assertion also negates the fact, probably based
on ignorance, that at the beginning of the 1960's, when the third real
subsumption began, numerous proletarianization and declassification
processes took place-

During the process of the deindividualization and technocratization of
universities, the concentration of the media etc., which were the internal

causes for the mobilization at universities beginning with 1966. The
external cause was the 0.8. war in Vietnam. And it tries to deny the fact

that all RAP fighters have been learning and working on the basic projects
of the new Left since Easter 1968.

The struggle itself proletarianises the fighters. Lack of possessions and--
it is the tern used by the Korean Party for the proletarian relationship to
the struggle for communion: the dschutsche [meaning unknown]

characterize the proletariat as antagonist of isperialisa, i.e. the subject
of liberation. It is certainly not a sociological term for proletariat.

It does not interest us either. Proleteriat is not a term that has its
origin in the descendency doctrine of the fascists-it denotes a relation-

ship, the relationship between the guerrillas and the people-it denotes
the relationship between the proletariat and the imperialist state, defines
it as deadly enaity, antagonism, class war.

Proletariat is a tern that implies war.

17h

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sartre says:

"It is true that the proletariat carries within itself the death of the
bourgeoisie; it is true that the capitalist systea is shaken by structural

contradictions; but it does not necessarily iaply the edstence of a class

consciousness or a class struggle; consciousness and struggle can only
exist when sonebody is fighting."

But where does Hunder's sentence cone from? Does Hunder think that "work
makes free"?--in other words. the concentration camp. 0: is he talking
about the Protestant work ethic. well--quote--

"Work as the source of all riches and culture." a statement from the Goths
Program. which was of no use to the old Social Dsaocracy during the time of

high uneqloyment in 1930 other than finally hand over the political power
which it had already lost a long time ago (because it never took it away

from the Reichswehr [German Army] Hinistry to the fascists-about the

mystified concept of work of the Goths Program hr: made the brief and dry
remark:

"that in all social and cultural circumtances the man who has no other
possessions must be the slave of the other people who nsde themselves the
owners of objective working conditions"--

Marx used this fact to develop the economic necessity and the political
right of the workers to leave the factory, t< are themselves and to fight

against the state. And we are only referring to Marx because he substan-
tiated scientifically the necessity of the insurrection, the class struggle

as a class war against the parasitic net of the repressive and ideological
apparatuses. against the bourgeois state. The idle talk is only cynical--

considering our unegzloynent figure of more than lo percent or more than
1 nillion people in the PRC and almost 5 aillion in West Europe. This ties

the reply by the Social Demcrsts is their own fascist project “internal
security." the integration of repressive state apparatuses in Heat Europe
and the command of the informatics: monopoly, which is in the hands of the
Federal Criminal Police Bureau and the integration of the apparatuses of
internal and external security within the franework of NAN. which means
under the couand of the Pentagon. (We will cone back to that later-

concerning the political function of the Social Democracy for U.S. capital,
its fascist project and the institutional strategy of the new fascism.)

As little as the legal land is the real land. the real life of the worker
is in the factory. Of course, the federal prosecution synpathises with the
enslavement of the factory proletariat, and consequently and quite

logically. "under makes a fetish out of factory work—as a mask of the
parasitic national security machine--because, if the workers w0uld no longe:
go to the factory. the factory which is under discussion here—labor under
the co-and of capital--the group of masked national security officials
that is opposing us would no longer have anything to eat. (And "under, an
old Social Denocrat--an old Social Democratic rat--knows that at the end of
our struggle there is the liberation fron work through the ruination and

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFHJAJ.USE(NVLY

finally dissolution of the repressive and ideological state apparatuses.)
The subject of the insult is only Andreas or we should, please, support

the federal prosecution. In the opinion of the federal prosecution, a
decent person is a person who supports the federal prosecution—the

swjugsted subject, the an who exists for the state and who has no inten-
tions other than existing for the state. It is like Andreas said:

"The prisoner who has Buback's photograph in his locker is the federal
prosecution's ideal citizen."

Part XVIII . Protocols

Here are the protocols of two of 2S prisoners who -de stateaents about the
"structure of the group" in July and August 1976. during the trial in

Stauileisnagainst the propaganda and the cliches of the psychological war-
fare, which were presented at that point in tine at the trial by Muller,
the bought witness of the state security organ.

Protocol Hilde
Testimony by Brigitte Hohnhaupt in Stauhein on 22 July 1976

...of course, it is nonsense to say: student, because the ease thing hap-
pens snd happened to all of us. The only thing one can say: Nothing of
the sort.

And the second point is that I will not answer any questions anyway, not
here, facing you, facing the court, the federal prosecution. That would be
absurd. That is not the way things are. The proper tern for the relation-

ship between us and the court, the judicial systes, the federal prosecution
is war. and the nest distinct expression of it is the fact that four of us

are dead. have been lurdered as prisoners.

Purthermre. here--on this level there is no possibility at all for a
discussion.

Why we do it at all, cone here, take part in the trial...

Prinzing:

No, that is not the subject. The connection...

«yes, it is, it is part of it. It is actually the beginning. Now I an
going to start with what I want to say here and not listen to your stupid
rensrks.

The reason why any of us even cons here after Ulrike's death is that we feel
it is necessary to nske transparent the actual structure of the group

through whatever we can say here. in other words, what it actually was
and is.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not this distillate of psychological warfare, which Mueller described in his
testimony, as has been claimed--practically a fascist structure, if we have
to call it something, which will be the reason why the entire construction

will collapse, thinking that Ulrike would actually have been able to cot-nit
suicide.

We are not at all concerned with proving how Mueller is lying or that he is
lying. This area: criminality--that is not at all the issue. He are sisply
concerned with content to present the content of politics, the content of
the structure as it really was. Of course, it is quite difficult to do it
here, but one will have to try by simply describing it.

I will do that now: I will start with the gist of Husller's testimony, what
it is aiming at; his statennt with respect to the attacks, for instance,

and his classification--the classification which the national security organ
considers necessary to be able to come up with something at all in these

trials. Our consent is that the strategic concept which was developed by
the RAF 72 has been aised at the military and political 3.5. presence in the

PRC and the individual, tactical, operative steps.

For that purpose there were the attacks on the CIA headquarters in Frankfurt,
the attack on the 11.8. Army headquarters in Heidelberg and the kidnapping of

three city cal-sanders in Berlin. The fact that this decision, this concept
was developed during the collective discussion process, involving everybody

who belonged to the RAF organization, i.e. there was a consensus that
included all groups. all individual units in the cities, and, consequently,

everybody had to be clearly conscious of the significance, the function of
these attacks.

As far as that is concerned, we are all responsible for these attacks on the

military presence of the United States in the m, i.e. we are all responsi-
ble for the attacks. for the attacks on the headquarters.

It says everything about the structure. It makes uncannlly clear what
Mueller is trying to do: This nonsense. saying that six people would have
been able to do it: carry out all the attacks that were made—completely
absurd. In connection with the strategic concept is also the project to
capture and exchange the allied city comandersuthe escalation which it
represents and the escalation which was contained in the plan by the

reaction; nevertheless, I do not want to talk about that here. There is
nothing that can be said about it anyway.

This decision, the concept of these attacks and our responsibility for then
can be explained from a Western component of our own history: the
politicization through the mobilization of the student movement as opposi-
tion to the Vietnam war. the fact that we simply want to get involved--
considering the necessity and the limitation of the Vietnam mobilisation,
its objective limit: what it could achieve and what it could not achieve
until it was shattered and integrated.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One can say: It is this experience of the necessity to get involved in
arned atruggle--i.e. to reach the level that is appropriate to the situation

in which we find ourselves here in the PRC as a 0.8. colony, a strategic
subcenter of [1.8. inperialisr-the situation which has been constituted by

the RAP; anyway, the entire argu-entetion which has already been developed
in this statesent. I do not think that I have to repeat again. Right now
I an concerned with explaining it from the viewpoint of the group.

Something concrete on the city co-anders:

The nsterial purpose of the kidnapping was to free the prisoners. i.e. to
use the kidnapping to bring about an exchange of the prisoners. who at that

time had already been arrested and placed in isolation and subjected to
physical torture.

In other words, it was an objective necessity for the group to free the
prisoners. Exchange is the only mans.

As far as Mueller is concerned, the Berlin city co-anders appear only in
a STERN colportage—at least, that is all I know-dc has been conpletely

omitted free the testimony. The sinple, well-aimed purpose is to suppress
the politics that were made by the MP 72. It is clear because Berlin was

a crucial project for us and it was also quite difficult to do, in other
words. it was difficult free the operational aspect. Three city couandersn
three: i.e. three large col-andos were to carry out the plan. The action
had already reached the phase of execution. but because of the arrest it

could not proceed-~Andreas was arrested approxinately 2 weeks before it
was to be carried out, and consequently a part of the infrastructure

naturally collapsed, i.e. we could not know whether it would also affect
a part of the infrastructure which was directly intended for the action.

In addition, the 0.5. city contender was quite heavily guarded. tining and
coordination were difficult. Thus, it was no longer possible for us to

carry out the action.

But the important thing is: It was the project which with we were occupied,
we were involved--particularly Andreas and Gudrun. Because of that, the

national security organ will not let Mueller talk about it any longer, so
he can clail that Andreas and Gudrun were involved in the attacks on the
police presidia.

That is garbage, nonsense. It has nothing to do with the facts. At that
tine Andreas and Gudrun were with use in Berlin and that is where we were
organizing this thing.

His insane construction is that four or five types were supposed to have
carried out all of the attacks in the PRC. It should certainly not require

any more explanations. because it is clear to everybody how ridiculous it
is and how obvious the purpose is. In other words. here is the entire

monster: five defendants--and to blaln everything on five defendants, now
there are only three anyway. It is all the sane line. It also makes

terribly clear the entire dramturgy-~the line in general which is being

178

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

employed: psychological warfare by the federal prosecution and court--the
fact that there are actually no contradictions and, naturally. that there
cannot be any at all. what Mueller says about Munich, for instanceo-I
think, he says that Andreas and Holger had done it. The fact is that
neither one nor the other was involved. I said it already: At that time
Andreas was in Berlin, and these actions were carried on: by groups that
were in Manich. At any rate-now it can be said--at the: time the RAF was
organized in the following manner: There were eight groups in six cities,
among them were two strong groups in two cities. One group was in Munich.
The groups, the individual units, were integrated into the logistic system.
There was a connection with respect to discussions between the individual

units, but they were autonomous in their decisions on the operational
implementation.

The exact goal. planning, checking, timing was left to the individual
groups--it cannot be any other way. And, naturally, it happened that we
did not know anything concrete about these attacks before they happened-
i.e. even if we had had information, we would not have prevented then,
because-well, it is simply not appropriate to prevent something that has
been planned by a group. Also-«we would not even have been able to prevent
it, neither as far as time is concerned nor technically, it was not possible
under the conditions. It was clear. the meaning of the attacks was: an
answer to the fact that the fighters had been killed in the street. I am

referring to Petra and Tommy. Therefore it could never have been our
intention to prevent it.

Naturally, the purpose is evident why Mueller is purauing such classifica-
tions with his talking: to mask the strategic concept, to let it out
altogether. to destroy it with idiotic classifications. The strategic con-
cept which from the very beginning clearly stated its opposition to 0.8.
military presence, to the occupation by the U.S. Army, the complete economic
and political dependence on the United States. And that is the item in the
testimony which is affected by this ruling. It is important, because it is
to disavow the politics of the group and to destroy it.

Then, there is another matter on which he insists-perhapa I can ask some
of you individually when you come to give more concrete information. Now I

will deal with it only generally. It has to do with the claim that Ulrike
rather than Andreas or Gudrun or rather than parts of the group intended
and carried out the attack on the Springer tower. And the claim that there
was a disagreement within the group or, at any rate, that there was infight-
ing, terror or how should I know exactly what the pig said. The fact is
that we, when the action was carried out in Eaaburg--and it has already
been explained during this trial--did not know anything about it because

of the total structure: It was an autonomous decision and an action that
had been carried out autonomously by the Hamburg groups.

After the action there was a great deal of criticism within the other groups.

Subsequently Ulrike went to Hanburg to find out the details and get accurate

information about what had happened, because as a natter of principle the
RAF never conceives actions with the implication that civilians may be hurt

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the process. It was a vital principle in all discussions, and the
criticism of the group in Hamburg dealt with the fact that it carried out

the action without realizing in its concept that, naturally. Springer would
not vacate. In other words, they did not take that into consideration.

That was the reason why Ulrike went to Hamburg at that time. to clarify,
to find out the details. After her findings she formulated the statement

about the attack which also contains--the entire procedure, warning,
Springer is not vacating etc., i.e. what Mueller claims-well, things that
are already known, the purpose; and concerning Ulrike, now he claims: She
had the intention anyway or could have had the intention to plan actions
against the others--which is complete nonsense--but it corresponds exactly
to the line, which is now spread through propaganda: tensions etc. Total

fiction which is to legitimize the murder of Ulrike. The claim that there
had been tensions that had existed for some time; going back--as Mueller is

saying here--going back as far as Hamburg, back to the structure of the
group 71-72. It is all manufactured, put together for one purpose, to
legitimize the murder.

Prinzing:

well, I will tell you now that your opinions and assessments are not the
subject here. The additional claim that a murder had happened here is

something I will not accept at any rate. "hat would happen is that you may
have to count on disciplinary measures.

--Certainly. There is another item about Berlin, Mueller says that
Andreas had ordered people to carry out attacks or he had urged them, I do
not know the exact formulation. That is absurd. because the action

against the city commanders was about to be executed. In other words.
there were no decisions at all about attacks in Berlin. If Mueller says
so, it can only mean--because he had already released the information
about the action in STERN and he knew about it. although he did not know
concrete details--that this claim is to break the political line, that no
more politics are to be permitted in these constructions and, naturally,

it is also to be applied to this trial.

That is all I can think of right now concerning the complex issue of attacks.
Question by Attorney Teaming:

...it has to do with the problem that Mueller, Chief Witness Mueller.

claimed that the attack against Springer in Hamburg has been planned and
prepared by Ulrike Meinhof.

The federal prosecution objects to the question because of "chief witness."

Attorney Teaming continues:

My question: Do you know whether Ulrike was actually in Hamburg at that
time and do you know whether there were any tensions between Ulrike and

Andreas because of these items or any other items; or what was the rela-
tionship like anyway?

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--I already cosmented on that and what I said was that there was general
criticism after the attack. i.e. among all of us...

Prinzing interrupts:

We do not want any more repetitions here.
--Just stop it, you do not have any idea what I an going to say...

"hat he wants is more precise infatuation. Hell. perhaps I will repeat one

more time the main thing. which was what I said about it before: that
Ulrike did go there at that time to clarify things and to formulate the

explanation following the result of this clarification and the establish-
ment of the facts.

More exact: The facts were, she was in Berlin and about the middle of May
she went to Stuttgart. She was in Berlin because of the preparations for

the kidnapping; she was involved in the planning process and the organiza-
tion.

After that she went to Stuttgart to do another job which was important. and
the reason why she did that was that she knew a lot about it and was able to
do it very well. It was a matter of collecting asterial for the discussion
within the framework of what Ulrike was doing in general: information

organization on the international level, in other words, she tried to trans-
mit the discussion process that was going on within the Left. particularly

on the international level, with groups abroad. At that time the discus-
sion concerning factory guerrillas was timely. In Italy there were

attempts of this kind--a certain tactic which is possible in Italy because
of the different conditions-~we will have to say that it is not possible

here. And this was the matter Ulrike wanted to take care of: She wanted
to organize this discussion process under the aspect, the perspective of a

continental strategy. That was the reason why she went to Stuttgart--I
think Andreas called Stuttgart immediately after the Hamburg attack. when

criticism surfaced right away in our group, and subsequently she went to
Hamburg to get things cleared up. I think that is the way it was. It also

answers the question whether there were any differences or, the devil only
knows. fragmentation. The facts are ominously clear that these claims are
completely unfounded.

Attorney Teaming:

Another question: It concerns the testimony of Gerhard Mueller, witness for
the prosecution. who said that it had been planned to liquidate Siegfried

Hausner. Do you know anything about that and do you know whether there
were individuals who left the group and how things went?

--Of course. there were some who left. It would be wrong to say that some-

thing like that does not exist. There are disagreements within the group.
They result from the process in which the group is involved. Thus. the

process of the struggle naturally results in disagreements and there comes

181
FOI‘OFFKJAL.US£i0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a tine when some people decide that they do not want to do that any longer.
Because they do not want to do that any longer, they decide to turn around
and go back; or there is an atteqt to form another practice, although

everybody really knows that that is not possible, it is a lie if one has
done it. A step like that can never be aore than a step backwards, it is

always a step backwards, stepping back into the filth.

But there were people who left and, naturally, nothing was ever said about
liquidation, never at any tine. There were people who left because they
could not do the work any longer, they do not want to do it any note,
perhaps because they understood what illegality, what arned struggle means.
That was their free decision. It was right for then to leave—it would have
been crazy to keep then, what for, a canon practice would no longer have
been possible at all.

And there were separations. when it was our decision. There were people,
when we said, we will separate ourselves from then for certain reasons-

essentially, of course, they are the sane reasons—because there was s tine
when working together was just no longer possible, well, of course, they
are all still alive. So, everything was quite cool. They left, they are
doing something different, aware of the fact that they could not continue
this practice.

Perhaps I should add what happened when people decided to quit.

It has always been that way. Decisions were ude during the discussion
process of the whole group, the wit to which one belongs. In other words,

everybody participated or a great nusber didneverybody who was able to
participate under the conditions.

Discussions progressed well and there was nothing abrupt, but there was

always a development, so that everybody just like all the others in the
group understood that the point had been reached where it was no longer

possible to fight together. At that point he has to decide: Either he
changes now, he wants to do it, he sakes hiaself do it, he gets there--snd,
naturally. together with the others--or he goes, and then he goes without
being coerced, without pressure, because it is his decision, and he can only
understand it as his decision, because it came across that way during the
process. Because a separation or an exclusion which is not carried out
responsibly means hatred and sooner or later this type lands with the
bullies. The group never--well, threw anybody away. It never happened.

The structure was not like that.

It is also the point that nakes the entire ﬂausner story which meller
brings up something that is absolutely impossible:

Liquidation .

That is, we know, of course, that principally it cost be possible. that is
no problem; when you fight illegally, it is siaply the way it is.

l&

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(MVLV

But the process in which the group 72 was involved it would have been wrong,
in contradiction to its situation. In Bausner's case it is absurd, because
it just is not true that he wanted to go or that we said he should go. As
far as his person was concerned. what he was doing, there was no reason at
all to say that he must go or be completely liquidated. It is ridiculous.
There was nothing. Of course. everybody lakes listakes or things like that,
but this arrogance and to way with such definity: I do not make any mis-
takes. nobody can do that.

At any rate. the way things were in the groups. if somebody would say some-
thing like: he must go now and if he does not go abroad, then....

--In other words, what Mueller is saying is more or less: If he cannot go
to Rolland. cannot be sent abroad. the simplest emergency solution would be
to liquidate him-only the national security organ can come up with some-
thing like that. In other words, that a thing like that never strengthened
the structure, the group. the individuals who fought in the group but that
it weakened and destroyed then.

Because of the implication that something like that could happen in the
group--how could it be possible that the types can fight, that they have
courage. establish any kind of identity at all.

To liquidate someone who has fought with us as an emergency solution and
only because there is perhaps no room--that is a totally ridiculous con-
struction.

I can present another example:

There is the story in Berlin involving Edelgart Graeter. I thin: that is her
name--at least it is Graefer-dwho snitched on half a dozen people. She
betrayed people, betrayed apartments and what happened and what had been
done: Somebody dumped a bucket of tar on her head and put a sign around
her neck. "hat I am saying is that if something like that is known. that
someone betrayed people-—i.e.: he betrays them and practically puts them
in the line of fire. because nobody can really know when the bullies are
coming to the apartments, what happens then--when he gets a bucket of tar
on his head. it is even more absurd to assume that somebody who did not
betray anybody could. because of a certain situation when everything
culminates the way Mueller describes: searches and who knows what,
arrests-this person could be simply eliminated. That is out of the ques-
tion.

And then. of course. the proof, I would say that it is not possible that
Siegfried led the Commando Holger Heine. It is out of the question that he
could have done it or did do it. It is only the way it was reported. that
he does that, does it himself, it tells exactly the right thing about the
structure the way it was. I think that one can understand that very well.
How should he be able to do that, how should he be able to fight, consider-
ing the story meller tells.

183

FOI‘OFFKJAI.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Attorney Temming:

And then: The prosecution witness Mueller also claimed that the hierarchic
structure had been led by Andreas Baader.

It was said that Andreas leader had made a claim to leadership. I would be

interested to know whether there was such a thing, whether there is such a
thing within the group? And what is the group's position with respect to

leadership in general?
-Hell. if someone made a claim to leadership...
Federal Prosecutor Zeis:

I think this letter concerning the hierarchical structure or not, it was
the subject of an extensive testimony by the witness this morning... ,

--Now it is concrete...

Zeis:

...the question...

--now it is concrete about Andreas.
Zeis:

Be quiet when I speak.

--Ah. just stop this nonsense. really.
You said ”claim to leadership," not...

If somebody had made a claim to leadership. he vauld have been ridiculed.
In other words. to make a claim is silply ridiculous. The way things are,
the way they were and how we understood it: Leadership can be a function
and in certain situations it can also be necessary, for instance, in
actions. So, we certainly have it and. naturally, Andreas has a function
of leadership. Simply because he can develop an enormously precise concept
of situations and fro: this concept, from the analysis of situations he can
conceive a tactic. a certain procedure and subsequently he can establish
lines. in other words, the tactical line and the strategy. But that is
simply a thing that never is done single-handedly or the result of an
individual decision. but a concept like that, if drawn up by one person.
naturally is subject to discussion by everybody. because. after all. every-
body is concretely involved in the practice, also in the line. They must
discuss the line, they lust understand it, they must continue its develop-
ment. everybody must be able to determine it in every situation. Because
in certain situations you find yourself alone and when you do not under-
stand it--well, nothing will work any longer. what Andreas did. was
established, defined in detail and continued by everybody in the discussion

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

process. And at that nonent when it was established as a line, at that
nonent. naturally. he becaae subject to this line or bound by it—not by

force but simply because of the concept that it is necessary, that it is
right, that it is the right perspective, a real tactic--just like everybody

else. And so it was in very good hands. In other words, leadership always
has a certain function and. of course, for then who use it and for then who

depend on it. it is only bearable when it is not doaination, when it is
coapletely in line with what everybody wants. Anyway, the principle of the
organization is voluntarisn, i.e. that everybody mat be able and willing
to do it. He called it cadre line: that everybody nuat get there whether
he has been in the RAP for a long tins or not, it sakes no difference,
everybody aust get there exactly to be able to do it hinself. It is not
what meller claim when he talks about an open group, it is nonsense—that
in practice everybody is involved in all working processes. There is

nothing like that, but it is a part of the construction of his testimony,
because it would nean that Mueller knows everything. But holler knows

little. meller was not a cadre. lie only save that and the purpose is the
sane as the one pursued by the national security organ.

Prinzing interrupts:

well. that is sone kind of an assessnent...

No, I an not finished, wait a assent...

Prinzing:

Just stay with the facts, please, whatever you know and can tell us.

"Yes. it is a fact. I know that he was not a cadre.

Prinzing:

Yes, you nay say that, but the rest of. the assessaent. Does that wean that
the question has been answered adequately, Hr Attorney?

--No, I an not finished...

Prinzing:

I do not know. Do you have a prepared concept for every question?
--I...naturally, I thought about what I want to say here, of course.
.Prinzing:

bid you know the question that you would be asked?

“Hell, how an I supposed to know it.

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Printing:

Hell, you already have a prepared answer.

-I read the haeller things in the press...

Prinz ing :

You have already read the “seller files?

...I read the meller things in the newspapers. th do you not listen? And

the things that I know about holler and what I found out free the discus-
sion and the infatuation about his. etc.. free the STERN article-after all,

there are a few crawler-I put the- together and ease up with a few points.
he points he uses to describe the structure of the group; when I say:

fascist. fascist gang structure. the way he describes then—it becaae clear
to as what I had to say in this capacity here as a witness.

About cadre line. It neans that everybody oust be able to do it hisself.
‘lhat is a concrete consonant of leadership, naturally: "hen everybody has
to be able to do it hiaself, it siwly scene that there can never be donina-
tion. that it has been established as a function. which. however. can also
be dissolved in a collective process. where everybody gets there and can do

it and knows how to do it. It is siqu also a condition for continuity,
in other words. when cadres are arrested. it met be avoided that every-

thing loses all orientation, but the types nust really be able to deter-
mine things the-elves. to continue the developunt to mks sure that there

is no interruption. no penetration. It is a condition of continuity and
therefore a condition for the entire politics, for the entire practice. At

one tine we said about it: The guerrilla mveaent is a hydra. i.e. it is
constantly growing new heads. The goal is that it will be that way. The

discussion of the information-4 as sure the federal prosecution has it,
quite sure, and it also knows that there never was a hierarchy—there were

the sentences that expressed exactly what I an talking about. One of
Ilolger's sentences said the following: "Everybody is collective." It seans

exactly what it says. Md there is one of Ulrike's sentences. She said it
during the trial in Berlin: "The guerrilla is the group." It arena that

everybody brings hiuelf or gets involved in the process of everybody. the
entire learning process. which, of course. is sonething continuous: the

practice. in other words. during this confrontation. because it is manda-
tory, it is nandatory to learn. to change oneself-”result: The guerrilla
is the group.

Errand boys and chiefs. leaders and subjects--ss meller says--is the
antagoniss to this structure. to araed politics. The guerrilla ave-ent—

like the apparatus which spits out these pretenses for psychological war-
fare: national security.
At one tine we defined what leadership scans to us in the following nanner:

"Leadership-what it should be: The concrete concept of the situation and
its transcendence: the goals and their transaiasion in the structure of the

186

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fighting group"-which means. what we have learned is that leadership in

the guerrilla movement is the initiative, the implementation of the politics:
armed proletarian politics.

Not "the leadership" constitutes the guerrilla group, but it comes into

existence only as a function which is used during the learning and working
process of the group. the illegal group--in other words. tron its practice
and for it.

when it operates properly it combines the initiative and experience of
everybody--it becomes, it develops into a collective process. which results
in continuity and ability to act. That is the only way. And

to come back to the sentence: The essence within is the relationship
between subjectivity and objectivity. in other words. between will and

necessity--to lake it come together, to a head in the action. It is the

only way-~it is simply the experience--thst subjectivity is even possible
at all. Are you--the type who tights--the subject and is whatever you are
and will be really the meaning of the struggle. It is exactly the way it

is summarized by us: Freedom is only possible in the struggle for libera-
tion.

Attorney Teaming:

What about the authority of command which Andreas Baeder allegedly had and
carried out, according to the witness for the prosecution Hueller. I
believe, he gave the example of an order to shoot. the fact that every RAP
member. in case of arrest, is supposed to use area to defend himself.

--Hell. I an gping to divide the answer into two parts.

First the relationship. the definition which the group had about orders,
the way it was defined-and it was quite a process to come up with a defi-

nition: 0rder--what it is, what our relationship is to an order, and then.
concretely. the relationship to an order to shoot.

First I want to say something about orders in general:

To be sure, the way we saw it was that an order is the collective decision
during the phase of implementation. In other words, during the action
there are ordera--to put it simply: It is a military necessity. it is also
proper, it is functional, it has nothing to do with force, because the
action is. after all. a collective decision, it was discussed previously.
agreed to by everybody, understood by everybody, the specific jobs every-

body had to do in the process. And. consequently. an order is actually
nothing more than coordination.

That is one thing. And the other one is the authority of command. The

entire picture which hueller painted is: Andreas the boss with absolute
power...

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anyway. for instance, the order to shoot asntioned in ”seller's testimnyv
I would siqu say it is clearly the distillate of the psychological war-
fare since 1970, which maintains that W neﬂers had had orders to shoot.

Although the W said quite a bit about that, particularly about that point.
But I will again be lore specific. It has popped up in the aedia since

Haﬁurg, when Petra Schela was shot to death: Order to shoot, in other
words. cannon fodder. nan who are sent to the front by sons kind of people

in the. background--that is the exact construction. And meller...
Prinzing:

You are now to be questioned about the authority of co-snd by...

--I as talking right now...
Printing:

...the lawyer for the defense. Hhat you are talking about here is really
no longer relevant to the question.

“Hell. I an of a different opinion.
I an now talking about the order to shoot.

It is a utter of fact that mallet knows that there was no order to shoot:

lie did not have one and none of us had one. And why he said thatuthat is
what ay co-ents were about. and that is what has been labeled "irrelevant"--

it is the distillate of psychological warfare which is to be verified with
this testiaony. the fact that it was supposed to have been that way with
the purpose of destroying the effectiveness of the group.

Attorney Iieldnann:

Weller stated here as a witness that the structure of the Red Artsy Faction
was: Baader. the leading head. then there were the asabers of the nucleus.
then there were ordinary neders and then the fringe members. Can you con-
firn this information?

«Hell, I said about that, what we called it. the way it was: Ihny heads
and in addition the line of cadres, the way we developed during the entire
process. That was the goal, and it was the ease in most of the groups that
had been together for a long enough tine.

The latter concerning fringe were etc.. what can be said about that is
that, naturally, there were contacts with people who were not fully
integrated into the group. But that is really quite all right. because,
after all. the MP is a military organisation, i.e. not a nob that just
sits somewhere, but its contacts are defined according to functions.
according to political and operative criteria. which scans. for instance--
well. it does not really belong here: You can also again see the nonsense
in the stateasnt about the "open group."

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Likewise, not everybody had all the information or participated in all the
working processes; not everybody had to know everything-«of course. Every-
body had the informtion that was necessary for bill to be able to do what he
had to do. i.e. he had a function to fulfill. To do something else is
idiotic, not at all the thing to do, and everybody knew exactly why it is
not necessary—But there is a oomletely open discussion within the groups
and between the groups about the strategy and the tactic and also the
theory and analysis, how it developed and, naturally clearly about the
principles of the organization. It is an open, collective process of
everybody who is fighting-~lt is right that I have only concrete infom-
tion about what concerns us directly, because, naturally, one has to expect
that when one gets arrested that there can be traitors. that they say be
pressured, tortured. He knew that, and it is siqu a condition for an
illegal ailitary organization to conduct itself in a aanner that is neces-
sary, according to the conditions, otherwise it would consist of a bunch
of idiots.

For a group that wants to fight, this nonsense about an "open group" would

mean that it would never get there, because the neabers would act like
ignoranuses, like people who do not know what they are doing there.

To be open is a very good thing, open discussions. open, honest relations--
and everything runs, but never with respect to nilitary details: i.e. the
political structure is open, collectivistic, and even the comndos have a

collective style of working. but the question concerning military details,
contacts etc. runs strictly functional, conspirative...

Printing interrupts:

Hell, right now the issue is not what the tern "open" ilplies. I think the

question. Herr Heldnann, has cone up the third tins and has been repeatedly
explained...

--...open group--really, as a principle of organization for an illegal
group--that is siny a dunb denunciation, that is the way I would put it.

At to mey lie ldnann:

were there any nenbers who had control over other members. in other words,
a controlling function within the group or of a group?

"What kind of "controlling function," I do not quite understand it.

Attorney Heldnann:

I cannot say it either. I an referring to page 10221 of the minutes of the

main proceedings. “seller's testimny, "in addition, these nuclear nelwere,
the leading neabers, were exercising a constant control," and the ample:

"Assuming that one of these people was in Stuttgart, he—which means a so-
called nuclear newer, as Ilerr mallet expressed it--he called berlin con-

tinuously to check on the situation there, whether the people were func-
tioning the way they were supposed to."

189
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--All right, calling--the example actually speaks for itself. Intonation
is siwly a condition to be able to act, to be able to deternine a situa-
tion at all and it takes place along the sewers and it is clearly under-
stood and functions well among the individual groups, because it is sons-
thing that is necessary to be able to intervene at certain points, to be
inforned about what happens in other cities. And when the people in

Stuttgart call Berlin, it is quite in order, quite nor-s1. and everybody
did that nany tines a day when sonething had to be finalised or coordi-

neted. To call that control only demonstrates the conplete stupidity of
this testinony.

Attorney leldmann:

Are there or were there any attorneys anong the RAP sewers?

"Hell. attorneys as aeﬁers of the RAF, one can only do one thing. howl
with laughter. Because our relationship with attorneys is a distant one.
Attorneys are attorneys and as attorneys they are not aedaers of the RAP.

And we are quite certain that we do not want any attorneys in the RAF or
that we ever had one. It is a contradiction in itself. Someone who is an

attorney does not want to be an RAF neaber. otherwise he would no longer be
an attorney—there would have to be a total break with the job. Attorneys

are part of the judicial system. even when they are critical. That is the
way it is. And our relationship with attorneys was and ia—it is very
funnyuand shit, and I really have little desire to talk more about it
because it is so tiresome, after so many years it is always the seas--
because nost of the tins and again and again these types have obscure
private interests and fear. which is rationalised politically. Hell, nest

of then are trying to finish off the prisoners-in other words, a constant
nuisance.

Attorney Taming:

A question about infornstion. The prosecution witness Mueller claiud that
informtion was used to continue pursuing crininal goals inside and outside.
above all, outside the prisons. Can you say sonething about the function
of information and, second. was there something like pressure to participate
in the information and. third. was there any kind of pressure in connection
with the infornation, did some prisoners use the information to pressure
other prisoners?

“The information was the absolute opposite. It was the only possibility--

the way we defined it and conceived it-tha only possibility at all for
isolated prisoners to interact socially. Even if it is only a surrogate.

in other worus, letters, paper. But it was the only possibility for polit-
ical discussion. political inforution and, naturally. for orientation.

here was absolutely nothing like a hierarchical structure or something like
that. But what meller is saying there concerning inforaation l--actually

I cannot renewer exactly how it is formulated-«he idea that there had been
several categories and one had to earn his way up, sons kind of a prono-
tional oyster-that is absurd.

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Information l-it included everybody who was organized in the MP, and it
was simply functional.

Information 2 hardly existed. At one time there was talk about doing it,
but in reality it never existed. And the information 2, which never

existed, became the information system during the hunger strike. I cannot
see any kind of hierarchy, no categories. They are simply two entirely
different groups. One of them consists of MP prisoners, the other one is
a group which consists, in part, of cleetely different prisoners, 2 June,
Hamburg and lunich urban guerrilla groups. Hell, they include all those
who participated in the hunger strike, and there were really quite s few.

It would be imossible to cut it short. It involves totally different
levels of discussion, how the groups were connected. To cut it short

would be lumping everything together and it would defeat the reel function.

And information 3--It has absolutely nothing to do with hierarchy. Informa-
tion 3 was information, i.e. press articles, analysis, political economy etc.
In other words, simply informational uterial. What everybody got who is in
jail and who wanted it to work with it. The idea that information 3 was
somehow the lowest level of political information is nonsense. It was a
certain kind of information-well, newspapers, press reports, foreign
reports, in other words, everything that is needed to get a certain over-

view; also essential economic analyses we made. That was information 3.
In addition--how did you just say it?

Attorney Telling:
Whether there was any pressure to participate. ..

--Oh, I see. The meaning of the information, its entire function as it was
defined by us was after all a means against the isolation. He said: Every
sentence written by a prisoner about information is like a deed, every
sentence is an action. That is the way it was for the prisoners. After
all, we had nothing, we had no opportunity to do anything in isolation
except to use this communication and that was really—one can say--a

radical collectivization process for those who had not known it previously,
because on account of the information everybody knew everything about

everybody and what was written. Anyway. it is the absolute opposite of
hierarchy, or of some kind of a structure. Everybody wrote what he was

thinking about, what kind of problems he had, where he could not continue
all alone and simlteneously everybody tried to come up with some kind

of a political assessment, an understanding of the situation and its condi-
tions to be able to fight against the isolation, against the annihilation

of the group in isolation. As far as that goes. of course, everybody had
control over everybody. But that is good and not bad. Not domination

but the negation of it, something I would call: the attempt to maintain
a structure which is different, which is the exact negation of fascist
ideas, to maintain it in jail-against the machine which wants to make it
impossible. So, the information is simly a means for us to be able to
fight on this level any way possible. For isolated prisoners it is only'
possible by way of analysis and statement. Naturally, the possibilities

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are very limited and an euwle of how limited it is, is the hunger strike--

sinly‘the most extreme defensive, otherwise one would not have to engage
in a hunger strike against the isolation...

Attorney Teasing:

I have another question about the function or the alleged function of
disciplinary aessures.

Printing does not pernit the question.

Attorney Tex-ling:

But perhaps it can be better illustrated in connection with the hunger
strike, what was the function of the hunger strike and were there any
sttewts during the hunger strike to exert any pressure on the prisoners
who were on the hunger strike by taking away the intonation systen'! how,
first, what was the function of the hunger strike and, second, was the

information system perhaps used as a disciplinary measure during the hunger
strike to induce someone not to discontinue the hmger strike?

“The information was not a disciplinary neaaure during the hunger strike or
at any other titer-by whoa, really by whoa, by everybody or what. The
inforaation was not a whip to be used to keep people in line, but it was a
weapon for every one of us who needed it. In other words, it was a weapon
for connication, although it was only paper. Perhaps it is ridiculous

to say: weapon, but the situation of the prisoners is exactly like that.
There is really no other possibility in isolation.

And concretely, there was naturally no pressure. The hunger strike is a
practical exane for the fact that it is not possible at all to exert
pressure, because otherwise actions become iepoasible. The hunger strike
was discussed by us for a long tine. Whether we should do it at all and
what the conditions were for the group, i.e. each indivile in the group.
And since the federal prosecution confiscated all these things, it knows
about it anyway. Consequently all the claias it makes, naturally are only
a means for diffanation anyway. But it does not natter. At any rate, the
hunger strike was the product, the result of the discussion. And during
the discussion everybody had to make a clear decision: Can I go on a
hunger strike, do I want to do it. Because it was clear to us what it
neans: The situation may arise that I may die. It leans that it is a con-

dition that always exists when one fights: the fact that one dies, one is
shot to death. Experience has already taught us that it is the sec in

prison. At any rate, it was the decision of each individual and it was the
only way that it could work. One can very well find out from the inform-
tion that everybody wrote whether he wants to do it and why and whether he
feels that he can do it, whether he thinks it is right, of course, the

tactic, etc. hunger strike in general, whether it can be a aeans, a weapon

by prisoners. we arrived at the conclusion that it is a weapon, siqu it
is a weapon for us because we do not have another one. And a thirst
strike, which is of an even shorter duration, well, it is quite evident--for

192

I-‘OROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFTNCJAI.USEZCN§LY

instance. Ulrike's statement in Berlin that we will start a thirst strike
if water is withheld again from Andreas in Schwalastadt, i.e. he will die,

of course. immediately. All these decisions were made collectively. It is
really quite simple. One could also prove but it is probably not what we

want to do: crininalistic argumentation against the falsifications and lies
of the national security press. The fact that we were able to do it shows

that it is true and those who collapsed under the condition of the hunger
strike. in other words, under the total confrontation, naturally, they are

also an example for the fact that there was really no pressure. They
stopped and the way they understood it was that all the politics, in other
words. the form of confrontation which is necessarily contained in these
politics--guerrilla movement-without which it is not conceivable at all-
these are the conditions--the fact that they did no longer want this con-
frontation, live at any price—-and even if it is nothing more than vegetat-
ing like an animal, like a plant in isolation. No fighting, rebellion,
revolutionary war. which is your cause. Mueller himself quit. he quit and
betrayed us. when the collapse comes like it did with him. it shows very
clearly: He was only interested in his belly and not in other politics--
and now he sold himself for it. He wanted the deal and now he has it. In
the process he has been conpletely devoured by the national security system.
A history of 3 years of brainwashing, and there are letters from him in
which he describes it. But now it is a different matter.

Attorney Teaming:

A final question: You said that hunger strike was a possibility although

it was a limited one in the struggle. which means that information was also
a weapon. To fight against what and a weapon against what?

--The hunger strike?

Against the confinement conditions, against the annihilation through isola-
tion, in other words, simply because it was necessary to do something
against it. To fight against it and the only way this struggle was possible

considering all the conditions. The experience was that everything that had
been tried from the legal aspect, for instance. complaints and just about

everything all through these years, was completely ineffective. Because
it is exactly as I said at the beginning. The relationship is war.

The entire machine. consisting of national security, secret service, media
and the political justice system, is conducting the war, it is a function
of the counterinsurgency. And the legal means which still remain are,
naturally, of no help at all. pure traps. It became clear very quickly-wc
realize it in the case of Astrid. the first one who was really destroyed in
jail. Then there was Ulrike in jail. He had, the prisoners had no possi-
bility other than the hunger strike. it was really an action of the most
extreme defense. But collectively and determined and as determined as we
really were to break it, this measure against the prisoners: isolation, a

hunger strike, naturally, is and can become a weapon.

Prinzing cuts off.

193

FOR¢Nﬂﬂ€1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL UFE ONLY

Zeis:

Frau Hohnhaupt, a little while ago you answered Attorney Dr Bald-son's
ouestion, I believe, by saying that in the group there was no such thing as
an order to shoot. by I ask why you were carrying a weapon when you were
arrested, a weapon which was loaded and ready to go off?

no you want to answer the question?
«Ah bunk. no.
Printing:

that legal gromds do you want to plead?

«Ah. no legal grounds at all. it is sisply too stupid after all the things
I said.

Part m1. Speech by Ronald Augustin in lueckeburg

Whoever is watching the trial here is renindad of a nrionette stage. what
is happening here cannot be explained by the presentations oi the state

prosecutor and the court.

he rolls of barbed wire. the loo-non unit iron the Federal Border Police.
the helicopter which transports the judges to the prison on trial days, are
sywtons. They show the m as a state, the legal justice systen on its way
to the state of eeergsncy, a fascist justice oyster-hare iron the contra-
diction that breaks out in all trials against IA! prisoners: beween the
national security sdainistration of these trials and the attmt to nake

then appear as a class justice routine.
All the trials against us are one trial.

It was conceived according to a centrally developed propagandistic counter-
strategy against the politics of the RAP. is tactically split up into
separate trials in Berlin, in ““23. in lsiserslautern. in Stuttgart. in
Bueckeburg. ‘lhey are planned in detail and perfectly orchestrated by
counterinsurgency staffs, who do not know civil ridrts: the docunsnts, the
witnesses, the construction of the prosecution are identical down to the
fornulations. The coordination is to sake it easier for the prosecution,
the courts, the police witnesses to wind their ways through the contradic-
tion between the criainal law systen and the national security adninistra-
tion. between the sutonony of the courts—within the systen of the class
justice systea it is only ideology anyway--and the cloak and dagger nethods
of the counterinsurgency. During the sooth proceedings the contradictions,
the ruptures. the decay and the destruction of civil law is to be contested.
the war, the counterrevolutionary character of the trials is to be hidden

behind the seal: of the legal systen.

19b

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Every trial against revolutionaries uncovers nore contradictions than it can

solve. The defeat which was to be presented demnstratiwely by these trials
is propagandistically invalidated with the barbed-wire rolls and the sense

used by the state powers to defend thenselvea.

During the war of annihilation. which the state is conducting against us.
use of the tactics is to dispute the effect of the RAF. It has—in the

dialectics of the struggle agaimt our ennihilationwbecone difficult.
Because the sinple truth of the guerrilla novenent:

victory or death

cannot be disputed. It accentuates the concept of imerialian, expresses
it clearly: naked lie and naked power.

In a letter to Ien van den Ileuvel. chairperson of the Partij von de Arbeid,
Holland's social denocratic party, Hilly Brandt for-dated the counter-

strategy: "II-amization" of soc‘ety against the revolution through the
"quiet and deternined naintenance of the nor-a1 state"--

The usual state, which is to be maintained. is portraying in the crisis of
the systen—-

here: by instituting special triale against the RAF-the transfornstion
process.

Nornsl is

legal nurder. for which the govern-ant prepared the population in the

canaims of psychological warfare over the nedia concerning the hunger
strike of the prisoners. In this unner, the differences between the govern-

ment and the national security organ, SPD and am have been reduced to tac-
ticel differences over the most efficient political way of execution.

CDU politicians demanded open larder by discontinuing forced feeding

while SPD politicians preferred the nesns of nedical technology: intensive-
care station. secret nurder. In the CD!) Land of Rhineland-Palatinate,
Holger was executed systesatically starving his to death

while in the SPD Laender of North-Rhine Hestphalia and lower Sunny the
prisoners are to be destroyed on death row.

Norsel is

torture of political prisoners.
And I know what I as talking about:

Following 9 months of total isolation in Stuttgart-Sta-hein. I spent 6
sonths on death row in Hanover and now I an in a wing of an institution

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Bueckeburg. a wing which was specifically constructed for this trial
and which is coqletely sealed off fron the rest of the institution.

Bowl is

that already now. before the prisoners have been sentenced. annihilation
depart-ants have been constructed in at least three prisons, containing

soundproof cells. There the sentences are to be executed as death
sentences.

“cruel are

civil war neneuvera like the "winter trip" following holger's aurder.
Terrorist operations like the one in Brenen's nain railway station. where
a bot was planted according to a CIA enqle. with the intention of

thwarting the nobilization of the Left for the hmgsr strike of the
prisoners. Propaganda capaigm against defense attorneys to elininate with

then the opposing segnent of the poprlation. which is the condition for our
survival.

Noml is

the fact that the national security organ is securing the testiaonial

construction of the public prosecution by nanipulating and suppressing
prosecution records. he first part of 9,000 pages of investigative nata-

rial. for instance, was not ads available to the defense attorneys until
the beginning of rebruary; the final parts of the files were not available

until 6 days before the beginning of the trial. on 16 February.
Part of it has been altered by covering the tracks of the investigation.
Nor-s1 is

the fact that the defense attorneys of Iy choice could not be certain mtil
2 weeks prior to the trial whether they would be barred fro. the trial-

the fact that for 7 nnthe in 1976 I had no opportunity at all to talk to
an attorney--the fact that the attorney who is sitting here is a public
defender who is to guarantee the show trial, after the political defense
was denied and elininated.

Nor-a1 is

that the no has a national security legal syster-a net of special courts,
introduced in violation of the Potsda- Agreenent. They have judges who are

said to be-according to the Bundeatag debate on the reforn of the national
security law-dparticularly "reliable," possess a "special decisionnaking
ability"; their function—according to Federal Attorney Iohlhaasuia the
fight against "subversive activities."

196

MOWIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'heir job is to take the uncontrollable information of the secret service,
constitutional protection. political police and the Federal Criminal Police

Bureau and convert it into sentences.
ﬂornal is

state of emergency legislation for trials agath the RAF. Following 2
years of a propaganda caapaign by the national security organ and the

federal prosecution against the RAF prisoners. against the political
defense in political trials,

today special laws lake possible

the trial without defendants and

the complete liquidation of the defense. They firaly and effectively

establish the legality of torture and brainwashing, because the control
through defense lavyers and the final remants of a liberal public in the

trial is the last protection for national security prisoners.

He are not saying that this development-«he creation of institutional
prerequisites for counterinsurgency-way applies to the RAP. According

to its structure and framework. it is aimed at nipping in the bud any
revolt and crush every revolutionary noveaent.

It is class struggle fron the top. preventive comterrevolution--applying
fascist principles to the state of the iaperialiat bourgeoisie.

It is only becoming visible because of the reaction to the struggle by the
urban guerrillas and the RAP prisoners.

While fighting against the retrenchment skiraishes of the legal Left against
fascist advances--purging caspaigls against ”radicals in public service."
using heavily arsed military units against periodic sieges and killer

cousndos during civil war maneuvers-«he state security organ is gathering
tactical information to keep the ghettoized, encircled Left under total

control. Illegal treatment by the reconnaissance service has becoae
routine. Blacklists have been put together and at the touch of a button

they can be obtained froa the central cowuter.

The Left is exhausting itself in these retrenchaant skiraishes. ”the strata-
gists and practitioners of the civil war are gaining power. are independent

during this phase of transition to the state of eaargency, independent of

party representatives in state power organs. reaching as far as the govern-
ment level

and they implement counterinsurgency as a doaastic-policy strategy.

Federal Criainal Police Bureau President Herold. for instance, is asking
for open legislative functions for the national security nachine. lie

writes: "Of course, it is ay opinion that the duties of the police must be

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

changed. Because in a democracy it is intolerable that the function of the

police is restricted to the role of executor.... A democracy cannot afford
to have an institution that possesses an almst incoqarable privilege of

knowledge and keep it cowletely from contributing to the social health of
the enormus superstructure of...laws and norm."

'Ihe condition for the"'privilege of knowledge" of the Federal Criminal

Police Bureau is its control over Vest Europe's biggest police data bank,
located in Hiesbaden at the federal Criainal Police Bureau.

In order to, according to Retold, "deal with the crime in a new form of
prevention," the Federal Criminal Police Bureau is in the process-according
to a statement he Imde during a 1976 interview: "to prepare a system which

makes it possible to find connections...between fingerprints and heredity...
between physical size and crime." It means that he is saying precisely

what is meant with "social health": racism of the new fascism.

I will now read from the correspondence between Jan van den lieuvel and
Willy Brandt, because it was cowletely suppressed by the Heat Geraan press.

Van den Heuvel wrote on 27 hoveder:

"Re have learned from press reports that the German minister of justice,

Comrade Vogel, intends to restrict the rights of the attorneys of the
Baader-Ibinhof defendants.

"Furthermore, it is our understanding that a legal change is being prepared
which will nke it possible to sentence the defendants even if they are not
present. It is our opinion that these measures can be attributed to the

general auction with respect to the Baader-Mainhof group. We are con-
cerned, however, that the impression will arise that changes in the law can

be nade, special measures so to speak, agath the defendants, against the
meabers of the Baader-Heinhof group. After all, our party is of the opinion

that the laws applying to the conduct of a trial mat be the same for every
defendant, regardless of the seriousness of the charge or personal opinion.

"It is painful for us to learn that laws are changed suddenly, laws that
were considered adequate during the trials against German war criminals....
I hope with all my heart. you will understand that this letter was written

because of our deep concern for the political developments in Germany."

‘Ihe letter is the result of distrust that is growing abroad against West
German inerialism, against its big-power chauvinism. It is an expression

of the unrest felt particularly along the Dutch public, because Holland is
one of the countries that were ravished by the old Gerun fascism.

Furthermore, the reason why it is distancing itself from the SPD is an
attempt to escape the exposure of Social-Demcratic policies in Holland

itself through the development of Social-Democratic policies here in the
PRC.

198

FOIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Brandt replied on 9 Decewer:

"I regret the fact that, probably due to incoqlete press information. you
got the iwression that the F36 intends to use measures aimed at specific
cases to restrict the rights of imprisoned letters of the criminal Reader-
leinhof group or their defense attorneys. Such fears are unfounded.

"...Since we want to nip in the bud the political cri-inality as soon as
possible, our efforts are first of all to incite society for the reason

of averting hysteria and psychosis by pursuing a quiet and determined
maintenance of the normal state. Criminal nihilism can be fought more

effectively when fear is eliminated as an object of political and journal-

istic calculation...law, order. security..., to defend this substance
effectively is the real test for the liberal-democratic and civic con-
sciousness in our country. “the iwortant thing is to stand the test."

Brandt's letter operates with the naked lie--he does it and he can afford to

do it. aware of the fact that the use media have been totally utilized for
the propagation of the imperialist policies of this state, internally and
externally.

It is a fact that special legislation is a direct reaction exclusively to
the struggle of the urban guerrillas, the hmger strike of the prisoners.

It is aimed against the publicity these trials receive. against the inter-
nationalization of sympathy with our struggle.

Everybody could realize it—from the contradictions that erupted within the

SPD. And the unity among the parties. the haste, the panic to get these
lave approved within a 15-day period to obliterate that which characterized
them: the fact that these laws are retroactive, in other words, fascist
laws, to be able to use them as propaganda for the Landtag elections.

Frank Kitson, the British military strategist for countermeasures against
subversion and riots, developed in 1971 the functionalization of the legal
system for the purposes of the counterinsurgency:

"In general there are two alternatives; first." Kitson writes, "the legal
justice system could be used as a weapon in the arsenal of the government.
In this case it becomes nothing more than a propagandistic disguise for

the removal of undesirable persons in public life. To make sure that it
functions effectively. the activities of the legal justice service must be

integrated as discreetly as possible into the preparations for the war.
This means that the meter of the government responsible for the legal

justice system must be a member of the highest government circle or he not
receive his instructions from the head of govern-ant himself."

The highest office here is occupied by the federal attorney general, who
receives his instructions from the PRC minister of justice and who is the
coordinator between the Justice Depart-ant, the police, the Federal

Intelligence Service, constitutional security. the Federal Criminal Police
bureau and bonn's security force, department for national security.

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lhe idea of discretion, which was envisioned by the national security organ
or the federal prosecution. was the discreet annihilation of the prisoners
in brainwashing institutions in Cologne-Ossendorf and in Bannover, during
any years of social isolation. The plan was to take these people, who had
been tortured. who were living on death row, in couplets social isolation
for my years, who were disoriented. depoliticised, broken. and use then
as proof for the senselessness and hopelessness of revolutionary politics.

“(his plan failed, because the discretion was taken away, it fell apart in
view of the resistance of the prisoners. the hunger strike. the publicity

work of the defense lawyers. the cmaign against torture in- and outside
the country--as a result the second alternative of Kitson'a defensive
develop-ant becsse relevant: new laws--special legislation.

Kitson:

"Of course, the governsent can introduce new laws to deal with subversion,
which, if necessary, can be very severe. This second alternative is as a

rule not only orally right but it is also advisable because it cones
closer to the goals of the govern-ant to retain the loyalty of the popula-
tion. This procedure say be unfeasible if it is politically iepossible to
adopt sufficiently severe emrgency assures."

The reply to that is that it was possible.

The fact that special laws were adopted here within a 15-day period
reflects the relationship of power in legal natters between the ieperislist
bourgeoisie, its state and the political opposition: It does not exist.

Legality is a territory which froe the organisational point of view is
occupied and doeinated by the reaction. which also controls the publicity.

the legal Left. encircled and defensive. has becons unable to react out of
fear of the police, of illegality. its illegalisation; since the destruc-

tion of its class organizations by the old fascism. the proletariat has
nothing left but the labor unions which have been integrated into the

counterstrategy of inerislisn.

The offensive of capital after 191.5: consumer culture-~transported anti-
co-nnisn during the cold war and was able to cut off the possibility for

the proletariat to understand fascis-

as c0unterrevolution. as the political forn of a decaying social order
attacked by the oppressed class.

In 1905 Lenin wrote:

"It would be wrong to believe that the revolutionary classes always have
sufficient strength to accomplish a revolution when social-economic condi-
tions seen fully ripe for an overthrow. No. the huen society is not nsde

that sensibly and it is 'mcoafortable' enough for the progressive elensnts.
Conditions may be ready for the overthrow, but the strength of the revolu-

tionary creators of this overthrow say not prove to be adequate to bring it
about--then society decays end this decay can last for decades."

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following the big mobilisations in 1968, the condition for the demobiliza-
tion was the SPD, the party in power.

in addition to the snobbish class consciousness of the student movement,
which nrked its limits and made its integration into the bourgeois struc-
ture inevitable, where it did not want the consequences of its experiences.

criminalization, proletarianization, and did not understand the revolt as
a consequence of the discovery of inerialism as a universal systcm of

power .

In a situation which reflected s twofold dialectic (at tl’e grassroots level
as well as in the comterrevolutionary movement) because of the struggle of

the Vietnamese people

the SPD used the state of emergency internally and the politics of co-
existence externally to realize a part of the 11.8. counterstrategy, s phase

of the strategy of preventive counterrevolution. It helped establish the
new antics-unism, and gave to antico-amism its current direction:

against the development of the crisis of the system in the process of its
encirclement through the economic, political and military struggles of the

peoples of the Third World. It was mndatory because of the fact that it
is not the Soviet Union, but the south, the guerrilla movements in the
Third World, which are conducting the war against the imperialist state,
against the 0.5. inerialist state system and because of the fact that it
is the development of this war which will pull the rug out from under the
feet of iaperialismnby withholding raw materials, by eipropriating the

multinational u.s. concerns. by fighting the limitlessness of the.
exploitability of the people in the ‘mird Horld through the guerrilla

IDVCDI‘It .

"There is no doubt that the revolution," Lenin continues, "matured objec-
tively. We do not know, however, whether the forces of the revolutionary
classes are sufficient to bring it about. It will be decided in the
struggle, the critical moment of which is approaching with giant steps,
unless a nusber of direct and indirect signs are deceptive. The moral
superiority cannot be doubted, the moral strength is already overwhelmingly
greatnthis condition is indispensable but not sufficient and whether it
will be transformed into material strength sufficient to break the

resistance of the bourgeoisienthis question will be decided by material
strength—in modern European culture, however, such a question is only a
military one."

The dile-a of the imperialist state: 'lhe fact that a positive perspective
is no longer available--becomes an acute factor in a crisis. The S?!) will

be forced into an open apology of a brutal offensive of a class struggle
from above. It has already lost the power, which it is still propagating,

after fulfilling the strategic function of reformism: the iwrovement of
exploitation conditions by securing them, the legitimation of the political

program of nonopolies—"internal security," by setting in nation the execu-
tive machinery of power, to which the bourgeois state was reduced during the

process of its decay, to defend the order of private property, which is

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beconing independent and beginning to turn agath the left wing of the SPD,
because it is directed against the proletariat, agath the revolutim,
against the liberation struggle.

The sensitivity of this state to the politics of the RAP, its existence, its
nteria‘l strength which enabled it to attack even froa the asst extreae
defensive, unarmd-n-the sensitivity to the fact that it becane known that
this state tortures-

The brutality of the apologetics toward this fact as well as its use in
propaganda for the state. which tortures-

All these things are syQtons of fascia.
and signals: He will be human beings.

He will win.

Part XXIII. w Pronounceasnt on the lonb Attack in Badmrg's thin Railway
Station

mm BUMCBAII, Friday, 10 October 1975

Against the atteqt by state propaganda to associate the IA? with the
attack in Haﬁurg's aain railway station we establish the following:

The language of this explosion is the language of the reaction. It is only
rational as an action of psychological warfare by the state security organ
against the urban guerrillas. “the neth and the goal of this crine
against the people identify it as fascist provocation.

The politico-nilitary action of the urban guerrillas is never directed
against the people. lhe IMP attacks the iaperialist apparatus. its aili-
tary. political, econonic and cultural institutions, its functionaries in
the repressive and ideological etc 1 apparatus.

In the process of the develop-ant of its politico-nilitary offensive out
of class struggles in metropolitan areas. terrorisn cannot be a tactic of
urban guerrillas. Urban guerrillas are operating where the rift is between

the state and the nasses, to deepen it, to develop politicisation. revolu-
tionary solidarity and organisation of proletarian power against the state.

On the other hand. terror ained at the people is provocation directed by the
intelligence service to force the people to identify with the state by
creating fear and diffusion anong the people. During the Besse forun. the
president of the Braunschweig Superior land Court expressed the counter-
tactic of the national security organnliterally: one should "start with
the citizens' feelings of insecurity" and "proceed fron the subjective
feeling of fear."

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the neantine a report in the FRANKFURTER RUNDSCIIAU (23 Septewer) con-
firmed the fact that the counterprojects of the national security organ
since 1972 (boat threat against Stuttgart, threat of polluting the drinking
water, theft of matard gas, surface-to-air missiles in football stadia,
the bold: attack in Bremn's Iain railway station and now llamburg)-vere
developed according to the concept of the central office of the CIA. The
FRANKFURT!!! RUNDSCEAU is only authenticating what has been known for a long
tine: the use of poison gas in subway shafts and the pollution of the
drinking water in netropolitan areas are countertactics of the special war-

fare of the "psychological action" of inperialist intelligence services and
counterguerrilla units.

At the assent the question cannot be clarified whether tae attack in
Hamburg was the crine of an individual or whether it was carried out by a
right-wing radical group in Brenen under the auspices of the intelligence
service, or whether it was initiated directly by the national security
organ or by the special CIA unit for counterinsurgency established at the
0.5. Eubassy in Bonn since the Stockholn incident.

A fact is that the national security organ uses its net of journalists
which operates within the structure of the institutionalized public to
steer the reception of the attack against the urban guerrillas. Profiled
figures in this net, which is attached to the press offize of the Federal
Criminal Police Bureau and the press conference of the federal prosecution,
are Kru-a at the FRANKFURT!!! WCHAU. Busche at the FRANKFURT“
ALLGEHEINE ZEI‘I’UNG, Leicht and Kuehnert at the SUEDDEUTSCHB ZEITUNG and
Riber and Zimernnnn at various transregional papers. ‘l'1e article by
Zimernann, which claim that there is a connection between the attack, the
novenent 2 June. the RAP and Siegfried Hang, appeared simltaneously in
eight transregional daily newspapers in addition to the Springer press.

whoever feels, in view of the weakness of the urban guerrillas. that it is
unlikely that the state reaction is already using means of this kind,
should realize the strategic significance of the reason for instability,
which is the urban guerrilla novesent--The PRO is a central operational
basis for 0.8. imperialism in the North-South as well as the East—HEst
conflict: Iilitarily in NATO, economically in the EC. politically and
ideologically by way of the leadership function of the Social Danocracy
within the socialist international.

The attewt of a reactionary sass mobilization by the state, which operates
with provocations projected by the intelligence service, is not reacting to
the urban guerrilla nave-ant but to the conditions of its strategy: the
economic and political crisis of the 11.8. state systea.

It scans the possibility and actuality of revolutionary politics and it is
a trap and a function of a psychological warfare directed at any denocratic

opposition, to split, to isolate, to encircle and finally to annihilate.

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Marx said: "Revolutionary progreaa 1a paving the way by producing a united.

powerful counterrevolntlon, by ptoduclng an eneuy, and only by fighting this
enemy, .tbe subversive party will grow into a real revolutionary party.

The urban guerrilla are pointing the only way to tight atate tarrorlan:
through and ptoletattan polltlce.

The prisoners of the IA?

Stadxeln, 23 Septadaer 1975

(”mt-'1': m/m. c/o Internationale. lode“ tut Vertaldlgung
polittacher Gofangonar 1n Heatauropa—Sectlon up. Stuttgart. Hal-o.
Sweden. 1977

0991 m,
(30: 6000/0024

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY