FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10659
16 July 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 11/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OMC'IAL USE ONLY
non

.ms publications contain inforntion prinrily froa foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
lation was suuarized or extracted.

Untauiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tines within iteas are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the [1.8. Goverment.

OOPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGUIATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMLNATION
OP nus PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FUELS

USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(1000 11/ 82 )

CONTENTS

Bconmic Peaaibility of vain; Natural Bite-an. Heavy Oila,
Oil Shala, Brown Coal
(I. I. Tuchltov, ‘l’. A. Alckporov; mmu 9mm? ,
slkn‘z‘onmam1. 1982) DOOOIODOOOOOOODDOOOOOQOC00"O.

Oil Proapacting. Drilling Guido for Enginaara
(II. Ya. Bykov, at IL; mvocmm P0 WWHDVOY
mm. 1981) IOOIDOOIOIOOODIOD.00....00'90000000000..00...

Deter-ination of Oil, Gaa Hall Conatructian Coata
(P. A. Baroaovakiy. at al.; MAM“ msmmr'.
mIYA mm. *5. 19.2) IIOOOOOOIOOOOOOIOOODOOC..00...

Hondbook Providoa Intonation on Well Drilling Equipment
(lonatantin Vladinirovich loxanacn: 8m mm.

19.1) aaoo.aaaaooaoaoaaaoaoooooaaaaaaaaoaoaoaoaoaaooooaabaoa

Collaga Tart on udioactivo lav Hatarial Depoaita
(Vladimir Ivanovich Danchav, Tat'yana Alokaandrovna
Lapinahyng “381030203!!!“ RADIOAK‘I'IVIUOGO SYR'YA. 1980) ...

PIPELMS

Optimal Control of a ﬂarina oil Dapot and Port Following a Scorn
(A. A. Dot-cake, L. G. Stopmto; MAM“ WW1",
SRIYA TRANSPORT I mum um 1 WW.
Mk. 1982) C000.......00....OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOICOOIOCO..00....

15

20

26

- a - [III - ussa - 37 wool

FOIOI‘FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

31815

unc 622.753:658.155
WC “1311.117 0? [SING “Am arm, HEAVY 011.3, 011: 88118. m COAL

macaw MARI!“ Pmmr', “MYA mm in Russian lb 1, 1982 pp 15-18

[Article by I. 1. mommy and ‘1'. A. Alekperov, All-mica Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Organisation, Control and loomics of Petroleua and Gas Industry)

[‘next] Considering the growing denand for petroleu products and growth in their
world prices, the problea of developing and utilizing alternative nontraditional

sources of crude hydrocarbons in acquiring increasingly greater inortance.

This is why there is so ouch urgency to the task of achieving national ecumic use
of crude hydrocarbons contained in natural bitusn, heavy oils, brown coal and oil
shale in the Oral and Volga river basins. the loci M38, Kazakhstan, the ukreine.
Azerbaijan, Estonia, Siberia and other regions of the country.

known acct-ulations of natural bituen exist in basins of the ancient Russian and
Siberian continental plateaus and. prinsrily, on their Ionoclinal slopes and in

depressions (Melekesskiy, Anabarskiy, Oleneksxiy. Uchuro-Hsyskiy-Aldanskiy and
rimo-Pechorskiy regions). 'mree basic types of accuulations of natural bitmen

are distinguished: Blanket and lenticular-blanket; surface brea and blanket effu-
sions (including asphalt lakes); and. finally, veins.

The first type is of the greatest interest.

The regions characterized by deposits having the most favorable geological and
econonic parameters are Yurhno-‘l'atarskiy and Helekesskiy (Tatar ASSR, Kuybyehevskaya
and Ul'yanovskaya oblasta): Teentral'no-ubensxiy (wr'yevskaya and aktyubinskaya
oblaete): Hangyshlakskiy (Western Kazakhstan); Priiorskiy (western Azerbaijan.
Eastern Georgia).

me following regions say be of interest to the country as its asphalt raw uterial
base: Halo-Kinel'skiy and Zbiguievekiy (Kuybyebevskaya and Orenburgskaye oblasts):
Varandey-Adr'vinakiy (Arimangei’skaya molest): Irhna-mrinskiy (mi assn).

Deposits of hiwly viscous. heavy and residual oils are contained in practically
all oil-bearing regions of the USSR. We know of sore than 300 petroleu deposits
located at a depth of up to 1.200 asters that would favor develop-ant by nines,
open pits and wells (from the surface).

summon“
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oil shale is known to exist in the IBSR in Casbrian (the Siberian continental
plateau), Ordovician (the Baltic basin), Devonian (Belorussie). (Douanik) (Ural toot-
hille, Kuznetsk Basin) . carboniferous (Kazakh ssh). Jurassic (gutgm mum continental

plateau, Central Asia), and Paleogenic and Nsogenic deposits (attaine. Central Asia
and the Transcaucasus).

'l‘hirty coal basins and more than so isolated deposits (not contained within basins)
are known to exist in the 1583. In the aspect of interest to m, brown coal basins

in the Buropean (Ben, the Drals and Southern Siberia are fuel and power bases:
Pochoskovsky, unprovskiy, Chelyabinskiy and Kanek-nchinsk. containing coal beds

suited to developunt as large open cuts. The Yuahno-Ural'skiy, lbsganskiy
(Mgayskiy), hykibenskiy (Kazakhstan), unskiy and Tungusskiy brown coal basins

are pronising sites of expanded coal lining. Coal fro. these basins is concurrently
a fabulous raw aaterial from which to acquire synthetic liquid fuel.

Let us dwell in sanswhst greater detail on one of the brown coal basins—the
Kansk-Achinsk.

The coal reserves lie near the surface, in many places they emerge onto the surface.
and they may be worked by the cheapest and most productive method-«pen cut mining.

Relatively low ash content (5-10 percent of the mineral utter) and a high concen-
tration of volatile components are typical of Rusk-“chin“ coal. It can he used

as a raw material in many sectors of chemistry and coal cheuistry. and it is the

best raw saterial for synthesising synthetic liquid fuel and for obtaining refined
solid fuel and industrial heating gas.

novever, research on their developmnt and utilization for the needs of the national

economy, on the probles of developmntal and refining technology, and the econouic
aspect of their developuent is still in its initial stage.

An analysis of information on the geology of shallow natural bitmn and heavy
oils and an evaluation of the available resources would reveal that exploratory
drilling for these materials is now being conducted only in the 'ratar ASSR. In the
country as a whole. the volme of exploration and prospecting aimed specifically at
bitinen does not correspond to the coqlerity of the problen.

At present only a few regions of the country (Helekesskiy, olenekskiy, menskiy,
the Ito-i 388, the Azerbaijan 88!!) may be of interest to detailed exploration and

prospecting. Others would first require regional and exploratory studies.

The main thing to consider in light of the problem under examination here is to
create econcnically effective methods of working these deposits on an industrial
basis. An investigation of the Soviet and foreign experience would show that
development and ilprovenent of the techmlogy and methods of extracting petroleus
from bituminous rock is proceeding in the following three directions:

quarry and mine extraction systess in which rock is brought to the surface for

extraction of bitmen (with solvent, hot water and so on) to produce so-called
synthetic petroleum

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

Mine drainage systems, in which bitunsn (or high-viscosity heavy petrolsu) is
extracted within a nine shaft, without removu of bitumen-containing rock to the

surface. by way of a drainage system consisting of wells drilled into the mined
rock:

in situ well method. in which bituinous oil is extracted by wells drilled from

the surface, using a thermal or sons other influence upon the bitumen-containing
bed.

The results of laboratory research and erperinental industrial operations showed
that it is fundamtelly possible to extract petrol». fron terrigenic bitumen-
containing ruck using in situ well nethods. The solution of the problen is closely
associated with geological, geophysical and hydrodynnic research and with the
nthods of thermsl power engineering and econonics.

The nine asthod is being used today on an industrial scale only at the 'laregskol!e
deposit: experinsntal well extraction operations have been started on a linited
scale at certain deposits of the Tatar A888.

In addition, extensive industrial application of quarry and nine extraction systens
for developing bitumen and high-viscosity oil deposits is associated with a signi-
ficant unfavorable effect upon the environment: the piling of sireable quantities

of surface rock and of extracted and processed bituinous rock. but the advantages
of conducting mining operations by this nethod are obvious: extraction of a large

quantity of crude hydrocarbons fron the nined rock: the possibility for using
existing mining equipment and for multiple use of all of the extracted rock, since
following extraction of bituen. the waste rock can be used to produce construction
and road building materials.

hsearch shows that development of natural bitumen and high-viscosity oils may be
of practical interest in a miner of regions of the Ural and Volga basins, Western

Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan.

The nostpronising and best studied deposits of natural bituen can be found in the
Tatar A883. About 170 deposits have been revealed here, with bituminous beds from

1 to 15 meters thick lying at 639th from 0 to 400 meters.

'ihe total outlays on obtaining heavy oil imported into this region at the time of
the beginning of industrial develop-ant and the corrected outlays on production of
1 ton of "synthetic” petroleus froe bitminous rock were used to deternine the

economic effectiveness of developing bituinous rock.

The corrected outlays on extracting natural bitumen by the in situ nethod using
steam injection are the highest: ‘mey are conparatively less than the outlays on

open cut and nine developnent of bituninous rock. and 50-65 percent of the outlays
on well extraction using steam.

Oonparative analysis of the parameters of different extraction methods would denun-
strate the econonic feasibility of introducing the open cut and nine methods of

extracting bituinous oils. ‘lhus given the conditions for extracting petroleum
by the mine method at the Balakhany-Sabmchi-Ronsninskoye deposit (Azerbaijan 888) ,

FOIOI'FICMLUSBONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the teclmical-econonic indicators of extraction would be mnsurate with the
current indicators for petroleu- extraction in the 'hsneft" Association. Accord-
ing to corrected figures, the planned cost of extracting 1 ton of petroleu- frcn
the Yaregskoye deposit is coming close to the outlays of the ”mgneft" Association.

The lost inortant feature of the mine and quarry methods of developing petroleu-

and bitmn deposits is multiple use of the extracted carboniferous rock and the
practically cleete utilization of the organic mess. 'lhis is why these methods

can be thought of as econuically praising.

the cowlexity of the production process, siseable outlays on extraction, pulverisa-
tion and transportation of roch and the problems of environmental protection-the
negative aspects of surface mining of oil shalom-gave birth to the idea of in situ
distillation relatively long ago. ﬁle in eitu method is siqler in organizational
respects. All production operations. with the exception of producing synthetic
oil, do not differ in principle from those traditional to petroleu extraction
industry--drilling the wells, breaking down the bed by hydrostatic pressure,

injecting working agents. in 013124 codamtion, remal of liquids by pining and
so on. The in situ nethods are now at the stage of laboratory and field research.

An analysis of the results of this research made it possible to for-ulate and
plan Inasures which would make the in situ method of developing oil shale deposits
profitable.

The need for highly productive large-scale processing of coal. mainly to obtain en-
riched fuel, including liquid. has become increasingly more obvious in the last
lO-lS years.

There can be no doubt that gasoline, kerosene and synthetic petroleua from cheap
coal obtained by the open cut method can already out“ with natural petroleu and
its processing products.

today the procedures of transforming coal into liquid fuel are still far from
perfect. We need to solve many fundauntal and purely engineering problems to

make the process siner and cheaper. He will have to develop various productim
processes applicable to different kinds of coal and to different kinds of end

products. the new processes will have to be thoroughly checked out with experimental
and erperinental industrial facilities.

It should be noted that the total corrected outlays on acquiring liquid fuels are
significantly influenced by the outlays on coal, since 1 ton of liquid fuel requires
the expenditure of 3-4 tens of the organic seas of coal. which in terse of Rana): -

Achinsk coal is about 6 tons.

In the more remote future, "swthetic' petroleu will become cometitive with con-
ventional petroleum in terse of outlays per unit of product.

It is entirely obvious that to solve the problem of producing “synthetic“ liquid
fuel. we need to turn attention to the following aspects: replacing fuel oil (pro-
duced in large quantities free petrolem) by low-sulfur coke (coals. oil shales)

and deeper processing of conventional oil to obtain additions). quantities of
lighter products; direct acquisition of liquid motor fuels fros coal and tar through

the pyrolysis of shale.

“OFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to tentative estimates, a significant savings of traditional fuel, in-
cluding boiler and furnace fuel, can be achieved by making extensive national
economic use of crude hydrocarbons from oil shale, coal and bituinous rock.

Inasmuch as the problem of creating a stable base of crude hydrocarbons in the
country is acquiring special urgency, it would now be feasible to initiate forced
development of shale industry and to organize an indutry to process bituminous

rock, oil shale and brown coal with the purpose of putting these additional hydro-
carbon resources to use in the national economy.

11» decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress attach iQortant significance to this
problem. The “Basic Directions of the ussm Economic and Social Development in

1981-1985 and in the Period to 1990' state: ”Develop and introduce effective methods
of sultiple use and processing of solid and heavy liquid fuels, and of acquisition of

synthetic fuels; ...imrove the processes of extracting high-viscosity oils and
bitminous petroleum."

Conclusions and recos-endations :

1. Acquisition of synthetic liquid fuels from nontraditional sources of crude
hydrocarbons is associated with development of specific-purpose integrated programs
coordinated with scientific research and experimental design projects, with con-
struction of pilot and experimental industrial facilities, and with the planning,

erection and operation of the first enterprises producing synthetic fuel from bituo
minous and oil-bearing rock, oil shale and brown coals.

Scientific organizations of the (8811 Academy of sciences and the scientific research,
planning, design and production organisations of the ministries of geology, petrole-
um, chemical, pstroleun refining. coal, instrument making and machine building in-
dustry and nonferrous metallurgy must take part in solution of this problem.

2. Purposeful efforts to find and explore deposits must be organised; the develop-

ment of methods of industrial and field geophysics nust be continued with the
purpose of revealing acct-ulations of these minerals; a mandatory complex of scien-

tific research must be developed and approved, and geochemical studies must be
broadened: detailed maps showing the distribution of industrial, geological and
predicted reserves of the indicated minerals on the territory of the 0888 must be
drawn up, showing the depth at which such minerals lie, the thickness of the pro-
ductive horizons and the types of country rock.

3. Research should be conducted on the production processes and conditions of

effective use of the quarry, mine and in aim (well) methods of developing deposits;
integrated theoretical. laboratory and full-scale studies Inst be performed on

various physical and chemical methods of extracting liquid hydrocarbons; effective
equipment and procedures to be used with the mine, mine-drainage and well methods
of extraction nust be created; bin-ens and heavy oils, oil shales and coals must
be classified in relation to their nature and their chemical and technology proper-
ties. with a consideration for their subsequent deeper processing and multiple use
in the national econaly; effective liquid hydrocarbon collectionand transport systems
must be developed within the mining regions: attention must be turned to the con-
centration of organcmatallic compounds in liquid hydrocarbon, and the possibili-
ties of their attraction for the purposes of engineering and economic evaluation

of their subsequent use mist be examined.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. It would he ilportant to develop the criteria of ecomeic effectiveness of
extracting end obtaining petroleu tron bin-inane end oil-bearing rock, oil ehelee
and brown coele obtained by the quarry, nine and in eitu (well) nethode, depending
on the eining. geographic end econo-ic condition” the criteria of the economic
effectiveneee ot groceeeing nontreditional crude hydrocarbon end of evaluating
their metulneee ae raw eateriale, depending on their natural propertiee, the depth
to which they are proceeeed and the waye they are need in thenationel ecoooly. mt
be developed; an eoonoeic torecaet out be nade of the echednle and order 0! intro-
duction of experimental indmtrial :ecilitiee (producing liquid hydrocerbone) at
depoeite of natural bitmene. heavy oile. oil ehale end brown ooale.

common: Veeeoyuznyy nauchno-ieeledovetel'ekiy inatitut organizataii, uprevleniye
i ehotuoeiki netetgaaovoy pro-yehlennoeti (venous). 1982

11004
GO: 1822/206

MWWONLY
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLV

FIBLS

OIL PIOBPBCTING, DRILLING canoe FOR mamas

Ibscov spawn: po WWW! moon in mum 1951 (signed to press
25 m; 81) pp 1-9. 526

(Annotation, table of contents and foreword frat book "Banbook of Oiltield
Geology“, edited by N. Ye. Dykov, n. I. Naksimv and A. Ya. rursov. Izdatel'stvo
'Nedra", 4,700 copies, 526 pages]

next] 1111- maoox oo-prohcnuv-lviuu-imu- prome- of «121.14 geology en-
countered during preparations for exploitation and develop-ant of an oil deposit.

Part One presents the methods of oilfield geological analysis. Special attention

is devoted to Isthods ensuring maxi-1- dstail in studying the oiltield and its
properties, and to the methods used to process the results, observations and
useurenents. Part No examines the Iain objectives of oilfield geological analysis
in the sequence followed in practice. lays of integrating the research nethods

and the procedures for processing infatuation using nethensticel geological nodsls
and oomuters are discussed.

This handbook is intended (or petroleu geologists and oil prospectors working

for production and scientific research organizations. It nay be useful to in-
structors. gradmts students and'atudsnts or petroleu engineering was and schools.
titty-tour tables, l64 figures. 158 bibliographic reterences.

m Page
m mzd O O O O 0 Q 0 . O O O O O O O O O O I O O O O O O O I O C O O O I 7
Part One

methods of Oilfield Geological Analysis

chapter 1. Detailed Study of the Material mition and Types of Rock

inProductiveDeposits......................... 9
il. rutnods and lBechnioauea of Sapling be): IronProductivs Deposits

(A. u. Ntmwk.y‘) O O O I C O Q C O O O O O I O O O I I O O O O O O 9
52. Analysis or the Haterial Cognition. Mure and Structure of

Productive ‘nerrigenous be): and or Interstitial Spaces within It

(A. u. ”mwhy‘) O O O I O O D I O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O 0 1°
53. Analysis of the material Ooqosition, ﬁxture and Structure of

Productive amounts tho): and of Interstitial Spaces within It

(Ya. I. m'ym) C O O O O I I O O O O 0 I O O O O O O O O O O O O 19

MWWCMY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 11. lbthode of Deteiled Breakdown of uoee Sectione of Productive
“wt“ 0 I O O O O O O O O I 0 0 I O O O O O O I O O O O C O I O O 0 O ‘0
51. (bjectivee of Breaking Down the moo Sectione of Productive

Depoeite(A.II.Petrovekeye) ..................... 40
52. Breaking Down Croce Sectione on the Dale of aeoeerch on the
Neterielmqoeitionoflbck (Ll. Petrovekeye) . . . . . . . . . . . 40

i3. Oilfield Geological netnode of Deteiled Dreekdoun of Productive
Depoeite(ll.v.uencheve)....................... 41

N. heheeeticel Geological lbthode of Deteiled Dreekdmn of e Croee
Section Doing Goring Dete (A. z. Gorin, B. a. Yenikeyev) . . . . . . . 47

55. Derivation of e Su-ery Geologicel-Geophyeicel Croee section
(“e v. mm”) C O O O O C O O O O C O O O O O C 0 O O O O 0 O O O . 52

Chepter In. Detailed Correletion of Q‘oee sectione of Productive Depoeite . 53
51. Oorreletion Principlee (A. I. Petrovekeye) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
52. Peeturee of node need in mteiled mneletim of Croee Sectione

(‘0 a. ”mv'uy.) O O O 0 O O O C O O O O O O O I O O O O U 0 O O 0 e 5‘
i3. Peeturee of Gorreleting Productive Gerbonete Strete

(Yu.l.ller'yenho) .......................... 56
N. Detailed Correlation ofenedontbeneeie of lollnoge

(VeVevOLno') 000.000...OOCOOOCCOOOOQOOQGO 58
55. Hetheneticel Geological llethode of Deteiled Correletion (V. A.
Ded'venov)..............................59

utopter Iv. Metnode of Determining the Phyeicel Propertiee of beervoire . . 67
il. laboretory Ihthode of Deter-lining Phyeicel Propertiee of neurvoire
(A.G.Kovelev)............................ 67
52. Oilfield Geophyeicel Hethode of Deter-lining Phyeicel Propertiee of
neeervoire(l.v.nencneve,‘r.i.3ultenov). . .. . .. .. . . .. . 85
.53. nydrodyne-ic hthob'of Determining Phyeicel Properties of neeervoire
(Yu.P.Gettenberger).........................104

Clapter v. Hethode of Deteiled Anelyeie of the Phyeicochenicel Propertiee
ofBedPluideendGeeee (m. P. Gettenberger) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107

51. Phyeicocheeicel durecterietice of Bed rluide end Geeee Ueed
intheDevelopeentofOilDepoeite ..................101
52. Specific Peeturee of wing seqlee in Different Oonditione to
Acquire mlieble Dete on the Propertiee of Oil. Gee end Water . . . . . 125
$3. Hetnode of Predicting clung“ in Propertiee of Oil end Gee During
Develop-entofroreetiooe.......................lz9
54. mange in atelicel Oomoeition of Dyproduct Ieter when Developing
Oilendceerielde 135
55. Prediction of Depoeition of Suepended Solide During Oilfield

Developeent.. .. ...'......................138

Gupter VI. nethode of Studying Oil end Gee anetion Energetice . . . . . . 156
ll. mleculer Porcee Influencing the Distribution of Oil. Gee end voter
in . M (u. I. mmv) O ’ O O I O O O O O O O O O O 0 I o O 0 D 0 e 156
52. Porcee Propelling Oil Within e Bed During lte Exploitation
(H.1cmmV)aco5....o..........o......o153
s3. Bffective end bletive Pneeel Per-ability (u. l. Hekeinov) . . . . . . 159
54. he neture of Deurvoir Preeeure end Moreture in Subeoil
(YuoPoattwmt)..o.o....................161

MOMMUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

55. Deter-ination of Reeervoir Preeeure in Nelle (Yu. P. Gattenberger) . .
56. Deternination of maervoir Merature in Well: (Yu. P. Gattenberger)
57. Oil and Gas Foreation Uorking Oonditione (u. I. llakeinovv, Yu. P.

Olapter VII. Methods of Geoutric Analysis of Oil and Gee Porntione . . .
£1.6eneralPreuieee(A.Ya.mreov)....................
52. Methodological Principlee of Geo-atria Analysis of Oil and Gen
Pornationa(L.P.Denent'yev) ....................
53. 'me Nature of Orange: Occurring in rield Propertiee in aeeponee to
Geo-etric Analyeie of Oil and Gee Pornationa (A. Ya. Pureov.
R.A.Yegorov)............................

54. Pbmandmthode of Graphical Silulation ofthe Distribution of
PbruationPropertiee(l.Ye.mreov).................
§5.lhthodeof¢oq3uternapping(O.P.Ioffe) ..............

clapter VIII. Methode of Studying the Heterogeneity of Productive Bede . .
ll. Basic majectivee and Levele of Analyeie of Heterogeneity (L. r.
Denent'yev) .............................
52. Methods of Graphical and Analytical bpreeentation of Bed hetero-
geneitiee(z.K.Ryabinina.V.V.Vbinov) ..............
53. nethoda of Determining the Bed Dieplaceeent factor Using zonal nape
(2.x.mabinm,V.V.Vbinov) ...................
54. A Statistical lbthod of Evaluating the Dieoontinuity and Coefficient

oflnflmce(v.A.Da‘d'yenov)....................
55. Specific features of Studying Beterogeneitiee in Oil and Gas

Pornatione(v.s.xer\-zade) ....................
56. Evaluation of Bed Heterogeneity by Different Statietical Coefficiente

(3.x.kyabinina,v.v.Voinov) ...................

Chapter Ix. Method: of Determining the Para-etere of Oil and Gee Porntione
sl.GeneralPrenieee(l.Ye.Pureov)...................
52. Methods of Determining mi” Valuee of Petrophyeical Properties

of Rock When Calculating Oil and Gee neurvee (V. x. Gouihov.

Yu.A.Kuz'eichev)..........................
53. Specific Beaturee of Determining Parenetere Characterizing neeervoir

Propertiee of Productive Dede (A. Ya. Pureav) . . . . . . . . . . . .
54. Specific Features of Deter-ining Parenetere alaracterizing Physical

PropertieeofOiltA.!a.Pureov) ..................
55. Specific Peaturee of Geometric Analysis and Deter-ination of the

VolmaeofoilandGeePor-etione (A.Ya.Pureov) ... ... . .

Chapter x. Methods of Determining the Planning Coefficient of Oil Output
on the Basie of an Analogy lith Ooiogical Conditione of Oilfield
Development(v.x.a>nrikov).......................
51. Deternination of the Oil Output Coefficient for e Bydroetatically

mloitedaedUeingGraphicalDependenciee. . . . . . .. . . . . . .
52. Determination of the Oil Output Coefficient Doing mltidineneional

sut1.t1u1 m1. 0 O O O O O O D e O O O 0 e I O O O o O O O O C O O
53. Foreign Data on Determining Oil Output Oeing mltidineneional

StatisticalDependenciee.......................
54. Deternination of Oil Output of a Bed Worked with Dieeolved Gee Ueing

thePhyeicalPropertieeofOil....................

l-‘OIOFI'IGALUSEONLY

165
167

170

174
174

175

182

191
205

212
212
21‘
219
222
223

233
239

2 39

240

2“

252
255

265
265
268
274

276
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter x1. lbthods of Calculating Oil and Dissolved Gas meervee
(v.x.Gomzikov) ...........................
sl.volunetric!4ethod....................
52.naterialaalancenethod...................

§3.hpiricalmthods...................
54. Calculation of the Reserves 0! Gas Dissolved in Oil . .

Olapter x11. Methods of Evaluating the Reliability of Pbrnation
Para-eters and the Development Indicators Used in Planning . . . . . .

51. General Ila-ark: on Accuracy Evaluation (R. A. Yegorov, A. Ya.
Pursov,x.s.‘l‘aldykin)......................
g2. Principal Sources of Systematic Error in Parameter Determination
(R. A. Yegorov. A. Ya. P'ureov, K. s. Taldykin) . . . . . . . . . .
s3. Calculation of Random Errors Associated With Detenining Oil
Formation Paraaetere (R. A. Yegorov. A. Ya. Pursov, K. S. 'raldykin)
54. Evaluation of the Accuracy of Deter-ining the Planned Oil Yield
of an Oilfield (R. A. Yegorov, A. Ya. Puraov, x. s. Taldykin) . . .

a
a
eeae
e
e

55. Evaluation of the Accuracy of Calculating the Cost of oil thraction

(R. A. Yegorov, A. Ya. mreov, K. s. Taldykin) . . . . . . . . . .
56. Permissible unite for Ibunding Off Para-eters (R. A. Yegorov,

A.Ylomsov,x.5.m®kin).o.....o........o.
57. Methods of Evaluating the Reliability of Parmters Based on Infor-
nationlleasuree(L.P.Denent'yev)................

dupter XIII. Methods of Intonation Support to Oilfield Geological
Analysis(V.R.Voronovskiy) ...
51. General uguireaents on System Providing Information Support to
Solution 0: Oilfield Geological Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . .
s2. Automated Data Aetrieval Systeue in Oilfield Geological Analysis .

Part M

276
276
278

280
283

284
284
285
287
305
307
309

313

319

319
324

Basic Problems of Oiltield Geological Analysis and the mthods of their Solution

Chapter nv. Preparation of oilfields for Developaent (A. Ya. Purscv,
R.A.Yegorovandﬂ.2e.3ykov)....................
51. Objective: and Problems of Preparing Oil Pbraationa tor

Developaent............................

52. Basic Requirements on the nan Data and on the Voluns of Intonation
Available on Parameters Used in Planning Oilfield Developnent . . .

i3. Systems for Exploring Oil and Gas Porntiona and Pields and
Systems tor locating Exploratory Hells . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

54. General Prenieee of a Sensible Procedure for Preparing Oil and Gas
PieldstorDeveloplnnt ......................

55. Supplementary Duploration of Oil and Gas Pielde . . . . . . . . . .

mapter xv. Isolation of Sxploitable Entities in mltiple-Bed Oilfields
(v. G. Kanalin, L. P. Deaent'yev, N. Ye. Bykov) . . . . . . . . . . . .
51. Basic Factors Accounted for When Isolating Bxploitable Entities . .
52. Selection of Quantitative Criteria for Evaluating the Suitability

of Combining Several Beds Into One Exploitable Entity . . . . . . .
53. Consideration of the Influence of the Degree or Dirterencee Between

Bede on the Results or hair Joint Exploitation . . . . . . . . . .

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

329
329
333
342

349
362

363
363

366

372
s4. lethods of Evaluating the than of the Prodwtivity Coefficient when

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PlanmingJointaxploitationofSeveralBeds. . . . . . . . . . . . .

$5. ExaIple of Quantitative Evaluation of the Suitability of Cosbining
Beds Into the Bxploitable Entity

eeeeeeeesee-eeeeee

Chapter XVI. Consideration of Geological Conditions when Selecting ﬁsts-e

ofDevelopment(H.I.IIaksinov).....................
51. classification of Con-only naployed Systems of Oilfield Developunt .

52. Consideration of the Geological Structural features of Pormations and
of the Planned Oil Extraction level Ilhen Selecting Plooding System.

53.5ystensofnocatingProducingﬂells.................

54. Geological Grounds for the Systems of Oil and Gas Pousation Developusnt
55. characteristics of the Productivity of Oil Pods and the Principles
of Establishing the Norms of Liquid Extraction

Chapter XVII. Basic Stages of
Derivation of the Geological

Planning of Oilfield Development and
Gromds for Planning Docuents (z. X.

eeeseeeeeee

Ryabinina,V.V.Voinov) ........................

51. Basic Stages of Planning Oilfield Development. and the Purpose and

ContentofPlanningDocuaents....................
52. Derivation of the Geological Grounds (Drawing Up the Geology Section)
for Planningthe Developsent ofanoilfield . . . . . . . . . . . . .

mapter XVIII. Oilfield Geological Analysis in the Initial Period of

oilfield Development (A. V. dumitskiy)

51. Basic Problems of Oilfield Geological Analysis in the Initial

Period of Oilfield Develop-eat
52. Collecting and Processing the mm Data

53. Methodological Pastures of Geological Analyses Performed on Exploited

eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeoeeeeeesoo

Deposits With the Purpose of Isproving the Development Systea . . . .
54. Eagles of Integrated Geological Analyses Perfornd at the

Uzen' Deposit With the Purpose of Immving the Development Systes

clapter xxx. Oilfield Geological Analysis and Control of Oilfield
Developuent(vu.P.Gattenberger)...................

51. Control of Development as an Integrated oilfield Geological Problem

52. Control of Hell Output and Injectivity, the Plooding and Gas

Pactors of Production and the Status of Bottom Hole and Reservoir

Pres‘uIC. O O 0 e e O 0 e O 0 O 0 e 0 O O O O 0 e 0 e O I O C O 0
53. Control of the Movement of Oil-water and Gas-Oil Interfaces

and Plooding of Oil Beds
54. Control of the Extent to

eeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

which Productive Dede are Influenced by

theDisplacingAgent......................

Chapter xx. Oilfield Geological Control of Cowlete Exploitation of
ProductiveBeds(V.K.Gonzikov) ..................
51. Reasonably Complete Exploitation of Productive Beds-Jane lbst

Iqaortant Prerequisite of Development Effectiveness . . . . . . .

52. A method for Controlling the Current and Pinal Oil Output of Beds
"0er by Hydrostatic Pressure Using Displacelent Guaracteristics

53. A Method of Qantrolling a Curmt and Final Oil Output of Beds
Worked by Hydrostatic Pressure nntailing Evaluation of Output in

Flooded Portions of Beds

eeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

384

385

389
309

393
394
399

401

412
412

415

420

420
422

426

432

437
437
440
445

454

468
468

469

469
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Method of Controlling mrrent and Final Oil Output of Beds Worked
by Hydrostatic Pressure Using the Initial and Residual Oil Saturation
nevelsofthesed...........................47l
S. Detenination of Current and final oil Output of Beds worked With
DissolvedGss......... ....................d72

chapter XXI. Methods of Increasing the Oil Output of Beds. and the
Geological auditions of 'meir Application (A. A. Bokserllan) . . . . . . . 472
1. Basic Reasons for Incowlete Extraction of Oil tron the Suhsoil . . . . 472
2. Ihthods of Increasing the Oil Output of Beds. and their classification
andPurpose..............................476

3. Methods of increasing the Degree of Oil Displacemnt . . . . . . . . . 477
4.hethocboflncreasingthelednisplacesentractor... .. . . . . . .482

5. Methods of Increasing the Bed Displacesent factor and the Degree
ofOilOisplacaent..........................454

6. Conditions for Using New lbthods of Increasing the oil Output of

m 0 O O 0 0 O D O O O O O O I O O 0 O I O O O O 0 O 0 O O O O O O O ‘96
7. Basic Requiremnts on Geological and Physical Investigation of

Beds to Which the New Msthodsof Increasing Oil Output Are Applied . . . 497

Chapnr m1. Oilfield Geological Docusentation of Oil and Gas

ExtractionProcesses (v.11. Voronovskiy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .498
lekllmnu 00....OOOOOIOO00.00.000.0000‘98
2.3edDevelopnentDocunents.......................502
3. A System of Auto'sted Collection of Oilfield Information . . . . . . . 504

Chapter mu. Protection of the Subsoil and Environ-ant of Oil and Gas
Pields(A.Ya.mr~sov)..........................SO‘I
1. General Premises of Protecting the Subsoil and Environment . . . . . . 507
2. Protecting the Subsoil and Environ-Int wring Exploration and

ProspectingofOilandGesrields. . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . .509
3. Protecting the Subsoil and anironasnt wring Develop-ant of
011 “d m rid“ O O O O I O O I O O O O o O O 0 O O C O O O I O C O 513

Bibliogtlﬂly.........oo..............o..o...521

Foreword

In recent years the country's oil industry entered a period of its develop-ant
in which the necessary levels are ensured not only by the development of new oil-

fields but also by fuller extraction of oil from the subsoil. Solution of this
conlex problem would be ispossible without broad use of oilfield geological methods

of studying oil and gas deposits.

As a response to the needs of the industry. the traditional methods of oilfield
geological analysis have been inroved. and enriched with new procedures of ob-
taining and processing infatuation. when we study the eateriel ccwosition of rock.

in addition to using the usual lithological-petrographic characteristics we often
obtain the characteristics of the rock's nicrostructure so that we nay evaluate the

possibilities of using different sethods of physicochesical influence won a bed
and predict changes that would occur in the rock in response to the develop-ant

processes .

12
mommusaomv
roe omcm. uss'omv

Liquids and gases contained within a bed and pumped into it by art! ficial means are
studied with the purpose of determining not only the physicochemical properties of
these fluids but also their interaction with one another, since this interaction can
cause certain negative consequences.

It would be unimaginable today to break productive deposits down into their parts
and subject them to detailed correlation--especially in large oilfields, where the
logs of nany hundreds and south-es even thousands of wells must be processed-without

the automated coaputerized data processing systems that are new operating successfully
in a nutter of the country's regions.

Ceometric analysis of oil and gas deposits--that is, creation of their “unre-
quires a detailed knowledge of the variability of characteristics (properties). which
Ilust be accomted for when selecting a particular model with which to reflect obser-
vation data. Methods of accomting for the heterogeneity of productive beds when
planning oilfield development--diverse methods which adapt the-selves rather well to
local conditions--have now appeared and are enjoying practical application. A cer-

tain mutt of development has occurred in the methods of calculating the parameters
of oil and gas deposits with a consideration for the lower limits of reservoir proper-

ties, and sethods of evaluating the reliability of parameters and reserves taking

account of the variability of a particular characteristic. the amount of information
on it and so on.

All of this has made it necessary to generalize the information on sodern methods of

geological oilfield analysis in a single pmlication, such as the handaock offered
here. Part me of the bamboo]: presents the basic methods of oilfield geological

analysis. Special attention is turned to those methods which promote fuller study of
a deposit and which provide lore reliable information on its parameters, since these

factors predetermine the quality of problem solution.

Part no uses angles of solving concrete problems in preparing oil and gas deposits
for development and in developing them in order to demonstrate how different methods
of oilfield geological analysis may be integrated with hydrodynuic, economic and
other methods. aphasis is placed on the reliability of conclusions ends in differ-
ent stages of a formstion's study. 'mus the process of preparing an oilfield for
development is presented from the standpoint of satisfying optima quantitative
requirements associated with the completeness of analysis and the reliability of
determining all paranters needed in drawing up the flow chartsand plans.

Isolation of exploitable entities within the cross section of a multiple-bed forma-
tion is viewed as an optimization problem which can be solved by using the procedures
of quantitative evaluation of differences in the geological and physical properties

of productive beds intended for Mined exploitation, and by accounting for the
influence the degree of these differences exerts on the well productivity coefficient.

In order that efficient solutions could be found to the problem associated with
geological oilfield analysis in the oilfield drilling stage. it would be suitable

to obtain the information for such analysis free autoeated systems that can process
the large volt-ass of raw data. the procedures of such analysis are presented. using
developmnt of a multiple-bed oilfield as an eagle.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problens of oilfield geological analysis associated with controlling develop-ant

of an oilfield are exanined both in relation to tne reliability of determining the
current oil or water saturation level of a bed fro: infornation provided by wells.

and in relation to organizing an effective system by which to control the status of
develop-ant and so on.

'lhus modern geological oilfield analysis represents a systen of procedures for
studying and creating models of oil and gas deposits and of processes occurring
within then during their develop-ant. Such analysis is performed in all stages of
preparing an oilfield for dsvelopnnt and exploitation. and it is typified by a
gradual increase in the nwer of problem addressed and by growth in the stringency
of requirements iaposed on the quality of problem solution--that is, on the reli-

ability of the obtained parameters and conclusions and of the decisions aade on
their basis. The methods practically enloyed for solving oilfield geological pro-
blems are highly diverse: therefore the appropriate sections of the handbook reflect
those procedures that are best suited to typical geological conditions. ascouenda-
tions concerning other cases involving unique features of geological structure and
development conditions may be found in the suggested literature.

0091mm: Izdetel'stvo "Nedra'. 198l

11004
GO: 1822/203

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 622.24
WARM OF OIL, CA8 WILL WWI” costs

macaw "EMMA Pmamnwosr', SMA ransom in Minn No S, 1982 pp 20-23

[Article by P. A. aererovsxiy. O. G. Generalova. 8. A. Ponouerev, r. I. 8irazetdincv
and u. L. laegcstayev. “Bashneft'” Association and lashnvlneft'] -

[text] The syeten for estimating the costs of drilling is essentially a cyst. of
forming the prices on the products of drilling organizations.

while prices have been stable in industry and ccnstzucticn (at least for a mﬂer of
years) , in drilling, which is a variant of construction work, this is completely

untrue (in connection with yearly changes in planned drilling rates). since there
are no stable, scientifically grounded standards to serve as an operating base.

Thus the ccmrcial drilling rate “t be planned more accurately on the basis of
well grounded standards. In our opinion we could solve the problea of planning
ccnercial drilling rates if we calculate the per-aster drilling tine with a con-
eideraticn for natural and geological factors and if we establish labor outlay

norms in relation to different categories of rock drilling difficulty that couid
remain stable over a mute: of years.

The labor-intensiveness of breaking down one aster of rock. or the drilling diffi-
culty, lies at the basis of stable tine nor-s used to deternine couerciel drilling
rates necessary for drawing up the planning and estiaate acct-ants and for deter-
mining the esti-ated cost of corpleted operations.

‘me method proposed here is being successfully applied to tine now used to draw

up estimates for structural exploratory drilling. A special study was conducted
with the purpose of analyzing the theoretical and practical possibility of using

this approach to deternine the cost of drilling oil and gas wells in the “Bashneft”
Association.

Breaking down well profiles into stratigraphic subdivisions has become a widespread
practice in oil and gas well drilling. In our opinion when we draw up eetinates
for well drilling. it would be more proper to deal not with stratigraphic divisions
of rock (the difficulty of drilling rock of the seas age nay vary), but rather with
the litholcgical homogeneity of rock beds having identical nechanical properties.
mis would lake it possible to ccqare. in terns of drilling difficulty, both the
rock of epecific deposits and the rock of entire drilling regions irrespective of
their geographical location.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lithological-stratigraphic profiles were detersined for 67 areas being drilled by
the I'Bashneft'” Asaociation's ministration for Drilling Operations in order to
establish distinguishing features of rock coqosing a particular area and responsi-
ble for the differences in rock categories. Using stratigraphic subdivisions of
the profiles of all of the areas, we isolated the basic fans of rock and deterninod
the indicators describing their hardness. drilling distance per run. and the rate

of nechanical drilling. After analyzing these indicators we arrived at a classifi-
cation of typical representatives of rock related to 12 categories of drilling
difficulty. Specific lithological-pstrogrsphic characteristics of rock and specific

indicators of drilling distance per run and mechanical drilling rate correspond to
each category.

Experinsntal general estinate tine acres were developed for drilling operations

in relation to all categories of rock and intervals of well depth. ‘i'hese tine none
were related to the drilling nethod. the sire of the drill bit. to whether or not
core samples were taken. to the fons of flushing fluid ewloyed and to the type of
drilling rig. ‘i‘he norms were tailored to all categories of rock in relation to
specific intervals of well depth (every 100 meters) with the purpose of per-itting
their use to draw up planning and estinste docmsnts for well construction (for
deternination of co-srcial drilling rate and the estisated tins of drilling opera-
tions).

Although the well drilling process includes a large quantity of different operations.
in keeping with the standardization principle it would be best to gnoup the. as
shown in Table 1.

Table 1
Group of
gantions Forms of wations
1 Mechanical drilling, as characterised by the tine

required to drill l ester of rock and by the distance
drilled in a single run of the drill bit

I! lowering, raising and other auxiliary operations
associated with well depth and drill bit running
ties. Adding drilling pipe.

111 Bwplensntary operations
1V Securing wells with casings
v Correcting problems arising not at the fault of the

workers. and internmtions in work for reasons
for which adsinistrations for drilling operations
cannot be held responsible

nechanical drilling (operation group 1) directly detersines the correlation be-
tween rock drilling difficulty (the ties standards for mechanical drilling of

l ester. in hours. and the drilling distance per slot. in haters) and the well
drilling equipment and procedures. 'lhis correlation is reflected in the flow

charts for drill bit processing.

16
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thu ties outlays on operations in group 11 are detenined tron the drilling distance
per run of the drill bit in specific torn of rocks, using the unified intereector
time norm presently in etfect. Thus the duration of operations in groups 1 and II
is directly associated with the lithological-petrographic characteristics of the
rock being drilled.

The duration of operations in groups III and 1v depends on the drilling conditions
and on the design and purpose of the well, and it is determined true unified inter-
sector tine norms presently in ettect.

Tine outlays on operations in group V reﬂect the general conditions of drilling
operations (clisatic, social and geological. as well as the econoaic and industrial
level of development of the region): therefore they are calculated on the basis 0!
an analysis of the statistics for each region. After tentative general tine none
were drawn up. they were tested by all of the association's adainietrations for

drilling operations in order to reveal the sort of corrections and additions that
would have to be ads in the tentative norms.

In order to reveal the acceptability o! the now we developed, we coapared the
drilling rates shown in the planning and estisate docuents with the actual well
drilling rates and the rates calculated from the tentative general time none.

The results of testing the first experiaental general tine none in the 'naehnett"
Aaeociation are shown in Table 2 (1980 data).

 

 

Table 2
Drilling Me
Indicator mutional Eloratog 'l‘otal Voluae
'nested
Hells 417 112 529
Meters 745.944 218.553 964.497

umber of wells for which drilling

rate detersined from general

time noru is closer to actual

drilling rate than is the drill-

ing rate determined from

planning-estinte documents
Wells 266 59 325
s 63.8 52.7 61.4

Drilling distance for wells
tor which drilling rate deter-
sined from general time none
is closer to actual drilling
rate than is drilling rate
determined tro- planning-
estimate docunte

meters 525.591 122,783 648,374
\ 70. 5 56. 2 67. 2
17

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to begin calculation of cornercial drilling rates and time on the basis of the
general time none we developed. However, it has been found necessary to continue

the effort of improving the collection of general time norms, to make certain correc-
tions and additions with the purpose of raising the accuracy of the norms.

between the coaxial rates calculated using the general and conventional norms
and the actual rates. in particular we used Pearson's congruence test to verify

planning and estimate documents used in the financing of the drilling operations.

Our evaluation of the significance of the correlation between conercial rates showed
that in the overwhelming majority of cases there were no significant differences be-
tween actual oo-ercial rates and the rates calculated on the basis of the general
tine norms. The duration of drilling operations. as determined from the general
estieate time norms. reflects the existing level of the drilling equipment, proce-
dures and organization to a greater degree, since this indicator is closer to the

actual value than is the duration of drilling operations that was deteuined from
the planning and estimate documents. All of this confirms the correctness of the

principles and methods of deriving general tine norm with a consideration for the
use forwhich they are intended.

the general time norms for drilling operations are convenient to use in planning
mdestimate docmsnts as a means for objectively deternining the duration of drilling
operations and the coastercisl drilling rates, for creating a stable base from which
to determine the cost of oil and gas well construction and for ensuring that the

cost estimates arrived at for different oil drilling regions are equitable.

The estimate time norms per meter of drilling must be reviewed as well drilling
equipment and procedures inrove. But their review should not require any special
additional outlays, since the introduction of new equipment into drilling operations
is always accowanied by a special analysis conducted to reveal the effectiveness
of the new equipment and to correct the norms.

After the general time norms are introduced,' estinates for drilling operations will

be made on the basis of the col-ercial drilling rate calculated using these norms
with a consideration for the geological profile of the well but without considering

the previously encountered rates. This will ensure that the estimated per-aster
drilling cost would retain stable over a ntﬂer of years for wells drilled in con-

stant natural and geological conditions.

A firm per-meter drilling cost estimate. one determined with an eye on socially
necessary outlays that can be comeneatsd and intended to remain constant over a
number of years, would be a dependable basis for planning capital inveetasnts and

18
“MUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for financing drilling operations. It would also seen that the collectives of
drilling organisations would have a dependable basis tordeternihing the financial
end result of their work.

Under these conditions the savinge in outlays enjoyed due to growth in drilling

rate would be reflected as an increase in the profits or the drilling organizations,
rather than as a reduction or the estinsted cost or planned work. as is the prac-

tice today.

Creation of a foundation of progressive standards based on a rock classification.
on general time norm for drilling operations and on objectively calculated drilling
operation tines would be anecessary prerequisite of increasing the drilling rates.

reducing the time and cost or well construction and iwroving the technical-economic
indicators of drilling operations.

009mm: Vsesoyusnyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organisatsii. upravleniya
i ekmiki neftegarovoy prooyshlennosti (mxoeno) , 1982

11004
(30: 1822/193

l9
POI mt USI ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W nouns Imam-Ion on m DRILLING mum
macaw 59mm 30mm in maaian 1981 (aigned to pteaa l7 Dov 81) pp 1-2, 196-200

[kxnotation and table of contenta fro. book 'Drill Operatox'a wide" by Konstantin
Vladiairovich Ioganaen, Izdatal'atvo ”Dada", 35,000 copiea, 200 pagea]

[‘l‘extl Brief deactiptione are given of «flee-produced turbodrilla. bite, drilling.
caaing. pulp and coqzeaaor pipes, core extractote. drilling colum coaponente.
grabe, packexa and blovout preventera. Nell fluahing and cementing are examined,

and infor-ation on oilfield geophyeica ia preeented. the handbook ia laid out in
the fora of tablea. smngth characteriatice. for-alas. proceduee, noaograne and

graphe required for calculationa are provided.

'l'hia guide ia intended fox engineere and tachniciane emloyed in well drilling
aaaociated with all for-a of aineralauoilaan, gaa drillers and geologiata.

Tamer-173, figureauloe, bibliography-~26 referencea.

mutants
10 "‘11 at“ 0 O O O O O O O O I O 0 O O O O D O O O O O O 0 O O O O a O 0 I

Conditiona for Being be): Dita . . . .
Mr of End Alloy Pine in Drill Dita
m at" O O 0 I e 0 0 O I O O O O O 0
Drill 3‘" O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
lnduatrially Produced Dore Drill Bite . .
Induettially onduced luck Dita . . . . . .
weight and Peniaeible load on Rock and Drill Dita
not): sit ﬂea: Coding (All-mien Scientific haeaxch Inatitute for

mllmg mi“) 0 O O O O O C I O O 0 O I O O O O
Dbdification of Soviet andmreign Dita . . . . . . . . .
'1.” at“ O I O O I O O O O O 0 O O I I O O O O O O O 9
Diannd Drilling mole (Natunl and synthetic Diaaonda) .
Areaofmlicatimofoiaaondlita. . . . . . . . . . .
Drilling Dool- Reinforced with Slavutich Alloy . . . . .
Conditions for Going Gxapha of Profitable Working of Diamond Bite
thing Gxapha of Profitable working of Diaaood Dita . . . . . . .

3
‘8

eeaa
eeoae
eeeee
eeeae
eeee-e
eaeeea
eeeeeee
eoeeee.
eeeeea
eeeo-e
OOQaeeo
eeeeaaa
0000...
ope-eee

U‘QUW‘UUU

e
a
a
e
e
a
e

eeeaeea
eeeeee.

e
a

eaaeae

e
a
e
e
e
a
e

e e a e e
e o a e a e a
o e e e . e e e a
a a e e e a e e e
e e e e e e a e
e e e a e a a e o
M

eeeeeeee

20
”WMONLY
II.

III .

IV.

v._

we OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Specitic mate of Bite. . . .
Actuel Veluee of Specific lament

Core:xtrectore.......
buryCorethrectore ....
CorexxtrectorDeeigne ....
turbodrille

mrbodrill Pere-etere . . . . .
Mbodrill Weeding . . . . .

eeeeeeee

DrillingPipee .... ...
Steel Drilling Pipee

e

eeeeee

Drilling Pipee for Blectric Drilling
Strength Clurecterietice of Drilling Pipes

AluminuDrillingPipee. . . . . . . . . .

Strength merecterietice of Aluninu milling Pipee

Per-ieeible Ieero! Pipe Outer Die-eter . . . . . .

Pernieeible mien on Cleee 11 end In Aluinun Drilling Pipee
Pernieeible Deneion on cleee I! end 111 Steel Drilling Pipee

Squere Kelly Pipee

0
e
e
e
e

:xtIC-smng 031111119 Pi”. e e e e e e e e e e e e e e
Layout of the Dotton or e Drilling Colun . . . . . . .
Strength meeting of e M-Dineneionel Drilling Calm .
indicatore a. b and h for thee of Different Me-Siue

Mtioe

of the Squeree or Verieblee kszz

DrillingColu-Irittinge. .......

locks for Drilling up“ . . .
adapter: {or Drilling Pipee . .

mptere (or Drive Drilling Pipee

Square Centering Glidee

Railing Cutter Celibretore . . . .

Bleded Spirel Celibretore . . .
Expender-Celibretcre . . . . .
Celibretar-Centering midee . .
8“.” 1m 0 O I e O 0 0 I 0
Flexible Stabilizers . . . . .

mbber hinge (or Drilling Pipee

Reflux Velvee for Drilling Pipee
Hetel Seperetore
Sludge Extrectore . . . . . . .

e

eeeeeeeeee

e

eeeeeee

Calculation of the Durability of Drilling Pipee . . .

eeeOeeO

eeeeeee

eeee

e e

e
e
e
e
e

e e e e e e
e e e e e e
e e e e e e

eeeeeeee

~¢eeeeeee

e
e
e
e
e
e

e e e e e e e e e e e
e e e e e e e e e e e
e e o e e e e e e e e
e e e e e e e e 0 e 0
e e e e e e e e e e e

eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeeeeeee

Dietence to Dotton Bole tron tiret Centering aside when Drilling
slant “11. O O O 0 O I I O O 0 O O O O I O 0 O O I O O 0 O O O D O

Dietence tron Dotton Hole to riret Centering Guide in Rater-y Drilling

eoeeeeeeeeeeeeee

eeeoeeeoeeee

0

Distance Bron Dottoe Bole to Piret Centering Guide in mrbodrilling .

POIOFHCIALWONLY

21

eeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeeeeeeeegeee

eeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeeeeeeeeee

21
22

23

23
24

25

25
26

27
27

32
32
33
33
34
35
35
37
38
39

40
40

‘2

42
‘3
46
‘6
47
4B

49
‘9

50

51
51
52

52
53
5‘
VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

POI “MAI. USE ONLY

PwandOospressorPipes.......................
‘nechnicai Characteristics of Pm and Conressor Pipes . . . . . . . . .
CouplingsPorPupandCeressorPipes............ .....
Strengthauracteristicsotmandoowressorl’ipee. . .. . .. . ..

CasingPipes.........

CasingPipes..........

Cowlings for Casing Pipes

ees

OG-la Cowling-Pres Casing Pipes
weldedCasingPipss . . . . . . .
Contact-welded Casing Pipes . . .
ceding o! Poreign Casing Pipes .

Strength characteristics of Casing Pipes
Peruissible Pension for Casing Pipes

Casing Pipe holding Pressure
Strength Ouracteristics of Casing Pipes
Steel Sea-less not-Rolled Pipes . . . . .
CasingCalculetions...........

Pasting Wells for Imerviousness

Calculating Casing 'rension
Deter-ining Casing Perviousness or Casings During
Drop in Casing Level in msponee to xxtraction o!

Stop‘mrustning . .. ..

Reflux Valves . . . . .

e

Influx Choke Valves . . . .
Reflux Ball Valves . . . .

Auto-atically liplenishsdh
Milling and Smooth Shoes
shoes for Casing Pipes .
ColusnShoes ......
Crown Scrapers . . . . .
Double-Action Pm . . .
Springnasts . . . . . .
Spring Centering Guides .

Distanoe Between Centering Guides

Piercingnandrels. . . . . .. .
ﬁve-Section Piercing Mandrels . .

HellPlushing.........
Delivery of 08-6}! PW . . . . .

Pressure losses in Drilling Pipes
Pressure bosses in Drilling, Pun

MWUSEONLV

e
e
e
e
e
e

btlux Valve

in. the ooéreesed Segent or a Casing

essssasssseeesssses

eeesseseesssseesees

s
ssssss
ssOsss
essee

e
e
a
s
s
s
e
e
s
e
e
e
s e s
s

e
e
s
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
s

esesssse

s e s e e e
s e s e s s
s s e e e s
a s a s e e
s e e e s s

s e e s
s s s e e e
s e s e e e
e e e e s s
s s s s e s
s s e s e s
e e e a s e

e

e
e
e
s

“.mg ﬁtting. 0 O O 0 O O O O O O O I O O O
'Desplates tor Casing Pipes

ssssssseessse

.
.
I
I
I
O
I

e s s s s s
e a s s s s
s

ssseseee
s

s e e s s e a s
s s s e e s e s
a o a a e e e

s s e s s s e e
s e e e s s s e
e e s e e e e s
s e e a s

esees
sesss
eseees
eeses
sessss
eeees
so

es

s

sseesesssesssss
ssssssesssssses

sesesee
seesse.
sesss
ssssa

Discharge
Pipes Without Air Lift

eseeseeeesss

e s s s a s e s s e e e
e a e e e s e e s s s s
e s s s e e a e e s e s
e s s e e s e e e e e e
e s e e e s e s s e s e
s s s a s e e e e e s e
e e e s e s e e s e e e
a s s s e s e s e e e s
e s s e e s e s e e s s
s s s e s s e s e e s e
s e e e e s e s e e s e
s e e e s s e e s e e a
s s e s e e e e a

s

s

s

ssseseeeseeessesesee

esesesessesseseseees

Due to Plow ot Drilling Pluid . .

and Comressor Pipes in Response
tothsPlowotDriliingPluid.....................
Pressure Losses in Ring Space in Response to Plow or Drilling Pluids

Between Walls of the Hell and Drilling Pipes
Pressure bosses in the Ring Space in lbsponse to Flow of Drilling Pluids

Between Hell walls in Extra-Strong Drilling Pipes . . . . . . . . . . .

22

ssseseeseee.

sssesssa

eeeeeessessse

$888

61

61
63

65

65
65

70

71
77

78

83

86
87

89

90

91
92
92
93
94
94

95
96

97
98
98
99

100

100
101

102

103

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pressure losses in Msponse to Flow of Drilling Fluids in Extra-Strong
nri11ingPipes.............................104
Pressure losses in lbsponse to Flow of Drilling Pluids in luck Bits . . . . 104
PressurelossesinaetnrillingNoules. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Pressure lossesinnrillingnigﬂanifold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106

x. FlushingrluidsandCheaicalneagents . . . . . .. . . .. 107

Classificationofrluahingrluids.. . . .. .. . .. . . .. 107
aneucalnaagentstlsedinwellnrilling..................109
Materialsosedinlellbrilling..... . 111
Classification of Chenical Reagents in lielation to Salt tolerance and
Heatmsistance.............................112

n.wellCeasntation ... 113

DaliveryandPressure Generatedhstnsnting mite . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
ColunIarOansntingﬂeads.........................114
PropertiesotOesentSolutions.............. ........ 115

Determination of Bottom Hole Wraturs Priorto Censntation . . . . . . . 117
ValuesofmetticientsA,BandC.. . . .. ..... . .. .... 117

MethodsofCalculatingOeuntBridges..... .............. 118
CalculationofautferPluidvblm .. .. .. 119

HydrodynanicCensntingCalculations....................120
lnnerVolunsoflock-aquippednrillingl’ipes ............... l21
InnerVoluneothandCoapressorPiping .. .......... 122
lnnerVolureotCasingPipes ........ 123
Inner Volume 0: Casing Pipes Made According to“! Standards . . . . . . . 123

Volune of Space Between Iell walls and Casing Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

XII. Troubleshooting'lbols.. ....................... 125
General-PurposeTaps.......................... . 125

smcialn”.0...OOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO....000126
Specialcrabs............................... 127
Grabs Used in Geological Esp1oration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
SlipSockets........................... .129

Bells tor Retrieval of Drilling Pipe Ooltllns . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
Be1-s for mtrieval of PunpandCoIpressor Pipe Calms . . . . . . . . 131
'1‘hrough811p80ckets . 132

sees
a
e

slip Sockets Used in Geological Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
Releasing Internal Pipe Catchers tor Pm and Comressor Pipes . . . . . 133

NonreleasingPipeCatchers........................ 135

TVOInternalPipeCatchers .. ................. 136
'l'VU-lBTlnternalPipeCatchers ...................... 137
External hleasing Threading Die Catchers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
mtting-Abradingnilling’lbou ...................... 139
Cutting-Abradingningnilling'mols.................... 140
Budnillingmtters............................. 141
IntercolunnandnillingCutters...................... 141

Bottonﬂolenilling‘l‘ools......................... 142
TaperedOolmHining‘lbols....................... 1‘3

23
POI OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Bayberlﬂiiling‘lbols ............... ..........

PilotMilling'lbols....................
ColunnScrapers........... ..... ......
General-PurpoeeSeals...................
mgneticCatcher.....................
nagneticﬂilling‘lbols ..................
Piehingﬂods. .........
Determination of Catching Depth Prom Length of. me Piping

e0...

XIII. OilfieldGeophysics..................

'nechnical characteristics of Geophysical Well Instnnents .
Technical duarecteristics of Clap-Equipped Instruments . .
lechnical (:harecteristics of Claspless Well Instruments . .

AxialShapeddIarges....... ..... ..... ......

Nonherneticshapeddaarges ................
mnshapedcharges....................
DetonatingOord......................

Z'ISh'rShapedourges..................

Using Monograms to Determine the Quantity of Explosives Required to

UnscreworBreakPipes .................
Hollow-Charge Boused Perforators ...... . . . . . . .

Hollow-ChargePertorators.................
StripPerforators.....................

XIV. Packingoevices....................

Hydraulic-Mechanical Packers Used to Seal 0:: Space External to

When CementingUpAbeorption Zones . . . . . . . . . . .
Mechanical Packers (bed to Seal 0:: 001m Spaces . . . . .
sleeve Packers Used to Seal 0:: Colulz Spaces . . . . .

Anchors Holding Packers to the Places of Their Installation
Packers Used to Prevent Gas Leakage Outside Piping . . . .

Packer-Filter Used to hprove the Quality of easing Oeoentation

e

e

PackersUsedtoSealOttSpaoesinaColI-n.... . . . . ..

e

e

Drillable Packer Used to Plug Absorption Zones . . . . . . . .

XV. BlowoutPreventere...................

lowerColmaeads ..............
InternediateColu-laeads. . . . . . . . . . .
Casing Bracing aquipnent . . . .
Coupleteness of Blowout Prevention Equipmnt .
Blowout Prevention Equipment . . . . . . . . .
Blowout Prevention Equipment Preventers . . . . .
Blowout Prevention Equipment Manifolds . . . . .

eeee
eeee

eeeee
esse
e
eoeee

eeeoee

Flanged Adapters Used to Connect Sealing needs to PPG Preventers
Sealing Heads Used in Lowering and Raising Pipes under Pressure

GusherPittings........................

XVI. 1ypesandoinensionsof‘mreade

Dock‘mreadProfilee...................

o

'mreadedlockingaoints....................

21.
FOR OPTICAL [SE ONLY

145
145
146
146
147
147
148

150

150
151
152
154
154

155
155

155

156
159

160
160

161
161

163
163
164
164
165

165
166

167

167
168
170
172
172
174
175

176
176

177

179

179
180
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mckmreadwtthalockingnands.................... 182
bundedpipe‘mread.......................... 183

Ramdedﬂnreadodupomnnecum............... .. 184
unwandmrapomd‘mnadprotnu ................ 187
mandmu‘meadedconnections.... . ........... 188
Trapezoidal Pipinq‘mrud for Stool Drilling Pip. . . . . . . . . . . . 190
own-landorl‘G-lwtnqmpomroads.................191
OG-lnCasmgPipe‘mreaa.......................192
'mreading‘norques...........................193

Bibliography............................... 195
mPYRIGn‘: Izaatel'stvo "Neda", 1981

11004
C80: 1822/2200

25
m OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80) pp 1-8. 252-254

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents ffon book “Radioactive Raw Naterial

Deposits", by Vladimir Ivanovich Dandaev and 'rat'yana Alessandrovna Lspinskaya.
2d edition. revieed, Irdatel'etvo 'lledra'. 2.400 copies. 25¢ pages]

[text] Intonation is presented on the earth's radioactive eleasnts and on the con-
ditions of aigration and concentration of uranium radiu and thoriu. A brief
era-ination is offered of the earth's radiogenic heat and of the principal methods
of detersining the absolute age of ninerals and rock. the aost ilportant uraniu

provide a significant proportion of industrial uraniuauare discussed soaevhat aore
briefly. Special sections of the book are devoted to the relationship between uraniu
and carbonaosom and bituinous latter and between ore-forling processes and the
stages of for-nation of ore-bearing rock.

The book is intended as a training aid for var students specializing in geology and
geophysics. It may also be useful to geologists, Wsicista and other workers

of geological prospecting parties having radioactive raw materials as one of their
incidental objectives.

eleven tables. 90 figures, 22 bibliographic references.

m Page

”mmeeeeeseeeeeaeeeeeeeoeaeeeeoeeeeeee 3

Chapter 1. 'me tarth'e Moactive liensnts and their Principal 17p“
of “p.1u O O O O O O O O O O O O I l O O O O O 0 O I 0 O I O O O O O O

51.Generallnfonaationonf'adioactivity.................
52. Uranium. moriua and Radium Their Properties. Geocheaical features
andArsasoprplication....................... 19

0‘0

26
FOR OHIO“. IS! ONLY
53.
54.

55.

‘6.
57.

Ozaptern. EndogenousDeposits.............

58.
59.
£10.
511.
912.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

1heProbleao£lladiogenicBeat...... ... ..
utilizing the Radioactive Properties of Elements to Determine
thcAbsoluteAgeotuimralsandnock . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PrincipalUranimand‘moriuauinerals . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Classification of. Uranium and “ﬂuorine Deposits . . . . . . . . .
Uraniu and maria Production in Capitalist and Developing
Oountriuxthenavnaterialnase................

Uraniu and morn-I in agile Rockand raglan Deposits
PeglatiticDeposits ................
Deposits of hdioactive Metals in Carbonatites . . .
Contact-lbtasonstic Deposits . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bvdrotheualneposits ...............
Plutonogenic Rydrotherlal Deposits . . . . . . . . . . .
Volcamgenicaydrothernalnsposits. . . . . . . . . . .
mgtogenic or Stratitoraic Hydrotherlal Deposits . .
Bydrotherml Deposits De-insted by ‘morit- . . . . . . .

eeeee
e
e
s
eesee
a

seoes
e
e
eeeee

Chapternl.ExogenousDeposits................. ..

513.

514.
$15.
516.
517.
518.

$19.

Uranius and 'moriu in Brogenous Conditions: Lithogenesis and

UraniunOrePornation .....................
Behavior of Uranium in Response to Hind Erosion of Rock . . . .
migration and Accumulation of Uranium in a Sedimentation Done .
UranimandDiagenesis.....................
Uraniu in the Presence of Hypergenesis and Catagenesis . . . .
The Ibis of Organic Matter in Bediuntary bolt in Concentration
of ”rm“ 0 O 0 0 O O 0 O O O O O O O t O I O O O O O D I l 0 0
Classification of Uraniua Deposits in Sedinsntary Cap lbck . . .

Chapter Iv. Principal Genetic Mes or Uraniu and Thoriu- Deposits

inSedinentaryCapmck.....................

520.

521.
522.
523.
524.

525.
526.

Uraniua Deposits in Pra’ntal Rock . . . . . . . .
Diagenetic, Brodiagenetic and Polystadial Deposits .
BpigeneticDepooits .............
Uraniu-Bitmn Deposits . . . . . . . . . . .
Uraniu Deposits in Carboniferous Pornations .

Uranium Deposits in Carbonaceous Rock . . .
Uranium-Phosphate “posits . . . . . . . . .
Uranim in Phosphorite and Almophosphate Ibex
Uraniul in Accumlations of Osseous Detritus .
Alluvial Uraniu and Thoriu Deposits . . . .
Bxasples of the Polygenicity of Uranitn Ore Porntion in

SediuntaryCaplbck......................

s s s s e a e
e e e e s s s
s e s s s e e s

eseeeesee
e

e e e e e e e
s e e s e e e e
s s s e s s s e e

eeee

chapter V. Sediuntary-Heta-orphic Deposits . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter VI.

eeses

sesse

eeees

eseee

svesesoe

Laws Governing Distribution of Radioactive mmurial uposits

Appendix. Principal Minerals Containing Uraniu and Thorium Ore . . . . .

27
momaaiusconu

25

28
35
39

41

48
48
55

63
79

98
105

107

107
112
114
122

128

130
136

141
141
141
164
179
183
198
208

209
212

215

222
227
239
248
250
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreword

Our country's industry and agriculture require tremendous quantities of raw ninerals.
Recent technological progress and the introduction of chemistry into all areas of
science and production are promoting extremely swift expansion of the range of
minerals and of the coqalex of elements extracted from them. With very minor escap-
tions, almost all of Ilendeleyav's table is “working“ for man today. In addition to
elennts that are widespread in the earth's crust--iron, gold, copper, tin and lead.
the history of the me of which nurbars in the millenia--rare and dispersed Octal.
and mstalloids that are quite 'young" in tern of their utilisation--lithium.

beryllium. boron, indiu. germanitm. seleniu, catiu, rare earth metals and many
others--have gained importance in connection with the development of automation,

electronics. rocket technology and other forms of modern industry.

Some of them have enjoyed broad application in the acquisition of special alloys
made from ferrous and nonferrous metals, and heat-resistant glass and ceramic, and
in the production of new synthetic nterials. solid chemical fuels. semiconductors
and so on.

Owing to the remarkable successes of physics. which have made it possible to control
the nuclear fission reaction, yet another grow of minerals. referred to as nuclear

fuel. has acquired extremely great significance. min group contains natural radio-
active elemantsnuranitm and thorium-which. when used in atomic reactors, produce
colossal quantities of energy exceeding the possibilities of all energy sources known
to date. At present the main nuclear fuel is uraniu, but introduction of new types
of reactors into indmtry in the next few years will make broad use of thoriu for
similar purposes economical as well.

One of the greatest discoveries of mankindudevelopment of the means for liberating
energy locked within the atom-made itself known through a terrifying disaster-the
explosion of atomic bosbs dropped by American military pilots in 1945 on two Japan-
ese cities. In the course of a few seconds, tens of thousands of inhabitants were
annihilated, and people who had been subjected to lethal radiation more than 30 years
ago are still dying today. -

'l'he Soviet mion proposed the first paths of peaceful use of atomic energy. in-
search of exceptional scope and depth conducted by a group of Soviet physicists led

by I. V. Kurohatov resulted in the creation of the world's first atomic electric
atosic power plant on 27 June 1954. Soviet scientists shared their experience at

the Geneva Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Inargy in 1955, after which con-
struction of atomic power plants began in the USA, England. France and other coun-
tries. Sixteen countries of the world now possess more than loo operating atomic
power plants with a total output of about 60 million kw. and there are plans for
increasing their umber and output further.

Atomic power engineering has gained a firm foothold in our country's life. As of
1975 the output of atomic electric power plants (ma) in the 0883 attained 4.7
million kw (20). an. 10th rive-Year Plan foresaw preferential development of atomic
power engineering and introduction of ABSs with a total output of 13-15 million kw,

which would significantly reduce consmtion of gas. petroleue and coal for energy
production purposes. ‘1!) reduce the cost of energy and ensure fuller use of nuclear

fuel. reactors are being inroved continuously: system operating on the basis of

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

fast neutrons, which make possible the use of not only the highly radioactive iso-
mm 73"!) but also the naturally more widespread 2350, are being introduced. A
l~s:.l. neutron reactor is already operating successfully in the city of shevchenko
in support of a plant desalinising water from the Caspian Sea.

we are continuing our efforts to create low power ass: which may be broken down into
mdules and shipped by all forms of transportation. including airplanes. which would

have great significance to industrial development of remote regions of the North
deprived of their own sources of fuel.

The icebreaker 'benin"--the world‘s first surface vessel with an atomic propulsion
unit-was launched on S Deoewer 1975; a larger icebreaker, the “Arktilca'. was
launched in 1975. a: 17 August 1977 the latter was the first in the entire history
of navigation to reach the geographical location of the north Pole. At the end of
1977 yet another atomic icebrsaker appeared--the “Sibir”. Il’he work of these vessels
has very great national economic significance. making it possible to lengthen the
navigation season in the northern seas of the Soviet mion. This will pave the

way for providing new industrial centers and populated regions presently developing
in the Arctic with everything they need.

Nuclear explosions are being med to build canals and reservoirs and to support
stripping operations in mining industry.

The reactors of various designs used in our comtry not only provide energy but also
permit highly iQortant scientific research digging deeper into the secrets of the

structure of matter. and development of new, economically more advantageous facili-
ties. In its form of mnerous radioactive isotopes, the peaceful atom is being
extensively used in various areas of science and technology, helping us to trans-
illuninate netals. to subject minerals and rock to highly detailed analysis. to
observe the aovement of water and of biocurrents in plants. to study wells and to
treat severe illnesses. Scientific research in atomic science and techxiolcgy has
enjoyed extensive development in the Soviet union. Soviet scientists now possess

large thermonuclear facilities and a network of scientific research institutes.
the (united Institute for Nuclear Studies, inwhich scientists of many countries are

laboring over the problem of the peaceful use of atomic energy. was created on the
Soviet Union's initiative. Atomic energy is no longer the energy of the future.
as it was not that long ago at all; it is making an enornous contribution not only
to the country's defense but also to supporting the main task posed by the 25th
CPSU Congress-oraising the welfare of our people.

The great successes of Soviet atomic physics and power engineering owe a great deal

to the labor of workers in the geological service, who have managed to provide atomic
industry with the reserves of radioactive raw materials it needs.

Research on the laws governing formation of deposits of radioactive elements,
started on the initiative of one of the greatest Russian scientistsnhcademician

v. I. Vernadskiy, was continued and developed by D. I. Shcherbakov, A. P. Vinogradov.
A. A. Saukov. V. V. Shcherbina and many other scientists. It should be noted that
the last few decades have been narked. by serious research on the geochemistry.
mineralogy and geology of atomic raw material deposits in other countries as well.
The data that have been accumulated have made it possible to significantly improve

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prospecting and pinpoint its efforts more accurately. lbreover the data have damn-
strated how great an influence natural radioactive decay processes have on many

geological phenceenaunagnetisn, regional netancrphisa, tectonic processes and the
thermal regime of remote territories and of the earth as a whole, and so on.

A new branch of geological knowledge has cone into being-oradicgeology, or nuclear
geology, together with its specific research nethoa. Radiogeology is asking it

possible for us to approach prospecting for deposits of radioactive ole-ants with
better grounds. And this is one of the lost inortant problees of modern geology

in connection with the continually increasing role of atclaic energy.

The geochemical features of the principal nuclear Iatalwuraniueware such that its
ore concentrations nay be for-ed in various conditions, beginning with the stage of
the cooling of nag-a and ending with the latest stages in the life of sedinentary

rock. therefore industrial deposits of uraniu are known to be contained in ex-
tremely diverse surrounding rock.

While in the first stage of developeent of atoeic industry the bulk of the uraniu
was obtained from endogenous deposits, nainly hydrotherual, in the last 20 years ore
concentrations in sedimentary and sedinentary-aetanorphic rock have begun to play a
distinctly nore iQortant role, and the center of gravity of uranium extraction and
reserves is gradually shifting in the direction of exogenous deposits. In sue

types of these deposits, thoriue, rare earth and other elenents having industrial
significance are satellites of uranium ‘mese say be interpreted as couples deposits.

Because the range of geological conditions in which industrial accu-ulations of
radioactive raw Iaterials nay form is relatively broad, at least sons testing for

such raw materials should be conducted in all geological studies, especially in
relatively unexplored regions. Such incidental prospecting soutines leads to the
discovery of major industrial deposits of uraniun and thorium

In this respect great possibilities are opening up before geologists and petroleum
geophysicists. who conduct regional studies in vast, often very poorly studied
territories in connection with their search for oil and gas fields.

Detailed geophysical and geological analysis of core sanples from nunercus wells
will domatlessly be an aid to revealing new deposits of radioactive raw naterials
and to clarifying the behavior of radioactive elements in different types of sedi-
mentary and sedimentary-metamorphic rock. Of course, if the quality of such research
is to rennin high, the prospectors must become acquainted with the fundaaentals of
the geochenistry, mineralogy and geology of radioactive ale-ants.

this book is a training aid for the geology section of the course ”nuclear Geo-

physics and lladionetric Prospecting" for V02 students specializing in geophysics
and geology. It is also reco-ended for a numer of sections of the course “Princi-

ples of Mineral Geochsnistry and mlwy.’ pollowing publication of the first edi-
tion of this book (1965) a vast new literature devoted to the geology of uraniua

and thorium deposits appeared. his was associated with the enornous scope of
explorations and prospecting being conducted in all countries of the world, elicited
by the need for providing raw material to intensively developing atomic energy produc-
tion and owing to significant exhaustion of the reserves of traditional sources of
energy--coebustible minerals.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A sysposium on fornation of uranium deposits, which was attended by 220 scientists
from 40 countries, was organised in Athens in 1974 for the purposes of information
exchange by the International Agency for Atosuc Energy. A smsiu with just as
broad a representation was held in Vienna in 1976 with the purpose of discussing

the methods of exploring for uraniu deposits. In the last 10 years the Soviet liter-
ature has been supplemented by extensive suluaries on the geology of endogenous and
exogenous uranium deposits in both the Soviet union and foreign countries (works by
P. Ya. Antropov, P. I. Vol'fson, v. II. Kotlyar, N. P. Laverov, V. I. Smirnov.

A. I. Tugarinov and others). The need for considering these data in the training of
geological engineers and geophysicists led to the creation of new textbooks. The

training aid “Hestoroshdeniya radioaktivnykh i redkikh metallov" [Deposits of Radio-
active and Rare retals) edited by v. N. Kotlyar (7) was published in 1973, and in

1976 a laboratory manual intended for the same course was published under the
editorship of N. P. Lavenov (8). i‘hese books devote their greatest attention to
formation, classification and characterisation of endogenous deposits.

As in the first edition, this training aid turns its main attention to exogenous
and metamorphic deposits owing to their increasingly greater indmtrial significance,
and in connection with the fact that it is intended primarily for geologists and

geophysicists prospecting for minerals in sedimentary cap rock and in metamorphic
rock underlying the former to one degree or another. All of the sections of the

book have been significantly revised. The description of endogenous deposits is
based wholly on published literature; exogenous deposits are described in greater
detail on the basis of the results of research conducted by the authors themselves.
in addition to punished sources. making some sections of this book original. New
subsections have been introduced--”I.ithogsnesis and Uranium Ore Donation“ and

"The hole of Organic Matter in Sedimentary lbck in Concentration of Uraniu.‘ ‘l‘hese
subsections focus attention on the relationship of uranium ore formation to different
stages of the lithogenesis of sedimentary rock. and on the ore-forming role of
organic matter, which is such a frequently encomtered cowonent of sedimentary
formations. The limited volume of the book would not permit description of many
kinds of deposits. This is why either the largest deposits or those which lost
clearly represent a particular genetic group were selected. Despite the long ties
that uranium deposits have been subjected to study, a under of problems associated
with their classification and genesis remain debatable. as is noted in the appro-
priate sections.

The authors are extremely grateful to their colleang II. P. Strelyanov and v. A.
shumlyanskiy for their assistance in gathering some of the material on the geology

of exogenous deposits. which made it possible to significantly supplement and update
the descriptions of these deposits given in the first edition. The authors are also
deeply grateful to Prof V. Ye. Boytaov and to instructors of the Department of
Geology, Mineralogy and Geochemistry of Rare and Radioactive Blement Deposits of
the Moscow Geological Prospecting Institute imsni 3. Ordshonikidse, who acquainted
themselves with the manuscript of the training aid and made suggestions which were
taken into account in the final draft.

COPYRIG'IT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra', 1980

11004
60: 1822/205

31
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
won OFFICIAL us: only

91931.1“

one 622 . 692 2629. 123

MMWO’AWOILWMPOHWASNM

Meow manna Pmsmm'r'. SIRIYA MPG” I my; arm I muo-
DIIKM In M81”! llo d, 1982 pp 25-27

[Article by A. A. Dotsenko and L. c. Stepanete, Black Sea ministration of main
Petroleua Pipelines]

[Text] The irregularity with which tankers arrive at port to mload their oil is
mainly the product of weather and the freighting conditions. In this case the lost

typical cause of irregularity in the arrival and processing of tankers is storas.
During a storm, a large quantity of tankers can emulate at a roadstead. Ihsn
the weather returns to nor-a1, they Illt be processed quickly. The experience of
operating Iarine oil depots shows that the way the first batch of tankers to be
processed is organized after a stor- has fundasental significance to the control
of an oil depot and port.

Because tankers lust be processed quickly after a ston, the throughput of the oil
depot suetbe increased, and acertainopti-n strategy of operational control out be

inlessnted during this period.

the possibilities for accelerating tanker processing are linited by the loading
capacity of the oil depot in integration with that of the treat-ant facilities
and the nooring space of the port. ‘ihe traditional way to arrive at the tactics
of operational control following a stor- is to standardize the hunter of tankers
sisuitaneously undergoing processing at the soorings of the oil loading port.

no existing approach to establishing the nor- for simultaneous vessel processing
entails setting the norn in accordance with the quantity of loading lines connecting
the oil depot to the moorings. For practical purposes a branched flow and discrete
control of the branches of this flow are used to sinulate the transition fro. a con-
tinuous inflow of cargo (oil) to the oil depot to a coahined discrete-continuous
for: of onloading of the cargo at the soorings. ‘l'his sodel does not account for. a

significant for- of mloading of the cargo at the moorings. This nodal does not
accomt for a significant feature of the oil transloading process at an oil depot:

rransloading proceeds fro. one reservoir at a ti-euthat is, the transloading
process is continuum-discrete. ‘l‘his creates objective difficulties in the on-

loading of oil at the aoorings, where the continuous-discrete flows fro- several
reservoirs lust be distributed along the onloading lines in such a way that the tins
of continuous flow in the onloading lines is greater than the reservoir thying
tine. ‘nxe reason for these difficulties lies in the fact that the unit capacity of
a reservoir at existing soviet oil depots is less than the capacity of a tanker as
a rule.

32
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In some cases the situation is aggravated by the fact that the reservoirs at port-
side oil depots located in hilly terrain are at different elevations. which severely
limits the possibilities for joining the reservoirs together, owing to the danger
of overflows. he should add to this that when cargo is pned fro. the reservoirs at
an accelerated pace. the whirlpool effect intensifies. which reduces the use coeffi-

cient of reservoir capacity and makes control over the reservoir park as a whole
significantly sore difficult.

It follows from this that the mater of onloading lines at the soorings must corres-
pond to the resins: loading capacity of the oil depot, which is liaited by the design

features of the oil depot and by the ratio between the unit capacity of a reservoir
and the capacity of a tanker. The degree of this limitation is rather difficult

to calculate. which is why the Inter of onloading lines is planned as a rule to be
deliberately greater than the possibilities of the oil depot. Inasmch as the on-
loading capacity at the snoringe is calculated on the basis of the nutter of on-
loading lines, it would not be difficult to understand that the loading capacity of
the oil loading depot iapoees the greatest li-itation on the possibilities for
hastening the operations.

Anus that it is known free the experience of rating a marine oil depot that its
naxiam loading capacity is M- We know from thorvessel processing standards the
the loading capacity Art of a vessel of class i (i-l,2,...,n). men the lisit on
the loading capacity of the oil depot may be expressed by the inequality

in. ‘E’Hm- (l)

where Ni is the nutter of vessels of class i undergoing processing siaultaneously
(that is, it is the vessel sieultaneous processing norm for vessels of class 13).

Research has shown that the nuter of different structural classes of vessels is
usually larger than the Inter of moorings, and therefore vessels of different
structural classes are grouped into classes 13 corresponding to the onloading and
offloading capabilities of the vessels, and the moorings are correspondingly dis-
tributed with respect to classes 11.

In a period following a storm. vessels of all n classes can usually be fomd at a
port. 'l'he priority of vessel processing is regulated by the existing international
shipping regulations. Thus to avoid the possibility of slighting the flag of a
foreign vessel, the rule adhered to strictly when servicing foreign ships is to
process the. on a first cone. first served basis. when processing doustic vessels,
there are various alternatives for the priority of vessel processing. and they are
entertained on the basis of economic considerations associated with the fleet's
operation and cargo transport. -

the known way of handling the problem of optima operational control of tanker
processing at a marine oil onloading port. entails establishment of the processing

 

'Dotsenko, A. h.. and Alibekov. 8. 1., "Optimal Planning of 'ranlwr Processing at
a Marine Oil unloading Port,“ mas. TMNSPOKI‘ I HWY! run: I mm,
No 2. Moscow, vunosuc, 1981.

33
POI 0W“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sequence in relation to a certain operational tine interval M, on the basis of the
considerations indicated above. In a period following a store the situation is such
that the economic grounds for changing the order of vessel processing are signifi-

cantly diminished owing to the long tine the tankers had stood idle (up to 5-9 days).
Consequently the criterion used in the solution described above cannot be used to

aka a sufficiently gromded decision as to the priority of processing a certain
group of tankers inediately after weather returns to normal. Assune that N1: vessels
of each class have acct-listed at the port during a storm. Next assuee that the port
possesses Um: moorings for each class of vessels. By solving the prgblee indicated
m (that of optimizing the long-range plan), we can isolate from H; a certain

quantity of vessels 1’; with an equal right to inclusion in the first batch of
vessels to be processed. mis creates different alternatives for defining H; such
that inequality (1) and inequalities

”13‘ Na (2) m m (3)

are observed.

'me effectiveness with which an oil depot and an oil port operate following a storm
nay be evaluated either directly from the sire of A". reached or indirectly fro. the

level of satisfaction of the norms for 111:, as is rra'itionally done. In the latter
case. however, we would have an additional limitation which would not always permit

us to select the soot advantageous alternative of It in relation to the criterion
of achieving Am.

And in fact. the actual onloading capacity 1.21011)“: depends strongly on the correctness
t
with which I); is defined, since in view of the discreteness of gum. it cannot be

equated exactly to *cro But vhen control is organised properly, the shortfall in
utilizing the oil depot's onloading capacity following the store may be minimised.

Therefore the tactics of operational control of a coqlex consisting of an oil depot
and an oil port following a storm should be established not by the traditional

lethod indicated above, but rather on the basis of the criterion of mini-um shortfall
in the use of the oil depot's onloading capacity during the processing of the first
batch of tankers.

0 -min(M'§H£ln:) . (4)

Thus problem (Id-(4) is formulated as a problem of optima: for-scion of the first
batch of tankers to be processed in the period following a storu. this problen is

in the class of mathematical whole-mater programing problems. It oust be solved
by the appropriate methods at the level of an automated tanker processing control

systen in cosbination with the problem of optima operational control of tanker
processing at a marine oil onloading port.

(Doorman: Vseeoyusnyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut organisatsii, upravleniya i
ekonoaiki neftegasovoy promyshlennosti (VNIIOBNG), 1982

11004
(30: 1822/194 END

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY