FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10310
8 February 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFI‘ 1AL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1031I

8 February 2

EAST EUROPE REPORT

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(Fouo 3/82)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIWAL AFFAIRS

CPSU's Zagladin Comments on Polish Developments
(Maurizio Chierici; CORRIERE DELLA SERA, 15 Dec 81) ..........

POLAND
Harning to West on Polish Expulsion Threat Noted '
(Editorial; THE GUARDIAN, 8 Jan 82) oooooaolocoeoooeaOOQOOOOCO

Role of Halesa's Hire in Strikes Reported
(Sue Mastemm; MIL! EXPRESS, 18 me 81) OOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOCCC.

Prosecutor General Issues Communique on Strikes
(Michael Simmons; THE GUARDIAN, 22 Dec 81) ...................

UK 'Resident' Describes Situation in Poznan
(THE GUARDIAN, 23 me 81) 0.00.0'OODOOCOOCIO'OOOCCOOICIOOUQCOO

Solidarity Cofounder Interviewed on Prospects in Poland
(Karol Modzelevski Interview; L'EXPRESS, 11 Dec 81) ..........

Polish Party, Solidarity ijicials Cited
(Bernardo Valli; u STMPA, 6 he 81) UOIOOIOOCOOOOOIOOQOD'O‘O

Spanish Magazine Interviews Minister Krzak
(Marian Krzak Interview; CAMBIO l6, 7 Dec 81) ................

Briefs
Soviet Invasion Unlikely
Deaths in Warsaw
Halesa Ends Hunger Strike
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

CPSU'S ZAGLADIN COMMENTS ON ?0LISH DEVELOPMENTS
PM171501 Milan CORRIERE DELLA SERA in Italian 15 Dec 81 pp 1-2

[Maurizio Chierici report on 14 December press conference in Geneva given by Vadim
Zagladin, first deputy chief of the CPSU Central Committee international section:
"Reassuring Action"]

[Excerpt] Geneva--[Question] Mr Zagiadin. is the Soviet Union entirely in agreement
with the action undertaken by General Jaruzelski?

[Answer] It seems to me a reassuring action. At least I hope so. Our opinion is
that the situation in Poland has become untenable. There were forces determined to
clash with the socialist forces. Something more than a verbal conflict was being
planned. If General Jaruzelski had not taken the measures in question we might have
witnessed more serious and more tragic events.

[Question] Western observers hint at Soviet Union pressure on the Harsaw Government:
"hat is your opinion?

[Answer] There has been no pressure from us.

[Question] In your opinion, how is it possible to take decisions in any way connected
with democracy at a time when the state siege is being intensified?

[Answer] First, nobody has denied the existence of trade unions. They are not
prohibited. Their activity has been suspended for a while. General Jaruzelski
himself has confirmed this. It is a temporary measure. It must be realized that
democratic order had nothing in common with disorder recently nurtured in Poland by
certain rightwing elements in Solidsrity....

[Question] Only by Solidarity's right wing?

[Answer] Only by the right wing-not by all members.

[Question] Were you surprised by the proclamation of the state of siege?
[Answer] Personally, no. Perhaps I did not expect it to happen right now, but I

had evidence that there were elements in Poland ready for a violent confrontation.
They said that it was necessary to "hang" (we might have Iisheard here: "pendre"

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

means "to hang" in French, but Zagladin might have said "prendre," "to take," in
other words "to set sside"-CORRIERE editor's note) thousands of people...loya1 to

the democratic State. In view of this threat, the Govern-eat decided it was
necessary to intervene.

[Question] How was this decision taken?

[Answer] It is a decision that derives iron the latest Polish Communist Party [as
published] plenum. All Party representatives undertook to "do something" to restore
order. It was easy to imagine what would happen.

[Question] Why are you in Geneva?

[Answer] I an a member of a scientific delegation....

COPYRIGRI‘: I981 Editoriale del "Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.
CSO: 3106/87

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

HARNING T0 "EST 0N POLISH EXPULSION THREAT NOTED
PH081323 London THE GUARDIAN in English 8 Jan 82 p 12
[Editorial: "when Doors would Have to be Bolted"]

[Text] One thing is ominously certain after General Jaruzslski's meeting this week
with EEC ambassadors to Warsaw. There will be, to use the general's reported
phrase, "no place for Solidarity extremists in the Poland of the future." It is
less then clear whether the Polish authorities were emphasising that Solidarity

in its old form was dead and buried or whether, as some sources suggest, Warsaw

is flirting with the idea of departing thousands of free trade unionists and other
dissidents. If the latter, then EEC governments should have a united response
ready before the unfortunate detainees find themselves herded together at Warsaw
Military Airport or shovelled on to troop trains ready for shipment to points West.
And that response should be spelled out beyond all doubt to Poland's military
dictators.

Austria's chancellor, Bruno Kreisky, who had similar harsh decisions to make when
the Czechoslovakian authorities were harassing members of charter 77, has said that
he will accept any Solidarity leader who genuinely wishes to leave Poland. That

is right and proper. The Heat can hardly condemn the Soviet Bloc for refusing
exit visas to those who, like Andrei Sakharov's deughter-in-law, want out and then
turn away persecuted Polish trade unionists. It would, however, be intolerable

for the West to accept--or even to allow the military authorities to believe that
we might accept-—people unwillingly expelled from their homeland for their political
beliefs. Many Solidarity activists might decide they preferred a martyred exis-
tence-harassment, unemployment or detention-to exile. That choice should be for
them and then alone to make. It can be no part of the EEC objective to help
General Jsruzelski rid himself from such embarrass-ante.

Above all, the Heat can be party to no deal which includes the mass expulsion

of unwilling emigrcs as part of a so-cslled relaxation of tension inside Poland.

If General Jaruzelski has prisoners who, he claims, wish to leave Poland and whom
he wishes to be shot of [as published], then Western ambassadors should have direct
and free access to them to substantiate that claim. Then, and only then, should
they be granted political asylum-—not, be it noted, refugee status. And the

Polish Government should be told that no restrictions would be imposed upon the
political activities of such exiles beyond those placed upon all of us by our
countries of residence.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 8 January 1982

080: 2020/23

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I \I. \II I 0‘ Ihlo Unit'- UI‘I‘.

POLAND

ROLE OF HALBSA'S RIPE IN STRIKES REPORTED
PH181203 London DAILY EXPRESS in English 18 Dec 81 p 8
[Sue Masterman dispatch: "Ualesa's Wife Stopped a Bloodbath"l

[Text] Harsau-Lech Halesa's heavily-pregnant wife intervened to stop a blood-
bath in Poland's Gdansk Shipyard it was revealed yesterday.

Prom inside embattled, censor-ridden Poland this is one of the facts to emerge
from the last few days of crisis.

Danuaia [diminutive of Danuta] Halesa. who expects her seventh child at Christmas,
went to the Lenin Shipyard, birthplace of Solidarity, to appeal to sit-in workers
to leave.

Her husband is interned along with up to 15,000 other Polish workers' leaders
but she told the shipyard sen:

"My husband is still chairman of this union. Do nothing until he gives you
instructions.

"Lech has told me: 'It's hopeless. Tell them not to do it.'"

Thnt resulted in thousands of workers obeying the Military Government's deadline
of one hour to quit the yard and temporarily defuse the situation.

B-c thousands more are still inside.

They threw spanners and hammers at the men walking out and reports say the
dlehards have mined the approaches to the yard.

COPYRIGHT: Beaverbrook Newspapers Limited 1981

CSO: 2020/19

FOR OFFKHAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

PROSECUTOR GENERAL ISSUES COMMUNIQUE 0N STRIKES
PN221427 London THE GUARDIAN in English 22 Dec 81 pp 1, 18
[Report by Michael Sin-ions: "Warsaw Admits to Continuing Strikes")

[Excerpt] A comunique from the Prosecutor General's office yesterday listed
activists indicted in eight arena for organising strikes and made the first public
reference to attempted sabotage. No Solidarity medaers in northern Kossalin were
accused of pouring glue into packing machines and removing transmission belts in
a match plant.

It seemed last night that the authorities were trying to give the impression there
could be some easing of martial law.

Mr Uieslaw Gornicki, an adviser to General Jaruulski, was quoted yesterday as
saying tnat he could not envisage a future for Poland without Solidarity. And
[he] could not imagine Hr Halesa, the Solidarity leader, coming to any harm. while
one of the military leaders, General Mieczyslaw Debicki. said martial law might
be repealed in provinces or regions where the situation was becoming normally
organised.

Reports from Hungary last night indicated that Mr Halesa might we removed from
his present place of detention to the custody of the Church.

here were also reports that the curfew had been relaxed by a couple of hours in
a number of areas, that midnight Mass would be allowed in some churches. and that

a ban on travel was being lifted for people over 60.

But these were only pinpricks of light. The Roman Catholic Church now apparently
bears the brunt of the authorities' wrath. Reports reaching London last night
said that priests had been beaten or arrested.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 22 December 1981

C80: 2020/21

5
. ma omcm. use ONLY
FOR‘OFFKHAI.USE(NVLY

POLAND

UK 'RESIDENT' DBSGRIBES SITUATIGI IN POZNAN
PH231303 London THE GUARDIAN in English 23 Dec 81 p 5

[Report "from a correspondent,” who is described as "a British resident in Poznan
who left on Honday": "'Suicide Pacts Mark the Country's Desperation”!

[Text] Halls which 10 days ago were festooned with posters of protest and union
demands are now blank, the posters having been removed by the public under the
supervision of armed policemen.

Desperation is displayed in the reports of miners' families in the Silesian mines
and the dockers in the Gdansk Shipyard barricading themselves in the docks with
more than 100 acetylene bottles and threatening to ignite them.

Solidarity members report widespread suicide pacts in factories throughout the
country.

In Poznan, the Gegielski Metal Plant has become a bed of unrest. At the beginning
of the week, the presence of military guards at 15-yard intervals maintained a

superficial calm.

However, by last Thursday there were widespread rumours of ambulances ferrying
casualties to hospitals. The number of casualties is difficult to ascertain
because beaten workers are taken to private homes for treatment. Government

figures are extremely unreliable.

At the Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznan, more than 1,000 arrests have taken
place. Among these are Solidarity officials, students, and members of staff.

One department has had one in 15 members of its staff detained, and the Biology
”apartment has been told that it should destroy its experimental animals because
they will not be needed. On Friday. a rectora' meeting was broken up by military
guards waving machine guns.

Last Wednesday. the anniversary of the Gdansk food riots in 1970 was accompanied
by silent protest in churchyards. In Poznan, the monument erected in the summer
was the meeting place for more than 100 people who lit candles in the memory of
those killed. From across the street the police and military watched the ceremony,
which passed peacefully.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1Al.lﬁﬂi(NNLY

Reports of incidents in the country are often carried by lorry and train drivers
who retain their Solidarity allegiance despite their militarisstion. Civilian
movements have been greatly reduced. Poznan has been surrounded by tanks, and the
Army patrols the main roads. Trains arrive unannounced and leave quickly in an
effort to confuse attempts to travel.

Armed guards and plain-clothed secret policemen patrol all stations. We witnessed
several arrests. People approached us with letters to relatives outside the
country, but often they were warded off openly by secret policemen.

Secret contact has also provided the only clue to the detention centres of those
arrested. In the Poznan region women are detained in Gniezno, men in military
barracks to the south and priests in the northwest. No clue us proved [?provided]
about their health, although it is believed that they have no heating.

In Poznan, Solidarity has uncovered deep infiltration by three cells of secret
police. Two of these are said to have been broken up while the third is regrouping.
The depths of infiltration displayed the advanced planning for the military take-
over. One Solidarity member suggested that the planning began in September 1980.

Allowing the Union to survive, he said, was not an experiment for the Polish
authorities, but a conscious exercise in bringing to the surface the dissident

elements in the country. However, with troops reported to have sided with workers
in Lublin, the military takeover has not been without flaws.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 23 December 1981

cs0: 2020/21

7
FOR OFTWCJAL USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

SOLIDARITY COFOUNDER INTERVIEUED ON PROSPECTS IN POLAND
PH091651 Paris L'EXPRESS in French 11 Dec 81 p 56

[Interview with Karol Hodzelewski "One of Solidarity's founding members," by
Christian Jelen and Branko Lazitch: "Poland: "ho Governs2”-—date and place not

given]

[Text] [Question] According to General Jaruzelski, the strikes are responsible
for the agravation of the crisis. "hat is your view?

[Answer] The hours lost through strikes are insignificant compared with the time
wasted by the lack of raw materials and spare parts. The reasons for the aggrava-
tion of the crisis lie elsewhere.

[Question] where?

[Answer] The Party has not been in control of society since the Gdansk events
(August 1980). But it is very difficult to find a modus vivendi between a society

which is run according to democratic principles and a government which clings to
totalitarian traditions. The Government is having no effect. It is incapable of

administrating.
[Question] How can administration be restored?

[Answer] By self-government reform in the enterprises, free elections to municipal
and regional councils and giving those councils a greater role in local administra-

tion.

[Question] Does that not amount to suicide for the Party?

[Answer] No. It is the limitation of an omnipotence which. in any case, is com-
pletely fictional. Reforms are vital. People cannot tolerate the present situation
for much longer without some hope that their survival can be guaranteed by credible
and effective institutions.

[Question] is Jaruzelski seeking compromise?

[Answer] He would like to find a solution which guarantees some political stability.

8
FOR 0FFNJA1.USEIJNLY
FIHI(NﬂﬂC1AL USEIONLY

[Question] what is stopping him from doing that?

[Answer] Obstacles within the leadership apparatus, but Jaruzelski has more room
to maneuver than Rania: He controls the Army, is chairman of the council and is
Party secretary. His meeting with Halesa and Monsignor Clamp proves a desire to
compromise. But personal contacts are not enough. No coalition will be viable

if the regime's structures remain intact. Hitherto Solidarity and the Government
have each sought their own solutions. Solidarity does not have adequate machinery
for management and administration. The Government has failed.

[Question] Hhat remains of the Party?

[Answer] The apparatus is trying to preserve its privileges. But the working
class grassroots are disappointed. The Party's ordinary members are sending back
their cards in vast numbers. Since August 1980 the drop in membership runs into
hundreds of thousands. This is especially true since threats to use force against
Solidarity were made by Political Bureau members this Fall.

[Question] How can this deadlock be broken?

[Answer] The Government has finally accepted the existence of autonomous forces in
society. It must also allow them a share in management.

[Question] But will the Russians tolerate that?

[Answer] That is the basis of the hisotrical compromise reached in Gdansk in

August 1980. In view of their international policy, I do not think that the Russians
stand to gain from intervening in Poland at present. Moreover, they have made that
fairly clear both through Kremlin spokesman Zamyatin and in their recent letter to
the Polish Party. when they called for an end to demonstrations of "anti-Sovietism"
without passing judgment on the situation as a whole. In my view that means that

the USSR is resigned to giving us some room to maneuver. But it is doing so on the
implicit conditions that the Party keeps control of political power, the Army. police,
foreign policy and international communications. These demands are not incompatible
with the reforms Solidarity is demanding.

[Question] During the recent Sejm debate on self-government. pro-Government Catholic
deputies and non-Party deputies disobeyed the PZPR and it backed down. What is the
political significance of this event?

[Answer] Parliament is a facade which covers the monopoly of power with an appearance
of national unity. When a law is passed solely by the communists' automatic major-
ity, it means that the party is isolated, even among its satellites. That is why

it backed down.

[Question] Supporting the Government cooperates with society: How long will it
take to start overcoming the crisis?

[Answer] Around 3 years. What we must do immediately is to prevent the crisis
turning into a catastrophe.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] How do your friends view the new political situation in France, with
the coumunists' entry into government?

[Answer] Since there are cotuunist ministers in a democratic government. people
sometimes ask: why could there not be democratic ministers in a Columnist government

in Warsaw?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 S.A. Croupe Express

CSO: 3100/259

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

POLISH PARTY, SOLIDARITY OFFICIALS CITED
PM091233 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 6 Dec 81 p 3
[Bernardo Valli dispatch: "Poland: Two Faces, A Single Fear"]

[Text] Warsaw--I made a brief journey through the two opposing alignments in 1981
Poland. My first stop was at the Party, which has lost strength and prestige but

is kept (condemned to remain) in power by a higher will--a party sometimes aggressive
out of necessity ("I move, therefore I exist"). My second stop was at the trade
union, the major social movement of "aware citizens," grandiose in its thrusts but
uncertain of its objectives. A friend in Warsaw recommended that I read as a guide
“Considerations on the Government of Poland,“ written two centuries ago by,Rousseau.
Even then the author of the "social contract" described this country as "valiant and
indomitable," without an economy, always internally divided and always threatened
from outside.

There was a single picture on the wall: a portrait of Karl Marx. In view of the
rapid succession of party secretaries, politically wasted by events one after the
other. the occupant of this Central Committee office prefers to play safe. There
are no superfluous photographs. My interlocutor is a leader who. like many other
East European political leaders. has suffered an evolutionary neurosis: He was a
liberal, then orthodox, and now I have the impression that he is persisting in that
direction. The latest traumatic effects of Polish history have distanced him more
and more from his initial stances.

[Question] Following the 4 November meeting here in warsaw of General Jaruzelski.
Archbishop Clemp and Lech Unless, have the conditions been created for a compromise
between Party and trade union, with the Church's outside approval?

[Answer] The situation is difficult, very bad. A mass political force has been
born in the country, led by men without a rational view of the national and inter-
national situation....

[Question] Are you talking about Solidarity?

[Answer] That force stemmed from a conflict with the State and is split into various
tendencies. This has been apparent since the 4 November meeting. Halesa declared
himself willing to negotiate the front of national accord. whereas the Commission

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Soiidarity's "parliament"--LA STAHPA editor's note) has, on the whole, shown itself
more intransigent. They are men who emerged during a conflict and who are not in-
clined toward rationality. The Church does have a rational view of the situation.

[Question] Do you in the Party constitute a tight—knit force?

[Answer] Our latest congress took place in the open, and everyone was able to see
that an open debate was conducted.

[Question] After that interlude the Party clamned up again, however. In any case,
it has shown itself so weak as to have to choose a soldier as its first secretary.
Having lost its credibility, it has taken refuge behind the respectability of a man
in uniform. Is that not so?

[Answer] Of course the Army is respectable. But it is not our last resort, as you
suggest. The Army is one of the components of the system that has not been eroded

by the crisis. It is true that the Party has lost prestige, thanks to the tribula-
tions of 35 years in power, but when it held its congress the entire country follow-
ed the debate attentively and realized our importance. Moreover, Jaruzelski is not
just a soldier. I know him. He is an intellectual Party activist.

[Question] You have suffered a cruel decline.

[Answer] we are and will remain a decisive force on the political plane. It cannot
be otherwise.

[Question] The "front" that y0u propose is not so very new, in fact. You have
created so many "fronts" in the East European socialist countries. The trade union
is afraid of meeting the same fate as the other forces swallowed up by the author-
ities over the decades by means of such formulas.

[Answer] The "council" that we are proposing must be a center of consultation among
the variOus tendencies, must have its own statute, and is necessary if we are to
emerge from the political and economic crisis. The country is tired, exhausted.

[Question] But the vast majority of the country is represented by Solidarity.
According to a recent poll. over 96 percent of it.

[Answer] Our principle with regard to the front of national accord is similar to
the one formulated by Kadar: Whoever is not opposed to socialism is with us; who-
ever is opposed to socialism cannot be with us. [answer ends]

lusically, according to my interlocutor, the Party wants to isolate the tendencies
regarded as “antisocialist”; in other words, to split Solidarity. It is an idea
which other leaders consider dangerous, xecause it could lead to "civil war." This
latter expression is one that often recu"s in Warsaw. In other words, not everyone
thinks of the same thing, namely the Party, when they think of the need for a com-
promise, though everyone considers it necessary "to emerge from the crisis." Con-
tradictory decisions are emerging from this internal conflict: 0n the one hand
negoriations are being started, while on the other bills are being submitted to the

Sejn with the aim of restricting the rights to strike and of assembly-~emergency
laws.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the next offices of the regime that I visited there are no portraits on the walls.
They have all been removed. This was the official headquarters of the Planning In-
stitute. This is where economic power should be exercised, but the economists

responsible for planning acknowledge that the situation has been beyond their control
for some time.

"It is a disaster," one authoritative planner exclaimed, referring to the Polish
economy. He is a member of both the Party and Solidarity. His heart is split two
ways. He spoke very frankly: “The conflict within the Party is a harsh one.
"eighty accusations are bandied about at meetings. I am expecting some surprises
any day now."

[Question] Is anybody sincerely willing to reach an honest compromise with the
trade union?

[Answer] Some people are. But others incline toward restoration. They want to
regain the broad portions of power that have been lost and to restore the Party's
prestige. In the economic field an understanding between Solidarity and the Party
is not impossible, since everyone realizes that it is necessary to emerge from the
crisis and that the country cannot stand the sacrifices for long.

[Question] Hhat about the political field?

[Answer] I doubt that it will prove possible to reach an agreement. While there
are people in the Party who want a restoration. there are people in the trade union
who want to achieve their final objective at once--the country's complete indepen-
dence and a pluralistic system. They are two irreconcilable stances. [answer ends]

In Gdansk, the Solidarity trade union has its headquarters in the 01d Sailors'
Hostel, occupied immediately after the August strikes. The depressing order that
reigns in the offices of the official government in Harsaw is transformed here into
a great disorder. It is difficult to hold a conversation without being interrupted.
walesa's adversaries no longer come to this shabby headquarters. Two historical
leaders no longer meet. Andrzej Gwiazda, the engineer, is still to be seen in the
city, in a cafe or a friend's house. He is nonreligious and considers Halesa a
capitulationist moderate, a servant 0f the clergy. Anna Halentynowicz, the Lenin
Shipyard worker, has been expelled from all Solidarity bodies and considers herself
persecuted by Walesa and by Jaruzelsli. I smmmarize in a single anonymous dialogue
here everything that I learned in Gdansk from Halesa's friends and enemies.

[Question] who represents the trade union's most intransigent wing?

[Answer] The workers' grassroots. It is above all the factories and the mines that
reject the Party's leading role, thaI demand free elections, strict monitoring of
the Militia and secret police. an end to ideological impositions on the eocnomy, and
independence of the USSR.

[Question] Has the economic crisis not worn people down?

[Answer] Yes. But the blame for the economic difficulties is attributed to the
regime. The crisis is becoming a confrontation. The sacrifices being suffered

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

sometimes assume the character of a resistance. Not for everyone, it is true. And
this is why the trade union does not make excessive use of strikes and is trying to
calm the grassroots.

[Question] Can the major tendencies within Solidarity be defined?

[Answer] There is a socialist or social democratic and a nationalist tendency. But
the split is not so clear cut. The major tendencies are split into currents. The
socialist or social democratic tendency is overrun by both nonreligious and Catholic
currents. Solidarity reflects society and society provides a complete range of
opinions, from right to left.

[Question] what about Halesa?

[Answer] Lech undoubtedly has charisma. Personally, he is a nationalist populist;
a Catholic who heeds the bishops, particularly Primate clemp, and, therefore, also
the Pope. He is also advised by a number of socialist and social democratic Catho-
lics. He is both moderate and impetuous. He has common sense, and people know

that there are honest and sensible people behind him. He reflects many contradic-
tions. His language is certainly not Marxist, nor is his education. But at the
same time he does express egalitarian ideas. He does not want bosses but is in
favor of a market economy. And he is a patriot. His simple, direct words are liked
in a country tired of the regime's sophisms, the Party's false rhetoric. If he is
confused, it is because the objectives are often confused.

[Question] Hhat about the nationalists?

[Answer] They are very strong. There are the liberal ones-~those belonging to the
"young Poland" group, for instance--who are willing to accept a kind of Finlandiza-
tion of Poland, and those of the KPN, the Confederation for an Independent Poland.

who want a complete break with the Soviet Union. The KPH leaders are in prison and
this is why, or partly why, their sympathizers are multiplying.

[Question] At present are the moderates or the intransigents prevalent within the
trade union?

[Answer] The moderates in the trade union leadership; in the grassroots, it is
difficult to say.

[Question] Is a compromise more likely than an open conflict?

[Answer] A compromise is by nature temporary. A confrontation could prove inevit-
able in time.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editr. LA STAHPA S.p.f.
CSO: 3104/88

1h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

SPANISH MAGAZINE INTERVIEWS HINISTEK KRZAK
”(111325 Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 7 Dec 81 pp 99-101

[Interview with Marian Krzak, Polish minister of finance, by Victor M. Ferreras:
"A Polish Self-criticism"--date and place of interview not specified]

[Text] Polish Minister of Finance Hr Krzak is a stout man who laughs easily, is
close to 50 years of age, is genial, has a sense of humor, and does not lack a
certain sarcasm. He has worked since 1958 in the Ministry of Finance. where he
has been chief of the Coordination Department. undersecretary, and minister since .
?ugust 1980. He is an economist and a member of the Polish United Workers' Party
PZPR].

Cambio 16: How was the present situation reached, and when will Poland emerge
from this crisis?

Marian Krzak: The principal cause was the mistaken economic policy of the last
decade. In the first place, agriculture was greatly underestimated by our paying
excessive attention to industry. There were periods during which one-third of the
national income was earmarked for the latter. Excessive investments were made, and
several problems arose. The first was the over-extension of the investments.
Another problem was that these investments were based on imports from Western
countries. And they were not profitable, since they were not productive or self-
financing. In addition. the policy of fixed prices for agricultural produce con-
tinued to be maintained. The State was subsidizing the- increasingly, and the low
prices paid to the peasants were curbing output.

Cambio 16: And cannot these shortcomings be corrected in socialist planning?

Marian Krzak: Yes. And in fact this was done, but badly, the State always attempts
to ensure that state subsidies are not too high. It attempts to find the ideal
prices for purchasing produce from the peasants. There was a change in prices in
the 1970's, and the peasants ceased to be interested in raising animals. Let us
say that what they were paid did not remunerate them. And for this reason over 3
million pigs were lost.

Cambio 16: How will real production costs be calculated following the economic
reform?

15
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Marian Krzak: There is a paradox in Poland, and that is that raw materials are
showing a deficit. An example: The official price of coal is 500 zlotys per ton.
Since the tourist exchange rate of the dollar is 30 zlotys, this means that the

price of a ton of coal is just over $15. and the world price $80 per ton. with
the economic reform, the basic prices of raw materials will be set in accordance

with the world price, and so the price of a ton of coal will be approximately 2.400
zlotys.

Cambio 16: Is Poland prepared to withstand the political consequences of joining
the IMF?

Marian Krzak: Since our economy is heading toward a market economy, this means that
it is in accordance with the IHF's requirements. It confirms the direction which
we wish to take. We could say that our aims coincide. Since the Poles are Distrust-
ful, it will be a good thing if they listen to the IMF representatives, since they

do not listen to the Government, even though it is saying the same thing.... I say
this rather as a joke, of course.

Cambio 16: Could the zloty become a convertible currency?

Marian Krzak: In the long term, yes. Next year, Polish enterprises will have the
right to keep part of their income in foreign currency. Moreover, they will be
able to purchase foreign currency through the bank Handlowy [the Commercial Bank],
in accordance with the profits made through exports. Enterprises which have
foreign currency will be able to use it and lend it or sell it to other enterprises.

Cambio 16: Will there be investment of foreign Western capital in Poland?

Marian Krzak: This possiblity is envisaged. And there is some investment, although
on a small scale. In view of the crisis. We have many opportunities for production
which we intend to exploit, and if foreign capital wishes to assist us, it will be
well received.

Cambio 16: And would this not create any problems with any Warsaw Pact ally?

Marian Krzak: No, not at all. It is our affair.

Camhio 16: will there be more private enterprise in Poland?

Marian Krznk: Yes. We want a large part of the population to engage in small
business.

Cambio 16: But the law does not allow enterprises with over five or six employees;
is that not so?

Marian Krzak: The existing laws are in fact inflexible, but we will seek to make
them less so. I personally believe that there could be enterprises with 20 or 30
people. we are very anxious that there should be enterprises of that kind--state-
owned, private, or as cooperatives.

Cambio 16: Do you not believe that there is concealed unemployment in Poland and
that it will increase even further with the new stabilization plan?

16
FOR OFF“ Ml. USE ONLY
l-‘OR 0FH('|AI. USE ONLY

Marian Krzak: It depends on how self-government works, either the workers set wages
lower and they all work, or fewer workers work and they set wages higher. Currently,
there is no unemployment in Poland, and if that phenomenon emerged, the government
would intervene. The fact is that in some enterprises it is difficult to know who
is working and who is not....

Cambio 16: Do you like Solidarity?

Marian Krzak: I would say that I tolerate it. I sympathize with Solidarity'a
grassroots because I know what they want and I understand them. But when it comes
to its leaders, my feelings are different, because I do not know what they are
thinking. I believe that some day history will judge then.

Cambio 16' And do you not believe that you are bound to reach an understanding?

Marian Krzak: Yes, I believe that we are bound to reach an understanding. But
what I am not sure about is whether they wish to understand us. I am currently
holding a series of talks with Solidarity, and we have the same language. although

I am never certain whether they do not speak in two languages. But they. too. are
inseparable sons of socialism.

Sometimes they say impossible things. For instance. they want the economy to be a
market economy. and at the same time they disseminate the slogan that prices must
be frozen. They wish to discuss prices and wages, and that is too much. As we
say, they wish to have the pleasure without losing their virginity.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Information y Revistas, S.A.

CSO: 3110/65

17
FOR OFT-TOM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

BRIEFS

SOVIET INVASION UNLIKELY-Danish and Swedish military experts, who are well placed
to watch developments, yesterday reacted cautiously to a report that a Soviet-led
invasion of Poland was being prepared for Boxing Day. They consider that there

has been no appreciable increase in the readiness of Warsaw Pact forces encircling
Poland since martial law was imposed 10 days ago. Mr Jakob [Jakub] Swiecicki,

the chief of the Solidarity Information Office being established in Stockholm,
earlier quoted a source with "especially good relations with the Polish establish-
ment. including the Soviet Embassy in Hartaw," as saying that Red Army units were
preparing to strike against coastal cities in the North, while Czech troops were
poised to move into Southern Poland. Asked whether the likelihood of bitter
resistance by the Poles was a deterrent to military intervention, Mr Swiecicki
said: "That argument could still be valid. I am not saying an invasion is very
likely, but I am afraid the possibility is more imaginable now due to new elements
in the situation-~the split in the Communist Party, rivalry between the generals,
and discontent in the Polish Army." The Swedes have not sighted movements in the
Southern Baltic that could point to a big assault on Poland, and nothing comparable
to last August's huge Soviet naval build-up. [Text] [PH241212 London THE GUARDIAN
in English 26 Dec 81 p S] [CDPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited, 25 December
1981]

DEATHS IN NARSAw--A Cornish radio "ham" said last night that he had heard from
Poland that 50 people were shot dead in warsaw yesterday. Mr James Irish, of
Scorrier, near Truro. said an un-named fellow enthusiast broadcasting from Poland
told him he wanted the information passed on to the British Government. His
informant, who spoke in English with a slight accent. gave no further details and
switched off soon after. saying he was afraid a detector van might catch him.
[Text] [9M241217 London THE GUARDIAN in English 24 Dec 81 p 5] (COPYRIGHT:
Guardian Newspapers Limited, 24 December 1981]

HALESA ENDS HUNGER STRIKEr—The 2-week strike at the Silesian anthracite mine at
Piast finally ended yesterday. according to Warsaw Radio and the remaining 1,034
miners agreed to return to the surface. It was also learned that Mr Lech Halesa,
Solidarity's leader, has been persuaded by his friends, including high Church
officials, to abandon a hunger strike. They want him to conserve his strength for
further attempts to save Poland's independent trade union from the course of
systematic destruction on which the martial law authorities have embarked.

Confirmation that Mr Halesa had been persuaded to end his fast came from unofficial.
but trusted sources. [Excerpt] [PH29123S London THE GUARDIAN in English 29 Dec 81
pp 1. 18] [COPYRIGHTz Guardian Newspapers Limited, 29 December 1981]

C80: 2020/21 END

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY