FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10094

4 November 1981

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAI. AFFAIRS

(FOUO 27/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FUR OFFICIAI USE ONLY

JPRS [/1 0|
4 Novanbe:

USSR REPORT
POLlTlCAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(rouo 27/81)

CONTENTS

INTBRRATIONAL

International Cooperation in Preventing Terrorism Buphaaized
(I. P. Blishchenko, N. v. Zhdanov; sovzrsxor: cosunansrvo
IPRAVO. Aug 81) I0..0.00I.OOJ.00.0.‘OIOOOOOOOOGOUOODOOOCOO

NATIONAL

Book on Development of Soviet National Relations Reviewed
(L. H. Drobizheva, et al.; ISTORIYA $583. No 6, 1981) .....

REGIONAL

Positive National Differences To Remain, Says Scholar
(Y. v. Brouley; AZARBAYJAN KOHHUNISTI, No 7, 1981) ........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

IN'I‘ERI’ATIONAL COOPERATION IR PREVENTING TERRORISI menu)
Moscow SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO in Russian do 8. Aug 81 pp 110-119

[Article by I. P. Blishchenko. leading researcher on the Learned Council for Re-
search on the Prohlens of Peace and Disarlanent. doctor of juridical sciences.
professor. and N. V. Zhdanov. candidate of juridical sciences: "Cooperation be-
tween states in Ccnbattinq Terrorist Acts of an International Nature-:7

[react] Since the late 1960's the world press has begun to publish with increasing
frequency alanine accounts about airplane hijacking». explosions in subassies.
kidnapping of diplomats. provocations and direct attacks on various governmental
and non-governmental bodies. as well as about the use of the nails to send plastic-
type letter-boabs. In connection with this. in 1972 at the 27th Session of the UN
General Assenbly there was a discussion of the problen of "international terror-
isu." which was included on the agenda of the General Assesbly by Paragrqii 92. en-
titled "ﬂeasures to prevent internatioml ten-cries. which ”meatens the lives of
innocent persons. or leads to death. or threatens basic freedoss. and the study of
the root causes of these ferns of ten-cries and acts of violence. proceeding free
poverty. a dead-end situation. nisfortunes. and despair. and which incite certain

people to sacrifice human lives. even including their own. in striving to achieve
radical changes” [1. P 5].

The Soviet Union's position with regard to the problen of 'intsmtional terrorist"
has always been consistent and principled. Henber of the Politburo of the CPSU cc
and USSR Minister of °oreizn Affairs A. A. Gronyko declared as follows at the 27th
Session of the UN General Assenblyt ”The Soviet Union opposes fro- a position of
principle acts of terrorien which violate the diplonatic activities of states and
their representatives. transport ties between then. the usual course of interna-
tional contacts and weetings. acts of violence which do not serve any positive '
purpose and which bring about the death of people“ [12].

Recently there has been an atteapt on the part of the new adninistration in Wash-
ington to utilize the question of "international terrorism" striving to draw
state leaders of a nuaber of western European countries into a regular canpaign
against the socialist countries and all the denocratio forces of the world. using
it to destabilize international relations. On 28 January 1%1 the 0.8. Secretary
of State A. Haig declared that the Soviet Union ”is preparing. financing. and sup-
plying international terroriss." and he tried basically to identify it with the
national-liberation novenent. However. in response to questions fro- the press

and in Congress. U.S. officials. of course. could not adduce a single proof of any

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on acknowledged that the Ameri-
can administration had "no proof whatsoever that the Soviet Union is behind acts of
terrorism on 0.3. territory." Thereby. the FBI chief
of highly placed fizures in the adainistration of R. Reagan concerning the ”pen-
chant“ of the USSR toward international terror were slanderous and false from be-
ginning to end. h'ot long before this the CIA prepared a report which also con-
tained a conclusion that there was absolutely no proof of the accusations of the
Reagan adainistration. aised at the Soviet Union. The goal of this entire canpaisn
is to nalign the Soviet Union's peace~loving policy. to distort the essence of the
national-liberation sovesents, hanging on then the label of international terror-
ism. in order to prove that aid fro. the progressive states to these save-eats con-
stitutes support for "international

battins "international terrorism.” inperialien is

On the other hand, the problem of
all the peace-lovins states are di
problem encompasses

ism.” which has because widespread in the litera-
ture and in the practice of the UN. Various phenoaem are understood under this
tern. but in all cases it is a matter

of actions directed at worsening interna-
tional relations. Precisely such a concept of a terrorist act is also contained
in Art. 67 of the Crininal Code of the RSF'SR.

I. Karpets. who in his work entitled
definition of terrorism in the

as well as in wartime. with regard to wartine.

a number of norms concerning the pmhibitio
sitting of actions bearing a

terrorist nature and qualified as war crises and
crises aminst humanity, in regard to prisoners of war. peaceful inhabitants. coa-
Intent: and civilians who have ceas

ed participating in ailitary activities. even
in case of a conflict which is not international in nature. with regard to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

partisans and sesbers of the hose guards. whose status as prisoners has been aade
equal with the status of prisoners of war fro. aaong the regular units.

In peacetiae systeaatic and uses terrorist acts say be carried out by a state's
authorities in regard to its own citizens for the purpose of trig-atoning thee.
eliminating an opposition (for emple. the policy of terror in facist Ger-any
against the Conunist Party and all those who thought differently than the ruling
party. the terror in Chile after the ailitary coup of 11 Septeaber 1973. etc.). to
enforce a policy of racial discrisination. racial supresacy. genocide (for emple.
the apartheid regiae in the Republic of South Africa. the Pol Pot regiae in Kanpu-
chea). Terrorist acts coaaitted by the authorities of any given state on the ter-
ritory of another state. or the permission or encourageaent of any sort of activi-
ty on the territory of another state. designed to conit a terrorist act in ano-
ther state. must be qualified as acts of indirect aggression. For emple. the
territory of Pakistan is being utilized by right-wing circles of the United States
and China for training bands to lake arsed incursions into Afghanistan and to car-
ry out terrorist activities there: terrorist groups are being hurled free China's
territory into Bum. Thailand. Halaysia. Indonesia. and the Philippines.

In March 1971‘ the UN General Assenbly adopted a definition of aggression in which
sisilar acts. as well as fellow traveling or the support of activities directed at
the committing of such acts. are qualified as an aggression [h]. This is precisely
how the UN Security Council qualified the actions of Israel. as expressed in the ‘
'coenission by Israeli coasandos in Beirut on 10 April 1973 of terrorist acts
against the leaders of the Palestinian resistance aoveaent. '

From the point of view of qualifying these actions. which are sonetiaes terned
state terrorism. one should also bear in sind Par. 6. Art. 2 of the draft Code of
crimes against the peace and security of sankind. as prepared by the UN Commission
on International Law at its sixth session in 1954‘. According to this document. a
crime aminst the peace and security of sankind (and. consequently. as indicated in
Art. 1 of the draft. a crime of "intemtional law”) is the "conduct or encourage-
ment by the authorities of any state of organised activity. directed at connitting
terrorist acts in another state.” Such a qualification is cospletely Justified.
inasnuch as an act of aggression by one state against another. regardless of whe-
ther it is direct or indirect in nature. undoubtedly is a criae according to in-
ternational law. not only because it is coasitted by a subject of international law
but also because such an action threatens international peace and security. Con-
sequently. the actions being considered here are encospassed by the concept of ag-

mssion. and they may certainly be relegated to the category of international
crises.

In a supplementary protocol on arsed international conflict to the Geneva Conven-
tions of 191:9 on the protection of victims of war. as adopted on 10 June 1977. the
following actions are regarded. in particular. as the grossest violations of the
Conventions. which may qualify in certain cases as terrorist acts: turning a civi-
lian population or individual civilians into an object of attack. couitting an at-
tack of an indiscrininate nature. affecting the civilian population or civilian ob-
jects. when it is known that such an attack will be the cause of extrese huean los-
see. casualties among civilians. or will bring about dange to civilian objects.
turning undefended locations and denilitarized zones into objects of attack.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

committing an attack against a person when it is known that he has ceased to par-
ticipate in military actions. Thus. in case of terrorist acts committed by a
state or its officials. these actions are qualified in accordance with interna-
tional law as crimes against the international peace and security of states. as
crimes against mankind and as war crimes.

infliction of danage upon. and destruction of property necessary for the conduct
of political. economic. technical. trade. and cultural relations between states.
as well as the commission of these actions with regard to the funds. equip-out.
and facilities of airline. water. railroad. and automotive transport. Horeover.
in order to relegate such actions to the category of acts of international terror-
ism. it is necessary that there be present a special active for the criIe-~a coe~
olication of international relations. The indicated purpose of a terrorist act
defines its particular social danger and. consequently. its qualification. It is
obvious that the terrorist acts which have becoae the objects of the UN's atten-

tion constitute. from the viewpoint of its own qualification. crises of an inter-
national nature.

Differences in the oositions of states with regard to international terrorism led
to a situation whereby neither the 27th Session of the UN General Assembly nor its
ensuing sessions were able to work out specific measures aiaed at conbatting ter-
rorist acts which threaten the normal course of international relations. The Spe-
cial committee which was created on the basis of UN General Assembly Resolution
3034 (27th Session). dated 18 December 1972. also failed to further advance the
discussion of the problem as a whole. Not one of its three suboonnittees--the
Full Subcommittee on defining international terrorism. the Full Subcommittee on
studying the root causes of international terrorisa. and the Full Subcommittee on

FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I‘SI". ONLY

"international terrorism" which is sosstiwes called state terrorisa. as well as
concerning the forms of its manifestation. In particular. this line was aeticu-
lously promulgated in the position of a group of non-aligned countries.

The representatives of the imperialist states atteapted to utilise the discussion
of the question of "international ten-cries" in the UN for the :urpose of extend-
ing this concept to the national-liberation struggle and various fans of workers'
class struggle for their own rights.

During the course of the discussion the representative of the USSR camasised that
the Soviet Union advocates the working out and adoption of an international con-
vention iaposing on states definite obligations with regard to cutting short acts
of "international terrorisa." but that it is umcceptable to broaden the interpre-
tation of the concept of "international terror-is." and to extend it to the nation-
al-liberation struggle. to actions of resistance to an aggressor on territories oc-
cupied by such an aggressor as well as to deaonstrations of workers on behalf of
their rights against the yokes of exploiters [5]. In the first place. Ioreover.
the struggle must be directed against acts of violence directed at foreign citi-
zens. coanitted for political motives. establishing for theaselvee the goal of
worsening relations between states. The docuaents being worked out. as the repre-
sentative of the USSR pointed out. lust also be directed against the activities of
Zionist extremists. emigre centers. and other oranizations of a fascist stripe.

In this connection a particular responsibility rests on states which receive inter-
national orgsnisations. The conclusion of bilateral and lultilateral agreeaents on
extradition may assist in the struggle against airplane hijackings and other ter-

rorist activities. The documents which are adopted should be based on a consensus
among the states.

In the Special Conrittee an over-all affiraation was achieved on the inalienable
right to self-determination and independence on the part of all peoples who are
under the doaination of colonial and racist rsgiaes or who are suffering fro.
other ferns of foreign doaination. as well as the legitinacy of their struggle. in
particular. the struggle of the national liberation aoveaents in accordance with
the goals and principles of the UN Charter.

It is undoubtedly true that the lack of progress in the Special Omittee's work
has been influenced by the divergences in the approaches of states with differing
social systeas to defining the concept of "international terrorisa" and the prin-
ciples of the convention being worked out. This circumstance could lead to a situ-
ation whereby the convention would not be universal fro. the viewpoint of including
the participating states. Nevertheless. practically all the states recognize the
need for cooperation in the sphere of cutting short terrorist acts which threaten
international relations. Therefore. well-known steps were undertaken with regard

to working out conventions aimed at coebatting individual types of terrorist acts
affecting international relations.

 

' Algeria. Guinea. the People's Deaocratic Republic of Yeasn. Zaire. 2aabia.

India. Yeasn. Congo. Mauritania. Nigeria. the Arab Republic of Egypt. Syria. Tuni~
sis. and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um "I!" l“ UN} "\i \

During the course of the general discussion at the 27th Session of the UN General
Assembly. at which. among other points. there was a discussion of the problem of
"international terrorism.” the United States presented a docunent entitled "A
Draft Convention on Preventing Specific Acts of International Terrorisa and Punish-
nents for Then" [6]. Structurally this draft convention consisted of 16 articles
and a preaable. The preamble contained a reference to Resolution 2025 (25th Ses-
sion) of the UN General Asseably. dated 2h October 1970. and attention is drawn to
the fact that this resolution provides for the obligation of each state to refrain
fros organizing terrorist acts. instigating their connission. rendering aid or
participating in them on the territory of another state or from supporting within
the boundaries of its own territory organized activity directed at the coaaission
of such acts. However. the preaable contains not a single word about the right of

Despite the externally finished quality of the statutes. Art. 1 of this draft had
serious shortcomings. since it lacked a complete definition of the make-up of cri-
ainal actions (the convention would be extended only to crises committed against
persons). The American draft. which ignored the right of peoples to self-deter-
aination and which was essentially directed against the national-liberation nove-
nent. which is considered in the draft as "international terrorism.“ did not re-
ceive support at the 27th Session of the UN General Assenbly and was. for all
practical purposes. taken off the agenda. In this connection. it should be espe-
cially emphasized that the US position directly contradicts international law.
since. in accordance with the UN Charter and agreed-upon practice (Supplementary
Protocol on International Arned Conflict. dated 10 July 197?. to the Geneva Con-
vention on the Protection of Victims of Var. 19b9). a conflict. in particular.
must he considered to be international. in which ”peoples are waging a struggle
azainst colonial doaination. foreign occupation. and against racist regines in in-
plenenting their own right to self-deterlination.' This leans not only the legiti-

sible aid to them. including even arns aid for the purpose of securing their right
to self-determination. All the more dooaed to utter bankruptcy is the present at-
tomnt by the US administration to resurrect this doctrine. as undertaken in the
necech by Secretary of State A. Haig. As was underscored in the TASS Announcesent
of 3 February 1981. "neither the Soviet Union nor the national-liberation nove-

the terrorist acts which certain states will have to encounter." A fertile en-
vironnent for terrorisa is comprised by the activities and policy of those who

support dictatorial and racist regimes. who flout the legimitate rights of sove-
reign states. who conduct a line aiaed at increasing tension. Their address is

well known. At the 26th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev. in speaking about the ad-
venturisn of the aggressive circles of inperialisa. declared as follows: "Demon-
strating an utter scorn for the rights and aspirations of peoples. they are try-

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill (WI‘N‘I \I INF “VI \'

In Art. ‘3 of the American draft there is an sffirsation of the principle of “ant
dedere aut Judicare" (”extradite or try”). the need for which had found reflection
in the practice of the League of Nations and the United Nations in connection with
working out the conventions on co-batting terrorist acts of various kinds. affects
ing the nor-a1 course of international relations. However. the lost effective
means of procedure would be the unconditional extradition of the crininal to that
state on whose territory the crise was omitted. if the person in question is not
a citizen of that state on whose territory he was. He cannot agree with the posi-
tion of the draft convention in including in principle a statute of liaitations

In the UN's Sixth Connittee Austria. Belgium. Italy. Canada. Costa Rica. New Zea:-
land. and Japan. to which were subsequently Joined a nusber of other countries. in-
troduced another draft [7]. It spoke. in particular. about affirming the principle

international cooperation in working out measures ained at effectively preventing
acts of terrorism and in studying their root causes for the purpose of seeking out
just and peaceﬂul solutions as rapidly as possible. This draft reaffirmed the in-

uhich denrive the peoples of their legitiaate rights to self-determination and in-
dependence. as well as other rights and husan freedoss [8].

The aovernnent of Israel. despite the fact that Israel voted against Resolution
303k (27th Session). dated 18 Decesber 1972. sent its own relax-ks to the UN general
secretary. containing the positions which. in the opinion of the Israeli govern-
ment. should conprise the basis of a future convention. Israel's position must be
considered in close connection with the policy of terror which is being conducted
with regard to the Arab people of Palestine. as well as with the practice of indi-
vidual terror aninst the national-liberation Iovessnt and its leaders. which has
allowed the representatives of a number of Arab states to qualify these actions as

state terrorism. On the other hand. Israel's proposals failed to touch upon these
actions in any way and were aimed at Justifying thee.

operation for the our se of eliminating the probles of “international terrorisn"
as soon as possible [7. These reconsendations reflected the general opinion,
which is principled in nature. Thus. as an important condition of effectiveness

in the struggle against terrorism it contains a ueet to the UN General Assem-
bly to call upon all states in a unilateral procedtrige and in cooperation with

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
need for preparing a supplementary international convention or conventions. based.
in particular. on the principle of extraditing or punishing criminals for the pur-
pose of conbattinz acts of ”international ten-uric." which have not yet been co-

inevitability of puniehnent would be assured with regard to those persons whose
activities comprised the crimes, if the Juriediction of any of the participant-

lusory this goal night he. horeover. consideration nuet be given to the great di~
vex-Renee: in the states' understanding of the contents of the concept of "inter-
national terrorize." This circumstance could lead to a situation whereby such 1:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY

convention would not becone universal at this phase in the developeent of interna-
tional relations.

let us note that well-known steps had previously been undertaken in the utter of
working out conventions ained at coalntting individual types of terrorist acts
which affect international relations. and this represents the intermtional cos-u-
nity's contribution to the strumle against this type of international cries .'

Regardless of whether the proposed convention is of a general or a specialised na-
ture. it should contain specific legal principles which would ensure its effective-
ness. By analyzing the practice of the League of Nations and the United Nations
on this question. one can draw the conclusion that the inclusion of the following
principles and positions in the convention could create the conditions for its ef-
fective application: 1) the affirmation of the inalienable right of all peoples
under the yoke of colonial or racist regises and other fans of foreign donina-
tion to self-determination and independence; 2) a reference to the Declaration of
the Princinles of international law. touching upon friendly relations and coopera-
tion anong states in accordance with the UN Quarter: 3) a proposal that the states
become mrticipants in the existing international conventions affecting various ae-
nects of the nroblen of terrorist acts of an internatioml nature; 1‘) underscoring
the importance of international cooperation in working out seasuree directed at the

that states adont all suitable measures on the national level for the purpose of
solving the problen as rapidly as possible: 6) defining the make-up of the crine
falling within the nurview of the convention in order to avoid differences in the
contents and interpretation of this lake-up in the practice of individual states)
7) the qualification of crises falling under the purview of the convention as cri-
ninal. independent of the specific notives for their emission; this constitutes
an ieportant condition for ensuring the inevitability of punish-eat for the con-is-

“Convention on Crimes and Certain Other Acts Connitted on Board Airliners
(1963): Convention on the struggle against Illegal Acts Directed aainst the Safe-

Persons Enjoying Soecial Protection. Including Diplomatic Agents (1976): Interna-
tional Convention on the Struggle against the Siezure of Hostages (1979). Moreover.

two international amenents of a regional nature should be noted: Convention on
the Prevention of and Punish-ent for Acts of Terrorisn which Take the Port of

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIM. USE UNIX

overnnont or a member of his l‘nnily should not be connhiered as n williml crime
710/: this article subsequently found application in many international legal agree-
ments and documents; 8) inclusion of the principle of "out dedere aut Judicare."
which. along with the above-mentioned point. is extrenely inportant for ensuring the
inevitability of punishment for the emission of crises falling under the purview
of the convention; 9) deternining the international element in the couission of a
crime. 1. e.. the conditions under which a given convention will be applied; 10)

the obligation of states which are participants in the convention to qualify crises

in to their national legislatures: this will allow us to reduce to a mini-us the
differences imposed by the national legislatures: ii) the adoption by the states
which are participants in the convention of appropriate neaeuree. including national
laws, for the struggle against the activity of orgmizations. if the crises falling
under the purview of the convention were omitted as a result of this activity.

by states which are eenbers of the convention of obligations with re to legal
cooperation in connection with the application of the convention; 13 the convention

above-mentioned principles. The 3hth Session of the UN General Assembly in Resolu-
tion 315/1135 formulated specific reconendatione ained at conbatting ”international
terrorism.” and it regarded these as preliminary steps. Along the seams provided

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time. ascribes great importance to cooperation along states in the struggle to pre-
vent terrorist acts of an international nature. intercepting. prosecuting. and pu-
nishing those persons who are guilty of omitting then. It is obvious that possi-
ble legal neasures against terrorisa lust. first of all. once-pass those spheres in
which there is still no international-legal regulation and under all cimstances
exclude the possibility of any such interpretation of "international terrorisn"
which would be applied to the national-liberation novenents. acts connitted for the
purpose of resisting an aggressor on territories occupied by his. and the actions
of workers directed against exploiters. Attention must be mid primarily to every-
thing which facilitates the worsening of relations between states. In this sense.
of principal importance in the struggle against terrorisn is the extradition of cri-

minals for trial in the state against which or against whose citizens this serious
crine was couitted.

smuocmm
1. UN Doeunent A/c.c/h18.

20 PRAVDA. 22 Septhber 1%2-

3. karpets. I. I.. "Hezhdumrodnyye prostuplenlya" [International Grimes].
Moscow. 1977. p w.

a. UN General Assembly. Official Records. thh Session. Document No 19 (A 9619).
W 6'10. ‘/%9°e

5. UN Docunent A/AC.160/I/Add. I. p 28.

6. UN General Assembly. Official Records. 28th Session. Supple-ent- No 28
(M9028). p 38.

7. UN Document A/C.6L.879.
8. UN Document 303’: (27th Session). 18 Deco-her 1972.
9. UN Document A/AC.160/SR.19.

10. Oppengein. I... "Hezhdunarodnoye pravo" [International Law]. Vol I. Part 2.
Moscow. 1959. D 269.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Nauka. SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO. 1%1

2381s
(30. 1807/165

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SE 0Nl.\

NATIONAL

BOOK ON DEVELOPMENT OF SOVIET NATIONAL RELATIONS REVIEWED
Moscow ISTORIYA SSSR in Russian No 6, 1981 pp l48-150

[Review by L. H. Drobizheva of H. I. Kulichenko (responsible editor), E. A.
Bagramov, S. T. Kaltakhchyan. K. Rb. Khanazarov, ed., "Razvitiye sovetskogo
naroda--novoy istoricheskoy obshchnosti" [The Development of the Soviet Nation--
A New History-Making Community], Moscow, Politizdat, 1980]

[Text] The 26th CPSU Congress pointed to the necessity of promoting the comprehen-
sive development and rapprochement of the nations and nationalities of the USSR,
the strengthening of the social homogeneity of society, and the consolidation of
the ideological and political unity of the Soviet nation as a new history-making
cmmaunity of people.

The book under review is devoted to the development of the Soviet nation in the
conditions of mature socialism. The collective of authors set itself the goal of
revealing "the law-governed principles of the progress of the new comnity; the
growth of its role. the development of the classes and social groups, nations and
nationalities that go into it; the strengthening of the socio-political and inter-
national unity of Soviet society; the significance of the progress of class and
national communities, their increasingly strong unity for the development of the
Soviet nation" (p b).

The book is, above all, distinguished by an examination of the current problems

of the development of the Soviet nation and an orientation towards the tasks of
ideological work. The authors attempted to combine the theoretical elaboration of
the problem and the generalization of the most recent data, to raise practical
problems demanding solution, to submit debatable questions in science for dissua-
sion. Moreover, the attempt is made to examine social and national processes on
a country-wide basis, as well as by individual regions, in towns and rural local-
ities, and to reveal many phenomena not only within the limits of social and
national communities, but also as they apply to the individual.

Let us say at once that the attempt to tackle the problems in such a compre-
hensive manner was successful to differing degrees in the illumination of in-
dividual topics. For example, in the parts of the book devoted to the role of
the CPSU, the social and political bases of the development of the Soviet nation
(chs 2, a, 5), the development of the linguistic life (ch 8), the examination
of the theoretical questions and analyses of the most recent empirical

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [PSI-I ONLY

materials, and the posing of practical problems are accomplished more fully than
is the case in other instances.

The historical approach lies at the basis of the authors' characterisation of the
development of the very concept of the Soviet nation as a new history-making com-
munity of people. An examination of the posing of the problem in party documents
makes it significantly easier, not only for researchers but also for a wide range
of propandists and teachers, to have an idea of the time of the development of the
new history-making community, its basic characteristic traits, the combination of
national and international factors, the fundamental transformations of Soviet
reality, which were conducive to the development of the Soviet nation (pp b9,'51,
and others).

The book talks about the basic spheres of social life in which the development of
the Soviet nation as a new historyvmaking community of people finds manifestation.
These are the spheres of the economy, social and political life, culture, and, to
a certain extent, psychology. Let us note that in the examination of the social
bases of the new history-making community special attention is given not only to
the strengthening of the leading role of the working class, but also to the devel-
opment of the peasantry and the intelligentsia.

From the point of view of the questions being investigated and the inclusion of
new documentary materials, the illumination of the political bases of the new
history-making community has been noticeably expanded. Two mutually connected
processes are analyzed: the further development of socialist democracy and the
perfection of the union and national statehood of the peoples. Of interest are
the data concerning the representation of the nationalities among the deputies of
the Supreme Soviets of the union republics and local Soviets in correlation with
the relative weight of each nationality in the composition of the population of
the country (p 155), concerning the realization of their rights by the republics,
and.others (pp 155, 181, 191, 192, and others). The book summarizes materials on
the realization of the observations and suggestions made by the workers in the
constituent union republics, in particular on the amendments to the constitutions
that were adopted, which had to do with the more precise definition of the com-
petence of the central and local organs of power and their composition, and on the
peculiarities of the constitutions of the union republics (pp 158, 159, 185, 186,

and others.

0f the most urgent questions of the development of the multinational Soviet society
during the contemporary epoch, the book examines such questions as the growth of
the working class from the environment of the indigenous nationalities, above all
in the republics of Central Asia, the representation of the various national groups
in the organs of power of the republics, the further development of democracy that
determines the development of the nations. All of these problems call for the
still more profound elaboration by Soviet scholars, especially in the light of the

resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

The next group of interdependent problems touched on in the book in connection with
the development of the Soviet nation concerns the spiritual life of society, cul-
ture, language, the strengthening of the friendship of the peoples. Let us note

13
FOR OWTWCJAL.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the authors try to illuminate these questions to the fullest extent, commen-
surate with the cantemporary level of the development of historiography. In par-
ticular, in the section on culture they talk not only about the problem of the
national and international in professional artistic creative work, but also about
many aspects of the development of spiritual and even material culture as well.
The book correctly states that spiritual culture has a complex structure, which
encompasses "production, the distribution and consumption of values in the sphere
of science, philosophy, morality, art, education, etc" (p 208). The numerous
examples, it is true, relate more to professional artistic culture, while the con-
sumption and assimilation of spiritual values have not found such illumination.

The questions of morality, of moral life are to a certain extent reflected in the
chapters devoted to the strengthening of the friendship of the peoples of the USSR,
to the characterization of the Soviet man, the builder of communism. But it would,
no doubt, be important for the reader to find in the book also concrete material
on the formation the general views, conceptions, and cultural interests of the
people of different nationalities, on the moral principles of the interrelation-
ships of people in production collectives. in the family, and in friendly inter-
course. To throw light on these subjects, as the authors themselves note, new
sources are necessary, in particular materials of empirical sociological research.
in other parts of the book, in partiCular those devoted to social problems and
also to the strengthening of the friendship among peoples, such materials are
partially included, but evidently they could be used on a wider scale.

As far as the problems of language are concerned, the authors in particular accent
attention on current practical questions that can help the dissemination of bi-
lingualism among the peoples of the USSR (p 291, 292, 293).

In the chapter on the strengthening of friendship among the peoples of the USSR
and the international unity of the new history-making community, the attempt is
made, on a theoretical level, to generalize the notions about the friendship of

the peoples as an indication and trait of the new history-making community (cf.

pp 249-252). The category of friendship of the peoples is examined in correlation
with the international unity of the Soviet natiOn (p 257). Three aspects of inter-
national unity are singled out: unity on the level of social consciousness, inter-
national unity on the level of individual consciousness, and "objective interna-
tional links, relations among peoples, among people or different nationalities"

(p 258). It is also stated that the friendship of the peoples of the USSR is
manifested in the interrelationships among all Soviet republics and nations on a
state-wide scale; in the interrelationships of nations and nationalities within
republics and oblasts, and elements of the friendship of peoples in the life and
activity of the multinational work collectives, the intercourse of people of
different nationalities (p 266).

in the analysis of the concepts of international unity and friendship among peoples
the authors were more successful in showing the common elements in these concepts
than the differences between them. It would be expedient to note that the inter-
course of people of different nationalities has its specific character in work col-
lectives and in the circle of family and friends, to turn attention on those
factors in contemporary conditions which can promote the strengthening of friendly

1k
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DH-“14“. PSI". ONLY

relations not only among peoples as a whole, but also among the representatives
of different nationalities and further the overcoming of national prejudices.

The authors' research into the problems of the formation of the personality in con-
nection with the development of the new history-making community of people does
them credit. This will help the further elaboration of the subject on the basis
of empirical material.

The book gives a critical analysis of the basic directions of the falsification
of the essence of the new history-making community in the works of bourgeois
ideologists.

The illumination of one of the basic subjects of the book--that of the interrela-
tionship of the national and the international-~finds its completion in the conclu-
sion, which includes the inference that the development of the new history-making
communities of people, such as the Soviet nation, is a law-governed development of
mature socialism (p 427). In these new history-making communities, the conclusion
notes, the peoples will exhaust the possibilities of progress "by virtue of the
independent existence and development of national specific factors". The further
development of the productive forces and the deepening of internationalism will
lead in the final analysis to the disappearsnce'of national differences and the
amalgamation of nations" (p 428).

A positive aspect of the work is the posing of a series of practical problems;
among them are such questions as the struggle against the underestimation and over-
estimation of national features in economic life and in the spiritual sphere, the
conduct of cadre policy (pp 134, 135), the calculation of the national interests
of the non-indigenous peoples of the republics (p 163), the question of the factors
of the transformation of one state form into another (p 195) and others.

Unfortunately, some subjects mentioned in the book were not laid bare. The authors
frequently talk about the internationalization of the composition of the population
of the republics, but the reader does not get any notion about the republics in
which there is an increase in the multinational composition of the population and
those in which, by contrast, national homogeneity is growing. Contemporary
science has developed a method for studying the level of multinationality of the
work collectives which is not utilized in the work.

The book will promote the theoretical discussion of the important questions it
raises as they apply to the study of the process of development of the Soviet
nation, it will call forth the interest of a wide circle of researchers and play
its role in ideological work.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo Nauka, ISTORIYA SSSR, 1981

8970
030: 1800/719

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

[Article by Y.V. Bromley. Director, Ethnography Institute ineni Hiklukho-Haklay,
USSR Academy of Sciences: "The Basi '

Processes in the USSR"]

of nations and their rapprochement-~do not manifest themselves the one way in the
different sectors of social life, but their mutual connection reveals itself
everywhere. For example. this connection strikes the eye very clearly in
sector. As is known. innediately after the October victory the struggle began to
eliminate the great inequities in the economic development of peoplea--a legacy

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In practice, the redivision of a collectively created resource means that the
interest in the economic development of the USSR and in each individual republic is
taken care of at the same time.

The development and rapprochement tendencies of nations under socialism are seen in
their clearest form in social-class relations. That is to say, the development of

the social structure of nations characteristic for a society of socialism means the
creation of a single type of social structure on the all-union level at the sane time.

The social progress of the people of our country has found its brilliant embodiment
in the visible achievements in the cultural sector. As is known, the culture of the
peoples of the USSR began to develop at a faster pace from the first years of Soviet
rule; at first, this development was most rapid among the oppressed peoples of
developmentally backward, remote areas. The process found its expression, before all
else, in the liquidation of illiteracy and semi-literacy through the development of
training in the native language, the creation of alphabets for peoples who previously
had had no script, the development of a national culture, and in broadening the sector
of the application of national languages and the channels of mass information.

After the war a great forward movement took place in educating the population.

As a result, there is no longer any basic difference in the educational level of the
urban population and, to a significant degree, the younger generation of the rural
population .

The flourishing of national cultures of the peoples of the USSR. which is an
expression of the triumph of Lenin's nationality policy, has been supported on the
basis of changes which took place in ethnic aspects of national processes in the
ethnic sector of our country in the years of Soviet rule, along with nation-state
building and socio-economic development. Demonstrable factors have contributed
significantly to ethnic consolidation processes. The processes have emerged in the
formation and re-creation of some rather large ethnic units (the Altays, Khakass, etc.)
and in strengthening the internal unity of those ethnos which had taken shape
previously to a greater extent by wiping out earlier differences among ethnographic
groups which were part of them (Russians, Ukraniana, Latvisns).

As a result, relatively large new groups were formed in the USSR, and ethnic
differentiation decreased. However. one must bear in mind that the period of
greatest activity in the process of ethnic consolidation has passed. It is
characteristic that the list of nations in the 1979 census of the population
does not differ from the ethnic nomenclature of previous censuses (1959, 1970).

As in all multi-national countries, one comes across the ethnic process of
assimilation side—by-side with ethnic consolidation in the USSR. One of its most
important characteristics in our country possesses a natural, visceral quality.

It is not by chance that assimilation in practice shows itself rather clearly in
ethnically mixed marriages. Children born of such marriages customarily take the
nationality of one of the parents, thus breaking with the ethnic pattern of the
other. The sharp weakening of national antagonism in the years of Soviet rule and
the falling away of religious barriers, along with the strengthening of the process
of the territorial shift of nationalities in especially rapidly growing cities.
caused a significant growth in the number of such marriages. If, in the 1920's,
only one in every forty marriages was mixed by nationality in the country as a whole,

'17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at present one in every seven--in some cities. one in four--is of this type. As a
whole, however, mixed marriages in the ethnic assimilation processes apply to a
relatively small segment of the population of the USSR-—mainly to groups scattered

over a broad area living outside the basic territory of their ethnos, primarily
outside the corresponding national republics.

But in our country it is not assimilation which constitutes the path of mutual

influence of ethnic groups but, primarily, the ethnic intergroup integration which
constitutes its expression in the rapprochement of cultures.

Socio-economic and ideational-politicsl unity within the unique socialist state
borders of nations and peoples created the foundations for such rapprochement.

The unique ideology of Marxism-Leninism, the international unity of workers on
behalf of the CPSU and the spiritual-political uniqueness of the Soviet people are
the most important factors in the unity of the spiritual life of the Soviet nations.

multi-national Soviet people who unanimously rose up to defend their country and new
social structure were marked by their heroism, which demonstrated their faithfulness
to the socialist Fatherland and to the ideals of proletarian internationalism on the'
front and their self-denying labor behind the lines.

Our entire Soviet way of life, experience in international cooperation and broad

exchange of cadres create a social-spiritual environment contributing to the rapid
and deep mastery of internationalistic ideas.

Great territorial shifts of population have a special importance for ethnic intergroup
rapprochement. This leads to a measurable quickening of the process of territorial
relocations of the peoples of the USSR. For example, if in 1959 close to 27.5 million
people lived outside their own republics, the number of such people in 1979 was more
than 55 million; in other words, they constituted 21 percent of the country's
population. Now representatives of many nations who are not of the local population
live in every union republic. As noted in the 26th CPSU Party Congress "they have
their specific demands in the sectors of language, culture and way of life"

(CPSU Materials of the 26th Congress. Baku, Azarnashr, 1981, p 75). A responsible
duty of scholars is to study these demands and work out appropriate recommendations.

One of the most important aspects of contemporary national processes in our country
is ethnic language change. The policy of the equality of national languages, the
application of organization and rules to them, the creation of an alphabet and
literature among many peoples without their own script, the publication of literature
in the mother tongue--all these caused a broadening of the sector of use of the
languages of the peoples of the USSR from the first years of Soviet rule.

The mutual influence of the languages of the peoples of the USSR has found its
expression in changes of lexical composition mainly as a result of borrowing words
from other languages, but this, certainly, could not bring forth a "merger" of
languages in any form. Because of this, the influence of the tendency to unified
national development manifests itself basically in the spread of bilingualism, and

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only partially in language assimilation. The mastery of Russian as the basic
inter-national language of communication in the USSR by non—Russian peoples has
played the major role here.

Because of the strengthening of the process of Russians mixing territorially with
other nations and the broadening of ethnic intergroup relations in the development
of education, economy. science and culture, the number of nationally mixed marriages
and the spread of the Russian language have grown to a striking degree in the years
since the Great October socialist revolution.

The 1979 census showed that the number of people speaking Russian fluently or
considering it a mother tongue is 216.8 million in the USSR. or 81.9 percent of the
entire population (for comparison, the number of people in this category was 183
million, or 76 percent in 1970). This language is the mother tongue for 137.2
million Russians (in 1970, 128.8 million) and 16.3 million from other nationalities
(in 1926, 6.6 million; 1959. 10 million; 1970, 13 million). It is the second
language for 61.3 million people (in 1970, 41.9 million).

Along with Russian. other nationality languages were wide spread as a second

language. In 1979, 12.3 million people--4.7 percent of the population of the country--
(in 1970, 6.2 million) claimed fluent knowledge of these languages: Ukrainian,
Belorussian, Uzbek, Tatar, Azeri. Moldavian, Tajik, Georgian, and others.

Along with this it must be noted that the wide use of languages of inter-national
communication is coupled with strongly held concepts with regard to the mother tongue
as the language of one's nation within our country. 93.1 percent of the population
of the entire country gave the language of their nation as a mother tongue in the
1979 census questionnaires (USSR Population. Political Literature Press, Moscow,
1980, pp 26-27).

Our peoples' ethnic intergroup rapprochement processes in the diverse areas of
culture have not been manifested in the same way. Ideologists of anti-Sovietism
claim that under contemporary conditions, national ethnic characteristics pass
quickly from one sector of a culture to another. Sectors showing intergroup ethnic
integration processes rather clearly are obvious. These pertain especially to
material culture: one rather infrequently comes across people dressing only in
national garb, eating only national foods or living in traditional dwellings.

As for a person using purely ethnic tools or transport. one could say the he is
virtually nonexistent. This, however, has been conditioned by general laws of
human development in the 20th century and results from a natural-historical process--
especially strengthened in a time of scientific and technical revolution--taking
place not only in the USSR but also in the majority of the other countries.

The attempt of sovietologists to evaluate this process as russification is absurd.
The material culture of the Russians themselves has not been subjected to less
change in the last decades than the culture of, for example, Belorussians, Kazakhs,

Armenians or Estonians.

One must consider another aspect of the process taking place. Recent decades have
brought a growth of interest in the USSR and a number of other developed countries
in material culture and the attempt to be liberated from monotonous factory products
in favor of individualized form. The production increase in different mementos
representing national traditions has definite importance in this context.

19

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Different from material culture, the spiritual culture of our country's peoples

has preserved its national ethnic coloration to a significant degree; this has been
conditioned by the language characteristics of many of its components. In addition,
the destruction and elimination of certain elements of past culture (primarily
religious elements) were united to a revival and development of cultural elements
which had earlier been destroyed, or to a number of elements which had been spread
in this or that ethnic group. Such tendencies are reflected especially in the
recent progress of certain fine arts and in the development of artistic activities.

But the national characteristics of artistic culture of the peoples of the USSR are
not only confined to folk art. To a significant extent these characteristics result
from a new skilled creativity. One must also bear in mind that it is only possible
to achieve diseaination of skilled artistic culture among peoples on the basis of
its development in the most national forms. Such an aspect is very important in
that skilled cultural workers of every ethnic unit form the symbols of the specific
shape of the culture as a whole to a considerable degree; such workers aid in the
creation of new specific traditions within it. However, despite active international
exchange. many of the components of an artistic culture having an international
character do not lose the capability to preserve national form and to be expressed,
partially. in influential national variations. At the same time, mutual inter-
national influence takes place as a whole even more actively in the skilled forms

of a culture.

Ethno-sociological research presents a clear picture of the concrete progress of this
process. For example, research shows that the number of systematic readers of
artistic literature who are 60 years old or older among Bstonians, Georgians and
Russians (in their own republics) is 30 percent, and is 7-9 percent among
Moldavians and Uzbeks. As for 18-19 year olds, the number of relatively systematic
readers in these nations is not less than 50-70 percent. The number of adults
going to the theater no fewer than 1 to 2 times a year is 58 percent among the
Estonians, 44 percent among the Georgians and 15-16 percent among Russians and
Moldavians; in the youth group-98-99 percent among Estonians and Georgians and 73
percent among Russians and Holdavians. Certainly, however. the community of culture
bears witness, not only to the utilization of spare time. but also to spiritual
interests. Special research shows that national differences never play a decisive
role here. Socio-professional and age differences have special importance.

Science. which is one of the components of culture, has a rather independent, specific
role in contemporary national ethnic processes. One must note that natural and
technical sciences, as a rule. do not directly interfere with the obligation to
influence the concept of a national ethnic self; they either stand outside national
ethnic processes or influence them equally as a whole. The conversion of science

into a continuous productive force significantly increases its role as an
internationalizing factor in social life. Nevertheless. the activity of natural
scientists definitely influences national (ethnic) identity. when a scholar makes

a major discovery. this emerges especially clearly. The fame of the scholar is

spread to a considerable extent. For example, the Poles, English and Russians are
proud of the contributions of N. Copernicus, I. Newton, N.V. Lomonoeov, D.I. Hendeleyev
and others to the world. In addition, "putting into practice" the scientific
achievements in the economy of a country directly influences its socio-economic
development. In this context, such achievements are component parts of national
processes. The growth of the internationalizing influence of science in the USSR

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

caused its general democratization in the years of Soviet rule. While scientific
and technical achievements serve the objective interests of the ruling class in a
bourgeois society, similar achievements under socialism serve the interests of the
working masses. The exciting development of Soviet science, which gained momentum
during the scientific-technical revolution, has been assured by an outpouring of
research cadres from the most different levels of Soviet society and from different
national population groups. All these strengthened the relationship of the broad
masses to science, along with generally raising the educational level, and strengthening
science's role in the formation of a social concept. The direct conversion of
science into a productive force, which is one of the manifestations of the modern
scientific-technical revolution, has increased the role of production as an
inter—nationalizing factor in social life to an important degree. Since the
scientific-technical revolution is carried out to raise the level of social

production, it connects different economic regions and sectors to each other with
even stronger ties.

The social and humanitarian sciences have a special role in the development of
national ethnic processes. These sciences (most of which emerge in their national
ethnic form according to research), constituting the study of different social
events and processes in an objective society, cannot but draw attention to the study
of national (ethnic) events. Social sciences have many more national aspects than
the natural sciences have. This is partially explained by the fact that the social
sciences are tightly bound to the emotional sector; those like literature can
reflect ethnic characteristics of the perception of the external world and specifics
of feelings and impressions which enter into an ethnic psychology. In connection
with this, it is appropriate to recall the idea of X. Marx and P. Engels that the
French perfected English materialism by giving it ingenuity and clarity (cf K. Marx
and F. Engels. Second printing of their works in Russian, vol 2, p 144).

In this regard one must especially examine the role of sciences like history,
ethnography, archeolosY. linguistics and folklore. These sciences connect their
research subjects to the emotional sector to sale degree. Collecting historical
data on the peoples of the Soviet Union, studying their historical traditions,
clarifying language development, revealing national cultural achievements.
comprehending ethnic characteristics of folk art, customs and traditions, and
communicating these findings through the school, literature. press, radio and
television--all this has influenced and influences the consolidation of our peoples
and the development of national (ethnic) identity by creating conditions which
increase their level of internal maturity. The influence of the social sciences
in this direction is rounded out by historical and local museums. Such museums
customarily have special exhibits showing national ethnic uniqueness.

The great influence of historical and philosophical sciences on national identity
requires an increasing struggle against the idealization of the historical past of
certain peoples and against one-sided evaluations of their traditions. Artificial
inflation of national characteristics can result in illegally setting one people
against another and can lead to national recidivism.

The social sciences must reveal the reality and progressiveness of development and
rapprochement of nations in a socialist society and must defend the ideas of

internationalism as the opposites of covert and overt nationalism and national
exelusivity. For example, the historical sciences reveal the ancient positive

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SI-I ONLY

traditions among the peoples of our cauntry, their common participation in defending
the Fatherland froa invaders and their united revolutionary struggle against tsarist
authoritarianism to build socialism and communism. Archeology and ethnography prove

the equal capability of all peoples for cultural progress and teach the similarities
of their culture to specific symbols.

In this context the world-view sciences, primarily the philosophy of Marxism-
Leninism. have special importance. Soviet social studies, which are based on the
legacy of Harxism-Leninism, pay much attention to the nation-building process and to
the leadership role of the CPSU in administering national processes. In this sector.
social science scholars who carry Out administrative duties are participating in the
international education of workers by means of works which analyze different aspects
(economic, social, legal, etc.) of contemporary national relations. The Party does
its duty in studying national processes in all social sciences sectors under
conditions of developed socialism-studying tendencies and prospects, characteristics
and tempos, optimizing factors, and factors which slow down the development and
rapprochement of socialist nations and peoples.

An important component of the Soviet people's social concept--proletarian
internationalisnr-has exceptional significance for national processes (in essence,
for ethnic aspects). As a result of an intense ideological struggle and educational
work, "the party was successful in that internationalism changed from the ideal of

a handful of communists to the deep belief and norm of relationship of millions of
Soviet people from all nations and peoples. This was a basic revolutionary turning
point in the social concept, a turning point of incomparable importance" (L.I.
Brezhnev, The Leninist Path: Articles and Speeches, vol 6. p 67).

The community of goals and views of the Soviet peoples which took shape in all
sectors of social psychology in the years of Soviet rule has great importance for
their inter-national relations under modern conditions. For example. social
concepts in the moral, political and legal sectors underwent important changes.

In the process of developing socialism, special working class qualities were changed
into symbols inseparable from the spiritual makeup of the entire Soviet people.
Ideas. spiritual principles and working class interests became principles, norms and
interests common to all the people. The spiritual-political unity of the Soviet
people took shape. The spiritual makeup is always being perfected under conditions
of developed socialism; the common Soviet moral and legal norms influence the
conception of the workers even more deeply. Now it is impossible to conceive of the
mental attitude of the Soviet people separate from the elements of the socialist
humanism special to it, the concept of a high order of social obligations and a
regard for socialist togetherness. The ideology of internationalism, the programs
and goal of the peoples' education and higher education network, the work methods
and basic similarity of the activist content of cultural-educational institutions
working in Russian and other national languages as well as the channels of mass
information. the community of the method of socialist realism in the fine arts

(as for this community, it is united with differences of national forms and style
variations formed in the process of the building of socialism)--all these created
not only the basis for the rapprochement of nations but also the actively functioning
mechanism for this rapprochement.

There is no doubt that the internationalization of culture which is constantly
expanding in our country will be strengthened eVen further in the future.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

National cultures are not becoming the same on the basis of internationalization

but are becoming mutuallv enriched. The peoples of the USSR are not simply forming
an inter-national culture in the process of mutual influence and mutual enrichment

of thle spiritual cultures. they are forming a common Soviet culture. This is
manifested not only in literature and fine arts but in daily life. including the laws
of etiquette taken from all-Soviet traditions. holidays. celebrations and habits.

and common anthroponomics. Ail-Soviet culture as part of a way of life is an
important component of a new historical unity--the Soviet people.

The stability of international socio—political unity--the Soviet people-has found
its reflection in the spiritual identity concept of the Soviet man. The relevance

of this tn each nation is combined with the concept of a relationship to the Soviet
people.

The Communist Party and the Soviet state which views the multi-faceted rapprochement
of the nations and peoples of our country as the most important objective law of the

aspects of national processes in our country are borne in mind. The report of the
26th CPSU Party Congress said: "We oppose tendencies directed at artificially
eliminating national characteristics. But, by the same token. we consider the

artificial inflation of these characteristics to be unacceptable" (26th CPSU Congress:
Materials. p 75).

It was especially noted at the 26th CPSU Congress that the unity of Soviet nations is
stronger than ever. But as L.I. Brezhnev noted. "certainly this is not to say that

sociology. which must reveal all facets of the "internal mechanism" of contemporary
national processes. It is not by chance that recently a new "peripheral" science--
ethnosociology--has emerged which links these two sciences in our country. Its basic
duty is to research the mutual relationship of the socio-economic and. in the true
meaning of the word, the ethnic aspects of national processes under contemporary
conditions and to clarify, on one hand, the changing characteristics of ethnic
manifestations in different social milieus and, on the other hand. the specifics of
social dynamics in national units.

Ethnoseciologicnl research on contemporary national relations in the USSR were at the
center of attention of the participants at the All—Union scientific session which took
place in Baku at the end of May this year and which connected to the requirements of

the 26th CPSU Congress. Other aspects of this problem-—ethnodemographic, ethnolinguistic
and ethnopsychnlogical aspects-~were analyzed as well. The session showed

350: 1831/100 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY