FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10486

30 April 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE
(Fouo 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the [1.8. Governaent.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP 0F
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I'UK Ufl‘l‘JAL 03¢. UI‘LI

JPRS L/1048
30 April 19

USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE

(7000 7/82)

CONTENTS

AGRO-EOI'OKICS AND ORGANIZATION

New Concept for Setting Procurement Prices in Agriculture
(Aleksandr L'vovich Meyendorf; VOPROSY MOMIICI, Mar 82)...

Economic Planning of cm Countries in Agroindustrial Operations
(Ivan Nikolayevich Buzdalov; VOPROSY EKOIOMIKI, Mar 82)

-a- [III-USSR-7E
NEH CMBP’I‘ FOR SETTING PROCURDENT PRICES IN AGRICULTURE
Moscow VOPROSY momma in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 77-86

AArticle by Aleksandr L'vovich Meyendorf, candidate of economic sciences. senior
scientific worker at the Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
"Socially Necessary Expenditures and Procurement Prices in Agriculture17

[rex_t_/ At present the levels of zonal procurement prices of any types of agricul-
tural products deviate considerably from socially necessary upenditures. This
hampers the fulfillment by prices of their accounting function, leads to a distor-
tion of economic indicators and to an inaccurate comparison of economic results
with expmditures and nkes it inossible to objectively evaluate the results of
the econondc activity of kolkhozea. sovkhoses and associations and to draw up cor-
rect plans for the distribution of purchases of agricultural products and for the
specialization of farms and rsyons. 0n the whole, everything that has been men-
tioned has a negative effect on the measures for an increase in production effi-
ciency. The accountability report of the CPSU Central Co-Iittee to the 26th party
congress states the following: "If agriculture as a whole is discussed, it faces
the same min problem that other national economic sectors do—improvement in ef-
ficiency and quality." The solution of this problem is largely connected with an
improvement in the formation of prices of agricultural products.

The production of the biggest volume of output of a structure and quality needed
by society with given expenditures or the production of a given volume of output
with the lowest possible codained expenses is the generally accepted criterion of
the economic efficiency of production. lhe efficiency of agricultural production
with observance of the social. political and other conditions corresponding to so-
ciety's interests is determined by a comparison of the volume of output in value
units with the expenditures on its productim.

‘me procurement prices of agricultural products set by the state have an active
effect on the efficiency of their production. Since the distribution of purchases
is also nde by the state, consequently, the cost accounting efficiency of various
types of products is established by planning and agricultural bodies. At the same
time. in accordance with the adopted concept of price formation the levels of pro-
curement prices are directed toward the average conditions of production in the
price zone. that is, they deviate considerably from socially necessary expenditures.
which correspond to worse production conditions. As a result, a low profitability
and sometimes even unprofitableness of output is actually planned for farms under

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

various financial levers (intone tax. disposable balance of profit and so forth).
With such a method of price formation a diffeer efficiency of production of any
types of products is planned for a large nusber of fans.

Under existing conditions of price for-nation a considerable part of the differen-
tial incone on fertility is withdrawn through prices. This leads to the fact that
the levels of zonal procure-ant prices of give: products in basic consuming and
large production regions are separate from each other—several individual terri-
toriea. in which economic calculations are inconarable with each other, are seen-
ingly formed. To eliminate this shortcoming, the differences among zonal prices
lust not be arbitrary, but not correspond to real expenditures. including expend-
itures on the transportation of products from me zone to another.

withdrawn through prices, and now can give a certain idea of the amount of differ-
ential income withdrawn through procurement prices. In 1936 the procure-ant price
of soft wheat in Gor'kovskiy Kray as only lo percent higher than in Severe-Kevlar.-
skiy.1 In 1981 the basic procurenent price of this product in Gor'kovskays Galast
(as in a nulber of oblasts in North-West and Central Regions) was approximately 75
percent higher than the price in a nutter of administrative rayons in Krasnodar-
skiy Kray. 'n'ne difference in the procure-ant prices of barley between consuming
and producing zones is now "four to five times higher than the cost of its deliv-
ery from mss production regions.”2 In all probability. in a nutter of consuming
regions the zonal procurement prices of some basic types of products are new higher
than the socially necessary expenditures on their production and in producing re-
gions. essentially lower than the socially necessary expenditures.

Socially necessary expenditures are reduced expenditures (that is, production cost
plus the standard of profit-el(-where e is the acre of profitability with respect
to capital adopted for agriculture and K is specific productive capital) under
worse conditions of production of a product in a given region. The lack of corres-
pondence of the levels of procurement prices to the levels of socially necessary
expenditures leads to certain shortcomings in planned nanagenent. The ilpossibil-
ity of an objective determination of the economic efficiency of the plans for the
distribution of purchases and production development is the most important of then.
For example. let us assume that the reduced expenditures on the production of 1

ton of wheat on farm A are 86 rubles and the socially necessary expenditures. 81
rubles. At the zonal price of 86 rubles per ton wheat production seems efficient.
In fact. however. it is unprofitable for society. because the farm‘s reduced ex-
penditures exceed the socially necessary expenditures. If the reduced expendi-
tures of farm 8 on this product are 79 rubles. the zonal price is 76 rubles and
the socially necessary expenditures are 83 rubles per ton. with the seeming un-
profitableness of wheat it is effective for society. Hence it follows that the
first farm should be specialized in the production of sons other productsnd the
purchase of wheat should be planned primarily for the second far-n. However, to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Calculations in existing procurement prices not corresponding to socially necessary
expenditures can lead to an incorrect distribution of not only agricultural produc-
tion. but also of industrial production connected with it. For example. it is in-
possible to efficiently place a plan for the processing of agricultural products.
when socially necessary expenditures on their production and transportation are not
known. For the same reason contradictions. which are not characteristic of the so-
cialist economy, between the interests of society (which should be observed prim—
arily) and the cost accounting interests of enterprises and associations often
arise. Prices set without reference to the levels of socially necessary expendi-
tures on the production of some product can stimlate farms to deviate production
expenditures from the levels of socially necessary expenditures. or to "punish"
them for the approximation of expenditures to these levels.

Price formtion not based on the principle of approximation of prices to the lev-
els of socially necessary expenditures generates a need for petty tutelage over
the economic activity of enterprises on the part of planning and agricultural mn-
sgema'nt bodies. because procurement prices often do not stimlate or weakly stim-
ulate farms to fulfill the plans for the sale of comedity output established for
them. The lack of correspondence of the cost accounting interests of a number of
farm to society's interests at tines disrupts the mechanism of reward of workers
for the attained production results.

For the purpose of improving price formation: in agriculture. it is necessary to de-
termine the levels of socially necessary expenditures on the production of various
types of products in the country and to Inxinnmlly approximate local procurement
prices to these levels. Academician V. S. Nemhinov stressed that the "correspond-
ence of prices to socially necessary expenditgres of labor is one of the most im-
portant and basic provisions of our party..." The methods of price formation
based on this important provision can contribute to a significant increase in the
efficiency of agricultural production.

The lack of methodological training of personnel. not the technical cowlexity of
calculations. is the main obstacle to a correct determination of the levels of so-
cially necessary expenditures on the production of agricultural products and to
the setting of procurement prices close to them. To this day some economists still
have the idea that in agriculture socially necessary expenditures are the average
expenditures on the production of a given product in the zone or region. However.
the average level of reduced expenditures cannot be utilized for the determination
of the efficimcy of output. because for the state it is also important to utilize
relatively worse production conditions. In practice. procurement prices are ac-
tually set at levels of expenditures most different with respect to the average in
the zone. in some cases they approximate them. while in others they deviate from
them considerably. The sale of individual types of products is often planned for
farms under poor conditions for their production. although they are planned to
give little profit or to be unprofitable.

The advocates of the need for the deviation of prices from socially necessary ex-
penditures and for price fomtim according to average production conditions cite
a nusber of arguments in their defense. In particular. they point out that the
state has economic and administrative levers. by means of which specific assistance

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is given to farms under worae production conditions; for example, the planning of
efficient, along with inefficient, types of comadity products for farms; alloca-
tion of outright budgetary appropriations to economically weak sovkhozes. which en-
able them to carry out expanded reproduction; granting of various privileges. in-
cluding the writing off of credit indebtedness to banks, to lagging kolkhozes.
However, these and similar treasures do not solve the problem, because the lack of
correspondence of prices to socially necessary expenditures and the uncertainty of
the levels of the latter rennin. which deprives procurement prices of their ac-

counting function making it possible to objectively determine the economic effi-
ciency of agricultural production.

‘me distribution of purchases of specific output throughout oblasts. rsyons and
farms with different natural and climtic conditions for the purpose of equalizing
the profitability of farms inevitably leads to an increase in the cost of output.
because it does not nuke it possible to efficiently specialize the activity of
farms in the production of individual products. The granting of budgetary appro-
priations, writing off of debts and similar measures do not stimlate kolkhozes,
sovkhozes and associations to increase the volume and to improve the quality of
output to the extent to which this is attained when mterial and financial re-
sources are received in the form of payment for the quantity and quality of sold
output, that is, through prices.

Another argument advanced in defense of the used methods of setting of procurement
prices is that their formation according to the average production conditions in ‘
every price zone and without reference to the levels of socially necessary expendi-
tures makes it possible to withdraw in favor of society part of the differential
income on fertility where production conditions are better. However. if procure-
ment prices close to socially necessary expenditures (according to worse produc-
tion conditions) are to be introduced, their general level and the level of retail
prices should be raised considerably. Furthermore, according to this argument, it
would be necessary to create a complex mechanism of withdrawal of rent payments to
the budget from farms and to pay farms large sums for output in order to withdraw
part of them afterwards.

Society is interested in obtaining agricultural output with the lowest expendi-
tures both at places of production and at places of consumption (with due regard
for transport costs). At both places the prices of agricultural products should
be as close as possible to the corresponding levels of socially necessary expendi-
tures. At the same time. at the place of consumption socially necessary expendi-
tures are equal to the amount of the procurement price close to socially necessary
expenditures at the place of production and of the expenditures on the transports-
tion of products to the place of consumption. In connection with the fact that
natural conditions at places of production are different and transport expedi-
tures on the delivery of products from various places of production to places of
consumption are not the same, in the country there cannot be a single level of
socially necessary upenditures and of the price of a specific type of product
corresponding to them at places of production or at places of consuuption.

0n the basis of the criterion of minimization of coahined production and transport

expenditures it is possible to draw up a plan close to optimal for the distribu-
tion of purchases of agricultural output of a given volume and structure. he

1.
'ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
setting. simultaneously with the physical indicators of such a plan. of the lev-
els of socially necessary expenditures and of procurement prices, which are close
to socially necessary expenditures, of the production of specific types of products
in the country's various regions is a necessary condition for its development.

1111s is connected with the fact that, to select the nest suitable variant of dis-
tribution of purchases according to the criterion of national econoMc efficiency,
it is necessary to make comparisons of combined results with expenditures.

has significant deviations of procurement prices fron socially necessary expendi-
tures are due mainly to the use of the price apparatus for the perfomnce of the
function. which is not characteristic of it. of withdrawal in favor of society of
the part of the differential income of farms in regions with relatively better con-

For the purpose of simplifying calculations, the concept of "standard wholesale
price" of output can be used. this standard wholesale price is close to socially

at about 6 rubles per ton.“ 'lhen the standard wholesale price in Moscow and the
procurement price in Moscow Oblast will be approximately 100 rubles per ton (96-0-6).
At the sale time, it is taken into account that part of the wheat transported from
Krasnodarskiy Kray arrives in Moscow or is transported through Moscow farther.
Ivheat is also delivered to Moscow from other regions, including the Ukraine, the
Volga area, the Urals and west Siberia. When it is delivered fron Zaporozh'ye,
standard expenditures on the transportation of 1 ton of wheat by railroad to Mos—
cow can be 4.5 rubles. from Saratov. 3.8 rubles. fron Orenburg. 5.3 rubles, from
'rselinograd, 9.4 rubles and from Novosibirsk, 9.8 rubles. Taking the standard
wholesale price in Moscow as the basis. it is possible to approximately determine
the preliminary levels of procurement prices per ton of wheat in the oblasts sup-
plying it. In Zaporozhskaya Oblast it will be equal to approximately 95.5 rubles
(loo-6.5). in Saratovskaya (blast. 96.2 (mo-3.8). in Orenburgskays (blast. 94.7
(mo-5.3), in Tselinogradskaya Oblast, 90.6 (loo-9.1.) and in Novosibirskaya Oblast,
90.2 rubles (loo-9.8).

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large producing regime supply wheat to my places. While the expenditures on the
transportation of 1 ton of grain from Novosibirsk to Khabarovsk are 14.5 rubles and
its standard wholesale price in Novosibirsk is 90.2 rubles. the standard wholesale
price in Khabarovsk and the procurement price of 1 ton of wheat in Khabarovskiy
Kray can be about 106.7 rubles (90. 2444.5). The prices examined by us are conven-
tional and serve only to illustrate the principle of determination of the differ-

ence among zonal prices in the country's various regions according to the transport
expenditures on the delivery of a unit of output among them.

Next it is necessary to determine the approximate quantity of comodity output of
each type planned for various republics and oblasts. At the same time. it is nec-
essary to take into account the preset levels of zonal procure-ant prices, which
should ensure planned loss-free production of no less than 90 to 95 percent of the
total volume of a given product. in oblasts at first the levels of reduced expend-
ltures on the basic types of comdity products planned for the five-year plan are
determined and farms are ranked according to them. Levels of reduced expenditures
on the production of various types of products corresponding to the production
structure planned for every farm are adopted. 'lhe levels of procuremet prices
close to socially necessary expenditures set for an oblast are used to "cut off"
the farm whose planned reduced expenditures on individual products exceed the lev-
e1 of the procurement price. he sale of given products to the state is not planned
for these farms. Then it is determined whether the levels of procurement prices
adopted for various oblasts are mutually compatible and whether they contribute to
a full utilization of farm resources.

To explain what has been said. we will assume that in Krasnoderskiy Kray the re-
duced expenditures on the production of 1 ton of comdity wheat planned for the
five-year plan total from SO to 100 rubles on farms. we will assune that. while
the kray procurement price is 910 rubles, on 5 percent of the farms these expendi-
tures exceed 910 rubles. If 95 percent of the farms can ensure the fulfillment of
the kray plan for the purchases of this crop, the sale of wheat should not be
planned for 5 percent of the farms where at this procurement price it would be un-
profitable according to the plan. However, if the wheat plan at this price and
with a planned profitability of its production is not fulfilled, it is necessary
to either lower the plan for the purchases of this crop for this region. or to
raise its procurement prices.

For the purpose of checking the correct setting of the levels of procurement prices
of various types of products. it is necessary to clarify whether the levels of
standard wholesale prices of a given type of product transported from various re-
gions are close to each other at every big place of consunption. If this is not
so, either purchases are distributed and directions of flows of transportation of
products are chosen inefficiently. or the levels of procurenent prices are deter-
mined incorrectly. For example. as taken above. 1 ton of soft wheat transported
from Krasnodar to Moscow costs 100 rubles. Let us assume that in Kaluzhskaya 0b-
last, from where wheat is also delivered to Moscow, the procurement price of 1 ton
of this product is preset at the level of 103 rubles. with an expenditure of l
ruble on the transportation of 1 ton of wheat from Kaluga its standard wholesale
price in Moscow will be 104 rubles. lhe lower level of the standard wholesale
price of. wheat arriving from Krasnodar indicates that the total expenses on the
production and delivery of this product to Moscow can be lowered through a reduc-
tion of its transportation from Kaluzhskaya Oblast at the expense of a correspond-
ing increase in deliveries from Krasnodarskiy Kray. After the plans for the

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
distribution of purchases of wheat. the flows of its transportation and procurement
prices are corrected. price levels are set in various wheat supplying regions.
Along with transport expenses on the delivery of wheat they should be in Moscow ap-
proxintely the same (for exane, at the level of 100.5 rubles per ton).

Upon the attainment of equality of standard vholesale prices of basic types of con-
nodity products at every big place of consunption the levels of procurement prices
and the plans for the distribution of purchases throughout the country can be con-
sidered sufficiently close to optiul, that is. corresponding to the above-cited

criterion of efficiency of the sector as a whole (with provision of a actual or
close-to-normal profitability of most ferns).

Directive bodies plan the volunes. structure and specifications of output on the
basis of society's needs and capabilities. Thus, the levels of procurement prices.
close to socially necessary expenditures, of various products are determined by the
plans for economic development. the population's supply and existing natural con-
ditions. 'lhe task is as follows: To set in a methodological and uthodically cor-
rect manner the levels of procurement prices close to socially necessary expendi-
tures, which objectively nest the requirements of the plan for the distribution of
purchases of products throughout the country. At the same time, the bigger the
transport expenditures from the place of consumption to the place of production of
a product. all things being equal. the lower socially necessary expenditures and
the procurement price of this product corresponding to then at the place of produc-
tion should be and vice versa.

The mltitude of interconnected levels of procurement prices of various types of
products in the country's various parts can be determined only by means of a num-
ber of repeated calculations. In connection with the fact that. in general. trans-
port expenditures on the delivery of products among the country's localities are
invariable. the difference among the levels of procurement prices in various re-
gions also can be constant. For exawle, in the above-cited exanple if the pro-
curenent prices of 1 ton of wheat in the amount of 9!. rubles in Krasnodarskiy Kray,
96.2 rubles in Saratovskaya Oblast and so forth do not take it possible to obtain
the planned total quantity of comdity wheat without damage to the interests of
most farms, a rise in these prices by an amount uniform or close to uniform for all
oblasts my be needed. For maple, if the price of 1 ton of wheat in Moscow is to
be raised by l ruble, in Krasnodarakiy Kray the procurement price of this product
should also be raised by l mble and it will be 95 rubles (WM-1)- In Saratovskaya
(blast the price will rise to 97.2 rubles (96.241), in Khabarovskiy Kray. to 1.05.7
rubles (104.7%) and so forth. The planned volumes of purchases should be changed
accordingly.

when the level of procurement prices is set higher than necessary for the produc-
tion of the planned volume of a product, farms try to overfulfill the plans for the
sale of this product and to underfulfill them for other types of products. Then
the level of procurement prices for this product should be lowered everywhere by
the same amount and local procurement plans should be brought in correspondence
with state needs.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To correctly determine the planned levels (for exanple. for the five-year plan) of
oblast (republic) procurenent prices is not an easy, but quite feasible, task. In
the future. when an ever greater proportion of calculations will be performed by
computers, it will be possible to more accurately set the levels of socially nec-
essary expenditures and the levels of procurement prices corresponding to them and
to distribute purchases. Taking into consideration the fact that now it is not yet
possible to sufficiently accurately determine the levels of socially necessary ex-
penditures and the flows of transportation of products in various places of their
consumption, which change from year to year, and that it is difficult to calculate
the expenditures on the transportation of products among the country's regions,
procurement prices close to socially necessary expenditures can be set only approx-
imately. However, even such prices Imke it possible to more substantially perform
planned calculations for the distribution of purchases and to more reliably eval-
uate the activity of farms than with the existing method of price formtion.

in order not to differentiate procurement prices unnecessarily. at first they should
be set for oblasts (republics without an oblast division). Subsequently, it will
be possible to bring them up to administrative rayons. Oblast and rayon procure-
ment prices will differ from existing zonal and differentiated prices in the fact
that they are interconnected in terms of. transport expenditures. At the same time.
the same price can be set for several oblasts (rayons). For example. using the
foregoing example, it can be assumed that the procurement price of 1 ton of soft
wheat in the Bashkir ASSR can be close to the price in Krasnodarskiy Kray. because
wheat is transported to Moscow from both regions and the distance between Ufa and
Moscow is close to the distance between Moscow and Krasnodar.

At present prices deviate from socially necessary expenditures mainly in order to
more easily withdraw part of the farm income by means of them. However, it is
withdrawn from farms in such a way regardless of the amount of the planned net in-
come and of whether. in general. net income from a given product is planned for
them. This leads to a differentiation of the planned profitability of farms. be
setting of procurement prices corresponding to the levels of socially necessary
expenditures will abolish the planned unprofitableness and low profitability of
farms. However, this will require the establishment of a system of direct with-
drawal of the differential income of farms, which can be done through the intro-
duction of so-called stable payments to the budget used in the food industry.
These payments are set for enterprises in percent of their actual profit. The
amount of percentage depends on the amount of planned profit and the profit that
is to be left at the enterprise's disposal.

Stable payments in agriculture can be set for highly profitable kolkhozes and sov-
khozes and. as earnings are received in the current accounts of farms in the bank,
the appropriate sums in a certain percent of these earnings can be withdrawn until
the payment is liquidated fully. At the same time, on sovkhozes stable payments
will replace the disposable balance of profit. which is now withdrawn from then.
The amount of the planned net income remaining at the farm's disposal after the
withdrawal of a stable payment should be sufficient to ensure its planned expanded
reproduction. Hith due regard for the payments received in the budget the total
volume of capital granted agriculture for a given quantity of output purchased by
the state can remain at the approved level.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘lhe transition to the new principle of withdrawal of differential income in agri-
culture is possible on the basis of the existing system of settlement of accounts
between farms and procurement enterprises. in accordance with which the enterprises
that purchase the basic types of products of farms at different zonal prices credit
them at accounting prices uniform for the entire country. For example, soft wheat,
regardless of the levels of procurement prices at which it is purchased in various
price zones, is credited by procurement organizations at a price uniform for the en-
tire countrynlll rubles per ton.

'me change in the levels of zonal prices should not affect the levels of accounting
prices and. consequently. wholesale and retail prices of food. This is due to the
fact that the additional payments from the budget to procurement organizations in
the zones where procurement prices exceed the accounting price will be liquidated
not only by the budget revenues in the zones where procurement prices will remin
below the accounting price, but also by the budget revenues from stable payments of
highly profitable farms.

FOOTNOTES

1. Calculated according to the data cited in A. N. Halafeyev's book "Istoriya
Tsenoohrazovaniya v SSSR (1917-1963)" _/_Hiatory of Price Formtion in the USSR
(1917-1963)]. (Izdatel'stvo Mysl', 1964, p 393).

2. A. S. Baranov, "Gosudarstvennyye Zagotovki v Uslovi akh Spetsializatsii i Kon-
tsentratsii Sel'skokhozyaystvennogo Proizvodstva" __State Procurements Under
Conditions of Specialization and Concentration of Agricultural Productiogl. Iz—
datel'stvo Kolos, 1978, p 83.

3. V. S. Nemhinov, "Obshchestvennaya Stoimost' i Planovaya Teena" [Social Value
and Planned Pricg7. Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1970, p 213.

lo. here and hereinafter the expenditures on the transportation of products approx-
imately correspond to the actual expenditures.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy Ekonomiki", 1982

ll ,4 39
C30: 18 Zia/2’00

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roa omcm use oniv

AGRO-ECONOHICS AND ORGANIZATION

ECONOMIC PLANNING OF CEHA COUNTRIES IN AGROINDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 96-104

[Article by Ivan Nikolayevich Buzdalov, doctor of economic Sciences, aenior
cientific associate of IEMSS, USSR Academy of Sciences; and Mikhail Yefimovich

Bukh, Candidate of economic Sciences, department head, NII [Scientific-Research
Institute] of TsSU SSSR [USSR Central Statistics Administration]: "The

Economic Mechanism of the Agroindustrial Sphere"]

[Text] In the agrarian policy of the Connmnist and workers parties of the social-
ist countries, ever-increasing attention is being devoted to increasing the effec-

tiveness of the economic mechanism of agriculture and the entire agroindustrial
complex.

There operates in the single system of the national economy of a particular
socialist country a single economic mechanism, and application is made of single
forms and methods of the planned social organization of production and

exchange of labor activity, which encompass all levels and links in that system.
At the same time, to the degree that it is rightful to isolate agrarian relations
from the overall system of socialist production relations, it is completely
natural to carry out a special consideration of the economic mechanism of the
development of agriculture, and, under conditions of the deepening of its
integrational links with the related branches and spheres in the national
economy, the economic mechanism of the agroinduatrial complex. When analyzing
the specifics of the economic mechanism in the agroindustrial sphere and especisly
in its basic link, agriculture, a factor of fundamental importance is the

taking into account of the vast variety of concrete conditions of production,
which substantially influences the nature of the formation, making, and
implementing of the planned economic decisions, the providing of economic
incentives to production through a system of prices, the distribution of income,
etc. In turn, these specifics exert an influence upon the fundamental aspects
,of the operation of the entire economic mechanism in the national economy.

A very important link in the economic mechanism is planning, and the forms and
methods of carrying it out. Studies by economists in the socialist countries and
the positive experience derived from the changes in the economic mechanism of

the agroindustrial sphere indicate that their initial point is the use of those
methods of planned administration, forms of making and implementing planned

10
FORlOFFﬂJAI.USEtoNLY
decisions, and evaluations of the results of labor which, in all links of
economic-planning activity, are based on incentives and interests. The essence
of this orientation consists in the more consistent observance of the principle
of democratic centralism. in the elimination of excessive administrative regula-
tion of the work performed by the primary production links, which are supported
through a system of economic contracts and through the mutual material responsi-
bility of all the partners participating in the reproduction process of the

APK lagroindustrial complex] system. The necessity for improving the economic
mechanism specifically in this direction was indicated, in particular, at the
November 1981 Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee. In his speech at the Plenum,
L. I. Brezhnev remarked, "An important place when developing the food supplies
program should also be given to such large-scale problems as the improvement

of the economic mechanism and the system of administration -- the administration

of agriculture and the agroindustrial complex as a whole. And, of course,
administration at the local level."

Recently in the socialist countries steps have been carried out, or are being
planned, for the improvement of planning, and for involving the collectives of
enterprises and APO [agroindustrial associations ] in economic-planning activities.
When forming and implementing planning decisions and concrete assignments,

more and more active use is being made of economic levers, interests, and incen-
tives, and there has been an increase in the economic independence of the produc-
tion collectives, as a result of which there is a more consistent carrying out

of the principle of democratic centralism. An important form is the economic
contract, which acts as a direct economic lever for the well-substantiated
formation of the assignment, as an instrument of planning.

When evaluating a particular approach to the use of the economic mechanism, and
primarily its chief link -- methods of planning -- from scientific positions,

it is necessary to take into consideration the results of the application in

the practical situation of the corresponding methodological concepts. In this
regard, something that deserves attention is the study and dissemination of the
experience in organizing the economic-planning interrelations in the agro-
industrial sphere in VHR [Hungarian People's Republic]. It is specifically that
experience that contributed to the skillful coordination of the work performed
by the Hungarian agricultural cooperatives and enterprises, as was noted in the
Report of the Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress.

During the past 15 years the increase in the harvest yield of grain crops in
Hungary came to approximately 20 quintals per hectare (with that increase being
achieved from a level that was comparatively high at the beginning of the eco-
nomic reform: in 1966-1970 it constituted an average of 25.4 quintals per hectare).
In other European CEMA countries, the harvest yield of grain crops increased

with the limits of 7-10 quintals per hectare. 0n the new economic-organizational
basis that was linked with the orientation of the economic mechanism on the final
results, high overall growth rates for agricultural production were assured.
During the past two five-year plans they came to an average of a percent per

year. During the 1960's Hungary was a country that was a net-importer of grain,
but in recent years, with a production of more than 1.2 tons of grain per person,
Hungary became a net-exporter of that basic product. The level of meat production
per capita of population was more than 140 kilograms in 1978-1980 (increase of
more than 50 kilograms as compared with 1965).

11
FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fact that the results of the rapid and -- as has been shown by the dynamics
of the production costs of output and profitability -- more effective development
of agriculture and the entire agroindustrial complex were achieved thanks to

the comprehensive improvement of the economic mechanism, is attested to by

the data concerning the amounts of attracted resources. During the period indi-
cated above, for example, capital investments in the agriculture of Hungary
dropped from 18 to 15 percent of the overall volume of investments in the national
economy. All this attests to the indisputable effectiveness of the economic
approach to the making and implementation of planning decisions, when provision
is made for the active manifestation of such a motivating force in the economic
mechanism as interests, personal self-interestedness, the special importance of
which in the course of communist construction was pointed out by V. I. Lenin!
The broader the horizon for the manifestation of interests -- primarily the
material ones -- is created by the planning methods that are being employed,

the more dynamic the development and interaction of the entire system of
socialist production relations and the more effective the functioning of the
productive forces and the method of production as a whole.

The basic peculiarity of the economic mechanism of the sgroindustrial complex in
Hungary consists in the fact that the state carries out the planning of the
national economy not by means of the direct informing of the specific executors
of what their planning indicators are, but, rather, by means of using such
economic levers and incentives as the economic contract, the controlling of
state deductions from enterprise income, the regulation of the part of the
income remaining with them, various fixed payments and taxes (payment for fixed
and working assets, income tax, etc.), price policy, credit system, etc.

Enterprises and organizations in the agriculture and food industry of Hungary in-
dependently develop their own annual and five-year plans. Those plans are

not approved by superior organizations, which carry out monitoring functions with
regard to their execution. The procurement organizations and the trusts in the
food industry, on the basis of the plans received from superior agencies,
conclude contracts that are based on equality between the contracting parties,
with the SKhPK [agricultural producers cooperatives] and state farms for the sale
of specific types of output. The cost-accounting form of implementation of the
planned assignments guarantees the observance of the material interests of the
cooperatives and state rarms and contributes to the formation of such an
agricultural division of the statewide plan in which the needs are more completely
«)ordinated with the real capabilities of production and with its concrete
conditions.

An important area in improving planning is the inclusion in this process of the
purchase and supply-and-sales organizations on a cost-accounting basis. As has
been shown by the experience in Hungary, under conditions of the broad, active

use of economic methods, the cost-accounting principles of plan formation and
implementation, direct contacts, and economic-contract forms of exchange of
activity, the need for purchasing organisations and other intermediaries completely

 

*This does not contradict the determining role of social interests. In this
instance we have in mind the assumption that, the more completely personal self-
interestedness manifests itself in the system of interests, the more successfully
the collective and social interests are implemented and the highest goal of
production under socialism is achieved.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
disappears. But in the event that they a1: retained, only complete cost accounting
(and cost accounting is a method for the planned running of the economy) can
convert the procurement and supply organizations into active participants in

the system of planned administration, which have a direct self-interest in

the improvement of the economic~planning work, the efficient placement of the
plans, the improvement of the structure of production and technology, etc.

The course of the Communist and workers parties in the socialist countries, aimed
at improving planning, has led in recent years to noticeable qualitative shifts
in the direction of bringing the CEHA countries closer together with regard to
the economic mechanisms of the development of the agroindustrial sphere. This is
of great importance not only for increasing the effectiveness of these mechanism
within each country, but also for forming an effective economic mechanism for
international cooperation in the agroindustrial sphere within the framework

of the socialist economic integration. Obviously, at such time it is necessary
to orient oneself not at some medium alternative, but upon the more effective
decisions that have been developed and that are being employed comprehensively

in the individual countries.

Substantial changes after the March 1979 Plenum of the Central Committee of the

Bulgarian Comunist Part’y occurred in the mechanism of the planned administration . .
of the agroindustrial complex of 3“18‘r1" Previously C e 9Y$teﬂ Of plannlns 1? the
NAPK [national-economic agroindustrial complex] of Bulgaria was characterized by

the fact that the central agencies developed the detailed indicators in the
plans for the districts, and the districts developed them for the agro-
industrial complex, For purposes of developing the economic initiative of the
collectives in the new economic mechanism there is an intensification of the
role played by cost-accounting levers and incentives. The APR and the other
enterprises in the agroindustrial sphere are informed of only four consolidated
indicators, including the mandatory sale of a number of basic types of output
(no more than eight types of products. depending upon the farm specialization).
All the remaining sections and indicators in the plan, including such ones as
the sewing structure, harvest yield, quantity and productivity of livestock,
production costs, profit, capital investments, and the number of employees,

are developed by the agroindustrial complexes themselves. The new economic
mechanism stipulates a sharp increase in the role played by prices and other
economic levers in planned administration. The mentioned limited number of
assignments for the APKare implemented on an economic-contract basis of inter-
relations with the appropriate purchasing and other organizations. As was noted
in the Report of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party to the
12th Party Congress, within the near future it will be necessary "to make
complete application of the basic principle and requirement of the new economic
mechanism -- the changeover of all types of economic and social activity to
cost accounting, the very core of which is the paying for oneself"*.

The measures for improving the planned administration are also being carried out
in Czechoslovakia, CDR [German Democratic Republic -- East Germany]. Romania,

 

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and other CEHA countries, and this attests to the undoubted progress in bringing
closer together the economic mechanisms of the agroindustrial complex in those

and incentives.

In conformity with the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council
of Ministers that was adopted in November 1980, entitled "Improving the Planning
and the Providing of Economic Incentives for the Production and Procurements

of Agricultural Products," steps are being carried out to eliminate the excessive
guardianship over the farms. There has been a reduction in the number of indi-
cators that are communicated to the kolkhozes and sovkhozes in a centralized
procedure. For kolkhozes, for example, they are limited to the volume of
purchases of agricultural products and the quantity of basic material-technical
means to be delivered. For sovkhozes, in addition, plans are specified for

the wage fund, profit,and financial limits of capital construction. Instead

of a large number of plans, a single plan is established for purchases of output
at all levels of planning of production, and norms lists for material-technical
support and capital construction are employed.

Since 1981 there has been a new procedure, according to which the collectives

in the subdivisions are granted the right to determine for themselves the sire
of the bonuses and the overall earnings, with a consideration of the actual
contribution that was made to the final result by the activity of the collective,
and a consideration of the level and effectiveness of production. There has
been on intensification of the sanctions applied as a result of poor work.

The farm managers and specialists will receive bonuses not for overfulfillment
of plan. but for an increase in the volumes of sale of output and profit
received. In the implementation of these principles, a factor that is of
decisive importance is, of course, the change in the forms of executing the

planned assignments on the basis of increasing the role of the economic contracts
in the process of planning.

that is of determining importance is the limitation of the directive assignments
to enterprises and associations in physical indicators, the communicating of
those assignments to the appropriate departments and regional agencies of admin-
istration, and the use in implementing them of cost-accounting methods that
grant equal economic conditions of management for the planning-and-procurement

and supply-and-sales agencies, and the enterprises of the APO [agroindustrial
associations].

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
consistent application of cost-accounting methods in planned administration, and
the directed use of the motivating basic of the entire mechanism -- interests.

At the present time, basically as a result of the lack of perfection with
regard to prices, there has been a break in the direct link between material
incentive and profitability, as a concrete expression of the repayment principle
and a generalizing indicator of the effectiveness of production. One should
note that the improvement of pricing is not a local question of reinforcing the
cost-accounting relations in the APK system, but, rather, one of the key
national-economic problems of socioeconomic development and the application of
effective cost accounting in the entire national economy. "hat is required

here is the consistent carrying out of a series of economic-planning, statewide,
centrally carried out measures involving the application of a price system

that corresponds to the objective natural laws underlying the formation of
prices. These measures touch upon such an important problem of improving the
economic mechanism as the systematizing of retail prices of foodstuffs and
articles made from agricultural raw materials.

For the European CEMA countries during the past 20-year period a typical feature
was the considerable increase in purchase prices. That contributed to the
reinforcement of the economic foundations of cost accounting in agriculture.

At the present time a task that is becoming a very important one is the creation
of a more flexible system of purchase prices, which is based on the expenditures
of live and embodied labor, and also which takes into consideration the capital
requirements of output, including in the assets the land in its monetary
evaluation. The complexities in improving the purchase prices lie in the

fact that in a number of CEHA countries the production costs are not computed

by all farms. The normative production costs are determined for random groups
of enterprises. Their more precise computation requires an increase in the
number of farms that establish the production costs of the output being produced,
and the work on the basis of cost accounting includes the necessity of computing
the production costs of the output on each farm.

The role of prices as an incentive presupposes definite deviations from the
basic price, particularly through establishment of bonus markups to be applied
to it. The principles of paying such bonuses are different in various countries.
In Hungary, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia they are computed for the planned
increase in production as compared with the previous period. For production
of output in excess of the planned volume, no increased prices or markups are
established there. In Bulgaria and Romania, and prior to 1981 in the USSR,

in addition to the basic prices for a number of agricultural products, bonus
markups were applied for the production of output in excess of plan. The
encouragement of the planned increase in production by means of prices appears
to be more effective, inasmuch as the markups for sale of output in excess of
plan do not encourage the farms to accept intensive plans and are, in essence,
a return to a double price system.

The changeover of agriculture to an industrial base is closely linked with the
intensification of the integrational processes in the branch and with the forma-
tion of interfsrm enterprises and agroindustrial associations. In this connec-
tion, during recent years there have arisen in the capitalist countries new

15
FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE4ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aspects of improving the pricing of agricultural output, which aspects are
influenced by the fact that, through prices, it is necessary to guarantee

the equal interest that the partners have in cooperative actions. primarily
income that is proportional to the contribution made by each participant per
unit of expenditures invested in the obtaining of the final results of the
economic activity. A factor that takes on great importance is the establishment
of contractual settlement prices. The degree of correctness with which the
settlement prices are established decisively determines the material self-
interestedness of the partners in the cooperative venture.

An important question when establishing the settlement contract prices is

their interrelationship with state purchase prices. Apparently, the construction
of the settlement prices exclusively on individual costs without a considerationOf
the existing purchase prices can'lead to a break between the economy of the
associations and the real reproduction process within the framework of the
national economy, and this, in the final analysis, will lead to undesirable con-
sequences. Therefore, when establishing the settlement prices, it is desirable to
orient oneself on the overall price policy, on the economically substantiated
level of state purchase prices. With the price relationships that have developed,
it is possible to include in the settlement price the purchase price, plus or

minus a markdown or rebate, proceeding from the individual costs and the nature
of the specialization of the partners in the association.

The chief area for improving pricing is the application of a well-substantiated

system of purchase and other sale prices, including the correct establishment of
prices of producer goods that are delivered to agriculture, and for the services
rendered to it. Unfortunately, the correlation between industrial and agricul-

tural prices for the output produced by the APR [agroindustriel complex] in the

CEHA countries, as a rule, is formed to the advantage of the industrial branches
and that lessens the incentive principles of the economic mechanism.

In the establishment of prices it is especially important to take into considera-
tion of the chief specific features of agricultural production -- the limited
nature of the land, with its dissimilar natural fertility, that is, social con-
ditions which objectively lead to the formation of differential rent. Therefore
planned pricing cannot orient itself on the cost of production of output on
average land (in any instance, for the USSR). With this kind of orientation an
inevitable result is the preservation of subsidies and other channels, outside
the cost-accounting system, for redistributing the net income, and that weaken
the economic role of price as an incentive for intensifying production, for

specializing it, for encouraging an increase in effectiveness, etc. At the same
time this gives rise to the differentiation of the economic and social develop-

ment of the farms that have at their disposal land of worse or better quality.

The orientation, in pricing, on the products of agriculture which are produced

on the worse land presupposes the transfer of rent to the social funds by means
of its direct extraction, by means of the differentiation of the rates for rental
payments depending upon the evaluation of the land. The income derived by the
farms and by the state will remain approximately the same, but the very mechanism
of regulating the rental relations with the use of a single price will have s
more active effect upon the increase in effectiveness.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An important role in the providing of economic incentives for agroindustrial
production in the CEHA countries is played by the credit system, which is be-
coming a more and more effective regulator of production. There has been

a fundamental change in the structure of credit: there has been a sharp increase
in the percentage of long-term investment credits and a reduction in the share

of short-term ones. The interest rates for credit are becoming more substantiated,
inasmuch as the reduced rates, which are divorced from the overall normative
coefficients of effectiveness, nullify the encouraging role of credit.

An essential role in the economic mechanism of the agroindustrial complex of
the CEHA countries is assigned to taxes, in the form of which deductions to be
paid into the state budget are made. Experience shows us that the incentive
importance of the system of taxation is greater in proportion to the extent to
which the size of the taxes is closely linked with the profitability and with

the level of profitability. This principle is being carried out most consistently
in Hungary.

In Bulgaria in the mid-1970's a single task for the APK was established depending
upon the profitability of production. In East Germany the base for computing

the tax since 1981 has been the farms' profit, rather than the gross income,
as had been the case previously.

Another typical feature in the development of the system of taxation is the
increase in the importance of the land tax. In Hungary and East Germany, for

a long time, a part of the famms' net income has been extracted and paid into
centralized state funds on the basis of the land tax. In 1980 in Czechoslovakia
the land tax collected from enterprises running farm on fertile soils was
increased by 25-30 percent, including 70-90 percent for those on fertile
ohernoaema. Factually speaking, this is a concrete form of rental payments.

A factor of particular importance in increasing the effectiveness of the
economic mechanism is the intensification of the mutual self-interestedness and
responsibility borne by all linksiin the economic and administrative structure
of the APK in the final results. In directives dealing with'the Sixth Five-Year
Plan for Hungary it was emphasized that, when carrying out the control functions.
the agencies of planning administration must bear the direct responsibility

"for their own economic resolutions and the effectiveness of their economic ac-

tivity.“ Contract relations are the legal and economic form of carrying out
this principle.

Scientific generalizations and the practical experience in the CEMA countries
indicate that the observance of the functional principles that are inherent

_in contract relations, with which the partners in the agroindustrial sphere

act as completely equal economic links operating on a self-repaying basis,
creates real prerequisites for the efficient combination of centralized planning
with the development of economic initiative, for achieving a closer tie between
the incentives and effectiveness.

During recent years, in the decisions of the Communist and workers parties in
the socialist countries, there has been an emphasizing of the need to intensify
the role played by contract relations. to reinforce contract discipline, and to
achieve a direct relationship between the providing of material incentives and

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fulfillment of the pledges with regard to economic contracts. The economic
contract is becoming an increasingly active economic instrument for forming,
making, and implementing planning decisions.

The role of direct economic-contract ties in the prevention of losses is great.
Under the conditions of the relations that have developed between the farms

and the procurement and supply-and-sales system, the producers orient themselves
only on that amount of output which can realistically be accepted and stored

in that system in storage facilities, at warehouses, etc. with the traditional
system of procurements, as a result of the lag with regard to the infrastructure
of the agroindustrial complex, there is a loss, for example, of as much as 40
percent or more of potatoes, and as much as 25 percent of vegetables and fruit.
In the All-Hungarian Vegetable and Fruit Association that was created and is
operating on a contract basis, and that uses modern equipment, almost complete
elimination of losses has been achieved.

Practical life attests to the fact that it is precisely with a developed system
of economic contracts that one achieves the best balancing of production,
overcomes departmental barriers, and provides for the application of a truly
comprehensive system of planned administration of production both on the
macroeconomic and on the microeconomic level. The experience of Hungary shows
that the resolution of these problems to a substantial degree appears possible
on the basis of converting the economic contract into the chief form of economic
interrelations between enterpri es and the organisations of the NAPK, thanks to
which, factually speaking, the directed formation and successful implementation
of the state plan are carried out.

At the present time in the European CEHA countries 80-100 percent of the commer-
cial agricultural output produced in the social sector, in the course of its
subsequent processing and sale, is recorded in economic contracts. However,

in and of itself, the share of output that is involved in the economic contracts
does not yet determine the degree of effectiveness of the use of this system.
Against the background of overall progress in the development of economic-
contract relations, the degree of use of the functions and principles that are
organically inherent in that economic category is substantially different for the
individual countries. The contracts can fulfill the economic functions of
direct influence upon increasing the final results of the development of the
NAPK, when they act as a relatively independent lever for implementing the
economic-planning decisions, rather than formally duplicating the planned
assignment. Correspondingly, the entire system of incentives and sanctions
should be constructed depending upon the fulfillment of the economic contracts.

The effectiveness of the economic mechanism depends to a substantial degree upon
the forms and methods of material incentive provided to the workers in the
production subdivisions, upon the clearly coordinated economic relations

within the enterprises of the agroindustrial associations, complexes, combines,
etc. The question that is fundamental here is the question about how the
system of incentives is consistently directed at effectiveness and quality,

and what predeterminea the strictly established evaluation criteria and indi-
cators of economic activity. when improving the economic mechanism of the agro-
industrial complex, it appears to be important to achieve a direct functional

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
relationship between the enterprises' income and the level of payment of the
labor performed by the workers, on the one hand, and the generalizing indicator
of their effectiveness -- profitability -- on the other.

with the aid of a price policy, deductions from profit, and other forms of
financial-economic regulation, one guarantees the combination of the interests of
society as a whole and the individual collectives. Simultaneously one creates
the prerequisites for intensifying the material self-interestedness of individual
workers within the economic subdivisions. However, in order to implement these
prerequisites, it is necessary to inform every worker collective, every concrete
producer, of what the incentives are. This is possible by the development,
practical introduction, and constant improvement of a system of incentives that

is based on the socialist principle of remuneration for labor on the basis of
its quantity and quality.

Payment for labor is the chief form of realizing the personal economic interests
of the producers in the system of production relations under socialism. During
the past decade the role of the basic wages as a form of material incentive in
the agriculture of the CEHA countries has grown. This is linked with the change-
over to monetary payment, with the introduction of a guaranteed minimum wage,

and with the gradual reduction in the share of the vitally needed means which

are needed for the reproduction of the manpower and which are coming from the
personal subsidiary farm. But simply through wages one does not always assure

a direct relationship between the results of labor and the effectiveness of

production, on the one hand, and the income of the immediate producers, on the
other.

As a result of the development of comprehensive mechanism. the results of labor
are increasingly determined not by individual workers, but by a collective -- a
brigade, section, etc. Under these conditions in all the countries that are
being considered, there has been an increase in the role of the system of
payment by the job plus bonus. This system, when determining the contribution
made by each individual to the overall result takes the most complete considera-
tion of the individual material interests of the producers and assures their
combination with the overall, collective interests*.

At the present time there has been an increase in the role of bonuses paid to
workers on the basis of the final results of their labor. For example, in
Czechoslovakia, in the overall volume of bonuses there has been an increase
in that share of them for which the payment is linked with the qualitative

 

*In the European CBHA countries, the job-plus-bonus system is used with the
giving of time advances. Sixty to 80 percent of the total earnings is paid
during the course of the year, and 20-k0 percent on the basis of the year's
results. Experience indicates that the excessive increasing in the share of
payment based on the year's results is undesirable, since the even payment of
the labor during the year increases the sense of confidence in the workers.
Twenty to 40 percent of the total earnings to be paid out at the end of the

year seems to be a sufficient amount for guaranteeing the material self-
interestedness in the final results of the labor.

19
FOI.0F1WCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

results of production and labor. Hhereas previously that share constituted
approximately 7 percent, at the present time it occupies 25-30 percent of
the total wage fund.

Despite the unification of the forms and methods of providing incentives to

the workers, including the farm managers and specialists, on the whole the pay-
ment of labor is not always directly linked with the results of production, with
its qualitative indicators. The forms of additional material incentive are
extremely varied, and frequently duplicate one another, but, most important,
they are insufficiently interrelated with the criterion and indicator of
effectiveness. That is why it would appear to be important to intensify the
work of guaranteeing the direct dependence of any additional incentive payment
upon the achieved indicators of effectiveness, upon the amount of profit
obtained, and the level of profitability. According to many participants in
the international conference that was held in 1981 and that was devoted to

the problem being discussed, herein lies one of the basic areas for improving
the economic mechanism in the agroindustrial sphere of the CEHA countries.

The rate of results in the comprehensive improvement of the economic mechanism,
the effective useof all the previously analyzed elements of that mechanism, and
the concrete economic instruments and levers, are largely determined by the
organizational structure in the NAPK, by the orientation on the final results of
the agroindustrial production not only of the economic levers and incentives,
but also the organizstional-adﬁgnistrative system.

Practical life has shown us that without a change in the organizational-
administrative structure of the agroindustrial complex, it is impossible to
overcome the departmental dissociation or to eliminate the disproportions

within the complex. A step forward in the elimination of these shortcomings

was the creation in Hungary, East Germany, Romania, and Czechoslovakia of single
ministries of agriculture and the processing industry. That made it possible,
in particular, to maneuver the resources more effectively on the scale of the
entire complex, and to be more time-responsive in taking into consideration

the changing economic situation. However, the experience of the activity of the
new ministries attests to the fact that it has not yet been possible to overcome
completely the interdepartmental discrepancies in the relations among the
branches and spheres of the NAPK. The question of including the branches in
sphere I in the administrative system of the agroindustrial complex has not been
resolved (or has not received a definite scientific substantiation).

At the present time in the CEHA countries there predominates the opinion con-.
cerning the need to create a coordination center for “APR on the Council of
Ministers level, which center would be granted broad powers for resolving the
basic questions of developing the complex, as well as the administrations and
departments of the agroindustrial complex in the planning agencies. That kind
of center, with the existence of the corresponding economic functions, could,
by using contract relations and cost-accounting levers and incentives,
guarantee the comprehensive development of the NAPK and carry out effective
interdepartmental monitoring of its development.

In a number of OSHA countries there have already been created organizations that
are fulfilling functions that are analogous to the tasks of this

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
coordination center. For example, a governmental commission for administering the
supply of the basic types of foodstuffs is functioning in Czechoslovakia. The
comission is headed by the deputy chairman of the Federal Government. Its
makeup includes representatives of the ministries of agriculture and the

food industry, Cosplan, the Federal Price Administration, and other departments.
In East Germany for a number of years all the questions linked with the develop-
ment of the NAPK, within the framework of the State Planning Commission, have

been under the jurisdiction of one of the deputy chairmen. That makes it

possible in a more time-responsive manner to maneuver the resources, and especial-
ly to change the structure of capital investments. At the present time there

has been an intensification of the comprehensive nature of planning and adminis-
tration of the Mark in the USSR. In 1981 an Administration of Planning of the
Agroindustrial Complex was formed in USSR Gosplan. It has four sections:

a combined section and three branch sections (agriculture, food industry,
microbiological and combined-fodder industry).

Efficient organizationaI-adminiatrative forms of the agroindustrial complex are
also developing on the Microeconomic level. In Hungary a form that has become
widespread is the use of industrial production systems (IPS) for growing
animal-husbandry crops and for the production of animal-husbandry output. Their
members are the overwhelming majority of the state farms and agricultural
production cooperatives in the country. The central link in the organizational-
administrative structure of the IPS is the so-called head farm, which might be
an advanced state farm or cooperative. The head farm is characterized by the
availability of a large amount of experience in the production of a definite
kind of output, by a high level of comprehensive mechanization, and by the
availability of highly skilled personnel. The association functions as a
completely independent economic organization. Every member of the industrial
production system concludes a contract that regulates its relationship with

the head farm and with the other partners. The general assembly, where the
delegates of all the participating enterprises are represented, and the board of
governors, which is elected by the general assembly, are the collective adminis-
trative agencies of the IPs.

In East Germany organizations that have proven their value as an efficient form
of agroindustrial integration are the associations which have been given the
name of cooperative unions. The cooperative unions include specialized agri-
cultural enterprises and organizations, as well as enterprises in the processing
industry and trade. The enterprises and organizations that are included in

a cooperative union retain their legal and economic independence. The highest
agency of the cooperative union is the assembly of authorized agents, the
makeup of which includes an identical number of representatives from all the
enterprises and institutions that are included in the associations. The assembly of
authorized agents elects the council chairman and a time-responsive administra-
tive agency -- the council of the cooperative union. Various working groups

and commissions are the consultative agency for administering the association.
Their tasks include the preparation of decisions in a particular area of develop-
ment of the association.

In the Soviet Union the regional agroindustrial associations (RAPO) are a
promising organizational-administrative form of agroindustrial integration. These

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

associations include within themselves, within the confines of the rayon,

all the kolkhozes, sovkhozes, interfarm associations, and processing enterprises
and sections of Goskomsel'khoztekhnika. The administrative agency of the
association is the council, which carries out the administration of the partners
on principles of cost accounting. The RAPO are subordinate to the rayon executive
committee and to the functional republic-level or union-level agency. The

RAPO have become most widespread in Estonian SSR. Starting in 1982, all the
rayons in the republic are changing over this kind of organizational structure
for administering the agriculture and the branches that are connected with it.
There has been an increase in the number of rayon agroindustrial associations

in Lithuania, Latvia, and Georgia. The formation of regional organizational-
administrative structures on the nicrolevel completes the transition to

production-economic integration within the national-economic agroindustrial
complex.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekononiki", 1982.

5075
C80: 1824/242 END

22
FOR‘0FFK]AI.US£(NVLY