FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10603
21 JUNE 1982

USSR Report

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT

(F000 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
scurces are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED :lEPZIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENsTNEERINs AND EQUIPMENT

(P000 4/8 2)

CONTENTS
AERGIAUTICAL AND SPACE
Rocket Waten Gas Generators ........................................ 1
NUCLEAR ENERGY
Fast Hydrogen Atom InJectors u.........................o............ '0
Use of Burning Absorbers in mm .H................................. 15

Choice of Extractors and Filters for Plants Reprocessing
Spent Riel Elements of “me Pover Stations ooesoooo-eeeesooooooss 22

Radiation Dense to Steel in Hater-Moderated, Hater—Cooled

Reactor Vessels .ooooooooooooooooeooocooooooooo-oeeeoooooooooooooao 32

Radiation Safety and Protection of Nuclear Power Plants ............. 37
NON-NUCLEAR ENERGY

Industrial Magnetohydrodynuic Equipment and Processes .............. 53
INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

Strength and Rliability or Technical Devices ....................... 55
TWINE AND ENGINE “ION

Optimal Last Stage Design of High-Power Steam mrbines . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 6’6

- a - [III - USSR - 2].? SET P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAVIGATION MD GUIDMG SYSTBB

Cornecﬁng Inertial Guidance Systeu by Using Combined
3Qb81d1lry 9°31 tional Sud Velocity Intonation o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

FLUID MBQIIAIICS

Supersonic Flow Perturbations Hith Injection of Moss and Heat coo-coo.
TBTING AND WRIAIB

Investigating Efficiency of Sliding Beuings in Helium Environment .00

Adaptive mum-ins Instruments oooooooooooooooooooooono-oo-coooooooooo

ab-

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

78
AERONAUI'I CAL A]! D SPACE

UDC 629.7.066.2

ROCKET SYSTEM GAS GENERATORS

Moscow GAZOGBNBRATORY mm 8181'!!! in Russian 1981 (signed to press
14 Apr 81) pp 2-10. 152

(Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Gas Generators for
Rocket Systems", by Al'hert Alekseysvich Shishkov. and Boris Vasil'yevich
Runyant'sev. Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye'ﬂ 1183 copies. 152 pages)

[Text] The book gives a systenatic presentation of principal designs, charac-
teristics and peculiarities of working processes in gas generators using chem-
ical fuel (liquid. solid and nixed) that are sources of power and gas jets

on flightcraft and in ground-based rocket systems. Methods of experimental
development of gas generators are briefly covered.

the book is intended for engineers and designers in the field of rocketry.
Preface

Gas generators are extensively used in rockatry. Their najor conponents are
in many ways similar to those of the nain rocket engines; however, the working
processes in gas generators have important distinguishing features that must
be taken into consideration in design and development.

In connection with the development of rocketry and expansion of areas of appli-
cation of gas generators in recent years, a nunber of patents and journal
articles have been published with results of research on gas-generator devices
[Ref. 12]. Condensed information on gas generators is given in handbooks

on the principles of rocket engine design [Ref. 2. 3]. However, as a whole.
the published naterials on gas generators are disconnected, fragmentary and
procedurally nonuniform.

In this hook the authors attempt to systenatize the designs and particulars
of working processes of gas generators using different fuels based on major
principles of the theory of rocket engines.

The book has five chapters. Chapter 1 presents the basic characteristics
of gas-generator devices and the fuel compositions used in then. giving indi-
vidual attention to netth of model, laboratory and stand tests.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2 dea1: with peculiarities 0' gas flows in gas generator. gas line
and exhaust nozzles. and methods of calculating gasdynamic characteristics

of gas generators. and also takes up problems of filtration of gas generation
products and gas-thermodynamic processes in the devices that are used.

A survey of materials on the peculiarities of devices and principles of calcu-
lation of one-component and two-component liquid gas-generators. as well as
gas generators based on fluidized powder fuel is contained in chapter 3.

Chapter 5 is devoted to designs. methods of intraballistic calculation and
different possible methods of regulating solid-fuel gas generators (particu-
larly with end-burned charges), including gas generators that can be repeatedly
energized. A solution is given for the problem of transient processes with
variation of certain parameters.

The last chapter deals with problems of development of a variety of combined
gas generators using solid (with separate components), quasi-hybrid and hybrid
fuels. vapor-gas generators, and gas generators for straight—flow rocket en-
gines and turborocket engines; engineering methods are given for calculating
the major characteristics of some gas generators.

Chapters 1. b and 5 were written by both authors jointly. chapter 2 - by
A. A. Shishkov and chapter 3 -- by B. V. Rumyantaev.

The authors are sincerely grateful to the reviewer. Doctor of Technical Sci-
ences A. P. Tishin. for constructive recommendations that have improved all
parts of the manuscript. and to Candidate of Technical Sciences H. Ye.
Yevgen'yev for useful advice in solving the problems in various sections.

He would be grateful to readers for comments and suggestions. which should
be sent to the publishers: Hashinostroyeniye, 107076. Moscow. Stromynakiy
per. 4.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: General Information on Gas Generators 5
1.1. Fields of application and principal characteristics of gas generators S
1.2. Gas-generator fuels 13
1.3. Gas-generator tests 28
Chapter 2: Gas-Thermodynamics of Gas Generators 37
2.1. Equations of the gas generator 37
2.2. Characteristics of the gas channel #2
2.3. Filtering combustion products 69
2.4. Gas-thermodynamic processes in devices fed by gas generation products 56
Chapter 3. Liquid Gas Generators 66
3.1. One-component gas generator 65
3.2. Two-component gas generator 68
3.3. Use of fluidized fuels in gas generators 75
Chapter A: Solid-Fuel Gas Generators 78
6.1. Design of solid-fuel gas generators 78
4.2. Intraballistic calculation of the gas generator 84
2

FOR(Mﬂﬁ(]Al.USIZONLY
4.3. Methods of regulating solid-fuel gas generators

5.4. Transient processes in the_solid-fue1 gas generator

Chapter 5. Combined Gas Generator Designs

5.1. Solid-fuel gas generator with separate conponents

5.2. Controllable gas generator using quasi-hybrid fuel

5.3. Gas generator using hybrid fuel

5.4. Vapor-gas generators

5.5. Gas generators for straight-flow rocket engines and turborocket
engines

References

COPYRIGR‘I‘: Izdetel'stvo 'ﬂashinostroyeniye". '1981

6610
cso: 1861/192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR ENERGY

UDC 621.039.616
PAST manners AM INJECNRS
Moscow MW? BYS‘I'RYKH ATM VODORODA ill-Russia! 1981 pp 2-11, 18, 152

[Excerpts from the book "Fest Rydrogen Atom Injectors”, by N. N. Susshko,
A. N. Vladimirov, V. V. mzneteov. v. H. Rulygin and A. A. Panasenkov'
Energoizdat. 168 pages]

[Excerpts] Annotation

Equipment for producing test hydrogen (deuterium) atoms is described for
heating plans to thermonuclear teeperetures in closed and open magnetic sys-
tems. Powerful injectors for thermonuclear research. demonstration and resc-
tor instelletions are considered. Methods of producing flows of low-energy
stone based on charge exchangn of positive ions and flows of nediun-energy
atone based on conversion of negetive ions are described. no book is in-
tended for scientific workers: and engineers working in the field of controlled
throuonuclesr fusion. accelerator technology and space technology. It my be
useful to students and greduete students of physicel engineering specialties.

contents Page

Chapter 1. Injection of Fast Atoms-A Method of Creating a

mermnuclearrlasle.................... 5

1.1. Types of thermonuclear installations with injection . . . . . 6

1.2. Requirements an injection systems.............. 8
1.3. Design principles of injection systems. . . . . . . . . . . . 9
ChapterZ. Structureotthelnjector.................. 11
2.1. Injector with production of test stats from positive ions . . 11

2.2. Production of fast atoms by conversion of negative ions . . . 15
2.3.Injectorsmpportsystens..................18
ChapterB.IonSourcns........................3O
3.1.Bseicconcepts.......................3O
3.2. attractionand formationof ionbesn ............ 34
3.3. Plasueenitterotpositiveions............... 54
3.4.Wsofionsources.....................67
3.5.Negativeionsources.....................88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 4.
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.

Ion-Atom channel of Injector

Divergence of ion been with uncompensated charge .
Ionbeantranspcrt................
Ionbeanchargeexchenge.............
Calculating transit of neutral been through injector

0118111101o.........-....co.....

S
6
7

blob
see

5?
. a

UIU‘UIU‘UlU'
e e s e

C'UIBUNP
e

Chapter 6.
6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.4.
6.5. Electric power supply system .

Bibliography

. Bean separation.

Injector Based on Direct marge Exchange of Positive Ions
Initial prerequisites
Structural diagram of injector . .
Components of ion-atom channel . .
Cryogenic vacuum syeten
Injector vacum preparation systen

. Electricpowcrsupplysyetem...

Injector Based on Negative Ions

Selection of injector parameters
Structural diagru. of injector .
Components of ion-eton channel

Pumpingsystem.........

seeseeeeesseese

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e

e

esees

Ion energy recovery
Preacceleration of negative ions . . . . . . . . . .
. Reionization losses in atonic been . . . . . . . . .

ssees

eee'ess

eeeees

seeeee

essees

aeeeee

eeeess

eeeeee

eeeeee

seeees

eeeoe

e
s
e
e

eesees

eeeses

sees

eesss

seesee

seeeee

eeeses

eseeess seee

eesees

94
94
96
103

111
114
120
124

128
128
131
133
135
137
137

142
142
144
148
158
159

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER].

INJECTION OP FAST RIDES, mnoo OP CREATING Wk PM

method was born during the early 1960s when the Phoenix [1]. Ogre-2 [2] and
2x [3)--open traps designed to store a plasma formed upon ionization of fast
atoms entering an installation-appeared. The initial captures made by the
Lorentz ionization and an exponential increase of density than occurred due
to ionization upon collisions of the been of atone with particles of the
formed plasma. .

The injectors of that time were comparatively low-power: their rapid develop-
sent was largely stieulated by interest in additional heating of plan in
tokanake. Installations of this type, developed at IA! [Institute of Atomic
Energy) ineni I. v. mrchatoy and that deInonstrated good capabilities in pro-
ducing a dense hot plasma, spread rapidly throughout the laboratories of the
world. The corresponding intensive research led to conclusions on the inade-
quacy of Joule heating, ordinary for tokanaks, and the need for additional
input of energy, for example, by high-frequency heating or injection of power-
ful beams of fast hydrogen atoms. The results of efforts to develop injectors
meeting the needs advanced by tokamaks are presented in Figure 1.1. which il-

lustrates the sharp increase of flows of atone injected into installations
throughout the decade from 1969 through 1979.

These results were reflected in please parameters achieved in tokanaks with
injectors-u record value of 8 (ratio of plasma pressure to magnetic f1 eld
pressure) in the 1-11 [4] and an absolute ion temperature record in the PM
[5) . The Iain thing is that the classical mechanism of energy transfer from
a been trapped in a tokens): to a plane is confirmed and it is shown that its
temperature increases in proportion to the output of the injected beam no
additional losses related to the presence of a group of fast ions occur.

The appearance of powerful injection systeee again aroused flagging interest
in open traps with injection since the hopeful results obtained in the ans
[6] permit one to talk about a new quality of an old combination.

'rhus, experinents of the last few years confirmed the practical importance of

the injection method to solve the problem of controlled thermonuclear fusion;

injectors of fast atoms will apparently be one of the main parts of the demon-
stration thermonuclear reactor of the near future.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms: "701: 19751" I 1%

Figure 1.1. Growth of Flows of Atous Injected Into Installations

1. Equivalent anperes 3. Ogra
2. kev

1.1. Types of. 'l‘heruonuclear Installations With Injection

As already noted above, fast atoms are injected into both open and closed mag-
netic systems. It is assuned that both methods may lead to the gosh-develop-
ment or a thermonuclear reactor, initially a desonstration reactor and then a

counercial reactor that is economically advantageous and capable of competing

with other energy sources. 'nokenaks are presently the most advanced represen-
tatives of closed systole toward this goal.

According to modern concepts, at least one of three varieties of a thermonu-
clear reactor based on a tokens): with injection can be achieved: 1) a reac-
tor with ignition, 2) a reactor with constant heating and 3) a two-componmt
reactor.

The first version is the most preferable. In this case the injectors should
be switched on only during the initial operating cycle. By using then, the
plasma temperature is brought up to the required teuperature for "ignition"
of an intensive thermonuclear reaction, after which the injectors are switched
off, while "conbustion" is self-sustained due to the energy or u-particles
formed as a result of the reaction itself. It is clear that the o-particles
must not leave the system without having released their energy to the plasma
and that the rate of energy loss from the plasma to the reactor wall not ex-
ceed sons saxinun value to realize this attractive possibility.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If heat transfer is so high that the reaction is not self-sustaining. the
reactor will be able to operate only provided there is continuous makeup of
the departing energy due to continuous injection of high-energy particles in-
to the plasma, i.e., we have a system with continuous heating in this case.

It should be noted that practical realization of a thermonuclear reactor can
be an intermediate version of these two varieties: a powerful heating injec-
tion system at the beginning of the operating cycle brings the reactor "almost
to ignition,” after which the required energy balance is maintained by a com-
paratively weak control injector. This scheme is convenient fro: the view-
point of monitoring the operating mode. since it permits control of reactor
"criticality' by changing the output of the injected flow.

Finally, the third possible variety-«m two-component toksmak reactor [7lo-is
a system in which energy is produced in reactions occurring upon collisions of
high-energy injected particle: with particles of a comparatively cold plasma
that serves as the target baubarded by a beam impinging on it rather than in
a thermonuclear reaction. i.e.. not in the combination of nuclear reactions

in a plasma heated to a high temperature. A two-component tokamak. being a
powerful neutron generator, can be used specifically not only in the form of
a purely plasma-beam system but also as a hybrid reactor in whose jacket ad-
ditional energy is produced as a result of neutron irradiation of fissionable
materials with simultaneous breeding of a nuclear fuelnplutonium.

If we can talk about a plasma heating method alternative to injection in toke-
maks--introduction of a flow of high-frequency electromagnetic radiation. then
the practically interesting idea of using an open trap without injectors
apparently does not exist at the given moment. Moreover. as already noted,

it is the modern level of developments in the field of injection systns that
made possible the appearance of such very promising proposals as systems with
reversal of the magnetic field and ambipolar traps.

The idea of reversing the magnetic field inside an open trap has existed since
the time of the sstron [8] in which it was suggested that this reversal be ac-
complished by creating a conducting layer of fast electrons injected into the
trap. Realization of this old idea on a new base-~due to the dimagnetiem of
a plasma created in a trap with a powerful injector-mow appears quite real-
istic. The results of experiments on the 2x118 [6] indicate that total repul-
sion of the magnetic field from the center of a plasma has now been fully
achieved in this installation. If a magnetic field reversed to the external
field can be produced in the center of the plasma, then a qualitatively new
field configuration is achieved--the magnetic system is cloaed due to the di-
magnetic current in the plasma itself (Figure 1.2).

An ambipolar trap was suggested comparatively recently at Novosibirsk by G. l.
Dimov at al [9] and independently by Fowler and Logan and is being actively
analyzed in both our country and abroad. It consists of three parts--two
small traps into which are injected high-energy particles (1 MeV) are joined
to an ordinary open trap, while medium-energy particles (10 keV) are injected
into the main trap. By corresponding selection of the injection currents, one
can achieve a plasma density in the outer traps nk higher than in the central

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1.2. Reversal of Hagnetic Field in a Reflected Trap and
Formation of a Closed Configuration

trap no (Figure 1.3) and in this case the asbipolar electric field for-as a
potential barrier in the axial direction to ions located in the central trap.

Figure 1.3. Distribution of Hagnetic Field, Potential and Density
of Plasna Along Axis of habipolar 'rrap

1.2. Requirements on Injection Systems

The requirenents placed on an injection syst- during design are determined by
the type, designation and scales of the installation. Let us enmerate the
main characteristics primarily stipulated by these requirements: 1) the out-
put of the flow of atone injected into the installation, 2) the total injected
flow of atoms, 3) the energy of the bean particles. 4) the injection pulse
length, 5) the geometric characteristics of the been of atone. 6) the accou-
panying flow of cold gas, 7) the energy efficiency of the injection system and
8) the operating reliability and service life of the system (including its ef-
ficiency under conditions of neutron and game-radiation).

It seems at first glance that one could limit oneself only to two of the first
three bean characteristics. However, depending on the type of installation
for which the injector is being designed, pair cashinations different for them
emerge to the forefront. Thus, the specific paraseter in a heated tokueak
(with ignition or with constant heating) is the output of the bean injected
into the installation. The particle energy must then be selected so as to
provide the particles with sufficiently deep penetration into the plasua and
capture more or less uniform through the pinch cross~eection. It is natural
that in this case the total injected flow of stone is a deviation. If the in-
jector is designed for a two-component tolsmak, then one must first select an

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy so as to adzieve the maxim- yield of nuclear reactions with estab-
lished energy distribution of trapped fast particles. 'me design intensity
of the reaction with selected injection energy permits one to deternine the
total injected current. Thus, been intensity is now a derivative.

The remaining parameters can remain undnanged with formlation of the initial
requirenents on the injector.

Table 1.1. Parameters of Injection Systems of Some Existing Installations and
Those Under Construction

 

g7
' .
<

5+;

do

60

60

70

35

Key:

1. Installation 6. Number of sources in injector
2. Injectim power Po, m 7. In: current frat source 1*, A
3. hem of atoms 80, kev 8. Pulse length, s
4. Number of injectors 9. length of injector channel.
5. Injector power, an meters

10. Dimensions of inlet aperture, cm

Injection systess capable of injecting flows of hydrogen or deuteriun atoms
with power of 10-20 M! with particle energy of 40-120 keV and injection pulse
length up to several seconds are required for research installations of the
next few years. Some parameters of these systems in installations already
operating and those being designed are presented in Table 1.1 [10]. The de-
vices of the next generation, which will actually be denonstraticn reactors,
will be desigted for outputs of injected fluxes on the order of hundrea of
megawatts. me efficiency of the injection system will be of determining
significance for these installations.

1.3. Design Principles of Injection system

The physical prinicple of producing energetic beans of atoms, med in modern
injectors, includes acceleration of ions with subsequent conversion of then to
atom. This principle can be realised by two schemes--through positive or
negative ims. Specific selection of one or mother scheme is detenined by
the desire to produce the naximm energy efficiency of the injector. The fact
is that it is easier to generate positive hydrogen ions than negative ions,
but the charge exdxange cross section of positive ions on the target, which

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
determines the coefficient of converting than to atone. decreases etrongly
with an increase of energy (Figure 1.4). At the one tile. the "stripping”
cross-section of negative ions that converts then to ata- ie weak1y dependent
a: energy up to very large valuee (figure 1.5). therefore. it is much more
advantageoue'vith respect to energy to use poeitive ione to produce ampera-
tive1y low-energy ﬂux" of atone and negative ion: if high-energy atonic
fluxes are required. The dependence of the energy efficiency of injectors

designed according to the two schemes diecuued above are presented in tigure
1.6.

6'".
“a

   

Figure 1.4. Dependence of Reemanoe (marge Exchange Que-Section
of tact Hydrogen Iona to Atom on Energy

._.._. I

----z

eeeeee J

 

Figure 1.5. Dependence of uStripping" Crane-Section of PaetoNegetive

Hydrogen Ions on Hydrogen, Nitrogen and Oxygen Holeculee:
1--queei-c1asaioa1 approxination; II--Born approxim-

tion; 1-3--experiaenta1 deta tra [11]

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’Dechnical enbodissnt of one or another physical ache-e is always related both
to fundamental limits imposed by the laws or nature “a to real techno-
logical capabilities. For sample, the restrictions of the typical dimen-
sions of the iaI-optical system (105) of the ion source-~the nest iaportant
component of the injector-are directly related to the madam achievable pre-
cision of manufacturing its parts on natal-cutting lathes, to the nedtanical
strength of the material and to the capabilities of heat dissipation. 'mus.
the sire of the accelerating gap is determined by its high-voltage strength,
which is very strongly dependent on the quality of nadlining the electrode
surfaces. ‘mese restrictions in turn limit the ion current density from the
source at which the bean can be for-ed by the ion-optical systes in a satis-
factory manner. An ion-emission surface lust be developed, the nuaber and
dimensions of the input apertures in the installations laust be increased and
so on to practice large fluxes of fast atoss.

 

0 m m m no um I.
ksV

Figure 1.6. Dependence of Injector Efficiency m Energy to for
Deuterium: l--injector based on direct diarge ex-
daange of positive ims; 2--the sane injector with
recovery (85 percent) of ion energy; 3—injector
using negative ions with double charge exchange on
a soditla target

Key x
l. efficiency 2 . kev

Analysis of similar relationships and also the requirements of operating reli-
ability and operating convenience lead to fornuletion of the following struc-
tural principle of designing injection systole! for thermonuclear installa-
tions: the injection system should consist of several injection zones, each
of Vhldl conbines several injectors having self-contained vacuu: systeu:
several ion sources with self-cmtained electric power apply circuits and

a working gas supply are installed in each injector. This situation is actu-
ally the nodular principle that pernits independent optimization of the parall-
eters of separate conpments and that increases the operating reliability of
the entire system as a whole, since a failed or worn-out component can be re-
paired or replaced without interrupting the functioning of all the remaining

canponents.

The sodiu- dtarge exchange target (figure 6.7) consists of a steam generator
1 with supersonic nozzle.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2.8.

Bxpczinenul m Injector: 1~pu1t1vo ion sure” 2-
insulator: 3-400 hon: duvacuul aha-bar; 5-wvacuation
pip. with slid. vulva; annual mm: of sodium target:
7-1:.“ generator; Susanna-11c jot of sodiu- vapors:
9--ocndonur; lo-otnmlator; Illa-preacedetatlm system
undiagnontic detector; Iii—vacuum PW: lk-plattom

under grand potential; u—platfon undo: pounttal of
100 xv; Manama and: valves

13

FOR OMGAL L88 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigun 6.7. Design of Continuous Gun}. Emma Target: lwsuu
generator; Z-aopnntor; aquacu- £or been tnvel:
Quintet-edict. condenser; 5--condenut; 6--oloctro-

aquatic m
commas-r: morgoizdat, 1981

6521
C80: 1861/188

11»

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621 .039. 516. 22

USE OF BURNING ABSORBERS III RBI!

Moscow MOMMA “3361‘“ in Russian Vol 51, No 5, Nov 81
(manuscript received 13 Feb 81) pp 3010-30?

[Article by v. K. Vikulov, s. A. Dorshakov, v. I. Ilyukhin and In. I. Mityayev]

[Text] The intensive development of nuclear power is making even small improve-
ments in power reactor characteristics signiﬁcant. One such improvement in the
RBMt [1] fuel cycle is enhancing uranium enrichment. This enables a significant
increase in its burnup, which in turn noticeably lowers the need for natural
uranium and reduces the fuel component of electric power production cost. How-
ever, it is not always possible to enhance uranium enrichent. In the contin-
uous fuel recharging mode, and when bringing the reactor to this mode, the

fuel channels of the core have a different power output (burnup), from zero
(fresh) to that of the spent ones. Therefore, the content of fissile isotopes
in these channels is unequal, causing an additional power variation factor due
to overload [2]. Enhancing the enrichment raises the overload factor, which
can lead to unevenness of power distribution that is unacceptable in terms of
the cooling conditions. Such a constraint is especially significant for
reactors with high specific fuel power, such as the ERIK-1500 and the RBMCP.
One possible method of Overcoming such a limitation is to use a self-shielded
burning absorber inserted as an absorbing rod in the fresh fuel assembly during
loading into the reactor. Implementing this method is aided by the fact that
the design of individual RB!“ fuel assemblies provides a central hole 6.5 mm [3]
in diameter.

Usually, burning absorbers [lo-7]are used to lower the reactivity, compensated
by mobile control elements, where its burnup reserve is large. In such a case,
the reactor operates in the continuous recharging mode, and the compensating
capacity of the regulation elements is known to be sufficient. The capacity
for local balancing of the power distribution is limited, however, since each
of them affects a rather large region of the neutron field that includes both
the freshly loaded and burned up fuel channels, and the effect of the control
eleaents on fuel channel power is insufficiently differentiated. Burning
absorbers are thus used in this case only for local balancing of the power
distribution.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors were faced with two tasks: to determine the density of the absorbing
material'and diameter of the absorbing rods inserted in the center of the fuel
assembly which will provide maximum reduction in the power of the loaded fuel
channels with the least total neutron absorption in the absorber during the
time of operation; and, given the existing power engineering constraints on

the maximum fuel channel power, to find those conditions of channel utiliza-
tion allowing enhancement of enrichment and burnup of uranium, resulting in
improved economic indices of the fuel cycle.

The theoretical approach to solving the first problem, that of choosing the
optimal burning absorber with the best coordination of its burnup with that
of the fuel, is the same as that given in works [6 ,7]; however, the method of
solution is different. It is based on using the V03 [2] computer program,
enabling calculation of the spatial distribution of the thermal neutrons of
the fuel channel cell in a P3 approximation with part of the calculation grid
in the region of the absorbing rods (such that the distance between the calcu-
lation nodes is much less than the neutron path length). It thus becomes
possible to directly calculate the "burning" [7] of the rods using a small
time step, with simultaneous burnup of the uranium, and correspondingly allow
for the change in the neutron-physical characteristics of the fuel channel
cells with the run“.

The solution of the second problem, requiring a heterogenous design of the
reactor, used a two-dimensional diffusion grid HODIIIBR program [8], whose
two-group cell macrosections are calculated in the first part.

The experiments showed that when absorbing rods 5.6 III in diameter are
inserted in the central fuel assembly hole, the power of the fresh fuel
channels declines by 10-15}. In both experiments and calculations the
absorber was gadolinium oxide GD203, having two strongly absorbing isotopes
15501 and 157M. If an identical uranium and absorber burnup rate is
assumed, then the reactivity and power of the fresh fuel channels and the
absorbing rods will remain consistent until the absorber burns up. The power
distribution variation factor in the reactor will thus drop by the same
10-15%. In practice, it is impossible to maintain an identical uranim and
absorber burnup rate during the entire burning time of the absorbing rods.
However, it follows from the results of work [7] and this research, that the
discrepancy in the burnup rates can be reduced to a minimum given a certain
gadolinium concentration. This is confined by graphs of Fig. 1, illustrating
the varying effect of the self-shielded burning absorbers on the RBMK fuel
channel reactivity in the process of simultaneous burning of uranium and
gadolium. Uranium enrichment in the fuel channels is 2.6%. Given a low

 

' The authors first used such a calculation method in 1966, in designing the
first loading of the reactor of the second stage of the MES power plant.
Bxperinents during the physical start-up confirmed the basic calculation
results.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

absorber concentration, the burnup of the rods is faster than that of the ura-
nium, and a fast growth in reactivity, and thus power (curve 2), is observed.
0n the other hand, given a high concentration of gadolinium, the rods burn too
slowly (curve lo), and although the maximum fuel channel power In“ declines (it
is defined by the initial point), the reactivity loss is too great, which
unJustifiably reduces the uranium burnup. There is obviously an absorber con-
centration at which the reactivity loss will be minimal (curve 3) given the same
action on In“. calculations show that for ma fuel channels the optimum
absorber concentration corresponds to a Gd203 density of 0.h-0.5 8/0113, and is
almost independent of the rod diameter if it changes in the range of 3-12 m.
The initial influence of the rods on the fuel channel reactivity and power is
basically determined by their diameter, and increases with it.

Under conditions of continuous recharging of the fuel channels and burning ab-
sorbers, the dianeter of the rods with an optimal absorber concentration unam-
biguously determines such mutually connected characteristics as lmax’ rod burnup
time to and uranium burnup time P. The greater the diameter, the lower Km and
P and the greater to. Spatial calculations of the reactor have been performed
to establish the relation between such characteristics. Fig. 2 gives curves for
determining the possibility of lowering "max and the relative underburning of
uranium when using rods of different diameter in fuel channels with 2.65 enrich-
ment. The calculations were perforned according to an iteration scheme worked
out by the authors. Assuming a continuous rechargim mode, it allows for
underburning of the spent uranium given the use of absorbing rods. The power of
the fuel channels containing the rods is asstned equal to “max: and does not
change until their complete burnup. This enables detemination of the fuel
channel run, to, and thus the proportion of the fuel channels containing the
absorbing rods; i.e. , formulation of the reactor composite lattice whose calcu-
lation is used to find Rm.

The calculations done with allowance for the different diameter of the rods and
the enrichment of the recharged uranitn showed the possibility of a maximum
increase in its enrichment, given a predetermined constraint on the maximum fuel
channel power depending on the diameter. It is more convenient to use the
power distribution variation factor KB or overload factor Kov than In“ as the
constraint. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that despite a certain loss of uranium
burnup due to the additional neutron absorption resulting from the use of rods,
its enrichment and burnup increase noticeably. Naturally, less uranium burns
up in this case than in the absence of the constraint (curves 1, 2).

These results describe only the technical aspect of enhancing uranium enrich-
ment and burnup, and are still insufficient for a clear conclusion on the
economic advisability of using absorbing rods. mta are needed on the eco-
nomic and natural indices of the fuel cycle. To provide then, the calcula-
tions of the relative change in fuel components of electric power production
cost and adJusted costs for producing electric power, and the uranium fuel

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rate required for annual make-up of the reactor, have been done as a function
of the rod diameter. The calculation results show (Pig. 1s) that in the 83K-
1500 and RBKP it is advisable to use absorbing rods up to 10 III in diameter.
The greatest technical and economic effect is achieved using rods h—6 II in
diameter, which is very important from the practical standpoint, since it
enables their installation into currently manufactured fuel assemblies without
any design modifications. The effect is greater the more rigid the constraint

on power distribution variation. For emple, at Kov - 1. 27, the fuel compo-
nents of power production cost and adJusted costs for electric power production

can be reduced by 7-8 and around 2%, respectively; 2-2. 55 less natural uranium
is consumed.

Finally, it is interesting to point out certain results of a calculated study
of the effect of absorbing rods on the space-energy distribution of thermal
neutrons in the fuel channel cell. This effect, studied using the man [9]
program, turns out to be negligible (cf. table), which makes it possible to
simplify the rod burnup calculations and preparation of the two group constants.
In particular, it turns out to be possible to use the single-rate VOR program,
to whose sections are added the necessary thermalization corrections. Deforma-
tion of the neutron distribution due to the use of rods can cause a relative
increase in the power of the fuel elements of the outer row of the m1 assem-
bly; however at a 5-6 mm diameter it does not exceed 23.

The results given are also valid for the use of other self-shielded thermal
neutron absorbers, for example those containing 1130d or H931.

 
 

. _--__—-—

I, 1—,.me P, mt. day/kg

Pig. 1. Dependence of the neutron breeding factor on an infinite lattice in
an mam fuel channel K. on uranium burnup p at a Gd203 density of o (1),
0.2 (2), 0.16 (3) and 1 g/cm3 (lo).

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
az;cu,m

Fig. 2. Effect of the absorbing rod diameter on uranium mnnp (l) and
power d; *ribution variation factor (2').

 

Fig. 3. Dependence of spent uranium burnnp on its enrich-sent x in the absence
(1) and presence (2) of a constraint on Inax' ensured by the corresponding
dialeter of the absorbing rods (3). Kov I 1.2? and 1.3. respectively

 

Pig. )0. Effect of the absorbing rod diameter on the relative change in fuel
cycle indices: a - natural uranium consumption 6; b - fuel couponent of electric
power production cost or (1) and adJusted costs LI (2). KW - 1.27 and 1.3,
respectively

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE

Distribution of thermal neutron fluxes 1"" (relative units) and neutron gas

temperature Tms (K) in a fuel channel cell as a function of absorbing rod

diameter (density of 0.1203 0.15 3/m3).

    
  
  
 
  

     
     
   

Tues 00
I

b.l!ola c 110- Knnnna 6. run."
1P l Tl-l' 0 Tim I T. I'

"-f

 

 

 

0.508 658
u m m metal 102 |o.&16 an luml M7

‘ :-’—'—"""'° :36 0.652 101 0.600 m In»:

   
 
   

'I

Weasel 788 l0.799| 813 ILMZI 859

m wlowml |O.700| 8M ll.0’d M9

 

 

I.
a. Fuel elenents b. Water ' c. Channel pipe (1. Graphite

' The average values by volume of the indicated elements are given for
fluxes normalized to the average value by cell volume.

" The data in the numerator are for the 12 outer fuel elenents; those in
the denominator, for the 6 inner fuel elements.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REFERENCES
Yemel'yanov, 1. Ya. et a1., ATOMNAYA ENERGIYA, Vol 46. No 3. 1979, p 139.

Dollezhal', N. A.. Yemel'yanov. I. Ya., "Kanal'nyy yadernyy energeticheskiy
reaktor" [Channel Power Reactor], Moscow, Atomizdat. 1980.

Bulkin. Yu. H. et a1.. in: "Opyt ekspluatetsii i puti dal'neyshego
razvitiya stamnny energetiki" [Operational Experience and Paths of Future
Development in Nuclear Power]. Obninsk, izd. FBI. 1974, Vol 2, p 28.

Radkovskiy. A.. in: "Trudy vtoroy Zhenevskoy konferentsii. Izbrannyye

doklady inostranykh uchenykh" [Transactions of Second Geneva Conference.
Selected Papers of Foreign Scientists]. Vol 3, Moscow, Atomizdat, 1959.

p 717.

Volkov, V. S. et 31.. AIDMNAYA ENERGIYA, Vol 11. No 2, 1961, p 109.

Toshinskiy. G. 1.. Kalashnikov, A. 6., in: "Teoriys i netody rascheta
yadernykh reaktorov" [Theory and Methods of Calculating Nuclear Reactors],
Moscow, Gosatomizdat. 1962. p 118.

Orlov, V. V. et al., "Tret'ya Zhenevskaya konferentsiya. 1966. doklady
SSSR" [Third Geneva Conference. 1964, Soviet Papers], No 354.

Gorodkov. S. 8.. "Instructions on Using the HODIHER Program for Hetero-

geneous Reactor Design", Institute of Atomic Energy Preprint No 2578,
Moscow. 1975.

vikulov, V. K. et al.. "Voprosy etomnoy nauki i tekhniki. Seriya Yadernaya
Eizika nizkikh i srednikh energiy. reaktornaya fizika" [Problems of Nuclear
Science and Engineering. Series on Nuclear Physics at Low and Intermediate
Energies, Reactor Physics], No S, 1977. p 57.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Atomnaya energiya", 1981

9875

C50:

8164/1002

21

FOR 0FFHJAI.USE1MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.039.59

01016 01" BHWORS AID FILTERS FOR PLANTS BPROGSSIIIG SPENT PUBL
ELEMENTS OF ”OHIO POWER STHIOIS

Moscow NEOICMYA ENERGIYA in Russian Vol 51, No 5, lov 81
(manuscript received 8 Dec 80) pp 317-320

[Article by A. M. ﬂudel', A. P. Roshchin and v. v. Dolgorv]

[Text] The chemical conditions of processing spent nuclear power plant
effluents have specific equipment requirements, such as nuclear safety, remote
control servicing and maintenance, possibility of decontamination, air-
tightness, a minimum of radioactive wastes, etc. This complicates the design
of the equipment and increases its cost and operational expenditures. Con-
sequently, equipment design significantly influences the effectiveness of the
radio-chemical plants being examined here. In principle, the optimal construc-
tion or type of equipment for given conditions may be selected on the basis of
technical and economic calculations. However, the necessity to take into con-
sideration complex and contradictory requirements, and the absence of reliable

mathematical models of the process makes it necessary to introduce varying and
often subjective hypotheses that lower the reliability of such calculations.
Even with adequate intonation on the process as a whole, the reliability of
the comparative evaluation of equipment may be improved through application of
empirical methodology. For example, a system of criteria for selecting
extractors was suggested [1, 2]: value intervals for each criterion selected
in advance are evaluated by a specific number of points and the sum of points
received by each compared piece of equipent determines its advantages.

The basic inadequacy of present methodologies is that their authors attempt to
derive an absolute evaluation of equipment that does not depend on what it is
being compared with; consequently, after a single comparison, the criteria
tables themselves become unnecessary since the evaluation remains unchanged.

In addition, it is impossible to suggest a system that would permit an intui-
tive determination of the selected interval values of the criteria and the num-

ber of points they were assigned. One more substantial inadequacy is that it
is impossible to determine the expediency of utilizing different types of
equipment in a single technological chain. For example, the ability of an

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
extractor to handle unclarified solutions is evaluated by the highest mark 5,
while inability to do so receives no mark at all [2]. However an arrangement
including a filter and high-efficiency extractor may turn out to be more
advantageous than a less effective extractor without solution clarification.
It's also impossible to compare versions in which different types of equipment
are used in the extraction and reextraction stage.

The following principles serve as the basis of the suggested methodology:
equipment for a specific technological process is compared; the comparison of
equipent assures that required technological parameters will be met and their
operational characteristics learned and verified. Also taken into considera-
tion is its connection to related equipment in the technological chain. The
final evaluation of the equipment is not absolute but its superiority or
inferiority is determined only in relation to other equipment being compared.
The methodology has been developed to compare extractors and filters--the basic
tools utilized in modern radio-chemical reprocessing of atomic power plant fuel
elements. other equipment may be compared similarly.

Basic criteria influencing effectiveness (Tables 1, 2) were selected in advance.
Selection was based on known and generally accepted evaluations recommended

for technical/economic calculations. Each canpared piece of equipment is char-
acterized by an absolute value on the basis of any criterion but its link with
related equipment in the technological chain is characterized by criteria that
take into consideration the value of auxilliary equipment for transmitting the
effluents and operating expenditures. Criteria are ranged by their value and
rated by coefficient r. Evaluation of the equipment's water phase B according
to any criterion is determined by taking into consideration absolute values of
the latter with regard to the instruments being compared

N,. '
”pl "" "N‘T— "I:

max

where "P - is the value of the criterion for the instrument being examined;

N1 - is the highest criterion among the instruments being cmpared; p - the
ngmber of instrument being examined; 1 - is the ordinal criterion number.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1'01: 1

Filter Evaluation Criteria

Kuuulmn

Critcri

Cmnuun women. «Ivumapommm °

‘lucno rhmmpon. vuoﬁxommoc Mn
oﬁmnc‘cuuu uonpu-pmlma p.160?"
MMlclllul rlmnmlmualmu c mm:-
um‘I muouawmutumocnn

06M)! cﬁvocuux manpo- u nyau-
nu nponumro ornnxa. unname-
mu m mpemﬁomy mxnnou"

llonrpxnmu. quunmpynunﬂ nanom-
pomxu. "Myra-lei! mueuu. a par,
«to m 3 me. 'I [Inﬂow Mantra

06mm amomruumux pact»-
n .0.

061m: cﬁronmx pncrnopol n "yah-
nu ommta. minimums: an nope-
]naﬁorxy llﬂlotl noxamm-mcii "

ram-m- utram nu alnuynmmlm
muomom u unonontmmmw
oGopynouanu-u

Crouuocu. thump: (ryunuplum
crounncu. clmnnpon mug-0mm)

Burma upuum-onctmmux mmnmr-
um‘t

llaomnm. naummouux muons-oun-
ucmmx nnumummn

Ctmmucn. ncmmontcnuom 060px-
:mnamm (namru mm nun-mum:
[nunmumn u cytucnumi‘l Imyﬂm
oraclmmn)

:lnlmtu Ila llonromluly mermpnn
x Qumnpunamm (-hanuyamnu.
umonoratcmaluc {mawpynmmo
muwm1)"'

Knauucnv- nanny“. cﬁlmumcuom
Ila omen-mm lln (I'mcﬂty

Cwlmocn. curmnu KHIIIIA

Cmnnm-u. cmmum’: ammwrypu.
uooﬁxunmmin :vm uolmnamuii p.1-
ﬁom «Maul-on

cmmmcn. nmneﬁucpcm u npucuo-
coﬁanu-ﬂ mm nucmmmmnmﬁ m-
ucnu :Imlvcmuux yam-n n ,‘ll'illlcl-l

0 "gm |IM'I"I‘ munchrm-Iml "mum! ulnnm-Im "alum.-
ax-uc- m-uummu. «ﬁn-avian em aﬁcmmnnh)‘ :IIu'IrIIu-r. 0- n:
l w' tum-«luau: “D u- I y llcnumml eye-imam.

 

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key to Table l

l.

2.

3.

9.
10.

ll.

12.

13.
lb.
15.

16.

Average filtration rate.

number of filters necessary to assure filtration department's continuous
handling of assigned production

Volume of effluent solutions and washed sediment pulp provided to vaste
processing"

Filtering partition surface requiring replacement calculated for eight
thousand hours of Operation per filter

II.
Volume of auxilliary solutions

Volume of effluent solutions and pulp sediment provided to reprocessing
us
prior to localization

Annual expenditures for operational and auxilliary equipment
Filter cost (total cost of filters for department)

Height of production premises

Total area used by production premises

Cost of auxilliary equipent (pumps to transfer solutions and suspensions
inside the departnent)

Expenditures for preparation of filtration solutions (flocculants,
auxilliary filtering substances)”.

kaount of air discharged for cleaning by department
Cost of the control and measurement instrumentation and automation system.
Cost of storage equipment necessary for normal filter operation

Cost of containers and equipment for remote substitution of defective
units and parts

 

II

when calculating the relative evaluation of the criterion, a value inverse
to its absolute value is utilized

Per 1 m3 of filtrate

"’For 1 m of initial suspension

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNv-o

t

10
11

12

13

16

15

16

19

20

21

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tale 2

Extractor Evaluation (hitcriu

ltpmq-Il

l‘ocypc mam: auuapnta no mun-
uxmluro [low-ma °

llpusm uprGumuuu «Inna u auuuputo

Mcxauuqocmui yuoc opuuumoﬂ
dam upu uoummmumi upomno-
nnmmocm

‘Iucno munpamn. uonéxonuuux nu
:uuwuuui upnuuomumsuoctu

Illnmoumlmusllwn. p.601“ anu-
pam no amumm npu myopia!-
uo pawn-pout, coucpmmuux nop-
nyn WY °

Mummnuuo nouynumn pannogn‘
ummu-cm ulna '

133mm «axon: auunpzrm un crumm-
nammﬁ mum» noun mmuolml
um 12 u u 605cc -

‘lucan tellyluux u unuouo-upou-
nmutuwux Pcuouml nunm
(.muuparou) I mum: Ill 8 me. u
Mun!

Axum-unmet» lu-uuma mum-MI a
cxy-Iac aulmiuarn uuxom no
cvpuu om mun-lulu yuan

Kola-comm nprzmu'u-cnoﬁ than u
mum'sno (aIIuaIunu)

“cull-mum «wan-r0 may“. tum-ry-
ummom no mummy upu pawn
aununn (nnuapaton)

Muuuuammo mlymuum- mumuouuo
ummnm opmuu-ooclm'i u "much

Mnunuuuuuu aunyctuuoo otuomou
ummmn nonuol'i u npnumecuoﬁ
4m)

Zln‘fpl‘l'u (rum-nu) nu :mmnyutmum
ocumumx u Icucmnrnicnunux
aunnpamn. “"1ch anmmmuot-
Rnrn yupu-ucmm II pan‘aulmlmmm

M uuuuuamm Imnﬁx-mmmn mun-alum-
cur-man Iumuum. mm I-azmcmo-
mm anunpam (Mullammn)

Mummunmmu manna umumumct-
mmux numuu-uuii nan nanome-
mm mmupu‘m (ﬂung-axon}.

C‘rmmocn. auunpnm (anumynmn

C‘HIIIMIN‘JL IIEI‘UMI'HI'II'IIJIDI'O I [ly-
Aoumlml. uoumnupyuuem c pa-
mmamuunuuu rammpauu (It’ll-o
cut-mu. uncocu u 1. u.)

Cmnm-cu. cum-nu ulmmu'm'lcmmnn .

ryuupnnauuu u yumuolmu pn-
oma mumpnra (mm-pump)
Cwuuut‘n. Konrrﬁuupon u npyrux
IlpllCllIDUIGm-Illli mm nucvuumum-
mm) mu'raum n noununwn mum-
para. no yuon u unouornms-
norn Momma-mum
Pncxon :mcmmmcpruu upu mam
uuunpnta (auunpwu)

 

| ~
5.70
0.“!
0.12
1.79
8.2!
8.“

9J8

mu-

10.26
“.37

".38
“.98

12.23

13.46

l3.“
14.3.1
15,”

“3,03

“hm

 

2.49
2J0

2.65
3.37
3.55
3.65

3.97

4.!

is

L“
4.92

4.93

5.10

5‘
S

1.2I

° "ll“ I‘ld'lﬂc omecunm-unn autumn anpml lean».-
3101a- H‘lll'llllll. «(up-mu em aﬁcwnuuy alumna).
.

26

POIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Table 2

1.
2o

3.

l6.

5.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

1h.

15.

16.

17.

Operative life of equipment prior to overhaul

Time that phases remain in equipment

Mechanical entrainment of organic phase at nominal capacity
number or devices necessary for assigned production scale

length or equipment operation prior to stripping when reprocessing
solutions with solid phase content.

Minimally permissible difference in phase density”

Time for equipment to reach steady operation after shutdown of 12 hours
or more.

Number or routine and preventive maintenance service calls of equipment
(devices), calculated for eight thousand hours or operation.

mration of equipment repair in the instance of accidental failure of its
basic units.

Organic phase quantity in the equipment (devices).

mount of condensed air released for cleaning vhen equipment is in
operation.

Minimum permissible ratio of organic and water phase flows.
Minimum permissible ratio or water and organic phase flows.

Annual expenditures for operating basic and auxilliary equipment, and
automatic operation and control systems.

Minimum production area necessary to set up equipment (devices).

Minimum necessary height of production praises to set up equipsent
(devices)

Cost of equipment (devices)

 

“When calculating the relative criterion evaluation, a value inverse to its
absolute value is utilized.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Table 1 (continued)

18. 00st of auxilliary equipment coming in contact with radioactive solutions
(pulsators, pumps, etc).

19. Cost of automatic operation and control system of the equipment (devices).

20. Cost of containers and other devices for remote assembly and disassembly
of the equipment, its units and auxilliary equipment. -

21. Use of electric energy when the equipment is in operation.

Values of 3p, are totaled utilizing all criteria. Since criteria are formulated
in a manner where the least value corresponds to the best piece of equipment,
and the more important the criterion, the lower the value of the coefficient,

it follows that equipment receiving the least sum of evaluations is given
preference over all the others. For example, two pieces of equipment are com-
pared where the absolute criterion value with significance coefficient 0.2 is
equal to 10 and 8. Then all - 8:10 - 0.2 - 0.16, and 321 - 10 : 10 - 0.2 a
0.2 (to facilitate calculation, each evaluation based on all of the criteria
may be multiplied by a constant greater than unity, which will not affect the
results).

The suggested methodology is more flexible than those presently known, as it
permits the rclaLive advantages of devices being compared to be evaluated. In
addition, criteria intervals and their evaluations are not included here since
they would be impossible to substantiate.

Obviously, comparative evaluation depends first of all on correct determination
of the significance coefficient r1, which is impc ssible to determine by strict
calculation. For this reason, a professional poll of experts working in this
area was conducted. Experience, intuition, and understanding of the essence
of the problem permitted them to evaluate the significance of individual

criteria, and they were able to decrease uncertainty and subjectivity by
assessing the evaluations with known methods. The experts were given ques-
tionnaires containing the criteria shown in Tables 1 and 2. The arrangement
of criteria in the questionnaire was arbitrary. Bach expert was required to
assign a number to each criterion, beginning with the most significant (in
his view). It was also permitted to assign the same number to any number of
criteria. Numbers did not have to be consecutive, however they were not to
exceed the total number of criteria. It was also permitted to delete those
criteria which the expert considered unnecessary and to add those which in his
opinion had been omitted fran consideration. In addition, he had to evaluate
his own competence according to a scale: am completely familiar with planning

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
issues of the divisions and with development and operation of the equipment

(v I 3, the "weight" of the expert); am well acquainted with planning issues
of divisions and development of equipment (v I 2); am acquainted with the
operation of the equipment (v I 2); am acquainted in general with planning and
operation issues (v I 1). In response to the questionnaire, 35 were received
concerning filters and 26 concerning extractors. Professional positions held
by the experts ranged from engineers to directors, with more than 10 years of
on-the-Job experience. They were enployed by design organisations, scientific
research institutes, and plants. The majority of experts rated their own com-
petence at v I 2.

The questionnaires were handled in the following manner [3, It]: criteria were
set up in order of significance, in relation to the number of ranges deter-
mined by the expert (with the most significant listed first). When ease of the
criteria received the same evaluation, they were then marked with identical
standardized ranges determined by the equation

r _ IKE-(kl IH Hk-I-h)
" h|1 ‘

where k, (h 4- l),...,(k + b) are positions occuped by criteria with an identical
evaluation. Standardized ranges were utilized in further calculations.

After ranging each expert's criteria, the r1 mean total range was determined for
criteria provided by all of the experts:

x": "
r‘r: _ r NI“ v .
i“ I ’fn ’

where m - the total number of experts; J I 1.2,..., n - the expert's number;

i I 1.2,..., n - the criterion number. The unanimity of the experts was eval-
uated by utilizing the concordance coefficient a, determined by Kendall's
equation 5

(0": n I! I
37(5) 'I]2"‘"""“2 r,
' 5-1 i-t

 

Sr: >1": (r.— F) (IE: mt;

where

tJ - the number of identical ranges, given by the J-th expert.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'I'lu: «:ml‘idcncc lcvul (significance) of the coefficient a was evaluated with
the aid of chi-square distribution, with n - l the nuber of degrees of
freedom. _ -~

. s
.,_.,._.____.__——-——;—.

1
I/2mu(n-I-"-—'1—_:: 2 1',"
m "

To derive the relative importance of r1 criteria values were normalized:

 

R.- -- "”-

Oalculation results are shown in Tables 1 and 2 (criteria are arranged in the
order determined by the experts).

for filters, the concordance coefficient was an I 0.188, with a confidence
level p > 0.99; for extractors u - 0.287, confidence level p > 0.99. The
unanimity of the experts was not very high, however it cannot be considered
insignificant. Overall, the arrangement of criteria by their significance
should be acknowledge as successful and logical. Thus, for filters, the
criterion taking into account the equipent's intensity of operation was rated
first; criteria characterizing a single filter's maximal potential performance,
and one of the more important indicators, the amount of waste, followed next.
For extractors, the criterion determining its operational life stood first.
This reflected the tendency presently in existence to utilize the mos‘. labor-
intensive extractors in the radio-chemical industry, those equipped with a
mechanical energy feed (centrally powered, mixer-settlers with nechanical mix-
ing, and so forth) for which duration of Operational life is precisely one of
the basic indices. The criterion characterizing the duration of the equip-
ment's tine phase, i.e. high performance, came next. The arrangement of other
criteria is also non-contradictory in both cases.

or naJor interest is the casparison of expert‘ opinions from other countries.
Experts from the Atomic Energy Commission of France agreed to respond to the
questionnaire. The responses were processed in the same manner. The unanimity
of bench experts was higher than that of our experts («I - 0.793 for filters,
on - 0.59 for extractors). Characteristically, the differences in extractor
evaluations was higher here as well. Apparently, this is due to the greater
complexity of the extraction process. The distribution of the criteria pro-
vided by the French experts approximates that shown in Tables 1 and 2, even
though there are differences determined by the differing approaches to problems
in other countries. The degree of correspondence in the responses of the
experts from both countries can be conveniently evaluated by Spearman's rank
correlation o:

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where x, y are the number of ranks assigned to each criterion by Soviet and
French specialists, respectively.

For filters, 9 - 0.6%; for extractors, o - 0.82. This shows a rather high
unity of views.

Naturally, the given criteria systems and their evaluations reflect current
views and approaches to the problem. As science and technology develops, i.e.
as new intonation appears, conceptions may change; this will decrease the
level of uncertainty in evaluations based on new polls of the experts.

Thus, the suggested methodology does not require designation of an unsubstan-
tiated masher or points for evaluating equipment under caparison; it also

permits the advisability of utilizing equipent of various types and design
to be evaluated with minimum uncertainty, as well as the advisability of their

application within the framework or plants reprocessing atomic power station
fuel elements.

REFERENCES

l. Kasstkin, A. 6.. ed., "Zhid‘kostnaya ekstraktsiya (teoriys i praktiks)"
[Liquid Extraction (Theory and Practice”. collection of papers. Moscow,
Khimizdat. 1958.

2. Karpacheva, S. H.. AWAYA MGIYA, Vol 67, No 5. 1979. p 3210.

3. Beshelev. s. 0.. Gurvich, F. 6.. 'Hetemstiko-statisticheskiye netody
ckspertnykh otsenok" [Mathematical-Statistical Hethods of Expert Evalua-
ntions]. Moscow. Statistika, 1976.

lo. Khan. 6.. Shapiro. 5.. "Statisticheskiye modeli v inzhenernykh zadachakh"
[Statistical Models in Engineering Problems]. Moscow, Mir, 1969.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat. "Atomnays energiys", i981

9875
(:80: 8104/1002

31
FOR OFFICIAL LB! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039.531
RADIATION DAMAGE m STEEL m wens-mnemrsn. HATER-0001.31) REACTOR VBSSBLS

macaw MDIA‘ISIOKNYOYE Pommm STALI KORPUSOV vow-vommm REAKTOROV
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 27 May 81) pP 2-7

[Annotation, table of contents. and introduction fron book "Radiation M80 to

Steel in Water-Hoderated, Watercooled Reactor Vessels", by Nikolay Nikolaysvich

Alehseyenko, Anir Dzhabrailovich Anyev, Igor' Vasil'yevich Gorynin and

Vladinir Aleksandrovich Nikolayev, edited by Igor' Vasil'yevich 60min,

Egrespomiing nter of USSR Acadeny of Sciences. Bnergoizdat, 1250 copies,
pages

[Text] The results of research of a nder of scientific and engineering problem
connected vith serviceability of the vessels of water-noderated, water-cooled power
reactors at nuclear power plants are generalized and analysed. A study is nsde of
the require-tents ilpossd on nterials used in water-moderated. waterbcoolsd poser
reactor vessels. naterial selection principles and also the properties of used and
proposed materials. The greater part of the paper is devoted to the behavior of
vessel asterials mder neutron radiation conditions. in particular, in contact with
the reactor coolant. The basic luvs of variation of strength, ductility and tough-
ness of steel and the netal of welded joints stbjected to neutron radiation are
described as a function of heat treatment, structure, alloying. nature and

anount of inurities and a mute: of other factors. Information is also given on the
specific behavior of hydrogen in irradiated naterials.

The book is designed for scientific workers and engineers dealing with the probless
of building nuclear power plants and also for instructors, postgraduates and students
in the corresponding specialties at the institutions of higher learning.

There are 27 tables, 94 illmtrations and 321 references.

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
Table of Contents
Introduction

Grapter 1. Materials Used in Building NaterNodereted, Water-Cooled
Reactor Vessels
1.1. Operating Conditions of W [Hater-Moderated. Hater-Cooled
Power Reactor] Vessels and Require-ants Ilpoaed on Then
1.2. Soviet Reactor Vessel Hateriala
1.2.1. Base Metal
1.2.2. welding Materials
1.3. Foreign Reactor Vessel Haterials

Chapter 2. Influence of Neutron Irradiation on Strength. Ductility and
Toughness of Vessel Materials
2.1. Gmeral Concepts of Radiation Damge to Steel
2.1.1. Variation of Strength and Ducti1ity
2.1.2. Variation of Brittle Temperature
2.1.3. Influence of Irradiation on Work of Ductile Failure
2.1.4. Properties Under Repeated Static Load
2.2. Basic Laws of Variation of Properties of Steel Subjected to
Neutron Irradiation
2.2.1. Influence of Radiation Flu: and Towerature
2.2.2. Inflwnce of Neutron Flux Density
2.2.3. Influence of Stresses During Irradiation
2.2.5. Recovery of Preperties During Annealing
2.3. Role of Structure and Heat Treatnent of Steel
2.3.1. Influence of Amtenization and Stbaequent Cooling
Conditions
2.3.2. Influence of Towering Conditions
2.3.3. Preliminary Aging
2.4. Influence of Chemical Coupoaition
2.6.1. Influence of Iapurities
2.15.2. Influence of Alloying Blemts
2.5. Materials of the wan-1000 Hater-Moderated. Water-Cooled
Power Reactor Vessels
2.5.1. Base Metal
2.5.2. Hotel of Nelded Joints
2.6. Comarieon of Radiation Blbrittleaent of Industrially Produced
Vessel Steels '

Chapter 3. hehaniam of Radiation Damage

3.1. Cold Shortness of Body-Centered ethic Metals. Role of Neutron
Irradiation

3.2. mananim Controlling Radiation Hardening
3.2.1. Radiation Defects Responsible for Hardening of Iron
3.2.2. Influence of Interstitial Iwuritiea
3.2.3. Influence of Substitution llenente
3.2.4. Inﬂuence of Coherent Segregation

3.3. Influence of Iapurities on Surface Energy
3.3.1. Intergranular Segregation
3.3.2. Intracrystalline Segregation

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Hydrogen Butrittlenent of Vessel Material under Irradiation

Conditions 12!.
6.1. Reactor Vessel Hydrogen Absorption 126
6.1.1. Sources of Hydrogen in Vessel Material 126
6.1.2. Absorption and Release of Hydrogen by Irradiated
Steel 127
6.1. 3. Estimate of Hydrogen Accululation in Vessel Material 136
6.2. Influence of Neutron Irradiation and Hydrogen on lbchanical
Properties under Short-Tern Tension 163
6.3. Influence of Neutron Irradiation and Hydrogen on Cold
Shortness, Static Bending and Eccentric Tension Properties 168

6.6. Recovery of Properties of Hydrogen Charged Steel During Annealing 151
6.5. Low Cycle Fatigue of Steel After Neutron Irradiation and

Hydrogen Absorption 153
6.6. Delayed Fracture of Irradiated Steel under Effect of Hydrogen 157

Chapter 5. Problems of Operating Reliability of Reactor Vessel.

Estinating the Resistance to Brittle Failure 170

5.1. Brittle Failure Inhibition Criterion 170

5.2. Brittle Failure Initiation Criterion 173

5.3. Vessel Radiation Life 176
Bibliography 179
Alphabetic Subject Index 189
Introduction

Neuty-five years have gone by since starting up the First Nuclear Power Plant in the
USSR. Whereas at the beginning of the 1950's nuclear power engineering had taken the
first steps in the direction of serving peaceful purposes, in the past two and a
half decades it has been able to win strong positions in the fuel and energy system
of the country and it has becole an independent branch of the national econony.

The 26th CPSU Congress stated the goal of generating 1550 to 1600 billion kilowatt-
hours of electric power in 1985, including 220 to 225 billion kilowatt-hours at the
nuclear power plants and 230 to 235 billion kilowatt-hours at the hydroelectric power
plants. The increase in electric power production in the European part of the USSR
will take place primarily at the nuclear and hydroelectric power plants. New
capacity in the slant of 26 to 25 nillion kilowatts will be put into production at
the nuclear power plants [1-3].

A significant part of the program for develop-eat of nuclear power engineering in
the Soviet Union and the majority of other indmtrially developed comtries is based
on the use of two-circuit water-moderated, water-cooled power reactors (WBR).
Reactors of this type are along the best assimilated. They are distinguished by
great compactness, high use coefficient of the power, oowarstivsly low cost,
reliability and siwlicity in operation and naintenanoe. Hith respect to specific
power intensity of the core and economy, the MR are at the. present tine some of
the best [6, 5].

36

ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um. respect to chronological attributes and technical indices the WEE can be pro-
visionally divided into three generations [6-8]. The first generation reactors
(MR-210, wen-70, WEI-365) confirmed in practice the correctness of the scientific.
technical and desip development solutions used as the basis for them. They promoted
the accumulation of experience in the industrial operation of Will nuclear power
plants and offered the possibility of training hidlly qualified service personnel.
The second generation is made up of the Mil-660 reactors used as the basis for the
large series of nuclear power plants already in operation or being built in the
Soviet Union. German Democratic Republic, Finland and in a nuﬁer of other countries.
Economic calculations and operating experience indicate that the teclmical and
economic indices of power plants equipped with these reactors are in no way inferior
(and in a nuber of cases are even superior) to the corresponding indices of classi-
cal thermal electric power plants operating on inorted organic fuel. The next
qualitative step in the development of MR (third generation) is manifested in the

WEIR—500 and the wen-1000 reactors with a unit electric capacity of 500 and 1000
megawatts respectively.

One of the mat responsible elements of the structural design of WER to a signifi—
cant degree determining the unit power and operating safety is the reactor vessel.
Direct monitoring of the change in the mechanical properties of the vessel material
of an operating reactor and necessary repairs impose great technical difficulties.
High manufacturing quality, which can be insured only mder the conditions of a
specialized plant, can serve as a definite guarantee of the serviceability of a
reactor vessel. In the Soviet Union. the possibility of plant mufacture of a
vessel subsequently transported by rail, has formed the basis for all structural
designs since the very beginning of the development of WER. This has led to the
necessity for solving a large number of problem in the areas of material science.
metallurgy and welding technology.

First of all, it was necessary to develop andindustrially assimﬂate high quality,
low-alloy steel which has hiya metallurgical adaptability to mufacture. weldability
in large thicknesses and mechanical properties that insure operating reliability of
the vessel for no less than 40 years. The high value of welding involved in manu-
facturing a reactor vessel has led to the necessity for creating new welding
equipment, the development of welding mterials, welding conditions and technology
guaranteeing the mechanical properties of the welds and high efficiency of the weld-
ing operations. lligh corrosion resistance of’ the vessel material has been insured
by anticorrosive surfacing of the inside surface. In addition, the possibility of
operating WBR vessels without anticorrosive protection has been proven. The prob-
lems of quality control of the base metal and welds by highly effective n—ray and
game techniques, ultrasonic, color and luminescent flaw detection have also been
solved.

In contrast to ordinary high-pressure vessels, the reactor vessels are subjected to
powerful neutron and gama radiation calming significant changes in properties of
the metal. The most unfavorable of these changes is the loss of ductility and
increase in inclination of the steel to brittle failures. Accordingly, the problem
of radiation strength of reactor vessel material from the point of view of pro-
longed serviceability has acquired primary simificence. The first person to point
to the necessity for studying radiation strength of reactor materials in the Soviet
Union was I. V. Kurchatov. By his initiative a nunber of scientific research

35

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

complexes were set up which are equipped with specialized mterials science reactors
and "hot" charters offering the possibility of studying the properties of nterials
in intense ionizing radiation fields. In the final analysis, the broad developmnt
of such research has led to the creation of a new field of science - solid-state
radiation physics, a component part of which is radiation uterials technology.

The general problens of the influence of reactor irradiation on the properties of
metals are fully covered in the book by s.'r. Konobeyevskiy [9]. Various theoretical
and engineering aspects of the influence of neutron irradiation on the behavior of
materials designed for making WBR vessels have been discussed in the reports by

a nutter of international and all-union conferences and nunerous periodicals. How‘-
ever, the increasing scale of the construction of nuclear power plants equipped with
VVBR has put the question of the necessity for systenstization and generalisation of
scattered information and the investigation of the problem of radiation strength of
reactor vessels as a whole on the agenda. The effort to solve this problen has been
mdertaken in the book now brought to the attention of the specialists.

In conclusion, the authors consider it their duty to express their deep appreciation
to P. A. Platonov, G. P. Karsov, Yu. I. Zvezdin and V. V. Rybin for useful dis-
cussion of individual sections of the book, and also to L. H. Lebedev, V. I. Badanin,
B. P. Usatov, A. A. Kuznetsov and A. M. Horozov who participated directly in the
experimts.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, 1981

10845
CSO: 1861/196

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RADIATION SAFETY AND PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS
Moscow RADIATSIONNAYA BEZOPASNOST' I ZASHCHITA A38 in Russian 1981 pp 2, 64-78

[Annotation and article "Tritium at Nuclear Electric Power Plants" by V. V. Badyayev.

Yu. A. Yegorov, V. P. Sklayrov and G. P. Stegachev from book "Radiation Safety and
Protection of Nuclear Power Plants", edited by Professor Yu. A. Yegorov, Atomizdat,
256 pages]

[Text] The fifth edition includes part of the papers discussed at the Second
All-Union Scientific Conference on Protection of Nuclear Engineering Facilities from
Ionizing Radiation (lbscaw, MIFI [Moscow Engineering Physics Institute].
Deceuber 1978) and the Branch Conference on Excher of Experience in Radiometric
and Dosimetric Research at Nuclear Power Plants (Moscow. NIKIET [expansion unknown],
May 1979). Reports by American specialists heard at the Soviet-American Smosium
on the Problem of Fast Neutron Reactor Shielding (Obninslt, PEI [expansion mknownl,
November 1978) were also included. The retaining materials will be published in
the sixth edition.

The results of studying the radiation conditions at nuclear power plants and the
problem of predicting activity are investigated. Beginning with this edition, a

new section has been initia:ed where the environmental protection problems of operating
nuclear power plants are discussed. Materials on passage of radiation through

reactor shielding and methods of calculating shielding are presented.

The book is designed for specialists in radiation safety and protection of "nuclear
power plants.

There are 59 tables, 70 illustrations and 317 references.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tritium at Nuclear Power Plants, by V. V. Badyayev, Yu. A. Yegorov, V. P. Sklyarov,
G. F. Stegachev

Tritium, which is a superheavy radioactive hydrogen nuclide, _p1ays an important 'role
in the problem of radiation safety of nuclear power plants. Tritium has a halflifs
of 12.26 years, it decays with the emission of B—particles with maximal energy of
18.6 kiloelectron volts (average energy 5.8 kiloelectron volts). Tritilml belongs in
the category of so-called global radionuclides for it has a quite long halflife, it
cm enter into the composition of organic and inorganic eowounds and when it gets
into the environmt it can spread to significant distances.

Tritium exists primarily either in gaseom form-or in the form of tritium water, but
it can also enter into the composition of various organic cospomds. The toxicity
of tritium as a radionuclide depen¢ to a great extent on the form in which it is
found in the environment and in which it enters into the organism of ma: in gaseous
form (HT, T2) or in the form of tritium water (810, T20). Gmeous tritium modifies
the skin and mucous membrane of the respiratory tracts of man by its B-radiation
(external irradiation) and causes damage to the internal organs of man, being found
in the chemically bound state in these organs. Upon entering the environment in the
form of tritium water, tritium can enter the organism of man both through the
respiratory tracts (tritium water vapor) and through the skin and gastrointestinal
tract (with food and water). It is noted that mo penetrates the organism through
the entire skin surface of a htnan just as efficiently as through the lungs: up to
10 microcuries/minute with a tritium concentration in the air of l microcurie/ liter
[1]. When tritim water enters the gastrointestinal tract with food, it is quickly
msimilated by the organism, and a few minutes after ingestion it can be detected in
the venous blood. It is also noted [2] that 210 hours after tritium enters the
organism. the greatest concentration of it is detected in the blood, liver and
small intestine, and after 5 days the tritium concentration in all of the internal
orgms is almost identical. According to the most recent findings, the process of
elimination of tritium from the human organism is described by a curve with three
exponential segments. At first, the tritium is eliminated quite intensely (effective
halflii'e ~10 days). This is connected with the water exchange of the organism.
Later on, the process of tritium elimination decelerates. It has been established
that the elimination rate of organically bot-1d tritium depends on the type of organ
and biological tissue: the effective halflife for the majority of organs varies
from 10 to 100 days, but there are argue for which the effective halflife exceeds

5 years.

According to the recommendations of the International Comission on Radiological
Protection, it is considered that on irradiation of the organism of man with
B-particles with an energy to 0.1 megaelectron volts, their energy is absorbed by the
skin, that is, only the skin is irradiated. Considering that the skin of the entire
body of man belongs to group III of critical organs (tissues), the maximum permissi-
ble dosage of irradiation for which is 30 rem per year, the “RB-76 established the
following mean annual permissible concentrations HAPC): 2-10’6 cuties/liter in the
air of the work place (for personnel) and 6.6'10' cuties/liter in atmospheric air
(for individuals of the population). For tritium in the form of T20 or 3T0, the
HAPC are 4.8°10‘9 curies/liter in the air of the work place, 1.6-10'10 curies/liter
in atmspheric air and 3.210“6 cuties/liter in water. Such a large difference in

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

values of the MP0 for different form of existence of tritium arises from the
difference in radiotoxlcity of these form.

Usually tritium of natural and artificial origin is distinguished. Natural tritium
is formed in the upper layers of the atmosphere as a result of the interaction of
cosnic radiation with “N and 160 nuclei. Natural tritim exists primarily in the
form of HT or no. The natural tritim content in atmos heric air is 1 atom per 101‘
hydrogenatoms, and in water 1 tritium atom occurs for 10 3 hydrogen atom, which
corresponds to a specific concentration of 3.2. 10"12 curios/liter. The total
natural tritium content on the earth is 20 to 80 million curios.

The primary source of artificial tritium until recently was thermonuclear weapons
testing (to 10 million curies per megaton of thermonuclear blast), as a result of
which the tritium concentration in entities of the environment increased sipifi-
cantly: the total tritium concentration on the earth in 1973 was 29001700 million
curies, which is appreciably hidler than the natural level [3]. Thus, in the 1960's
the tritium concentration in rainwater in the northern hemisphere was on the average
1.6'10'9 curies/liter [6]. Detailed studies of the tritim pollution of the water
of the Baltic Sea in 1972 [5] descnstrated that on the average the tritium concen-
tration in the sea was (l.98¢_0.73)°10'10 curies/liter. Curtailment of thermonuclear
weapons testing is naturally accompanied by a decrease in the tritium concentration
in the environment. However, in connection with the development of nuclear power
engineering, nuclear power plants and plants for processing irradiated nuclear fuel
are becoming contributors of tritium to the environment. Processing of uranium fuel
to generate l megawatt of power is accompanied by the release of 19 cuties/gram of
tritium; the same figure for plutonium fuel is 36 cuties/gram [3].

An analysis performed in reference [6] shows that in 1980 the tritium production at
nuclear power plants and plants for processing nuclear fuel will be 6.7 ngacuries,
and 34 megacuries of it will be accumulated for all years of operation of nuclear
power plants. The same values for the year 2000 will increase to 140 and 720 megs-
curies, respectively. Inasmuch as the greater part of this tritium is discharged
into the environment, it can become a radionuclide significantly influencing the
radiation situation, especially if we consider the possibility of interference of the
discharge of nuclear power plants which in the future will be located comparatively
close to each other. All of this indicates the necessity for careful study of
sources and mans of entry of tritium into the environment, accumulation and migra-
tion of it, the forum of its existence in the environment, possibly the development
of leans of localizing tritium in order to remve it from the nuclear power plant
waste and other radioactive waste [7].

In nuclear power plant reactors tritium is formed in the following processes:
Directly on fission of the fuel nuclei as a product of ternary fission:

As a result of capture of neutrons by deuterium nuclei in the coolant-water in the
form 020;

On capture of neutrons by boron or lithium nuclei in the coolant-water (boron
control. adjustment of the water regime);

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of boron nucleus reactions in the control rods;
mring capture of fast neutrons by construction materials.

The contribution of each of these processes to the total amount of tritim forned in

a nuclear power plant is detenained by the type of reactor. its parameters, operating
conditions and materials used in the reactor.

One of the primary sources of tritium is formation of it in the fuel elements during
ternary fission; the triton yield per fission of 23511 [8] is on the average
8.7-10'32. that is. 1.23-10‘ curies of tritium is formed per megawatt of thermal
power of the reactor in the fuel slsunts per day. The fission process as a source
of tritium can be characterized by the following exawle: by 1980 an accumulation of
about 3-106 cuties of tritium is expected in the fuel elemts of the nuclear power
plants of Great Britain, and by the year 2000, about tenfold lure [9].

As a result of diffusion through the fuel jacket and also through cracks and micro-
cracks in the jackets, tritium can get from the fuel to the coolant. It is natural
that mder other equal conditions the tritium leakage out of the jackets depends on
the amount accumlated in the fuel element. Estimates made on the basis of experi-
mental data [10] indicate that the tritium leakage rate from fuel jackets with a
microcrack surface area of 1: of the entire jacket surface for fuel in the form of
sintered uranium dioxide is characterized by a coefficient of 0.86 per day. Accord-
ing to other data [ll], the tritium leakage from fuel jackets made of corrosion
resistant steel is 12, and fron zirconium alloyed jackets, 0.12 of the total amount
of tritium under the jacket. Considering these data, the amount of tritium getting
from the fuel elements into the coolant can be defined by the ratio [12]
QT-l.32'10'16H, caries/sec, where H is the thermal power of the reactor, watts
(zirconium fuel jackets).

Table 1. Thermal Neutron Reactions with Tritium Formtion
————__._________—____________

Content of target Thermal neutron
Reaction nuclide in a natural reaction cross

mixture 2 section 0

W

,H(-.~.-) 1‘" 0,015 5.7.10-4
31:90:41)?" 1.3.10" 5.4.10:
‘I i (n. a) {H 7.52 9.3540:
7|.i (a. 11'. :Ht) ?H 92.43 0.02.
”Din. 2a) fH 19,3 0,01"

*Cross sections are averaged with respect to fission neutron spectral.

The probability of tritium formation as a result of other reactions is characterised
by the data presented in Tables 1 and 2. It is obvious that the basic reactions of
tritium formation in nuclear reactors are the deuteron and 103 nucleus (11, v)

reactions. The D(n. 1)T reaction leads to the formtion of tritium directly in the

coolant, and the ammt of tritium formed by this reaction in an ordinary water-
cooled reactor can be defined by the formula

ho

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
QT - 27.6nRV0- 10"19 cuties/sec.

where n“ is the nuclear densi
volume in the reactor core,1

of hydrogen in the coolant. cm‘33 V is the coolantl
;¢2 is the average thermal neutron flux density with

respect to the coolant, sec’

The 103 nucleus reactions, as has been noted, are possible during boron control—in
the coolant and in the rode of the control and safety rod system of the reactor.

 

Table 2. Past Neutron Reactions with Tritium Formation
Neutron Target Average
Reaction energy. nuclide con- value of the
Nev tent in reaction
natural cross section.
mixture. 2 o
"N (n 013C 5—10 99.63 340-3
‘Li(n “9’“ 0.0l—l0 7.52 1.0
Li(u. n .03”: 6—H 92,48 4-!0“
"B (n. n) T l—9 19.8 7.540-
”6m (HR 14.7 95.018 2-10"
“C1 (1:. "Mi “.7 96.97 0.I-l0-’
“Fem. "”3“" 11.6 5.54 7.5404
“ma. n“- Mn ”,8 5.84 6w“

 

The contribution of the various tritium formtion reactions to the total amount of

tritium in the coolant was estimated in reference [12] in the example of the
Rheinsberg nuclear power plant for its operating period during boron control testing
in 1970:

Yield from fuel elements 0.5
Yield from the rods of the control

and safety rod system 0.15

Formation in coolant as a result of

the following reactions:

1) n, y)T 0.18

1on(n, 2n)T 5.23
103(11, n' , o)T 10"

It is obvious that more than 852 of tritium is found as a result of the fast neutron
103(n, 2o)T reaction. The authors of reference [12] note that this does not agree
with the conclusions, for example, of reference [13]. in which it was demonstrated
that the primary reaction of tritiua foraation under such conditions must be the
interaction of thermal neutrons with 1

The results of the approximate calculation [6] of the specific activity of tritium
in the coolant of the Kol'skaya Nuclear. Power Plant also demonstrated that in
WEIR-460 water-moderated, water-cooled power reactors with boron control (boric
acid concentration 3.4 g/kg) the primary reaction of tritium formation is the

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mun, 24:)1 reaction: during the operating tin of the reactor of 7000 effective
hours, the specific tritiu activity in the coolant of the primary circuit as a
result of this reaction is approximately 10'3 codes] liter, at the same tine as the
specific activity will be about 510’6 cuties/liter as a result of deuteriul activa-
tion and dowle activation of protim.

For nuclear power plants with WER-SO reactors [12], the estimates show that in
one rm, the coolant picks up as much as 260 curiea of tritium 5.23 curies as a
result of ternary fission, 3.22 curios as a result of protiun activation and

252 curies as a result of the 103 reaction (din-ins boron control).

The presented calculated values agree qualitatively with the data on the actual
tritium content in the coolant of a masher of operating nuclear power plants with
pressurized water reactors gathered, for example, in reference [lb] (cuties/year):
Indian Point-1 ("-163 ngawatts), 500; Yankee 03-183 megawatts), 1300; Haddon Rock
("462 megawatts), 1733. All of these nuclear power plants have boron control and
fuel elements in corrosion-resistant steel jackets. In reference [15] it is also
pointed out that the specific tritiun activity in the water of the prinary circuit
of nuclear power plants with FUR falls within the limits of (0.1 to .‘))'10'3 curies/
liter as a result of introduction of boron into the coolant. The tritium activity
in the water of the prinary circuit of the Novovoronezh Nuclear Pager Plant [16]

is 2.2-10‘6 cuties/liter for block I, 21-10”6 for block II, 7210" for block III
and 9540'6 curios/liter for block IV. The maxim:- recordsd tritiun concegtrations
in these blocks in the period from 1973 to 1975 was 3, 10, 520 and 360-10‘ curies/
liter, respectively [17]. At the Kol'akaya Nuclear Power Plant, 3 mnths after
beginning operation, the tritium concentration in the coolant was 31-10"6 curiea/liter
[17].

It is natural that for nuclear power plants with reactors of other types, the amount
of tritiua formed as a result of one reaction or another and, consequently, its
concentration in the coolant will be different. Thus, for nuclear power plants with
heavy water reactors the prinary tritium formation reaction is deuteriua activation.
Bstimtes show that in heavy water reactors up to 30 curios/year of tritium: are
for-ed per megawatt of electric power. At nuclear power plants with boiling reactors,
the tritiun formation as a result of ternary fission and as a result of reactions
on the boron nuclei in the control rods is significant, but the primary source of
tritium is deuterium activation. 'l'hus, calculation of the amount of tritium formed
by the D(n, y)‘l' reaction at the Dresdenol Nuclear Power Plant deronstrated [1] that
the rate of tritim formtion is 6°10'8 cuties/sec, and experimental informtion on
the accmlation of tritium in the ooolmt gives a rate equal to approximately
5'10"8 curies/second, that is, it is obvious that the tritiun is formd primarily
as a result of deuterium activation. Estimates made for nuclear power plants with
Ram-1000 reactor also demonstrated that in the multiple forced circulation circuit
tritium is formed primarily as a result of the Mn, v)‘r reaction, its specific

_—_—_—————

*Sec also the survey: N. G. Gusev, "Provision for Radiation Safety at Nuclear Power
Plants," ATOPIMYA BNBRGIYA [Nuclear Power], Vol 61, 80 6, 1976, p 254.

ha

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- activity in the multiple forced circulation circuit is low, and it amounts to
about (0-10'7 curies/liter.

The actually assured tritium concentrations in the coolmt of nuclear power plants
with boiling reactors are characterized by the following values:

Blocks I and II of Beloyarskaya Nuclear Power Plant 2010‘6 and 28°10‘6 curies/liter
[16], maximum recorded concentration for block I 2910'6 curies/liter [17];

For block I of Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant 048-10-6 curiea/liter [17];

At the nuclear power plant with 83241-1000 reactor (on the average) during the initial
operating period at stable power level, in the water of the multiple forced circula-
tion circuit and in the saturated steam condensate (l to 2)°10'7 cuties/kg;

At a nuclear power plant with “(-50 reactor the maxim recorded concentration is
4-10"6 cuties/liter [17].

The amount of tritium produced by nuclear power plants with boiling reactors in a
year is characterized by the following data [1"]: Dresden-l (ll-200 megawatts),

2.9 curies; Hudaoldt Bay (52 megawatts) and Big Rock Point 01-50 mgawatts),
20 curies each.

At nuclear power plants with channel boiling reactors, in addition to the multiple
forced circulation circuit, tritium is also formed in the control and safety rod
system circuit and in the gas circuit, that is, in the gas blown through the graphite
stacking of the reactor. In the control and safety rod system circuit at a nuclear
power plant with ”MK-1000 reactor, about 2.5 curiae of tritiun are formed per year
as a result of reactions on the boron nuclei (under the assuqtion that the tritium
leakage from the jackets of the rods of the control and safety rod system is 0.12)
and about 1 curie as a result of denteriul activation. The tritium concentration in
the control and safety rod system loop in the absence of leaks is ~5-10”6 curies/ liter.
Tritium is formed in the gas circuit as a result of reactions on helium nuclei. At
the nuclear power plants with Ram-1000, up to 800 curies of tritium are formd in
the circuit, and its average concentration in the gas will be 3640-7 Curies/ liter.
‘lhe results of measurements of the tritiun concentrations give the following values:
in the control and safety rod system circuit (2 to 6)-lO’7 cuties/liter; in the gas
circuit, «10'9 cuties/liter of tritium in the form of tritium water vapor.

In general, it is impossible to note good convergence of the calculated and measured
tritium concentrations in the various circuits of nuclear power plants. At the same
tin it is necessary!“ to note defined scattering of the experimental data on concen-
trations. All of this is connected, on the one hand, with the fact that it is
difficult to consider all the factors influencing the tritium concentration in the
calculations. for exanple, the state of the core. the actual magnitude of the leaks:
the water chemical regime of the coolant obviously influencing the chemical forms

of endstence of tritium, the amount of iwurities in the scavenging gas, and so

on.

193

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

influx of tritiu- into the environmnt and the development of devices for localiza-
tion of tritium if the necessity for such arises. It is now possible to state that
at nuclear power plants with boiling channel MIR-1000 reactors the tritiul concen-
tration is below the HAPC of tritium for open bodies of water, and at the nuclear

power plants with watemderated, waterbcooled power reactors it is higher than
the MAPC by 10 to 100 times and no more.

with respect to absolute mgnituds, the activity of the discharged tritium is
appreciably less: from 4 to 50 curies less (for 1973), for example, (at the Var-ant
Yankee Nuclear Power Plant, 0.2 cuties/year) [18]. It is natural that the tritiu
concentration in the liquid waste of nuclear power plants with boiling reactors is
also lower: unadju- tritiu: concentrations in the waste water of the Beloyarsk

and Leningrad Nuclear Power Plants do not exceed 0.26 to 0.27 cutie/liter [17], in
the industrial sewage of Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant (6 to 7)-lO-9 cuties/liter,
that is. significantly below the HAPC for water. This conclusion agrees with the

the tritium concentration in the waste before reservoir dilution mat not exceed

5-10“9 cuties/liter, that is, approximately no more than 25 times the average tritium
concentration in the water of the Baltic Sea.

In the gas effluents of nuclear power plants the tritiun content is much less than
in the liquid effluents, which is naturally explained by the inclination of tritiun
toward oaddation. Thus, the activity of tritim discharged in 1973 by nuclear
power plants with boiling reactors falls within the limits from fractions of a cutie
to 75 curies [18), and in percentage ratio this is 10'3 to 10“! of the total
discharged activity. In reference [20] a theoretical estimate was Iade of the power

'4':

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the tritium discharge for nuclear power plants with wan-1.40 reactor. Tenmry
fission of 2350, activation of deuteriu- and basic reactions on 103 nuclei were

at nuclear power plants necessary, just as is done. for exanple, for iodine radio-

7.22 of the personnel have
from 0.1 to 1 tines the permissible amount of tritium in the organisms, and 602 of

the workers are tritiu- carriers; at radioisotope production facilities, the internal
irradiation by tritiun is also on the maxim permissible level [21].

At the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant (People's Republic of Bulgaria). during the
initial period of operation, the tritium concentration in the air or various room

was (1.3 to 3.4)‘10‘13 Curie/liter [22]: according to the estimates of reference [20].
under the above-described conditions in the facilities of

WEIR-440 tritiul will be detected. but its concentration will not exceed the "AFC
for work places established by the “RB-76. The neasuremnts made at the

Novovoronezh Nuclear Power Plant demonstrated that the sum recorded tritium con-
centrations in the work places of the nuclear power plant fall within the limits of
(61a to 180)°10‘9 cuties/liter. At nuclear power plants with boili

A; is obvious, the data presented here on the actual liquid and gas discharge of
tritium by the nuclear power plants do not permit establishment of any laws. 0n the

power plants and obtaining detailed intonation about the interrelation of the
process flow chart of a nuclear power plant, its operating conditions with the

e units--the primary eleuent of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) The investigated media can be different (water, steam, gas, air), and tritium
can be found in the same medium in different chemical forms (for eagle, tritium
water and gaseous tritium in the water of the multiple forced circulation circuit,

in atmospheric air);

2) The activity of the salples, as is obvious from what has been stated above. is
low, but the measurement results mt be obtained with good accuracy inasmuch as
they are needed for forecasting purposes;

3) The energy of the tritium B-particles is quite lav: therefore for reliable
recording of them. detectors and equipment with low intrinsic noise level md low
natural background are needed.

Hovever, at the present time reliable uthods of taking eagles of various media,
concentration of them (if necessary) and measurement of the activity, which will
permit us to obtain qualitative infatuation about tritium at the nuclear power plants,
have been developed and are in we in practice [10, 23-25].

 

Figure 1. Diagram of a device for taking tritium gas samples from air:
1 -- mixing chatter; 2 -- thermocouple; 3 -- furnace; lo - tube with
pelletized copper oxide; 5 - quartz wool; 6 - Dewar flak with
liquid nitrogen
Key:
a. Nitrogen
b. Gas sample

If it is necessary to determine the tritium water content in water, the sample is
taken directly, that is, a vessel is filled to the appropriate volume, mechanical
impurities and other radioactive nuclides are remved, for enmle. using an ion-
cxchange resin, and the sawle is stored in a sealed container until analysis

In order to exclude evaporation, inasmch as evaporation can distort the results

as a result of isotopic effects. "hen determining the tritium gas concentration in

water, the sasple is taken sealed. Gaseous tritium is extracted from the sample
by bubbling. A sample of atmospheric moisture is collected either by freezing out

’6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum; cooling units or by pming air through water absorbers, for exasple. through
concentrated sulfuric acid or silica gel [210]. On 2 kg of silica gel it is possible

to collect up to 250 ml of water. The water is isolated from the silica gel by a
closed current of dry air.

The gas sales for determining the concentration of gaseous forms of tritium are
taken with the help of a compressor in bottles or elastic shells. However, if a
sample must be stored for a prolonged period of time, this method of sawling can
lead to errors as a result of uncontrolled tritium loss by diffusion through the
walls of the sanling vessel. It is more reliable to take the eagle by final oxida-
tion of volatile forms of tritium in a special device through which gas or air is
puwed. Final oxidation of tritium is carried out in a nitrogen current on

pelletized copper oxide (Figure l) at a temrature of 600°C. The vapor in the formed
water is frozen out in a U—tube. By selecting the oudation conditions (catalyst,

tewerature, and so on) properly, it is possible to obtain intonation about the
tritium content in various chemical form.

 

Figure 2. Diagram of a hydrolyzer for concentrating tritium unples:
1 -- cooler; 2 -- electrodes: 3 -- vater sample stbject to concentration;
lo -- vessel for cooling the electrolysis cell.

If it is known in advance that tritium activity in the couple is small. the sasple
is concentrated. The difference in hydrolytic decolpcsition rate of the molecules
of ordinary. heavy and tritium waters is used for concentration. Concentration is
carried out in special devices called hydrolyzers (see Figure 2), and if necessary
the process is repeated several times. Usually eightfold to tenfold enrichment of
the sample with tritium water molecules is achieved in one cycle.

For determining the tritium activity in the sample, the scintillation or ionization
method is used. For implementation of the ionization method, either proportional

internal filling meters (sometime flow meters) or ionization chaﬂaers (for
measuring high tritium activities in the sanple) are used.

1‘7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the scintillation method usually liquid scintillators based on dioxane are used,
for it is possible to add a sample to dioxane in a volume of up to 202 of the value
of the dioxane without having significant negative effects on its conversion
efficiency. Various scintillating additives and spectrum displacers are used; ready-
madc ZhS-7 md zus-s (dioxane+o-mthylaaphthaline4-BPO) liquid scintillators are
suitable for recording tritium radiation. The conversion effectiveness of liquid
scintillators becomes noticeably worse on "poisoning" of then with oxygen and
various inurities, especially impurities containir 3 sulfur and chlorine. Therefore
before introduction into the scintillator, the sasple is purified of its impurities
on ion exchange resin or by distillation, and after introduction of it into the
scintillator, the mixture ready for measurements is purged with argon to remove the

oxygen.

The activity of the sample is measured on units with l, 2 or 3 photosultipliers.

The advantage of units with one photomultiplier is simplicity. However, in such mite
it is necessary to use a photomultiplier with high sensitivity of the photocathode
and low energy equivalent of the intrinsic noise. Sometime the photocathode is
cooled for this purpose. 0n the 1155-1 unit without cooling of the photocathode of
the photomultiplier. a sensitivity of ~10’7 curies/liter of tritium is achieved by
applying a scintillator based on dioxane with naphthaline (100 g/liter). PPO

(8 gram/liter) and POPOP (0.2 grams/liter). 0n units with .xeveral photomultipliers
noise pulses can be avoided to a significant degree, and it is possible to determine
activity on the level of 10‘10 cuties/liter. The known standard foreign-made devices

(TRICARB, SL-ZO, and so on) have a sensitivity of ~10‘9 curiae/liter.

Devices for preparing a ample with measuring by the ionization method and propor-
tional internal filling counters with active shielding Inds of gas discharge comt-
era are described in reference [23]; they fully satisfy the requirements of the
problems solved when investigating the formtion and transport of tritium at nuclear
power plants. Such devices T-l and T-Z, which are distinguished by small structural
dnanges from those investigated in [23], are described below. These devices are
used in operations performed at the nuclear power plants“, and they are distinguis ed
by their sensitivity: the T-l is a device with relatively low sensitivity, to 10'
curie/ liter.

In the T-l device, an internal filling counter with a volume of 600 m3 (Figure 3)
with cathode in the form of a corrosion-resistant steel cylinder and with anode
made of gold-plated tungsten wire 20 nicrons in diameter, is med. In contrast to
the counter described in reference [23]. the flange seal of its ends has been
replaced by a seal using a nut, which has made it possible to reduce the overall
dimensions of the counter and to use mat for its protection and lead shielding from
the UHF device. In the massive organic glass and covers, devices are mounted for
putting tension on the filament—anode—an intake connection for the investigated
gas, a socket for connecting the electronic unit and thin-walled window of lavsan
filn (50 microns thick) for admitting 55% Irradiation into the counter

 

*l'he authors express their appreciation to 1.. I. Gedeonov, V. I. Blinov,
V. P. Tishkov and their colleagues for consultation and assistance in adjusting the
traits.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(E ”5.9 Rev) used to select the operating conditions of the center. The mt is

as enbled iron the )6-6 type gas discharge counters, and it is included anti-
coincident with the nein counter. The lead shielding is 50 a- thick. The system for
filling the center with the working gas mixture is analogous to that described in
reference [23]. The working gas mixture is prepared fron propane (901) and the
investigated eagle of hydrogen with tritium (10%); during the measurements a
pressure of l to 1.2 atmospheres is nintainsd in the counter wlune.

 

Figure 3. Structural design of a gas discharge internal filling center:
1 - counting gas intake connection; 2 — pressure nuts; 3 - counter
housing; 0 - end type organic glass insert; 5 - nther gaskets:

6 — lavsan film

The 1-2 device consists of an internal filling counter with a volume of 4500 a3
(disneter 120 1-, length 650 an) of analogous structural design placed in the last
of gas discharge counters type 81-66. The counting nodule is placed in the cavity
(300x300x900 In), in lead shielding 150 .1 thick with sliding door. Just as in
the T-l device. the known [23] systen for preparing the sanple and filling the
working volume of the counter with it is used (see Figure 4).

For neasm'ensnts on the 1-1 device the sanples are prepared in advance by decouposi-
tion of water by calciun oxide and zinc; on the 1-2 device the sale is prepared
either in the counter filling systen by decomposition of water by upesiun [22]

in a special tube furnace or in advance.

MOMMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

(a)

synadueu ——

14

    
 
 

(b) ”pa/TC" -—a—

 
   

    

. ,3- ~17“
13 ' T
l l
' I - .
(cf‘tfgfiifﬁsé‘? ,
i . I 19 “l‘
a be

Figure la. Diagral of a stand for preparing low-active tritium samples
for masurenents:

1-13 -- vacuum valves; 16 -- vacuum meter; 15 - vessel for mixing
butadiene and hydrogen; 16 - vessel for storing excess gas;

17 -— 112 absorption; 18 - n2 generator; 19 -- counter: 20 - catalyst;
21 -- liquid nitropn

a. Butadiene

b. Propane

c. Hydrogen for a vacuum pulp
d. “20 feed

The electronic nodules of both devices are the sane, they have a total channel gain
of ~1000 with stability of no worse than 12, deviation frcn linearity of the ampli-
tude characteristics in the tritium B—particle energy range does not exceed 111.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Yuzgin, V. S. and Yavelov, B. Ye.. "Tritium and Environmnt," AMAYA
13mm 2A RUBBZHOH [Nuclear Engineering Abroad], No 10. 1973, p 26.

2- Hoskslev, “1- In Okis' tritiya [Trititn Oxide], lbscow, Atonizdat, 1968.

3. Telmhkina, Ye. 1... "Radiation nygienic Evaluation of Tritiu as a Factor of
Environmental Pollution," Report at the 3d All-Union Scientific and Practical
Conference on Radiation Safety, ﬂoscov, 1976.

lo. Lur'ye, A. 11.. "Nuclear Power Plants and the Tritium Problem," 83. mmov “1’0
"ENERGIYA' [Collection of Horks-of the "Energiya" Scientific Production Associa-
tion], No 2, Moscow, 1975, p 11.4.

50

MWIBEONLY
s.

7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

Vakulovskiy, s. n., Katrich, Yu. 1., Halakhov, s. 6., et a1., ”9081‘, 137Cs
and Tritium Contents in the Baltic Sea in 1972," ATOMYA ENERGIYA [Nuclear
Power], Vol 39, No 3, 1975, p 183.

Cedeonov, L. I. and Trusov, A. 6., "Environmental Protection in Connection with
the Development of Nuclear Power Engineering," AmmAYA TERHNIKA 2A RUBEZRON,
No 12, 1973, p 22.

Gelkin, 8. Ya., Gedeonov, L. 1., Demidovich, N. N., et a1., "Discharge of
Volatile Fission Products into the Atmosphere During Operation of Nuclear
Power Plants and Installations for Regenerating Spent Fuel and Future Prospects
for Trapping these Volatile Products," ATOMYA ENERGIYA, Vol 46, No 2,

1978, p 145.

Sloth, a. N., "Tritium in Thermal Neutron Fission of 2350," J. mono. mm.
01311., Vol 24, No a, 1962, p 337.

Danster, H. 6., Warner, B. F. , "The Disposal of Noble Gas Fission Products
from the Reprocessing of Nuclear Fuel," UN. KINGDCM ATOM. ENERGY QUARTERLY,
1970.

Turkin, A. D., NZIMETRIYA RQDIOAKTIVNYKH GAZOV [Radioactive Gas Dosinetry],
Moscow, Atonizdat, 1973.

Smith, I. 11., "The Significance of Tritium in Water Reactors," GENERAL BLECTR.
C(HPH Sept. 19, 1967.

Langekker, K. and Graupe, 101., "Tritium in Pressurized Water Reactors,"

DOKLAD NA 11 SIMPOZIUH! SEV "vowm RBZHINY VODO-VODYANY‘KH REAKTOROV,
RADIATSIONNYY KWTROL' TEFLONOSITBLYA I SREDSTVA SNIZNENIYA RADIATSIONNOY
OPASNOSTI TEPLONOSITELEY [Report at the 2d Smosium of the (IBM ”Water Regimes
of Hater—Moderated, Hater-Cooled Reactors, Radiation Monitoring of the Coolant
and Means of Lowering the Radiation Danger of Coolants], German Delacratic
Republic, Stral'sund, 1972.

Ray, J. 14., "Tritium in Power Reactors," REACTOR AND FUEL PROG. TEOINOLOGY,
Vol 12, No 1, 1968-69.

sze, B. and Vimmd, K. , "Problem of Monitoring Tritium in Nuclear Facilities,"
see reference [12].

Sawochka, S. G. , "Sampling and Analysis Procedures in Vater Reactors,"
PROC. AMER. POWER (DRE, V01 38, 1971, p 741.

Lur'ye, Ye. 1..., "Tritium Dosinetry at Nuclear Power Plants," see reference [3].

Abolnasov, Yu. P. , "Tritium Content in Liquid Media and the Air of the Work
Places of Nuclear Power Plants," ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA, Vol 101, No 3, 1976,
p 215.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Sm-mgr of Radioactivity Released in Effluents from Nuclear Power Plants
during-1973," NUCL. SAFETY, Vol 16, No 6, 1975, p 7310.

Abkin, A. 0., Agapkina, N. P., Aleksandrov, A. P., et a1., ATOMAYA NAUKA
I TBKENIKA V SSSR [Nuclear Science and Engineering in the USSR], Hosea,
Atomizdat, 1977.

Velikovskiy, A. A. and Chernousov, S. A., "Estinating the Bquilibrim Concen-
tration of Tritium and Its Discharge into the Environment at Nuclear Pouer
Plants with WEE-660," see reference [3].

Balcnov, H. I. and Kupryaahchin, Yu. IL, ”Study of the Tritiul Content in the
Organism of Workers," I‘R. IV swam-ram. KONP. P0 WWI I RADIMTRII
INIZIRYUSRGIIKH 121.le [Works of the 4th Scientific and Tedmical
Conference on Doeimtry and Radiomtry of Ionizing Radiation], Section II,
edited by V. A. Knyazev, Moscow, Atanizdat, 1972.

Khitov, K. and Konstantinov, Ye., "Radiation Shielding and Dosinetric Monitoring
at Nuclear Power P1ente--Pirat Operating Results," MATERIAL? MP. PO

PROBLEM" RADIATSIONNOY BRZOPASNOSTI PRI EKSPLUATA'BII ATM

ELEKTROS'IANTSIY [Materials of the Conference on Problem of Radiation Safety

in the Operation of Nuclear Power Plants], Czechoslovakia, Prague, 1975.

Gedeonov, L. 1., Blinov, V. A., Stepanov, A. V.. et a]... "Sale Collecting
and Tritium Analysis in the Ground Layer of the Air," MATERIAL? SIMPOZIUHA
P0 NABLYUIENIYU ZA OKRUZBAYUSBCHBY SRBDOY VBLIZI YADBm USNOWK
[Materials of the Smeiun on Observation of the Environment Near Nuclear
Facilities], Poliah Peeple's Republic, Warsaw, 1973.

Ledeonov, L. I., Blinov, V. A., Stepanov, A. V., et a1., "Set of Units for
Taking Samples and Measuring Tritiun in Objects of the External Environnnt,"
AmmAYA ENERGIYA, Vol (.2, No 5, 1977, p 361.

Lomonosov, I. I. and Soshin, 1.. 1)., IZHERENIYB TRITIYA [Measurement of
Tritium], Moscow, Ataniedat, 1968.

COPYRIGHT: Atonizdat, 1981

10845

CSO:

1861/198

l-‘OROFI'ICIALLSEONLY
non-sum ENERGY

UDC 532.538.10

INDUSTRIAL MAGNETOBYDIDDYRAHIC EQUIP” AND PNSSBS

Kiev WOWICHESKIYE HOD USTANOVKI I PROTSESS‘Z in Russian 1980 (signed to press
21 Oct 80) pp 2. 189-190

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Indmtrial Hametohydrodynamic Equipment
and Processes", by Anatoliy Fedorovich Koleanichenko, Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences, Electrodynamics Institute, Izdatel'stvo "Naukwa dunks", 1000 copies.

191 pages]

ducting gas and placed in physical fields-~electric, magnetic and gravitational.

Among such convenient are transformation and transport of energy—conversion of
electromagnetic energy to heat and mechanical work, transport of the heat and material
use of a liquid conductor under the effect of various combinations of electromagnetic,
capillary and thermoconvective effects. The results of theoretical and experimntal
studies of a new class of mgnetohydrodynamic flows—capillary flows that occur

during arc and induction working of metalsu-are diseased. New indmtrial procedures

for working alloys based on the application of mm phenouna are described.

The book is designed for scientific and engineering-technical personnel interested
in the development and application of Ingletohydrodynanic devices. '

There are 82 illustrations, 1 table and 119 references on pages 182-188.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3
Basic Sywols used in the Text 6
Chapter I. Basic Equations of Hagnetohydrodynalics 9
Chapter II. mo Phenomena in Electric Arc Welding 18

l. Volumetric and Surface Forces in Electrically Conducting Drops,
Jets and Plasma 18

2. Form of the Phase Transformation Interfaces During Welding Arc
Fusion of A cylindrical Electrode 30

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter

Chapter

3.

5.

6.

7O

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Quasisteady States of the Free Surface of Drops and Jets of
Electrode Metal

Drop Formation and Transport in Arc Fusion of a Cylindrical
Electrode

Drop Formation and Transport of Electrode Intel During DC Welding
with the Application of Current Pulses

Drop Fornstion and Melt Transport in Electric Arc Welding vith
Nonsteady Electrode Feed

Drop 'Fornetion in Hapetic Pressure lbdulation of Noncontracting
Arcs

III. )BD Pelletizing of lhtals

HHD Methods of Controlling Disintegration of Free Electrically
Conducting Jets

Free Electrically Conducting Jets under the Effect of Sim
Variable Electronagnetic Forces in Sources

Disintegration Conditions of Free Jets Placed in a Longitudinal
Variable Hametic Field

Conditions of Obtaining Spherical Particles
KID Liquid htal and Alloy Dispersers

IV. HID Heat and Haas Transport in Induction Melting Furnaces

Eddy Nature of Electronagnetic Forces and lbchanisns of
Creating Unidirectional Motion

Pressure Developed by Active Sections of a Channel
Hydraulic Drag of Induction Guannels

Simulation of Heat and Mass Transport Processes in Induction
Furnace Channels

Simulation of Industrial Induction Furnaces

V. Gas and Liquid Plug Flou mn Devices

Physical Essence of Processer in Accelerated Gas and Liquid

Flows
Fornation of Plug Flows

Stable Form of Gas-Liquid Interfaces. Hess Variation of
Liquid Dose During Acceleration

Dispersion of Liquid Dose and Haas Transport

Interphase Heat Exchange in Accelerator Channels

Model of the Motion of Liquid Doses of Variable Mass

Losses During Acceleration of a Plug Flow. Efficiency and
Other Energy Parameters of Plug Flow Accelerators

Example Calculation of s Device for Accelerating Plug Flows

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nsukova dusts", 198)

10845

CSO:

“361/195

5‘;

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

UDC 539.3+5l9.2
STRENGTH AND RELIABILITY OF TECHNICAL DEVICES

Kiev PROCHNOST' I NADBZHNOST' TEKHNICEBSKIKH USTROYSTV in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 8 Jan 81) pp 2. 184-191

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from collection "Strength and Relia-
bility of Technical Devices", editor-in-chief V. s. Gudramovich. Institute
of Technical Mechanics. Ukssn Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Naukova
dunks". 1300 copies, 192 pages]

[Text] Current problems of strength and reliability of technical devices

are discussed. Data are presented on theoretical and experimental studies

of the load-bearing capacity and strength of thin-walled systems under static
and dynamic loads with consideration of plastic deformations and creep strains
with complex loading histories. Contact problems of the theory of shells

are discussed as well as questions of optimum design of structural members.
Some problmes of the theory of accelerated tests are outlined. Some questions
of checking the working condition of technical devices are examined.

The collection is intended for engineers and researchers specializing in the
field of strength and reliability. and also for undergraduate and graduate
students with the corresponding majors in colleges and universities.

000 539.374

OSCILLATIONS 0F SYSTEM WITH PHYSICALLY NONLINEAR CHARACTERISTICS UNDER PULSE
LOADING

[Abstract of article by Velichkin, V. A.. Gudramovich. V. 8.. Konovalenko,
V. Ya.. Hakeyev, Ye. H.. Pilipenko. V. V., Popov. A. 1.. Senenenko, V. P.
and Fediy. S. P.]

[Text] An analysis is made of oscillations of a complex mechanical system
that consists of two masses with plates on springs fastened to an imponderable
hinged been of finite stiffness under pulsed action with consideration of
physically nonlinear properties of the spring material.

Accelerations are studied as a function of the magnitude and time of applica-
tion of pulses. ratio of stiffnesses and plastic properties of the springs.
and clearances between the plate and the beam. f

55

FIN!(NHHCJA1.USE|JNLY
FOR‘OFF“1AI.USE10NLY

Calculated and experimental values of accelerations are compared.
Figures i. references 6 Russian.

UDC 519.2+625.011:539.6

PROBABILISTIC PROPERTIES OF FREQUENCIES AND REDUCED HASSES OF TRANSVERSE
OSCILLATIONS OP THIN-HALLED FLUID-FILLED CYLINDRICAL SHELL

[Abstract of article by Velichkin. V. A. and Fediy. S. P.]

[Text] The paper formulates the problem of finding the probabilistic charac-
teristics of a dynamic system by the method of statistical modeling.

An analysis is made of the probabilistic properties of frequencies and reduced
masses of transverse oscillations of a dynamic system based on the example

of a reinforced cylindrical shell filled with liquid.

The conclusions are illustrated by results of numerical calculation.

Figure 1. table 1. references 3 Russian.

UDC 539.386.6:624.074.k

STRESS-STRAIN STATE OF CYLINDRICAL SHELL UNDER LOADING VIA CIRCULAR ELASTIC
SADDLE SUPPORTS

[Abstract of article by Gayduchenko, A. P.. Katan . L. I. and Hakeyev. Ye. H.]
[Text] The authors give the results of an experimental study of the deformed
state )f a cylindrical shell lying on elastic circular saddle supports of
finite dimensions. Calculated data found by a previously developed method
are compared vith experimental results, and an estimate is made of the influ-
ence that accounting for the interaction of support and shell has on the
stressed state of the shell in the vicinity of the support based on the exam-
ple of a tested structure.
Figures 3, table 1, references 6: 6 Russian. 1 Polish, 1 Western.

UDC 539.376
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF CYLINDRICAL SHELL LOAD-BEARING CAPACITY UNDER LOCAL LOAD
[Abstract of article by Gerasimov. V. P.. Gudramovich, V. 8.]
[Text] The paper gives the results of experimental studies of the load-
bearing capacity of cylindrical shells deformed beyond the elastic limit under
the action of local loads of variOus classes applied to the surface of shells
by rigid saddle-support punches.

Figures 5. tables 3. reference 1 Russian.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
unc 539.3710
EXPERDMTAL STUDIES OF BAUSCHINGER EFFECT FOR MiG-6!! ALUMINUM ALLOY

[Abstract of article by Konovalenkov. V. 8]

[Text] The author gives the results of experimental studies of the Bauschinger
effect for Arm-6H. The tests were done on specimens of circular cross section.
Results of processing experimental data are given in the form of tables and

a graph.

Figures 2. table 1. references 3 Russian.
UDC 539.386.6:62lo.072.lo

EXPERIMETAL STUDY OF DEFORHATION IN BULKHEADS RBDIFORCING CYLINDRICAL SHELL
UNDER TRANSVERSE LOCAL LOADING

[Abstract of article by Hakeyev, Ye. M. and Semenenko. V. P.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of an experimental study of the deformed
state of circular bulkheads that reinforce a cylindrical shell under local
loads of various kinds with different laws of distribution in different con-
binations with consideration of their defamation together with the shell.
Calculated data are conpared with experimental results, and an analysis is
made of the effect of some simplifying assmptions that are generally made
in approximate solutions.

Figures la. tables lo, references lo Russian.

UDC 626.07lo.lo
MODEL OF MATCHING REQUIREMENTS IN HULTICRITRRIAL STRUCTURAL DESIGN PROBLEMS
[Abstract of article by Pochtman, Yu. H. and Shalozub, V. [1.]
[Text] The authors discuss the feasibility of using an n-person game model
with a considerable set of criteria in multicriterial problens of optimizing
structural members. It is noted that the model penits simultaneous analysis
of stages of "external" and "internal" design; sons conditions are presented
that are sufficient for constructing a ninimax solution with required proper-
ties. A technique is given for reducing certain problems of optimizing beans.
plates and shells to game problens. Numerical examples are given.

Figure 1. table 1. references 10 Russian.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIN!()FF1C1AI.IJSEZ(NVLY

UDC 539.376

STABILITY OF STRUCTURALLY ORTHOTROPIC SHELLS UNDER CREE? CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Poshivalov, V. P.]

[Text] The author derives equations of stability of structurally orthotropic
shells under conditions of creep. It is assumed that during creep the stresses
and strains in the shell differ little from the stresses of the basic zero-
moment state. Consideration is taken of the biaxial stressed state of the
shell and the uniaxial stressed state of the reinforcing elements.

References 6 Russian.
UDC 539.3

STRESSES IN REGION OF JOINING BETWEEN PIPE AND CYLINDRICAL SHELL

[Abstract of article by Sel'skiy. Yu. 5.]

[Text] An examination is made of the stressed state of a joint for small
ratios of pipe and shell radii.

Coefficients of concentration are obtained for cases of internal pressure.
uniform temperature differential. and also the longitudinal force and torques

applied to the pipe.

It is proposed that a ray method be used for problems with arbitrary boundary
shape (as applied to intersections at an arbitrary angle with small ratios

of radii).

Figures 4. tables 2. references 10: 8 Russian. 2 Hastern.
UDC 539.3

PRINCIPAL EQUATIONS IN THEORY OF SHELLS WITH DIFFERENT HODULI IN TENSION AND
COMPRESSION

[Abstract of article by Tamurov. N. G. and Turovtsev, G. V.]

[Text] The paper proposes a model for a material that has different elastic
characteristics in compression and tension. Without discussing the details
of deriving the model, the authors find the principal equations of a theory
of thin shells in the geometrically nonlinear approximation that are converted

to the corresponding classical expressions in the case of a single-modulus
material. A method is outlined for solving problems with the proposed physical

relations.

References 7: 5 Russian. 2 Hestern.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UN 539.384.6z626.072.lo
DESIGNING REINFORCEMENT RINGS NITB NAXIMIH BEDDING STIPFNESS

[Abstract of article by Thacheva, T. V.]

[Text] The Prager optimality criterion is used to solve the problem of opti-
nizing the cross sectional shapes of rings that reinforce a cylindrical shell
under loading by a concentrated transverse force. The optimum area of the

supporting layers of a sandwich ring is determined. An example of calculation
is given.

Figures 3. references 6: 6 Russian, 2 western.

unc 62§.O72.Io

PROPERTIES OF OPTIMUM RING FRAME DESIGNS 0ND“ MINE!) FORCE AND MRRATURE
LOADING

[Abstract of article by Binkevich. Ye. V. and Dzyuba, A. P.]

[Text] The problem of designing nonunifornly heated ring frames loaded by
concentrated forces is numerically solved on the basis of a maximum principle
with consideration of limitations on deviation of the shape of the axis from
circular. and also strength and structural deviations. The properties of

optinun designs are studied. An analysis is made of the particulars of using
necessary conditions of optimality in design. Results of digital computer
calculations are given. Figures 5. table 1. references 3 Russian.

UDC 539.37h
DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF PLASTIC SPHERICAL SNELL UNDER REPEAIED PUlSﬂl LOADING

[Abstract of article by Gudramovich. V. s. and Shatsillo. S. 1.]

[Text] A formulation is given for the problem of dynamic analysis of the
notion of a plastic spherical shell under repeated pulsed loading. The factor
that accounts for the nonunifornity of properties that is acquired during
preceding loading is the fields of residual stresses. The finite element
method is used for the analysis; the finite elements are selected in the form
of frusta of cones. An examination is made of the problem of motion of an
initially homogeneous shell with pulsed loading on the basis of isotropic

flow theory. References 14: 12 Russian, 2 Western.

UDC 539.3
CYLINDRICAL SHELL BEHAVIOR WITH DYNAMICALLY APPLIED NONUNIFORH EXTERNAL PRESSURE

[Abstract of article by Hakarenko, A. D. and Hakarenko, N. 3.]

[Text] The authors consider the problem of stability of a cylindrical shell
with dynamic application of nonaxisyuetric external pressure. Results of

59

FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

calculations are given that were obtained with the use of a specially conpiled
algorithm enabling investigation of the process of deformation and loss of
stability of shells with respect to space and tine coordinates. Figures 3.
references 3 Russian.

UDC 519.248:62-192
DETERMINING MARIAN“ m ACCELERATED TEST THEORY
[Abstract of article by Avranenko, V. 1.]
[Text] A definition of invariance of a factory that produces goods by batches
is proposed on the basis of a statistical probability approach that is different
from the existing definition. A definition of invariance of the properties
of items relative to a load is introduced. An illustration is given of the

feasibility of using these concepts to solve problems of the theory of accel-
erated tests. References 6 Russian.

upc Sl9.2.68:62-l92
mmnmzcaz. most. or svs'rm samurai!
[Abstract of article by Belosvetov. s. A. and Dyschenko, V. Ys.]
[Text] Based on an approach to systena analysis as comprising a paired random
process and level. the authors propose nathematical models of processes of
structural and phase degradation of a system as a basis for developing algo-
ritlsns and for nachine simulation of real degradation processes to evaluate
the reliability of a system. Reference 1 Russian.

UDC 629.6:519.2-l92
DEFINITION OF RATIONAL MAINTENANCE srs'nm FOR COMPONENTS OF TRACTION UKITS
[Abstract of article by Bosov, A. A. and Khandrigs. A. 6.]
[Text] A method is proposed for determining the periods of renovating compo-
nents of traction units. An exalple is given of designing and setting up

a system for maintenance of. the III-9N traction engine. Figures 5. tables
lo, references 2 Russian.

UDC 519.26

sous PARTICULARS OF USING STANDARDIZATION IN COHPUTKRIZING REGRESSIW ANALYSIS
ALGORITHMS

[Abstract of article by Dolgiy. V. I... Perlik. V. I. and Sokolov. A. 8.]

[Text] An exaninstion is nade of the effect of the sequence of linearizing
and standardizing variables in regression analysis algorithms. It is shown

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that when constructing incomplete second-order models, algorithms based on
standardizing variables before linearizing are more correct in all cases.
Table 1, references 6 Russian.

UDC 539.2

EVALUATING DUEABILITY OF MATERIALS UNDER AGING CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Pereverzev. Ye. 8.]

[Text] Approximate analytical expressions are given for evaluating the dura-
bility of materials under aging conditions. Approximate methods are considered
for taking account of damage accumulation due to mechanical loading and natural
aging. References 0 Russian.

UDC 621.3
RELATION BETWEEN TNBRMODYNAMIC AND STATISTICAL EQUIVALENCE PRINCIPLES

[Abstract of article by Pereverzev. Ye. 8.]

[Text] Based on a thermodynamic approach. conditions are found for which
the thermodynamic principle of equivalence is identical to the statistical
method of equal probabilities. It is shown that in this case the failure
rate is proportional to the rate of increase in entropy. References 6 Russian.

UDC 519.281

STATISTICAL ESTIMATION OF TECHNICAL SYSTEM RELIABILITY INDICES DY EFFICIENCY
FUNCTION METHOD

[Abstract of article by Perlik, V. 1.]

[Text] The author considers the statistical aspects of the method of efficiency
fucntions; the main principles of the method have been formulated in previous
papers by this author. First an investigation is made of the theoretical
sequence of statistical estimation of the index of reliability of a system,
which in principle enables derivation of the exact solution. Practical imple-
mentation of this sequence is difficult because of insurmountable mathematical
difficulties. The process of approximate statistical estimation recommended

in the article is based on a moment approach. A detailed examination is made

of problems involved in getting the initial information. References 3 Russian.

UDC 519.24

STATISTICAL METHOD OF EVALUATING SCALE PASTOR FOR ROCK STRENGTH PROPERTIES

[Abstract of article by Rubets. G. T.]

[Text] Various generalizations of the Weibull theory of strength are
examined on the basis of the theory of distributions of ordered statistics.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is shown how these generalizations can be applied to estimation of the
scale factor of rock strength characteristics, as well as those of structural
components in underground structures. References 10: 5 Russian. 5 Western.

‘ UDC 519.268:62-l92
NOEL TO ACCOUNT ["08 A PRIORI INFORMATION IN ACCELERATED TEST PROBLEM
[Abstract of article by Ryballta, K. P.]

[Text] The author examines a method of determining how the mathematical ex-
pectation of time to failure (He) depends on the load vector (c) from results
of accelerated tests using a priori information on the distribution law for
time to failure and the function of change in H; as dependent on c. Refer-
ences 3 Russian.

UDc 621:004.l7:620.l99
BAYES MODEL FOR SEQUENTIAL_EVALUATION OF TECHNICAL SYSTEM RELIABILITY INDEX
[Abstract of article by Savchuk. V. 9.]

[Text] A mathematical model is proposed for evaluating the lower confidence
limit of the reliability index for predetermined confidence coefficient. The
model uses a Bayes approach. Inversion of the model enables planning of the
number of demonstration tests when confirming reliability. It is shown that
carrying out tests of long duration considerably reduces the number of test
specimens as compared with the conventional method. Table 1. references 3
Russian.

UDC 62l.3.019.3:519

DETERMINING RELIABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR ITEMS FRO“ PREDETERHINED LEVEL OF
SYSTEH RELIABILITY

[Abstract of article by Skripnik, V. H. and Spirkov, S. “.1
[Text] An expression is derived for determining guaranteed up times of items
in a complex system with predetermined system reliability requirement when

the distribution of service lives of the items conforms to Heibull law.
Figure 1, references 3 Russian.

UDC 620.171.311.2-192

POSSIBLE METHODS OF RECALCULATING RELIABILITY CHARACTERISTICS UNDER DIFFERERT
LOADING CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Stepanov, V. V.]

[Text] The author considers some possible methods of recalculating reliability
characteristics of technical devices under different loading conditions. A

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
relationship is established between the proposed formulas and known principles
of reliability theory. Figures 2. references 5 Russian.

“06 62:519.2

READINESS PACTOR AND OVERHEAD COST OF TECHNICAL DEVICE FOR COMBINED MNITORING
AND VARIOUS RATES OF RESTORING OPERABILII'Y

[Abstract of article by Chunakov, L. 1).]
[Text] Analytical expressions are found for the readiness factor. operating
costs and average number of restorations of opersbility in the case of expo-

nential distribution of the time of fail-free operation and restoration.
References 3 Russian.

ch 62-192:539.3
DURABILITY EVALUATION HBTIDD USING sm-mnrov NOBEL
[Abstract of article by Shiyan, 0. V.]
[Text] An examination is made of a method of accelerated tests -- the stepwise
loading method. A method is proposed for estimating the parameters of the
failure distribution function under operating conditions using the Rorolyuk .
theorem of mean sojourn time of a semi-Markov process in a fixed set of states
and the principle of maximum likelihood. References 3 Russian.

UDC 62:519.2
EVALUATING DURAIILITY OF TECHNICAL DEVICE WITH PERIODIC HORXABILII'Y CHER

[Abstract of article by Chunakov, 1.. 1).]

[Text] An estimate is obtained for the durability of a technical device with
periodic monitoring of its working state when the nathenatical expectation

of the tine of fail-free operation is known. References 3 Russian.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nsukova dunks", 1981

6610 _
CSO: 1861/189

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TURBINE MD "Gm 13810!

UDC 621.165000.5
OPTIMAL LAST STAGE DESIG! OF HIGH-MR STEAM MINES

Kiev OPTIMAL'NOYE PWTIROVANIYE P08131113? 3mm 108800"!!! 2mm TURBIN
in Russian 19% (signed to press 7 Jul 80) pp 2, 226-227

[Annotation and table of contents fron book "Optimal Last Stage Design of High-

Power Steam Turbines". by Leonid Aleksandrovich Shwenko-Shubin, Anatoliy
Alekaeyevich Tarelin and Yuriy Petrovich Antiptsev. Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences,
Problem of Machine Building Institute; Izdatel'stvo "Nation dunks", 1000 copies,

228 pages]

[Text] This mnogrsph discusses the problem of optiml last-stage design of high-
power steam turbines. A study is made of the physicomathemtical and engineering
principles of optimal turbine stage design. optiniaation of the choral gas dynamic
process and blade design. The folloring are presented: a mathematical model of the
thermal gas dynamic process and its investigation ming the existing mthemtical
methods of finding optiml solutions and Iodern counter engineering means. The

specifications and geometric characteristics. A fomlized blade design process is
proposed which offers the possibility of using simple methods of optimizing various
types of designs which are convenient in practical application.

The book is designed for scientific and engineering-technical personnel specializing
in turbine building.

There are 54 illustrations, 3 tables, and 59 references on pages 222-225.

Table of Contents

Foreword 3

Basic Symbols used in the Text 7

Chapter I. Problem of Optilsl Last Stage Design of Power Turbines 9

1. Last Stage in Power Turbine Design System 9

2. Last Stage Operating Quality Criteria l3

3. Structural Bleunts of the Last Stage in its Design System 16
6h

MWWEONLY
Chapter II. Primary Problem of Constructing a Last Stage Mathematical

Model 23
1. Statement of Problem of Optimizing Plow maracteristics in Stage

clearances 23
2. Formation of the Assignment and Restrictions on Optimal Blade Design 31
3. General Structure of Optimal Blade Design System 37
a. Problems of Selected Axial Clearance and its Outlines 42
Chapter III. Mathematical Ibdel of Thermal Gas Dynamic Process and .
Optimization Methods ’07
1. State of the Art of the Problem 47
2. Basic Propositions and System of Flow Equations 50
3. Initial Specifications and Quality Criteria 55
lo. Optimization and Limitation Parameters 58
S. lbthnds of Solving the Synthesis and Analysis Problems 60

Chapter IV. Analytical Method of Optimizing Stage Kinematic Characteristics 63

1. Optimization by Quality Criterion - Integral Stage Efficiency 63
2. Optimization by Quality Criterion -- Integral Stage Energy Loss

with Output Speed 76
3. Maximum Integral Stage Efficiency with Minimm Integral Energy

Loss with Output Speed 83
lo. Some Peculiarities of Considering Restrictions 86
5. Study of the Basic Laws of Blade Twist 95

Chapter V. Optimization of the Stage Paramters by Gunputer Simulation 110

1. Simulation Model of Thermal Gas Dynamic Process of a Stage 112
2. Study Performed by the Scan mthod and a Procedure for Processing

the Results 117
3. Optimization of Stage Economy by the Random Search Method 127
Chapter VI. Designing the Blade Cascades of Tun-bomchines 13)
1. Basic Principles, Initial Data, Parameters. Restrictions 130
2. Simplest ﬁlo-Parametric Profile 138
3. Profiles with Given Configuration of the Output Part of the Outer

Profile 166
lo. Profiles with Increased Strength Characteristics 156
5. Optimization of Blade Cascades 160
6. Blade Cascade Design Considering Peculiarities of Actual Blade

Engineering 166
Chapter VII. Engineering of the Working Part of Blades 175
1. Basic Principles, Initial Data, Restrictions 175
2. Analytical Method of Shaping the Blade 185

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070049-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Numerical Methods of Forming the Blade Surface
lo. Optimization of Blade Design
5. Research Results

Bibliography‘

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1980

108165
CSO: 1861/199

66

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070049-6
lANIGAIIOﬂ AID GUIDANCE SYSTEMS

UDC 53l.55:521.1

CORRECTING INERTIAL GUIDANCE SYSTEMS BY USING COMBINED SUBSIDIARY POSITIONAL
AND VELOCITY INFORMATION

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NADK sssn: HEKHANIKA TVERDOGO TBLA in Russian
No 5, Sep-Oct 81 (manuscript received 9 Oct 79) pp 12-19

[Article by V. I. Kalenova. V. H. Horozov. N. A. Parusnikov and A. G.
Shakot'ko. Moscow]

[Text] An investigation is made of the problem of correct-
ing an inertial guidance system with combined utilization

of redundant positional and velocity information. In con-
nection with the solution of this problem the authors discuss
one of the possible correcting algorithms that realize decom-
position of the problem with respect to components of the
correction vector.

In present-day navigational systems that are based on the
inertial guidance method. the inertial information is sup-
plemented by information of noninertial nature to improve
accuracy properties. The problem of correcting inertial
guidance systems by using redundant information can be formu-
lated as a problem of estimating the vector of state of

a linear system from given measurements (Ref. 1. 2].

To evaluate the possibilities of correcting such systems
with respect to subsidiary information of a given type.

the linear theory of observability should be used [Ref.

3. 6]. Analysis of the observability of the system enables
discrimination of the variables that can be evaluated. de—
termination of the limiting accuracy of evaluation of such
variables. and also construction of a class of suitable
algorithms of evaluation that are subject to further detailed
study. In addition. analysis of observability enables esti-
mation of errors due to various simplifications in construct-
ing the correction algorithm.

In Ref. 2. 5 an analysis was made of observability. and
some correction algorithms were constructed for inertial
guidance systems using either positional or velocity subsidiary

67

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFlCIAI. USE ONLY

information. We discuss below some modifications of combined
use of this information, and propose corresponding estimation
algorithms. In doing so. we use one of the methods of de-
composing the observed space with respect to the components
of the correction vector.

1. Consider the linear system
dﬁldt-GH-q, o-IIE-i-r (1-1)

Here E; is an n-dimensional vector of state. a is an s-dimensionsl vector of
measurement, G. H are fixed matrices of the corresponding dimensionality,

q. r are random vector processes of the white noise type with given intensi-
ties. It is seemed that the pair (6. H) is observable. It is required to
get an estimate 5° of quantity C by measurement a on segaent [to. t].

In constructing practical estimation algorithm, it is often advisable to
decompose (split) the estimation problem with respect to the components of
the measurement vector so that this problem is reduced to a series of sub-
problens with scalar measurements. Generally speaking, the deccmposition
can be carried out in different ways [Ref. 6]. Let us consider the problem
of decomposition for a two-component measurement vector 0- (01. o;)"'. having
in mind a situation where the time interval on which information a; and 02 is
used in conjunction is preceded by a long time interval with arrival of only
information 01-

Let OWN}. oa=h.’§ and let {X}. {Y} be spaces observable by using measurements
01 and a; respectively.

We use the notation dim {EJ-n. din] {IQ—I'm. dim {Y} -1. Obviously m‘". 1‘".
m+l>n. Let us also introduce the notation

“1"“. "a-c'aln - - - 0 “IN-Grab - ‘ °

(12)
11")!“ bg—G'bh . o . , bng-Gfbh . . .

The vector z-(z..r....r..)’ made up of components observable by means of quantity
01 takes the form

1:14;. L.-C.(a.a. . . . a...)' (1-3)

where c; is some nondegenerate square matrix whose selection is not directly
related to the decomposition problem. In virtue of the linear dependence
of vectors a., a....., a... a... we have the representation

“Gil-olaa'l'ozag+ . . . +0.“- (1.4)

Here the 01 are constant coefficients. From (LU-(1.4) we get
. (ix/.dl-Gaﬁ'qn ou-g.':+r. (1.6)

o a o...o
"3'01“?! 0 o 1... o

g‘nb‘q 8- .......

1'_‘o”. -10 0 0 .01
‘* ‘ ow. 0.0.0....0,

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The standard algorithn that yields estimate x' of vector x is described by
the equation

dz° / d1-G..r°+K. (o.-g.’:°) (1.8)

Vector It, is unambiguously determined either by the Ralman optimum filtration
method. or from the condition of assiment of roots of characteristic equa-

tion |pB-G.+K.g.’|-0. At sufficiently low intensity of the measurement error
rx, the initial condition ¢°(t.) -x.° should be given as :.°-C.(o..oo...o)',

Let us introduce vector :—(z.:....x.-..)'. n—m<1 so that
3-bit. Lr-Cg(b.bg...bg-.), (1.7)
where C; is a square nondegenerate matrix.

Since the set of vectors «1.. 11...... a... 6.. b.,.... b.-. can serve as a basis of

the space {E}- vectors : and "f“ are related by the mutually equivalent trans-
formation

3 L
I, I'LL la-l I: I. dubs/=0 (1.3)
By analogy with (1.5). we get

d1/dt-Gngx+calz+QIo at-‘Irx+rl (1'9)
Gui-Caoﬂu". qu-Ldl. G's-010.0,", g.’- (10...0)'C," (1.10)

0 0...0 0 1 0 ...0

0 0...0 0 0 1 ...0

(D a. ----- . 0 a ....... a a - a a

’ oo...o ' o o o ...1

'h Tau-V. 'nol 9n» ’MI“"n

and the elements of matrices 0x. 0; are determined from the relation

bm-MI I-‘Plnl+ . . . +Q~ﬂn+W-¢|b.+ . . . +q1.b.--

We seek the estimate 2' of vector 2 in the form
dz° / dt—G..:°+G..z°+K. (ox-(32°) (1.11)

estimate at“ being given by algorithm (1.6). Vector K2 is uniquely defined
if roots are assigned for characteristic equationlpE-Gn+K.g.’|-0. Estimate
6° of vector 5 is found by using relation (1.8)

ﬁ‘ - “I f." (1.12)

The algorithn described by relations (1.6), (1.11). (1.12) has a two-stage
structure. Let us make the folloving remarks about algorithms of this kind.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if information 01 arrives on interval [t9. t1]. then for sufficiently mall
errors qx, rx the error of the estimate Ax-x-x' can also be made sufficiently
small by time t; by suitable selection of Kx. This reduces the influence

of this error on the estimate of quantity 2 found by algorithm (1.11) with
combined use of information o; and 01 on interval [tn t].

If vector 2 does not have excessively high dimensionality, then the time inter-
val necessary for getting an acceptable estimate 2" may not be too long. The
latter circumstance is often decisive for practical use of an estimation algo-
rithm.

Canment. A more general case of realization of the idea of "two-stage struc-
ture" is this: vector x is defined as before by relation (1.3); vector 2
is defined by transformation z-Lﬁz such that the rows of matrix L°z and the

rows of matrix 1.; are linearly independent, and therefore matrix L°- II 2',“ is

a square degenerate matrix (otherwise matrix 1.; is arbitrary). In this case,
by analogy with (1.9) we get

dz/dt-G..°z+a..°x+q.. a.-g..’x+gn’z+r.

where G..°. G.,°, 3.3, g..’ are determined from (1.10) by transformation Lg. The
corresponding algoritlml of estimation of quantity 2 takes the form

as / dt-G..°x°+G..°z°+K.° («ﬂuff—33¢) (1.13)

It is essential that the estimate x° given by algoritlml (1.6) must not depend
on measurement 0;. As a consequence of this circumstance. algoritln (1.13)

is generally speaking less preferable than (1.11) since the error of the esti-
mate Ax- x- x° influences the error of the estimate MI 2- 2° with weighting
factor K; - the gain selected from the condition of a sufficiently high degree
of asymptotic stability of the equations of errors of the estimate yielded

by algorithm (1.13).

Let us give a useful modification of algorithm (1.6). (1.11), (1.12) for a
special case. Let the set of vectors 0.. 0...... 0.. b.. b;...., b, for some £<m
form the basis of space {5}. Let us introduce the vectors n-faﬁ. I..-C..(a.a....
01),; v-LJ. [a-cnhundua-uam)’: w-Lo" L.-Cu(b.ba...b,)’. where C... C“, C" are
nondegenerate square matrices. The behavior of vectors u, v, v conforms to
equations

du/ au-G..u+G-av+q-
d0 / dt-G,.u+G..v+q. (1.14)
dw / dl-G..u+G..w+ I].
GuHCchll". ch-cuemcII-‘n- G-I-ansCu"
cut-CHPCH". ova—€119.03". Gun-cuopcn"
¢.-L.q. “-64. vc-La

010...0 00...0
00!...0 00...0
F; ...... . F°= .....
000. I 00 0
000. 0 lo 0

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
................

9-" o o .o ' °-= 9 o 1
0, 0. . 0‘ 0",. 0“, 0“
0 0 0 0 i 0

0-. o o . o a DU- 0 o ‘
5| 0. 6. °m 6“, an

and the elements of matrices D“. D. are determined from the relation
bug-6.G|+ . . . +6ﬂl+6u~|b|+ . . . +6.61

Let us note that the dimensionality of system (1.11.). equal to m+ j, is greater
than that of initial system (1.1) by an amount m-i. and vectors 5 and I," are
related by the reciprocally equivalent transformation

mm. ».-|2~.I

Components 01. oz of measurement vector (7 are: o.-s.’u+r.. g.’-(10...0)Cu".
aa-er-Ha. 3.3-“ 0. . . 0)c..7'.

The corresponding algorithn for estimation of vector 5 takes the form

du° / dc-G..u°+G..v°+K. (tn-330°)
dv‘ / dz-G..u°+G..v'+K. (av-:31?)
dw’ / dt-Guu°+Guw'+K-(¢a-lu'w.)

ﬁ'rbi'lsl

Let us make a comment regarding possible selection of the quantity i-dimu.
Heuristic considerations reinforced by practical experience show that when
estimating components of the vector of state that are derivatives of an observ-
able quantity, the time required for estimating a given component with pre-
determined accuracy increases with the derivative order of this component.
Therefore it is desirable if possible to form the basis of space (5} by a

set of vectors {an a2...” ai. b1. b2,..., bﬂ’ such that max“. .1) is mini-
mum.

2. Consider a two-component inertial guidance system with levelable platform
in which altitude information is provided by altimeters or given a priori.
The following trihedral representations are used in describing inertial sys-
tems [Ref. 1]: ideal trihedron Hxxxzxgmx), point H being identified with
the moving object. ﬁx; is the direction of the local vertical. orientation
of trihedron ﬁx in the azimuth is given; instrumental trihedron anagrams),
which is the material realization of trihedron H: in the navigation system;
model trihedron Hygyzygmy), which is the numerical pattern of the ideal

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trihedron (the orientation of the trihedron is determined by nunerical infor-
mation contained in the computer of the inertial system).

The mutual orientation of trihedra Dix, Hz is determined by the vector of small
rotation ox- (agu2n3)7; for trihedra My, Hz -- by vector 3x' (8182897; for
trihedra Hx. My -- by vector yx- (1112797. The quantities a1. 81. 71 (1" l.
2. 3) are projections of the corresponding vectors on the axes of trihedron
Mx. Let us denote the vector of absolute angular velocity of trihedron ﬁx in
projections on its own axes by In" (wxlmxzwngr. To be specific. we will
assrme that trihedron ﬁx is azimuthally free (um-0). Having in mind mainly
aircraft guidance. we will assume that the follouing conditions are met.

I. The velocity of motion of thevehicle is small compared with orbital ve-
locity: ”12+wx22¢woz (no is the Schuler frequency).

2. Evolutions of the ve icle with respect to altitude h are limited: h<e2a,
h'<0.lamax(wx1’+mxzz) (a is the semimajor axis of the terrestrial ellip-
soid. e1 is the square of eccentricity of this ellipsoid).

The equations of errors of the inertial guidance system in this case can be
written as [Ref. 2]:

al.-5Pt+V-cv _ as.-6P:+Vn
6p.'--o.'(a.+¢.) —m..~;. . (2.1)
6P='--oo.' (ca—a.) hum.

§|'-—0n53+V-h pa'-0uﬁa+vn
(2.2)

pa.-0nBI-0npr+vu
TI-au‘ﬂu 11-11343: . H (2.3)

Here Gpl, 6p; are variables that have the sense of velocity impulse. v“. um,
W: are errors of inertial information about the projections of angular ve-
locity of the instrulental trihedron. c1, c: are the normalized errors of
inertial information about the projections of the external force applied to
point H on axes H21. M22.

We are considering the problem of correction of inertial guidance systems by
using redundant positional and velocity information. The vector of velocity
correction o.'-(o..‘o.a')’ takes the form [Ref. 2]:

Ou‘ -6PI+ullm1+ unﬂa- "8158+ W...

(2.0'
on‘-6Pr‘unﬂn+uuDI—usupn'I'Wn‘
The vector of positional correction takes the form [Ref. 2]:
a."-1.+w.". oa"-xa+wa“ (2-5)

where u... ".3. u.. are projections of the angular velocity of the earth on the
axes of trihedron M1, "’n’. 10.13 Wu". w,” are the normalized instrumental errors
of the corresponding redundant information.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we will solve the correction problem with the following assumptions.

1. Motion of the vehicle is along "steady" trajectories (0u”+0!n")“'<m°l
(u,,'+u,;) — this condition is let in particular when the vehicle moves along
a great circle at constant velocity.

2. The correction time tk is nail compared with the period associated with
proper notion of the vehicle: k<2ul (o..'+0a')"-

3. The model assumed for instrumental errors is: quantities “x30 :1 are
practically constant on the correction interval; w.'-Inn'+r«'. wu'-w;,. +r..'.
w..". wt... are nearly constant quantities on the correction interval; r1“, rue
are random processes of the white noise type with given intensities (i- l. 2.
j- l, 2. 3). He introduce dimensionless time t-wot. and dimensionless quan-
tities

n,-6p,/ 0., of—o‘,‘ / 0)., u.-m../ mm, m-udl um.

\‘.-\'u/00 “-1.1. a: 5-3.1): “-331“ '0“ +04 I”.

Under the above conditions. u<0.l. The characteristic values of variables
on. :1). r... v. usually are of the same order p; the characteristic values of the
variables h. 1. by the instant of start of correction may be of order p/u;
the characteristic values of quantities on. u. are of the order of unity;
the characteristic value of the quantity n-wot. lies in a range of 1-3.

Let us introduce two groups of variables x1 (1- l, 2,.... 6) and y (j - 1,
2,..., 8). Variables x1 are associated with analysis of observability of
system (2.1), (2.2) by subsidiary velocity information (2.4). Variables y
are associated with analysis of observability of system (2.1). (2.2) by sug-
sidiary positional intonation (2.5):

z.-a.+eg. :.-u.+v.

z.-n(u.D.—u.lia)+10..‘-v.+uuas.

(2.6)
ls-ag—CI. z.-u.+v,
r.-Mush-u.”+wa‘—Va+uu.c.
UN'TFHI’M". .y:_n'+”w‘p'
ya-ari-sh y.-n.+v.
(2.7)

y.-1.+wu". y.-n.—um.p,
sly-are" y.-u.+v.

Leaving the former notation for differentiation with respect to dimensionless
time 1', and disregarding terms of order uzp. we get the following relations:

z.'-.r.. x.'-—z.-u¢o;vs
:,'--p’u,(u.a.—u.b.)+n(uaV.—u.va)
.r.'-.z.. z,'--z.+uo.v. (2.8)
x.'-p.'¢o.(u.p:—uzﬂ.)+n(u.Va—uavn)
o.‘—.r,+z,+nu,z.+r.‘. o.‘-.r.+.r.—uu.z.+r.‘

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFK]A[.USE(N‘LY

£11."ch Vs.-"V’+|“(¢°1UI-Ntlh)01+W110

VI-Uo. y.'--y:-|mav.. v.'-y.

v-'--uv+u'(mw.-o.v-)u.—no.‘3.
III-v» v-'--Ih+uo.v. (2.9)
lulu-"‘4'“... Us” "Va‘l'ﬁn

We note that equations (2.8), (2.9) are inhomogeneous relative to variables
x1. y , but the terms that introduce inhomogeneity are of order up. The
quantity u is treated here as a small parameter.

Analysis of observability of relations (2.8). (2.9) shows that variables

x1, yj are readily observable variables when the appropriate redundant infor-
mation is used. 1. e. they permit an estimate with acceptable accuracy on

the correction interval. In this regard. it is feasible for practical purposes
to use the algorithms described in section 1 as estimation algorithms.

3. A comparison of the two groups of observable variables (2.6) and (2.7)
shows that the space that is observable by using positional information is
to a considerable extent overlapped by the space that is observable using
velocity information. Besides, there are identical variables among those
introduced above:
3 - .-a.+s.. z.- .-n.+v.
I U U (3“)

Zc-Uv-aa—BI. io-Vs-ﬂd'v;
These variables are the dynamic errors of the inertial systems.

Combined utilization of positional and velocity information can be approached
from two standpoints. According to one point of view. when positional infor-
mation is available there is almost no need for velocity information. On

the other hand, as a rule positional information is available for only a short
period of time (about 30 minutes). whereas velocity information arrives over

a much longer time interval. including the period preceding the interval of
positional correction. Therefore it is advisable first to use velocity infor-
mation to estimate the variables observable in this case. and then as the
positional information begins to arrive. to use it for estimating the remaining
observable variables. Such an approach is in some sense natural. First those
variables are estimated that change fairly rapidly (with the Schuler frequency)
and then the slowly changing variables are estimated.

In accordance with the results of sections 1 and 2, the following algorithm
is proposed for combined processing of positional and velocity data:

z.°'-z.°+K.‘ ('o.‘-¢:°-za°-uuaz.°)
11°. " -Z:°+ Ki. ('0.‘ _:’o_z’o__uu’z.0)
Irv-Ks. (0:'—$:.—3s°-PW:)

3:. -Is°+K|. (01' ‘39.” °+W‘:3|°)
(32)
z.°'- -z.°+Ka' (o.'-x.°—x.°+uum°)

z.°'-Ka‘(oa'-z.°-z.°+ 11:132.”)
7h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ibo-"VFW“ (mu ’91.)

luv-Wan (emf-mu 3 J' ”30‘1"!!!” ”3:.
”1°. 'Uo°+ K0. (Can-Vs.)

y.°' -|t’«o. (unvf- my?) “6‘ (o.“-y.°) -=«'

(3.3)

In the simplest feasible version. coefficients K6.K? are chosen so that

the characteristic polynomials of subsystems of equations that describe the
behavior of errors of the estimate 611. Aug. Ax; and Ale, Axs. Ax. take the
form (pd-Ac)3 (disregarding relations between subsystems), while the character-
istic polynomials of subsystems of equations relative to the quantities Ayx.
by; and Ays. Aye take the form (p+ A92. where Ac>0, Ak>0 are the degrees

of attenuation. 0n interval [to. t1], when only velocity information is coming
in. -K.‘=-K.‘-K.‘—K.'-o, The algoritlu described by expressions (3.2). (3.3)
was simulated on a digital computer at different noise intensities ric and r1H
and different values of n,h,ln.lr The results of simulation showed that the
algorithm is completely acceptable for practical implementation.

Let us note that relations (3.2), (3.3) can easily give a correction algorithm
that accounts for all possible situations that might be encountered in the
given problem. such as: only positional information; only velocity information
but preceded by a run of positional information; neither positional nor veloci-
ty information after a combination correction run. etc.

REFERENCES

l. Parusnikov, N. A.. "The Correction Problem in Inertial Guidance". NAUCHNYYE
TRUDY INSTITUTA WIKI MSKOVSKOGO GOSUDARSTVENNOGO UNIVERSITEIA. No 29,
1973. p 102.

2. Parusnikov. N. A.. Kalenova, V. 1.. Parusnikova. 0. 1.. shakot'ko, A. 6..
“Problems of Observability in Correcting Inertial Guidance Systems",
NAUCHNYYB TRUDY INSTITUTA NEWARK! MKOVSKOGO GOSUDARSTVBNNOGO
UNIVERSITBTA. No 33, 1974. p ll.

3. Roytenberg. Ya. N., "Avtomaticheskoye upravleniye" [Automatic Control],
Moscow. Nauka. 1971. 552 pp.

4. Zade, L., Dezoyer, Ch., "Teoriya lineynykh sistem" [Theory of Linear
Systems], Moscow, Nauka, 1970, 706 pp.

5. Parusnikov, N. A.. Kalenova. V. I., Parusnikova, O. 1.. Shakot'ko. A. 6..
"Algorithms of Positional and Velocity Correction in Inertial Guidance".
NAUCHNYYE TRUDY INSTITUTA MEKHANIKI HOSKOVSKOGO GOSUDARS‘IVBNNOGO
UNIVERSITBTA. No 33. 1971., p 22.

6. Razorenov, G. N.. "Decomposability of Linear Dynamic Systems". AVIOMATIKA
1 TBLEMEKHANIKA, No l, 1978. p 12.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Hekhanika tverdogo tela",

I98]

6610
cso: 1861/191. 75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FLUID BMICS

UDC 533.6.013.N:629.7.025.3

SUPERSONIC FLOR WTIONS WITH INJECTION 0F MASS AND HEAT

Kiev VOMUSWIYA SVKRKHZVUKOVOGO m PR1 “WPODVODE in Russian
1980 (signed to press 9 Jan 80) PP 2-5

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Supersonic Plow Perturbations
Hith Injection of Mass and Best". by Nikolsy Dmitriyevich Kovalenko. UkSSR
Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks". 1150 copies. 226 pages]

[Text] The monograph examines interaction of a supersonic stream with local
sources of mass and heat. Models are described for various cases of interac-
tion. The author considers the way that the physical properties and param-
eters of the injected and onconing streams influence the flow pattern. Par-
ticular attention is given to investigation and development of engineering
methods of calculating perturbations of pressure and aerodynamic forces on

a surface in a flow as various gases and fluids are injected. and also to

the study of the way that efficiency in setting up aerodynamic forces is in-
fluenced by the parameters of the injected streams and the injecting devices.

Intended for engineers and scientists working in the field of aerodynamics,
and may be of use to instructors. undergraduate and graduate studnets in in-
stitutions of higher education in corresponding areas. Figures 99. references
[60.

Contents page
Preface 5
List of symbols 9
Chapter 1: Supersonic Flow of Ideal Gas Around Plat Surface in Presence of
Mass and Heat Sources 11

l. Supersonic flow perturbations caused by discrete or continuously

distributed sources of mass and heat 12
2. Gas flow in zone of volumetric injection of mass and heat 27
3. Supersonic flow perturbations and aerodynamic forces on flat surface

caused by minor volumetric injection of mass and heat 37
a. Gas flow in the presence of minor injection of nose and heat on surface

in a flow 44
5. Pressure perturbations and aerodynamic forces on flat surface caused

by intense sources of mass and heat 48

76

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

Approximate calculation of departing shock wave in front of semi-
permeable body adjacent to surface in a flow
Plow around jet barriers

Chapter 2: Hydrodynamics of Injected Lateral Jets

1.

2.

3.
h.

5.
6.

Mechanism of penetration and decay of a lateral fluid jet in a super-
sonic stream

Models of fluid jet penetration into supersonic stream

Height of jet barrier and asymptote of spray plume

Influence that fluid properties and the parameters of injecting
devices have on depth of jet penetration into gas flow

Relative motion and evaporation of liquid in spray plme

Penetration of gas jets

chapter 3. Pressure Perturbations and Aerodynamic Forces on Surface in a

1.

2.

3.

be

5.

6.

7.

Flow With Gas Injection

Plow pattern above surface in supersonic flow with local injection
of gas

Pressure perturbation and elementary force diagrams on surface in a
flow with gas injection

Principal components of aerodynamic forces with gas injection.
Injection coefficient

Aerodynamic forces in Laval nozzle with asymmetric gas injection into
supersonic stream

Integral method of calculating lateral and axial forces with gas
injection into a nozzle

Dependence of lateral and axial forces on flowrate and parameters of
main and injected streams

Influence of parameters of injecting devices

chapter a: Pressure Perturbations and Aerodynamic Forces on Surface

2. Diagram of pressure perturbations and elementary forces on surface with
liquid injection

3. Aerodynamic forces on surface in flow with fluid injection

a. Dependence of lateral and axial forces on flowrate and physical
properties of injected fluid

5. Influence of characteristics of injecting devices

References

in a Flow With Injection of Liquids
Physical pattern of gas flow over surface in a stream with injection
of liquid

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1980

6610

C80:

[861/191

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

50
S7
66
66
71
83
93
101
116
129
129
136
149
153
163

168
175

181
182

190
196

205
209
215
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TBSIING MD MATERIALS

UDC 621.822.9
INVESTIGATING EFFICIENCY 0P SLIDING BEARINGS IN mrun WW
Moscow ENERGOIASINOSTROYENIYE in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 36-39

[Article by Candidates of Technical Sciences R. G. Bogoyavlenskiy, Yu. D.
Nikoforov, Yu. V. Makarov and A. T. Yer-akov and engineer A. B. Anapol'skiy]

[Text] Important significance is now given to development of the energy pro-
duction direction in nuclear power engineering on the basis of high-temperature
gas reactors with heliun coolant [l]. Investigations are being conducted in
our country to develop an experinental che-ical power plant with the VCR-SO
reactor for simultaneous production of electric power and radiation products.

A nunber of complex design, production and metallurgical problems must be
solved for manufacture and further emergency-free operation of the plant. One
of the problems is to ensure the efficiency of the bearings of the production
circuit mechanisms.

The conditions of their operation are characterized by a highly pure helium
medium, elevated temperature (approximately 300°C), the presence of radioactive
radiation and the requirement of failure-tree operation over a prolonged time
(up to 400 days). This combination of operating conditions of bearings elimin-
ates the use of liquid or plastic lubricants both because of. their insufficient-
ly high temperature stability and radiation resistance and because of the possi-
bility of contaminating the coolant.

In the given case solid lubricant materials, along the wide nomenclature of
which are temperature- and radiation-resistant materials, including neutral
gas environments, are promising. of special interest are the dichalcogenides
of the transition metals of groups 5 and 6 of the periodic table and primarily
the most thoroughly studied, widespread and economical of thew-molybdenum di-
sulfide (H052).

Its basic advantages are the high temperature stability in a venue and in in-
ert media (up to 800-1,000°C) [2]. radiation stability [3] and the capability
of ensuring the operation of a dry friction assembly over a wide range of speeds

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and loads. However, analysis of data presented in the literature [4] shows
that the development of bearing assanblies with long service life (in time
and method of friction), even when using M052 solid lubricant, is a problem.

Table l

 
 
  

 
  
 

Tums n s
nos-2.3.:
Me. ’C

    
 

mun-neural torus neural-s

  

S
manna-5‘s. aOunuus as Pb
Moh- z-s (rupatgfscncp)

 

Key:
1. Notation of coating 4. 24082 4» 20-25 percent lead
2. Chemical composition of coating by volume
3. Stable temperature in helium, °C 5. Solid solution

This is explained by the comparatively short life of molybdemml disulfide
solid lubricant coatings (TSP) and the low wear resistance of self-lubricating
structural materials (KSM) based on M052. The significant effect of the coun-
terbody material on the nature and intensity of wear of molybdenum disulfide
TSP is shown in [S] and it is concluded that the optimum selection of the
counterbody material with respect to specific operating conditions is an ef-
fecting means of increasing the life of solid lubricant coatings.

According to this conclusion, the effect of counterbody material on the fric-
tion characteristics of TSP and K84 based on M052 in a helium environment at
approximately 300°C was investigated to solve the postulated problem. Molyb—
demln disulfide solid lubricant coatings of the diffusion type produced by
sulfiding molybdenum parts in sulphur-containing media, were selected as the
main object of investigations among the group of TSP [4]. These coatings have
comparatively high thickness (60-100 microns) and durability, high temperature
stability in a vacuum and inert media (up to 800°C) during prolonged operation
and are capable of tolerating large specific loads [6] .

Several versions of the technology for producing coatings based on 14052 of the
diffusion type, distinguished by composition and properties (Table l), have
been developed at VNIIOPI [expansion unknown].

men and 14-812 composites, als'. developed at VNIIOPI, were selected as the
object of investigations from the group of isotropic KSH. The solid-lubricant
base of M-810 is comprised of MoSz-Pbs and that of M-812 is comprised of
MS?-PbS'(PeMO)Szi the binders in both cases are metallic lead [7, 8].

Preliminary investigations of friction characteristics during friction with
different counterbodies in a helium environment and at elevated temperatures
(approximately 300°C) were conducted on the WT-lM laboratory installation [9].
The installation consists of a system of evacuation pumps, friction assembly,
motor with electromagnetic coupling, loading system, heater, cooled chamber,

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inlet system and system of instruments that record the force of friction,
load, temperature in the contact zone, nunber of revolutions and gas vacuum
and pressure.

The pumping system ensures preliminary exacuation in the test chamber of the
installation in the range of 10"5 to 10- Pa. The drive system permits trans-
fer of the torque from the DC motor by the electromagnetic coupling to the
shaft being tested in the speed range of 0.05-0.7 .m/s. The friction assembly
consists of a housing, shaft to be tested (10 mm in diameter and 40 mm long),
two working bushings attached to self-adjusting holders and a center bushing
connected to the loading system and normal load measuring system.

The tests were conducted in two steps. The efficiency of M-801, M-802-l,
M-802-2 coatings and 31-810 and M-812 KSH were compared during the first step
in different combinations at sliding rate of 0.5 m/s and at specific load of
016 MPa. The best pairs were tested at sliding rates of 0.05, 0.5 and 0.7 In/s
and at specific load of 0.3 MPa during the second step to evaluate the effect
of sliding rate and load on friction characteristics. KhlBNlOT steel and
8-820 pseudoalloy consisting a porous N18K9M3T body of martensite-aging class
impregnated with molten lead containing 25 percent copper by volme, were used
along with the enumerated TSP and KSH as the counterbody materials. Thus, the
suggestion of the possible lubrication of the surfaces by the molten lead was
checked (test time was 100 hours or until seizing occurred.

Highly pure helium (TU 51-689-75) was used in the investigations. The evalua-
tion criteria were the friction coefficient and wear intensity. The test re-
sults for the first step are presented in Table 2 and those for the second
step are presented in Table 3.

Table 2

 

(linen-me unanno- d-pununomme "manner-nun )

 

 

(5’ 61:37:; (7)

(33 (4) . T
am Bryan “ﬁxﬂm (3, 93:3.

 

I
i
1‘
Bl
____—_.____________
M-llo adv-0.51 — — 2.0(cxss(9)
(8) M-ll2 mun—0.31 - - ﬁgmm
C4" M-aoz-I 0.2-0.0 — — |.s
M-aoz-z one—0.1. — — 1.5
M-nol 0.2—0.4 — -— 4.0
(10) M-aun 0.00—0.07 — 0.0: um»-
xmlm M-uo 0.05-0.06 — .03 1‘33"”

 

 

 

(Key on following page]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key [Continued from preceding page):

1. Combination of materials 6. Wear, microns/km
2. Friction characteristics 7. Operating time. hr
3. Shaft 8. 8-820

4. Bushing 9. Seizure

5. Friction coefficient 10. summer

The investigations conducted during the first step made it possible to es-
tablish that the presence of lead in the composition of the contact materials
is a sharply negative factor that significantly limits durability. The com-
bination of solid lubricant coatings with different properties on a molybdenum
base showed the most encouraging results.

A combination of H-802-l and Ill-801 coatings was selected on the basis of the
given laboratory investigations for bench tests under conditions that approx-
imate full-scale conditions to the maximum.

Service life bench tests of sliding bearings were conducted at VNIIAM [ex-
pansion unknown] on a specially developed UrG-l installation. The installa-
tion consists of a working section, loading devices, electric drive, electro-
magnetic coupling, electric heater, cooled chambers, evacuation and filling
systal and monitoring and measuring instrtnents.

Table 3

   
 
  

 
   

mew-nu III".

 

(1 "I”! arm: I’lﬂpuc -
3 sun.
(4) :5) «.43.... (9 ""“'
E ween (4) (5)
5 Ben vasu

 

Key:
1. Combination of materials
2. Friction conditions

6. Load, HPa

7. Rate, m/s

3. Friction characteristics 8. Friction coefficient
9

4. Shaft
S. Bushing

. Hear, microns/km

The working section (Figure l) is a sealed cylindrical chamber 1 manufactured
of stainless steel, inside which a shaft 2 is installed on rocker bearings 3

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the assembly of the bearing to be tested 4 and 5. The arrangement of

the shaft is vertical. The chamber is enclosed by two flanges sealed by
vacuum rubber. An electromagnetic coupling 9. through which hermetic entry
of rotation to the chamber is accomplished, is attached to the bottom flange.
The loading devices are lever systems with set of weights. Radial loading of
the bearing is accomplished through connecting pipes welded to the middle part
of the chamber. The axial load is transmitted through rod 8 and ball support
7 to sleeve 6, to which the outer bushing of the bearing to be tested 5 is
attached. A bellows serves as the flexible coupling element. The inner bush-
ing of the bearing 4 is installed on shaft 2 resting on two roller bearings 3.

    
    

 
 
   

|‘

...\‘3.
WV,
\

It

II,
‘.E N
l/
|/
/
J;

= v. I - ;
\
”1/”.
\\\\\‘ ,
. \ ll 'llllr
~.\\\\\\ '
\\\\\\\

l“—
\N
/////I

\\\\\\\

' \

\\\\\‘ .\‘ .\\\\\\\\ \\\ k ,

\
I

.__ \v.\VommL\\\\\\
_‘ WW... V1,;
' like
\'\\

~ V
- Ii-

83
"um.

   

Figure 1. working section of UTG-l Installation

Thus, the axial and radial loads applied to the sliding bearing to be tested

are transmitted through shaft 2 to roller bearings 3 and are enclosed in a
Mmsnw L

The self-lubricating roller bearings designed by VNIPP [All-Union Scientific
Research. Design and Technological Institute of the Bearing Industry] with
bronze separator in which a composite consisting of 50 percent fluoroplastic
and 50 percent molybdenum disulfide is pressed [10], are used in the UTG-l
installation. Two water chambers are available to cool the flanges of the
working section and also the roller bearings. The working part of the section
(the zone where the bearing assembly to be tested is located) is heated by a
three-sectional electric heater. The temperature of the housing of the work-

ing section is measured in three cross sections by Chromel-Nopel thermocouples

82

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE1DNLY
which are caulked in the wall of the housing. A potentiometer of type K8?
is used as the recording instrument. The chamber is filled with helium from
a tank through a gas reducer and cut-off valve.

The order of conducting the tests on the UTG-l installation was as follows:
the bushings of the bearing to be tested, after being wiped with acetone and
alcohol, were installed in the working sectiog, the chamber was sealed and
evacuated to residual pressure of 10 to 10' Pa and was filled with helium
to a pressure of 0.1 HPa. The chamber was again evacuated but upon reaching

a pressure of 10"2 Pa the chamber housing was heated to a temperature of 150-
200°C, it was held at this temperature for 1.5-2 hours, the chamber was filled

with helium to a pressure of 0.1-0.2 MPa and was purged with helium three
times.

    
 
   
 

    
  

\\ \\\\\\V

  
  
   

ON

   

aim

j§Z?MM“”

Figure 2. Sliding Bearing.

This operation was repeated no fewer than two times. The required helium
pressure and temperature in the chamber were established after the last fill-
ing and the installation was ready to conduct the tests. The temperature and
pressure in the chamber and the operating time of the bearing were monitored
during the testing. The temperature was regulated and was held at a given
temperature by voltage transformers and millivoltmeter. The helium pressure

in the chamber was monitored by a pressure gauge and was kept constant by means
of a gas reducer connected to the helium tank. The operating time of the bear-
ing was recorded by an hour-meter, connected to the electric drive circuit of
the installation.

Experimental radial-thrust sliding bearings consisting of two bushings (Fig-
ure 2) were manufactured to conduct the service life tests. The inner bush-
ing 1 was made of molybdenum with H-BOl-l coating and the outer bushing 2 was
made of molybdenum with M-801 coating. This design of the friction assembly
ensures high stability of the radial clearance of the bearing elements over a
wide temperature range. The service life tests provided evaluation of the
effect of the thickness of solid lubricant layers on the durability of the

bearing. A bearing with thickness of coatings approximately 30 microns
(M-Boz-l) and approximately 20 microns (H-BOl) were initially tested.

The efficiency criterion of the bearing was the time until total wear of the
coatings. After 5,000 hours of operation (which corresponds to a friction
path of 7,500 km), the thickness of the sulfide layers of the end surfaces of
the bearing bushings was measured on a profilograph-profilometer, for which
scratches were made with a needle to the entire depth of the coating (Table 4).
It turned out that the thickness of the remaining layer of the coating of the

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Test Conditions

Surrounding medium Highly pure heliun
' (TU-Sl-689-75)
Medium
pressure, HPa 0.14
temperature, °c 300
Load on hearing, N:
axial P 400
radial Q 100
Rotational speed, rpn 200
Table 4
Thickness of CoatingI microns
Combination of masher of Friction th k”
Materials Bearing 0_ 7 , 500 10‘ 500
Outer bushing M-SOl 20 lo 0
1
Inner bushing H-802—l 30 5 0
Outer bushing 14-801 65 40 25
2
Inner bushing H—802-l 40 35 25

outer bushing comprises approximately 10 microns (with initial thickness of
approximately 20 microns), While that of the inner bushing comprises approxi-
mately 5 microns (with initial thickness of approximately 30 microns). The
tests were then continued and the total time to canplete wear of the coatings
comprised 7,080 hours (10,620 kn). since the life of the tested bearing was
less than the required life (12,000 hour-18,000 km). the thickness of solid
lubricant layers was increased to 65 microns (bl-801) and 40 microns (M-802-l).
Running-in over a period of 1,000 hours was carried out under the previously
adopted conditions and the rotational speed was then increased to 540 rpm.
The data of measuring the thickness of solid lubricant layers after 2,500
hours (7,500 km) and 3,250 hours (10,500 km) of operation of the bearing are
presented in Table 4.

Based on the results, one can suggest that a bearing with total thickness of
sulfide layers (ll-801 and M-802-1) greater than 100 microns provides the re-
quired service life.

Thus, the investigations indicate the prospects of MOS; coatings of the dif-

fusion type for the bearings of mechanisms of nuclear power plants with
helim coolant.

8h

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

”Status and Prospects for Developent of Investigations on High-Tempera-
ture Reliun-L‘ooled Reactors in the USSR," Report TS-109/3 at a meeting of
the Technical Connittee on High-Taperature Helium-Cooled Reactors, in
'Atomno-vodorodnaya energetika i tekhnologiya" [Atomic-Hydrogen Power
Engineering and Technology]. No 2, Moscow, Atanizdat, 1979.

Hakarov, Yu. V. and A. A. Silin, "Modern Concepts on the Properties and
Lubricating Effect of Molybdenum Disulfide,“ in “mochnoye deystViye
molibdenita pri vozdeystvii radiatsii i drugikh faktorov" [The Lubricating
Effect of Holybdenite Under the Effect of Radiation and Other Factors),
Moscow, Atmizdat, 1976.

Lewis, I. a. and R. a. McDaniel, "A Test of Molybdenum Disulfide Lubri-
cants in Radiation and Vacuum Environments,“ TRANSACTIONS 6 THE ASHE,
July 1969.

Drozhzhina, M. P., Ye. A. Dukhovskoy, A. T. Yermakov et a1, "Some Results
of Testing Coatings and Canposite Materials Based on Molybdenum Disulfide
in a Vacuum at High Temperatures,” in "Treniye i iznashivaniye pri vyso-
kikh temperaturakh“ [Friction and Hear at High Temperatures], Moscow.
Nauka, 1973.

Buyalo, A. s.. B. P. Lobashev, Yu. V. Hakarov and s. A. Shepel', "Investi-
gating the Effect of Counterbody Material on the Efficiency of Diffusion
Type Molybdenum Disulfide Coatings,” in "Tverdyye masochnyye pokrytiya"
[Solid Lubricant Coatings], Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

Lobaehev, B. P., “Methods of Producing and the Properties of Solid Lubri-
cant Coatings Based on Molybdenum Disulfide," in “aaazochnoye deystviye
molibdenita pri vozdeyetvii radiatsii i drugikh faktorov", Hoscow, Aton-
izdat. 1976.

Inventor's certificate 602584 (USSR).

Inventor's certificate 594203 (USSR).

“Slovar'-spravochnik po treniyu, iznosu i snake detaley mashin' [Glossary
on Prication Wear and Lubrication of Machine Parts] , Kiev, Naukova dumka,

1979.

“Treniye, iznashivaniye i smazka. Spravochnik" (Friction, Hear and Lubri-

cation, a Handbook], Book 2, edited by I. V. Kragel'ekiy and V. V. Alisin.
Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo “Hashinostroyeniye”, "mergcmashinostrcyeniye", 1982

6521

C50 :

8144/1152

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.317

ADAPTIVE MEASURING INSTRUMENTS

Kiev SAHONASTRAIVAYUSRCHIYBSYA MIM'NYYB PRIBORY in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 8 May 81) pp 2. 202-203

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Adaptive Measuring Instruments".
by Sergey Glebovich Taranov, Institute of Electrodynnics, UkSSR Academy of
Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Nauluova dunks". 2350 copies. 20!. pages]

[Text] The book presents the theory and principles of constructing wide-
band and selective adaptive instnnent maplifiers, and also stabilized sources
of alternating current. A classification is given for adaptive measuring
instruments. A method is given for analyzing the stability of adaptive mea-
suring instruments that are nonlinear, nonautonomous. unsteady automatic con-
trol systems described by nonlinear differential equations with variable coef-
ficients. A method of time quantization is proposed for analyzing transient
processes. The informational characteristics of instruments are defined.

For scientists. engineers and technicians specializing in information-measure-
ment technology, as well as specialists in development of electronic measuring
devices. Figures 40. references 195.

Contents , P38e
Preface 3
List of abbreviations 5

Chapter 1: Analysis and Classification of Instrulent Amplifiers and

Highly Stable Sources of Alternating Current 7
l. Particulars of circuits with modulator primary converters 7
2. Hide-band instrument amplifiers 9
3. Selective nplifiers of high class of accuracy 28
lo. Stabilized sources of alternating current 37
Chapter 2: Theory of Adaptive “ensuring Instruments 49
l. Peculiarities, classification and generalized block diagrams 69
2. Generalized equations of dynamics 63
3. Reducing adaptive measuring instruments with periodic comparison
to an equivalent model with continuous comparison 68
lo. Basis for feasibility of analyzing dynamics with respect to envelopes
of input and Output signals of sections 78
86

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5. Determining boundary of stability region of generalized scheme by
the method of harmonic linearization

6. Simplified analysis of dynamics of generalized scheme

7. Method of time quantization for analyzing transient processes

8. Statics and information-measurement characteristics

Chapter 3: Adaptive Selective Amplifiers

1. Principles of design and determination of working range

2. Boundaries of region of stable equilibrium

3. Approximate estimate of quality and analysis of transient processes

6. Errors and information-measurement characteristics

chapter A: Stabilized Sources of Alternating Current

1. Principles of design and determination of stabilization coefficients

2. Boundaries of region of stable equilibrium. and quality

3. Errors of stabilized sources with fixed frequency

4. Errors of stabilized sources with variable frequency

Chapter 5: Adaptive Instrument Amplifiers Hith Probe signal

1. Principles of design

2. Boundaries of region of stable equilibrium

3. Errors for schemes with frequency separation of signals and with
probe signal modulation

4. Errors of one-channel and two-channel circuits with probe signal
with time separation of signals

References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1981

6610
cso: [861/190 ' m")

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

88

92

96
101
101
110
117
123
135
135
146
150
156
162
162
168

176

185
192